

SPEECH
OF
SIR ALFRED STEPHEN KNT.
ELECTORAL BILL.
IN THE
Legislatibe Council of New South Wales
ON THE
SECOND READING OF THE BILL
TO AMEND THE
ELECTORAL LAW.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY STOKES & CO., 205, GEORGE-ST. NORTH.
1858.




A 3 the subject of this speech is not one of to-day only, or for this
generation alone, and the principles which it involves are of deep impor-
tance, the writer conceives that its publication in this form may be useful.
The views enunciated in the speech may not, in times of excitement, be
popular. But, before persons reject them as unsound, it is to be hoped
that they will be examined, and the arguments and authorities in their
support be fairly weighed.
The Bill in question was to amend the existing Electoral Law. By that
law, —the Constitution Act of 3853, —the qualifications of electors for the
Assembly, (the Legislative Council being a wholly nominated body,) were
the following. A freehold estate worth £lOO held for six months, a lease-
hold estate of the same value, if the person had possessed it for three
years, or worth £lO a year and having at least three years to run, the
holding of a depasturage license, or the occupation for six months of any
house or building whatever, worth £lO a year; the land or building, in
each case, being within the district to be voted for:—or having a salary
of £lOO a year, if enjoyed for six months; or being the occupant of any
room or lodging for that period, and paying for it £lO a year, if lodging
only, or £4O a year if board and lodging. The Bill of 1858, retaining for
non-residents, the license qualification, as well] as freeholds and leaseholds,
but without any limitation whatever a 3 to value, substitutes the condition erf'
six months' residence , simply, for every other qualification.


SPEECH, &c.
(TUESDAY, 14th SEPTEMBER, 1858.)
Sib Alfred Stephen said, That he should vote with pleasure for
the second reading of the hill; and that he approved of its intro-
duction, and the greater part of its contents. He dissented,
however, from some of its details; and for that dissent, he thought
that he was bound to express fully his reasons. He had reflected
much on the question, whether he ought to address the house at
all on a measure of that character; one which was described, by
many persons, as being the subject of excitement and now, he
heard, even of irritation, out of doors. But the conclusion at
which he had arrived was, that it was his duty to vote on this
measure; and. if he did so, he conceived it to be equally his
duty to give his reasons for that vote. If there was really the
irritation which had been spoken of, pervading the people out of
Parliament, he trusted that nothing would fall from him which
could have any other effect than that of allaying the irritation.
This was a bill not merely for altering the electorates, and in
other respects improving the existing law, but also, and mainly,
for extending the franchise. And he was there for the purpose
of discussing, as far as his convictions and observation, his
experience and his reading enabled him to do, the principles on
which, as he humbly conceived, a bill of that kind should be
founded.
He would declare distinctly in the outset, that there was no
man in this colony, he believed, who had a deeper and more
heartfelt sympathy with the manual labourers of the country.
Far from looking down upon them, he respected them much.
He entirely agreed (differing in that respect from many, whose
qpinions were on most subjects in accordance with his own,) with
the two speakers on this side of the house who had preceded
him, that a more extended electoral franchise might be safely
and advantageously adopted in this colony, than it would be


prudent or safe to introduce in Great Britain, or perhaps most
other places; since there was more of intelligence, as well as less
of poverty, and more of energy, certainly of activity, among
that class of the inhabitants, than was exhibited, or probably
existed, in any other portion of the empire. He believed, indeed,
that among the lower classes generally, as they were termed,
there was very much of energy and intelligence, not to say also
of good feeling and integrity. But he refused to concede to any
of these, exclusively, the term “ working ” classes—for he was
himself one of that class. He had from early youth earned his
bread, as his father before him had done, by the sweat and labour
of the brow, if not by the labour of his hands; and if he had
not succeeded, after the exertions of more than thirty years in
public life, in establishing (as so many thousands around him had
done) a fortune, it was because the sums which he had received
periodically from the public treasury, though they might seem
very large to many, had flowed rapidly out again in minute rills
among the classes of whom he had been speaking. The accumu-
lation which might have followed from the amount he had
received, he was happy to believe, had tended to make the wealth,
not only of some merchants, and some shopkeepers, but of many
mechanics and artisans, and very many of the manual labourers
of all grades. From these classes, therefore, he had abstracted
no wealth; by him, he was persuaded, none of them had ever
sustained either injury or burthen ; and there was little, he trusted,
in his station or other attributes, to excite their envy or ill will.
They might rest assured, then, that he was not the man to grudge
them privileges, or desire to oppose any scheme which might be
calculated to advance their interests. Nor would they readily
suspect him of any such desire. He was there as a member of
this house, as a member of the community, as one deeply interested
in its welfare, as the head of a very large family born in the
colony, for the purpose of lending his aid in making perfect if he
could, or at least in rendering more perfect than he now conceived
it to be, a proposed enactment, which was of vast importance to
the well-being and happiness, not of one or another class, but of
the whole country. If the accomplishment of such an object
were a difficult task, he held that the endeavour to attain and


achieve it was a high duty, and any contribution towards it a
high honor. And he did most emphatically deny, that in seeking
to discharge that duty, contributing his humble share towards
the elucidation and discussion of great and important principles, he
in the slightest degree derogated from any duty, which the public
had a right to expect from him in his capacity of a judge.
This, let it be observed, was no party question. It was not
on the floor of that house, that the battles of party were fought.
The members of that house met, calmly to consider, deliberately
to investigate, and impartially, without prejudice or favour in
respect of any man or set of men, to decide on the various
measures brought before them. If such were not the feelings
which actuated all of those whom he addressed, he was sure the
public would believe that they actuated him—and a great many
more. The votes on that bill could not affect the existence of any
ministry. In fact, the vote upon it—so far as the second reading
was concerned—was settled in its favor already. The only contest
which would arise, as the course of the debate had clearly shown,
would be on one or two of its clauses ; and these, if they did not
involve a principle, would practically have been regarded by him,
accompanied by the changes which he hoped to see introduced, as
of no great moment. It was in fact his deliberate opinion, that
the bill as it stood, word for word, would be found practically to
induce no evil consequences—(cries of hear, hear,) provided only
there were accompanying it, as a sister measure, the establishment
permanently of a highly conservative and independent second
chamber. (Hear.) The gentlemen who adopted the first portion
of his sentence, without regarding—or waiting for the second,
destroyed the very life of his meaning. He desired to see some
consolidated counteracting power in the state—a Legislative Council,
which could not at the stroke of a pen be rendered inefficient; and
the franchise might then be almost as extended as they pleased.
To return, however, to the topic from which that at present
was a digression. It was the duty of that House, he apprehended,
to consider what measure was best for the interests of the com-
munity at large, and to pass such as shall be likely to benefit, and
at the same time unite together, all classes of society. We had,
rightly understood, but one interest. There was but one end in


view; and that end was the securing and preservation of liberty.
But in what did liberty consist ? —for few people really seemed to
understand what it was, though all talked about it. Now, he
proposed, in the course of his address, (he was afraid at the hazard
of trespassing longer on the time of the house than he desired,
and more than they wished, or would be disposed to tolerate,) to
cite from authors of reputation, definitions and explanations which
he conceived must be heard and understood, before there could be
a clear conception of that which they were called upon to do. And
he began by asking, what is liberty ?It was, security —of the
rights and interests of all classes, and all individuals; not of a
section, but of all men, and every man. And that constitution
could never be said to have attained that end, or to be in accordance
with any rational idea of liberty, which left any one class or set
of men—be they landowners, or merchants, or poor men, or wealthy
—at the disposal of a larger body, whose interest it might be
to annihilate or trench upon their property or rights. The question,
therefore, of universal suffrage, or, to speak more accurately, the
question of the elective franchise, as it was by this bill proposed
to be conferred, unaccompanied with the attribute or possession
of property, was that upon which they were likely to differ or to
agree, in proportion as they should think that one great end likely to
be attained, or sacrificed, by the concession.
He entertained no manner of doubt, that the bill had been
introduced, not merely because it had been called for by the voice
of very many of the inhabitants, but because also in many respects
it was desirable in itself; and indeed it seemed admitted, that some
change had been thought to be essential on all hands. He admitted,
and he entirely believed, that the manual labourers of the colony had
probably the same honest feelings, as persons in more elevated
stations had; and were likely intentionally to make no bad use
of any franchise, which might be conferred upon them. He believed,
however, that there was nevertheless no necessity for altering the
franchise. It might be desirable (that was a matter of opinion) that
there should be such an alteration; but the actual necessity, or
really pressing occasion for it, he had yet to learn. He had heard
no reason advanced by any of the speakers, as yet, on the side
of the measure, who had shown or attempted to show that a change


in the franchise was even desirable. He found one single exception,
that of the Solicitor-General; and the only instance he could
gather from him was, that there were a few educated and intelligent
persons, whom the present law did not enfranchise. The omission
was that of sons and others, residing in a house in which they
were lodgers only—where they received no salary. Sons, assisting
in the business of their fathers; or young men of family and
education, living on a distant station for the purpose of learning
the business of a settler. Beyond that, he saw no deficiency in
the present electoral franchise. All persons of intelligence, all
persons receiving a salary, or a very large class of persons receiving
salaries, (of course it did not go down to the smallest sum,) all
who were men of education, or likely to he intelligent, were included
by the law as it at present stood; all persons occupying a house of
£lO a year; all persons occupying freeholds of a like amount: —
leaseholds, also, and other interests, were included. What classes,
then were excluded ? What persons were shut out from the honor
of appearing as voters? The only class excluded, as it appeared
to him, was of those who were the most likely to he deficient in
intelligence. Residence alone was now to qualify. But what
security was there in this hill, against the exercise of the fran-
chise by those who, it was conceded, were the last persons to be
entrusted with the franchise? He held in his hand, for instance,
a return from the gaol, by which he found that annually there
were discharged, on an average, in Sydney alone above 3000
persons: 481 for felonies, 1221 for misdemeanours and summary
convictions, undergoing terms therefore of imprisonment, and not
less than 1366 for drunkenness ; making a total of 3068 in one
year. What was there in the bill to prevent those parties, the
very day they came out of gaol, from being enrolled, or from voting?
But, he would ask, did the undergoing or remission of sentence
restore a man to his integrity ? The men who were engaged in
drunken brawls; the men who kept sly grog-shops; who beat
and maltreated their wives ; who deserted their children ; were they
excluded by this bill? Not one. It was true, indeed, that the
property class was not altogether excluded; and he thought it due to
the framers, to bear this continually in mind. He found, however,
that the educational class was entirely ignored; whereas, under the


existing franchise, those persons who were from their position likely
(though of course there would be exceptions) to be educated were
included.
He would not enter into minute criticism of the 9th clause. But
when gentlemen talked, as he believed some did, of the uselessness
of a second chamber, and of the perfection that a bill was likely
to attain by a passage through one house, especially if it lingered
there as this bill had done a long time, he hoped that the
public would take warning from the example before them. Let
them suppose critics, who understood the use of language, reading
this 9th clause. They would perceive that, while property freehold
in its nature was only a qualification when situate in the district
where the proprietor voted, and leasehold property might be for a
term of a few months only, the household or shop or other building
qualification might be situated anywhere. The limitation, which
he supposed was intended to be inserted, he would defy anybody to
find. It would be seen also in the clause, that those persons only
were disqualified by reason of lunacy, or eleemosynary support
who happened to be military men. And, if not so circumstanced
military men were not excluded unless they lived in barracks. This
could not be intended, of course; and therefore these remarks might
be considered hypercriticism. Be it so; but language was used
for conveying ideas, and the law construed an Act according to
the language used. And when they saw that there were such errors
in such a bill, although a large amount of labour had been bestowed
upon it in one house, (he could easily have multiplied the instances,
but other members had pointed out mistakes more serious,) gentle-
men who talked slightingly of revision here would probably in
future be more wise.
He had said, that the object of all in that Council was or ought
to be, in legislating on this measure, the protection of all classes
and individuals ; —in other words the promotion of the interests, by
securing the rights, of all classes and every individual in the
community. And he had ventured to say, that in this consisted
Liberty in a State; whatever might be the crude or extravagant
notions of some people, as to that much abused word. On this
point, he would trouble the house with a short citation from Lieber.
A preceding speaker had ventured to disparage ancient authorities.


We had outgrown such musty notions; and even Americans, it of
a past generation, could afford us neither precedent nor warning.
Libber, then, was a modern. A German by birth, an American by
adoption, distinguished as a philosopher, a professor and teacher
in an American University, he published his able work on Self
Government so recently as 1854. And this is the lesson which he
teaches, not to the youth of the great Republic only.
Liberty has not been unfrequently defined as consisting in the
rule of the majority. That rule, of itself, indicates only the power of
a certain body; but power is not liberty. Suppose the majority bid
you drink hemlock —is there liberty for you? Or suppose the majority
give away liberty, and establish a despot. There can be no doubt
that the majority ruled in the French massacres of the Protestants
was there liberty in France on that account? We might say, with
greater truth, that, where the minority is protected, although the
majority rule, there probably liberty exists. In this latter case, it is
the protection—or, in other words, the existence of rights beyond the
reach of the majority, not the power of the majority, which constitutes
liberty.— Lieber on Self Government, p. 15.
“Liberty practically means, in the main, protection ; or checks against
undue interference, whether this be from individuals, from Government,
or from the masses.” —“In the Teutonic languages, the term freedom
is of the same root with that for legal security and protection.”
— lbid. p. 24.
The' question, then, to which they had to address themselves
to-day was, whether the measure they were about to adopt was one
which was likely to afford the best security for all classes ? They
were to seek to unite classes together, not to set one class against
another class. He desired no class representation; but wished to
see all classes joined together as one man, with one heart and one
mind ; and not one seeking the depression, or looking with envy on
the prosperity of another. To use the beautiful simile of Moore,
whose lines had been quoted the other day in this house with so
much effect by the friend near him, he should like to see all classes
and grades of society blended together as are the colours in the
rainbow :—so intimately uniting, although separately distinct, that
we should be unconscious where one terminated and another began—
and the result “ one arch of peace ” —an arch, on which might be
securely erected the structure of a great empire. The honorable
member who had said, in this debate, that we were engaged in


laying the foundations of such an empire, was guilty he thought of
no hyperbole. It was no exaggerated expression, that the measure
now for decision was one of vast importance to this colony, in
perhaps all time coming. The character of a nation depended much
on its political institutions. And he concurred with him, that if
we could by this discussion settle the question on sound and safe
principles, and especially if we could do so permanently, to the
contentment generally of the community, this legislature would
achieve a good, the effects of which would probably be felt by many
coming generations. There was but one spirit, therefore, in which
so great a question should be approached.
Most of the speakers in favour of the measure, as he understood
them, based their support of it on public opinion. This, the
deference to a so-called public opinion, stood in the place of all
argument. He was not one, he hoped, who presumed to set himself
above public opinion; but he was not disposed blindly to follow
every popular impression, however general, which might be dignified
with that name. They should first consider, what it was that
constituted or might be taken to represent public opinion. He
thought, also, that every man was entitled if not bound to inquire
on what premises and grounds it rested ; and to judge for himself,
whether it was an enlightened or well-founded opinion. If not,
of what use was discussion in that house ? And in the first place
he denied, that the unanimous—perhaps clamorous —adoption of
resolutions at public meetings, however large, was a conclusive
test of public opinion ; still less, of the value of the opinion or
opinions embodied in those resolutions. He distinctly admitted,
however, that public opinion must be considered as represented in
the other house: —'and that, if that opinion should be more than
once unequivocally there expressed, it was proper, as he believed
that it was constitutional, for this house to yield ; even though it
might not concur in the decision, or think it a correct or wise one.
Such was the course recognised, he believed, but certainly admitted
by more than one distinguished statesman, in the House of Lords.
But the expression of such an opinion, on one occasion, however
intelligibly, and though by a large majority, was no conclusive guide
for the other chamber. If it were, the institution of a second
(which was in all cases meant as a restraining and co-equal) body,


would obviously be superfluous and idle. Opinions changed. The
opinion of the many changed frequently. And it was
the peculiar duty of that Council, to examine and weigh opinions,
and to interpose the opportunity for their mature re-consideiation,
under circumstances favourable for reflection. It was the opinion
of people out of doors, however, that had been most relied on ; and
one public meeting in particular, at which strong language seemed
to have been used, was alluded to. Let the house bear with him,
then, while he read a short extract from the learned American
professor; himself living in a country, where the value of popular
opinion is likely to be as well known, as it can be in New South
Wales. After instancing, as the result of popular opinion, the
condemnation of Socrates by the Athenian people, of our Saviour
by the Jews, and of the victims of the guillotine by the people
of Paris, and noticing the petitions which had poured in from
all parts of France against the cotton manufactures, one of the
greatest benefits, and indeed sources of wealth to the entire kingdom,
Lieber writes as follows.
“If we carefully view the subject of unanimity, we shall find that
in the cases in which vast action takes place by impelled masses, error
is as frequently the basis as truth. Great truths dwell a long time with
small minorities, and the real voice of God is often that which rises
above the masses, not that which follows them.”
—Lieber on Self Government, p. 366.
He would next quote, on the same subject, from Mr. Justice
Story ; whose works on jurisprudence would command respect,
and be placed on the same table with Blackstone and Coke, as
long as the English law existed. He said—
“ There is no small danger in disturbing the public tranquillity by
a frequent recurrence to questions respecting the fundamental principles of
Government. Whoever has been present in any assembly convened for
such a purpose, must have perceived the great diversities of opinion
upon the most vital questions, and the extreme difficulty in bringing a
majority to concur in the long-sighted wisdom of the soundest provisions.
Temporary feelings and excitement, popular prejudices, an ardent love
of theory, an enthusiastic temperament, inexperience, and ignorance, as
well as preconceived opinions, operate wonderfully to blind the judgment
and seduce the understanding. It will probably be found in the history
of most conventions of this sort, that the best and soundest parts of
the constitution, those which give it permanent value, as well as a safe and


steady operation, are precisely those which have enjoyed the least of the
public favour at the moment, or were least estimated by the speakers.
A lucky hit or strong figure has not unfrequently overturned the best
reasoned plan.”—2 Story Comm. Const., s. 530.
When, therefore, the resolutions and proceedings of large
public meetings were referred to, for the purpose of influencing
the determination of any question, he respectfully appealed to
authority; to the judgment of profoundly thinking men; to the
opinions of statesmen, and writers of acknowledged eminence.
This question was to be decided not by wishes or feelings, but by
sound reason, the fruit of experience and learning. He was
prepared to listen, with all respect, to every representation
emanating from large bodies of his fellow subjects; but their
object and his was the same. They all desired to promote the
geneial welfare ; and if differences of opinion existed, they were
merely as to the means of attaining that object—and, as to this,
no man had a right to dictate to another. But there were
people, it seems, calling themselves lovers of liberty, with whom
independence of thought (that is to say in any other than
themselves) is a crime. At the great meeting alluded to, the
same from which had emanated, he believed, the petition recently
pi esented to this house in favour of the bill as it stood, he found
that a speech had been received with great applause, which certainly
savoured singularly little of freedom. He would trespass on the
house by reading an extract from it. He forbore to mention the
speaker’s name; and it was quite possible, that in some degree
the report was mistaken—but, that language substantially as stated
had been used, and received with warm approval, was he believed
unquestionable. This, then, was the opinion of a great meeting,
as to freedom of thought and action in members of the Legislature.
In moving a resolution, to the effect that the people recognised in
the measure of Electoral Reform before the Assembly, “ the
first substantial promise of a system of Government, governing
by the people, and for the people,” the speaker said, that “this
had now become a battle between the people and the squatters; as
the latter knew, that if once electoral reform were granted, the
people would not be long before they had in their own hands
their own inalienable right, the public lands of the colony.
Defending the Sydney meetings, he urged that it was only by


agitating in Sydney that the public mind in the interior could be
properly roused. He then made an attack upon those who had
voted against the present Government, and called upon the
meeting to express loudly their reprehension of such conduct.
Their meeting that night would not only do this, but would have
the effect also of putting a stop to all future opposition. Every
member might have his whim, but each must give up his own
in order to secure the safety of the measure. It ought to be the
duty of the people to put down every member who should dare
to oppose the bill.” —That was the language of a gentleman, an
educated man, and no doubt a perfectly well meaning man. But
it showed clearly one thing. It proved to what an extent the
popular idea was wrong on the subject of liberty. It proved, also,
to what an extent people at large public meetings were likely to
be led astray, by mere clap trap, or something worse. He would
appeal to honorable members on either side of the House, to
conceive for a moment, if such sentiments as these were entertained
by the masses in a community, what hope could there be for
liberty;—for liberty in any sense. Why, those were the sen-
timents simply of tyranny; and the people who deliberately
uttered, or applauded such sentiments, showed by the very act that
they knew nothing, or thought nothing, of the sacred thing on
which they thus trampled. He could not believe, that such
sentiments were those of intelligent people, in whose hands
liberty—as philosophy defined it, and reason and justice required
it to be, —would be secure. But to persons of intelligence alone
could the elective franchise be safely confided. He had no distrust
of the mass of the people, as to their honesty. Such a feeling
had never entered his mind. He desired to see given to them as
large a share in the representation, or, in other words, to have
as extended a franchise established, as should be consistent with
the interests of all, with a due and necessary regard to the rights of
station and of property. And, if every one were fitted by intelligence,
or habits of reflection, for the exercise of this high privilege, who
in that chamber was there who would not rejoice in its instant
universal concession ? But what intelligence was exhibited, or what
regard for rights, in such wild ideas as those on which he had just
commented !


The fact unfortunately was, that the uninstructed—forming
ordinarily the lower classes, —were ever liable to be led astray.
Their integrity of purpose, however, he no more suspected, than
he did that of people in a higher sphere. And they had qualities,
(he thought that he knew as much of these classes, from his youth
as most persons did,) which others more fortunately placed would
do well to imitate. Many of them, indeed, were by no means
so ignorant as they might seem to be. But they were kind among
themselves, they were accessible to kindness from their employers,
their feelings generally were disposed to the right side, they were
wonderfully patient and enduring under privations :—and they were
neither more selfish, nor more eager after money, than those who were
in happier circumstances above them, and who were prone enough
to insist on the rights of property, without much caring for or
thinking of its duties. If those duties were more attended to, if
we could but introduce by some means a kinder, a more beneficent
and Christian system and course of action, by which the wealthy and
the poor should be brought into closer and friendlier connection,
then that large amount of discontent and irritation which too
commonly existed, especially in populous communities, in the minds
of the labouring classes, would cease; and harmony of feeling,
founded on a better understood union of interests, be substituted.
But, when men talked in this colony of distress and irritation,
and of withholding the franchise from the people, he would ask them
to compare the condition of the manual labourer here, with that
of his fellow-labourer in England. He would ask them to look
at the poverty, the grinding, wretched—almost hopeless poverty,
which existed in every manufacturing district, and in most of the
agricultural counties there. And how admirable was the patience
with which the people endured those evils ; how they bore up under
afflictions, which would drive other and wiser men mad ! When we
reflected on all these things, our sympathies could not but be
enlisted on the side of the labouring classes; and the natural
desire was, to raise them to the utmost extent possible in the social
scale. But that was quite a different matter from throwing into
their hands, while uninstructed, an uncontrollable amount of political
power, which they could not at present know how to exercise,
beneficially lor themselves and the community.


It evidently seemed to many, that few things were more easy
to understand than affairs of state. All things else demanded
s t u dy—but political science came by intuition. Every inexperienced
youth, therefore, every unread and even illiterate person, every man
whatever, provided only he had sufficient volubility of tongue,
thought himself qualified to decide on questions, which required often
extensive knowledge, and profound philosophy, for their solution.
Persons of that stamp were readily followed, for they never
reasoned —they only declaimed and denounced. They jumped up
in an assembly, advocated an opinion, pronounced it infallible, and
almost anathematised all who ventured to differ from them. He
would beg such people to hear what a very able writer, in a work
called “ The Rationale of Political Representation ,” says as to the
difficulty of such questions: —
“ Political science is perhaps that department of intellectual exertion
which requires the greatest powers of mind, and the intensest application.
Its facts are multifarious and complicated, often anomalous and con-
tradictory, and demanding the guidance of clear principles. Its principles
are many of them abstruse, and to be developed only by long and close
processes of reasoning; and the application of these principles requires
the sagacity of quick observation and long experienc e.—Polit. Rep., p. 185.
The constitution of this house had been introduced into this
debate —lie thought not inappropriately; and he would here,
therefore, make a few remarks upon that subject. A second or
revising legislative chamber, he held to be an essential part of the
constitution, in any country professing or desiring to be free. It
was useful, in compelling the full discussion of great measures,
and ensuring a careful and cautious examination of them, in
principle and in detail. If by merely retarding changes, perhaps
too ardently pressed, and too hastily adopted, until the commu-
nity at large have had time to consider the subject in all its
bearings, with the new lights and arguments brought to bear upon
it, the importance of such a body could hardly be too highly
estimated. The discussion of measures by a second set of men,
less liable to impulse, and more accessible, as smaller bodies always
were, to the influence of reason than of mere oratory and decla-
mation, was of incalculable advantage. In such a chamber,
moreover, if properly constructed, other classes and interests
were enabled to obtain a hearing, than those which were ordinarily


in the ascendant where, chiefly, numbers were represented. These
were not his views only. They were those of all writers on
political philosophy, he believed without exception. And he was
persuaded, that two chambers were even more important here,
where inexperience and rashness might easily do vast mischief’
than m older countries. If a second and co-ordinate legisla-
tive body should ever be abolished in this colony,
quences we may depend upon it will follow of which few of us
can foresee the extent or evil. It will be like the breaking down
of a dam, and allowing the waters to rush forth and deluge the
country—doing injury far and wide; to others beyond that
generation, as well as to themselves. Therefore, in dealing
with such matters, it became all men to be cautions how they
proceeded; and to take good care, that they had studied well
the principles to guide them. He would not trespass at any
ength on the house, by speaking of its present or its most
desirable future composition. The time for this had not arrived.
e nevertheless would make a few passing observations on this
topic. The present composition, then, of that house,-speaking
of its members individually, rather than the particular frame of
its constitution,—was, in his opinion, eminently qualified to secure
all the objects of a second chamber. There were men in it of
high intelligence, men of unquestionable personal character, men
of very large property in the colony—of which, some had
descended to their possessors, but the greater part had been
acquired by industry, in various walks of life. There were
here men of education, of intellectual attainments; some who
had long official experience, some who had sat in other legislatures.
There sat in this house professional men, judges, lawyers,
physicians, merchants, landed proprietors; representatives of
a most every class in the community. Such a body as this, all
interested m promoting the welfare of their country, with their
undoubted honesty of purpose, their capacity for thought, their
entire and absolute freedom from external influences, were surely
as ikely to arrive at a sound and right decision, on an important
egis ative measure, as any other body or set of men who could
e colected together. And if gentlemen desired to institute a
mpanson, between that nominated chamber and an entirely


elected one, let them visit the neighbouring colonies as he had
done.; and it would be perceived at a glance, that there existed
not among them that intelligence, those attributes of learning, of
wealth, of birth, (if of any importance,) of capacity generally,
which he claimed for the Council of New South Wales. In fact,
he believed that there was not an Upper House as well consti-
tuted—for all practical purposes,—as our own, in any other
colony in the British dominions. There were persons elsewhere,
however, wild enough to' maintain that one chamber only should
exist. Now that was a matter, about which no man should have
unsettled ideas for a moment :—and upon this subject he would
quote one passage only, which was decisive of the question. It
was from the work of Professor Creasy, already an established
text book on the subject of the English Constitution. He thus
writes respecting the necessity of a second Legislative Chamber.
“ The mere fact of the division of our Parliament into two Houses,
neither more nor less, has been of infinite importance in our consti-
tutional history. We have escaped thereby the miseries, which the
instability, the violence, and the impassioned temerity of a single
legislative assembly have ever possessed, when that form of government
has been attempted ; —as it often was, in the Italian Republics of the
middle ages, as it was for a short period in Pennsylvania, and Georgia,
and as it has been repeatedly essayed by revolutionary France, Spain,
Naples, and Portugal, in our own time. The great political writers of
the United States, Kent, Story, and Lteber, have exhausted the
arguments upon this topic; and have completely proved, how essential a
guarantee for orderly and permanent liberty is the principle of
two Houses.” —Creasy Engl. Con. p. 197.
He could not resist the temptation, trusting to the indulgence
of the house, of adding one more extract on this topic. It is
from the work of Lieber.
“The Bicameral System accompanies the Anglican race like the
common law, and everywhere it succeeds; while no one attempt at
introducing the Unicameral system, in larger countries, has so far
succeeded. France, Spain, Naples, Portugal; in all these countries has
it been tried, and everywhere it has failed. The idea of one house
flows from that of unity of power, so popular in France. The Bicameral
system is called by the advocates of Democratic unity of power, an
Aristocratic institution. This is an utter mistake. In reality it is a
truly popular principle.”—“ To have a measure discussed entirely de novo,
by a different set of men, with equal powers, and combined upon a


different basis, —this, and the three readings of a proposed enactment,
with the going into committee before the third reading, have a
wonderful effect in sifting, moderating, and discovering; and finally
in enlightening the country. Take the history of any great Act of
Parliament or Congress, and test what has been asserted. This effect
of two Houses, and the rules of procedure just mentioned, are alone
like so many pillars to the fabric of Liberty.”
—Lieber Self Government, p. 157.
It was for the maintenance of that same liberty, that the
Elective Franchise was regulated; and the wider the basis of that
franchise, consistently with the preservation of liberty,—such as
true lovers of freedom understood by the word, —the more secure
and enduring would be the structure. On that principle, he
believed, they were all agreed. The only difference of opinion
was, as to the extent to which practically the qualification could be
reduced —or whether, indeed, any qualification whatever should be
required. The Solicitor-General had rightly remarked, that the bill
did not recognise unqualifiedly the principle of universal suffrage;
that is, of absolute and unmixed universal suffrage. For, although
every man without property would be enabled to vote, if he had
merely resided six months in the electorate, yet there was also
some check or balance introduced, by allowing all owners of property
resident or non-resident, to vote also. That check, however, it was
pretty obvious, would amount to little. Nevertheless, he confessed
that he should not be surprised if the effect of this bill, should
it be passed, would be very different (at all events in the first
instance) from what most of its supporters imagined. He doubted,
whether members of more democratic tendencies would be returned
to the Assembly, under the bill, than already were found there;
and the qualification was already so low, that to abolish it altogether
seemed but a small matter. It was lower than any which existed
in England, or to which any statesman there had ever proposed to
reduce it. The ,£lO house in this colony would, in England, be
at a rental of about forty shillings ; and, in point of fact, com-
paratively few of the labouring class there occupied houses worth
£5 a year. The £lO qualification, accordingly, in England,
excluded a very large proportion of mechanics and artisans—among
them some of the most intelligent workmen in the kingdom. But
how many artisans or mechanics, how many ordinary labouring


men, in this colony, were excluded ? He believed that the number
of the entire population, not at present having votes, scarcely
amounted in the towns to five per cent. And of whom did that
per centage consist; they were probably the dissolute, the
thoroughly idle, the refuse of the various gaols, the drunkards,
the thieves. He had mentioned hitherto one gaol only. There were
four others, from which criminals of every shade were continually
pouring. Where were these men absorbed, and to what class did
they belong? Certainly not to the higher, or the middling classes.
Surely it was important, whatever might be done in reforming the
franchise, to take care that such men as these were excluded from it.
Few would desire to see such persons placed on the same footing, or
enjoying the same privileges, as the industrious and the honest.
But, as the bill now stood, there was nothing to prevent a criminal
of any dye from exercising the franchise, the very day after coming
out of the gaoler’s hands. ' One class had been mentioned, on which
the privilege would desirably be conferred ; young men living at the
homes of their friends or parents, and therefore not themselves
householders, or paying for their lodging, but fully capable of
exercising the suffrage with judgment. Well; if that class of
persons could be included, (there were very few of them,) let them
be so. Let all others, also, who would probably exercise the
franchise rightly be included ; and all who had the smallest——or some
reasonably small—amount of property, to afford a test that they had
an interest in the general welfare. But let it not be forgotten, that
already every hovel, every rude and slight 1 shanty on the bank of a
r i ver? he had been assured that such was the case in numberless
instances,— conferred a vote. This, added to a six months residence,
he did not object to. And he acknowledged, that, while abolishing
the condition of a property qualification, the bill afforded some
security by at least retaining the condition of residence. The person
who had resided for six months in a particular locality, it was clear,
was not to be classed with those absolute trampers, of whom there
were so many in the community. Still, however, many persons who
were drunkards, cattle stealers, or idlers, or habitual thieves, lived
month after month in the same district; and as to these, and the like,
the condition of residence certainly afforded no guarantee. But, in
fairness and candour, that condition itself must be admitted to be


something, whether its value be more or less, which qualified the
right of voting; and this, coupled with the franchise given in
respect of property, prevented him from regarding the bill as one
establishing unlimited, or universal suffrage, however near to it the
enactment might, in effect, be thought by him to come.
The opinion, nevertheless, at which finally he had arrived,
after tolerably extensive reading, and such reflection and study
as he had been able to devote to the subject, was—that there
ought in all cases to be a property qualification, or that which may
reasonably be accepted as an equivalent; as, for instance, the
occupation of a residence of a given value, or the receipt of a
fixed salary. And for this conclusion, if the house would be good
enough to bear with him, he would give reasons, and adduce
authorities, which he was sure would be deemed worthy of attention,
if not such as to be wholly satisfactory to all minds He had
no argument to offer, he begged honorable members to observe,
in support of the representation of property. He advocated no
privilege, or right whatever, for property as such. He did not
desire to see a property qualification established, as opposed to
universal suffrage, for the mere protection of property. He did
not wish, under any circumstances, to make property the basis
of representation. A gentleman not now in his place had justly
said, in the very sensible speech which he had delivered, that
property had no exclusive or superior rights ; and that life, and the
security of person and character, were of greater value. But the
error, if he might be permitted to say so, into which Mr. Jones
had fallen, was this; that he supposed property to have been con-
stituted a qualification, or made necessary for the possession of the
franchise, for its own sake ;—whereas the qualification had been
adopted, and was by all writers insisted on, as a test or index only;—
a test of the possession of other attributes, intellectual or moral,
or both, essential to the due exercise of the franchise— which itself
was a trust, for the use and benefit of the community. And the
possession of property afforded a guarantee, that its owner would be
likely to discharge that trust faithfully. This then was the prin-
ciple, on which a property qualification was founded. He supported
it on no other; and only because its maintenance appeared to him,
foi the reasons presently to be adduced, to be conducive to the
general security, and the welfare of all classes.


It was hardly necessary to observe, that, in matters of legislation
as in others, general rules only could be laid down or acted on.
Exceptional cases almost always existed; but the fact proved
nothing against the general law, and for every exceptional case it
was scarcely possible to provide. Men of property, for instance,
are occasionally neither intelligent nor honest; and very many men
of intelligence and integrity exist, who perhaps have not a farthing.
Yet the general rule is unquestionable, that the most intelligent
and upright are those, who possess or have acquired property;
that ordinarily the poorest in a community, from causes too often
beyond their control, are both uneducated and ignorant; and that
men are prone to crime, in proportion to their ignorance. On the
other hand, it might perhaps be urged that a more direct test of
intelligence was attainable, than the mere possession of property.
In individual cases, no doubt, if individuals could personally be
examined, the fact of education-—possibly even the capacity to
read and write, —might afford a better test. But it will be found,
that as a general rule no such test could be established. The
property qualification, on the contrary, including in the term the
occupation of a dwelling, or the receipt of a certain fixed salary,
was open to less objection than any other, while it had additional
recommendations, already glanced at, which were peculiarly its own.
He advocated its retention in our Constitutional scheme,
however, not merely because theoretically it was right, but because
the experience of our own country, in which the principle had
uniformly been adhered to, and the warning held out by other
countries in which it had been discarded, taught us its practical
value. His reasons, therefore, might be thus enumerated; and he
submitted them for candid examination, by all who desired to decide
rightly in this matter. Whether tenable or not, they were
intelligible; they were offered to the house respectfully, but with
earnestness and confidence ; and no one, he hoped, would reject, who
felt that he could not refute them. A property qualification was
desirable, then, in the first place, as presenting a test—if not the
most direct or certain, yet, as a general rule, a test the most
practicable, and on the whole the least liable to error, —of
intelligence. Secondly, as at all events affording evidence of
industry, and probably of integrity, in the possessor. Industry and
integrity, it is true, even when combined with intelligence, do not


always command fortune. The race is not always to the swift, any
more than the battle is to the strong. This, however, is only to
repeat the objection already disposed of. We have to deal with
general results and consequences only; and it will hardly be denied,
that honest and industrious men, if possessed also of a reasonable
degree of intelligence, are in general those who do acquire property.
But, thirdly, if failing as a test on both or either of those points,
the possession of property in the elector, (or, as commonly phrased,
the having a stake in the country,) was important, as a guarantee of
faithfulness, if merely for his own sake, in the discharge of his
trust. Men so circumstanced have a direct interest, which, however
upright in intention, the pauper has not, and the dissolute and the
idle are not likely to have, in the security of property generally, and
the conservation of order, and of law. Those who have nothing,
and can acquire nothing, who have not the energy, or perseverance,
or capacity, to obtain the small means required to qualify them for
the franchise, are not the men to whom the prudent would entrust
other affairs, and is it wise to trust them in matters of state; —to
dispose of the interests of others, after having taken such little care
of their own ? A fourth and independent reason may be found, in
the additional value thus given to the possession of property, even
though of small amount; and in the inducement consequently held
out to its acquisition, and the cultivation of those qualities and
virtues, which in general enabled men to acquire and to retain it.
The elective franchise ought to be regarded, as an object in itself of
ambition; as something which at once places all men politically on a
level, whatever the degree of their wealth; and which distinguishes
the man of industry and probity, whatever his grade or position in
other respects, from persons of profligate habits or incurable
indolence.
Fifthly, he considered it an argument in favour of this requisite
of a property qualification, of very great weight, that its retention
had from the earliest ages, at all times, and by all statesmen, even
the most liberal in politics, been regarded as essential and vital, in
our parent land. The fact, which appeared by some to be doubted,
he should presently prove by abundant authority; and it was, he
thought, in itself, of infinite value. Some people there were, no
doubt, who had no respect for any opinions except their own ;


who despised alike the teaching of philosophers, and
the lessons afforded by history; and who, therefore, casting
behind them the bright and clear light which wisdom and
experience supplied, walked on in utter darkness —or along a
path illuminated only by the small rushlight of their own
unaided understandings. He confessed that he was not one of
these. He could not bring himself to treat lightly, or with less
than reverence, the opinions of great and distinguished men.
Nor could he believe that there was nothing important, or nothing
beneficial, in a principle which would be found in almost every
part of our civil polity; which had been steadily adhered to by
our ancestors, and their descendants to this day, and always has
formed a conspicuous element in our glorious constitution, ever
the freest on the earth, and still the admiration of the world.
Surely, if we were wise, we should be slow and reluctant in
casting aside, as pernicious or useless, that which so many learned
and experienced men, as much lovers of liberty as any here can
claim to be, have conceived to be indispensable to its preservation.
Lastly, he would point boldly to results ; and adduce, as his sixth
specific reason for a property qualification, the contrast which is
presented by the condition of England—he meant, of course, the
British Islands,— and that of France, and the United States, in
which every such qualification has been abandoned. Of the
actual state of France, it is unnecessary to say more than this;
that under Universal Suffrage, the fancied panacea for every
political evil, there has been established in that great country
unmitigated despotism. Of things in the United States, existing
there by the admission of their own waiters, and as he believed
traceable directly to the influence of an unrestricted suffrage, he
would take occasion to speak hereafter. England, however, the
seat of freedom, was not as yet surrendered to the tyranny of
numbers; and where else was liberty so secure, in what other
country did there exist such independence, without anarchy, such
absolute immunity for opinion, such safety under persecution or
oppression, such certainty of protection by the law ? In England
a property qualification existed, not only as an element in the
electoral franchise, but as a requisite in municipal offices, in every
man admitted to the jury box, and even in the parish overseer.
And we found there results, affecting every individual member of


the State, such as he had described them. We beheld her .still
increasing in population and in wealth, as if gigantic wars, and
an expenditure almost fabulous, were in her case sources only of
prosperity. There she stood among the nations, unharmed by the
shock of battles, unconvulsed at home by treason or by tumult,
while nearly every kingdom in Europe had been shaken to its
centre, with her wondrous constitution, the growth of unnumbered
centuries, unimpaired—as he trusted it would, in all its essential
parts, remain to the end of time.
He proceeded now to enforce the arguments which he had
submitted, by citations from the writers of whose works he had
already made some use. To these he would add two others :
M. Guizot, a statesman and historian too illustrious, to need any.
other introduction than his name; and Dr. Bowyer, the author
of Commentaries on Universal Public Law, and on the English
Constitution. And first, as to the supposed absolute or natural
right, contended for by some, to the possession of the franchise,
and the degree in which, if wholly unrestricted, it tends to the
securing or advancement of liberty in a State.
Dr. Bowyer shows conclusively, that no such right exists; and
that the question, how far the suffrage shall be extended in any
country, is one merely of expediency—determinable by positive law
All that he says, however, is of course too long for quotation.
“ However extended may be the body of citizens in whom the
government of a democracy is vested, and who exercise political power
through their chosen representatives, many members of the general body
politic or State must be excluded from the electoral franchise, by reason
of actual or presumed incapacity. And of such exclusions the Legislature
must judge, with reference to the public service and welfare. So
Montesquieu says, that the laws establishing the right of suffrage are
fundamental laws. Whether the government be a democracy, or an
aristocracy, or a mixed form of government, the laws defining the
Electoral Franchise are arbitrary or mutable lawsto be framed in
accordance with the spirit of the particular constitution, and the greater
advantage of the community.”— Bowyer's Comm. Pub. Law, p. 257.
. “ The experience of our own times has confirmed these observ-
ations ; by showing the evil effects resulting from the doctrine, that
the universal enjoyment of political suffrage is an absolute right by
natural law. That error is based upon the notion, already refuted, that
the obligation of municipal laws arises from consent, express or implied;
and that the civil state is constructed on contract.”— lbid. p. 2GO.


The following are extracts from Libber and Mr. J ustice Story.
“ There is no greater error, than the idea of making the vote oi
election the sole basis of liberty—or believing that, with the establishment
of an extensive or universal suffrage, we found liberty, however true it
be that liberty stands in need of election. Absolutism may rest on this
as on any other basis. The idea of seeking all liberty in universal
suffrage alone, leads with the greatest ease to a Napoleon ; to a transfer
of everything to one man, and of all future generations to his
descendants.”— Lieb. Self Gov. p. 240.
“It is obvious, that, even when the principle is established, that the
popular branch of the legislature shall emanate directly from the people,
there still remains a very serious question,—by whom, and in what
manner the choice shall be made ? It is a question vital to the system ;
and in a practical sense decisive as to the desirability and efficiency of
the powers of government. Here there is much room for doubt, and
ingenious speculation, and theoretical inquiry ; on which different minds
may arrive at very different results. To whom ought the right of
suffrage in a free government to be confided ? Or, in other words, who
ought to be permitted to vote in the choice of the representatives of the
people ? Ought the right of suffrage to be absolutely universal ? Ought
it to be qualified and restrained ? And ought it to belong to many or
to few?” “ The most strenuous advocate for universal suffrage has never
contended, that the right should be absolutely universal. No one has
ever been sufficiently visionary, to hold that all persons of every age,
degree, and character, should be entitled to vote in all elections of
public officers.”— Story's Comm. Const. ; sections 576 and 578.
His next citations would be from the work already mentioned
by him—intituled “The Rationale of Political Representation.”
The name of the writer was not known to him, and its authority
was perhaps no greater than that of the individual quoting it. He
would venture to say of the work, however, that it discussed every
portion of the subject to which it was devoted, with great ability,
clearness, and fulness. No topic indeed in it was touched, which
the learned author did not exhaust. He might instance, in
particular, the subject of the direct Educational test, the adoption
of which, however much to be desired, was there clearly shown
to be practically impossible.
«i n a country in which the inhabitants were thoroughly enlightened,
(if we may be permitted to make use of so vague a phrase,) there could
be no reason why the Elective Franchise should not be universal. It
unfortunately happens, however, that in almost all countries the bulk of
the population is in a state which can scarcely be calumniated by terming


it intellectual darkness. When this is the case, the formation of the
electoral body is a problem of no small difficulty. To make the franchise
universal, would subject the legislature to the control of ignorance;- and
lower the character of its enactments, to the injury of the common good.
On the other hand, to limit the franchise to a part of the community,
would enhance the danger to be apprehended from the prevalence of
partial interests. The demand for intelligence in the electoral body, and
the demand for numerical magnitude, are antagonistic principlesone
can be answered only at the expense of the other.”
—Rationale of Polit. Rep. p. 228.
“In every country, then, in which the intellectual condition of the
mass of the people will not admit of universal suffrage, the object to be
proposed is—the formation of an electoral body, the members of which
shall be superior in knowledge to the mass of the people; shall possess
an interest in legislative enactments, and acts of administration, identical
for the most part with that of the whole community ; and shall be placed
by their numerousness, (with the aid of suitable regulations,) beyond the
reach of bribery and intimidation.”— lbid. 229.
The object of a property franchise is, therefore, according to this
writer, the obtaining of two qualities in the electors ; first, adequate
intelligence , and secondly, identity in interest with that of society
at large. After disposing of the Educational test qualification, he
proceeds thus.
“The next criterion which presents itself, is Property; or some
indication of the possession of property. This has one considerable
advantage over the last. The possession of property is a qualification
which pervades all society. It is not confined to any trade or profession;
to any rank, to any party, to any sect, to the inhabitants of any one
town or district. People with tastes of a thousand hues, and interests
of a thousand different kinds, have this qualification in common. There
is no individual, indeed, who has not something which he calls his own ;*
and who may not rise to the possession of something more. If, then, a ‘
certain moderate amount of property be taken as a qualification for an
elector, the consequence will be that the privilege will be diffused, through
a variety of ranks, classes, ages, and professions; so as to render it
difficult for any sinister interest to grow up amongst the electoral body.
Ihe lower the amount, of course the more surely will the advantage be
obtained. It would not be very likely, for example, that, if all persons
worth one hundred pounds were endowed with the elective franchise,
they could have any partial interests in the acts of the legislature, at
vai iance with that of the whole community :—and their number would
be large enough to raise them, with the aid of suitable regulations, above
the danger of bribery or intimidation.”— lbid. 230.


<< j n order, then, to combine the two requisites,—of identity of interests
with those of the nation at large, and adequate knowledge,—the electoral
body must be in the first place numerous, and in the second place
possessed individually of a certain amount of property:’— lbid. 232.
«if the Elective Franchise be restricted to persons possessing a given
amount of property, it is not for the reason that property is of more
importance than other springs of human enjoyment and welfare, but that
it is the best indication of intelligence within our reach :—and that, by
confining the franchise to men of a determinate income, a better choice
of Representatives will be likely to be made, in consequence of such men
possessing more knowledge than the rest of the people. Ibid. 247.
The same principles, as applied to the British constitution, at
all periods of its history, are recognised by Libber and Guizot.
“The English, not allowing universal suffrage, or a representation
based on numbers alone, require some limit beyond which the right of
voting shall not go. This limit is, as a general rule, indicated either by
property, or by,a certain annual expense that usually indicates the amount
of income.” —“ What is meant, when it is said that a constitution ought
to be founded on property, is this; that a minimum amount of property
ought to be adopted, as the last line beyond which no suffrage should be
granted. It means, that we seek for a criterion which will enable us to
distinguish those, who have a fair stake in the welfare of the State, from
those who have not.”— Lieber on Self Government 140.
“ They included all men invested with real independence; free to
dispose of their persons and wealth, and in a position to rise to some ideas
of social interest. This it is, which constitutes political capacity. This
capacity varies, according to time and place. The same degree of fortune,
and enlightenment, is not everywhere and always sufficient to confer it;
but its elements are constantly the same. It exists, wherever we meet
with the conditions, whether material or moral, of that degree of
independence and intellectual development, which enables a man freely,
aqd reasonably, to accomplish the political act he is required to perform.
, Guizot Pol. Ilist. —cited in Creasy Const, p. 272.
He came now to the history of the electoral franchise, in our
own country ; and he undertook to state, that not property only,
but freehold property, was anciently the sole enabling qualification.
In towns, as they became enfranchised, residents or householders
‘‘paying scot and bearing lot” therein, —were entitled to vote;
and, no doubt, in the course of time, the abuse sprang up and
obtained, of freemen being admitted as voters, who were non-
resident. This abuse, however, was in a great measure swept away
by the Reform Bill. But, almost without exception, and every


exception he believed founded on a presumption, that the voter be-
longed to the borough, and so contributed to the municipal expendi-
ture, the franchise was always dependent on property, or occupation
affording a presumption of property, even in the towns. In the
counties, it always was so without exception. The old Saxon
Witenagemote, the parliament of our forefathers, it had been
asserted, required no such qualification. There was nothing to
justify such an assertion. It would be seen, from the quotations
with which he should trouble the house, that there, as in all other
of our institutions, the same requisite of property existed. If not
the qualification of property, as such, the attribute of rank,
indicating necessarily the possession of property, alone conferred
the right of admission. On all these points, he was content to rely
on the authority of Professor Creasy.
“ Both the Democratic and Aristocratic principles entered largely into
the Anglo-Saxon polity: —the latter filially obtaining the ascendancy,
chiefly by reason of the strictness of the regulations which it was found
necessary to introduce, in order to maintain some degree of public
peace.”—“ To adopt the technical language of a modern writer on political
philosophy, security being the primary object of government, it was found
necessary to trench largely on both Liberty and Equality, in order to
preserve it ."—Creasy on Engl. Const, p. 44,
“ The Witan was essentially an aristocratic body. It was summoned
and presided over by the King ; and was attended by the Bishops, and by
the Earls or Eorldermen. The Thanes generally had a right to attend ;
and, probably, those who resided in the neighbourhood of the place where
a Witan was held, did attend in considerable numbers. The magistrates
of boroughs, and the four men and Beeves of townships, and other similar
officers, must haye occasionally been present, for the purpose of appealing
against the decisions of inferior tribunals. But there certainly were
no representatives of the Ceorls (or inferior Freeholders) at the Witan,
with any power to take part or vote in its proceedings. "—lbid. 6J.
“ With respect to the County Voters, the requirements of the 10 Henry
6. c. 2, that the land which gave the vote should be situate within the
county, was always obeyed ; and it is not likely that any great number of
persons, in the time of the Plantagenets, were owners of freehold property
in counties in which they did not reside, With respect to Boroughs, there
is little doubt but that originally a man miist have been a resident,
and must have been a member of the Court-leet of the Borough, in order
to he recognised as a burgess. Afterwards, the practice grew up in many
|3Ploughs of admitting non-residents as burgesses.”— lbid. 255),


11l another place, tracing downwards the history of the
representation, he says—“ We shall find nothing approaching to
Universal Suffrage.” — p. 266. Subsequently, Mr. Creasy admits
that the existing qualifications exclude, in England, many intelligent
and desirable persons. But, assuming that in this colony there
may be some such, who as yet have not the franchise, (there must
be very few, for the reasons already explained,) the observations in
his work are well worth attention, which show how easy it is for
any well disposed and tolerably industrious man, within a
moderately short period, even without occupying a £lO house, to
acquire the privilege. It is necessary to hasten on, however, to see
how completely the element of property, as a qualification tor the
exercise of power in any shape, is interwoven in every department
of our civil polity.
“ Another important general observation is, that there is nothing like
Universal Suffrage in matters of local political power. The principle, of
requiring some property qualification in electors, is now as firmly
established with regard to the appointments to local offices, as it is with
regard to the choice of Parliamentary Representatives. If we look both
to rural and to town districts, we shall find that it is only ratepayers,
(that is to say, those who have some house or other fixed holding in the
districts, and who in proportion to the value contribute to the local
taxes,) that can take part in the parish vestry, or act as burgesses in the
municipal corporations. The same may be observed, with regard to
voters for guardians in the poor law unions; for members of the local
boards of health; and it is, I believe, universally applicable to the
appointment of the governing bodies, in the numerous towns whose self-
government is regulated by special statutes.” —Creasy Engl. Const, p. 375.
Surely, all this proves incontestably the vast importance, the
essentiality and indispensableness—if it be pardonable to coin words
for the occasion, —of this great pervading principle. But this is not
all. The property qualification, as already observed, enters also into
the composition of our Juries. For what reason? He (Sir
Alfred Stephen) begged that honorable gentlemen would ponder
well over the question. They would find, that it was because men
who had not property, some stake in the country, some moderate
amount of possessions to indicate their interest in its security, their
steadiness and integrity of character, and their capacity in point of
intelligence, could not safely be entrusted with the duty. And the
house would see presently, how the administration of justice had


been obstructed and disgraced, and society itself almost resolved
into its first elements, in other countries, by (confessedly) the absence
of these attributes from the jury box. Was it reasonable or right,
then, that men without such guarantees should be entrusted with other
duties, quite as important—but with far greater and irresponsible
power ? It was impossible, he thought, to suggest one reason for
requiring a property qualification in jurors, which did not apply
with equal or greater force to the elective franchise. But the one
was a privilege, which all men coveted to possess:— the other was
a duty, which most men would be glad to evade.
“We have now observed the more important parts of our legal system,
in which members of the great body of the people take part, as Jurors, in
the administration of justice. It is interesting to ascertain, also, by what
classes of the people, and by what number, that privilege is exercised.
Here, again, we find the principle of a property qualification in full
activity: -and it is worth remarking, that, in this branch of Constitu-
tional power, the propriety of such a limitation is tacitly admitted on all
hands. The most vehement partisans of Universal Suffrage in
parliamentary elections, never require that the Jury box should be open
to all comers.”— Creasy, p. 381.
He had yet another authority to invoke; the value of which
the Solicitor-General would hardly be prepared to dispute, for the
learned gentleman had, in the course of his speech, distinctly referred
to and admitted it. And, indeed, if there was one name more
illustrious than any other, in all things relating to reform, —not less
reforms in parliament than in the law,—it was that of Lord
Brougham. But extreme liberality of opinion in politics, it will
be seen, does not imply approval of universal suffrage. Lord
Brougham, always the advocate of a very wide extension of the
franchise, never dreamed of bestowing it on those who have given
no adequate pledge of capacity, and have no guarantee to offer to
the State, of their identity in interest with that of the community.
In a speech recently delivered by him in the House of Lords,
recommending the concession of the franchise, if possible, to every
intelligent aitisan and mechanic, and to all persons of education,
of whom many thousands in England have no vote, he proposes
to abolish the class of so-called freemen, —mere residents, with
pioperty too small to place them above the temptation of bribery,


and, in conclusion, referring to the effects of universal suffrage in
France, he thus expresses himself.
“Depend upon it, my Lords, the principal objection to universal
suffrage itself, is not the evil effects which it might produce in borough
elections, though these would he very great, hut its destruction of the
county representation, by depriving property of all its influence, and
thus destroying the balance of the Constitution. Nor is the aversion
to it confined to this house, and to reflecting men in this country. Our
neighbours on the other side of the channel, those I mean who desire
to have a Constitutional government, hold it in supreme reprobation.
An honourable friend of mine (the Marquis of Lansdowne) warned me
not long ago, very unnecessarily, against it, and said that the liberties
of France lay prostrate before universal suffrage.”
“ My purpose this day has been, to mark the diversity of the political
conduct held in the two countries, both as showing how our course must
needs be followed by our neighbours, if they really desire to obtain a
constitutional government, or preserve it when acquired; and as illustra-
ting the doctrines of moderation, gradual amendment, and wise concession,
which I have recommended as essential to guide us in the administra-
tion of our happy system, our mixed and balanced constitution. Against
these doctrines he will grievously sin, who shall patronise any scheme,
that, under the name of reform, should break in upon the fundamental
principles sanctioned near a quarter of a century ago by the united voice
of Parliament and the country. Abiding by those principles, I protest
against whatever change would substitute for our limited monarchy a
democracy, to end as elsewhere in a monarchy without any limits at all.
(Hansard's Parliamentary Debates, House of Lords, Srd August, 1857 J
The honorable member on his left suggests, that these are changed
opinions. It is not so. Mr. Wise had just put into his (Sir
Alfred Stephen’s) hands a volume, from which he would read part
of a speech, made by the same eminent person in 1817 : —proving
that Henry Lord Brougham, in 1857, reiterated opinions which
were entertained equally by him in his earlier, though not altogether
more vigorous days. The speech itself was on the subject of parlia-
mentary reform ; and this is the way in which the “ wild” scheme
of universal suffrage (so Mr. Brougham deemed it) was denounced
by him.
“ I am anxious to take this early opportunity, of declaring my decided
opposition to the principle of universal suffrage; because it is my entire
conviction, that if that measure were adopted it would operate to destroy
the Parliament, instead of reforming it: —while it must serve to shake
the universal security of property. I am an advocate for that degree of


reform, which is obviously necessary to remove those blemishes which
have been mixed up by time, with that glorious fabric of human wis-
dom, the British Constitution. I am decidedly adverse to those wild,
vague, impracticable, (and even if practicable, pernicious) propositions,
which are so loudly talked of.”*
He now turned to the United States; and, notwithstanding
the admiration expressed by some for the great republic, he trusted
that a fair consideration would be given, even by them, to the
unquestionable facts which he proposed to lay before the house,
in support of his position that the institution of universal
suffrage, or, in effect, the vesting of the franchise in numbers,
irrespective of property,—was not favourable to liberty; or cal-
culated to raise the character, or promote the real interests, of
any people. The American nation was, indeed, powerful and
prosperous. Its material progress was wonderful. This, however,
was in a large measure attributable to position. The United
States had local advantages, which no other country possessed.
She had a boundless and fertile territory ; which afforded
an unlimited field for an expanding or restless population.
But America was not merely wealthy and populous. She was
eminent in arts, in literature, in science. Her educational and
charitable institutions, the fruit not only of private liberality, but
of systematic State support, were worthy of all imitation. Her
citizens were brave, enterprising, energetic, persevering. There were
men among them, distinguished as orators, statesmen, philosophers,
jurists. They were still our kindred, though estranged from us.
He was not therefore about to slander, or depreciate, either the
government or the inhabitants of that extraordinary country. But
mon, TriT 7 Were entertained b y Mr - In a debate in the House of Com-
universal s „ffL t "’"'T. * have spoken as follows. “ I have always deprecated
becluse I thS 7 S ,°, mUCh °“ aCC ° Unt ° f thG CoDfustol, t 0 ™ would lead, as
it would in -f we BhoUd m reallty lOSe the Very object we desire t 0 obtain. I think that
n nature embarrass, and prevent the deliberate voice of the country from
countine 7 thi '* that y ° U augraent the deliberative body of the people, by
, . . ea s ’ but that, in truth, you confer on individuals by this means the
power of drawing forth numbers, who, without deliberation, would act implicitly upon their
' 7 opinion 1S > that the best plan of representation is that, which shall bring into activity
17 ° f independent voters; and that that is defective, which would bring
orth those whose situation and condition take from them the power of deliberation.”
~~(Hansard's Pari. History, Vol. 33, page 126.)


when he heard gentlemen, in the excess of their admiration, insinuate
the superiority of her political institutions, and talk of those
statesmen as patriots surpassing all others, —that is, as men un-
equalled in patriotism in modern times, for so he understood the
opinion expressed, if this was not the exact phrase used,—he felt
no small indignation. On what foundation did such opinions rest;
or where was the memory, that had forgotten the long 1011 of
illustrious men, who adorned the legislative halls of our native land ?
Great as America was, she would have been greater, far greater
and nobler in every attribute, had she, happily for heiself, been a
limited monarchy. Her defects' were in her institutions; and all
that detracted from her character was due entirely to their demo-
cratic nature. She was under the dominion, not of the most en-
lightened among her citizens, or those who had the deepest stake
in her welfare, nor even of those who were confessedly her most
distinguished men, but of the masses. The property qualification
was unknown there, and she was governed by numbers only.
To this, as he had already observed, were clearly traceable most of
the evils which disfigured her history. On such a subject, actual
demonstration was of course impossible; but, as to the cause
of some of those evils, he would adduce authority and arguments
very nearly amounting to demonstration. He did not intend—he
would not stoop, nor did he think it fair,—to speak of mere riots,
and other popular tumults, common to other countries as well as
to the United States. He remembered things quite as disgraceful,
in cities where law was habitually superior to mob violence. He
did not forget the outrages at Bristol; the burning of the castle
of Nottingham. He was in London when the great Luke of
Wellington was attacked by the populace in the streets ; and he had
seen his house barricaded, to prevent attempts at its destruction. But
he (Sir Alfred Stephen) should refer to events of far deeper sig-
nificance, and too notorious to admit of denial. In the first place,
he instanced —not the mere existence of slavery in America, or
the shocking character of that institution, but its continual and
determined extension, and the constant increase, systematically en-
couraged and maintained, in the number of her slave States. And
this in spite of the vaunted declaration that all men are born


equal. Before the dominion of universal suffrage, slavery was
discouraged:—and some of the American Courts, on the faith
and under the sanction of that declaration, it is said, held that
men bom after that charter, although of slave parents, were citizens
of the commonwealth. But democracy, which pulled down all
above it, craved something below itself; and found this in the
acquisition and sale of human flesh. In strict accordance with
this, there were two most remarkable exceptions in the American
law, from the rejection of a property qualification, and the univer-
sality of manhood suffrage. There was a property qualification in
slaves. Yes; every free American citizen had one vote, as an elector,
for every five head owned by him. And one class of individuals,
as he understood the law, whatever their intelligence or property,
could have no vote at all. These were, coloured men—because
the descendants of slaves. He had spoken of riots, and similar
outrages in England. But who had heard, in modern times at
least, of rival and contending bodies of police there, in one city,
as recently there existed in New York; —or rival and contending
legislatures, or bodies claiming to be legislatures, in one State, as
there still exist in Kansas ? When did any one ever hear of
organised bodies, in England, systematically and by force setting
the tribunals at defiance, and executing justice (so called) themselves
at discretion; as during the last two years there have existed,
in California and New Orleans ?—Take another instance of the supre-
macy of numbers, or of the effects resulting from that supremacy,
in the well known fact that certain opinions, disapproved of by the
masses, cannot safely be published, or even safely uttered, in the States.
See her ablest and most worthy citizens, under the ban of popular
odium or disapproval, shut out from high office. Look at the depen-
dent position of her judges; almost invariably elected, and owing
continuance in office, in many instances, to whatever may be the
popular feeling of the day. Trace the effect of these things,—of
the absence of the test of property, and of the prevalence of
unrestricted manhood suffrage,—in the subserviency of men in
elected power, to the influence of the masses who elect them; in
the startling verdicts frequently given by juries; and in the abuse
of the prerogative of mercy—called in America the pardoning


power. See it, in the very existence and action of the Committees
of Vigilance, called into being by those same evils. And, at least,
before rejecting as unfounded anything which he had here asserted,
let honorable members-let this community, whose interests the
question so deeply affected,—read, and ponder over the observations,
made by Americans, which he would now read to the house.
His first citation was from the inauguration address, delivered
in the commencement of last year, by Governor Weller of Cali-
fornia; and, certainly, a curious picture it presented.
“ Every lover of republican institutions must deplore the disposition,
so frequently manifested by a portion of the people, in different sections
of the country, to take the law into their own hands, and place the
regularly organised tribunals at defiance. Ours is emphatically a govern-
ment of law, and that law is the essence of popular will, as expressed
through constitutional channels. In its execution, the sovereignty of the
people is manifested. It may be, that the law sometimes fails to give
adequate protection to person and property; but the fault will geneially
be found with the people themselves. In many localities, there is an
unwillingness upon the part of respectable citizens, actively engaged m
business, to serve upon juries; and, as a consequence, irresponsible men,
with no visible means of support, are entrusted with the power of passing
upon the guilt or innocence of persons charged with crimes. If, as is
often the case under the circumstances, a notorious offender is allowed
to escape, the whole community is thrown into a high state of excitement,
and summary punishment demanded. It is certainly a disagreeable duty
to be taken from one’s business, and compelled to spend a week or
two in the criminal courts; but every good citizen ought to be willing
to make the sacrifice, when the public interest demands it. Elevate
the charactef of your jurors by selecting them in strict conformity wit
the law, and by imposing severe fines upon citizens refusing to serve, and,
in my opinion, fewer villains will escape, and communities will be less
disposed to disregard the law, and resort to violence. Another cause of
difficulty may be found, in the manner in which our judicial and
ministerial officers are elected. Political parties hold their primary
meetings and present their respective tickets. Because of the indifference
manifested by respectable men of all parties, these elections are too
often controlled and governed by irresponsible men, whose patriotism
is generally subservient to their pecuniary interests. Ballot-box stuffers,
in the absence of honest voters, declare the result, and men without
intelligence, capacity, or integrity, are placed in responsible offices. The
ballot-box, in our system of government, is the medium through which
the people speak ; and he who attempts to stifle their voice is an enemy


to public liberty, and should be treated as such. He poisons the public
fountain, and corrupts all the streams which flow from it. He places men
in judicial and ministerial offices, in whom the community have no
confidence. It is not strange that the people of California have sometimes
been excited, even to madness, by the conduct of their public functionaries.
The fact is undeniable, that men have sought office in this State, not
fiom a laudable ambition to be useful in contributing to its greatness,
nor from an anxiety to acquire reputation, and confer honor upon then-
families or kindred, but from a sordid desire to make money. The contest
has not always been, who should confer the greatest benefits upon the
State, but who should gain the most money out of his position.”
(Governor Weller’s Address ; California, 1857.)
The extracts which he was now about to read, respecting the
gross tampering with justice and law exhibited by Governors of
the different States, under the influence of their constituents, are
from the pen of Professor Lieber.
“ The only case in which our Executives—(in the different States of
the Union) —have a real vetitive power, is the case of Pardon ; and, most
unfortunately, it is used in an alarming degree, against the supremacy of
law, and the stability of right—both essential to civil liberty. I consider
the indiscriminate pardoning, so frequent in many parts of the United
States, one of the most hostile things now at work in our country, to a
perfect government of law.” — Lieber on Self Government, p. 164.
“ All the disastrous effects of the abuse of the Pardoning Power,
whether inherent in the power itself, unlimited by proper restrictions, or
arising out of a state of things peculiar to ourselves, have shown
themselves among us in an alarming degree ; and are, in many parts of
the country, on the increase.”— lbid. 396.
He had already too long trespassed on the kindness of the
housebut- there was yet one feature in the bill, that of the
ballot,-on which he desired to say a few words. He entirely
approved of, and should in committee warmly support that measure.
The ballot was said to be un-English, and cowardly. He thought
the former term no otherwise applicable, than that the system, as
applied to the electoral franchise, (for it was common enough in
clubs, and elsewhere) was new; and, as to the other epithet, he saw
no cowardice in desiring to be secured, while conscientiously voting,
from the hooting or insults—perhaps the rotten eggs and cabbages,—
which not infrequently in England assailed, as he had himself seen,
both candidates and electors during the polling. It was easy to


create or foster a prejudice against the ballot, or anything else,
by affixing to it an opprobrious word. But cautious and prudent
men, or timid men, were not cowards, because they abstained
from voting at all, rather than incur the consequences (in whatever
shape they came) of voting uprightly; or because they wished
to be able to record their votes, without suffering the penalty of
those consequences. After all, however, the question for the house
was, simply, which of the two systems, avowed or undisclosed
voting, was likely to be the more useful to the public; and his
conclusion was, upon the whole, in favor of the latter. He would
not, however, in the present stage of the bill, enter more fully
into this matter. Those who desired to do so would find the
whole subject discussed, and every argument affecting it stated and
considered, in the work on ‘Political Representation’ already so
extensively used by him; and one more extract from it, he was
glad to inform the house, would be his last citation.
“ On the system of open voting, it is manifest that the anticipation
of the consequences of his vote to the elector, from the candidates and
their partisans, has all the force of which it is susceptible. Publicity is,
indeed, an essential circumstance; without which, the hope or the fear
of such consequences could not operate. Reward could be conferred
or punishment inflicted upon him, only in consequence of his vote being
known. Let the direction of his suffrage, however, he unknown and
undiscoverable, and by that single provision you render it impossible,
that he shall be either rewarded or punished for it. You surrender him
at once, to the undisturbed operation of his real feelings towards the
candidates; and to the play of those principles, on which the legislature
calculated in the construction of the electoral body. You enable him,
in one word, to vote as he likes; which is in fact all that it is possible
to accomplish, towards securing a right decision, and which is the
immediate object to be kept in view. It will scarcely be denied by any
one, that secret voting puts an end to intimidation. Menaces would be
absurd, when, as the conduct of the party to whom they were addressed
could not be ascertained, it would be impossible to execute them.”
—(Rationale of Polit. Rep. p. 288.,)
He had now concluded; and he cordially thanked the house
for the patient hearing which they had given him. He had, he
feared, wearied the house; but it was because he had felt it to
be a duty, to touch upon almost every point of importance in the
measure. And, as it would have been unbecoming in him to address


an assembly of that kind, without having studied the subject on
which they were debating, he had, since the bill was laid before
the Council, devoted to it as much time as he could command; and
he had availed himself of extracts from treatises and authorities,
which, however tedious to the house in the reading, would he
thought be found to support, if not to establish, the opinions that
evening expressed by him. He had at all events succeeded in
showing that property to some extent had always, in England,
been considered essential to the franchise, and indeed to the exercise
of almost every privilege, in all departments of the State. While
concurring in many portions of the measure, he hoped that he
had not too warmly opposed those of which he disapproved; and
that nothing had fallen from him, tending to increase the irritation
said to prevail out of doors on this subject, or that could reasonably
give offence to any one. If those who had at present no sufficient
property qualification, conceived that they had nevertheless a fair
right to the suffrage, and that to deny it to them was unjust or
harsh, let them—he entreated, if only in common charity, or rather
in a spirit of candour and justice, to men who, like him, might
reasonably be supposed to have no sinister or unworthy motive
actuating them, —let them fairly consider all the facts and reasons,
which he had that night adduced. Doubtless there may be instances,
in which, from insolvency, or other circumstances beyond the per-
son’s own control, individuals may at the time of an election have
no property (that is to say, neither freehold, leasehold, household,
nor salary) qualification; though the number of such cases must be
comparatively few. But let it be remembered, that the qualification
is after all very readily acquired; that the object of establishing
such a qualification, is one in the preservation of which all men
of integrity, industry, and intelligence, are alike interested; and
let not those so situated, or others who advocate the manhood
suffrage proposed by this bill, suspect that opposition to it springs
from selfish motives, or any other than a sincere and earnest desire
to promote the general welfare.
Sydney : Printed by Stokes & Co., 205, George-atreet North.


