

SPEECH
R. BURDETT SMITH, ESQ., M.P.,
ON THE
ADDRESS IN REPLY TO GOVERNOR’S SPEECH
(NEW SOUTH WALES CONTINGENT FOR THE SOUDAN).
Delivered in the Legislative Assembly , 24 March, 1885.
From the “ Parliamentary Dehates.”
Mr. Speaker,
It was not my intention to speak on this subject. I
attended the meeting—the largest, ever held in Sydney—called
together for the purpose of expressing approval of the action of
the Government, and for the inauguration of a patriotic fund, and
I there expressed my views. My name appeared first in the
requisition calling upon the Mayor to convene the meeting. It
was generally understood from the extended sphere of the debate
on Friday night' that it would be impossible to then come to a
division, and at the request of a number of honorable members I
therefore moved the adjournment of the debate. It is evident, I
think, from the spontaneous enthusiasm which was displayed on
the occasion of the departure of the troops, that the colony in-
dorses the action of the Government. Ido not take exception to
opinions which have been expressed by honorable members in the
course of this debate, and I am sorry that I feel compelled to vote
in opposition to some of my esteemed friends. I shall support the
Government, because I believe they have acted in a spirit of pure
and enlightened patriotism, and in no autocratic or selfish manner.
I shall have occasion to refer to the opinions of professional fault-
finders outside of this Chamber. We have heard a great deal
about the violation of the Constitution, and of the so-called folly
of depriving our defence force of the services of 750 men. The
Government admit that they have technically violated the Consti-
tution, and they ask us to condone what has been done. It is said
that Parliament has been ignored, and that its ancient and his-
tecs'


torical
be gov<
by rely
public
every c
enrolm
occurri
constit
I do r
countr;
satisfy
as 183
me ref
Lord 3
tions c
was a
sanctic
enrol i
who w
and th
view i
Palme
untry
crisis
on of
is in
ntous
is no
ment.
tother
I can
1 back
sd by
3Solu-
>r the
ion to
Jarlos,
•oiled,
nth a
Lord
The noble lord has said that there is no precedent ior tne course pur-
sued. I will not dispute with the noble lord on that point. I wish to
found the conduct which the British Government shall pursue, upon the
circumstances of the case, and upon the expediency of the time. . If the
Government be wrong in what they have done, twenty precedents in their
favour cannot convert that wrong into right; if we are right, as I contend
we are, it is indifferent whether we are following a stream of former pre-
cedents, or boldly establishing a precedent ourselves for time to come;
satisfied I am, that, when similar contingencies arise, our example will be
followed if we have been right, and abandoned if we have been wrong. I
therefore maintain that the case is not of precedent, but a question of
right or wrong. I hold that we are right—that we are acting in strict pur-
suance of the true interests of England.
This is a case in point, where, as in the case under consideration,
there was a necessity for prompt action by the Government in the
enrolment of troops. After their offer had been accepted by the
Imperial Government, was it not expedient for ministers to take
prompt and decisive action, but relying upon the good sense and
wisdom of Parliament to confirm and condone their action after-
wards 1 As has been pointed out both here and in the other
Chamber, had the Government waited for a meeting of Parliament
it would have been impossible to despatch the troops at the time
when they were despatched. What was the course pursued by
the British Government in the case to which I have referred?
Lord Mahon, in the course of a very exhaustive speech, used every
possible argument against the Government for violating the Con-
stitution in forming the Spanish legion without the authority of


torical privileges have been slighted. How could any free country
be governed if the advisers of the Crown could not meet a crisis
by relying on the authority of Parliament, and the expression of
public opinion for their condonation afterwards ? There is in
every country the necessity for sudden state intervention, and the
enrolment of the Soudan contingent was one of these momentous
occurrences. It has been argued with great force that there is no
constitutional precedent for the course adopted by the Government.
I do not suppose that in the history of this or of the mother
country a precisely parallel ease can be found ; but I think I can
satisfy honorable members that in the mother country as far back
as 1835, a case which is in some respects parallel occurred. Let
me refer honorable members to a speech which was delivered by
Lord Palmerston in reply to Lord Mahon, who had moved resolu-
tions condemnatory of the Government of which Lord Palmerston
was a member. Government had, without the authority or the
sanction of Parliament, given to British subjects permission to
enrol under the service of the Queen of Spain against Don Carlos,
who was regarded as a rebel. A legion of 12,000 men was enrolled,
and the Government of the day assisted in the enrolment, with a
view to support the throne and Constitution of Spain. Lord
Palmerston is reported in Hansard to have said :
The noble lord has said that there is no precedent for the course pur-
sued. I will not dispute with the noble lord on that point. I wish to
found the conduct which the British Government shall pursue, upon the
circumstances of the case, and upon the expediency of the time. If the
Government be wrong in what they have done, twenty precedents in their
favour cannot convert that wrong into right; if we are right, as I contend
we are, it is indifferent whether we are following a stream of former pre-
cedents, or boldly establishing a precedent ourselves for time to come;
satisfied I am, that, when similar contingencies arise, our example will be
followed if we have been right, and abandoned if we have been wrong. I
therefore maintain that the case is not of precedent, but a question of
right or wrong. I hold that we are right—that we are acting in strict pur-
suance of the true interests of England.
This is a case in point, where, as in the case under consideration,
there was a necessity for prompt action by the Government in the
enrolment of troops. After their offer had been accepted by the
Imperial Government, was it not expedient for ministers to take
prompt and decisive action, but relying upon the good sense and
wisdom of Parliament to confirm and condone their action after-
wards? As has been pointed out both here and in the other
Chamber, had the Government waited for a meeting of Parliament
it would have been impossible to despatch the troops at the time
when they were despatched. What was the course pursued by
the British Government in the case to which I have referred?
Lord Mahon, in the course of a very exhaustive speech, used every
possible argument against the Government for violating the Con-
stitution in forming the Spanish legion without the authority of


Parliament; but what did the British Parliament do? It indorsed
the action of the Government, as I am quite sure the large
majority of honorable members of the House will indorse the
action of this Government in regard to the Soudan contingent.
It has been argued by persons outside, who, I submit, with great
respect to some of them, do not understand the question, that the
Egyptian war is an unrighteous one, that the Mahdi is only fight-
ing for liberty, and that therefore the British Government ought
not to interfere. The same kind of argument was used by Lord
Mahon in his impeachment of Lord Palmerston. He, contended
that Don Carlos was not in any sense a rebel, but was fighting for
his rights, and that although he tried to subvert the throne and
Constitution of Spain he could not be regarded in the light of a
rebel. Then again, any one would suppose that the men who have
gone to the Soudan have been sent there compulsorily. How, it
is a well-known fact that every soldier went voluntarily, and that
nothing like compulsion was used. It has been said also, and a
great deal has been attempted to be made of the assertion, that
the British Government only accepted our offer of troops out of
compliment to us. I submit that such a statement has been com-
pletely refuted. Hot only has the British Government cordially
accepted the services of the troops, but her Majesty the Queen has
sent her thanks and congratulations to the colony, and the Prince
of Wales and the royal family have also expressed approval of
the course pursued by Hew South Wales. The Commander-in-
Chief of the British army and the general in command of the
Egyptian campaign—the Duke of Cambridge and Lord Wolseley
—have both expressed not only concurrence but admiration at
the action of this Government, and their willingness to accept the
services of our troops. Then, again, that august body, the House
of Lords, has unanimously by a vote of thanks expressed its satis-
faction, and the Lord Mayor of London and the corporation of
that great city have also approved of our action. The leading
public men of England, representing all shades of political opinion,
and representing also art, science, and literature, have all expressed
approval. And, lastly, the people of England as a whole are now
expressing their concurrence, for we find by late cablegrams that
an address is being signed throughout the United Kingdom in
which the colony is thanked for its offer of troops. Therefore, I
contend that the Imperial Government have not accepted the
services of our troops merely out of compliment to us. Then,
again, all the adjoining colonies have approved of the action taken.
Perhaps my honorable friend at the head of the Opposition will
pardon me if I make some slight reference to the part he took at the
embarkation of the troops. I have referred to the unbounded enthu-
siasm which animated all who were present on that great occasion ;
but could there be a more unmistakable illustration of the general


enthusiasm than the patriotic conduct of the Nestor of the Assem-
bly, our honorable and distinguished friend, Sir John Robertson,
who, in the fervour of his feelings, mounted the rigging of the
steamship Namoi, where he appeared waving a last farewell to the
departing troops. The sight was observed by thousands of people
to whom it gave the greatest gratification. That is one evidence
apart from many others I could cite of the admiration which seemed
to fill the minds of many persons at the departure of the troops.
This accomplished fact has brought us nearer to a close and sub-
stantial imperial connection than any other occurrence on record.
I will not deny that many able speeches have been made against
the action of the Government, and I may refer to the speech of the
honorable member for Morpeth as being for the most part logical
and terse in expression, and one of the best utterances the honor-
able and learned member has made in this House. I think that
if any honorable member wavered at all in his adhesion to the Go-
vernment the speech of the honorable and learned member would
to a certain extent have converted him. That speech, however,
was marred by one or two references which I think would have
been better left out. It is quite a mistake for the honorable and
learned member to assume that the troops which have been sent
away were undisciplined, and that they had no military experience.
I know that it was the desire of the Govemmeut to send no
persons except those who had had a previous military experience.
An educated young man who had passed his examination as an
officer on one of the mail steamers, came and asked me to give him
a letter of introduction to Colonel Richardson. I asked if his
friends objected, and he told me that he only had a sister, who
was not likely to do so. He waited on Colonel Richardson, but
that gentleman declined to take him because he had not had
any military experience. The same young man made a second
attempt to get enrolled, but was again refused for the same
reason. I mention this to show that the statement of the
honorable and learned member is not correct. The troops
that we sent to the Soudan had been well drilled, and they
executed their evolutions in a manner that gave satisfaction to
those who are competent judges in military matters. lam in-
formed on the best authority that these troops consisted of veteran
volunteers and men who had served in the British army, and I am
sure that they will give a good account of themselves whenever a
call to duty shall put them to the test. One might suppose from
what some honorable members said, that we had no interest in
the protection of British commerce, and that we should sit quietly
by whilst the great nation from which we sprung is being assailed
on many sides. I believe that no feeling other than one of the
purest patriotism induced the Attorney-General to make the offer
of troops to the British Government* A great deal has been said


about the honorable and learned gentleman wishing to promote
his own advancement, and that he made this offer of troops to for
no other purpose. I have had the privilege of knowing the
Attorney-General for some twenty-nine years—in fact, since I
was a mere lad. I recollect the time when he opposed at an
election one of the most estimable and influential men in the
colony, the late Mr. Fairfax, and defeated him. On entering this
Chamber the honorable and learned member took a leading
position among the gentlemen here, and soon afterwards he rose
by the force of his abilities to the position of Solicitor-General,
the duties of which office he discharged with great ability, and to
the satisfaction of the public. Subsequently a sum of £5,000 was
voted for the employment of immigration lecturers in England,
and Mr. Dailey was unanimously appointed one of the lecturers
by this House. He reluctantly accepted the position, and went
to England, where he remained for some time. On his return
subsequently he again occupied a place in the foremost rank of
out politicians. From that time up to the present the honorable
gentleman has occupied a prominent place in political life. Nine
years ago he was offered, and refused, the position of judge of the
Supreme Court, that position which is now so worthily filled by
Sir William Manning. How can it be said then that he has been
actuated by any other than pure motives ? It has been said that a
desire to secure a title was the mainspring of the Attorney-
General’s action; but I deny it. I believe that if the honorable
and learned gentleman had wished it he could have had a title
years ago. I believe that he was actuated by pure motives in
offering the services of our troops to the mother country. The
Attorney-General has been so assailed that I thought that I ought
to make these few remarks. It cannot be said that the honorable
gentleman was influenced by personal motives, or by vanity, or
ambition. It might be supposed from some of the arguments
used that there was no enthusiasm on the part of the men who
formed the contingent; but we know that the greatest enthusiasm
prevailed amongst them, and that they were most anxious to go to
the Soudan. None of them were forced to go, and none refused
to obey the orders of the officers. I think that for the expedition
shown in making all the preparations for the despatch of the con-
tingent the Government deserve, instead of condemnation, the
gratitude and the thanks of the community. Such a fact has
scarcely been known in the history of any country. In little more
than a fortnight ships were engaged and got ready, horses were
selected and purchased, the corps was formed, and all prepara-
tions for the embarkation were completed, without any fiasco or
hitch of any kind. I believe that the transmission of troops to
the Soudan will be followed by results which will repay us in a
manifold degree by bringing us into a stronger light before the


whole civilised world, and by binding us closer than heretofore to
the empire. Honorable members may have read a short sime ago
an extract from an English newspaper, in which Sydney was de-
scribed as a small village near the city of Melbourne, in the colony
of Yictoria. Ido not think that such a mistake is likely to occur
in future. The British public will have evidence of the import-
ance of New South Wales, and Sydney instead of being regarded
as a small village near the city of Melbourne, in the colony of
Yictoria, will be known as the queen city of the south, as a mari-
time centre of great importance, containing something like 250,000
inhabitants, and as being the capital of the most important colony
in the Australian group. Objections have been raised by some
honorable members to the formation of the patriotic fund, on the
ground that they do not approve of the action of the Government.
That spirit did not animate the leading minds of England when a
patriotic fund was being formed at the time of the Crimean war.
I may refer to the action of the party called the peace party in
England, composed of men who disapproved entirely of the war,
and did all in their power to prevent it, yet they assisted in the
formation of the patriotic fund, and subscribed largely towards it.
I would ask the attention of honorable members while I read a
short extract from a speech made by Lord John Bussell at the
Mansion House, London, in November, 1854, with reference to
the patriotic fund. In the course of his speech he said :
If the war were altogether in error, we should not be the less inclined to
support these brave men who, at the call of their country and desire of
their Queen, had gone forth to the East to distant climes, to brave every
privation, to submit to every disease, to encounter every enemy that might
be found. This is not a question depending on the general policy of the
war; it is a question that depends upon the judgment that you are about
to pass upon your countrymen in arms. And upon this topic I think that
whatever may be said with respect to the war—upon which I think the
people are nearly unanimous—upon this subject public opinion will be quite
unanimous.
And further on the noble lord said :
It is to the voluntary zeal, to the voluntary liberality of the people of the
country that we must look to supplying the necessities of those widows and
orphans, and to give that last consolation which a man dying on the field of
battle, or expiring on the bed of sickness, can have ; that though his arm
may be wanting, that his family may yet look to the gratitude of his country
for the comfort of their future life.
What a different spirit animates some leading lights outside this
Chamber with regard to our patriotic fund 1 They have done all
that they can to prevent its success; but notwithstanding their
opposition I, as a member of the committee, can say that the fund
is in a very prosperous condition. At this moment the committee
have a sum of nearly £30,000 at deposit, and they hope that in a
short time the total amount of subscriptions will reach at least
£50.000. It is not my intention to occupy the time of the House


further on the subject. But in conclusion I would venture to ex-
press the hope that those honorable members who, although pro-
testing against the action of the Government, have intimated their
intention to vote the necessary supplies and also the Indemnity
Bill, will now gracefully yield to the majority and allow the
address to be carried on the voices without a division, a course
which I know many honorable members on the Opposition side
are desirous of adopting.
S' * ' '■ A M
Speech of Mr. E. B. Smith , M.P. , at the Great Monster Meeting
held in Sydney in support of the Patriotic Fund.
From “ Sydney Morning Herald,” 21st February, 1885.
Mr. R. B Smith, M.P., who was received with cheers, said that in sup-
porting the resolution which had been so eloquently submitted to them, he
might be permitted to preface the few observations he intended to make by
referring to the genuine practical patriotism which had always animated
the breasts of the native-born of the colony—[cheers]—and the vigorous
growth of public opinion of late years in our attachment to the throne and
Constitution of old England—[cheers]—or in our affectionate loyalty to the
gracious Sovereign who ruled over the destinies of the Empire. [Cheers.]
We were in heart, soul, and intellect devoted to our allegiance as men
living in either England, Scotland, or Ireland. [Cheers.] Has not the
enthusiasm which a call to assist Great Britain in her hour of need demon-
strated the purity as well as the intensity of our loyalty ? But while we
rejoiced, nay, exulted, in the spirit which animated the members of the
New South Wales contingent about to embark for the Soudan—[cheers] —
we should not forget that most, if not all of them, left behind them
“hostages to fortune,” in the shape of wives and children, or of fathers,
mothers, sisters, or other tender ties. They are now in some sense the
wards of the colony, and those present were amongst the number of their
guardians. [Cheers.] It was on this fundamental principle—this sense of
moral responsibility that the establishment of the patriotic fund was
based. Those who could not share in the glory of the labours and dangers
of our noble and brave volunteers could at least prove the sincerity of their
opinions by taking such steps as would mitigate anxiety in the minds of
those who went forth to the field of warfare. It was almost an insult to
the patriotic instincts and aspirations of the colony to make any pathetic
appeal to its sympathies on an occasion like the present. He was con-
vinced they would accept it as a duty, and would do all they could to make
the patriotic fund a magnificent success; [Cheers.] Animated by these
sentiments, he most cordially supported the resolution, perfectly convinced
that its ultimate result would be one of the most praiseworthy occurrences
in the annals of Australia. [Cheers.]
The resolution was put and carried.
Sydney: Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBBs.


