

F'l fso
AUTHORISED EDITION.
SPEECH
THE COLSTON BANQUET
LORD CARRINGTON,
DELIVERED AT BRISTOL,
November 13th, 1891.
LONDON:
THE NATIONAL PRESS AGENCY, LIMITED,
13, Whitefriars Street, E.C.




[MSI
i r cp rw r*
LORD CARRINGTON’S BRISTOL SPEECH.
Lord Carrington, after some local introductory remarks, said :—-
Another dinner in honour of the great Bristol citizen is going on at
this moment in the city—attended by some shining lights of the Tory
party. To-morrow we shall read the exposition of things as a couple
of Cabinet Ministers consider they are going on all over the world. Of
course we shall hear a great deal of
SELF-GLORIFICATION.
But is that self-glorification quite carried out by facts 1 We shall
hear a great deal of the success of the different departments ; but the
most rabid Tory in Bristol could not conscientiously declare that at the
Home Office Mr. Matthews had been a conspicuous success. As
regards the War Office Lord Wolseley speaks of our army as a make-
shift, and as being a small, ill-manned, and very poorish one. Mr.
Secretary Stanhope describes it as a very fine one. Either may be
right—let us devoutly hope the latter; but we cannot shut our eyes to
the fact that we pay a great deal, and the private soldier gets precious
little ; and the public are beginning to have grave doubts whether our
soldiers are as well treated as regards pay, food, and quarters as they
have a right to expect.
Mr. Gloschen, at the Treasury, having had the advantage of the
great prosperity of the country, and of the co-operation of the Unionist
financiers, has frittered away his opportunities, and disappointed the
country by a series of futile budgets.
As regards the Foreign Office, there has been little criticism on
foreign affairs, as no one knows better than Lord Salisbury himself
that we Liberals feel it far more important that England should show
a united front to the world than that we should snatch any party
advantage from criticism at home. Had we wished it, Newfoundland
and Zanzibar would have presented an ample field for the severest
condemnation.
There is a grave danger especially in the autocratic policy of the
Tory party.
The Tory party by their autocratic policy maintain the
DIVINE RIGHT OF A CERTAIN CLASS OP ENGLISH ENGLISHMEN TO RULE
THE empire;
and by asserting the superior capacity of the English Englishman they
in fact imply a racial inferiority in their brethren of the same blood,


simply because they live on the other side of the Irish Channel or
across the broad blue sea.
Now, the refusal of the Tory Centralists to grant perfectly free
Provincial institutions, i.e., Home Rule, can only be justified on the
ground that people are unfit to exercise these free institutions ; their
disqualification either resting on disloyalty, or on unfitness of character,
or on want of moral training. It follows, therefore, that the Centralist
position can only be maintained by a campaign of aspersion, which, in
some cases, looks uncommonly like slander.
The Liberals, on the other hand, as Constitutionalists, contend that
practically all British subjects of European race should be considered
equal, morally and politically ; equal in loyalty to the Empire ; equal
in political capacity for self-government; and equal in their intellec-
tual capability of giving an opinion on such Imperial questions as
directly concern them.
This autocratic policy is in reality
THE ROOT OF ALL OUR IRISH DIFFICULTIES.
It was admitted in 1884 by Mr. Chamberlain himself.
“ You know the condition of Ireland is the constant preoccupa-
tion and anxiety of Statesmen. After a century of a hollow union the
people are still discontented. We only hold our own in the Nineteenth
Century, as we did in the Seventeenth, by an overwhelming display of
military force, as we have been unable to fix ourselves in the affections
of the people.” Mr. Chamberlain spoke these words in 1884, and he
went onto say: “This state of things, so discreditable to a free country,
is due mainly, if not entirely, to the action of the House of Lords—-to
the action of that club of Tory Landlords, which in its gilded cham-
ber has disposed of the welfare of the people with almost exclusive
regards to the interests of a class,” and he ended his speech with
these words : “ The cup is nearly full. The House of Lords have
alienated Ireland, they have oppressed the Dissenters, and they are op-
posing the enfranchisement of the people. We have been too long a
Peer-ridden nation, and I hope you will say to them that if they will
not bow to the mandate of the people, they shall lose for ever the
authority they have so long abused.”
What does Mr. Chamberlain say in 1891, in his criticisms on the
Liberal Programme, which he calls “ absurd and impracticable, and
therefore dishonest ” ? He says :“I am going to assume that Mr.
Gladstone has a majority at the next Election. How long do you think
it will take to pass Home Rule through the House of Commons, which
will be opposed tooth and nail by a very large minority of the House ?
It will take the whole Session. It may very likely take two Sessions.
Suppose we have got Home Rule through the House of Commons.
Then there is the House of Lords. Mr. Gladstone evidently thinks the
House of Lords will reject the Bill. I should not be surprised if they
did, and Mr. Gladstone has begun to threaten them with extinction.
The extinction or even the reform of the House of Lords is a pretty
large order. There are only two ways in which it can be accom-
plished. One way is, by the consent of the House of Lords, the


other by agitation so strenuous or so violent as almost to amount to
Revolution.”
This language is a curious contrast to the violence of the 1884
speech.
Let me say that I do not believe either in the violence of 1884
or the possibilities of 1891 as foreshadowing the real issue.
Agitations, gentlemen, so violent and so strenuous as almost to
amount to revolution have been going on in Ireland ever since the
Union—occasionally tempered with short seasons of comparative calm,
after which the agitation breaks out more fiercely than eypr. Through
various causes well known to you all Ireland is comparatively quiet
for the moment. The Tories take advantage of this, and claiming the
credit affect to believe that this calm will be permanent; and therefore
the party is ready to swallow Mr. Balfour’s “Ride at Home” Bill,
though they are in absolute ignorance of what its provisions may be.
At the same time they trust to the Upper House to throw out Mr.
Gladstone’s Home Rule Bill, and revile him because he points out the
danger of the Lords becoming a power “ not behind the Throne, but
between the Throne and the people.” But with our great leader, who
has so often and so constitutionally stood out as the champion of the
Crown as well as the defender of the liberties of the people, I can never
believe that the great historical estate of the realm, to which it is my
pride and privilege to belong, would ever accept the deplorable sugges-
tion offered them by Lord Salisbury, and throw out a scheme for self-
government accepted by the English people, in the belief that they, the
Peers, can break the will of the people.
Serious as the
DANGER OF AUTOCRACY
is as regards Ireland, yet this Tory Centralism strikes at the very
root of the existence of our great English Confederation all over the
world. Read an account of any Tory meeting, and you see the
Liberal party accused of disloyalty to the Crown, of anxiety to bi’eak
up the Empire, and of indifference to the great national interests of
England. But with all their fine words it is not the Tory classes who
are in real touch and sympathy with our great self-governing Colonies.
The English democracy built up this mighty confederation, and they
are maintaining and governing it now, and amongst our artisans and
industrial populations there are hundreds of thousands of families who
are intimately connected with Australians, South Africanders, and
Canadians.
OUR COLONIAL EMPIRE
was not captured, as India was, by the roar of cannon or by the
rattle of musketry, it was won by the ring of the miner’s pick and by
the crack of the stockman’s whip. I know, sir, there are some few who
are writing down the Colonies ; there are some few who question their
loyalty to the mother country —well, if loyalty means that the best
form of government is a semi-absolute sovereignty either by Prince
or President, with an irresponsible and irremovable Cabinet; if it
means that the world can be best governed by kings and statesmen,
and not by the people themselves; if it means belief in the Divine


right of kings and in the necessity for the supremacy and inviolability
of a State Church; then these men may be right : many of us may
be called distinctly disloyal. But if the word loyalty has, as I believe
it has, a far finer and purer significance ; if loyalty to the Queen
means not only devotion to the illustrious lady who wears the Crown,
but also respect for law and order, liberty and justice ; if it embodies
our belief in the power and in the right of each portion of Her
Majesty’s dominions to govern itself; if it means that while we glory
in our common origin, we rely on our collective individuality which
is our common strength; then shall we all of us remain one, united,
loyal, and invincible, for all time.
Be it granted that as regards Downing Street rule of the Colonies
things are certainly, thank God, better than they were some years ago,
when Lord Sherbrooke said: “ What can be expected from such a
system 1 The Secretary of State knows nothing about the Colonies,
except as much cram as may be necessary to make a speech to an in-
attentive assembly a shade more ignorant than himself. The Under-
secretary knows just enough to adopt some crude and impracticable
theory, to which he adheres with the desperate tenacity of ignorance and
presumption; and the clerk in Downing Street who writes the
despatches—our real governor —who is utterly unknown and irrespon-
sible—who will not be praised if we are governed well, or blamed if we
are governed ill—takes it as easy as possible, and echoes back the
despatches he receives, sometimes enlivening the matter by an occasional
abuse of the Governor for something pei’fectly right, just to show he has
a will of his own.”
Yet with all personal regard for Lord Knutsford, I cannot shut my
eyes to the fact that he is in many respects the living incarnation
of the old Downing Street regime; and it is the clear duty of all
Liberals carefully to consider
THE PRESENT POLICY OF THE COLONIAL OFFICE,
an office the traditions of which are regarded by our great Colonies
very much in the same light as the Irish regard the traditions of Dublin
Castle.
Lord Knutsford, at Saxmundham, complacently reviewing the
position lately, gave the official Colonial Office opinion. He said : “You
will find from the Colonial papers and the general public opinion that
the Colonists feel Lord Salisbury’s Government to be entirely in
sympathy with them, and to be desirous of meeting their wishes in
every possible way, and of strengthening the links between the
Colonies and the mother country. ” To confirm this statement he
alluded only to a portion of South Africa, and said : “As soon as the
Conservative Government came into office they annexed Zululand and
restored to that fine and splendid race of people such peace, happiness,
and prosperity as they had not enjoyed since 1878.”
Let us for an instant examine the prosperity, happiness and peace
of
THE ZULUS DURING THE LAST TEN YEARS.
During that time Zululand has been governed entirely by the Colonial
Office under two separate Administrations. Ho South African re-


sponsible Government has interfered with or “ contaminated ” Imperial
officers by its advice. What has been the result ? During the whole
of these ten years Zululand has been in a chronic state of civil war ;
and 50,000 men, women, and children have been sacrificed needlessly,
and have perished from the effects of battle, of exposure, and of
starvation; a peaceful, prosperous, and happy record indeed for the
Colonial Office to brag about.
Yet, in 1891, they propose giving self-government to 35,000
Englishmen living in Natal, and, undeterred by the failure in Zululand,
to retain the management of half-a-million of natives living in the
Colony. Why? Because English Englishmen cannot trust the English-
men who have gone out there to live among these native races; as they
are firmly convinced that the natives would be unfairly treated and
governed on the “ damned nigger ” principle.
The Colonial Office calmly ignores that all the blunders of the
Maori difficulties in New Zealand were attributable to Downing-street
or its representatives.
Does Lord Knutsford remember the difficulties he threw in the
way of
THE DIVORCE BILL OF NEW SOUTH WALES?
This Bill was introduced by Sir Alfred Stephen, Lieutenant-
Governor, and late Chief Justice of the Colony, a man of blameless life,
of the highest integrity, and who is conscientiously devoted to the
Imperial connection. His sole and only object was to protect helpless
women, who were deserted and brutally illused by their husbands, who
could escape by going into a neighbouring colony, where they were
practically safe from all interference —also women who were unfor-
tunately married to hopeless lunatics and confirmed drunkards. It
had the overwhelming support of the laymen in the Colony. It passed
both Houses.
The present Chief Justice was one of the warmest supporters of
the bill, which also had, I believe, the approval of all the judges.
It must, of course, be admitted that a conscientious protest was
made against the bill by the Cardinal and the Primate, whose protest
was backed up by the Synod.
This bill was virtually vetoed and remitted for further considera-
tion ; and the delay would have extended to this day, if a second
colony had’not’come to the rescue with a similar measure. Mr. Shields,
of Yictoria, came expressly to London and pointed out the danger
that must inevitably ensue if this measure for the relief of suffering
women was again shelved. Owing to party politics the law, indeed,
still remains unaltered in New South Wales, but the shelving has left
behind a bitter feeling which may bear ungrateful fruit for years to
come.
The attention of the Liberal party should also be drawn to the
increased military contributions which are being demanded from the
Colonies. Ceylon and Singapore especially are crying out against this,
and everyone should read the High Commissioner of Canada’s article
in the October number of the Nineteenth Century , in which he points
out the mistake of supposing that the defence of the Empire is best


secured by a direct contribution to the support of the Imperial Army
and Navy, and gives a very good instance.
In 1870 Louis Riel and a handful of half breeds terrorised the
whole of the North West of Canada for six months, till Lord Wolseley
arrived; and he took three months in reaching the scene of action after
the Spring opened. A rising occurred in 1885, when the Canadian
Pacific Railway was nearly complete, and 4,000 Canadians at once
volunteered. The rising was put down very easily in little time, without
calling for the aid of a single English soldier.
We all remember that troops were suddenly withdrawn from
Australia some years ago. The Colonies asked for these troops to be
allowed to remain, on the condition that they were to pay for their
maintenance, at any rate for a time. The Colonial Office pointed out
that the principle was all wrong, and the late Lord Lytton, Tory
Secretary of State for the Colonies, said; “ A Colony which is once
accustomed to depend on Imperial soldiers never grows up to vigorous
manhood.” What is wrong in the Army is right in the Navy; and
THIS COLONIAL MAINTENANCE PROBLEM
is being tried in Australia at the present time.
This arrangement is as follows :
Seven ships built at the cost to the English taxpayer of nearly a
million sterling have arrived at Sydney. Five of them are to be main-
tained at the cost of the Australians for ten years. England commis-
sions the other two in case of war. It sounds all right, but will this
experiment succeed ? Ships should have only one commander, i.e.,
the admiral, and no fleet can exist under dual control. But how can
you have taxation, even voluntary taxation, without representation 1
The Colonies will be certain before long to want to have something to
say as to management and placing of these ships, as the excitement
over the “ Egeria court-martial ” plainly shows. And, to increase the
difficulties, the Colonial Office has acknowledged a claim of Admiral
Fairfax to precedence over everybody except the Governor of the colony
in which he happens to be. So that if a Governor of a neighbouring
colony comes on a visit, the Queen’s Representative in that colony has
to give way to an officer of the rank of a major-general; and we all
know that in England officers of our army and navy “ have no place in
the table of precedence by right, custom, or statute.”
This claim, which shocked Colonial sentiment, was received with a
shout of laughter all over Australia, and is a dead letter and impos-
sible to be enforced.
Perhaps some people may say these are trivial matters, but
A pebble in the streamlet scant
Has turned the course of many a river ;
A dewdrop on the baby plant
Has warped the giant oak for ever.
THE SYMPATHY OP THE COLONIAL OFFICE.
Then look at the way the Tories tried to coerce the Newfound-
landers. Was there any sympathy in Lord Salisbury’s speech when he


spoke of the unfairness of imputing to the Colonists “so grotesque a
sense of susceptibility as was suggested ” by those who were asking the
House not to proceed with the Fisheries Bill until a reasonable time
had been given to the Legislature of the Colony to pass the necessary
legislation ? Did he strike a sympathetic chord when he said : “ England
runs the whole risk, Newfoundland runs hardly any at all, for I do not
suppose that in case of a war with France over the question, the French
would take the trouble to invade Newfoundland.”
Sir William Whiteway, Premier of Newfoundland, and two of his
colleagues were standing on the steps of the Throne while this speech
was being made.
Then as to meeting the wishes of the Colonies in every possible
way. Has Lord Knutsfordforgotten the Blake incident, or the trouble he
caused by his attempt to exercise the divine right of forcing a Governor
on a loyal self-governing colony 1
When Sir Henry Blake was appointed Governor of Queensland, he
was at once firmly declined by that great Colony ; so that the appoint-
ment had to be cancelled; and this is not a solitary instance. The
Colonial Office apparently thinks that the private communication of a
new Governor’s name to a Colonial Ministry would be the first step
towards separation, and therefore they claim the divine right to make
an appointment which they cannot possibly enforce, and shield them-
selves under the plea that Ministers want to interfere with the Queen s
Imperial advisers. This is not the fact.
The Statesmen of Australia have never expressed a wish for any
voice in the selection of Governor. All they try to do is to prevent the
English Government falling into an error by sending out a man whom
they would not receive. The general desire is to get an acceptable man,
so that the machine may work smoothly. In support of this I can
quote Sir Thomas Mcllwraith’s—the Premier of Queensland —speech at
Ipswich (a town of Queensland), on the glorious welcome given to Sir
Henry Norman (one of the grandest men who ever served the Queen),
who was appointed Governor in succession to Sir Anthony Musgrave.
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith said : £i He was glad to have been there
that day, and he was glad to have witnessed such a scene as the
welcome given to his Excellency. He thought they ought to take a
good deal of pride in the reception given to Sir Henry Norman, because
a section of the English press, in consequence of a proper and constitu-
tional course taken by the Ministry (with regard to the appointment of
the Governor), had represented
THE QUEENSLAND PEOPLE AS REBELS.
The Times called them so, and there was a notion that their loyalty was
questionable. Now, the lie direct could not have been given to such a
sentiment better than by the welcome which his Excellency had re-
ceived all over the country. His great career and personal qualifica-
tions would have forced a welcome in any case. But there was some-
thing far outside that—the real feeling of loyalty to the Crown of
England which had been expressed all over the Colony.”
No one will deny the good intentions of the Secretary of State
towards the great Empire of which he is so justly proud. Since the


days when Lord North lost us the American Colonies, the office which
controlled Colonial destinies has been paved with good intentions,
reminding us of the grim old proverb which tells how a certain tesse-
lated pavement was laid down years ago in another place. But if our
great British Confederation is to remain as it is now, one, united, and
invincible, our worn out “Imperial policy,” with all its old ball
cartridge blunders, must be thrown to the winds.
If we are still relying on
THE TRADITIONS OP DEAR OLD DOWNING-STREET
to keep us all together, the whole fabric will fall to pieces like a pack
of cards. Last winter one of my children, just back from Australia,
who had never seen frost or snow, broke off a long icicle which was
glittering in the sun, saying; “I never saw anything so beautiful as
this, I will keep it as long as I live.” Alas ! her fingers became
paralysed with cold, the precious treasure slipped from her grasp and
fell broken into a thousand pieces on the gravel path. Is it an absolute
certainty that mismanagement and want of perception in time may not
cause our Empire unconsciously to slip through our fingers 1 And if
this happened, what excuse would the Government of the day be able to
give to an indignant democratic England ? What would be the
position of the well-meaning, well-intentioned Secretary of State 1
Past mistakes of past Ministries would be of no avail to him. In
despair he might turn to the great countries whom flouts,
or jeers, as in the case of Newfoundland, or indifference, or mis-
understanding have alienated \ whose development Centralism (or,
as the Australians understand the word), Imperialism, has retarded;
those great countries which formerly looked upon their elastic union
with England as a creed and a glory. It is, however, not yet too late
to initiate a new constructive Colonial Policy, friendly and fearless, in
harmony with the spirit of the times. Gentlemen, the fate of the
nation is in your hands. Remember that autocratic Rome rested on
a belief in its eternity. Will you follow the example of “eternal”
Rome? We must get rid of the present Government, a Government
“ which, not knowing true wisdom, is scorned abroad, and lives by
tricks at homeand the country will be saved, as it was sixty years
ago, by the courage and by the foresight of that patriotic body (for
whom I have imperfectly endeavoured to return thanks to-night), the
grand and glorious old Liberal Party of England.
Printed by the National Press Agency, Limited, Whitefriars-street, London, E.C.




. • -
