

January 34th, 1873;
/ )
) On the Debate on Mr. Forster’s Motion for the Abolition oe (.
( )
/ Denominational Schools, and the Establishment oe a \
System oe Secular Education in this Country-
( ).
! /
\ \
/ :
\ :
( )
{ : )
LEE & ROSS, PRINTERS, 231 CASTLEREAGH STREET, (
) EIGHT DOORS SOUTH OE MARKET STREET. \
1


This speech is published at the expense and by the special desire
of several gentlemen who heard it delivered, and who are of opinion
that the cause of secular education will he promoted by its
extensive circulation.


K1335V r /fc
SPEECH
Mr. Speaker, —l listened, sir, with a great deal of attention to the very
able address of the hon. member for Illawarra, in moving the resolutions
now under discussion. That speech was valuable in many ways; but it
was particularly valuable in a statistical point of view, as shewing the
wretched waste of money caused by our support of Denominational
schools. I listened to the hon. member’s advocacy of a system of purely
secular education with unbounded pleasure, and I need not say how cor-
dially I endorsed all his ideas, so ably and powerfully expressed. I am
glad we have a gentleman so able and so competent to take the lead in
this great controversy, and one whose integrity stands without blemish,
and whose political honor and consistency has long challenged and en-
joyed the confidence of the whole country. (Hear, hear.) In speaking
thus of the character and ability of the hon. member for Illawarra,
Mr. Forster, I am sure I speak the sentiments of every member of this
House, and I am equally sure his worst enemies, both in the House and the
country, will not deny the truth and justice of what I say. (Hear,
hear.) Well, sir, I listened also with close attention to the speech, in
reply, from the Premier and Colonial Secretary, and I scarcely think I
ever heard anything so disingenuous, so absolutely false in argument, and
so dishonest in intention. He seemed to labour to put the hon. member for
Illawarra in a false position for the mere purpose of driving him out of it,
and he thought he had a triumph over him when he proved that the
Public Schools’ Act was carried by the advocates of secular education,
the hon. member for Illawarra having asserted that it was due to the
Denominationalists. Now, sir, I submit, and will show, that the hon.
member for Illawarra was correct in considering the passage of the
Public Schools’ Act due to the Denominationalists. When the Public
Schools’ Act was first introduced, we had a most unsatisfactory system
of public education, consisting of two systems, with two boards, one of
those systems being a system of Denominational education. This perni-
cious state of things had long existed, and the Public Schools’ Act was
undoubtedly introduced to put an end to it, and to introduce a system
of secular education. And who is there, that listens to me, will deny
that the Public Schools’ Act, when first introduced, was not much more
secular, in its principles, than when it ultimately passed 1 ? Well then,
the alterations were all in favour of Denominationalism, and were
brought about by the action of the Denominationalists in the House,
and in spite of the loud protest of the secularists. Hnder those circum-
stances, I ask the House, was the hon. member for Illawarra wrong
when he attributed the passage of the Act to the Denominationalists'?
It is all very well for the Premier to think to prove his case by reading
the division list, by which it is shewn that the secularists voted for it.
Of course they did, and took it as a mere instalment, rather better than
nothing. So completely was our Public Schools’ Act changed by the
influence of the Denominationalists in the House, that the Colonial
Secretary himself hesitated as to whether or not he would abandon the


Bill, so great had been the inroad made upon it by the advocates of a
Denominational system of public education. • I remember well contem-
plating, with absolute dismay, the mutilation to which this Act was
subjected, at the instance of the Denominationalists, and I also remember
saying to the author of the Act, the then Colonial Secretary, who is also
the present, that if he went another inch on the path he was going, I
would vote against the third reading of the Bill, I, with many other
friends of secular education, voted for the third reading, not because we
approved of the Bill, but simply to displace the system that then existed,
and as a very short feeble step in advance, and enabling us, by its passage,
to occupy ground from which we could deal a more effective blow at
Denominationalism in the early future. Under all those circumstances,
I think the hon. member for Illawarra was correct in his assertion that
the passage of the Public Schools’ Act, as it is, was entirely due to the
Denominationalists. I dare say the House and country will understand,
however much they may have been surprised at, the Premier’s sympathy
with the Papists—an alliance with the present Attorney-General could
only have been brought about on the understanding that large conces-
sions would be granted them, and as the Premier has neither principle
of one kind or another, those concessions have been granted in a
larger degree than even they themselves anticipated. But when the
Chief Secretary insolently charges us with refusing to allow the Papists
to take advantage of the educational institutions provided by the
country, because we oppose sectarian education, he descends to shear
claptrap and humbug, the atmosphere he invariably breathes. We say
to the Papists and to all sects —We have provided a system of public
instruction, purely secular, and you are all welcome to send your children
to our schools. If you do send them they will be taught the necessary
branches of secular knowledge, and all sects will be treated with perfect
equality, none enjoying privileges that are denied to others, but all
having the same rights, and enjoying the same advantages. But if any
sect refuses to take advantage of this great boon, and assumes the
preposterous attitude of demanding to have their peculiar religious
dogmas taught in our schools, then we say, emphatically and resolutely
No ! If you wont attend our schools, or send your children there,
because we wont allow you to have your religious dogmas there taught,
leave us alone and build schools at your own cost, and teach whatever
you like in them, and you shall get no interference from us. And yet,
although no one knows better than the Colonial Secretary, that those are
our views, he has yet the meanness to misrepresent us, and lead his
poor deluded followers to believe that we refuse the same rights to Papists
which we concede to all other sects. We say that the proper places to
instruct in religion are the Church, the home, and the Sabbath School,
the Public School is no place for such, teaching. How can you teach
faith 1 How can you teach piety to God 1 How can you inculcate that
nobleness that prompts a human soul to struggle heavenward 1 Religion
is infused into the human heart by a thousand different influences.
The very contemplation of this fair creation of God must elevate the
thoughts towards purity and devotion, even vice and wickedness, in their
darkest aspects, may teach a lesson never-to-be-forgotten, and may plant
a faith which may germinate and bring forth fruit, in a
soil that would have remained barren and blighted in the


hottest focus of your religious school teaching. But I say
it is impossible to impart any knowledge without in some measure
inculcating religion. You cannot comprehend any truth without the
thoughts stretching away towards the great foundation and source of all
truth; and you cannot impart any knowledge without carrying along
with it some idea of the origin of all things, and the author of our
existence. While, then, we have no objection to religious teaching in
the appropriate place, we protest against the absurdity of the attempt to
teach the dogmas of a variety of sects in our public schools. Besides,
hon. members will bear this in mind that, after a severe struggle, we
have succeeded in abolishing the principle of State-Aid to religion. We
all know that a system of State support to religion existed in this
country peculiarly revolting to men who cared a straw for the truths of
God. We had all sects supported, however true or however false, and
the true sects agreeing to the support given to the falso sects in con-
sideration of the pittance received by themselves. This very gross and
scandalous system has however received its death-blow, with the
approbation of the entire community, excepting one sect, namely, the
Papists, who would revive the iniquity to-morrow if they could. Well,
I ask hon. members of this House, who refuse to vote for the motion of
the hon. member for Illawarra, and who voted for the abolition of State-
Aid to religion, where is their consistency ? Religion taught by the
schoolmasters in our Denominational schools is surely a more objection-
able form of State-Aid to religion than the one abolished ; and if they
voted for the abolition of State-Aid to religion, and now vote for the
retention of Denominational schools, are they not setting up with the
one hand what the} - have pulled down with the other 1 Surely an
inconsistency so glaring and indefensible as this will rouse the country
into action on this important question. Those hon. members who see
the question in this, its true light, and vote against the motion now
under discussion, are guilty of the most flagitious conduct, and deserve to
be dealt with by their constituents on the first chance in a way that may
make them strangers to these benches for many a long day, and give
them an opportunity, during that time, of improving their political
integrity—a consummation devoutly to be wished for. I think it is
admitted that the Papists are the only sect who cling to Denominational
teaching. The Church of England, I understand, has at length seen the
advantage of the Public School, where secular education is taught, and
is satisfied to give up Denominational education in favour of a great
system of secular education, where all sects may be taught in the same
school. This is so far good, and now we have to deal with the Papists
alone—and there is only one way of dealing with them, that is, with
courage and unalterable firmness. There is scarcely a Government in
existence at the present moment which is not contending with them on
this very question, and there is not a Government in existence which
does not repudiate and despise their claims. Italy, Germany, Prance,
and England are all aiming at the inauguration of a purely secular
system of education, and are resolutely bent upon the defeat of the
Romish priests. And are we in this country to allow the insolent claims
of that arrogant priesthood to go unchallenged 1 I throw back upon the
Colonial Secretary, with utter disdain, his insinuation that we were pre.
pared to deny this sect privileges, simply because they were Papists-


Let them go to our secular Public Schools, if we can make them such,
and they will hear nothing from us but God-speed them. Great will be
our joy to see them emancipated from the teaching of a priesthood under
which their mental energies wither by the blighting influence of every
dark destroying superstition, where all manner of wretched fables are
served up to them as the truths of God, and where their power of
independent thought is speedily struck with paralysis, so that they fall
helpless victims into the hands of their priests, to be ever after used as
the merest tools and instruments. We resist those priests, and I trust
that we will always resist them in the injustice of their demands. If
we establish a system of public education to be enjoyed by the whole
community, and they think proper to demand a different system for
themselves, we only say, by all means let them have it, but at their
own cost. And because we say this, the Colonial Secretary has the
effrontery to ask “ Are our Roman Catholic fellow-subjects to have no
schools T wishing his hearers to believe that the fault is on our side and
not on theirs. In answer to the Colonial Secretary’s question—“ Are
the Romanists to have no schools T I answer “they have got the Public
Schools, if they choose to go to them, and if they refuse to take advantage
of them unless their priests have the power of dictating the quality of
education there taught, then I say, perish the ruler, in this or any other
country, who succumbs to so insolent a demand.”
It is as well to let those priests know at once that there is only one
thing for them, that is to build and endow schools at their own expense
if they wish their dogmas taught there ; that the Public School, under
any improved system, is open to them on the same terms as to all other
sects, but a strict conformity to the law must be exacted from them.
Among other dishonesties and fallacies which went to make up the
Colonial Secretary’s harangue, he, while eulogising Denominational
Schools, said—Would it not be a wrong to ruthlessly destroy that noble
school at St. Barnabas, founded by the Rev. Thomas Smith.” As if the
carrying of this motion, or the introduction of a secular system of educa-
tion, would destroy this school, or any school. Any system of
secular education adopted by this House would tend to improve such
schools as the Rev. Thomas Smith’s, and make them more effective by
being more numerously attended. Does the Colonial Secretary think to
advance his cause—or rather the cause of the Papists—which no doubt
is his cause, by so shallow a trick as this 1 Does he not know that the
intelligence of the country will not suffer itself to be deceived by such
bugbears as he has conjured up in his two hours’ speech ? and if he has
nothing better to say in favour of Denominational ism than what we
have heard, surely the advocates of non-sectarian education have little to
fear. That the Colonial Secretary has changed all his opinions on the
subject of education is palpable enough, and that he has done so in
deference to his new friends, the Papists, is beyond dispute. We find
him now the eulogist of Denominationalism, and he even has the temerity
to sneer at what he calls “ that chimera, secular education.” He is con-
tinually defending his appointment of Mr. Duncan to the Council Board,
and is never tired of wringing in our ears how fit a man he is for such
an office. But if there was any genuineness or truth in all this, why
did not the Colonial Secretary appoint Mr. Duncan long ago 1 ? particularly
during the two or three years that he was in office, and had the power.


He knew Mr. Duncan as well then as now, but he never dreamt of him
for such an office at that time. Whence all this new-born zeal on behalf
of Mr. Duncan 1 Is it not clear that his new alliance has overwhelmed
him in inconsistency and double-dealing, and compelled him to make
this concession to the clamours of his Popish allies, or to the silent
expectations of his Popish Attorney-General. The same lever moved
him in his action as to the Romish school at Grenfell, and will doubtless
move him in many other of his political acts. “ That chimera, secular
education !” So says the Colonial Secretary. But does that shallow,
pretentious politician affect ignorance of the fact that at the present
moment the entire liberal party of England are fighting, with
all zeal and earnestness, for this chimera, esteeming it a great and im-
portant principle, and resolutely bent upon securing its adoption in the
mother country.
I listened with great interest to the hon. member for Kiama in the
sound and sensible speech he delivered in favour of the motion. His
description of the action of the Romish priests was in the highest degree
truthful, and if the House would like to have a corroboration of the
views of that hon. member from an illustrious and well qualified source,
lamin a position to satisfy hon. members on that head. I hold in my
hand a letter addressed to myself, from perhaps the most illustrious, and
beyond all doubt, the purest public man in Europe, I refer to General
Garibaldi. He is a man who was born and bred in the very hot-bed of
priestcraft, and perhaps no living man knows more of what he writes
about than he. He is the very incarnation of truth and honesty, and
the most exalted example of enlightened patriotism that has appeared in
our time. The letter is as follows :
Caprera, March, 1870.
My Beak Bitch ax ax,
The principal obstacle to human progress is the priest, and those who
think that civilization will destroy him easily are mistaken. An impure emanation
of evil in the human family, he is like that herb that spreads the more you
attempt to destroy it. Look at the Jesuits, insulted, trampled upon, and expelled
from every city in Europe, they are at present the absolute masters of the Pope’s
imbeciles, and in France they are all-powerful.
It is a pity that a brave and generous people like the Irish should fail to see
that the Romish priest is the main cause of their abasement, their misery and
their degradation.
I trust in God you will not suffer the presence of this human reptile in your
beautiful and virgin country; and if any one says there must be liberty to all,
answer him that you will not give liberty to vipers, assassins, and crocodiles, and
the Romish priest is worse than any or all of these.
Yours, ever sincerely,
G. Garibaldi.
Here then is a corroboration of the truthfulness of the hon. member
for Kiama’s description from an authority that no man will gainsay.
It is with these Romish priests that the Colonial Secretary is now in
alliance, and we, knowing so well the designs and aims of those priests,
had better prepare for the coming struggle. Their principal aim is
the complete control of public education, and if we would rescue the
country from such a misfortune, nay, from so terrible a disaster, let us
buckle on our armour and enter upon the struggle at once. In this great
controversy those who are not with us are against us, and here let me
say a few words, before I conclude, to those hon. gentlemen who are in


TAFp
8 fJbIZ
favour of secular education, but who are to vote against this motion
because, as they say, the time of bringing it ‘forward is inopportune.
Those gentlemen, therefore, sacrifice their convictions to a wretched
so-called expediency, and so sure as they so act, so sure will their
unprincipled vote haunt them ever afterwards, and will invariably be
cited against as evidence of their apostacy. Put it off to a more conve-
nient season, is the way by which they stifle their accusing consciences.
One would have thought that the example of the Scripture hero would
have acted as a flaming beacon, warning them off this dangerous ground,
I would say to those gentlemen—lf you agree with the proposition, vote
for it, if the heaven’s should fall. Sacrifice no conviction of yours for
the sake of a base expediency. Vote for what you believe to be the
truth at all hazards, and in defiance of all consequences, and you will at
least have the satisfaction and consolation of having voted in accordance
with your opinions, and against what you believe to be damnable heresy
and error. It has been said, in the course of this protracted debate, that
this is not a party question. If parties are understood as meaning the
support of certain men as opposed to others, the ultimatum being the
placing of those certain men in power, one or other of them, then it
may not be a party question; but, as involving a great principle, I
assert that it is a party question, and a most important one, indeed, the
parties being the friends of secular education and their opponents. Let
the secularists unite in this House, and in the country, founding their
action upon an unalterable regard for the great principle of secular
education, aiming at its adoption in all the subsidised schools of this
country, and with this bond of union animating and inspiring them, let
them labour devotedly in the cause. We will then witness the spectacle
of at least one party in the country, held together and impelled by devo-
tion to a principle. The large number of secularists in this House,
combined with the truth and justice of our cause, will gather us strength
and power, and carry us on to ultimate vistory. Let us have no foolish
fears, but with boundless confidence in the principle we advocate, let us
march on, not behind, but in front of advancing time, with a free and
enlightened educational policy, inscribed on our banners, untrammelled
by every phase of superstition or theological chicane, and undismayed
by the hollow fallacies of prating bigots, or the more dangerous devices
of selfish and designing knaves. (Mr. Buchanan resumed his seat
amidst loud cheers from both sides of the House.)
