

THE FREE TRADE ASSOCIATION
|lefa Suut|j ®alcs.
SPEECHES
DELIVERED BY
G H. REID, Esq., M.L.A.,
Sir HENRY PARKES, K.C.M.G.,
THE SECOND READING Of THE CUSTOMS DUTIES BILL
In the Legislative Assembly.
JUNE, 1886.
<Sgbnej):
JARRETT & CO., Printers, 100 and 102 Liverpool Street,
■ / Vj ;* 1




3.SS-7T
Mr. REID’S SPEECH.
Wednesday Jane 16, 18S6.
Mr. Speaker.
In rising to address the House upon the motion of my
hon. friend at the head of the Government, that the Customs
Duties Bill be now read a second time, I think it is only
right that we should also look for a moment at all the proposals
which the Government have put before us to restore the equili-
brium between the revenue and expenditure of the country, and
to meet the deficiency they have stated to exist in the accounts
for past years. In dealing with the bill we are in this position :
The House has resolved that taxes should be levied through the
Stamp Act, which gives additional taxation to the amount of
£130,000; that a tax shall be levied on land, and that a tax
shall be levied on incomes. The whole of these three proposals,
which have received the approval of this House, or of com-
mittees of the House, represent an increase of the burdens of the
country to the amount of £630,000 sterling per annum. The
Government have put before us plainly what they conceive the
emergencies of the present situation to be; and my hon. friend,
the Treasurer, has shown that he requires £184,000 to make both
ends meet with reference to this year 1886, and he has told the
House that we have a deficit of £1,300,000 to provide for. Now,
with the stamp duties, the tax on land and the tax on income,
the Government would be able to restore the equilibrium between
the revenue and expenditure, and to devote no less a sum than
£446,000 sterling per annum to the reduction of the deficiency;
so that, with these three proposals, it is within the ability of my
hon. friend at the head of the Treasury benches to wipe out the
deficiency within a period of three years, or at the most of four
years. Now I submit that if that were done the honour of the
country would be in no way impaired. I submit that the honour
and credit of this country stand both here and abroad upon too
stable a foundation to be impaired if the Government are satis-
fied with that means of meeting the difficulties of the country.
I think if we are to believe any of the doleful predictions of our
protectionist friends, if we are to take them all as true, this is
surely the worst time in the history of the country to add un-
necessarily to the burdens of the people. The Colonial Treasurer
muss/F 9rfi


stated to the country that the proposals to which I have alluded
were the proposals to which the honour of the Government was
pledged, that these were the proposals to which the Government
had committed themselves with the people of the country. As to
the ad valorem duties, and as to all these specific duties, my hon.
friend desires to assure this House that he proposed them only
under a pressing sense of emergency. He did not like them ; he
liked them so ill that he had to invent a new name for them. It
was only under a sense of great emergency that these obnoxious
customs duties were to be passed through this House; and he
told us that they were only to be passed as a temporary measure.
What does the bill mean which my hon. friend submits to the
House on the faith of that emergency ? It means that the
Government propose to make these taxes a permanent part of
the fiscal policy of the country. There is not a word about three
years in the bill. (Hear, hear).
Mr. F. B. Suttor ; The Premier said last night that that was
an omission!
Mr. Reid: Of course in this House we can see what is going
on; and it has struck me for many nights past that my hon.
friends on the Government benches are being steadily nursed by
the protectionist party of Hew South Wales. (Cheers.) There
is a most venerable and agreeable personage who was once a
member of this House —I mean Mr. Luscombe —who attends
daily behind the Speaker's chair, his face beaming with joy and
enthusiasm as if he were at the back of the Government in the
matter. I look upon the sturdy freetrade sentiments which we
used to hear from my friends in the Government, and when I ob-
serve the relations now existing between the leading protection-
ists and themselves, I am reminded of one or two lines to the
following effect: —
Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,
As to be hated needs but to be seen,
Yet, seen too oft, familiar with her face,
We first endure, then pity, then embrace.
(Cheers and laughter.)
That is the state of things which has come about between the
Government and the protectionists of New South Wales. What
hon. member in this House can stand up to defend the customs
duties ? We have heard the hon. member for Queanbeyan—a
thorough protectionist. We are told that protection is wonder-
fully popular in this great city; but if it is, how is it that my
hon. friend had to run away from South Sydney to somewhere
in the wilds of the interior ? These protectionists cannot get a
seat in Sydney. They have to go to country electorates. I come
to the hon. member for South Sydney, Mr. Toohey, who said that
when he first came into the House he was not a protectionist.
He now tells us that he is a protectionist. lam not surprised to


find him speaking in favour of the bill; but does that hon.
member now represent his constituents or himself ? He does
not represent his constituents. (Hear, hear.) The hon. member
for South Sydney, Mr. Forsyth, made a long speech on nomina-
tion day, and I read a report of it in the Herald . He touched
upon a variety of subjects; but said not a word about protection.
I think the hon. member admitted very candidly that he
found that it was rather an unpopular thing to talk about.
Who are these protectionists who form the protectionist
party in this House, or in the country ? Do we not know that
for a number of years they have not been able to command the
leadership of any man distinguished in the public life of the
country ? Who does not know that they had not the slightest
opportunity to fasten their policy upon the country ? But now
with a free-trade government in power they have a glorious
opportunity to carry out all their principles, and all their
theories; they are able to “ sneak in ” protection. (Hear, hear.)
No wonder that they are delighted. Now, what was the way in
which hon. members talked to their constituents on this subject
at the last election ? We did not hear of this outspoken declara-
tions of protectionist principles. We heard the vast majority of
the members of this House say that they were unmistakably
free-traders, and what does that mean ? Ido not want to go
into any learned definitions of the meaning of free-trade. Hon.
members will admit this, that it does not mean interfei*euce with
every article of commerce in this country without the slightest
necessity. (Hear, hear.) Some of my hon. friends on the
Treasury benches have been particularly quiet during these
proceedings. They stood before the country as staunch and
ardent free-traders. My hon. friend at the head of the Treasury
benches did hint at taxation through the Custom-house, but he
told the electors, even of The Bogan, that there must be no
needless or injurious interference with the trade and commerce of
the country.. What I complain of is that whilst ray hon, friend
stated that to his constituents, he does not say it in this bill
which he asks the House to pass. (Hear, hear.) My hon,
friend, the Colonial Secretary, is known as one of the most blunt
and outspoken adherents to principle, but he has been very quiet
with reference to these duties. We have not heard his sturdy
eloquence lauding the virtues of ad valorem duties; perhaps we
shall hear it to-night. He did not laud them before his con-
stituents ; he had nothing to say about them, except to un-
mistakably condemn them. (Hear, hear.) As for the Minister
for Lands, it is almost impossible to know now what he is.
(Laughter.) When the hon. member was before his constituents,
he was such an unmistakable free-trader that, although he
thought it would be necessary to impose some ad valorem duties
until an income and land-tax were obtained—and they are now


practically obtained —even those ad valorem duties were only to
be imposed on articles which could not be produced in the
colony. (Hear, hear.)
An Hon. Member : On luxuries !
Mr. Reid : A few evenings ago my hon. friend spoke to this
effect: that he was a fair-trader; that he was a retaliator ; that
he thought a little protection would not be a bad thing; but he
has since discovered that protection is a device of the devil. My
hon. friend is working with a considerable number of the devil's
emissaries on the Treasury benches.
Mr. Copeland : The devil is not half so black as he is
painted ?
Mr. Reid : That is very likely; but we are not going to
engage in an argument on that point. (Hear, hear.) This brings
me to what is called the fair-trade party in the House, which
some hon. members call in the vernacular the “ hay and corn
party." They say, “ Here are the farmers of New South Wales
exposed to the competition of the farmers of Victoria, whilst
under the Victorian tariff they are shut out of Victorian ports,"
and they ask that taxes may be imposed on flour, wheat, hay,
and all other articles of colonial produce. And what answer did
they get from the Government ? What answer did they get from
this House ? By a vote- of 66 to 22 they were told that they
were not to get those duties for the benefit of the farmei’s ; but
they love this Government so much that, although the slightest
assistance to the farmers is denied, they seek to establish fair-
trade for the farmers by taxing almost everything they produce.
That is the latest edition of fair-trade. (Cheers.) It is said, in
reply to this, “ Oh, but look at the free-list; look at the cultiva-
tors that are admitted free; the strippers that are admitted free;
all the agricultural implements that are admitted free." Have
the farmers to thank them for that ? Are not these things all
admitted free at the present moment ? Now what does this cry
of fair-trade mean ? If duties were imposed on flour and wheat,
on hay and corn, who are the people who would suffer ? The un-
fortunate people of this country—the unfortunate consumers of
flour and wheat—the unfortunate draymen and cabmen in our
streets, who want to get their oats and hay, and chaff, as cheaply
as possible. What harm have these poor individuals done that
they should be subject to such oppressive duties, because
some other people in some other country do not understand free-
trade ? Then there is the other idea, of retaliation. It may be
natural if a man does not treat you fairly to retaliate upon
him—to hit him in the face ; but it is another matter whether it
is wise or profitable. I will take two men, A and B, in business
in Sydney, dealing with different articles. A buys from B; B
will not buy from A, but buys from C instead. A goes to B and
says, “ This is very unfair; I buy all the things I want in your


line from yon ; why don’t yon buy all you want in my line from
me ?’’ B refuses to do so, and A then refuses to buy from B.
Now, if A can buy things from B more cheaply than he can buy
them from any one else, he does not benefit himself by refusing
to deal with B. (Cheers.) He may gratify his feelings, but that
is all. It is the same with countries which impose protective
duties. Ido not advocate free-trade to benefit other countries ;
I advocate it because it is best for ourselves; because, in spite of
the protective policies of other countries, it is still a good thing
that the people of this country should enjoy the advantage of
buying in the various markets as cheaply as possible. We have
another class of incidental protectionists, who say this : “ While
we are raising revenue, why should we not impose such duties as
will while filling the Treasury incidentally encourage local
industries ?’’ What is the effect of that ? To the extent to
which local industries are encouraged the revenue disappears.
Then, it becomes protection to the individual working under the
duty, but the duty itself disappears, and fresh burdens have to
be put on the people to make up the deficiency. (Cheers.) But
you cannot take the item off the tariff. That must remain to
protect the industry. We have a number of proofs of that in
our present tariff. Do we not see that many duties imposed for
revenue purposes have come to have an incidentally protective
character; and do we not see that we cannot repeal a single
sixpence of taxation to touch vested interests which have grown
up ? It all comes to this : that men cannot be fair-traders, or
retaliators, or incidental protectionists, and call themselves free-
traders. (Cheers.) There are only two rational and logical
positions in this matter. There is the position of the man who
regards all the industries of the country as entitled to fair and
equal treatment, who regards them all as equal objects of solici-
tude and care, and who will not tax one to benefit the industry
of another. That is a free-trader. He may impose taxes for
revenue purposes, but he will never try to tax one class of the
community to benefit another. There is one thing that free-
traders will never try to do—and I speak of these proposals as
the proposals of a free-trade Government —and that is in raising
customs revenue, to raise it not on a few articles, but on as many
as possible. But that is what the Government are doing. As I
have shown before, the proposed tariff will be a more vexatious
and interfering tariff with the trade of this colony, than the tariff
of Victoria is with the trade of that colony. It will be infinitely
more mischievous; it will do infinitely more harm to our trade,
especially to our intercolonial trade to which we ought to attach
some importance. That trade has been growing for years past,
and we are looking forward to a time when this colony will
dominate the commerce of the Pacific. We have keen competi-
tion on the part of the colonies in that trade, and this 6 per cent.


duty will not help us, but quite the reverse. Again we are told
this is a fine opportunity to tax the merchants and importers. It
is common among protectionists to try to expose the mei’cantile
and importing classes to reprobation as if they were engaged in
an unlawful occupation : but the free-traders of the country can
have no sympathy with such ideas. In the growth of every
great nation, the merchants have played a conspicuous part —
pre-eminently in the growth of England—pre-eminently in the
growth of Victoria—not so much perhaps in the growth of this
colony. An hon. member says they can look after themselves,
but cannot the manufacturers who want these duties also look
after themselves ? Let us look at both sides of the question. If
we blame the merchants and importers, we must also blame
the shop-keepers, because the merchants only pass on the goods
to the shop-keepers. We must also blame the great improve-
ments in steam navigation which enable people in other countries
to send their goods to us with so much advantage to us; we
must also blame the sailors because they have entered into a con-
spiracy with the merchants to flood our local markets. The
whole thing is irrational and unfair. Let us go a little further,
and look at .the effect of these taxes on the consumers. That, I
submit, is the most solemn duty this House has to perform. And
when I speak of the consumers I mean every man, woman, and
child in the country. What will be the effect of the duties ?
Does any one believe that the merchants will not make an effort
to recover the 5 per cent, charged to them as duty ? In one
breath we are told that the merchants are a lot of money-graspers,
and in the next that they will be so simple as to pay the 5 per
cent, duty out of their own pockets. The two things are
quite inconsistent. According to the character which some hon.
members give the merchants they will try to get 10, 15, or 20
per cent., while others say, “ Oh, no, they will pay the ad valorem
duty and go on selling as cheaply as before.” I have heard of
many instances of the former character. I have heard of too
many instances of people going to shops and finding the prices of
goods raised 15 and 20 per cent., and they have been told that
the increased price is owing to the ad valorem duty. It does not
affect the man of substance if he has to pay 2d. or 3d. more for
his groceries, or 2s. or 3s. more for his clothes; but it does affect
the toiling and struggling masses of the country. (Cheers.) We
are told that they do not feel the duty, because they do not see
it. We know that in that circumstance lies the only chance our
protectionist friends have. If the people of any country could
only see marked on all the articles they buy the increase put upon
them by the taxes, protection would be scouted out of every
civilised nation. This country has hitherto been intelligent
enough to know that, although the people cannot see the effect
of the taxes, they should be saved from such increased expendi-


ture. The hon. member for Yass Plains, who is looked upon as
the leader of the protectionist party, and who was a virulent
opponent of the hon. gentleman at the head of the Treasury
Benches, seems to have become suddenly subdued to the most
implicit belief in the wisdom of the counsels which govern the
country at the present time. What is the hon. members position ?
He has no right to be alive. He solemnly announced his ap-
proaching political death. He went down and was waked by
his own constituents; but like Conn the Shaughraun, now that
he has been waked he positively refuses to be buried. (Laughter.)
And what is he remaining in the House to do ? I do not know
that his constituents have attempted in any way to bring him
back to life. He has stated that he only remained in the House
to carry the principle of payment of members ; but he has now
discovered that he must remain a little longer, in order to impose
all these taxes on the people of the country. If he succeeds, I
think that the name which the people will attach to the present
Parliament will be this : “ The pay-ourselves-and-tax-everybody-
else Parliament'.” (Cheers and laughter,) Has the growth of
this country been so discouraging that we need adopt this extra-
ordinary method of stimulating prosperity ? I decline to deal
with the question in any other way; I regard the great question
of free-trade versus protection as being on its trial—not on a fair
trial—not on a trial before the people, but on its trial in this-
House. Since I have been in the House I have refrained from
delivering a speech on free-trade; I did not want to take up
time when I knew that the protectionist party had no earthly
chance of carrying their projects into law, but I now find my-
self in a different position; I now think that it is time that I
should endeavour to show to the House and the country what
a mischievous policy that is which the Government are
attempting to introduce. In the first place I would ask is
there anything in the growth of the country during the past
ten years to discourage us ? We know that we have been
subjected to a series of droughts—that the price of our
staple article of production has become fearfully low; but
what has been the progress of the country in spite of all
these disadvantages ? At no former time in the history of
the country has it made more rapid stages of national progress.
Take our population. During the ten years 1871-81 it increased
by about 250,000 souls, whilst the population of the country to
which some hon. members are never tired of referring—Victoria
—only increased by 130,000 in the same period. The increase
here has not been spasmodic. It has been regular during the
ten years. During last year the population of New South Wales
was increased by no less than 59,000 souls in one year, a greater
increase of population in this free-trade country than there was
in all the other colonies of the Australian continent put together


—or leaving out the colony of Queensland on the north, a greater
increase in the population of New South Wales in one year than
in all the other colonies of Australasia together. (Cheers.)
That is the rate at which this country is growing. Then com-
merce, which some people despise, but which represents the
prosperity of the country in every sense of the term, has increased
during the last ten years from £27,000,000 to £41,000,000, or 52
per cent. The shipping entered and cleared in our ports during
the same period has increased from 2,168,000 tons to 4,660,000
tons, or more than double the total of 1875. The trade of
Victoria during the same period only increased from £31,450,000
to £35,250,000, or 12 per cent, against our increase of 52 per
cent! If we look at the condition of the working-classes, I have
no hesitation in saying that there is no country in the world
where the working classes have a greater combination of ad-
vantages than they have in this country. (Hear, hear.) Now,
we are told that nearly all the countries of the world are pro-
tectionist, It is rather a strange thing that we should be told
in one breath that this protection is only wanted for a short time,
and that by-and-by we can do without it, and in the same breath
that countries which have had the system for hundreds of years
cannot get rid of it. Since the hon. member for Queanbeyan is
so anxious for the working-classes of the country, let me show
him what the working-classes in these protectionist countries re-
ceive in the shape of wages. I will take Germany. I find that in
Silesiairon-founders receive—howmuch dohon.members suppose?
12s. per week; locksmiths, 9s. per week; labourers, 6s. per
week. In the rural districts of Germany agricultural labourers
receive l|d. per hour, and females Id. per hour —so that pro-
tection has not done great deal for the working-class in Germany.
And do they work eight hours or nine hours a day ? No ; they
work from twelve to fourteen hours every day of their life except
Sunday. In Krupp's celebrated manufactory, where between
8,000 and 9,000 hands are employed, I find that working men
are paid from Is. to Is per day. Carpenters and
masons, from 2s. to ss. Bd, In Austria skilled operatives —the
highest kind of artisans —receive only 2s. 6d, a day of from ten
to fifteen hours' labour. In Belgium, of which we hear so much
as such a progressive country, under the blessing of protection,
mill operatives receive only Is. Bd. a day for ten and eleven
hours of labour. In France ordinary labourers receive only from
2s. 2d. to 2s. 4d. a day. An hon. member says that is not
correct. I generally refer to good authorities for my facts, and
if my hon. friend will refer to a work in the library, published by
Mr. Young, consisting of a series of reports to the Government
of the United States on the European labour markets, he will
find that the facts are as I have stated them, I desire now to
say a word or two about England, We have been told that


England owes her greatness to the fact that for hundreds of
years she lived under a protectionist policy. There is no doubt
that England had one of the most complete protectionist policies
ever known, and for a long period of time. They went so far in
the reign of Charles II that to promote the woollen industry
they enacted that the dead should be buried in woollen shrouds,
(laughter,) and this extraordinary law remained in force for
130 years. The sheep and the wool of England were famous in
those days. Sheep could not be shorn within 5 miles of the
sea-coast for fear they should be kidnapped abroad. The wool-
producing industry came in not under protection, but with the
Romans many centuries ago. What was the growth of the
industry ? It took about ninety years from the beginning of the
eighteenth century up to 1789 to increase the export of this
industry by some £350,000 per annum. In the year 1846 the
export of woollen goods from England amounted to £7,250,000.
In the year 1885, when, as we are told, England was going to
the dogs, the export of woollens amounted to £23,000,000, three
times the amount of the export for 1846, the end of the pro-
tective era. Take iron, another industry brought in by the
Romans. They had been smelting iron in England for centuries;
but it was not until the year 1740 that they discovered coal could
be used for the purpose, and they were actually about to stop
smelting operations, because the forests of England were dis-
appearing. In 1768 there were only seventy-seven furnaces
throughout the whole of England. As we ail know, about the
end of the eighteenth century, there was a period of invention
with regard to manufacturing appliances, beginning with Ark-
wright, which gave an immense impetus to manufacturing
industry. The cotton industry, which is by far the greatest of
England, began there under the strongest opposition. Tne wool-
growers were all dead against the new manufacture, and only
100 years ago a panic arose when it was discovered that no less
than 7,000 bags of cotton had been imported into England during
the period of four months. This industry made the slowest pro-
gress under protection. In 1701 the export was £23,000. In
1780—the growth of eighty years —it was £350,000. Improve-
ments in the machinery for the manufacture of cotton came into
use and in 1837, the export of cotton manufactures increased to
£20,000,000, but in the year 1885 it amounted to no less than
£67,000,000. All the great increases in the manufacturing
industries of England began after the protective system had
received its death-blow. (Hear, hear.) Under protection their
progress was of the most sluggish character, in spite of the
wonderful resources of the country. England had marvellous
resources. She had, compared with other nations, one of the
most enlightened peoples under the sun. She had people so
enterprising that they could conquer the world, and yet these


industries were crawling on at this miserable rate. What was
the total export of British manufactures and produce at the close
of the protective era ? It amounted to only £57,000,000 ! For
the years 1845 to 1848 the average was about that amount. In
forty years the export of British produce and manufactures has
increased to no less than £278,000,000. That is growth in forty
years —from £57,000,000 to £278,000,000. Her export trade, in
foreign and colonial produce, simply passing through England
in transit, amounts to £60,000,000 sterling per annum—a larger
volume of goods in transit than the whole export of Great
Britain forty years before. Here lam confronted by the fact
that the imports of England are vastly in excess of her exports.
During the ten years from 1876 to 1885 the excess of imports
into England over the exports amounted to no less a sum than
£1,120,000,000, being £112,000,000 per annum. We are told
what a terrible drain on England this is. All this £112,000,000
going out of poor England every year ! But when I look at the
trade in gold, silver, and bullion, I find that during these ten
years the import of gold and silver amounted to £147,000,000,
and the export to within £500,000 of exactly the same amount;
so that England did not send the money out of the country —
she did a vastly wiser thing. She had lent upwards of
£1,100,000,000 in various parts of the world. Her enterprise
had invested her capital to the extent of hundreds of millions in
the United States of America, whence she receives £86,000,000 of
imports, and only sends £24,000,000, back again. Here again
there is no drain of gold or silver from England. What does
that mean ? She has brought into her ports, instead of gold and
bullion, the raw products of other countries, which have employed
her shipping, which have cheaply fed her people, employed her
manufactories, and enabled her to command the markets of the
world. (Cheers.) Is that not vastly better than storing bullion
in the Bank of England, while industries are prostrated and
population is starving ? That is the course of trade in England
now. What was the state of the working-class under the pro-
tective policy of England ? This is an interesting inquiry. The
corn laws were supposed to help the agricultural labourer.
After a long experiment of the corn laws, whilst the owners of
the soil made princely fortunes, the poor agricultural labourers
of England were receiving ss. or 6s. per week, and were in a state
of almost absolute slavery. What was the state of the districts
in which the great manufactures were being produced ? They
also were reduced to a state of beggary and destitution, I do
not often trouble the House with quotations; but perhaps the
House will allow me to read a few words, written at the time,
not prepared since, in the pages of one of the most reliable
reviews in England. 1 will read a passage from the Edinburgh
Review of January, 1844. These are the observations of the


reviewer, when dealing with the state of the juvenile and female
labour of England. According to all protectionist theories,
England, after all these centuries of protection, should have been
one of the most prosperous countries for the working man ; there
should have been no dearth of employment. At that time the
population of England was only half of what it is now. This is
what the reviewer says :
The melancholy truth is forced upon us from every side that all occupations
are overstocked ; that the labour market is not sufficiently extensive for the num-
ber of labourers who crowd into it; that the industrial departments of this active
and ingenious country—vast and various as they are— are yet inadequate for the
comfortable maintenance of all who wish to be employed, and who must live by
their employment; and that the expansion and multiplication of these is, there-
fore, our great desideratum. This is not the case with labourers and
artisans alone. The first and most liberal professions feel the same difficulty and
make the same complaint. The shopkeepers and tradesmen, whose daughters can
find no lucrative opening for their industry but the slavery of shirt-making or
millinery, and the farmer, whose sons degenerate into ploughmen, and compress
ploughmen into paupers—all alike groan under the pressure.
That is a picture of the state of the labour market of England
at the close of the protective era. (Cheers.) I will not trouble
the House with any reference to an article in the British
Quarterly Review of the following year, except to say this :
that that Review, in referring to the long hours of labour which
prevailed in the factories of England at the time quotes as a
proof of the prosperous condition of the factory system, that
according to the reports of the master manufacturers the average
wages of 212,000 operatives were 10s. sd. per week, and that
these wages were double those in silk manufactories and double
the wages of agricultural labourers. Such was the state to
which the English labourer was reduced at the close of the
protective era.
Dr, Cooke Taylor, who made a tour of the manufacturing
districts of Eugland about this time, in a book which he pub-
lished, wrote :
I have seen misery in many forms ; I have been in the huts and hovels of
Ireland when my native land was visited with the scourge of cholera ; I have
visited the cellars of Liverpool, when existence assumes an aspect that ceases to be
human ; I have penetrated into the wynds and vennels of Glasgow (localities that
would try to the utmost the hardest of hearts and the strongest of stomachs) ;
but nowhere have I seen misery which agonized my very soul, as that which I
have witnessed in the manufacturing districts of Lancashire. And why ? Be-
cause .... I was beholding the gradual immolation of the noblest and
most valuable population that ever existed in this country, or any other under
heaven
As to the framework knitters of Nottingham, Leicester, and
Derby, Mr. Muggeridge, Special Commissioner for the Hoard of
Trade, reported in 1843.
They labour fifteen and eighteen hours a day for three shillings and seven
pence a week wages. One third of the women in the manufacturing districts are
working in trades They pawn their blankets for a day’s subsistence
in the morning, and fetch them out at night, which costs each poor person three
pence per week.


I will now quote from a work on “ Fiscal Legislation ” by-
Mr. John Noble, in order to give a general idea of the state of
the Mother Country at the close of her long trial of the Protective
policy. Mr. Noble says :
It is, however, utterly impossible to convey, by mere statistics of our exports,
any adequate picture of the condition of the nation when Sir Robert Peel took
office in 1841. Every interest in the country was alike depressed : in the manu-
facturing districts mills and workshops were closed, and property daily depreciated
in value, in the seaports shipping was laid up useless in harbour ; agricultural
labourers were eking out a miserable existence upon starvation wages and parochial
relief; the revenue was insufficient to meet the national expenditure ; the country
was brought to the verge of national and universal bankruptcy,
The condition of the operatives in every district was most appalling. It was
proved that in Bolton 300 families consisting of 1,400 individuals, had a total
income of only £l3O per week, or deducting rents £lO5 11s, which was only equal
to 15|d per head per week. Out of 3,200 houses, 400 were empty ; 1,000 were
tenanted by families having only 18d per week to live upon ; and the remainder
by families whose incomes were not more than 2s or 2s 6d per w r eek. Of these
poor people 1,601 had only 500 beds among them, 582 sleeping three in a bed, and
185 five in a bed, 78 six in a bed, and 42 seven in a bed. In Stockport one out
of every five houses was untenanted, and half of those occupied were not paying
rent. In Paisley 650 heads of families were out of employment, and 1,200 looms
were idle. In the district of Manchester 8,000 persons were living on 15d. each per
week, and thousands of work people were wandering through the streets in search
of employment. By cutting off our foreign trade the operatives were deprived of
employment, and hence the home trade suffered through their utter inability to
purchase even the commonest necessaries.
This lamentable condition of affairs was not confined to one district, but spread
throughout the Kingdom ; not among the working classes only, but among the
middle and higher clases also. Bankruptcy and insolvency were remarkably fre-
quent The distress which deprived tradesmen of their customers at the same
time increased their difficulties by the high poor rates which it rendered indispen-
sable, In some of the agricultural districts estates were given up by the owner
to the parish because the rates exceeded the rents. It was estimated that half the
mills in Lancashire were closed, and that the fixed capital of that county had
depreciated fully 50 per cent. Moreover, there were no signs of improvement,
for during the Parliamentary recess the distress became fearfully and extensively
aggravated.
The protective system, which was supported with the view of rendering this
country independent of foreign sources of supply, and thus, it was hoped, foster-
ing the growth of home trade, had most effectually destroyed that trade by
reducing the entire population to beggary, destitution, and want. The masses of
the population were unable to procure food, and had subsequently nothing to
spend on British manufactures.
Mr. Forsyth : The same state of things exist now !
Mr. Reid: We know that the same state of things does not
exist now. (Cheers.) We know that compared with that con-
dition the working men of England are in a vastly better position
now ; they are better paid ; they do not work so many hours in
the day. My bon. friend will be astounded to hear, no doubt,
that the hours of labour in England are not so long as they are
in the United States. I am not quoting from an English
periodical now, but I am quoting from the labour report of the
State of Massachusetts, which shows that in America the working
men in factories work 309 days in the year, and sixty hours in
the week ; whilst in England the operatives work .306 days in
the year, and fifty-three hours in the week. Now, I should like


to read a few lines from a work which has just been published by
Professor Leone-Levi on the wages and earnings of the working
classes in England. These are the remarks which he makes with
reference to the position of the working men in England at the
end of the year 1884 :
With the enormous increase of wealth in the United Kingdom the position
of the working classes has likewise greatly improved.
Whence came that enormous increase ? Did it come under the
protective system ? We know that it did not. We know that
it was the system of freedom which enabled merchants and
manufacturers of England to turn over and over again the
products of other parts of the world carried thither by the
enterprising mercantile marine of England, which brought about
the increase in national wealth to which this author refers.
In a large number of instances working men of 1857 have become middle-
class men of 1884 Many a workman of that day has now a shop or an hotel, has
money in the bank or shares in shipping or mills. Cases of rising from the ranks
are by no means so rare as w r e might imagine. But working men of the present
day are much better off than they were twenty-seven years ago, for all wages are
higher.
He then gives figures showing the increases, with which I need
not trouble the House, but I will read the concluding paragraph :
I think I am justified in assuming that the working-classes as a whole are in
receipt of .30 per cent, more in 1884 than they were receiving in 1857, or in other
words that if the total weekly receipts of a family from all sources in 1857
amounted to 245. now they reach at least 325. a week.
In the Savings Banks of England there are now deposits
amounting to £90,000,000. The Friendly Societies numbered in
1883, 4,242,084 members, with funds amounting to £12,550,000.
In the same year there were 572,610 members of Industrial and
Co-operative Societies, with funds reaching a total of £8,200,000.
Then in addition to all these societies the Building Societies of
England at the close of the same year show funds invested to the
amount of £48,938,000.
I should like hon. members to remember what was the trade
of the country—which is now said to be going to the dogs—at
the end of this protective period. In 1815 the trade of England
was about £144,000,000. In 1884—a bad year in English trade
—it was no less than £644,000,000. What a wonderful increase
under the policy of freetrade 1
Mr. Forsyth : It is owing to a variety of causes !
Mr, Reid : Of course there are a number of causes; but I say
that this progress would be impossible under a protective system.
And how is it that we find that other countries have colonies
which are a drag upon them, instead of being a benefit to them ?
You may find the reason in the policy of protection to some
extent. Then what about the shipping of England ? When the
navigation laws were repealed in 1848 it was said that the whole
shipping industry of England would be ruined. In those days


the tonnage was 3,350,000 tons, and it is now about 7,000,000
tons, and about 5,500,000 tons of this s steamship tonnage, which
is vastly more powerful for the purpose of commerce than the
wooden ships of 1848. The increase in tonnage entered and
cleared in the ports of England during the last ten years was
about 18,000,000 tons. No less than 64,000,000 tons of shipping
are entered and cleared at the ports of England in one year, and
how much of the shipping of the great United States of America
finds its way to British ports ? How much of the shipping of
these sixty millions of people, with all their enterprise and all
their marvellous resourses, finds its way to the ports of England ?
Out of that 64,000,000 tons only 437,000 tons fly the Stars and
Stripes—a less tonnage than that of Belgium, one-third of the
tonnage of Holland, one-fourth of the tonnage of Denmark, and
one-eighth the tonnage of Sweden. (Cheers.) That is the
position of the American mercantile marine in the ports of Eng-
land, and now, if I might be allowed, I should like to make a few
references to the experience of the United States of America
under the protective system. In the first place, as we all know,
America has free-trade over an area of 3,000,000 square miles.
There is no protection between one State and another, although the
States have different interests and different resources. They have,
to begin with, free-trade over the vast area of 3,000,000 square
miles. They have also one of the most wondrously fertile countries
in the world, diversified by a number of splendid highways for
trade in the shape of wide rivers. They have also the advantage
of a stream of population from the overgrown centres of the
world in search of not only occupation, but also the blessings of
freedom. They have the advantage of this increase of popula-
tion—they have every facility for manufacturing progress ; but is
America yet able to compete in the markets of the world with
England ? She grows enormous quantities of cotton ; but Eng-
land buys her cotton in her Southern ports, takes it to Manchester,
converts it into cotton fabrics, and sends it out to the other
markets of the world to the amount of £67,000,000 sterling per
annum. What is the export of cotton manufacture from the
United States ? It is about £2,500,000, and her imports of cotton
manufactures, probably mostly made out of her own cotton,
amount to twice that value in spite of an almost prohibitory tariff.
The United States have, I suppose, the heaviest tariff known to
civilisation at the present time. For what purpose was this tariff
imposed ? It was not imposed for protective purposes. On many
occasions the tariff of the United States was imposed for revenue
purposes. In the year 1860, at the time of the tremendous
struggle between the North and South, the tariff was increased
to these enormous dimensions in order to meet the expenses of
the War; but now that the war is over—now that many of the
taxes are not required—now that they are a terrible strain on the


industries of the country, they cannot get them off. The Treasury
is overflowing with money ; they do not know what to do with
it; they are trying to devise every sort of means to get rid of the
surplus revenue, produced by these custom duties, and the one
thing they will not do is to relieve the people of the burdens they
entail. Now the total export of manufactures of the United
States amount to about £23,000,000, and, as I have said, England
in the one article of cotton manufactures exports three times
more than all the exports of manufactured products from the
United States. I will not trouble the House with any further
reference to the United States, except to say a few words with
regard to this policy of protection, which was to result in ad-
vantage to the working classes, and this system of democracy
which was to have prevented the accumulation of enormous
fortunes out of the masses of the people. But already, where are
the greatest fortunes in the world to be found, but in this
democratic America. (Cheers.) Where are greater extremes to
be found between wealth and poverty than in the streets of New
York ? And how have many of these enormous fortunes been
derived ? They have been derived by men who have made
millions out of the protective laws of the Uuited States. There
has been a duty on that common necessary of life—salt, out of
which wealthy capitalists have made millions sterling. I can
name a hundred industries on which the effect of taxation has
been to give, not an industrial paradise to the artisan, but luxury
to the millionaires of New York. Now, the United States has
not got the eight-hours system. Men work longer hours there
than in England ; they have tried by means of insurrection and
bloodshed to gain this boon ; and those who get the poorest wages
are those engaged, not in the industries which the tariff cannot
protect, but in the protected industries, on the strength of which
so many millions are wrung from the masses of the people.
(Cheers.) I shall only refer in brief to this fact, because I should
like my hon. friends to have the figures. I shall refer only to
the figures given by the labour report of the State of Massachu-
setts to which I have referred, and I will quote the actual rate of
wages which the artisans in that State are receiving under the
system of ten-hours labour. In the cotton manufactures, for
every working day of ten hours, the operative receive 3s. 4d.; in
silk and silk goods, 4s. a day ; in woollen goods, 4s. 2d., in iron
and steel, ss. 4d., and in mining, 4s. 2d. These are the wages
paid in these factories which have the benefit of these enormous
protective duties, and for a day of ten hours, too! From the
same report I learn that whilst wages in England advanced by 10
per cent, between the years 1872-83, in Massachusetts they
declined by per cent. We are told that if we have only a
protective system our labour market will be kept steady, and we
shall have none of the vicissitudes which afflict free-trade coun-


tries. (Laughter.) Now, eight years ago a petition was
presented to Congress by some merchants and manufacturers, in
which these sentences occur;
Pauperism and crime increase daily within our borders ; skilled mechanics
tramp the country over in vain search for the means of living ; and instances are
not lacking where some of our best artisans have been induced to leave our shores
to accept the so-called pauper wages of other countries. A day’s labour in
England will purchase from 25 to 30 per cent, more than a day’s labour in the
United States.
And the Chairman of the Ways and Means Committee of Congress
addressed the chairman of the Iron and Steel Association of
Pennsylvania, asking whether the enormous duties on iron, which
range up to 100 per cent, ad valorem , could not be reduced, and
this was the reply :
Philadelphia, 23 March, 1876.
Dear sir,—Your despatch has been received. With one-half of the furnaces
and rolling mills of the country standing idle ; with iron of all kinds lower in
price than before the war; with failure upon failure of our most experienced
ironmasters announced in the public prints from day to day ; with wages of iron-
workers necessarily reduced so low that they and their families can scarcely escape
destitution and starvation, the American Iron and Steel Association is astonished
to learn that a reduction of the duties on foreign iron is seriously contemplated
by the Ways and Means Committee. ********
If your committee would visit the iron district of the country, it would learn for
itself that manufacturers are either in the hands of the sheriff or selling iron below
cost, and men are working for 1 dollar a day.
Does not that reveal the vicissitudes to which the manufacturers
and working artisans are exposed under the most thorough pro-
tective system in the world. (Cheers.) I do not say this is
characteristic of the United States in general, or at all times,
and I merely quote it to show that only a few years ago the
industries of that country were in this depressed condition. At
that very time no less than 1,250,000 men were tramping the
United States in search of employment. Now a few words
about the shipping of the United States. Twenty-live years ago
I suppose that country had nearly as large a tonnage of shipping
as England herself. We all know that the Stars and Stripes,
before the American War, were as common in the ports of the
world as was the Union Jack; and we were told when the ship-
ping declined in the United States it was the Alabama which
swept American commerce from the ocean. (Laughter.) That
was a very good excuse for ten years, but it will not answer
now. The plain English is that twenty-five years ago the ships
of the world were made of wood, and the forests of the United
States enabled her shipwrights to compete with the shipbuilders
of England; but now that ships are built of iron the industry of
England has mastered the steam tonnage of the world; while
America, of all the lines which go to England, until a few years
ago, did not own a single line of American-built steamers. They
determined to establish a line.


Sir Henry Parkes; There is not one line from New York.
Sir Patrick Jennings : There is an American line !
Mr. Reid : I know they made an attempt to establish a line.
I know that the great American people were rather ashamed
that the ships of England were doing all their trade ; and they
determined to establish a line of ocean-going steamers. What
is the first thing they did ? They got the plates and rivets ready
made from the city of Glasgow. Now, a few days ago an
American company succeeded in getting a tender to construct
the railway bridge over the Hawkesbury; and I confess I was
rather surprised—knowing the state of the iron market in that
country —that an American firm should be able to compete with
English manufacturers. But I now learn from an English news-
paper—which was surprised also at this circumstance —that these
American gentlemen intend not to get all their iron from the
United States, but to make their purchases in the markets of
Europe; and I hope the iron they buy will be well tested
before it is used here. (Hear, hear.) The city of Chicago was
burned down, as we know, not so long ago; and one would have
thought the United States were strong and able enough to re-
build that city without foreign assistance. We were told what a
marvel of American determination and enterprise it was that this
city was built again so rapidly; but they had to pass an Act of
Congress to suspend the duties on building materials before that
was done. (Cheers.)
Mr. Burns : This Government wants to increase these
duties!
Mr. Reid: And when there was a large fire in Boston
a few years afterwards, the Bostonians asked a similar
concession; but the American Protectionists began to see
that this was rather an alarming confession to make, and so
they refused to pass such a measure. (Cheers.) The manu-
facturers of the United States, so great behind their protective
barricades, cut but a sorry figure in every other part of the world,
where they are exposed to competition. One would think that,
amongst the markets of South America, they would at least hold
their own. On this point I should like to give an extract from
a remarkable article translated from a newspaper called “ La
Union,” published in Chili, on the 11th September last. Allud-
ing to a recent visit paid by a Commission appointed by the
United States to promote the growth of commercial relations
between the that country and the republics of South America
the editor observes:
The representatives of the great republic could not but be pained and
surprised by the spectacle that the trade of the United States presents in the
countries of Central and South America. Their share in the mercantile relations
of the Continent could not be more insignificant. Generally speaking, it may be
said that North American manufactures have been proscribed in these markets to
the advantage of those of England, France, Germany, and Belgium. A continent,


nearly a world, and a world at their very doors, the up of which they
believed they had a preferable right to, has been allowed to slip from their grasp.
In their immediate neighbourhood, and just beyond their frontiers, Europeans,
and especially the English, rule the markets, and monopolize the trade. For
what reason ?
The authors of the report enumerate none that after a little study may not
be reduced to one, or at most two. In fact, it is not only possible but probable
that the others that they point out as causes may really be simple manifestations,
symptoms, or consequences of the evil.
Thus, we do not think that trade languishes for the want of lines of steamers,
nor because there are few consuls, nor because there are few American houses
of business established in these countries, nor because of a scarcity of banking
facilities : on the contrary, all these are rather the consequences of the evil, the
causes of which are the subject of inquiry. ... .
The want of business, or rather the reduced scale upon which it is carried out,
does not admit of the establishment of steamship lines, nor of American houses,
nor of banking connections ; neither does it require a more numerous consular
service than the present one. The cause is, therefore, somewhere else. It is to
be found in the protectionist and almost prohibitive system adopted by the United
States. , .
The Government of that country, in impeding, by means of high import
duties, the introduction of foreign merchandise, has struck a deathblow at its own
trade, inasmuch as the latter consists of a series of exchanges exchanges that
cannot be carried out with those who, while refusing the produce of foreign
industry, absurdly expect to sell without buying, ...
Protectionism, the result of which, if not the object thereof, is to raise the
price of goods and increase the cost of production, makes it impossible for 01 th
American, goods to compete in South American markets with those of England,
France, Germany, and Belgium, since those countries, while they produce at less
cost, can sell cheaper and attract customers.
These are the causes of the decay of the North American trade with these
countries and with the whole world ; and until in the republic a current sets in
sufficiently powerful to effect a liberal modification of the customs revenue system,
it will be in vain that they send us embassies, useless for them to extol their wares 1
and needless for them to talk of the right they have to expect that we should
leave the Europeans in order to give the preference to them.
Now, let us take the trade, such as it is, of the United States, and
I admit they have an enormous trade in exports, mostly raw
products. In the year 1861, 71 per cent, of American trade was
carried in American vessels. The Alabama stepped in theu, and
swept the seas. In 1868 it had fallen to 44 per cent.; in 187*1
it was 28 per cent.; and last year it was only 15 per cent.
(Cheers.) Compare that with the growth of this poor Kngland,
which is going to the wall, with her 64,000,000 tons of shipping,
and her free ports ! There are signs of a break-up of the present
fiscal system of the United States, and the party which now
holds the reins of power, I mean the Democratic party, at a great
convention held last year, resolved as follows:
We do especially deny the right of the Government to surrender its taxing
power to corporations or individuals, which is the result both of the theory and
practice of the Republican party, and we denounce the present tariff, which
burdens the people with excessive war taxes in a time of peace, as a masterpiece
of injustice, inequality, and false pretences. We arraign the Republican party
as the creator and def nder of the system which has impoverished many industries
to subsidise a few, which has prohibited imports that it might purchase the
products of American labour, and degrade American commerce from the first u>
an inferior rank on the high seas, which has cut down the sales of American
manufacturers at home and abroad, and has depleted the returns from American
agriculture, an industry followed by half our people. It costs the taxpayers five


times more than it yields to the Treasury. It promotes frauds, fosters smuggling,
corrupts officials, enriches the few by forcing bounties from the many, and favours
dishonest bankrupt merchants above honest ones. We assert the doctrine of the
constitution that all taxation shall be exclusively for revenue, and demand that no
more revenue shall be collected than is required to meet the expenses and obliga-
tions of the government economically administered.
Mr. Burke : Have we not free-trade, too ?
Mr, Reid : I will refer presently to our own colony, and I
shall come now a little nearer home. In these times of our dis-
tress and trouble, Victoria is held up to us as a country which is
making such rapid advances beyond New South Wales. I must
say it always seems a rather strange thing—although I suppose
it is a natural thing—that our protectionist friends in this country
should think their best chance of bringing their policy into
vogue here is by libelling all the interests and prosperity of the
colony in which they live. They are always telling us we are
going to the dogs. New South Wales, they tell us, has no in-
dustries. I admit we might have more; but so long as we have
the population I think we have the best proof of the progress of
any country. We have in this country, as I have said, this
enormous increase of population, and so that there shall be no
mistake I will quote from a rather formidable volume prepared
by Mr. Hayter, the Government Statist of Victoria, on the
census of that colony for the year 1881. I find from a table on
page 60 of this volume, that in the year 1881 she had 31,551
fewer men between the ages of 28 and 40 than in the year 1871.
Here less men in the prime of life—the pride and
strength of the country —in Victoria in 1881 than there were ton
years before. Is that progress ? (Opposition Cheers.) Is that
not eating the heart out of the country ?
An Hon. Member: Where are the old men ?
Mr. Reid: The old men are all there. There is an increase
of 28,000 men up to the age of 92. (Laughter.) But the men in
the prime of manhood—the men most valuable to the state were
31,000 fewer in 1881 than in 1871. I think a great many of
these men have come over here, and it is no wonder there is a
great demand for labour in Victoria. (Loud laughter.) But our
population is increasing at the enormous rate of 60,000 a year —
a greater increase than that of all the other colonies of Australia
put together ; and still, in spite of occasional distress, we can say
of the whole of this rapidly-increasing population, and of all our
varied industries, that they are in as happy, as prosperous, and
as promising a state as are those of any other country. (Loud
cheers.) And is that a state of things which this Parliament can
improve by legislation ? I think my hon. friend let the cat out
of the bag with reference to protection, and all it would do for
the country.
Mr. Burns ; Who did ?
Mr. Reid ; The hon. member for South Sydney.


Mr. Oliiffe : Which one ?
Mr. Reid : My hon. friend, Mr. Forsyth.
Mr. Chanter : What about immigration ?
Mr. Reid: I admit it has had a great deal to do with it;
but the largest proportion of our immigration was not borne at
the public expense. It was immigration without the expenditure
of a single penny of public money. And my hon. friend, if he
looks at the figures, will find that thousands of men have come
here at their own expense, and many of them from this happy
land of protection. The eight-hour system seems to be a stum-
bling block with the hon. member for South Sydney (Mr.
Forsyth) ; when that hon. gentleman was before his constituents
(cheers and laughter) the eight-hour system had been enjoyed
without casting a burden on any one. (Cheers.) Now, my hon.
friend, Mr. Forsyth, when he was before his constituents (cheers
and laughter) at South Sydney at the last general election, in an
unhappy moment made a confession, and we can now see the
sort of industries which this system is to fasten on the city. My
hon. friend Ims the privilege of being a manufacturer, and the
article which he manufactures I believe has the incidental en-
couragement of 40s. a ton; but he has not been able to get down
to the eight-hour system yet. This seemed to be rather a
stumbling-block to him on that occasion, and he went so far as
to say
“ Anumber of sincere, well-meaning, and enthusiastic supporters of the system
have been got at by agents and emissaries of some of my co-candidates, who have,
and now are, deluding them into raising a false cry and a false issue on the eight-
hours question, in hopes of increasing their support.
(Laughter.)
What does my hon, friend say as to the effect of this eight-hours
system which most of the great industries of the country can
still enjoy under free-trade ? Without imposing a single penny of
burden upon any class, or any individual in the country, many of
our industries are able to afford this blessing of the eight-hours
system. But my hon. friend's factory cannot extend this blessing
to its hands, and what does he say:
If eight hours is enforced as a rule in all factories at the present time, many
industries will not merely be injured but destroyed ; a reduction in the hours of
labour from ten to eight will close up every tweed factory in the colony.
(Laughter.)
There is the secret. (Cheers.) It is the system of eight-hours
labour which is the curse to the manufacturing industries of this
country. Give them pauper labour; give them men who will
work for fourteen hours a day, and they will not want protection.
(Loud Opposition applause.) They will have slaves int heirfactories
then. Free-trade has enabled the working men of this country
to obtain the boon of the eight-hours system of labour. They
cannot abolish that; yet it would destroy them, and how are they
to get on ? My hon. friend very candidly tells us:


If a fiscal policy is adopted that will assist colonial' manufactories to compete
with the imported goods, the hours of labour in such factories can be shortened
without destroying such industries.
We cannot get men to work for fourteen hours a day for 10s. a
week, because of the prosperity of this country ; but we must
try and get it oat of somebody, and we will get it out of the
Jennings-Dibbs Administration (Cheers and laughter), and they
will have to get it out of the country. (Renewed laughter and
cheers.) Now, that is what all this means. These protective
duties are required to compel the people to pay higher prices for
the articles which these factories produce. That is what they are
wanted for. They throw dust into our eyes about manufacturers
and importers ; but the men they want to get at are the men who
buy with their hard earnings from all the shops in the country.
The wage-earning class is conspicuously the class that would
suffer by the protection, (Cheers.) Those are the men they
want to get at, and those are the men which this system of
protection gets at. (Cheers.) The bulk of the people are those
who use the bulk of the articles of consumption, and the bulk of
the people are those who live on daily wages. Now, we know
what Colonial industry means. These gentlemen talk as if no
industry was a Colonial industry that could stand on its own
legs. The only industries they call by the name of Colonial are
those which cannot exist and prosper in the free air of heaven.
(Cheers.) These are the native industries of the country —not
our vast pastoral industry. I was going to speak also of our
agricultural industry. A great deal has been said about the
farmers; they are the stalking horse now. Our protectionist
friends said very little about the farmers until very lately.
An Hon. Member: Talk of a subject you know something
about!
Mr. Reid: I will show that I know something about it, I
hope. These hon, gentlemen think that if duties, which they
proposed in an amendment on going out of the House into Com-
raittcee, on articles of colonial produce were passed, it would be a
grand benefit to the farmers of this country. Now, I should
think, speaking of the individual farmers who are in this country
at the present time, that they have got the sort of market they
require when the demand for what they produce exceeds the
supply. That is the state of the market in New South Wales.
The demand for the production of our farming industry exceeds
the supply, because we do not grow all we want. What will the
effect of passing these duties'be ? Do you think these unfortun-
ate farmers are going to be allowed to appropriate them quietly ?
Will not other farmers start up throughout the length and
breadth of the land ? Will not the existing men have greater
competition to endure ? (Cheers.)
Mr. Dalton : There will be a cheaper leaf !


Mr. Reid : That may be. I can assure the hon. member I
have no unfriendly feeling towards the agricultural industry. If
there is an industry which I would go out of my way to assist by
legislation, it would be the industry my hon. friend represents. It
is because I believe that the individual farmers of the country
will by this means only hasten the time when they will be exposed
to greater competition
Mr. Purves : As is the case in Victoria at the present time!
Mr. Reid : Yes. And when the farmers of this country, under
any system you like, come to a period when they produce more
than we require, what will their position be ? They will not
find protection in the markets of the world. They will then
have to fight the Victorian farmers and the South Australian far-
mers. They will have to fight the farmers of America and the
farmers of India in the markets of the world; and then, if a
shilling a bushel is a fair thing for the farmers about Orange
and Wellington, ought not the poor farmers hundreds of miles
further inland to get more, say 25., 35., or 4s. ? It is said that we
must improse this duty, if we want to encourage farming ; if we
want to increase the farming area. Why should not farmers
at Bourke and other distant parts of the country have the
same facilities which the farmers about Orange have ? A
shilling a bushel would not help them, but ss. might. The effect
of this duty would be to put all the men who are near the coast
at an unfair advantage compared with the farmers who are
further back. How many of the farmers of this country are
tenant farmers ? In the case of that very large body who are
tenant farmers, do you think the landlords will nothavesomething
to say to these duties ? Do you think they will not want higher
rents ? But the Government will not help my hon. friend. The
hon. member for Orange (Mr. Dalton) and other enthusiastic
members will stand anything from the Government. We
have the spectacle of these gentlemen, to whom the Government
say : “We won’t help you to the extent of a penny/’ still
pressing on to assist the Government to increase the burdens
under which the farming population of the country labour.
What mystery is this ? We know that by the rules of Parlia-
ment these articles which our farmers produce cannot be struck
off the free-list; you cannot increase the burdens of the people
in Committee on this bill. My hon. friend knows that. All
hope has gone from him. He cannot by any attempt of that
sort give the farmers the benefit of these duties. But still
hon. gentlemen seem to throng round the Government in
order to oppress the men whom they cannot help, (Cheers.)
My hon. friend at the head of the Treasury benches seems to
have a queer idea of the necessaries of life. He says there is one
thing this Government will not do—it will not put one penny of
taxation upon the necessaries of life. My hay and corn friends


have to put up with that. (Laughter.) But my hon. friend has
just as great a tenderness for the interests of Colonial beer.
(Laughter.) Colonial beer, my hon. friend at the head of the
Government told the House some weeks ago, is also a necessary
of life—not English beer; (Cheers.) Oh no, that is to be taxed
9d. a gallon in the bottle and Gd. a gallon in the wood. Some
people seem to think that I have a down on my friends who
make Colonial beer, but I have been among the first to stand up
for the rights of those engaged in the licensed victualling in-
dustry. I would extend to them just as much protection from
the laws of the country as I would to any other class of the com-
munity. But I cannot stand my hon. friend calling Colonial
beer a necessary of life. I cannot stand my hon. friend calling
flour and beer necessaries of life while he taxes the clothes, and
the hats, and the boots of the poorest and humblest classes of the
community. The sewing-machine with which the poor, wretched,
and neglected female tries to earn an honest living is to be
taxed. (Laughter.)
Mr. Reid > This may be fun to my hon. friend, but it is a
fact. (Hear, hear.) Long after these laughs have died out, and
long, perhaps, after we have died out, these burdens which the
Government ask us to put upon the people of this country, will
continue.
Mr. O’Connor: They are not on them yet!
Mr. REID : And whilst the cultivators and the strippers of my
hon. friend, the member for Orange are on the free list, even the
sewing-machine which is often the last hope of the poverty-
stricken widow —even that is to be taxed. My hon. friend may
call that nonsense, but I say it is a fact. And more than that,
there is scarcely an industry in this country which will not be
affected by these duties. There is scarcely a human being in
this country who will not be affected by these duties. The 5 per
cent, which the merchant pays will become 10 per cent, before
the consumer pays. And what does that mean ? Let us reduce
it to figures. The Government proposes to get £soo,ooo or
£400,000 out of these duties. For every £300,000 ou. £400,000
that goes into the public Treasury, £600,000 or £BOO,OOO will
come out of the pockets of the people (Hear, hear.) There is
another objectionable thing about this system of taxation. It
not only presses upon the poorest classes of the community, but it
creates a vested interest in the continuance of the taxes.
When you impose taxes upon land and upon income, no human
being has a vested interest in continuing these taxes after they
cease to be required. But touch articles of trade —benefit men
who have an interest in producing articles in this country of a
certain kind—and you will find that these taxes can never be
repealed, even if they have ceased to be necessary. This has
occurred in several instances we know of. There are several


industries of this sort; and, free-trader as I am, if a protective
policy were brought into force to-morrow, I should be the last to
try to upset it ; because the moment vested interests arise—the
moment men become dependent upon industries—the moment
you have to deal with flesh and blood, you cannot alter the policy
of the country. This is the reason why it is so difficult in all
countries to uproot a protectionist policy when once it is
established. (Hear, hear.) How did the protectionist policy of
Victoria come into existence ? It was the free-traders who
brought the protectionist policy into Victoria. It was a free-
trade government that brought in 7| per cent, duties for revenue
purposes. And we know the result. Ido not wish to delay the
House, (Cries of “Go on ”). Well, I should like to make one or
two observations with reference to the idea that a system of pro-
tection keeps money in the country. My hon. friend, the
member for South Sydney, Mr. Toohey, used this argument
again to night. There never was a greater fallacy. (Hear,
hear.) The nations of the world do not do their business in
coin. What is the use of American dollars in London ? What
is the use of English sovereigns, except as gold, in America ?
They exchange goods. When we send home £IOO,OOO worth
of wool, and instead of bringing out 100,000 sovereigns, bring
out something which, in this country, is worth 120,000 sove-
reigns, we do not lose, but we gain by bringing the articles
instead of the sovereigns. (Hear, hear.) How is it that
gentlemen who see the force of this contention do not carry
out the idea in their own affairs ? Why do not affectionate
brothers keep the money in their own families ? Supposing a
man went up to his brother and said, “ I am going in for the
manufacture of hats; I know I shall not make so cheap an
article as the man down the road; but although you will have to
pay more for your hats, we will keep the money in the family/ 7
(Laughter.) The brother would not understand that; he would
say, “ I know that the money is going out of my pocket, and I
would recommend you to go and earn an honest living as I do. 77
A man was once caught by a shopkeeper in the act of robbing
his till, but he quietly assured the shopkeeper that it was all right,
because he was going to spend the mony in the shop next day.
(Laughter.) Ido not wish to liken our protectionist friends to
that man, but that is pretty much what they say to the people of
this country when they want to levy taxes on articles of con-
sumption, “ It is all right, we are going to spend the money in
the country.” (Laughter and cheers.) There is another remark
I would make about this ; if it is a good thing for the Colony to
have this system surely it is a good thing for each town in the
Colony. Take Tamworth and Maitland. Why should the
people of Maitland, possessing perhaps superior resources, have
the run of Tamworth ? Why should not a humble saddler in


Tamworth have some sort of protection against the large manu-
facturers of Maitland and Sydney ? All the arguments that
apply to the case of a distant country apply to the case of each
town in a country and of each district. It is a marvellous thing
that the free-trade which is admittedly the only tolerable system
in our own country becomes a curse when we deal with others.
Mr. Creer : The other towns keep Sydney!
Mr. Reid: One of my greatest objections to the policy of
protection is that this overgrown metropolis, under a system of
protection, by its vast manufacturies, will monopolise the manu-
facturing of the whole country. (Cheers.) Under a system of
free-trade every man has a chance. A man of enterprise sees an
opening in a country town; he seizes it and makes a little
business for himself. But one of the curses of protection is that
it brings into existence mammoth manufacturies, which crush
out of existence the small struggling manufacturers in different
parts of the country ; so that this system would exaggerate the
evils from which the country districts are already suffering. We
are told that although this policy may be a bad policy for other
countries it is right policy for a young country (Hear hear), but
I think that if there is a country in which it is not advisable that
Parliament should seek to prescribe the industrial occupations
of the people it is in a young country in which the true sources of
national wealth, enterprise, and industry have not yet been
discovered. (Hear hear.) We have heard that John Stuart
Mill expressed the opinion that it is desirable to establish a
system of protection in a young country. I happen to have an
extract from a letter which Mr. Mill addressed to the Hon. E.
W. Stafford, of New Zealand, in reference to that passage in his
works. Mr. Mill says :
I never for a moment thought of recommending or countenancing in a new
colony more than elsewhere a general protective policy,' or a system of duties such
as that which has recently passed the Representative Assembly of your colony.
Is it not an extraordinary thing that protectionists who
seem to despise the teachings of political economy should attach
so much importance to a stray expression in the works of one
author ? If they want to study the works of those men who have
thought out this question, I can tell them that out of seventy-
seven recognised works on political economy in the British
Museum, there are only two of those, and they are by unknown
authors, which countenance in any way the policy which they
seek to impose upon this country, and Mr. Henry George, who
astonished the world by a work which shows his desire to
revolutionize society as it is at present constituted —this apostle
of liberalism and labour—what does he say about it ? (Hear hear.)
He scouts it as an imposition on labour, and upon working men.
(Cheers). The other night my hon. friend found it very hard to
get in the range of history any distinguished man who has pro-


fessed himself a protectionist. We were told that George
Washington was a protectionist. Now, what does that illustrious
man say on the subject ? He says :
Our commercial policy should hold an equal and impartial hand, neither
seeking nor granting exclusive favours or preferences, consulting the natural
course of things, diffusing and diversifying by gentle means the streams of com-
merce, but forcing nothing.
That it is the opinion of the illustrious founder of the United
States. We were also told that Benjamin Franklin, another
eminent man, was a protectionist. I will read what he says:
Perhaps in general it would be better if government meddled no further with
trade than to protect it, and let it take its course. Most of the statutes or acts,
edicts or arrests, and placards of Parliament, princes, and states for regulating,
directing, or restraining trade have, we think, been either political blunders or
jobs obtained by artful men for private advantage under the pretence of public
good.
I do not think we could have anything more unmistakable than
that. Now, I desire to bring my observations to a close, thank-
ing the House most gratefully for the attention they have
bestowed upon my remarks. But before sitting down, I should like
to advert to one statement which the protectionists often make,
namely, that the policy which they seek to establish here, has
prevailed in every other civilised country in past times. I admit
the fact, but repudiate the inference they seek to draw from it.
(Hear hear.) If protection has prevailed in every other country
in past times, so has ignorance—so has superstition—(cheers)—so
has oppression—so has civil war—(cheers) —so have the constant
discords of international jealousy and strife. (Cheers.) But if
such have been the dark surroundings of infant nations in the
past, are we, in developing the destinies of this infant nation at
the present time, to go back for a policy to the maxims and policy
of the dark ages ? (Cheers.) Shall we, having no tyrants set
over us, enslave ourselves ? (Cheers.) As one who loves this
country —who has studied its resources, and rejoices in its pro-
gress —I hope that we shall keep free from all those errors and
evils which have disfigured the history of less happy countries.
(Cheers.) I should think that hon. members of this House who
have before their constituents pledged themselves to maintain the
cause of free-trade, will regard the pledges they have made.
Thanks to the wisdom of our public men, and the intelligence of
our people, we have hitherto been content to follow in that broad
and beneficent path along which our illustrious mother country
has so ptoudly advanced in the van of human progress. I call
upon all those hon. members of this House, who by their public
conduct and pledges are bound to uphold freedom of trade not
now to break their trust. I call upon them not now to betray a
great and just cause into the hands of those who are eager to de-
stroy it. (Cheers.) Let not their allegiance to the Government carry
them so far as to become a treason to their principles and a fraud


upon their constituents. (Cheers.) Let them not do the dirty-
work of those whose aims and principles they have professed, and
publicly professed, to denounce. (Cheers.) Do not cast upon
the expanding energies of this fair young commonwealth of ours
the restraints of a dark and antiquated past, the fetters of commer-
cial slavery. As men, you value freedom as your most precious
birthright; As legislators, you know that freedom is the corner-
stone of our Constitution. Then do not now enter upon a course
which history teaches you —which your own common-sense must
tell you —can only end in depriving tens of thousands of your
fellow-colonists, engaged in all the great and varied industries
of the country, of that freedom which, for yourselves, and in de-
fence of your own political rights, you would die to maintain.
On Mr. Reid resuming his seat, he was greeted with loud
cheers from all parts of the House, the strangers in the gallery
joining in the plaudits. The demonstration in the gallery was,
however, at once suppressed by the officers of the House,


Sir Henry Parkes 1 Speech.
Thursday, June 17th, ISS6,
Mr. Speaker.
I am quite willing to resume my seat if some members of
the Ministry will take part —as I think it is their duty to take
pa,it —ju this very important debate. If we have ever had a
question submitted to Parliament for many years past which
deserved to be considered by all sections of the House, and
especially by the responsible section who have introduced this
question j if we have ever had a question of that character and
magnitude, this is one. (Hear, hear.) What can be more im-
portant than a bill introduced by the Government which, let
them say what they may, really reverses the fiscal policy of the
country (Cheers.) And yet these ministers think so lightly of
the question which they have raised, that they cannot keep their
places in the House. Why, last night and to-night the Opposi-
tion had to keep a House together, and for hours together the
ministerial benches have not had more than two or three mem-
bers of Parliament upon them. We have never before had any-
thing so indecent as that in this country. Governments which
have introduced important measures have kept their places, and
fairly fought out the question in the free Parliament of the
country. But these gentlemen, either secure of their improper
majority, or ignorant of their responsibility, absent them-
selves from the House altogether, or sit in their places like so
many inanimate logs. (Laughter.) We have had no proper
explanation of the introduction of this question. We ought to
have had very high reasons given for its introduction ; but what
reasons have we ? lam bold enough to say, and lam quite sure
that every rational man who has followed the course of this dis-
cussion will say with me, that the minister who introduced this
bill has neither explained it nor defended it up to this moment;
and though I do not desire to say to a gentleman who is generally
so amiable as the Premier an offensive word, I cannot refrain
from saying, that in all my experience I have never seen a man
in his great place with an important bill in his hands, who made
such and foolish speech as he did when he introduced it.
What did the hon. member say ? The greater part of his speech


is occupied with an attempt to ridicule the merchants, and an
attempt to undervalue the right of petition. (Cheers.) The hon.
member told the House that because the petitions sent in from
all parts of the country were in the same language, or had
probably emanated from the same source, they were not entitled
to consideration. What can be more childish than that ? I
should have thought that if the petitions were in the same lan-
guage that was a proof of their unanimity. I should have
thought that if there was no divergence in the expression of
•opinion that was a proof of unanimity of opinion. What would
be thought if Brown had a bible, and Jones had a bible, and
Robinson had a bible, and each complained that the bibles were
in the same language ? It is the wide-spread belief in the bible,
that gives validity to the written book; and it is the signatures
attached to the petitions, or the voices raised in their adoption,
that gives validity to the petitions. It matters not who wrote
them. It matters not if they are written by a school-girl if they
express the sentiments of the public correctly, and if they are
adopted by the signatures or by the voices of the free citizens of
the country. Why, it is the most childish thing I ever heard of
to depreciate petitions because they are all in the same language.
It is the case all over our great empire, wherever the right of
petition is exercised, that somebody or other sends forth the
petitions; but the people do not sign them unless they believe in
them. The petition is valueless until it has received the signa-
tures of the people, or is adopted by their voices in a public meet-
ing. The hon. member entertained the House for some time
with his depreciation of the merchants, and he said, for I noted
down the words, that this class of citizens were not rooted to the
soil—their object was to make fortunes and leave us. I think
that charge against the merchants of Sydney lays him open to a
very just retort. Was he not engaged in mercantile business in
a small town in the sister colony of Victoria ? Why should he
forget his early struggles ? Why should he ridicule persons who
have risen to a much higher influence in the mercantile world ?
Let me tell the hon. member, and I say it proudly to this House,
that among our merchants we have had some of the noblest
citizens we have had in the country. (Cheers.) Why, the
Campbells were here before the hon. member was born, and
many of these Campbells have been among the noblest and most
public-spirited citizens we ever had. They have filled high
places. There must be men in the House who remember the late
Robert Campbell, who was one of our early treasurers, and a
finer type of an Englishman never breathed the breath of heaven.
{Cheers.) He and his brothers, instead of leaving the country,
are sleeping their long sleep under our own blue skies. We had
the Gilchrists here before the hon. gentleman set foot in the
country, and I might mention a number of other names. lam


reminded that we had Mr. Challis before the hon. member ever
set foot on Australian soil, and we know what a noble conception
of duty he had by the magnificent bequest which he made to our
highest seat of learning. (Cheers.) Even amongst our mer-
chants of more recent date we have had similar men. The name
of the late Mr. Frazer was most improperly mentioned. I think
we could hardly find a man who performed the duties of social
life or used his great wealth more conscientiously.
Sir Patrick Jennings: I never mentioned the late Mr.
Frazer's name. I mentioned the name of the firm. He is dead
and gone !
Sir Henry Parkes: That is precisely what I was going to
say. The founder of the great house and the present partners
are closely identified. The late Mr. Frazer sleeps under our own
blue skies. He did not take his fortune away, or his body to
sleep in another country. It ill becomes any one to accuse the
merchants of accumulating fortunes in order that they may leave
the country. That is not what they have done. They have
assumed and performed the duties of citizens with a noble public
spirit of which any country might be proud, and if they are not
to have the right of petition on the fiscal policy of the country
all I can say is, not God help the country, but God help the
persons who have such a miserable idea of what a citizen’s duty
is. Then the hon. member spent a great part of that weak
speech in trying to persuade us that the English tariff consisted
of a large number of articles. I say again it consists of only
eight articles.
Sir Patrick Jennings : What I said was correct. It consists
of 123 articles. I counted them !
Sir Henry Parkes : We do not often hear such a paltering
with conscience as that. There is one distinctive term, “spirit,’'
which includes all the articles he enumerates. They do not make
up the English tariff, but they are enumerated to prevent the
escape of persons who break the law.
Sir Patrick Jennings : They are all enumerated !
Sir Henry Parkes : In the way I say, for purposes of defini-
tion, but not as separate articles in the tariff. I must bestow a
slight attention upon the hon. member for Queanbeyan, but I will
not say very much. (Cheers),
Mr. Lyne: It will stick in his gizzard !
Sir Henry Parkes: Any hon. member may laugh when he
hears what the limit is of the attention I bestow upon the
hon. gentleman. It has been the fashion of this hon. gentleman,
as well as of the hon. gentleman who sits beside him, to speak
of St. Cobden.
Sir Patrick Jennings : He is not canonised yet!
Sir Henry Parkes : If there is a character in all the political
history of England who deserves the respect and reverence of


every person belonging to the middle class, it is Richard Cobden.
(Cheers.) If there is a man in all our long avenue of great men
who was gentleness itself, who was sincerity itself, who displayed
an nnmingled devotion to the public good, who never sought
distinction or gain, who steadily aimed at the emancipation
of his country, who knew no class, and who spent his mar-
vellous powers in trying to build up the prosperity and
secure the freedom of the people of England that man was
Richard Cobden. And whatever differences of opinion
men may have, they should hold in reverence such
a priceless treasure as the memory of a great, good
man like Richard Cobden; and it only shows that the persons
are unfit to take any part in free discussion who cannot
ciate such a noble, princely character. (Cheers.) Let us see
what a very different man said of him —let us see what Lord
Beaconsfield said of the man who was opposed to him all his
political life. When Mr. Cobden died, one of the most graceful,
pathetic, and eloquent speeches which Mr. Disraeli ever made
was upon his character, and these few words sum up all its beauty
and all its strength.
There are some members of Parliament who, though not present in the body,
are still members of this House, independent of dissolutions, of the caprice of con-
stituencies, even of the course of time. I think, sir, Mr. Cobden was one of these
men. I believe that when the verdict of posterity shall be recorded on his life
and conduct, it will be said of him that he was, without doubt, the greatest
political character the pure middle class of this country has yet produced—an
ornament to the House of Commons and an honor to England.
This was the opinion of the leader of the Conservative party in
England—of the man who had led the forces against which Mr.
Cobden had successfully contended. And then the hon. member
said that Mr. Bright had, no doubt, performed a good work for
England, and that in a country like England free-trade was the
true policy, but that in a country like New South Wales, said he,
pointing to the great extent of its area, was the field for pro-
tection. 0 One would have thought that any rational being under
the sun would have seen that in a country of limited area,
where the population had room hardly to stand, where they had
not room to cultivate sufficient for their own food, where they
must manufacture for the rest of the world there was the field
for protection ; and that in a country like ours, where we have the
free land and the free light of heaven, where all her riches are to be
developed, was the field of all others for the genius and ope-
ration of free-trade. (Cheers ) But he said that if Mr. Bright
was in this country, he would not take the same course as he
does —he would be a protectionist. Well, I happen to know
Mr. Bright very well —as well as I know most hon. members of
this House. I formed his acquaintance nearly a quarter of a cen-
tury ago. I have lived in the same house with him days together,
where he and I were the only guests; I have travelled great


distances with him in the same railway carriage, with no other
occupant; I have met him in society many times, and I know
that there is no man in the wide world outside these shores who
more supports the policy of New South Wales than does Mr. John
Bright. That opinion rests on his, not on my word. When in
England, in 1882, I gave Mr. Bright a copy of a little pamphlet
entitled, “ New South Wales in 1881, ” and he wrote me this ack-
nowledgement of it, which I have brought here to-night, after
these years, to show how utterly mistaken the hon. gentleman is.
It speaks in a complimentary way of myself, which I cannot
exclude from the text, but I have omitted one passage which
relates only to myself. He says :
132 Piccadilly, 25 May, 1882.
Dear Sir Henry Parkes, —I thank you for sending me the volume ‘‘New South
Wales in 1881.” I spent an hour or more upon it last night, about midnight, and
was astonished at some of the facts recorded in it.
The great future of your colony we shall not see, but we can try to imagine
it. Your name will be associated with it, for you have constantly maintained the
principles in which alone the prosperity and happiness of a people can be built up.
I hope all our far-off colonies may in time walk in the path which New South
Wales has chosen for herself.
We are much disturbed here in our political progress.
I hope the wisdom of your people and of your Government may save you from
the troubles by which we are assailed.
Believe me, &c.,
John Bright.
Perhaps the hon. member will accept at least Mr. Bright as an
authority that Mr. Bright would not be an advocate of protec-
tion in Australia.
Mr. O’Sullivan ! He never lived here!
Sir Henry Parkes : But, however, it is only in common with
the masterly and oft-quoted letters which he has addressed to
eminent citizens in the United States of America, to one of which
the hon. member for East Sydney alluded last night. He has
pointed out on all occasions to the Americans the fallacy of their
protectionist policy, and the great advantages that would accrue
by their changing that policy to one of free-trade. Now, in
coming to this bill, it would be satisfactory if we could get from
any one who is a supporter of it, a clear and unqualified declara-
tion of the grounds on which he does support it. The author of
the bill continually says that he supports it on free-trade
grounds.
Sir Patrick Jennings : Hear, hear!
Sir Henry Parkes: That ground is untenable, and it has
been proved to be so.
Sir Patrick Jennings : No !
Sir Henry Parkes : It has been proved on many occasions to
be untenable, and I think I shall be able to prove it yet once
more ; but do the eighteen or twenty votes which will enable him
to carry the bill say the same thing ? They say that while they


do not very much like his Government they will support the bill
because it is the introduction of this precious doctrine of pro-
tection, (Hear, hear), and lam inclined to believe that the
protectionists know what they are doing. (Hear, hear.) They
know the character of the commodity with which they are dealing
and about which the parent of the bill is entirely ignorant. The
most charitable construction I can put on his language and his
conduct is that he really does not see the pitfalls into which he i»
walking himself and leading others. The question of free-trade
as against protection might have been left—it might be left now
—with that masterly speech which we heard last night. (Hear,
hear), —a speech which I have great pleasure in saying was a
credit to Parliament (Hear, hear), and which will remain a bright
recognition of the great ability with which it was delivered.
(Cheers.,) But the question occurs to all of us in different lights,
and I would like to say some few words on this simple question of
protection against free-trade, or free-trade against protection,
because whatever the Government has done, most certainly there
is a section of the House that has given to the bill and to the
debate on its provisions that character in a most distinct manner.
I shall not go over the ground which the hon. member for New
England travelled just now, or which was travelled by the hon.
and learned member for East Sydney, Mr. Reid, last night; but
1 will allude to one or two features of the bill which to my mind
show conclusively with what little thought it has been framed,
and which ought, I think, to some extent to alarm its protectionist
supporters. Not only is it a bill which will introduce beyond
doubt the thin edge of the wedge of protection by crippling and
harassing trade and by impeding the operation of trade at every
turn, but it will in some cases destroy local manufactures. It
will, I am assured, destroy utterly some small manufactures of
this country. (Cheers.) Take, for example, our brushmakers.
We have certainly a very limited industry, but we have small
brush manufactories —one, or more, perhaps—where a very
elegant brush is made, and this bill for the first time places a-
duty on all the materials of these brush-makers, and to that extent
places them at a disadvantage with the importer of brushes.
Mr. Hibbs : There is no protection in the tariff !
Sir Henry Parkes : Even now I will resume my seat if the
Colonial Secretary will address the House in defence of the bill.
(Hear, hear.) If we take the article of spirits, we find that the
bill proposes to impose a tax of 12s. per gallon on all tinctures,
liniments, and fluid extracts. These articles are sent to all distant
countries with just as much spirit in them as is necessary to pre-
serve them in transit across the sea. lam assured by one of the
most experienced druggists in the country that these spirits are
used in more than 150 different forms of medicine, and that the
effect of this high duty of 12s. per gallon will be to increase the


price of medicines from Is. 2d. to 3s. ; Is. 4d. to 3s. 6d.; 2s. 6d.
to 65., and so on. Not only so, but the duty will have the mis-
chievous effect—a serious effect, seeing that the drugs are com-
pounded for sick persons—of offering a great inducement to
dishonest .druggists to substitute inferior articles. What possible
good can this change in the tariff do ? It will verify Sydney
Smith's description of taxation in England, when he said that
the sauce which ministered to the appetite of the rich man and
the drug which restored him to health were alike taxed. It will
realize that description; but it can do no good, and it can pro-
duce scarcely any revenue. Let us remember that the fact of
his having to pay 6s. instead of 2s. 6d. for medicine will be a
trifle to the rich man; but we know that the want of health more
frequently visits the homes of the poor —the homes of people who
have not the same accessories for the preservation of health as rich
people have —the homes of people who live in hovels, in small
houses with a pestiferous atmosphere surrounding them. These
are the people who have to go to the druggist most frequently,
and it will be a cruel thing to make some poor mother pay 6s.
for medicine for her sick child which she has been in the habit
of getting for 2s. 6d,, to say nothing about the risk of her being
supplied with an inferior article. There is another small indus-
try in the country —a paper-box manufactory. It is a very small
industry, certainly, but I should think that protectionists and free-
traders alike would desire to see these small industries arise and
spread themselves throughout the land. This paper-box manu-
facturer supplies his wares to tradespeople, many of whom do
not charge for them. For example, a milliner or a fashionable
tailor prefers to send a dress or a suit of clothes to a customer in
an elegant box rather than in a brown paper parcel. Under the
bill the whole of the material which is used by this paper-box
manufacturer will be taxed, while boxes already made will come
in at a much greater advantage. For example, the taxes on
straw-boards and fancy paper represents a duty of 33 per cent.,
while the boxes made in Germany and France are admitted at 5
per cent, on the value. I alluded just now to the rather well-
known passage of Sydney Smith on the taxation of England
before Mr. Gladstone's reforms. This bill, so far as vexatious
interference with trade is concerned, will bring about a state of
things here very similar to that which existed in England at the
time when Sydney Smith wrote. I admit at once that the taxes
will not be so oppressive, and in some instances articles will be
admitted free which were taxed in England, but still the vexa-
tion will be so widely spread that this description of Sydney
Smith will not inaptly apply :
We must pay taxes upon every article which enters into the mouth, or covers
the back, or is placed under the foot; taxes upon everything which is pleasant to
see, hear, feel, smell, and taste ; taxes on the sauce which pampers man’s appetite
and the drug which restores him to health ; on the ermine which decorates the


judge, and the rope which hangs the criminal ; on the brass nails of the coffin,,
and on the ribbons of the bride.
I shall proceed, with the permission of the House, to try to refute
once for all the assertions which are made as to the benefits of
protection whether it is positive or incidental. Ido not know
whether it will be possible to reach all minds, but I am certain
that what I am about to say will reach all unprejudiced minds;
it is utterly impossible for it not to do that. We are often told
that England grew up as a manufacturing country under the
system of protection; we are told at every meeting, in speeches
in Parliament, in letters published in newspapers, that England
grew up under the system of protection. You might as well tell
me—to tread slightly on the ground which was covered by the
hon. and learned member for East Sydney last night—that Eng-
land grew up under a system of negro slavery. Slavery was
contemporaneous and co-existent with protection. Slavery was
carried on by the capital of England, by the ships of England,
under the flag of England, and it was protected by the armed
foi’ces of England. The trade in human flesh was carried on up
to a late period in this century. Do you mean to tell me that it
was on account of slavery that England grew to her present
strength, her present prosperity, and her present influence over
the world ? You might as well tell me that as that it was protec-
tion which gave England her great power. True, it is, that
England has a great sin to answer for—great arrears of sin—for
she, generation after generation, and century after century,
applied the fetters of protection, and gave them their ugliest
forms. She taught other nations this horrid heresy, and it is
no wonder that other nations are slow to imitate her glorious ex-
ample in unfettering her commerce and industry. America was
taught to become protectionist by old England, when old England
was under the influence of that dark policy. I have here an extract
from a letter from the British Resident at Washington, written at
the time when the first protectionest tariff was passed in the United
States. The dispatch is addressed to Mr. Canning, who was
Prime Minister or Foreign Minister at the time :
_ I have only to add that had no restrictions on the importation of foreign
grain existed in Europe generally, and specially in Great Britain, I have little
doubt that the tariff would never have passed through either House of Congress,
since the great agricultural states and Pennsylvania especially, the great mover of
the question, would have been indifferent, if not opposed, to the enactment.
So that England was the teacher of that great off-shoot of the
empire in this dark policy of protection, and it was not until
eighteen years after this that any effort was made in England
to free industry and commerce. It is no wonder that other
nations which have followed the example of England through
centuries in this dark path should be slow to adopt the higher
and nobler policy which she now pursues, but they will adopt it.
(Cheers.) As sure as light reinvigorates the world, that the


summer follows winter, so sure will the mind-awakening
light shed by England, as the leader of the nations, have its
effect on all countries which are now under the protectionist
policy. There are signs out of number in the United States, that
the day of deliverance is near at hand, (Hear, hear). I say
fearlessly, not that the most thoughtful and most trusted, but
some of the most thoughtful and most trusted of the public men
in America areas staunch free-traders as Mr Bright is. (Hear,
hear). And they are scattered till over the country ; the farmers
almost to a man, are free-traders. There is no western farmer
in the United States who upholds the doctrine of protection.
Mr. Heydon : Rubbish !
Sir Henry Parkes : Why ? Because it is ruinous to him.
Mr.- O’Sullivan : Yet he returns protectionist members to
Parliament!
Sir Henry Parkes: They return protectionist members to
Congress just in the same way as the electors of Queanbeyan
return a protectionist member, simply by the opposite vote being
split up. The hon. member knows that he was returned by a
minority of the electors of Queanbeyan.
Mr. O’Sullivan : Send up a friend of yours at the next
election, or come up yourself.
Sir Henry Parkes : If the hon, member waits for me to op-
pose him at Queanbeyan, he will have to wait until he is a very
old man. (Laughter). What was the effect of protection on
the progress of England ? It cannot be too often repeated. In
the reign of the great Queen Elizabeth, the population of the
United Kingdom was not so large as the population of the Aus-
tralian colonies is at the present time. The population of Great
Britain in the time of Elizabeth is set down by Sir Archibald
Allison at not more than 3,000,000. A hundred years ago the
population of Great Britain was not more than 7,000,000. If pro-
tection was a valuable thing, it certainly had the effect of
preventing the growth of the population of England. There is
no other source of strength in a nation but the growth of its
population. No country can be truly great without human
beings; and it is just in proportion to the population of a nation
—if she is under true and righteous laws —that her strength will
develop. After the growth of a thousand years, the population
of our mother country was down to something like 7,000,000.
What is it now ? What has it been in its growth since the full
emancipation of English industry and English commerce ? It
has grown by bounds —grown by millions—almost beyond the
calculation of fable, it has been so rapid. As is well known, the
free-trade policy of England is not so very old. There has not
been such a very long time for other nations to follow our ex-
ample, considering how slow the progress and dissemination of
truth is at all times. The beginning of our free-trade was in


1842. Up to that period nothing could be darker, nothing more
retrictive, nothing more illiberal, nothing more oppressive, than
the fiscal laws of England. The work has been done in half a
life-time, and it has been done mainly by one man. The leader
in all this great work, from the time of Sir Robert Feel’s admin-
istration, when it first commenced, until now has been Mr. Glad-
stone. (Hear, hear). We all know how it made his budget
twenty-five years ago so attractive. For the first time in parlia-
mentary history the financial statements became so attractive that
the House of Commons was crowded at daylight to obtain places
to hear these deliverances, and Mr. Gladstone held his audiences
as if by a spell for three to five hours, while he delivered those
marvellous expositions of the reforms in the tariff laws of Eng-
land. lam going to quote from Mr. Noble’s “ History of
taxes ” :
In 1842 the protective system had been long slowly undermining our pros-
perity, and the evils it had caused could not be removed by mere reductions of
duty. The prospects of the country continued most gloomy ; in two years there
had been a falling of nearly one-quarter in the whole amount of the excise
revenue—a sure test of the condition of the working-classes. The number of able-
bodied paupers had increased from below 200,000 in 1836 to 409,570 in 1842, not-
withstanding extensive emigration, the number of persons leaving our shores
having increased from 44,478 in 1835 to 118,592, in 1841, and 128,344 in 1842. In
fifteen principal agricultural districts of England and Wales the increase in the
poor-rates between 1836 and 1842 was 21 per cent., and the twelve manufacturing
countries, 30£ per cent.
That was the state of England when Mr. Gladstone, in Sir
Robert Peel’s Administration, set his hand to reform the tariff.
Instead of benefiting the poor of England, the system of protec-
tion had ground England down to the dust, until its working
population' died from sheer hunger. In early life I have seen
many examples of the working artisans of England dying for
want of the necessaries of life. (Hear, hear.) One of the first
public duties I performed as a very young man was to sit on a
coroner's jury to inquire into the death of a poor fellow who,
having sold every article of furniture to sustain life, seeing
his children dying for want of food, seeing his wife dying for
want of food, knelt down on his floor and hung himself to a nail
in the fire-place, and who, when his body was cut down, was
found to be a mere skeleton from sheer want of food. That was
the condition of the artisan classes of England all over the
country, and that was the grand fruit of protection.
Mr. Melville: That is the condition of thousands of them at
the present moment!
Sir Henry Parkes: It is not the condition of thousands of
them at the present moment. (Hear, hear).
Mr. Melville: There are 15,000 of them in that state !
Sir Henry Parkes : I cannot stop to discuss that now. But
I have given my own experience as an eye witness of the con-
dition of the country at the time to which I have just adverted.


I saw the country afterwards. I was here a little over twenty"
years when I returned to England, and nothing in all England
struck me so forcibly as the altered condition of the population.
Farmers, who before could not pay their rent or keep a roof over
their heads were riding in their carriages, their daughters going"
to first-rate schools, their sons, in some cases, at the University;;
and they were enjoying comparative luxury notwithstanding that
they ate American cheese. And the mechanics were well-clothed,
for the most part well housed, and well educated, compared with
my experience of the same classes a little more than twenty years
before. Therefore I have been an eye witness of the state of
things at the time to which I advert, and I have been an eye
witness of the great change that came over the nation in conse-
quence of beneficial legislation. And now I come to try to make
out what free-trade is. lam going to put in the witness-box no
less a person than Mr. Gladstone, who is the author of the great
changes that have taken place in England. I trust that he will
be accepted as a witness equal to Sir Patrick Jennings on what
really constitutes free-trade, Mr. Gladstone’s great work of tariff
reform was over about twenty years ago. I think his last budget
was in 1864 or 1865. Being in Paris he was invited to attend a
gathering of the political economists and philosophers of the
French capital. In his address to this distinguished gathering of
some of the first scholars and first political philosophers of France,
Mr. Gladstone concluded in these words :
Will you forgive me, gentlemen, and will you acquit me of presumption, if
before I close, I lay before you the latest results of our experience? We have
advanced far in the process of liberating trade. The efforts and the legislation of
a quarter of a century have reduced our tariff from 1,200 articles, it may almost
literally be said, to seven. Gentlemen, for this comparatively advanced condition
Ido not say that we deserve any credit whatever. We set the nations of the
world a bad and pestilent example by building up through generations a protec-
tive and prohibitory system in all its vigour. We may thus as teachers have lost
all title to be heard. Nevertheless, having mended our ways, we are anxious that
other countries should profit, if not by our precept, yet by our example. For
this purpose I boldly refer to matters of fact, and I do not scruple, gentlemen, to
assure you as matter of fact established by our experience that the road of free-
trade is like the road of virtue—the first steps are the most painful, the last are
the most profitable. If it be good to abolish prohibitions and to substitute pro-
tective duties ; if it be good to pass from high protective duties to those which
are moderate, and again from the moderate to the low, yet there is one step to be
taken—it is to abolish such duties altogether, and believe me it is the best of all.
Where will you get the sanction of this great professor of free-
trade to the imposition of these ad valorem and specific duties ?
He tells you that if you go from prohibitions to high protective
duties, and from high protective duties to moderate duties, and
from moderate duties to low duties, there is yet another step —to
abolish the duties altogether.
CJ
As long as a duty of this kind remains, it is, after all, a question only whether
the chains laid upon human industry and skill shall be heavier or lighter ; but
they still remain, and do not let us fall into sophism which would persuade us
that the extinction of a duty is of necessity a loss to the State The State


abolishing duties which fetter industry finds its compensation in an increasing
return which the augmented wealth and activity of the country supply from less
exceptional sources.
I do not know how you can get over an authority like that
England is the only country where free-trade has been established,
and I have quoted from the man who established it. And there
is his description of what free-trade is. It is not in imposing
light duties, but it is in striking all duties away, and leaving
your ports absolutely free. Even now there are men in England
of great distinction who have organised for years and years to
remove the duties which still remain, and to raise the revenue
entirely from an honestly-assessed property-tax. Now the tariff
of Great Britain really consists of seven articles ; split the matter
as you like, that is the fact, as will be seen on reference to any
gazetteer or almanac of character.
Sir Patrick Jennings : Here is the list!
Sir Henry Parkes: I know what it is thehon. member holds
in his hand, and either he does not understand it or else he
wishes to deceive the House. The tariff of Great Britain consists
of, first, cocoa, chocolate, and such like articles; second, coffee;
third, currants; fourth, raisins—which might have been included
with currants; fifth, spirits ; sixth, tea ; seventh,tobacco; eighth,
wine. Putting currants and raisins together, the great lines of
the English tariff include only seven articles. Now we shall see
what progress England has made under free-trade. In 1840, just
on the eve of her emancipation after centuries of restriction, the
imports stood at £62,400,000, or at the rate of £2 7s. 6|d. per
head of the population. In 1854 they had not simply doubled,
but they stood at £152,389,053, or £5 10s. 2d. per head of the
population. This was after the first few years of entire liberty.
In 1864, ten years afterwards, they stood at £274,952,172, or
£9 6s, 2d. per head of the population. In 1874 they had bounded
up to £370,082,701, or £ll Bs. 3d. per head of the population;
and in 1883 they had gone up to £426,891,579, or £ll 19s. 9d.
per head of the population. We see the contrary state of things
during the generations of protection, and we see how the country
bounded on in wealth and trade, and in the comforts of the
people, during the few years of absolute free-trade. That there
may be no mistake, I will quote the exports also during the same
period. In 1840, that is two years before the great reform set
in, the exports of Great Britain stood at £61,308,740; the total
imports and exports together stood at £123,312,740, or £4 13s. o£d.
per head of the population. That was in the year which may be
called the last year of darkness and degradation—the last year of
repression and limitation —the last year of the state of things
which was co-existent with negro slavery in the British do-
minions. We shall see how the country bounded on after she
got her liberty. In 1854 the British foreign and colonial exports


in the same classification as in the first instance were £115,821,092,
the total imports and exports being £268,210,145, or £9 14s. per
head of the population, as against £4 13s, in the former case. In
1864 the exports had increased to £212,619.614, and the total
imports and exports had increased to £487,571,786, or £l6 9s. lOd.
per head of the population. In 1874 the exports had gone up to
£297,650,464, and the imports and exports —that is, the total
trade of the country —had increased to £667,733,164, or £2O
11s. lOd. per head of the population, In 1883 the exports had
increased to £305,437,070 and the imports and exports to
£732,328,649, and notwithstanding the increase of population,
the percentage stood at £2O 11s. 3d. for each man, woman, and
child in the country. How can figures prove a more glorious
march in prosperity than that ; and when it is contrasted with
the slow, stationary course of events before that era, I am at a
loss to know how any sane man can support the state of things
which oppressed England up to the period of about fifty years
ago. I shall not dwell any longer on the condition of
England. Ido not see how the facts I have stated can be chal-
lenged, You cannot get other facts to counteract them, and
when they are contrasted with the impoverished, down-trodden
condition of the nation up to that period, they are startling in
their magnificence and their glory. (Cheers.) I will now show what
has taken place in this country. I do not know whether the hon.
member for the Wollombi is present or not; but if he is, and will
do me the honor of listening to me, I think I can satisfy him that
he cannot vote for this bill. In the year 1852 the late Sir Edward
Deas-Thomson carried through the old Legislative Council a bill
to impose customs duties, and that bill followed as nearly as pos-
sible in the light of great English precedents. It reduced the
number of articles on which revenue was collected to about the
same number as that in the English tariff, or only one or two
more. And it is very remarkable that it reduced the duties on
tea and sugar to one-half the present duties on those articles.
The Deas-Thomson tariff left the duty on refined sugar at 3s. 6d.,
unrefined sugar, 2s. 6d.; molasses, Is. 6d.; on tea, l|d. The
duties were doubled before the Constitution came into force—l
think at the time when Mr. Merewether was acting-Treasurer,
during Mr. Riddell’s absence in England on leave. The Govern-
ment, however, wanted revenue, and the tea and sugar duties
were doubled ; but as Sir Edward Deas-Thomson left them they
stood at the low rates I have quoted. The tariff, as I have said,
almost copied what had been achieved in England. In the year
1865 a great alteration was made. In the year 1873 another
great alteration was made, and now it is proposed to make
another great alteration. Now, I will show to the House and
the country, that under freedom here as elsewhere the country
progressed, and that during the pressure of the duties which were


imposed in 1865, and until they were removed, the country was
stationary. If I prove that, I think I make out an unanswer-
able case for maintaining a free policy in this country. I shall
give the figures first, and then I shall show by an analysis of the
figures how the country went on under the two different systems.
From 1852 —we will say 1853, because the bill was passed late in
the year —from 1853 to 1865 the country appears to have made
very decided progress. In the last year the value of the imports
into this country stood at £10,635,507, the value of the exports
at £9,563,811, the revenue at £1,938,666, while the population
was 411,388. In this year 1865, which is represented by the
figures I have just read, revenue was wanted, and without much
regard either to principle or to symmetry, let alone scientific
lines of construction, duties were imposed on the country. They
were all customs duties. There were specific duties, a 5 per cent.
ad valorem duty, and there was a package duty. They lasted for
eight years, and remember that in 1865, when they were imposed,
the were of the value of £10,635,507, In 1873, when
they were abolished, after eight years, the imports stood at
£10,471,483. (Hear, hear.) Instead of progressing they actually
diminished during the eight years. That is our experience under
a system such as that which we are now asked in the madness of
its authors, appealing to some madness in ourselves, to pass. We
have had it before, when the country under its pressure made no
headway. The same amount of imports when it commenced
measured the amount of imports when it ceased, and the exports
declined also. Do not think that the volume of trade mounted up
in the interim. It sunk as low as £6,000,000. It never was as
high as £10,000,000 when these duties were levied. These are
our own figures, from our own records. We imposed these
destructive duties; and the effect was to arrest the progress of
our trade for eight years, so that at the end of that time you stood
at the same figure as you did when you commenced. Nay, you
had receded. Very well, the package duty expired by efflux-
ion of time the year before the time alluded to. In 1873, the
■other duties were all abolished, except what remain on the tariff
to-day. Let us see what the country has done since. I have shown
from our own records —which admit of no alteration—admit of
no misinterpretation —admit of no other explanation—that
throughout the eight years of this taxation the country stood still
in thefvolume of its trade ; and I will tell you what it did when the
taxes were taken off. I have just stated that in 1873 the imports
were £10,471,483. The exports were £9,387,873. In 1884, after
the expiration of eleven years, the imports amounted to
£22,826,985, and the exports have doubled. They stood at
£18,251,506. So here you have our own experience. You tried
freedom under the guiding hand of Mr. Deas-Thomson,
.and you made a great advance. You tried restriction for


eight years, and you stood still. Nay, you went back. And the
records are open to all the world. You cannot deny them. You
tried freedom for eleven years, and your trade doubled. Let us
see how the revenue fared. In 1865, when the duties were
imposed, the revenue was £1,938,656. In 1873 —and this makes
our trade stagnation the more remarkable, because the revenue
did progress by reason of the fruits of these duties end the dis-
posal of land—the revenue stood at £3,937,975. In 1884 the
revenue was £7,000,000, notwithstanding the cessation of the
land revenue. The population in the first year to which I have
alluded, namely 1865, was 411,388 souls; in 1873, it was 560,275 ;
and in 1884 it had increased to 921,268. A large number of
these souls, as was by the hon. member for East Sydney,,
last night, came from the protectionist country of Victoria.
Mr. Heydon : To make railways !
Sir Henry Parkes : This will be seen perhaps more strikingly
if I give the per centages of the increase. In twelve years of
Mr. Deas-Thomson’s tariff the imports increased 67| per cent., the
exports 111| per cent,, the revenue 135 per cent., and the popu-
lation 80 per cent. In the eight years of the Customs duties, ad
valorem, and specific duties exactly like these, the imports were
stationary, and the exports remained stationary too. The revenue
increased 113 per cent., and the population 35 per cent. In
eleven years of freedom, from 1873 to 1884, the imports increased
120 per cent., the exports 100 percent., the revenue 193 percent.,
and the population 70 per cent. (Cheers.) Answer these figures ?'
Try to answer these figures, and human reason must fail, because
human reason cannot accomplish impossibilities. (Cheers.) And
until you have answered these figures you have no title to ask
us to roll back the tide of freedom and bring in an era of dark-
ness and slavery. (Loud At least you must have a
mandate from the electors of the country before this great
national suicide is committed. You have no moral right, you
have no right against reason and understanding again to commit
this flagrant wrong, and to roll back the tide of our prosperity,
unless the electors of the country are blind enough, mad enough,
to give you this suicidal mandate, (Cheers.) What does the
hon. member want ? Has he not got a fair prospect of increasing
the stamp duties ? Has he not a fair prospect of getting a land
tax ? Has he not a prospect of getting an income-tax ? He can
milk the country by the teat of a stamp-tax, he can milk the
country by the teat of a land-tax, he can milk the country by
the teat of an income-tax. Will he go on milking till he milks-
the country dry ? I would appeal to him in the language of the
Irish poet:
If thou art strong, be merciful,
Great woman of three cows.
(Loud laughter.) Do not tax us to death. Have some mercy


upon us. Do not take more than you want. The taxes you are
imposing will simply oppress the people; but this tax will not
only oppress the people—it will disorganize all our commercial
arrangements; it will destroy our reputation in civilized coun-
tries ; it will take away our fair prestige which we have so
honestly won. It will not make you famous, but the reverse. It
will do no good to anyone, and it will inflict an enormous evil
upon the struggling classes at the present time in this country.
(Loud and prolonged Opposition cheers.) Why, it would be
better for us to have a volcano in eruption than to have a tax
like this ; it would be a less misfortune. Twelve hundred miles
of stormy sea between us and New Zealand does not afford us
safety from the disasters which have caused such dismay to our
fellow-subjects in that country. Our Mount Tarawera is on the
Treasury benches (Cheers,) belching forth its poisonous fumes, and
tainting the pure air which hitherto has fed us with such lusty
life, sending its black clouds, far and wide, over the land, covering
the fair face of our commerce and industry with the pestiferous
ashes of a -worn-out fiscal creed, and threatening to bury us
beneath the deathly-coloured "‘blue mud" of Old World laws of
restriction and repression. (Cheers.) It would be better for us to
suffer from these destructive natural catastrophes than to have a
thing of this kind invented in our midst—invented behind the
backs of the electors, and by men who dare not take this bill before
the face of the country. (Loud Opposition cheers.) There is not a
man amongst them who dare stand up and defend this treason
against the country, There is not a man amongst them who dare
appear before his constituents and say that he is inflicting upon the
country this enormous wrong. (Opposition cheers.) I feel quite
assured of this, because I believe in the principle of a great
cause at all times, that this bill will never become law. (Loud
opposition cheers). It never shall become law so long as others
will stand by me to resist it. (Opposition cheers).
Mr. Dibbs: Stonewalling !
Sir Henry Parkes : Stonewalling ! Why, there is nothing
that human ingenuity can contrive that is not justifiable against
a treason like this. (Cheers). Put the issue fairly; go to the
electors, and if the electors will support you we will accept your
nauseous measures till a more enlightened time arrives. But you
dare not go; not one of you dare go to the electors with this bill
in your hands ; and I am thankful to think that even here we
are still Britons, and knowing that we have a just cause we will
stand together, and will resist this iniquity, this gigantic treason,
until our resistance shall justify us before the enlightened por-
tion of the country, and shall redeem our dear land from this
heavy affliction. (Loud Cheers.)




\
«
«
I
t
ft
*
Jarrbti & Co., Printers,
100 and 102 Liverpool Street,
Sydney.


