

SPEECHES
*;
m
jSi* peqi*g paife g,c,m,g, mi.
PRIME MINISTER
W
NEW SOUTH WALES.
The €mii* : b®e im A^straua.
This Authority m Tim G©vbrnmbnt m cohtuollin®
I'M* Trrritorial Revrnues @r thr Colohy.
RSPLECTIONfi ©H TO3 G®VKRRI«W*F~-
Reply to Mr. McElh©ne, M.P.
1
t
»*i*nvQ t
TURNBR k MBN0JSRSOII.
K»se€-L.!«s«vm,
m












THE CHINESE IN AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH
SIR HENRY PARKES, G.C.M.G., M.P.
(COLONIAL SECRETARY OF NEW SOUTH WALES),
MOVING THE SECOND HEADING
OF THE
CHINESE RESTRICTION AND REGULATION RILL
IN THE
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY,
16 MAY, 1888.
SYDNEY: CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




PREFACE.
This speech is copied, with very few verbal amendments, from the admirable reports
published by authority, under the popular but somewhat loose designation of Hansard.
In some quarters the speech has been received with a kind of criticism, which I
venture to say has been neither accurate nor just ; and small consideration has been
shown for the complicated difficulties which beset the question under treatment. If
the colony could be relieved of the Chinese affliction by stilted phrases, slovenly
dealing with facts, and unwarranted abuse of other men’s motives, some of my critics
in both Houses of Parliament and elsewhere are eminently qualified to settle the
question.
I, however, have neither time nor inclination to offer any reply to these critics.
The position which I and my colleagues have taken up is plain and visible to the
people of Hew South Wales; and we look to our country for our vindication.
I wish to notice three points in the controversy, if controversy it may be called ;
but in noticing these only, I must claim to be understood as not admitting the
correctness of several others.
(1.) It is not true that I ever used language to show that I expected a reply in
forty-five days from the Imperial Government to the telegraphic message sent from
here on the 31st March. I complained of receiving no acknowledgment whatever.
My words were :
We put forth our case in the interests of preserving the integrity of the union of the empire.
Well, what was the result ? We certainly were not so foolish or simple as to expect a satisfactory
reply at once, or even in a month or two months ; hut we did expect, after stating in this earnest and
urgent manner the danger of our cause, the courtesy of some acknowledgment.
(2.) It seems to me something like insolence for men who have not had to face
our trial to accuse the members of the Government of acting from panic, and of
pandering to the multitude, when our course of patient and self-restraining action for
many months past is before them, and when I have expressly for myself and colleagues
disclaimed any such action. My opening words in the speech of the 16th were :
I disclaim any attitude of even aversion to the Chinese people settled in this country ; and I
disclaim any possible action on the part of the Government in deference to public agitations out of doors.
lam convinced in my conscience that neither have we at cony time joined with those who have derided ,
and, as I think, traduced, the Chinese resident in this country ; nor have we at any time yielded to the
pressure of popular agitation.
(3.) I feel that I need not say a word in vindication of my loyalty to my
Sovereign and to the Empire. The proofs of my devoted attachment to both are inter-
woven with my whole public life. But my loyalty would never lead me to prostrate
myself before men, however lofty their station in the Queen’s service, who are still
only subjects of the Queen like myself, and it would lead me by an overmastering
obligation to do my utmost to protect from injury, neglect, or slight the great province
of the Empire for the good government of which I, in common with my colleagues, am


directly responsible. My first duty in the high office I hold is to serve New South W ales,
and at the present moment I believe that this service, faithfully performed, demands of
me “ at all hazards” to preserve the soil of the country from the presence of Chinese.
With a genuine feeling of loyalty to her Majesty and her Imperial Government, I hold
it to be a sacred doctrine that no Imperial Minister has any constitutional right to
interfere with us in working out our system of self-government, and that under this
system the right of self-preservation from a great threatening evil is one of the highest
of our inalienable rights and liberties. In our national trouble we sought aid at the
seat of the Empire, and we failed even to receive an acknowledgment of our appeal.
And it must be recollected that some of the parties with whom we had to deal talked
loudly of appealing, and did actually appeal, to the Admiral on the station. It was in
view of all this that I used the words on the IGth :
Mow, if any person supposes that we have acted thoughtlessly or hurriedly, or without due
regard to all the consequences, he is woefully mistaken. In this crisis oj the Chinese question, and
it is a crisis, we have acted calmly, with a desire to see clearly the way before us ; • hut at the same
time we have acted with decision, and we do not mean to turn back. Neither for her Majesty s ships
of tear, nor for hei Majesty's Representative on the spot, nor for the Secretary of ft ate for the
Colonies do ice intend to turn aside from our purpose, which is to terminate the landing of Chinese, on.
these shores for ever, except under the restrictions imposed by the bill, which will amount, and which are
intended to amount, to practiced prohibition.
It is a noteworthy fact, that although the Government had been acting
“illegally” for nearly a fortnight, in refusing to allow the Chinese to land, no virtuous
member of Parliament said a word until our Bill was brought in on the 16th, and it
was thought that there was a chance, not of serving the Chinese or of protecting the
country, but of twisting our conduct in a time of extreme difficulty to a mean part_y
advantage. I had previously offered for three members of the Government to confer
with three members of the Opposition, with a view to agreeing upon a basis for legisla-
tion to secure unanimity, the question being considered a non-political one ; but this
was declined, no doubt with the hope of some chance turning up in favour of high-
minded party ends.
HP,
May 21, 1888.


Sir HENRY PARKES rose to move :
That this bill be printed and now read the
•second time.
He said ; In moving the second reading of
this bill, I disclaim any attitude of even
aversion to the Chinese people settled in
this country ; and I disclaim any possible
action on the part of the Government in
deference to public agitations out of doors,
I am convinced in my conscience that
neither have we at any time joined with
those who have derided, and, as I think,
traduced, the Chinese resident in this
country ; nor have we at any time yielded
to the pressure of popular agitation. So
far as the Chinese people who reside
amongst us are concerned, I have for
thirty years, many times and often, borne
testimony to their law-abiding, industrious,
thrifty, and peaceable character, and I
have never for a single moment joined
with those who have held them up as in
many respects more disreputable than a
similar number of English subjects. For
a generation —long before some of the men
who are listening to me took any part
whatever in public life—and at all times
I have opposed the introduction of Chinese
upon these, as I conceive, national, and to
a large extent, philosophical grounds : I
maintain that in a country like New South
Wales it is our duty to preserve the type
of the British nation, and that we ought
not, for any consideration whatever, to
admit any element that would detract
from, or in any appreciable degree lower,
that admirable type of nationality. Now,
I would like for a moment to examine the
ground on which I stand. I contend that
if this young nation is to maintain the
fabric of its liberties unassailed and unim-
paired, it cannot admit into its population
any element that of necessity must be of
an inferior nature and character. In other
words, I have maintained at all times that
we should not encourage or admit amongst
us any class of persons whatever whom we
are not prepared to advance to all our fran-
chises, to all our privileges as citizens, and
THE CHINESE IN AUSTRALIA.
all our social rights, including the right of
marriage. I maintain that no class of per-
sons should be admitted here, so far as we
can reasonably exclude them, who cannot
come amongst us, take up all our rights,
perform on a ground of equality all our
duties, and share in our august and
lofty work of founding a free nation.
It is on this very intelligible, this solid
ground that I, at all events, have been
adverse to the admission of Chinese.
Now, I want to call attention to the state
of the question at the present moment.
It cannot be denied—it is tacitly admitted
by all—that there is a widespread legiti-
mate agitation on this subject. We, the
members of the Government, who are re-
sponsible for bringing in this bill, have been
in no way instrumental at any time in
promoting this agitation ; but the question
is there, black and startling, in the midst of
our social economics, irritating, agitating
all classes of persons, and operating in a
most intense way on those who are least
informed, and for that reason the most
dangerous. Can this thing be allowed to
go on, this gangrene in the body politic,
this seed of disturbance in the midst of
society 1 No friend of the social fabric in
this country can for a moment say that
this thing can be permitted to go on with-
out danger to the peace, to the law, to
the good order and stability of society
itself. It is because this thing has grown
now to a gigantic dimensions of danger—
not a danger in which we need have any
fear of an invasion—not that danger which
has been in such puerile terms alluded
to, but the danger of a poison—running
through the veins of society, poisoning the
very health of our social life—it is that
danger that we have to confront; all the
more deadly for its being so subtle, so
unseen, and so little demonstrable to the
ordinary observer. It is against this dan-
ger that we are called upon at the pre-
sent time to legislate. You tell me about
obedience to the law ; you tell me that
because I occupy the great place which I


am permitted to occupy in this country,
that lam to set an example of obedience
to the law. I say, in reply, that there
is one law which overrides all others,
and that is the law of preserving the
peace and welfare of civil society. Would
you talk about a technical observance
of the law if a plague was stalking in
our midst—if a pestilence was sweep-
ing off our population—if a famine was
reducing the members of our households
to skeletons ? Why, a government that
stood in fear for the technical observ-
ance of the law in any such case as that
would be swept away, and deservedly
swept away. We rise above any such
considerations at the present time, in
staying the growth of a disastrous seed-
plot which, if left alone, would soon
ripen in the dismemberment of society.
And what justification is there for the
strong feeling which I am quite sure at
the present time pervades all classes ? We
have in this country, as in all others, the
working-class. The man does not live
who ever heard me pander to the working-
class. I have passed through some thirty-
five contested elections, and I never won
a single vote by pandering to any class.
Well, we have the working-class in the
country, great by its apparent and undeni-
able virtues. Ido not believe that at this
moment there is any class in society of
more value, of higher character, with a
more lively sense of social and personal
obligations, than the better portion of the
mechanics of New South Wales. Most
of those men are married, and have fami-
lies ; many of them have freehold homes,
which even in bad times they struggle
to preserve. Can it be surprising to
any of us that the mothers of those
families, during a period of depression
such as that which has passed over the
country of late, look with something like
aversion—with even stronger antipathy —
towards the Chinaman, who is a direct
competitor with her husband—the father
of her children—and with the future of
her household 1 Is it to be wondered
that the mother, who is suffering from
her husband’s want of employment, pos-
sibly from her son’s want of employment,
who sees her little ones deprived of many
comforts which otherwise they would en-
joy, should cherish, encourage, and cul-
tivate a feeling of hostility to the persons
who come in direct competition with the
bread-winners of her household for the
daily food of the family 1 Although I
may not say anything to encourage it, I
can well sympathise with the aversion that
grows up in the most influential and most
valuable portion of our working-class to-
wards those people. But that is not all. Is
it a safe, a wise, or a tolerable thing for us
to have nearly 60,000 —I mean in all the
colonies—of these men, belonging to an
alien race, out of tone with us in faith, in
law, in traditions, in everything that en-
dears life—to have 60,000 of these men,
with no natural companions, in the midst
of society 1 Must not that be a thing to
be deprecated, to be lamented, to be resisted
by every man who wishes well to the social
fabric of this new country 1 I may be
fairly pardoned if my sympathies go out a
long way to meet the feelings of that large
class of our people without whom society
could not exist for a day. It was said by
Sir Robert Peel that the great working-
class was the foundation of every other
class, and what was said by him was so true
that no man who has succeeded him could
deny it. Without this great mass of human
beings, who form the foundation of society,
society itself could not exist. They are really
the blood, the bone, the sinew, the mind,
and the spirit of the Social fabric. Having
stated my case so far as the social elements
affect this question, I shall proceed in as
calm a way as I can to trace the history
of late events, which have led up to the
present action on the part of the Govern-
ment. On the 12th December last the
Chinese Minister, resident at the court of
St. James, addressed a note to the Minis-
ter for Foreign Affairs, who happens to
be the Prime Minister of England. It is
not always the case in the constitution of
English governments that the same minis-
ter holds the position of leader of the Go-
vernment and also that of Foreign Secre-
tary ; but, at the present time, the Marquis
of Salisbury is not only Prime Minister,
but also her Majesty’s Secretary of State
for Foreign Affairs. In this note, to which
I have called attention on other occasions
as being a singularly able paper—l do not
think, so far as I can judge, that I ever
read a diplomatic paper more astutely
worded than this note of the Chinese
Minister —in this paper the Chinese Minis-
ter in London calls the attention of the


British Government to what the Aus-
tralian colonies are doing, and he evidently
calls the attention of the Prime Minister
to our proceedings with some kind of a
confused view that we are in the capacity
of school children, and can be called to
account by the Prime Minister of England.
His words are these :
The Imperial Government sees with regret the
continued existence of the exceptional and ex-
ceptionable laws which some of the colonial
legislatures of Australia and the Dominion have
at different times enacted against Chinese sub-
jects, and hopes that, with a view to the elimi-
nation of any part of them which may be found
to be at variance with treaty obligations and in-
ternational usage, her Majesty’s Government
will be pleased to institute an inquiry into their
nature, and how far they are compatible with
the increasing growth of the friendly relations
which now happily exist between the two coun-
tries.
No complaint can be made, and last of all
should I be to make any complaint, of the
Chinese Minister faithfully representing
his Government at the British court; but
he clearly was under the impression that
he had only to make these representations
to have the matters of which he com-
plained put right. That would hardly be
worth my while to notice, if it were not for
the great fact that lies beneath and beyond
it, and so much above it as to affect the
whole tenor of this diplomatic note—what
I have on another occasion described as
the awakening of the Chinese empire. It
clearly proves an inclination to assert the
rights of China on a level with other
civilised nations; and I confess at once
that I think the time will come, and that
probably very shortly, when they will
succeed. It will be observed, then, that I
do hot by any means concur in some
views which I have heard expressed here
to-night. I do not agree with any of
those persons who think that China is an
inferior power, with whom we can trifle.
I think nothing of the kind. I think that
with her large territory, with a population
which exceeds one-third of the whole
population of the world, China has only to
learn the lessons which are taught on
every hand —and which she appears to be
doing—to win an honored place in the
community of nations. I, then, neither
despise the individual character of the
Chinese, nor underrate the majesty of the
power of China; and it is for these very
reasons, and because I believe that China
is fast becoming a great power ; because I
believe her people are endowed with great
though homely virtues—the virtues of in-
dustry, of provident care, of foresight, of
unmatched patience, and vast powers of
endurance; it is that I believe in all
these things that I do not wish to see
the Chinese element increasing in our
midst. I wish to dwell particularly
on the circumstances which followed the
reception of this note from the Chinese
Minister, because I think they have been
greatly misundei’stood in this country.
Lord Salisbury caused a request to be
made to the Colonial Office to obtain for
him certain information to enable him,
which means the British Government, to
deal with the Chinese Minister’s note; and
in this matter the Secretary of State for
the Colonies has only been used as a
medium by which the Prime Minister’s
desires were made known to the colonial
governments. I dwell upon this because
I see it continually noted that Lord Knuts-
ford does this, and Lord Knutsford does
that. This question does not belong to
the Secretary of State for the Colonies at
all. It belongs to the English Govern-
ment, and the chief actor is the Prime
Minister of England, who is at the same
time Foreign Minister. The communica-
tion made to us was from him ; the infor-
mation sought is for him, and the Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies is only a
medium in the regularity of business by
which these communications are made.
Well, this note was received, as I have
pointed out, by the British Government
on the 12th December. No communica-
tion was made to the colonies until 23rd
January; then, for the first time, we were
asked for information. Now, it will be re-
membered that this Government, after some
communications of an irregular character
with neighbouring governments, and after
consulting among ourselves, sent a tele-
graphic m essage on our own account th rough
his Excellency the Governor in reply to
this communication from Lord Salisbury.
This communication of ours was dated the
31st March ; and up to this time I have
never heard of any person who has taken
serious exception to the character and the
completeness of our communication; on
the contrary, our opponents have more
than once, on several occasions, compli-
mented us on the character of this message.


I think myself, without taking to our-
selves any of the compliments paid to us,
that we stated the case fairly and fully,
and with sufficient emphasis of language.
I must now, at this point, call attention to
one or two passages in this message of ours
of the 31st March. We put forth our claim
to be considered in the exercise of treaty
rights in these words :
As these colonies form an important part of
the empire, it is submitted that our cause of
contention is of sufficient national concern to be
taken up by the empire ; if we have no voice in
the making of treaties, it seems only just that
our interests should be considered and protected
by those who exercise that power.
I maintain for the Government, of which
I am a member, that in these few words
we stated on solid ground the claim of
these colonies to be considered in the exer-
cise of the treaty rights of the empire, and
I believe that we made good the ground
of our contention. A little further on,
towards the conclusion, after having stated
as concisety, as clearly, and as emphatically
as we could the difference between the
impingement of the Chinese question on
us and on British people resident within
the United Kingdom, we use these words:
It is respectfully submitted that the examina-
tion of these principal phases of the question can
only lead to one conclusion, namely, that the
Chinese must be restricted from emigrating to
any part of Australasia.
That is surely clear and precise, as it is
unquestionably emphatic and concise. We
proceed :
It will be seen that, while the question scarcely
touches the people of the United Kingdom, it
vitally concerns these great colonies, whose im-
portance in their political and commercial re-
lations entitles them to be protected by the diplo-
matic influence and the powers of treaty which
belong to the empire.
Then we go on to say :
With renewed expressions of our loyal attach-
ment to her Majesty, we urge that immediate
steps be taken to open such negotiations with
the Emperor of China as will result in permanent
security to the Australian colonies from the dis-
turbance of Chinese immigration in any form.
The matter is too grave and urgent to admit of
long delay.
Then we conclude in these words :
However desirable it may be to avoid the irri-
tation and conflict of interests which may arise
from local legislation of a drastic character, if
protection cannot be afforded as now sought, the
Australian parliaments must act from the force
of public opinion in devising measures to defend
the colonies from consequences which they can-
not relax in their efforts to avert.
We stated our case, as I contend, fully,
fairly, and truthfully. We stated our
case in the highest sense in the interests
of this people. We put forth our case in
the interests of preserving the integrity of
the union of the empire. Well, what was
the result? We certainly were not so
foolish or simple as to expect a satisfac-
tory reply at once, or even in a month or
two months; but we did expect, after
stating in this earnest and urgent manner
the danger of our cause, the courtesy
of some acknowledgment. Well, things
went on until the 26th April, or twenty-
six days after our message was sent, when
at my instance his Excellency the Go-
vernor sent a message in his own name,
reminding the imperial authorities that we
had received no answer, and stating that
all kinds of statements were being made
on the spot, some to the effect that the
English Government had decided not to
interfere; that public feeling was very
strong on this question, and that in the
interests of peace and good order, and of
the preservation of society itself, it was
necessary that it should receive attention.
This message elicited no response either.
From the 26th April, the date of our re-
minder, until the 12th May, we received
no communication whatever ; but by this
time it was announced in various ways
that inconveniences were arising in the
colonies; that in the sister colony of Vic-
toria the Government had taken the step
of refusing to allow the Chinese to land ;
that these had left that port, and had
come on to Sydney. These and various
other statements appeared in the European
world. The owners of the ships who were
thus interfered with obtained audience of
the Secretary of State ; even merchants
in China, who care nothing about these
colonies, I presume, so long as their in-
terests are served, had begun to complain
of our action. Then we received from the
Secretary of State this message, which,
if it had come from any other quarter
would have been set down as a mean
method of excusing protraction, negligence,
and unwarranted delay. This is the mes-
sage :
Referring to your telegram of 26th April, no
foundation for report that her Majesty’s Govern-
ment refuse negotiations with Chinese Govern-
ment. Negotiations being carefully considered.
Her Majesty’s Government fully recognise
strength of feeling.


I say that if the same kind of treatment
for this long time had been inflicted on
any private person, and then a message of
this character were received, it would be
held as a specious device to cover culpable
negligence of the interests at stake.
Mr. Dibbs : Will the hon. member
kindly read it again 1
Sir HENRY PARKES : I have a great
deal to read to-night, and I do not know
why 1 should read it twice. Here it is.
Mr. Dibbs : No; I will not hear it now.
If we cannot get common courtesy we shall
not give it!
Sir HENRY PARKES: It is not likely
that we are to be frightened by this kind
of thing, which we hear until we are all
sick of it. Now I wish to say a word or
two on the treatment which we received
from her Majesty’s Imperial Government.
I do not know how any set of men could
use more temperate language to make their
grievance known ; I do not know how
within the limits of propriety we could
employ English words more clearly to ex-
press the urgency of our complaint. Not-
withstanding that, we are treated as if the
wisest course was to let us alone and the
excitement would die out, and there would
be no need for anything to be done at all.
I venture to say that a few other master-
ful displays of indifference like this on the
part of the Secretary of State would do
more than much more serious occurrences
to sap the loyalty of these great countries.
We can bear remonstrance, we can meet
argument, we can make good our case against
the world; but we cannot patiently stand
to be treated with the frozen indifference
of persons who consider some petty quarrel
in a petty state of more importance than
the gigantic interests of these magnificent
colonies. I say this with the most earnest
desire to preserve the integrity of the em-
pire, with as loyal a feeling to her Majesty
the Queen as any other man amongst her
subjects ; but we must be loyal to our-
selves—we must be loyal to the Constitu-
tion under which we live; and the only way
in which we can be true to ourselves as
her Majesty’s free subjects is to show that
we have a lively appi’eciation of the great
liberties —the great privileges —which we
possess, and which we will never forfeit or
suffer to be impaired. Now lam brought
to the immediate events which have pre-
ceded the present action of the Govern-
ment in appealing to Parliament. Every
person who has regarded our course of
conduct with anything like candour and a
spirit of fair play, must have known that
if we could obtain no redress where we
thought that we ought to have obtained
it, Ave should about this time make the
appeal Avhich Ave are hoav making. It
is not that we have neglected this ques-
tion. It is simply that in fulfilling the
first process of our action, Ave have waited
a reasonable time for some courteous ac-
knowledgment of our urgent appeal to be
made by the Imperial Government. We
could not have acted sooner; Ave could not
have acted a minute sooner. We have
waited until there has been not only time
for telegraphic communication, but also
time for communication by the regular
course of post. Getting no satisfaction
Avhatever, Ave began to feel as Avell as avc
might —and I venture to think we should
be unworthy of your confidence if Ave felt
less indignant—Ave began to feel that we
had been treated in a most unworthy
manner. We do not represent insignifi-
cant communities; Ave represent great,
free colonies, which are fast approaching
the threshold of national existence. We
represent interests too colossal to be passed
over in a flippant, or an unsatisfactory
manner; and Ave should haA r e been un-
worthy of our post if avc had not felt the
slight, not offered to us, but through us,
the constituted authority, to you, the re-
presentatives of the people, and behind
you, to the free people of this great colony.
Well, in the meantime, Avhat occurs 1 Ship
after ship arrives in this port Avith Chinese
passengers. A day or so before the arrival
of the first ship, tAvo large iheetings of
citizens Avere held in and near the Town
Hall; one inside, and the other outside
the Town Hall. A large, irregular, and
disorderly crowd of persons numbering, I
believe, some 5,000 or 6,000, headed by
the chief magistrate of the city, arrived at
Parliament House, and as some hon. gen-
tlemen observed to-night, it is almost by
a miracle they did not invade this place,
and drive you from your seats. Are
avc to have a recurrence of such proceed-
ings as those 1 Some hon, gentleman to-
night —I think it was the hon. member
for Wollombi —said that the police were
blamable for this great outrage on the
Parliament of the country. lam satisfied


that the police were not to blame. In
justice to that body, and in vindication of
their character and efficiency, if I may
be permitted, I desire to say that it was
to the police a complete surprise, such
as may occur anywhere under any cir-
cumstances in any country. The police
had no reason to apprehend any such
gathering at such a time—and especially
it was incredible to them that the chief
magistrate of the city would be at the
head of such a body—and for that reason,
and that reason alone, there was not a
sufficient force to meet the emergency. If
there had been any reason whatever to
have apprehended such an occurrence, and
I am satisfied there was none, there could
have been a power here that would have
prevented it; and if any attempt of the kind
should be made in the future, there will
be a power to render it impossible ; for I
do not believe the police were to blame in
any way whatever. It was one of those
surprises which will occur under the best
discipline and the best regulation, and
which cannot be guarded against. Now,
one of the reasons, as I stated in the com-
mencement of my observations, for the in-
troduction of the bill is to put an end to
these disturbing and most poisonous agi-
tations. If this could take place, which
did occur only a night or two before the
arrival of the steamship Afghan —if this
could occur in this well-ordered city, and
under the presidency of the mayor, the
chief magistrate of the city, what is likely
to occur in the remote thickly-populated
districts such as populous gold-fields, where
there is not the same means of preserving-
order, where there are not the same influ-
ences in favour of order at work, where
the distances between the agencies of
authority are much greater, where the
means of concentrating force to quell dis-
turbance is much more difficult—if it
could occur in this great metropolis, what
guarantee have we got that every centre
of a thick population would not be dis-
tracted by disorderly and tumultuous as-
semblages of this kind 1 And so long as
this question of Chinese immigration is
allowed to rankle in the hotbed of every
ill-formed and ill-informed passion—so
long as that is permitted, there is food to
feed inflammatory speeches and the mis-
chievous dispositions of the worst class of
persons who seek to lead the unthinking
multitude. And if, for nothing else than to
stop this source of fuel for feeding these
inflammatory influences, in the highest in-
terests of society, in the highest interests
of preserving law, obedience to authority,
and the promotion of peace amongst us, the
thing must and ought to be stopped. And
it is in that view that we think we are
bound to do all in our power to bring this
cause of contention amongst us, which
bears such a plentiful harvest of ill-fruit,
and which cannot bear any good fruit for
us, to an end once and for ever. Now, if
any person supposes that we have acted
thoughtlessly or hurriedly, or without due
regard to all the consequences, he is woe-
fully mistaken. In this crisis of the
Chinese question, and it is a crisis, we have
acted calmly, with a desire to see clearly
the way before us; but at the same time
we have acted with decision, and we
do not mean to turn back. Neither for
her Majesty’s ships of war, nor for her
Majesty’s representative on the spot, nor
for the Secretary of State for the Colonies
do we intend to turn aside from our pur-
pose, which is to terminate the landing of
Chinese on these shores for ever, except
under the restrictions imposed by the bill,
which will amount, and which are intended
to amount, to practical prohibition.
Mr. Fletcher : To the very letter !
Sir HENRY PARKES : Now in what
position do I stand in regard to this ques-
tion 1 When the Mayor of Sydney pressed
upon me to receive at Parliament House a
deputation from that disorderly multitude,
I refused to receive it. The request was
modified, and I was asked at last if I
would receive a deputation consisting of
the mayor and one or two other persons.
My answer was that, with every respect
for the mayor and his high position, I
could not recognise the disorderly proceed-
ings which he countenanced by receiving
him at that place ; but when he wrote to
me a respectful request, under his own
name, as mayor of the city, to know what
the Government would do on the arrival
of the Afghan with these Chinese passen-
gers, I replied to him in writing that they
would not be allowed to land. I have
said sufficient to show my condemnation
of the course he pursued; but, still, he was
the chief magistrate of the metropolis of
this country, and he was a very proper
medium through which for me to speak to


the people of the country; and I consider or their owners, or to put them to any
that I have given, through the mayor of
this city, a written pledge to the people of
New South Wales that these Chinese pas-
sengers shall not land. And, so far as I
am concerned, I cast to the winds your
permits of exemption
Mr. Dibbs : Oh !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I cast to the
winds your permits of exemption ; I care
nothing about your cobweb of technical
law ; lam obeying a law far superior to any
law which issued these permits, namely,
the law of the preservation of society in
New South Wales—so far as I have means,
against every power that can be brought
against me I will carry out my pledge
given on that night in writing to the free
people of this country, and not allow these
men to land.
Mr. W. J, Allen : That is, if we let
you !
Sir HENRY PARKES : Now, what
has been the conduct of the owners or
agents of these ships'? We have in the
port at this moment, I believe, four ships
freighted with Chinese passengers. We
have the Afghan, the Tsinan, the Guthrie,
and the Menmuir; lam not sure whether
the last ship is in or not.
Mr, Dalton : She is at the wharf !
Sir jTENRY PARKES ; It does not
matter. On board these vessels there are
not forty-seven, but considerably over 300
Chinese.
Mr. Garrett : 600, with the two last
ships !
Sir HENRY PARKES: And a por-
tion of these are the men who wei’e re-
fused a landing in Melbourne. But what
did the owners of the ships do 1 I am
bound to say that they have acted, as far
as I know, in the most commendable way
from the first. The owners of the Afghan
voluntarily wi-ote to me offering to carry
back the whole of these people.
Mr. Dibbs : If you did not fine them.
That was the condition !
Sir HENRY PARKES : There was no
condition of the sort. I may as well state
that I assured these gentlemen that the
Government were not desirous of subject-
ing them to any inconvenience whatever
that could be avoided. I assured them
that while we were determined to carry
out our decision in respect to their passen-
gers we had no desire to injure the ships
inconvenience, and they offered to carry
back the passengers to China on the con-
dition that those who had no proper per-
mits, or who, in other words, were fraudu-
lently on board the ship, should be carried
back at the expense of the ship, and that
those who had proper permits should be
carried back at the expense of the colony,
which I thought was an extremely fair
and handsome proposal. The owners of
the Tsinan went a little further, and
offered that if we would be at the cost of
conveying their Melbourne cargo by a
coasting steamer to that port they would
carry back not only the passengers for
Sydney, but the passengers for Melbourne.
I communicated with the Government of
Victoria, and they agreed to pay the cost
of conveying the Melbourne cargo by
coasting steamer to that port, and the offer
on the part of the owners is to carry the
whole of their passengers back to Hong-
kong. It is not a condition laid upon
them by this Government; but we have
their written offer, and I should like to
know whether that is not, to a large ex-
tent, a fair ground of justification for the
step we have taken?
Mr. Slattery : Did the Chinese agree
to go back 1
Sir HENRY PARKES : I have not
been in communication with them. If
the hon. member has, perhaps he will in-
form us. I now come to the bill. It pro-
ceeds to a large extent on the principles of
the existing law. The provision for impos-
ing a tax on the arrival of Chinese; the
provision for limiting the number to be
carried to the tonnage of the. ship ; the
provision for imposing penalties ; the pro-
vision prescribing the means by which
those penalties are to be recovered, are all
on the lines of the present law. If the
principle is admitted of imposing a poll-
tax of XIO, I assume that no gentleman
here will contend that the principle is
affected by the tax being XSO or XIOO.
The principle is in its nature precisely the
same, except that it is applied in a way in
which it operates more effectually. So
that the principle of the bill in all these
clauses is exactly the principle of the pre-
sent law. I now come to the new clauses
of the bill which distinguish it from the
existing law. By the treaty executed be-
tween her Majesty’s Government and the


government of the Emperor of China, and
signed on the 29th of August, 1848, it is
by article 2 provided that British sub-
jects shall be entitled to reside in a pre-
scribed area at five cities in China, and
that in those cities they shall be allowed to
reside for the purpose of carrying on their
mercantile pursuits without molestation
or restraint. Now if hon. gentlemen will
turn to the 11th clause of the bill they
will see that it is in the very language of
the treaty executed between her Britan-
nic Majesty and the Emperor of China :
The Governor, with the advice of the Execu-
tive Council, may by proclamation in the
Gazette set apart a defined area where Chinese
arriving in this colony, after the passing of this
act, with their families and establishments
shall be allowed to reside for the purpose of car-
rying on their mercantile pursuits without mo-
lestation or restraint at the cities of Sydney and
Newcastle, and such other places (not being
more than five) as the Governor with the advice
aforesaid may appoint.
So that it will be seen that we are more
liberal to Chinese subjects than the treaty
is to British subjects; for while in a
population of 400,000,000 Chinese British
subjects can reside at only five cities —I
think seven is the number now, by subse-
quent treaties —we are going to permit the
Chinese to reside possibly at five cities in
our limited population ; and all I can say
is much good may they do there. Well, by
these treaties no British subject can travel
in China without a passport to cover his
liberty. We are going to do exactly the
same. We provide in the following clause
that
No Chinese who shall arrive in this colony
after the passing of this act shall be permitted
to reside at or trade with any place or part of
the colony, except as prescribed by last pre-
ceding section, and no such Chinese shall be
permitted to travel in the interior without a
passport.
So that exactly what is done to us in
China we do to Chinese in Australia,
except that we do it with a more liberal
hand, and I cannot see how any treaty
obligation can be violated, so long as we
extend to our respected brethren from
the Chinese empire precisely the same
class of rights which they extend to us.
What is good for the British goose is
good for the Chinese gander. The only
provision that can press in any inconve-
nient way upon the Chinese residents in
the country, is the provision requiring
them to take out a license, for which they
are to pay a fee, which the Committee may
fix at any sum they like. We do not pre-
tend to interfere with the liberties of any
of the Chinese resident amongst us up to
the present time ; but we do consider it
expedient in the public interest to require
them to register their place of abode, and
their names, and to take out a license fee,
so that we may know who they are and
where they are. But with that one very
rational and justifiable restriction, they
ai’e free to go where they like —to indulge
in what pursuits they like—with one
exception, which I shall allude to pre-
sently—and they are free to enjoy all the
rights and privileges which we ourselves
enjoy. I would be no party to legislation
which would place disabilities beyond
what I have indicated, upon the Chinese
population now in the country ; but in re-
gard to those Chinese who may arrive
after the passing of this bill—if it passes
into law—they must enjoy the rights of
I’esidence just to the extent that the rights of
residence are permitted to British subjects
in China, and no further. So that under this
law—supposing the bill to pass into law,
and I do not doubt that it will—there
will be two classes of Chinamen in this
country ; those who arrived before the
passing of the act, and who will not be
interfered with, except that they will be
required to take out a license, and to
register their names and places of abode j
and those who arrive after the passing of
the act, whose residence will be restricted
to limited areas, and who will not be per-
mitted to wander all over the country.
There is another provision in the bill
which is justified by the laws of China.
The Chinese are not to engage in mining.
British subjects are not allowed to engage
in mining in China, and following that
example, and extending to Chinese sub-
jects the same rights, we forbid them to
engage in mining pursuits in this country.
These are the leading provisions of the
bill, and I maintain in the face of this
great gathering of honorable men, that it
is a fair and just, though somewhat dras-
tic measure for settling this question in the
interests of this young nation, and settling
it on the grounds of reason and enlightened
policy, and in the interests of preserving
the freedom and the great privileges which
we enjoy. I have said before, and I.


repeat now, that we are fully justified in
everything that we have done. Our first
object is to serve the people of New South
Wales, and in this high service to preserve
not only their liberties, but to preserve
to them the peace, the law, the order, the
safety of society. If this cause of tumult
were to continue, those high conditions of
the free people of this country could not
be conserved. We have taken the steps we
have to preserve to this people their great
inheritance of freedom and security ; and
if in doing that we have infringed any
law, I say that this House is bound in
honor to indemnify us, because, in infring-
ing the law, we have obeyed the higher
law of conserving society, and the best in-
terests of this people. We appeal with
Clause 1. The act entitled “An Act to restrict
the Influx of Chinese into New South Wales,”
forty-fifth Victoria number eleven, is hereby
repealed. But the repeal hereby enacted shall
not affect the past operation of the said act, or,
save as hereinafter provided, the rights of any
Chinese resident in this colony at the time of
the passing of this act, or any offence committed,
penalty incurred, or proceeding taken under or
pursuant to the said repealed act before the
passing of this act.
Mr. DIBBS moved as an amendment:
That the following words be added to the
clause:—“Provided that from and after the
first day of June next it shall not be lawful for
any subject of China to land from any vessel or
to enter any port of the colony, naturalised sub-
jects of the British empire, and such subjects of
China as legally possess certificates of exemption
or permits, alone excepted. ”
Sir HENRY PARKES : I have only
one word to say in reply to the lion, mem-
ber’s amendment. The object of it is so
transparently to defeat the bill that I
cannot agree to it.
Mr. JOSEPH ABBOTT said that he
was pledged to vote for the prevention of
the immigration of Chinese, and he thought
the adoption of the amendment would be
the most straightforward way to do it. We
considered that the Chinese were immoral,
and that their presence here was inimical
THE HILL IN COMMITTEE.
confidence to have our conduct justified,
and ourselves, collectively and individu-
ally, indemnified for the strong steps we
have felt bound to take. And I appeal to
gentlemen in all quarters of this House—
I appeal to every section of my fellow-
countrymen throughout the land—to sup-
port us in this effort to terminate a moral
and social pestilence, and to preserve to
ourselves and our children, unaltered and
unspotted, the rights and privileges which
we have received from our forefathers.
[,S’ir Henry Parkes teas loudly cheered through-
out the delivery of his speech.']
Question resolved in the affirmative
without division.
Bill read the second time.
to the interests of the working-classes. We
ought, therefore, to entirely exclude them
from the country at all hazards. He would
vote for the amendment, and if it was lost
he would vote for the bill.
Sir HENRY PARKES: I am not
going to say very much. I have already
stated that the amendment is a trans-
parent move to defeat the bill. If it is
carried, the bill is gone.
Mr. Frank Farnell : Show it, and I
will not vote for the amendment!.
Sir HENRY PARKES : It is utterly
impossible for any bill that would provide
for the total exclusion of the Chinese from
the colony to x*eceive the royal assent. It
is directly against the international rela-
tions of the two countries. Whatever
doubts may have been thx’own upoxx the
bill receiving the X’oyal assexxt, without be-
ing reserved in its present form, one thing
is certain, and that is that it could not
become law if it px’ovided for the total pro-
hibition of Chinese immigration. Neither
hex’e nor ixx England would the royal assent
be given to it. If that is not conclusive
I do not know what can be. I would not
waste the time of the House by proceeding
with a bill which I know would not receive


the royal assent. I have no reason to
believe, and my experience is as good as
that of any other hon. member, that the
royal assent to the bill in its present form
would be withheld. I have no reason
whatever to believe that the royal assent
to the bill will be reserved ; but in any
case, with the electric telegraph, the matter
could be settled in seven or eight days; but
it never could be settled if the amendment
were carried.
Mr. DIBBS said that of all the state-
ments he had ever heard from the Premier
the speech he had just made was the worst.
There must be something behind the
scenes when the hon. gentleman could tell
us that if the bill was passed in a certain
form it would receive the royal assent.
Sir Henry Parkes : I rise to order. I
ask whether the hon. member is in order
in directly misrepresenting the important
statement which I made? My statement
was that I had no reason to believe that
the royal assent would be ivithheld; and
standing in the position in which I do, I
am made to say that I had reason to be-
lieve that the royal assent would be given
to the bill. Is not the hon. member
violating all order in putting into my
mouth words that I never uttered 1
After other remarks from Mr. JDibbs,
Sir HENRY PARKES : Does any
member of the Committee suppose that if
the Government had thought that a bill to
entirely exclude Chinese from the colony
would receive the royal assent they would
not have brought in such a bill ? Would
it not have been a much easier plan, and a
plan much more likely to commend itself
to a mixed population ? But having con-
sidered the matter, we knew that we could
not do that, and our object is to do some-
thing practicable. The object of the hon.
member who has moved the amendment is
to curry favour with the extreme sections
of the population outside by going further
than the Government are willing to go, and
at the same time, if possible, to defeat the
measure. Hon. members will see what an
authority the hon. gentleman is, because
he asks to be assured that the royal assent
will be given to the bill. He ought to
have known that that was an improper
question to put to me even hypothetically.
Whatever indecent course the hon. mem-
ber might take, I should not take the
indecent course of trying to ascertain
what might be done in such an extreme
case. I say again, from what I know of
public affairs, that I have no reason to
suppose that the royal assent Avill not be
given to the bill if it is passed in its pre-
sent form. If it were amended as the
hon. member wants to amend it, I know
that the royal assent would not be given
to it, for the simple reason that it would
violate all international law and all treaty
rights whatever. I therefore refrain from
taking any such stupid, impracticable, and
resultless course. The amendment is
utterly impracticable, and I do not believe
it has been moved in good faith.
After a speech from Mr. Want in support of
Mr. Dibbs’s proposed amendment,
Sir HENRY PARKES : I must say
that I think that the hon. and learned
member has dealt with these two proposals
in a way which is really disingenuous.
The hon, and learned member has treated
this Government so fairly on all occasions
—I have great pleasure in acknowledging
his fair treatment—that it grieves me to
say that when the hon. member says that
there is no difference between these two
proposals, he says a thing which is wide
of the truth. One proposal—that of the
■bill—virtually stops the influx of Chinese;
but it admits of'Chinese coming here for
legitimate purposes under very stringent
regulations ; and therefore it is not of the
character of any measure which would at-
tempt to totally exclude the Chinese. Now
the Government —myself in particular—
have anxiously considered whether it was
possible to get even the sympathy of the
other Australian governments to any mea-
sure of the extreme character of exclusion ;
and I know that we could not get the sym-
pathy of any single government outside
our own colony; and if we could it would
be a dead-letter, and it would have no
effect. lam satisfied of that beyond all
doubt from the state of international law ;
and I am not satisfied that the present bill
will fail in any way whatever; on the
contrary, I believe that it will be very
successful for the objects aimed at ; and,
as I have said already, I have no reason
whatever to believe that it will not re-
ceive the royal assent. What is the use
of the hon. and learned member talking
about doing this thing in a straightfor-
ward and manly way 1 Our way is as


straightforward and manly as any way
could possibly be. We have faced the
thing to the utmost limits which are
practicable for the purpose ; and those
who desire—l do not include the hon. and
learned member in this, after what he has
said —to inveigle us into an extreme course
simply seek to lead us to a step which would
be fatal to our proposals. Then, of course,
they could say that there was a great pre-
tence, a great amount of profession; but
what had the Government done 1 ? They
had done nothing. The Chinese would
come here in spite of you, and they would
continue to come here until some one else,
under somewhat different circumstances,
took similar steps to those which we have
taken. The bill which we have introduced
is the most extreme measure commensu-
rate with what is possible to be done —com-
mensurate with justice and reason ; and I
know well enough that if any person de-
sires to effect the object of practically put-
ting a stop to the influx of Chinese, they
would without quibble or cavil assist the
Government in their honest, arduous, and
earnest attempts to effect this end. This
Chinese trouble has been so great, that if
I had had nothing else to do during the
last fortnight, it would have occupied all
my time ; and I have had to work night
and day to keep up with the ordinary work
which devolves upon me. I do not know
that I ought to mince matters; and I
confess that my physical strength is not
what it was ten years ago, and I cannot
be expected to undergo impossible labours ;
and 1 declare that my labours have been
so great, that I would gladly give my
place to the hon. and learned member
to-morrow, and let him try to exclude
the Chinese by his fantastical legisla-
tion. I have brought in a practical
measure. Let me tell the hon. and
learned member—who though he may be
much abler than I am, and have much
larger experience, has certainly not been
as long dealing with public affairs as I
have—let me tell him that the man is an
enemy to any cause who takes extreme
courses. The thing to be done is that
which is practicable, and the man who
does not see that is unfit to guide the Go-
vernment in any matter of legislation. It
is not what we think ought to be done; it
is not carrying out some naked principle
with extreme views and on extreme lines;
but it is taking into account conflicting
interests, opposing laws, and irreconcilable
difficulties, and doing under these trying
circumstances that which it is j ust, possible,
and practicable to do. We have gone as
near to exclusion as it is possible for any-
set of men to go; and if we were to go out
of office to-morrow our successors would
have to take up the same bill; they would
not venture to take up this impracticable
notion of exclusion, and they would know
that very well.
Mr. Want : I cannot see the difference !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I am sure
that lion, members sitting around me see
the difference. But there is one other
thing. We are the Government in office,
it is our duty, our labour, and our respon-
sibility. This is our bill; this is our
remedy for the evil, and if you cannot ac-
cept it, say so, and take our place and do
it yourselves.
After further dehate,
Question —That the words proposed to
be added be so added—put. The Com-
mittee divided :
Ayes, 18; noes, 31 ; majority, 13.
Ayes.
Abbott, Joseph McElhone, J.
Allen, W, J. Melville, N.
Dawson, H. O’Mara, T. C.
Dibbs, G. R. O’Sullivan, E. W.
Farnell, Frank Slattery, T. M.
Ferguson, D. A, Want, J. H.
Fletcher, J.
Jones, T. Tellers,
Lyne, W. J. freer, J.
Mackinnon, J. A. Gale, J.
Noes.
Abigail, F. Merriman, G.
Allen, A. Nobbs, J,
Ball, E. J. Parkes, Sir Henry
Bowman, A, Penzer, J.
Burdekin, S. Roberts, C. J.
Bums, J. F, Ross, Dr. A.
Clarke, W. Schey, W. F.
Cooke, H. H. Stephen, W.
Ellis, J. 0. Stevenson, R.
Ewing, T. T. Sutherland, J.
Garrett, T. Taylor, H.
Haynes, J. Teece, W.
Henson, W. Thompson, R. W.
Holborow, W. H. Teller*,
Hutchison, A. Brunker, J. N.
Inglis, J. Garland, C. L,
Question so resolved in the negative.
Clause 2 was proposed from the Chair
as follows;—
Clause 2. This act shall be held to have come
into operation and to have had the force of law


on and after the first day of May one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-eight, and all acts
done by any member of the Executive Govern-
ment in preventing the landing of Chinese or
otherwise in relation to Chinese immigrants or
to vessels carrying such immigrants since the
date aforesaid shall in all courts and elsewhere
be deemed to have been properly and lawfully
done and executed and the member or members
of the Government who may have done any such
acts are hereby fully justified, indemnified, and
shall in all such courts and elsewhere be held
harmless in respect thereof.
Mr. WANT said : If the Premier would
give the Committee an assurance that those
upon whom wrong had been inflicted would
receive compensation—that they should be
placed in the position in which they found
themselves when they left their country—
and that this provision was inserted only
as a safeguard to the Government, and to
prevent undue claims from being made
upon them, he should not oppose the clause
further. These men had come here utterly
ignorant of the strength of the agitation
which had arisen in regard to their in-
vasion of the country. They had come
here under the full impression that they
Avould receive the protection of the English
flag, which, when once afforded, Avas not
violated. Some of them had spent their
last farthing to enable them to return to
their friends in the colony, or to migrate
here Avith a vieAV to earn a living. Having
come here in expectation of the safeguard
of the British law and the British flag,
they ought not to be sent back to their
own country, paupers —deprived of every
farthing they had. They had trusted to
our honor as Englishmen, and they should
be treated accordingly. While he Avas
quite willing to protect the Government
against vexatious claims, he thought the
Colonial Secretary should give us some
such assui’ance as he had suggested. In
making this request he Avas advocating
only that Avhich was fair and honest.
Sir HENRY PARK ES : I understand
that the hon. and learned member for
Gundagai has stated during my necessary
absence from the Chamber that he desires
some assurance from the Government that
the Chinese passengers shall not suffer by
the course Avhich has been taken. What I
must understand by that is this; that in
the case of Chinamen Avho have come to
the colony to enter into some business or
some undertaking, by which they expected
to make money—perhaps a little fortune
—the hon. member does not include that?
Mr. Want ; No, certainly not!
Sir HENRY PARKES : I have al-
ready expressed a desire not to injure any
person if I could aA r oid it. I think the
Government Avould be perfectly justified
in preventing any injury to these Chinese,
by their being sent back in the Avay pro-
posed. It is hardly possible for me to give
any definite promise or undertaking —or
indeed any undertaking Avhatever —except
it is accepted in my assurance of an
anxious desire to see that no injustice is
done. I think the hon. and learned mem-
ber Avill see that it is almost impossible to
say the exact limit to Avhich any action of
the Government Avill have to go in the
matter. But so unwilling am Ito haA r e any
injustice done to the Chinese, that I have
determined during the sitting, from obser-
A r ations Avhich I have heard, to give express
instructions the first thing this morning to
the police authorities to take the most vigi-
lant measures for the punishmentof anyone
Avho interferes with them in this country.
This is apart from the question, but I feel
justified in making the statement to show
the anxiety I have on this head. I intend
further to publish in the ordinary way a
reAvard for evidence sufficient to convict any
person Avho atteffipts in any Avay to mal-
treat these people. It is only just that the
Chinese in this country, Avith whom Ave
are dealing, as I admit, harshly, should be
protected in the enjoyment of their civil
rights, and should not be interfered with
in any Avay AvhateA T er. I merely mention
that to illustrate the disposition I have
-—I think I may say on behalf of the
Government, we have—to see that no in-
justice is done. Coming to the inquiry
made, I will see, to the utmost of my
poAver, that these men are not only carried
back to Hongkong, but that they shall not
be left there removed from their homes
Avithout the means of reaching them. If
anything more than that is necessary I
will incur the risk of having it done. If
that is a sufficient assurance for the hon.
gentleman I am perfectly Avilling to give
it.
After further dehate.
Question —That the clause, as read, be
agreed to—put. The Committee divided :
Ayes, 37 ; noes, 10; majority, 27.


Ayes.
Noes.
Abigail, F.
Inglis, J.
Allen, W. J. Slattery, T. M.
-Allen, A.
Ball, E. J.
Jones, T.
Dibbs, G. R. Want, J. H.
Mackinnon. J. A.
Gale, J.
Bowman, A.
Melville, N.
Lyne, W. J. Tellers,
McElhone, J. Dawson, H.
O’Hara, T. C. Moore, S. W.
Burdekin, S.
Burns, J. F.
Clarke, W.
Merriman, G.
Nobbs, J.
O’Sullivan, E. W.
Parkes, Sir Henry
Penzer, J.
Cooke, H. H.
Creer, J.
Question so resolved in the affirmative.
Ellis, J. C.
Ewing, T. T.
Roberts, C. J.
Schey, W. F.
Further debate on remaining clauses.
Farnell, Frank
Fletcher, J.
Garland, C. L.
Stephen, W.
Stevenson, R.
Sutherland, J.
Bill reported with amendments and an
amended title, and passed through all its
Garrett, T.
Taylor, H.
Thompson, R. W.
Teller*,
remaining stages.
Haynes, J.
Henson, W.
The House adjourned a quarter past 7 o’clock
Holborow, W. H.
Ross, Dr. A.
on Thursday morning, May 17, having
Hutchison, A.
Teece, W.
been sitting all night.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBBB.








THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT IN CONTROLLING
*; ' THE TERRITORIAL REVENUES OF THE COLONY.
SPEECH
THE HON. SIR HENRY PARSES, G.C.M.G,
CLAUSE 18 OF THE CROWN LANDS BILL.
Delivered in the Legislative Assembly , 26 April, 1888.
(From the “ Parliamentary Dehates.”)
■ Sir HENRY PARKES : In what I
am about to say, I ought to confine myself
to this one amendment; but as the whole
of the clause has been discussed over and
over again, I think that it will be best for
me to follow the example of other hon.
members. In the first place, I should like
to read the clause as it would appear if
amended as the hon. member for Went-
worth proposes to amend it j and, in order
to have no mistake about it, I have had it
written out on the assumption that all the
amendments of the hon. member were car-
ried. The clause would then read thus :
Jf any holder of a pastoral, homestead, con-
ditional or special lease, or occupation license,
shall be dissatisfied with the rent or license fee
which may have been fixed by the Minister, or
shall after the commencement of this act be
determined by the local land board for any such
lease or license, he may in the prescribed time
and manner appeal to the land court, which
shall, after having given the appellant and the
Crown the prescribed notice, hear the case, and
the Crown and the appellant may be represented
at the hearing before such court by counsel or
otherwise. The land court shall determine the
rent or license fee at such amount as it may
think fit; and when so determined such rent or
license fee shall be payable in accordance with
the provisions of this act, and the determination
of such court shall be final. Provided also that
the land court may award such costs, either
against the appellant or the Crown, as such
court may deem proper, and such costs shall, if
awarded against the appellant, be payable with
the rent, and shall subject the holder of the
lease or license, in default of payment, to the
same penalties as attach to non-payment of rent;
but should such costs be awarded against the
Crown, the amount shall be recoverable from
the Crown, or may be deducted from the rent.
Should no appeal be made against the deter-
mination of the local land board, it shall never-
theless be lawful for the Minister to refer the
case to the land court for hearing and deter-
mination, in the same manner as if an appeal
had been made as aforesaid, and subject to all
the provisions of this section.
It will be seen that the amendments on
the paper in the name of the hon. mem-
ber would entirely change the character
of the clause. It would take away from
the Minister all right over the public
estate, in a last resort, and transfer that
right to some kind of court created under
the laws of the country, I think that
I shall be able to show that if the legis-
lature of the country consents to that,
it will betray its highest trust to the
people, and to prove my case I must go
back to the very beginning. I will go
back to the time when the magnificent
territories of this country were held by
the authorities in Downing-street, and the
people here had no power whatever over
them. At that time in the old Legisla-


tive Council, a number of men arose who ever, and that he intended and fore-
may be fairly grouped as exceptionally
powerful for the business of govern-
ment. At the head of these men was
William Charles Wentworth; and lam
going to show in what language, in what
spirit, and with what design he wrested
from the Imperial Government the re-
venues of the territory of this country.
Certainly, it would bring the spirit of
Wentworth back to this old floor where
he trod so often, if he could by any possi-
bility know that those who have followed,
at so early a date, are willing to barter
away this highest right of the people to
some party created under the laws of the
country. Mr. Wentworth commenced with
his petitions and remonstrances several
years befoi’e they bore fruit. I have gone
through the records of that most remark-
able time—the thirteen years from 1843
to 1856, when the present Constitution
was conferred on the colony ; and it would
well repay any one to wade through these
records as the very highest in historical
interest of any that we possess. In a
petition addressed to the House of Com-
mons, and at the same time addressed to
her Majesty the Queen, in 1851, he used
these words:
We, the Legislative Council of New South
Wales, do accordingly hereby solemnly protest,
insist, and declare as follows :—That the re-
venue arising from the public lands, derived as it
is mainly from the value imparted to them by the
labour and capital of the people of this colony,
is as much their property as the ordinary re-
venue and ought, therefore, to be subject only
to the like control and appropriation.
That is, control and appropriation by a
legislature existing on the spot. Concur-
rently with this demand, he demanded
that there should also be granted to the
colony a government like that of Canada.
At that time, although not so very far
back, there was only one responsible go-
vernment known throughout the British
dominions, and that was the Government
of Canada; and Mr. Wentworth and his
colleagues naturally enough quoted the
Government of Canada as a model on
which the Government that they de-
manded to have conferred on this colony
should be shaped. We thus see that
he demanded the territorial revenues of
the country to be placed under the abso-
lute control of the local legislature, who
up to that time had no control what-
shadowed as clearly as he could that the
representation of that legislature should
be a government on the model of the Go-
vernment of Canada. He, therefore, never
dreamt that this highest right over the
territorial revenue of the country should
be handed over to some body of paid
officials; and I maintain that if there is a
duty devolving on a free government that
duty in its highest development is to be
master, the last final voice in disposing of
the lands of the country. Say to me that
this question ought not to be made a poli-
tical one ! It is, from beginning to end,
a political question. If the soil of a new
land, without which the people could not
live; if the soil of a new country is to be
stripped of political character, of political
meaning, why, then, at once you confess
that you are unable to govern the country,
and you tread the Constitution under your
feet. But unless you are recreant to the
spirit infused into this country by the
great men who went before us when they
demanded these rights for us—unless you
are recreant to that spirit and forgetful of
all your highest obligations, you will never
surrender the control over the revenues
of our public territory. And to whom
do you talk of surrendering it 1 To some
non-political body. Why, if there is one
thing which is political, which is saturated
with political science, it is the disposal of
the territories of the people. There is
nothing else that approaches it in import-
ance. But you propose to hand over your
highest control to whom 1 One gentleman
said the Chief Justice. If the Minister
cannot decide, how can the Chief Justice
decide 1 If the Minister is too much occu-
pied with other concerns, is not the Chief
J ustice too much occupied with other con-
cerns 1 If the Minister has no personal
knowledge, what personal knowledge has
the Chief Justice 1 I take the highest
type of man who is to compose this court.
But some of you say that you would refer
it to a District Court judge. Suppose you
refer it to four, five, or six men, be they
whoever they may, how can you be sure,
what possible guarantee have you, that if
mistakes are made now mistakes will not
be made then? How can you be sure,
what guarantee have you, if improper in-
fluences are brought to bear now —which
no one has charged—improper influences


would not be brought to bear then 1 There
is no tribunal which you can construct
that will be safer, have more practical
knowledge, more ability to determine ques-
tions, than the Minister, who is not the
individual Minister, but the representa-
tive of the Government of the country.
The mistake which has been made all
through is talking of the Minister as
an individual. “ This is too much power
to intrust to one man” ! “ I would
not intrust my own brother with such
power.” “ How can we be safe if one
man has this enormous power,” and so on.
It is not the Minister. He, as every min-
ister must, acts for and represents the
Government, which is your creation, and
is put in the highest authority as repre-
senting the people. Who else should deal
with the people’s lands 1 But hon. mem-
bers, forsooth, would hand over this highest
right, this highest privilege, to some body
created by themselves. If then you are
prepared to do that, vacate your seats,
close the doors, and confess your impo-
tence —that you are unfitted to manage
the affairs of the country. Would you
treat this great question of the manage-
ment of the lands in an exceptional way 1
What a predicament you land yourselves
in then—that though you may debate for
hours and settle a matter affecting diseases
in vines, or the width of the Post Office-
street, you are quite unequal and cannot
trust yourselves to perform a duty which is
the highest and the most sacred, and one
which you cannot delegate to another
without betraying your public trust. Ido
not think a rag of argument can be adduced
in favour of putting this question, un-
equalled in its magnitude —the manage-
ment of public lands—into the hands of
any power whatever, which is appointed
and employed by you. That duty devolves
upon the Government which you create,
which you sustain, which, through you,
reflects the breath of the people of this
country. The land has been won for the
free people of New South Wales, and no
power on earth has a right to intervene to
decide in the last resort what shall be ob-
tained from the occupation of these lands,
as superior to the Government which repre-
sents the people. I have heard used glibly
enough in this discussion the words, “ You
must grant a right of appeal, as you
do in all other cases.” If the hon. mem-
ber for Wentworth (Mr. J. P. Abbott)
were here, I would challenge him as a
lawyer, to point out in the whole body of
British law, in the whole system of British
jurisprudence, a right of appeal such as
hon. members in their blindness seek to
establish. Who ever heard of the right of
appeal between the landlord and his
tenant in framing an original contract ]
Who ever heard of any appeal in British
law from the landlord who owns the pro-
perty, and who is trying to make a con-
tract with his tenant 1 ? The right of ap-
peal comes in in any transaction where
there is a complaint that the contract has
been violated. But there is no possibility
of any right of appeal from the owner of
land in asking what rent he chooses, and
in laying down what conditions he likes
with his tenant. The Government of this
country, called into existence by the efforts
of the great men who went before us,
is the landlord of the territory, and there
is no more ground for a right of ap-
peal in the first contract between the
Government and the persons who choose
to buy or to lease the public lands,
than there is in a private case between
the landlord and tenant. The right of
appeal, as it is known to English law,
comes in, as I have said, afterwards,
when there is some breach of contract in
the course of the fulfilment of the transac-
tion entered into. But I lay down this
doctrine, which cannot be set aside —that
when the lands of this country were handed
over to the people of this country, they
were to be under the absolute and exclu-
sive control of the local legislature, which
legislature must of necessity speak and act
by the Government which represents it.
Hence, then, as I think I have shown
clearly enough, the power which ought to
have the first and the last word in respect
to these lands, is the Government; and the
Minister represents the Government. If
it is desired to make it more plain, let
there be some amendment that his de-
cisions, where he alters the rent of the
squatters or of any one else, shall be
confirmed by the Government. There
can be no mistake about the Minister
not acting in an individual capacity.
In the Department of Lands he represents
the whole Government. I am sorry to say
that there has been too palpably apparent
an advocacy of class interest on this ques-


tion. The land belongs to the people—
not to the free selectors or to the squat-
ters, but to the peoj le of this country, and
we have only to legislate in view of the in-
terests of this people. It often occurs to
me that if these gentlemen who so largely
occupy the territoryin thewestern division,
we will say, at such an insignificant rent,
were to throw up their holdings to-morrow,
and were to leave the country altogether,
the country would be all the better for it.
Mr. Dibbs : No, no !
Mr. Garrett : We get nothing from
them !
Sir HENRY PARKES ; The hon.
gentleman is a great economist. I will put
a case —and there are a number of them
in the list before me. There is a gentle-
man residing in Melbourne. He takes
200.000 acres of our land, for which he
pays |d. per acre, and even then complains
of the excessive character of the rent. He
makes the whole of his financial arrange-
ments in Melbourne. He sends his wool
to Melbourne. He buys his stores in
Melbourne, and he lives in Melbourne. As
far as this country is concerned in its
commercial operations, and in its in-
dustrial progress, there might just as
well be a blackfellow living upon these
200.000 acres. The lessee is of no com-
mercial value to this country. He is not
a citizen of this country. He consumes
nothing from our markets, and he sends
nothing to them. He will not even con-
descend to live in the country. What is
the value of such a man as that to this
country 1 Would it not be infinitely bet-
ter to have any number of small occupiers
that could be sustained in his place—occu-
piers who would make homes among us,
and who, by their own practical industry,
would turn the land to the best account—
who would constantly live upon the land
and trade with us—buy from us and sell
to us, and to all intents and purposes
be citizens of this country 1 I say —and I
say it in the most deliberate way possible
—that if men of the kind I have spoken
of were to be good enough to throw up
their holdings and leave the country for
ever, the country would gain an enormous
advantage by their departure. We could
dispose of the territory infinitely better if
we had a clean sheet. We could get a
much better class of persons; we could
turn the land to much better account for
the good of society, and we could bring a
much larger revenue into the public trea-
sury. lam not going to say that I would
be a party to expelling these persons ; I am
perfectly willing to treat them liberally;
but I am not willing to give them a land
court which is to give a final decision, and
where they can go and work the oracle to
their own advantage. If the Minister can-
not be trusted, no land court you can con-
struct could be trusted. If mistakes occur
now, infinitely more mistakes would occur
then. If the Minister can be approached
—and no one has yet dared to say that he
has been approached—certainly the mem-
bers of a land court could be approached.
Then comes another question which I
have heard argued in a kind of way I
hardly understand. It is said, that if the
Minister is to have power, what is the use
of the land boards—why not abolish them,
and save the expense 1 The land boards
are, I confess, of very great use for the
very purpose
Mr. Kelly ; Not a bit!
Sir HENRY PARKES : I have not
the intimate knowledge of the question
which the hon, gentleman possesses ; but
I have common-sense. The boards ought
to be of infinite use in collecting informa-
tion ; and it is vejy proper that they
should estimate what they think would be
a fair rent. They can collect the necessary
information. An administrator, if he is
properly qualified for the duties of adminis-
tration, need not go into the interior to look
at these lands. His duty is to use other
instruments to obtain his information ]
and his duty is to decide, according to a
well-informed understanding, upon each
case in the light of the information so ob-
tained. The land boards are of great use
in leading to a practical estimate of the
real value of the lands j but to say that
what they set upon the land is to be ac-
cepted as a final rent, is again to betray a
most lamentable want of discernment as
to the real duties of the Government and
of this legislature. lam well assured of
this, that it was never dreamt that a time
would ever come when the Government of
this country- —and in the word Government
in this sense I include Parliament —would
propose to give the highest of all duties
—the determination of the value of a
portion of the public estate-—to some body


Seated by' themselves. 1 again fallback have never heard it publicly questioned.
Upon my ground of argument, that if
the Government is created to discharge
political functions, there can be no higher
political function than that which relates
to the public territory of the country.
It was never intended, and is not con-
sistent with the order of things, to dele-
gate this highest power to any body what-
ever inferior to the Government of the
country. I know that in this view I am
in accord with the men who have given
most attention to the study of legisla-
tion on the land question. I know that
most of the persons in this country who
have for years studied the question —not
from a land-jobber’s point of view, but
from the point of view of the law-maker
and the administrator —hold the opinion
Which I hold —that it would be a public
treason to surrender the control of these
lands by the Government of the country.
Hon. members will see that, from my point
of view, trying to trace the existence of
oUr rights from the very fountain from
whence they flow, the Government of the
country—which lives by your breath, and
through you by the breath of the people—-
that that Government, and no other body
•whatever, is the proper power to have the
ultimate disposal of the public estate; that
to delegate this power to a District Court
judge, or a Supreme Court judge, or the
Chief Justice himself, or to all these judges
combined, is to do a thing which you can-
not do without betraying your trust and
forgetting your duty to the people who
sent you here ; and, if you could do it,
you would delegate it to an authority that
Would not be so competent as the authority
which hitherto has had this power in the
last resort. Now, who have been the land
ministers of this country 1 We have had
Sir Jobn Robertson; we have had William
Forster ; we have had John Bowie Wilson ;
we have had James Hoskins; we have
had James Squire Farnell; we have had
Thomas Garrett, and Henry Copeland—
I overlook those who held the office for
ohly a month or so. I do not believe
that, notwithstanding our proneness to
indulge in accusations which often prove
unjustifiable, it all the indulgence of
abuse which has occurred in this coun-
try, in the random things that have been
said, any man seriously suspects the in-
tegrity \of any one of those ministers. I
They have had as much intelligence, a far
greater acquaintance with the country, and
better opportunities than any other gentle-
men whom you could select to constitute
the land court; and if by any lamentable
misjudgment of duty this land court should
ever be created, I venture to predict that
long before it has had the season of trial
which the ministers have had one after
another—long before that day the air will
be thick with accusations and suspicions
against this new body. But that I conceive
to be much below the line of argument
which I assume. This is my argument,
that we have obtained these lands for the
people of this country to be under the sole
and exclusive control of the constituted
Government of the country, and that we
cannot part with this highest function
of fixing the price or rent to be paid to
the people—this highest obligation, unless
we are prepared to surrender all the privi-
leges, all the powers, and all the rights of
self-government. It will be noticed that
I have not made any special reference to
the arguments of hon. members ; but I
could not but be struck by the partisan
bias, the class instincts which pervaded and
characterised the speech of the hon. mem-
ber for Bourke, Mr. Waddell, from begin-
ning to end. Tire hon. gentleman reasoned
on this question as if the only persons
to be considered were the persons occu-
pying these public lands. Who is to
be considered are the million people of this
country and their descendants, and we
ought to shut our eyes to the exigencies
of any particular individual or any class
of individuals. With regard to the justice
of the course taken by my hon. .colleague,
no man in his senses who reads the list of
rents which he has fixed, can, for a moment
—with any regard to justice to the people
of New South Wales—contend that they
are unreasonably high in any single case.
They may be unequal; but they are un-
equal because they are unreasonably low
in many cases. If the minimum was as
high as the maximum rent, still justice
would be done, as between the landlord
and the tenants of this country ; and as
to their being able to pay their rents, I
assume that if they were not, they would
throw up the lands. But we know, on
the contrary, that many of these gentle-
men have come over the borders from


the other colonies without any means value at the hands of the state and if they
whatever ; and, in the course of a few
years, they have made large fortunes—
not indeed by any individual industry,
but in too many cases by a lucky chance,
or a series of lucky chances—by obtain-
ing land favourably situated, land of excep-
tionally productive power, and by other
favourable circumstances. And there is
no reason to doubt —it is impossible to
doubt—that this occupation of the public
lands for the growth of wool has been in
this country one of those pursuits by
which fortunes have been most rapidly
acquired, and acquired by means which
almost elude the power of calculation.
Men with nothing at all have been able
to retire in a very few years with princely
fortunes, either to live at St. Kilda or
Toorak, or at Bayswater on the other side
of the globe, I know several men who
have so retired and never ventured back
into these colonies at all.
Mr. Vaughn : Where one would make
a fortune forty would be ruined !
Mr. Garrett : No man has ever yet
been ruined on the public lands of this
colony !
Sir HENRY PARKES: As far as
that is concerned, I remember very well a
gentleman who had a seat in the first As-
sembly who held runs between the Mur-
ray and the Murrumbidgee, extending to
the town of Heniliquin and round about
it, of such a princely extent that they
were afterwards cut up into five or six
runs, and held by gentlemen from Mel-
bourne. The gentleman who owned this
enormous extent of territory in 1855-6
was ruined, and the men who held the land
afterwards, in five or six different squat-
tages, all made fortunes. So that there
must be something in the ruin or fortune-
making of these gentlemen beyond the
mere natural advantages of their proper-
ties—something appertaining essentially to
management. But all this is beside my
argument. I allude to it because it has
been referred to by others, and I allude
to it for the mere purpose of asserting
the right of this Government and this
colony to its territory. We are not in
a position to bow down to any class, be
they squatters, or be they selectors. We
are in no way under any obligation to
them. For every penny of revenue we
have had from them they have had ample
arc not content with that condition, we
should forget our own interests in seeking
to detain them here amongst us. Though
I say that, I am not in any degree pre-
pared to join in an attempt to impose
harsh terms upon any class of persons oc-
cupying the public territory of this coun-
try, and I of course subscribe to the doc-
trine, as others do, that the man who
turns the soil to the best account is the
greatest benefactor to the country, let him
be who he may. But I merely want to meet
the charges which are so randomly, and I
venture to say, so impudently made, times
out of number, of the harsh treatment ex-
tended to these pastoral tenants and to
others. I merely want to say, in reply to
that that they have been treated most con-
siderately ; that they have had more than
value for every penny they have paid to
this country, and that a large number of
them are, as citizens, of no value to the
country whatever. Of what value can
such a man be as I have depicted just now,
who merely occupies enormous tracts of
this country at a fabulously low rent, and
who never comes amongst us; never trades
with us, never buys from us, never sells to
us; but conducts all his transactions in
another country 1
Mr. Haynes : And uses the railways
on the differential system !
Sir HENRY PARKES: No doubt.
In this respect, though, that is hardly
pertinent to my subject, I would point
out the exceptional advantages which the
sister colony of Victoria has derived from
us throughout the last generation, to say
the least. Throughout the last generation
influential citizens of Victoria, who had
the power of controlling financial institu-
tions, and obtaining money almost in
unlimited amounts, got possession of
large tracts of our territory; but every-
thing they did, which was of value in
adding to the prosperity of a commu-
nity, was carried to the sister colony.
We have had no corresponding class of
persons here. Ido not believe that you
will find ten persons residing in Sydney
who have property in Victoria or Queens-
land held in the same manner as I have
indicated these gentlemen in Victoria hold
large stakes in this colony. "Victoria has
really been sucking the blood out of this
country to a large extent—really been


living on this country. Her colonists owned as a whole, of the Governor-in-Council if
the best and fattest of our lands at nominal
prices ; they are discharging none of the
dutiesof citizens; they do not even establish
a home amongst us, but spend all they make
from the occupation of our land in Vic-
toria, London, or Paris. We in no way
derive a benefit from Queensland or Vic-
toria, or South Australia, in the same
way as Victoria derives benefit from us.
It will be seen now that the Government
must maintain, as a sacred obligation im-
posed upon them, the authority of the Go-
vernment over the lands of the people of
this country. We are willing to accept
any amendment to make that authority
more expansive, and at the same time
more definite —to make the decision of the
Minister the decision of the Government
you will. We are willing to consent to
any amendment to guard this decision from
any individual bias of the individual minis-
ter. We maintain that he represents the
Government under the Constitution ; but
to make it appear beyond all doubt,
we are willing to have his position better
defined, and that in all cases where he
alters the estimate of rent arrived at by
either a land board or a land court, whe-
ther by reduction or increase, this decision
should have no effect whatever until con-
firmed by the highest authority in the
land, the Government as a whole ; but we
maintain that this power must be held by
the Government, and that it cannot be
surrendered without betraying their high-
est trust.
Sydney: Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBBB.




REFLECTIONS ON THE GOVERNMENT
SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
THE HON. SIR HENRY PARKES, K.C.M.G..
IN THE
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY,
IN REPLY TO AN ATTACK BY MR. MCELHONE, M.P.
FOR THE UPPER HUNTER,
ON THE
18 OCTOBER, 1887.
SYDNEY: CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




Sir HENRY PARKES : Any one who
occupies personally the position which I
do to-day is open to he assailed by the
meanest person in the community ; and I
have found out very acutely that that is
my position. The hon. member who has
just sat down has made a wild, inconclu-
sive speech, saying at one time that he did
not believe I could be guilty of some
charges which he has reproduced here, and
at another that he did believe I had been
guilty of worse things; telling us at an-
other time that he would not give a vote
to displace me from office, whereas if I
had been guilty, or on fair and reasonable
grounds could be supposed capable of
being guilty of any one of these charges,
it would be his duty and the duty of
every other man to endeavour to displace
me from my position. If the hon. gentle-
man thinks he is a judge of honor, he has
sadly mistaken his own character. Does
honor consist even in paying 20s. in the
£ 1 Are there not procuresses of innocent
women for the basest purposes who pay
20s. in the £ 1 Are there not men who
are guilty of the vilest crimes under heaven
who pay 20s. in the £ 1 If property is
sacred, is not truth sacred 1 If misfortune
comes upon a man, is that the time to
misrepresent his acts 1 Not one single
statement has the hon. member made re-
lating to me which he has taken the
trouble to make correctly. Even the
amount of my indebtedness he continually
overstated by many thousands of pounds.
Then he said, as if his word proved any-
thing, that I was indebted to my hon.
friend, the Postmaster-General, £2,500,
and that I was guilty of concealing this in
the statement which I have made of my
affairs. I never owed Mr. Roberts £2,500;
I never owed Mr. Roberts £2,000; I
never owed Mr. Roberts £1,500 ; I never
owed Mr. Roberts £1,000; I never owed
him £5OO ; I never owed him a single
penny above the sum I have stated.
There he sits. He is a man of honor,
whose word will be accepted anywhere;
and he will say that I never was in his
debt to the extent of a penny beyond the
sum stated before the world.
Mr. C. J. Roberts : Hear, hear; that
is perfectly correct !
REFLECTIONS ON THE GOVERNMENT.
Sir HENRY PARKES : Then there
is the statement about my honored friend,
Mr. Sutherland. I have taken him into
this Government, forsooth, because he was
a judgment creditor of mine, because he
had the power to put me into the Insol-
vency Court; and, at the same time, the
hon. member for The Upper Hunter tells
the House that eight or ten years ago—l
do not think it is so far back ; about eight
years ago—l declined to take my hon.
friend into my Government. I was in the
same relation to him then when I declined,
and, if I acted from this base motive now,
how was it that I excluded him from my
Government before 1 ? Unfortunately for
him and for me our transactions have been
going on for some twelve or fourteen
years, and we have been both heavy suf-
ferers. It is not a case of money being
advanced to me ; but it is a case of a
joint speculation in some mineral property
in this country by which we have both
been sufferers, and the hon. member will
tell any one, if any one cares to know,
that at the very time when I took him
into the Government I had paid the
greater part of this particular debt,
Mr. Sutherland : Hear, hear !
Sir HENRY PARKES : Only a small
balance was left, and I was endeavouring
to pay it to the utmost of my power. A
question arises in relation to this trans-
action which I shall face at once. Have
things come to this—that if I or any other
man have relations with another man, is
that circumstance to prevent me enlisting
his services in the service of the country ?
A pretty state of things that would be.
If, for example, I have a friend who is
eminently qualified, in my judgment, to
serve the country, who happens to have
had transactions with me, to whom I may
be in debt, or who may possibly be in
debt to me, is that to weigh with me, and
on that account alone am I to exclude him
from the honorable service of the country 1 ?
I repudiate such a cowardly, such an un-
worthy doctrine as that, which can spring
only from a disordered and dishonest mind.
The same applies to appointments to the
Upper House. I think that in a con-
spicuous manner I have exercised my
power as adviser of the Crowp. in impar-


tial appointments to the Upper House. I fills the office of Minister of Justice, and
have times out of number advised the
appointment of men who were directly
opposed to me ; I have considered that
the Ministry stood to a large extent as the
constituency of the country in these ap-
pointments. I have never for a moment
considered that these appointments should
be made a party question, and in every
batch of appointments for which I am
responsible there have been men repre-
senting different shades of opinion; but
while I hold that doctrine, am I to
exclude the appointment of a worthy man
merely because he has had some monetary
transactions with me 1 If he is appointed,
is the infamous conclusion to be drawn
that he has been appointed for a mone-
tary consideration 1 Wby, this in a commu-
nity like ours would destroy all honorable
relations between men; we could not
exist, because there is scarcely any person
of conspicuous ability who would not be
excluded if such considerations as these
prevailed. There are obvious reasons why
I selected the gentlemen who form the
present Government. Everyone of them
had been sitting side by side with me in
the late Opposition to the Government
which had retired ; others, too, had been
sitting side by side with them, but I
could not take all the persons who
appeared to me to be eligible. I took
those who I thought would fairly repre-
sent the country, and who I thought had
the fairest claim on my consideration.
With regard to my hon. friend, the Post-
master-General, I say here that, as far as
I am of any value as a judge of official
aptitude, I have never seen a more
industrious, a more painstaking, a more
upright administrator in my life than Mr.
Roberts. In his place here he is always
courteous, uniformly attentive to all that
is said, and if he has occasion to explain
anything he has the great and special
merit of saying it in the clearest possible
terms and the fewest words. Surely these
are great merits, and I think that the
appointment of my hon. friend to the
important office of Postmaster-General has
been fully and conclusively justified before
the country. With regard to my hon.
colleague, the Minister of Justice, what
man questions his ability 1 There are
few men in Parliament who have stronger
natural ability than the hon. member who
he has performed his duties in a manner
which I believe, upon the whole, has
given satisfaction to the House and the
country. His relations to me in my un-
fortunate pecuniary operations are very
trifling. He offered to give his assistance
to my endeavours to dispose of a very
valuableproperty—aproperty, which every-
body will admit, is a very valuable one,
and which, in my judgment, is one of the
most valuable properties within the same
distance of the thick of the city of Sydney.
He offered to give his assistance, and a
certain sum of money was raised; he
contributed a sum of £2OO, other gentle-
men contributing £2OO each, in view of
the formation of a syndicate to purchase
the whole property. These amounts were
secured in the ordinary business way on
the property.
Mr. McElhone : Untrue !
Sir HENRY PARKES : It is per-
fectly true. The amount of my liability
to him is what has been returned in the
statement which I submitted to my friends.
The lion, member for The Upper Hunter
says that I went to Orange and called him
an infamous person.
Mr. McElhone : The hon. member
said that I made infamous charges !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I am not
going to shirk what I said. I think that
I declined to mention the hon. member’s
name. What I said was that if my hon.
colleague had done the things of which he
had been accused he was an infamous per-
son, but if it turned out that he had not
done them the person who made the base-
less charge was still more infamous. I say it
now. But the hon. member goes on to
say
Mr. Melville : Sir, I should like to
ask you whether it is in order for an hon.
member to deliberately cross the floor of
the House and cheer from the Opposition
benches, to create the impression that the
hon. member addressing the House is
being cheered by the Opposition ?
Mr. Speaker : The Chair has no control
as to where hon. members may sit.
Sir HENRY PARKES : The hon.
member for The Upper Hunter says that
I must go to the courts of law to defend
myself against charges such as he has read
to the House.


Mr. McElhone : You did it in the
Webb case !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I decline to
try the thing again. Everybody knows
that truth and justice were on my side
then ; every one knows that the infamous
libel against me was entirely unfounded ;
but so long as one man in a jury of twelve
stands out in a case of that sort I have
discovered that it is impossible to obtain
justice. But what would be the use?
How can I suffer from such wild state-
ments as the hon. member has made?
What good could arise from trying to de-
fend myself against them ?
Destroy the fib, or sophistry—in vain,
The creature’s at his dirty work again.
Pope wrote this 100 years ago; and that
is what is ever at work throughout the
ages. I can stand even now in my
unfortunate position and decline the sym-
pathy of any opponent. I can stand even
now and say that under the pressure of the
circumstances in which I found myself I
took the only honest course open to me;
I gave up everything, to the last farthing.
I could do nothing more, and if I had
struggled on, I should have had less to
give up. I did the most honest thing I
possibly could under the circumstances in
which I was placed. I acted on the ad-
vice of men as upright, as independent,
and as well qualified to judge as any in
the entire length and breadth of New
South Wales. I expressed no opinions of
my own, but was guided entirely by them.
As to my reaping benefits from the
opinions which I have held, I am now
standing before the world not worth a
a single shilling. I have been in this
great office more than ten years; I have
served the country a lifetime; I have
sacrificed my health more than once in
what I believed was the good of the
country ; and am I to be libelled by being
told by lawless men that I have sold my
services, when my conscience tells me
that I never derived the value of a single
farthing for anything I ever did ? But
there are, I admit, higher considerations
attached to my position. I should make
the matter very easy if I stood in an
ordinary situation. If I were a member
of the Administration simply, I should
resign ; but I cannot resign without doing
what I believe would be a great injustice
to the country; I cannot resign without
throwing confusion upon the great and
influential party who have brought me
into power. If I consulted my own feel-
ings, a breadless home would be sweeter
to me than facing the evil passions of
people who give no quarter when they
have a paltry object to serve. I know all
that well; but come what will, I think
that the fairest thing to me is to submit
some motion by which it can be tested
Avhether or not it is the will of Parliament
that I should remain here. Gladly should
I retire, even if a respectable minority
were to approve of my retirement. I
have never clung to office ; I value the
emoluments of office no more than I
value the despatch-box on the table. I
could give them up at this moment with
an easy conscience and an easy mind. But
I do value being able to carry out my
own opinions if I am placed in a position
of this kind ; and in justice to me, in jus-
tice to the House, in justice to the coun-
try, some definite decision should be
arrived at. Either say that lam entitled
to remain here, or say by the smallest
possible significant intimation of your will
that I ought to retire, and I shall obey
the will of Parliament gladly; obey it to-
day ; but do not make wretched motions
of this kind, and exaggerate my faults,
exaggerate the facts of my position
Mr. Speaker : It is my duty to call
attention to the fact that the hon. gentle-
man’s time has expired.
Hon. Members : Go on; go on ! ’
Mr. McEluone : I hope the House
will give the Premier every latitude !
Mr. Speaker : I am simply performing
my duty.
Hon. Members : Go on !
Sir HENRY PARKES: I have little
more to say ; but it enables me to state,
with greater calmness, that I am very sen-
sible of the assailable position in which I
stand. I do not complain of the hon.
member making his assaults upon me ;
but I think I have a right to complain of
his utterly evil suspicions against me,
which neither he, nor any man, nor all the
men in the world, can prove> I know that
I never took any man into office for any
such infamous considerations as are attri-
buted to me. There are men all round me
who know that I am the last man in this
community, whether I am in this position
or any other, who will be intimidated


from taking my course, or induced to take here to be the mere butt of calumny, mis-
it, for any considerations of that kind. I
believe that at the time of the formation
of this Government, taking the gentle-
men as a whole, that I formed the best
administration that was possible to me. I
might have found as good, I admit. I
might have left out one or two of these
gentlemen, and taken in one or two others,
who had equal claims upon me ; but I had
no better choice than the choice I made ;
and surely I ought not to be blamed by
any person who desires to conduct Govern-
ment on party lines for taking my col-
leagues from the ranks where I had been
sitting for many months past. With
regard to the other of my colleagues,
I have known my hon. friend the Treasurer
for a quarter of a century. I never had
any transactions with him in my life. I
never asked a favour of him, nor did he of
me, and the same may be said of several
other of my colleagues. And because
some others of them were connected with
me in the way I have truthfully described,
am I to have the vilest suspicions propa-
gated as to my honesty of purpose when
I have given time after time such abundant
evidence of my integrity in this respect?
One thing I am entitled to receive. I am
entitled to receive some definite opinion
from this House, or I am entitled to be
allowed to proceed and conduct the busi-
ness of the country in the ordinary way.
I want no favour; I want no special con-
sideration ; I want no sympatlay. I do
not seek to ward off any man’s attacks. I
have told you plainly that I would not be
here if I were simply a minister of the
Crown. I have told you plainly that I
cannot reconcile it to my sense of duty to
take the rash step of breaking up the
present Administration which, in my judg-
ment, has the confidence of Parliament
still, has the confidence of the country still,
and is capable of rendering great services to
this country. As to me, it matters little.
I am poor ; I am old ; I stand, as it were,
in the light of the grave. I use the words
advisedly, that I would rather die to-night
than live till to-morrow, if I could choose
such an event in my life. Nothing is
more attractive to me than the repose of
the grave, and it cannot be far off. Being
in this position, knowing how I stand,
how soon I must quit this active arena,
how can I particularly wish to remain
representation, and abuse ? I should pre-
fer quiet and peace ; but while I am here
I shall fight to the last. I shall allow no
consideration arising out of my personal
fortunes to temper my criticism or curb
my courage. If stung I shall strike; if I
am treated with forbearance I shall try to
study forbearance. lam anxious to do
my duty to the House and to the country.
I cannot forfeit my own respect, and I
know when I maintain that I shall main-
tain the respect of all good men of all
parties. To me what can it matter ? Let
me be as I am. Let my fortunes sink as
low as possible. Let my fate be amongst
the most obscure and the most wretched.
What does it matter to me ? But I re-
present here a great and living principle—
a principle which is making this colony
the leader of the Australian colonies. I
honestly believe I represent that principle.
I have a right to that belief. I shall act
in accordance with it to the best of my
ability, and the cause I have espoused I
will defend while I am here with my best
efforts, with my latest breath ; and 1 shall
not allow myself to be restrained by any
considerations of an inferior character. I
say put me out of office if you can. I will
give you great odds in doing so. Get a
minority of the House, get fifty members
out of the 124 to say that I am unworthy
of holding this office, and though all the
others vote for me I shall leave it at once.
Mr. See : You would not get ten to vote
for it!
Sir HENRY PARKES : I want no
favour. I must repeat that 1 want no
sympathy. No one can think of me in a
worse light than I think of myself, so far
as these transactions are concerned. But
Ido want some clear decision, I want to
have either a clear intimation that I am
justified in retaining my office, or I want
a clear intimation that I ought to retire
from it—whichever you like. But as far
as I am concerned, do not consider me.
Do not for a single moment take my cir-
cumstances into account; but if you think
that the honor of the institutions of the
country, the honor of Parliament, the use-
fulness of this House in performing its
duties, as part of the Pai’liament of the
country, will be best secured by displacing
me, only give me a reasonable intimation


that that ought to be done, and I will
meet you a little more than half-way, and
make way for some one else. I think that
the attack made upon me has been a most
unfair one. Ido not think it was made
in such a spirit as I had a right to expect,
even from the hon. member for The Upper
Hunter. • I cannot but think it cannot do
me any evil ; it can do no one else any
good ; it cannot promote good government
or the good order of our proceedings.
But another course might have been taken
which would have attained those objects.
Some definite motion could have been made
expressing what are the opinions of those
opposed to me, and if that motion were made
I would give it the fullest consideration,
even if it were not earried. I have to
apologise for accepting the indulgence of
the House, and trespassing over the time
allotted to me. Ido not think lam justi-
fied in detaining the House any further.
I have nothing particular to reply to, ex-
cept to say again that I am not conscious
of having done any of the things attributed
to me. What is more, I know I have not
done them. I know I have not taken the
Minister of Justice as my colleague be-
cause I owed £2OO to him, I know I
have not taken the Secretary for Mines as
my colleague because I owed £2OO to him.
I know I have not taken the Secretary for
Public Works into this Government be-
cause of the old remnant of the debt aris-
ing out of our unfortunate mining specu-
lation.
Mr. McElhone : It was the verdict in
the Supreme Court that I referred to !
Sir HENRY PARKES : It does not
matter what the hon. member referred to.
If he had been at the trouble of ascertain-
ing the truth, he would have found that
the judgment had never been attempted to
Sydney; Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lBB7.
be put into force. I had paid the greater
part of the money, and a very small
balance was due at that time. I can state,
at all events, that I never thought of the
circumstance when forming the present
Government. I think if the hon. mem-
ber for The Upper Hunter had been good
enough, or mischievous enough, to contri-
bute towards my election expenses at St.
Leonards, he might have kept that to him-
self. I am perfectly sure I never asked him.
Mr. McElhone : I simply did so be-
cause I wished to see you back in power !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I have only
to say that I certainly never asked the
hon. member.
Mr. McElhone : Hear, hear !
Sir HENRY PARKES : I never knew
that he did so, except in the same way as
I know his good qualities at all times—
because he tells us about them himself.
I have one word to say in conclusion :
that I am not in any way particularly
anxious to remain a member of the Go-
vernment or a member of the House,
except I can hold a seat in either place
with honor. If that cannot be so, I would
rather leave both places to-morrow ; and
if any hon. gentlemen who are opposed to
me in this House, or any other hon. gen-
tlemen who have been pleased to give me
their support so long—if, in the one case,
they think the time has come when, at all
hazards, they should try to displace me,
and if, in the other case, they think, the
time has come when they are not justified
in still reposing confidence in me—all I
can say is, let them testify that in some
way which is intelligible to me and the
country; and never fear but that I shall
know how to act upon it.
Throughout his speech the hon. member
was loudly cheered.






