

DELIVERED BY
HE HONORABLE I. A. ISAACS, M.P.,
AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL,
ACTING PREMIER AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL,
ON INTRODUCING
HE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA BILL 1897




THE MEANING OF FEDERATION
EQUAL REPRESENTATION IN THE
THE DRAFT BILL—ITS FORM
PREAMBLE AND COVERING CLAUSES
THE CONSTITUTION
THE SENATI
THE HOUSE >F REPRESENTATIVES
DISSOLUTION OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
POWERS OF THE PARLIAMENT
TRADE AND COMMERCE
RAILWAYS
MONEY BILLS
THE EXECUTIVE
THE JUDICIARY
FINANCE
Uniform Customs Duties within Two Years
Question of Surplus important
Distribution of Surplus before imposition of Uniform Customs Duties
Distribution of Surplus for Five Years after imposition of Uniform Customs Duties
Provision after such Five Years ...
EQUALITY AND FREEDOM OF INTERCOLONIAL TRADE
PUBLIC DEBTS
THE STATES
NEW STATES
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION
f !t>222


. "i- JAdi ; /O ' <: 1
ZOITIi
.. ... ■ 'LL 7.3: ■'l Ji ■: . 0
_ ■ PI. tih 10 JO: 00t oc ,">• t
’LL. MKLisim mn to
:iOJi j"!/[(o
...
... , ... ... ... L-
£“/sY ' i«lrfdlw 88|}«<I ««itO *9,0 '■
iaai’U qmi i.. v; ■-■
is ■■ avi *i ■ i-;; 5
... ~..m' ev.'T ibira TjJ3>. uolsi
, . . . ' ... .


x h fJ ■ '
/P* SP E
ECU
DELIVERED BY
The HONORABLE I. A. ISAACS, M.P.
ACTING PREMIER AND ATTORNEY-GENERAL,
ON INTRODUCING
THE COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA BILL 1897
For the
1897.
Consideration of the Legislative
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Mr. Mason, I sap- , its "plMl? -ii to alter the
pose no more responsible task ever fell to Cof&tHfrtioii underavTuch/we live, and the
the lot of any member in a House of Par- effect tha£ JOwiHAvoa'kAvhen in operation.
Lament than has devolved upon me in Before doing that, I should like to say
introducing, or rather in endeavouring to that, although, as is well known, I hold
place before honorable members the mean- views, and very distinct views, as to many
ing and general purport of the “ Draft of of the debatable questions in the Bill—
a Bill to constitute the Commonwealth of and those views will be found in the debates
Australia.” In bringing this matter un- of the Convention which honorable mem-
der the notice of the Chamber I would bers have had supplied to them—l do not
like to say, by way of preface, that our intend more than I can possibly help press-
first object ought to be to inquire what is ing those views or attempting to argue
the nature and what are the limits of our upon them at this stage. A later stage
functions at this stage ?In the first place, will occur when I shall endeavour to urge
I presume we may all take it for granted those views, and to support them by such
that this is not the time or the place to arguments as lam able to command. 1
discuss the abstract question of whether should like to reiterate what I stated the
federation is desirable or not, other evening—that the Government do
Mr. Carter. —We have passed that. not approach this matter from anything
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—We have passed like a party stand-point. As a Govern-
that for the present, and we shall have ment we propose no amendments; as in-
another opportunity, as a Parliament, of dividuals, the members of the Government,
considering the Convention Bill in its like all other honorable members of this
finished state. At present we are com- Chamber, are perfectly free to act as they
plying with the requirements of an Act of please. Therefore, every honorable mem-
Parliament, which, as was pointed out the ber will have the facility, absolved from
other night, places upon the shoulders of anything like party allegiance, as well as
this committee, as well as of the committee the full opportunity and responsibility, »f
of another place, the duty of considering acting in this matter as to himself seems
the draft Constitution as it has been right and proper. It is necessary to say
framed by the Federation Convention, and that in order to prevent any misconcep-
also of suggesting any amendments which tion hereafter. Having said this, I
may seem to us right and proper. Now, in shall go at once to the matter with
order to place the committee in the position which we have to deal.
lo’if.ndS'the rXfcnwWch^t I 'beare THE MEANING OF FEDERATION
to us as a people —and as we hope it will, Now, we are considering a question of
when completed, bear to us as part of a still federation, and the first inquiry that
greater people —if is my duty—a pleasing instantly leaps to our lips in approaching
duty, though a responsible one —to endea- the threshold of that matter is this ; What
vour to place before this committee the is a federation ? Unless we are able
salient points of the Bill —to show how in to give a satisfactory answer—satisfactory


of course to ourselves, for each man must
act upon his own opinion—as to what is
the meaning of a federation, it would be
next to impossible to decide properly many
of the questions which will undoubtedly
arise in the course of this discussion, and
also impossible to judge of the merits of
the contentions that must inevitably
spring up. History gives us very many
instances of so-called federations. We
may dismiss from our minds all the
ancient forms ; there was no true federa-
tion, in ancient times, in the sense in
which we desire to create one now. There
are many instances in European history,
as well as in the history of America,
where states separate for a considerable
time have formed some sort of union.
That union may partake of various char-
acters. There is the union formed by con-
solidation, or, as it is called, the unitary
state, where the whole of the state —the
Avhole of the people of the state —are
under one indivisible Government. That
form of state, such as Kussia and France,
is well known. There is another form of
state which we have very carefully to look
at, and that is a confederation. In the
unitary state the units are individuals. In
the confederation the Central Government
knows nothing of the individuals. It
deals only with the states as units, and
each state having linked itself to the rest in
a loose form of connexion for certain collec-
tive purposes, is a member of the confedera-
tion. The general Government looks to
the states, and the states deal with their
own people. It is said—and this is im-
portant when we come to consider the
question of the two Houses of the pro-
posed Federation—that the federal form
is a combination of these two. It
is said that in order to have true federa-
tion we must have two Houses, the one
representing the states and the other the
people. Honorable members will probably,
in the course of this discussion, have to
decide whether that is a correct position
or not. Another view presented is this,
that a true federation is formed by first
determining that certain of the authori-
ties, the powers, the functions, and the
interests of the states can best be
exercised collectively, instead of indi-
vidually and locally. Having decided
that question, provision is made that
the new State—the Federal State—shall
alone exercise those authorities and
powers, perform those functions, and safe-
guard those interests. If the latter is the
correct view to adopt, the states as such
are no portion of the Federation. The
people who form the Federation are the
only units. The idea that permeates that
view is this—Applying it to our own case,
we are at present a number of disintegrated
colonies. Each of these colonies has com-
plete jurisdiction over its own affairs, no
matter whether those affairs concern it
purely locally, or whether they extend
in their operation and effect to other
countries and to other colonies. It is now
thought right and proper—it is universally
conceded in fact—that the time has come
when certain of those powers, such as
Defence, Customs and Excise, Quaran-
tine, and others are no longer of purely
local interest but concern the whole of the
people of Australia, not as citizens of any
particular state but as citizens of Australia.
It is felt that a central authority can best,
for the benefit, present and future, of the
people of Australia, wield those powers,
and exercise those authorities, and that
we should therefore obliterate the lines
of demarcation that separate us as colo-
nies and form ourselves into one great
Australian nation. Now, if that is the
idea it will be seen at once that there is
no room in this conception of a federation
for states as units. You first select the
powers that belong to the people as a
whole, you take cognisance of the inte-
rests that concern them not as citizens of
Victoria, New South Wales, or Tasmania,
but as residents and citizens of Australia;
you say that the individual colonies shall
no longer have power to exercise supre-
macy in these matters, and you confide
them for the future to the federal autho-
rity. You leave to each of the
states (or colonies) the residuum; in
other words, you leave to them all the
powers and rights and authorities which
are local and concern them as individual
states, and you make a clean line of
severance between these and the powers
which the states surrender for the purpose
of confiding them to the larger and nobler
body. Mr. Freeman, in one of his works,
puts this view in very few words, and very
graphically. He says—
“ The state administration within its own
range will be carried on as if there were no such
thing as a union. The federal administration
within its own range will be carried on as freely
as if there were no such thing as a separate
state.”
If that be the correct view, and. Honorable
members will have to consider it, then you
will at once see that it is an entire fallacy


to build up a Federal Constitution on the
idea that states are units.
EQUAL REPRESENTATION IN THE
SENATE.
I know that this goes to the question of
whether there shall be equal representa-
tion. I want to make my mind perfectly
plain to honorable members, and I say I
have no doubt whatever that if we are to
have federation now we must yield equal
representation in the Senate. If we are
to secure the adhesion of the smaller
colonies to the scheme of federation, we
must be prepared to concede that much.
Mr. Bromley.—No.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—Honorable mem-
bers who doubt that will perhaps believe
me when I say that there was nothing
of which I was more convinced at the
Federal Convention than of that fact.
Mr. Deakin. —Hear, hear.
Mr. Bromley,—You will never get it
then.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.,—I do not wish to
be drawn into an argument about the
question at present. 1 am trying to make
this plain, not only in order that honorable
members may have a clear idea at the
outset of the various views as to what
federation really is, but also that as we
proceed we may show to the other colonies
who are watching us, as we are watching
them, what our mind is on this subject.
Those honorable members who have at-
tended to the debates that have taken
place in the other colonies, will have
perceived that it has been claimed
within the last few days in one of
those colonies that it is a fundamental
principle that the states are to be the
units in this Federation, and that as a
necessary corollary to that proposition the
House representing the states must have
co-ordinate powers with the House repre-
senting the people. It is therefore im-
perative upon us to consider this question
fully, not with a view of debating whether
we are going to permit equal representa-
tion to remain in the Constitution or not,
because I think that is inevitable if we
are to have federation at all, but for the
purpose of inquiring whether we are to
admit equal representation as a principle
from which other consequences ought to
flow, or to yield it as a concession without
any necessary train of consequences behind
it. Now, the American Constitution has
been taken to a great extent as the type
of the one that we have before us, and the
American Constitution is, according to the
view tha/t I last presented, not a truly
federal Constitution, not a national Con-
stitution, but a mixed Constitution. One
House, it is said, represents the states
and the other the people. The view
that is maintained by those who urge the
idea of a federal union as I have put it is
that the combination of a House repre-
senting the people and a House represent-
ing the states is not a federal union, but
is a combination of a national principle
and of a confederate principle. Honor-
able members know that before the
federal union was established in America
there was what was known as a Confeder-
acy, and that Confederacy had a Congress.
The name Congress has remained ever
since, and it bears upon the face of it
the notion that it is founded upon a con-
federate principle.
Mr. Rogers. —What about the Con-
gress of Vienna?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—That was scarcely
a federation.
Mr. Rogers. —l am referring to the
word itself.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—In a recent Ameri-
can work —Foster on the Constitution—
honorable members will find how this
equal representation arose. They will
see that before the revolution there was
what was known as the first Continental
Congress. That Congress assembled to try
and obtain the repeal of certain obnoxious
Acts of Parliament, and the first resolu-
tion of that Congress was—
“That in determining questions in Congress
each colony or province shall have one vote,
the Congress not being possessed of, or at
present able to procure, proper material for
ascertaining the importance of each colony. ”
The author says that the larger states were
never able to procure an alteration of this
rule. When the American Constitution
came to be framed we know that there
were two parties in the Philadelphia Con-
vention, the nationalist party and the
confederate party. The one wanted both
Houses to be on the national plan, and the
other wanted both blouses to be on the
confederate plan, and the result was a
compromise. Honorable avill
have to consider to what extght' they dee}
themselves bound in conscience to admit
this as a principle, or whiter
merely to treat it as a concession,- and,hot
necessarily to carry it any further.
Air. Murray Smith. —How can ' you
assure it not being carried any further?


Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—The Constitution
-as finally fixed will say whether it is to be
carried any further or not. Having placed
my observations before honorable mem-
bers on that point, there is only one other
thing I would say before I pass to the
Bill itself, and it is this: We arc fre-
quently told that the American Constitu-
tion has stood the test of a hundred years,
and that what is good enough for America
is good enough for us.
Air. Longmore.—No.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —We are told that.
I am not debating the matter at present,
but I want to draw the attention of hon-
orable members to it. Those who urge
that should, as it seems to me, consider
whether they are not looking merely at
the American Constitution as it was put
down in black and white at the very
moment when it was passed. Are they
not ignoring the circumstances of the
states at that time, and forgetting how
they were forced, by outward pressure and
internal dissension, to agree to things that
their consciences in many instances told
them were wrong ? And are they not also
-overlooking the* fact that instantly when
that Constitution was framed the question
•arose whether the United States were a
nation or a congeries of states, and that
from that time onwards, at all events,
down to the great civil war, a contest was
waged as to whether America had become
■a nation, and that that contest was waged
in Congress, in the courts of law, and in
armed camps? And would it not be well
also to consider whether the various strug-
gles, eventuating at last in the bloodshed
of a million of people, did not require
for their definite settlement the greatest
cataclysm that any country has ever
suffered ? It is impossible to go through
the history of the United States, to read
the debates in their Congress, to read
the reports of the cases in the Supreme
Court, and to dwell upon the American
-civil war without feeling that it is only of
late years that it has really been admitted
that America is one nation.
Air. AlcColl. —We have no slavery here,
mid that makes all the difference.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—Slavery was only
one of the questions at issue, and the
difficulty arose from the framing of the
■Constitution, which opened to ingenious
.argument various views of the question of
whether America was merely bound to-
gether by a compact or was welded into
one great nation.
THE DRAFT BILL.
In framing this Bill an effort was made
to make it as plain upon the face of it
as possible that it was the people of
Australia who were uniting together for
the purposes for which federation was
desired. If honorable members will kindly
turn to the book that has been dis-
tributed, they will see in a convenient
form on page 223 the Bill as now framed,
and also the points of difference between
it and the Bill of 1891. At the very in-
ception of the Constitution there is a dis-
tinct alteration. In 1891 it was set forth
that the Australasian colonies had agreed
to unite. Now it is set forth that the
people of the colonies have agreed to
unite, and that- is a point that I think
cannot be too strongly borne in mind.
There is, honorable members will notice, a
series of clauses which end at clause 8,
and then there is a new series commencing
with clause 1. In order that honorable
members may at the outset understand
what that means, I may state that this is
a Bill which it is intended should be
passed by the Imperial Legislature, and
the first eight clauses ai’e what have been
termed the covering clauses. They intro-
duce the matter, and then follows the
Constitution, and therefore the Constitu-
tion begins with clause 1.
THE PREAMBLE AND COVERING
CLAUSES.
In the preamble we start with the state-
ment that the people of the consenting
colonies have agreed to unite. There is
an omission which has been observed, and
which has been the subject of many peti-
tions to this House. It is an omission
that I hope will be remedied. I, for my
part, cannot understand why there should
be any serious objection to the recogni-
tion in the Constitution of the Supreme
Power. When we reflect that not a
single Governor’s speech is ever delivered
without reference to a Higher Power,
I think we may at once put aside
all controversy as to whether the name
of the Supreme Being should be intro-
duced into a State document. Before
I go further I may say that there are
very many verbal inaccuracies. Ido not
intend to take up the time of the
committee in the discussion of verbal
alterations, because they will be for later
consideration, if we desire to consider
them here at all. I take it that this
Chamber will be concerned, having regard


to the small amount of time, comparatively
speaking, at our disposal, with the con-
sideration of large and great principles,
and will seek to embody those which to it
seem to be good in suggestions to be sent
to the Federal Convention rather than
concern itself with any little finishing
touches, as it would do if it were merely
discussing a measure of its own.
Mr. Higgins.—Will you send them as
resolutions or as amendments to the
clause 1
Mr. 1. A. ISAACS.—Do you mean the
alterations we make?
Mr. Higgins.—Yes.
Mr. Irvine.—That can be decided later
on.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Yes, that is a mat-
ter for future consideration. 1 would like
to keep the mind of the committee rather
to the great questions which concern us
now. The 3rd clause of the Bill provides
that the Queen may declare by proclama-
tion that on a certain day to be named in
the proclamation this Constitution shall
come into effect, and that from that day
there shall be a Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia. Where honorable members find
the states referred to it means such of the
colonies as form a part of the Common-
wealth.
THE CONSTITUTION.
Passing by one or two clauses which
have no present interest for us, we come
to clause 8, which says —“ The Consti-
tution of the Commonwealth shall be
as follows.” Then the Constitution is
divided into various parts. Now, in ar-
ranging for the conduct of federal affairs
there have been provided three organs,
Legislative, Executive, and Judicial; and as
was stated in the Convention, and gene-
rally approved, at all events overtly, our
Constitution is to be based upon the lines
of the British Constitution. That is to
say, we are to endeavour, and I think that
honorable members will agree that this
much is indispensable, to give full and free
play to the principle of responsible govern-
ment. In America, as honorable mem-
bers know, responsible government in our
sense does not exist. In America there is
a legislative body, an executive body,
and a judicial body, but they are all
kept religiously and intentionally apart.
When the great men who framed the
American Constitution set about their work
they had before them the observations of
the great French writer Montesquieu, who,
in dilating on the advantages and the
beauties of the British Constitution, made
a statement which has not stood the test
of time. He misunderstood the British
Constitution, and what he said has been
falsified by results. His statement was in
effect—
“ The great advantages of the British Consti-
tution are that all three authorities —Legisla-
tive, Executive, and Judicial—are independent
of and separate from each other, so that neither
can overbear the rest.”
The Americans grasped at that. They
had suffered from what they believed to
be the tyranny of the mother country,
and the conduct of affairs by the mother
country had been such a lesson to them
that they determined that in future, aa
far as they were concerned, they would
never allow the Executive to overawe the
Legislative, or indeed any component part
of the states to overawe the other part,
and they kept them separate. It is so at
the present day. Neither the Senate nor
the House of Representatives contains a
single Minister of State. The President
is really the head of the Executive, and he
selects his own Cabinet. None of the
members are in Congress,
They there is no
such a vote confidence,
beca ifcq no Kp,ijse or of tho
two TlQAses comHvFnca orfuki affect tho
Mr. HlA^GmhN.—The-F can stop Sup-
plies.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Of course they can
stop Supplies, but, without going minutely
into the various divergencies that exist, I
would say that the principle of responsible
government —as we understand it now, and
as it has grown up since the American
Constitution was framed, under the benefi-
cent elasticity of the British Constitution—
was utterly unknown then, and is utterly
unknown now in America. What we want
to do, and this is a point that I think will
be universally conceded, is to take care
that no such catastrophe occurs here. We
must have responsible government, with
every opportunity for its growth and its
advancement. We desire indeed that it
shall take its natural course, that
natural course being, I presume, the
fullest exercise of national power by tho
people themselves. The Constitution
therefore provides here that there shall be
three great branches of tho Federal Go-
vernment, and the first is the Parliament.
The Parliament is to consist, as in the


British Constitution, of the Queen and the
two Houses. Here it is called the Queen,
the Senate, and the House of Representa-
tives. A Governor-General is to be
appointed over the Commonwealth, and
he is to be Her Majesty’s representative.
His salary is to be £lO,OOO a year, until
Parliament otherwise provides. And I
think a salutary principle has been intro-
duced by providing that the salary of the
Governor-General shall not be altered
during his continuance in office.
Mr. Longmore.— Shall not be in-
creased, you mean.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Neither increased
nor lowered. Then there are some clauses
which are familiar to honorable members,
as to holding the session and so on, and
which I pass over.
THE SENATE.
We come to clause 9, and on clause 9
many difficult and serious questions arise.
That clause deals with the question of
the Senate, and the first sub-section is
distinct that—
“ The Senate shall be composed of six sena-
tors for each state, and each senator shall have
one vote.”
The provision that there shall be six
senators for each state is, of course, the
embodiment of the principle of equal
representation. The provision that each
senator shall have one vote is, no doubt—
as will occur to honorable members’ minds
—a departure from that principle, because
it is not a provision that each state shall
vote solidly in the Senate, but it is that
each senator may vote as he pleases.
And, therefore, the vote of a state may be
neutralized by the votes of its representa-
tives. Now, the principle of equal repre-
sentation, it is said I am stating
this now for the information of honorable
members—has worked well in America. The
object for which it was introduced, it is
said by many, was to guard the smaller
states against the greater ones. That
notion, 1 believe I am correct in saying,
is not now entertained by Americans.
When I say that, I mean to say that the
notion that equal representation is neces-
sary for the protection of the smaller
states is not now entertained by Ameri-
cans. And I shall direct the attention of
honorable members to various modern re-
ferences which 1 think will show them that
such is the case. Honorable members who
desire to pursue the subject and to learn
how the question of equal representation
operates, and how it has been regarded
in America, and how it is gradually fading
away as a principle to be held to in that
country, may trace the whole matter in
two or three references which I will give
them. The first one is Foster’s work,
which I have referred to before. In that
work Mr. Foster—-and I may say at once
that he expresses his highest opinion of
the Senate—states that he believes it
holds a high position in the favour of the
American people,and, with impartiality, he
quotes the contrary view of Mr. Bryce.
He points out on page 494 and following
pages that, when the American Constitu-
tion was first inaugurated and carried, and
for some little time on, the senators of
the states owed their allegiance, as they
thought, to the state itself, and not to the
Federation; and one of them, Senator
Tazewell, of Virginia, declined President
Jackson’s offer of a place in the Cabinet,
and said—
“ Having been elected a senator, I would as
soon think of taking a place under George IV,
if I was sent as Minister to his Court, as I
would to take a place in the Cabinet. ”
Other instances are given, showing the
provincial spirit which pervaded the minds
of the senators ; and the author says—
‘ ‘ These doctrines are now abandoned. The
senators consider themselves as members of an
ordinary legislative body. They pay no more
attention to the instructions of state Legis-
latures than do members of the House, and, in
fact, since their terms are longer, they are more
inclined to disobey them. ”
In an article in the Century Magazine ,
published in America, the issue for March,
1893, this passage occurs in an editorial—
“In practice this equal representation has, in
notable instances, worked against the public
good. It was a powerful barrier for many
years against the anti-slavery agitation, helping
the Southern states to maintain their institution
many years longer than would otherwise have
been possible. In more recent times it has
enabled the new states of the north-west to
commit the Senate to the most dangerous forms
of free silver coinage legislation. ”
And in the next number, volume 24, page
156, a gentleman, writing a letter, and
referring to that passage, says—
“ Let me add my belief that the subject is
one of much importance, and is intimately con-
nected with the future welfare of the nation.”
Mr. Carter. —That is only the opinion
of one man, and we do not know who he is.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —I am citing it to
show that the principle is not accepted
without comment, and even without doubt,
in America at the present time.


Mr. Longmorb. —lt is not accepted in
America at all.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Sir Henry Maine,
in writing on this subject, makes an obser-
vation that may be well worth the con-
sideration of honorable members. In his
Popular Government , page 186, he states
that—
“The Senate of the United States is in
strictness no more a democratic institution
than the House of Lords.”
And, a little later on, that—
“It is founded on inequality of representa-
tion, not on equality.”
On page 227, he states that—
“Rhode Island, Delaware, and Maryland
have the same representation in the Senate as
the great and populous states of New York and
Pennsylvania. The constitutional composition
of the Senate is therefore a negation of
equality.”
And Professor Alden, in the World's
Representative Assemblies of To-day :
Johns Hopkins University Studies for 1893,
vol. XL, page 61, writes—
“ As the states of the American Union vary
greatly in population, the disproportionate
representation of the minor states —notable
even at the adoption of the Constitution —has
become excessive. In Nevada, 21,000 persons
are represented by a United States senator ; in
New York nearly 3,000,000, a ratio of 1 to 40.
These are the extremes. In Wyoming and
Idaho a senator's constituency is 30,000 to
40,000; in Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Illinois it
is 2,000,000 to 3,000,000.”
There are other references that I am not
going to take up time by reading now, but
I wish to say this, that if other colonies
believe that Victoria is prepared to admit
this as a principle, I think that notion, if
we are not going to do so, ought to be
distinctly corrected. And while I re-affirm
what I said that I think it will be our
duty to accept the principle of equal
representation, it will be equally our duty
—our paramount duty, I should think—to
say that, notwithstanding the presence of
that concession in the Constitution, we
must have free play for the development
of our nationality. And I will make one
more observation on that matter before I
part with it. It is said that in other
Federations you have the principle of
equality of representation in what is known
as the Upper Chamber. Now, in Germany
that is not so, for the state of Prussia has
seventeen representatives. They must all
vote as one state, but their votes count as
seventeen, while other states vary down to
one representative.
Mr, Murray Smith. —But there is no
comparison between the formation of the
German Empire and this Federation.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —My observation is
made in answer to those who say that a
necessary principle of federation is equality
of representation in the Upper House.
The next provision in clause 9 is that the
senators are to be directly chosen by the
people of the State as one electorate.
That, as honorable members see, is a
fundamental alteration from the Bill of
1891. In the Bill of 1891 it was provided
that the Legislatures should elect the
senators. The clause then provides that
the senators are to be chosen for a term of
six years, but that—
“ The Parliament shall have power from time
to time to increase or diminish the number of
senators for each State, but so that the equal
representation of the several states shall be
maintained, and that no state shall have less
than six senators. ”
A subsequent provision—clause 114—re-
ferring to the admission of states after the
formation of the Commonwealth, is framed
in terms which will require a recasting of
the portion of clause 9 that I have just
read. But the principle there is that,
although the Parliament is to have power
from time to time to increase the number
of senators, it can never depart from the
principle of equality of representation. I
should like to point out to honorable mem-
bers, with regard to the proposal to make
each state one electorate for the Senate,
that the idea that prevailed at the Con-
vention with respect to that was that, the
Senate having equal representation be-
cause the states were regarded as units,
the senators for each state should be
elected by the state as one complete
whole, and the only ways in which that
could be done seemed to be either for the
state Legislatures to do it, or for the
people as a whole to do it.
Mr. Irvine. —The question was hardly
debated in the Convention at all.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —No, I think most
members took it for granted. Sir Samuel
Griffith refers to this matter at page 346
of the Blue-book, where honorable mem-
bers will find his observations upon that
subject.
Mr. Higgins. —There was a long dis-
cussion in the Convention as to the selec-
tion by the people.
Mr. Irvine. —No, the report of the
debate only occupies about two pages.


Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —At all events, this
is the provision we have before us now.
Honorable members will find that Sir
Samuel Griffith is against the idea of pro-
viding in the Constitution that the sena-
tors shall be elected by the whole people
of the state, as one electorate. I merely
refer honorable members to his observa-
tions so that they may look at them if
they think fit.
Mr. Wheeler.—We have all read them.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Perhaps I should
take this opportunity of saying that Sir
Samuel Griffith’s observations on all these
subjects—if I may presume to say so
are very well worthy of every honorable
member’s consideration ; and I should like
to add that the same may be said of the
contributions of all the gentlemen whose
papers I have taken the liberty to include
in this Blue-book.
Mr. McColl.—You did a very good
thing by putting them in.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.- —Honorable mem-
bers will also see that the principle of one
man one vote has been applied to the
selection of senators and, later on, to the
House of Representatives. The mode of
the election of senators is, as I have said,
at the will of the people of the state as one
electorate. In clause 10 honorable mem-
bers will find provisions which are prac-
tically machinery provisions, and which
will require considerable alteration to
make them fit the circumstances ; but in
principle I do not think anybody will
quarrel with them. Now r , the Senate is
not subject to dissolution, according to
this Constitution.
Mr. Longmore. —lt ought to be.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —In Sydney, honor-
able members will no doubt, have observed,
the Assembly, by a considerable majority,
have resolved that the Senate ought to be
subject to dissolution, and I may say also
that, trusting my memory, I think it was
by 59 to 4, the Assembly have determined
that the states ought not to have equal
representation. In other colonies, smaller
states, no doubt that will be strenuously
objected to ; and I am quite sure that the
smaller states will not enter the Federation
unless we have equal representation in the
Senate. Clause 13 provides for the mode
of retirement of the senators, which is
this : That the senators of each state —it
is not the whole of the senators, as in
America—being six in number, are, on
their first election, to be divided into two
classes by lot. Three of the senators
will retire in three years, and the other
three in six years, and so on.
Mr. McCay.—How is the continuity of
this Senate justified by its supporters 1
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —That is a matter
for discussion hereafter in the debate on
the merits of the Bill rather than on its
explanation. Then honorable members
will find in a few subsequent clauses some
of the ordinary provisions that are found
in Acts of Parliament relative to Houses
of Parliament, and I should say that a
good many of these provisions, one would
think, would find just as good a place in
ordinary Acts of Parliament rather than in
the Constitution. I should like to draw
honorable members’ attention to clause 23.
It is a small point, but one worthy of
notice. Clause 23 provides that—
“ Questions arising in the Senate shall be de-
termined by a majority of votes, and the Presi-
dent shall in all cases be entitled to a vote;
and when the votes are equal, the question shall
pass in the negative.”
It means that, as there is equal represen-
tation in the Senate, the President must
always have a vote, and never more than
one vote. If he were not always to have
a vote, his stat e would sometimes be de-
prived of the vote of one of its representa-
tives ; and if he were to have a casting
vote, his state would, on occasions, have
an extra vote. In both instances equality
of representation would be destroyed, and
this provision is inserted in order that
every state shall have its full number of
representatives voting, and no state more
than its number.
THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
In clause 24 honorable members will find
a novel and somewhat curious provision.
The clause provides that —
“ The House of Representatives shall be com-
posed of members directly chosen by the people
of the several states, according to their respec-
tive numbers. ”
And then it goes on to state that—
“ As nearly as practicable, there shall be two
members of the House of Representatives for
every one member of the Senate.”
Mr. Irvine. —What is the reason that
was suggested ?
Mr. Thenwith.—No reason was put
forward at all.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—WeII, as far as I
can gather, the reason suggested was to
maintain a certain proportion in numbers
between the two Houses, so that the


Senate should not bo overpowered by a
sense of the numerical advantage of the
other House. It struck me, and it struck
some other members of the Convention
we may have been wrong—that the pri-
mary notion was to make a stepping-stone
for the Norwegian system of settling dis-
putes. The honorable member for Esseu-
don just reminds me of circumstances that
occurred which bore very strongly in that
direction, and led us not only to think so,
but also to express our opinions in that
direction. But the suggestion of the
application of the Norwegian system met
with so little favour that it was abandoned
before it really formally saw the light.
However, the conception, if we are right
in our idea, is left embodied in this draft
Constitution—in this clause —and honor-
able members w ill no doubt seriously con-
sider whether this provision should be
retained or not. The provision in ques-
tion is that there shall, as nearly as
practicable, be two members of the House
of Representatives for every one member
of the Senate. And the way that is
arrived at—the way you regulate it—is
this; Assuming, as I really do wish to
assume, that, notwithstanding present
unfavorable symptoms, we shall eventu-
ally, and at no distant date, have six
colonies in this Commonwealth that
although Queensland for the present is
standing out she will eventually come in,
just as in America two states stood out,
and did not come in until after the Consti-
tution had been in operation for some
considerable time—accepting the position
that there will be six states in the Com-
mon wealth, this is how the matter works
out: There are, roughly speaking,
3,600,000 people in these six states.
There are to be six senators for each
state, making 36 members of the Senate.
As nearly as practicable, there are to be
two members of the House of Representa-
tives for every one member of the Senate.
That will give 72 members of the House
of Representatives. But there are cer-
tain provisions guaranteeing to the smaller
states, whose population would not give
them more than an inconsiderable number
of representatives, a certain minimum. We
will leave that minimum out fora moment,
and say there are 72 members of the House
of Representatives. A 7 ou then take the
72 members of the House of Representa-
tives and divide the 72 into the total
population 3,600,000 —when you get a
quota, roughly speaking, of 50,000.
Having got the quota, 50,000, you turn
to each State and say —•“ You are to have
one member for every 50,000 of your
people, how many do you have 1” If Vic-
toria has 1,200,000 people she would have,
therefore, 24 members, and so on. Now,
Sir Samuel Griffith has pointed out cer-
tain objections to that. In the Convention
debates honorable members will find cer-
tain other objections pointed out, and I
observe that in one of the Legislatures
now debating the question further objec-
tions are urged that it has this inherent
illogical effect—that the Senate, admit-
tedly not based upon the idea of popula-
tion at all, must necessarily follow the
population, because if you want to increase
your House of Representatives you cannot
do it without also increasing the Senate.
You must always keep, according to this,
your House of Representatives as nearly
as possible in relation to the Senate as two
is to one. Another result will follow,
namely, that as population increases you
may want to make your constituencies less
in number, and the Senate may say —“We
will not pass that measure.” And unless
the Senate agrees to it it cannot be done.
Another objection is this—that if a large
state, or more than one large state, should
increase in population to such an extent
that the people desire and insist that
their representation in the House of
Representatives shall be increased, you
have also to increase the representa-
tion in the Senate of the smaller states,
who may not have advanced in popula-
tion at all, and thus make a practical
disproportion, increase the expenditure,
and create an anomaly, no sufficient reason
for which, I venture to say, exists. Now,
in America, the system is this—and it has
certainly worked well, the proof of which
will be found in an address I had the
honour to make at the Convention, and
in which the figures are given. In America
the Constitution provides that the House
of Representatives shall be according to
the population, and that there shall not
be more than one member to every 30,000
of the population. Now r , the result was
this : In the first instance, they had about
30,000 as a constituency. As the states
increased in population, that 30,000 was
gradually increased, not altogether in pro-
portion to the increase of population, but
advancing with it, until now, I think I
am speaking correctly when I say, it is
about 180,000, or nearly 200,000 to each
member. That keeps the representation


within reasonable bounds, and the House
of Representatives, impelled by public
opinion, will not refuse to increase its
own constituencies, and thereby com-
paratively diminish the number of mem-
bers in the House of Representatives;
and the Senate, on the other hand, will be
always only too glad to accept any sugges-
tion in that direction. Now, amongst all
the troubles of the American Union, there
has never been any trouble, as far as I
can ascertain, in relation to that matter.
I do not see any reason myself for departing
from the line I have taken up, but honor-
able members will have to consider whether
they see any reason for departing from
it. As far as we can judge, it has not
found favour in New South Wales. I be-
lieve it is highly thought of in South
Australia. I believe that there they
regard it as a very valuable provision,
because it magnifies the Senate, in their
opinion, and probably gives to it a prestige
which a smaller relative proportion to the
House of Representatives would deprive
it of.
Mr. Carter.— Shall we have that power
under this Bill? Will the Central Govern-
ment have the power?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—To do what ?
Mr. Carter.— -To increase the number
of electors.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —No, not without
increasing the Senate. There is a hard-
and-fast cast-iron rule introduced here.
Mr. Carter.— ln America it is more
elastic.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—In America it is
perfectly elastic.
Mr. Carter.— That is an advantage.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —The Senate has its
powers and its members; and the House
of Representatives whenever it wishes to
increase its members may, and does, in-
crease them without reference to the num-
ber of the Senate. And I believe that is
done every ten years, according to the
census. lam not going to criticise the
verbal purport of the clause ; I have given
the gist of its meaning. I would like to
point out what is the minimum number of
representatives for a colony. The clause
further provides—
“ But each of the existing colonies of New
South Wales, New Zealand, Queensland, Tas-
mania, Victoria, and Western Australia, and
the province of South Australia, shall be entitled
to five representatives at the least.”
Clause 114 contains a provision that if a
state does not choose to come in at the
beginning, and take all possible risks and
benefits of federation, it may be admitted
on terms which will not guarantee that
equal representation in the Senate, or that
minimum of representation in the House
of Representatives. That was introduced
because it was thought that some of the
colonies might endeavour to make the best
Constitution for themselves, and then they
might hold off to see how the federation
scheme progressed, with the view of coming
in at some future date. Sir George Turner
proposed the alteration which I have alluded
to, and I think it is an advantage. There
is in clause 30 a proposal which is well
worthy of our notice. Honorable mem-
bers will know that in South Australia
women have the right of the suffrage;
and South Australia will not enter into
the Federal Union unless that right is
preserved to their electors. That is only
natural, because the women have the right
of voting as to whether this Constitution
will be accepted by that colony, and if
they vote in favour of accepting the Con-
stitution they are surrendering to another
power many of the subjects of legislation
on which they now have a vote, and which
concern them j ust as nearly as men are con-
cerned, namely, such matters as marriage
and divorce. Therefore it is provided that
they shall not be deprived of their right in
the election of members of the House of
Representatives, unless they are deprived
of the right of suffrage in their own state.
Mr. Longmore.— What about plural
voting ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —That is not per-
mitted either in the case of the Senate or
in the case of the House of Representa-
tives. It is carefully guarded against—in
fact, it is a crime if it is indulged in.
The qualification of members is the same
as regards both Houses. There is no
property qualification, and the age qualifi-
cation is 21 years. A member of one
House cannot be’ a member of another
House. I pointed out that the President
of the Senate is to have a vote on all occa-
sions, and no casting vote. In the House
of Representatives that rule does not pre-
vail, and the rule which we have in our
Assembly is continued.
Mr. Carter.— ls there any reason for
making this difference ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—It is done for the
same reason we have in not allowing our
Speaker to vote except when he has a
casting vote. It is a House of the people
that we are dealing with, and the same


rule will prevail in it as in all the Legisla-
tive Chambers of the colonies. There is
a provision in regard to both the Senate
and the House of Representatives that the
qualification of a member or the matter of
a vacancy in the House shall be deter-
mined by the House, but in the case of a
disputed election that matter is to be
determined by the court. The line be-
tween the two provisions is one which is
very difficult to draw. Sir Samuel Griffith
directs attention to that.
DISSOLUTION.
I have now referred to the differences
between the two Houses except the one
which makes the House of Representa-
tives subject to dissolution. That House
lasts for three years, and it may be
terminated sooner by dissolution. Hon-
orable members will have to ask them-
selves later on —“Why is the provision
for dissolution inserted in the case of
the national House ? Is it in order to
decide disputes, as we are supposed to de-
cide disputes in the case of attempted
legislation which arise between the Houses.”
If it is intended to settle disputes between
the two Houses, it is a strange provision if
we are to accept the view that the Senate
represents the states and not the people,
because a dissolution of the House of Re-
presentatives is an appeal to the numerical
population of the whole Commonwealth,
and if the Senate is to be at liberty to say
—“ We are not to be bound by the verdict
of the people taken as a whole,” honor-
able members will have to consider very
carefully what the object of the power
of dissolution is, or whether it is to be
restricted to the mere case of disputes
between Ministers and the House of
Representatives. It means, if it is
designed to ascertain the feelings of
the constituencies upon any of the
great questions in controversy between
the Houses, either that the Senate will
have to give way, or that there will be a
severe strain upon the Constitution.
Air. Murray Smith.—The Lower House
will have to wait.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —It would be rather
a hard thing to say to the Lower House—
“ You have been penalized. It was doubt-
ful whether you were right or wrong to
start with. We have had to assume that
you were wrong ; we have sent you to the
country, and you have come back re-
inforced by public opinion, but you must
wait.” As to those honorable members
who argue that the Senate is a House of
States, and is not to be dissolved, and
that the House of Representatives is a
national House, and may be dissolved, I
leave it to them to consider how they are
going to deal with the question of a dis-
solution in the cases of disputes arising
between the two Houses.
Mr. Murray Smith. —The provision is
not applicable.
Mr. 1. A. ISAACS.—Then what is it
there for 1
Mr. McKenzie.— I There will be dissolu-
tions in consequence of disputes arising
between the Houses themselves.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—If the object is to
secure harmony in the House itself, honor-
able members must consider how far it is
desirable to carry that principle into the
Senate. Some honorable members think
that clause 47 and clause 48 ought not to
find a place in the Constitution at all.
They are disqualifying clauses, like a sec-
tion of our Officials in Parliament Act.
Clause 48 provides that no member of the
Senate or of the House of Representatives
can within six months of the time of
being a member accept any office of profit
under the Crown except that of a Minister
of the Crown. Sir Samuel Griffith drew
attention to pjftpyention, and
used som(which
appear oiypagel347 of tlie bofik papers
which haf| Uefcn circSi i U:&>)/r ecpm ffiending
the point*-'" yj
Mr. MurkAt judicial offi-
cers not exceptbrU?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—No. The words of
an authority like Sir Samuel Griffith, who
is altogether outside the sphere of politics,
are deserving of attention on such a ques-
tion. The contains various provi-
sions in regard to disputed elections. The
clause which I have referred to as not
being quite clear in its relation to
clause 41 and clause 43 is clause 50.
POWERS OF THE PARLIAMENT.
Now I come tothe powers of the Parliament.
Up to the present we have been consider-
ing its constitution. Honorable members
will see a long list (it is not very attrac-
tive in appearance) which contains the
subjects it is proposed by the Federal
Convention shall form the matters to be in-
trusted to the federal legislative authority.
TRADE AND COMMERCE.
The three foremost of them refer to the
regulation of trade and commerce among


the several states and other countries.
The word “ trade ” is not in the Ameri-
can Constitution, but apart from that,
that little sentence has formed the sub-
ject of more judicial decisions in the
Supreme Court of the United States than
the whole of the rest of the Constitution
put together. The difficulties have arisen
in this way —the states having been told
by the Constitution that the federal autho-
rity is to regulate commerce with foreign
countries and the several states, they have
endeavoured to impose regulations of various
kinds on trade and commerce which the Su-
preme Court has held affect other states of
the Union, as well as foreign countries, and
are therefore void and inoperative. There is,
not unnaturally, a continual endeavour, in
an unfederated collection of states, on the
part of each state to gain all the advan-
tages it can, regardless of the surrounding
states. If there is no federal union, that
would be perfectly legitimate, but with
the Americans consolidated into one state,
the Constitution necessarily provides that
there shall be a supervising authority, so
that the several states shall not endeavour
to injure each other. The provision I
have referred to does not mean that the
Federal Parliament can pass any law re-
lating to commerce, it does not mean that
the Federal Parliament has the exclusive
right of dealing with the trade of the
state, but it does mean that it has the
exclusive right of dealing with the trade
and commerce of the Commonwealth as
far as it affects other states and countries.
As long as it is internal, the states have the
fullest power over it. As soon as it ex-
tends beyond the borders of the state in
question the federal authority has power
to deal with it. 1 am speaking now of
the Federal Parliament. Numerous in-
stances of what I am saying exist, and,
by-and-by, if honorable members desire
it, I will afford them what information I
can on the subject. I think that a short
quotation in regard to one or two matters
which I wish to explain will make the
subject very clear. A controversy is con-
tinuing in the American states, though
it grows less and less every year, in cases
in which a state endeavours to impose a
licence or enact regulations creating dis-
abilities in favour of its own goods as
against the goods of other states; and
the most ingenious devices are resorted to.
Cases have come before the Supreme Court
of the United States, which hasonthe whole
pretty uniformly crushed such attempts
out of existence. I will give honorable
members an example of what I mean. A
state of the American Union may impose
what conditions it pleases upon the sale of
goods within the state, but it cannot im-
pose that condition upon goods which are
brought from another state into that state
as long as they remain in the hands of the
importer and in the original packages.
The keynote of the position is this—until
these goods are incorporated into the mass
of property in the state itself, the state
itself has no power to fix conditions,
and they are free from interference
by the state. That has been decided
in very many cases. There is a cer-
tain provision in regard to commerce
incorporated in the Constitution which
we are now considering, and which
distinguishes it utterly from the American
Constitution. In America there is no pro-
vision in the Constitution guaranteeing
free-trade between the states. It would
be perfectly open to Congress to-morrow,
if it chose, to establish duties between the
states. No state can do that, attd Con-
gress never would. But in our Constitu-
tion there is a provision which certainly
goes far beyond what was intended, at all
events, by most of the members of the
Convention. It is a provision which
guarantees, after the imposition of uniform
customs duties, what shall be free. So it
would not be even competent for the
Federal Parliament to prevent intercolonial
free-trade. In America the question arose
at a comparatively recent date in a very
singular case. It was held in the case of
Liesy v. Hardin that
“ The statute of a state prohibiting the sale
of any intoxicating liquor except for medicinal
or sacramental purposes, and under a licence,
is, as applied to the sale by the importer, and
in the original packages or kegs, unbroken and
unopened, of such liquors manufactured in and
brought from another state, unconstitutional
and void, as repugnant to the clause of the Con-
stitution granting to Congress the power to
regulate commerce with foreign nations and
among the several states. ”
That means from any one point of a
state to any other point. A little later
on, in re Hahrer , the court said—
“ It is earnestly contended that the Constitu-
tion guarantees freedom of commerce among
the states in all things, and that not only may
intoxicating liquors be imported from one
state into another without being subject to
regulation under the laws of the latter, but that
Congress is powerless to obviate that result.
Thus, the grant to a general (government of a
power designed to prevent the imposition of
restrictions upon inter-state commerce by any


state cannot be made to forbid any restraint
whatever. We do not concur in this view. In
surrendering their power for external com
merce, the states did not secure absolute free-
dom in such commerce, but only the protection
from encroachment afforded by confiding its
regulation exclusively to Congress.”
The court therefore decided that the state
could not impose any condition on the
state concerned, but that Congress could.
As it was urged that some statute ought
to be passed with regard to intoxicating
liquors introduced, Congress enacted on
the Bth August, 1890, that all intoxi-
cating liquors remaining in the state, and
which were liable to the operation of the
laws, shall be under the control of the
state in the exercise of its police powers.
From that time liquors brought across the
borders were subject to supervision. The
matter was debated in the Federal Con-
vention at Adelaide. I desire to point
out that with clause 89 of our Bill the
Federal Parliament itself cannot do what
the United States Congress did in relation
to intoxicating liquors. I may be fairly
asked by honorable members —“What is the
power left to the states in regard to the
regulation of commerce and other mat-
ters?” The states may exercise concur-
rent or independent power in all cases,
except where the power is lodged ex-
clusively with the Federal Parliament, and
except where the power must necessarily
he exercised by the National Government
exclusively. Sub-section (2) of clause 52
provides among the matters in regard to
which the Parliament shall have power to
make laws:—
“Customs and excise and bounties, but so
that duties of customs and excise and bounties
shall be uniform throughout the Commonwealth,
and that no tax or duty shall be imposed on
any goods exported from one state to another.”
That provision is not in the American
Constitution. Although in America, after
the amended Constitution came into opera-
tion, 'no state could impose customs or
excise duties, that is not contemplated in
Australia, because clause 84 provides that
the Federal Parliament shall have the sole
power and authority to impose customs
duties and duties of excise, and to grant
bounties upon the production or export of
goods ; but that power is not to be ex-
clusive until uniform duties of customs
have been imposed by Parliament. So
that until the two years have elapsed, or
customs and excise duties have been im-
posed by the Federal Parliament, the
states may continue to impose duties.
The next subject to which 1 will call the
attention of the committee is also con-
tained in clause 52. lam passing over a
great number of subjects which are mere
details (though very important ones) in
that clause ; they will be matter for specific
consideration when we come to them.
RAILWAYS.
But I refer honorable members now to
sub sections (33) and (34). Under these
sub-sections there is power given to the
federal authority to take over, with the
consent of the state or states, the whole
or any part of the railways of any state
or states upon terms to be arranged, and
there is also power to construct railways
and to extend them with the consent of
any state or states concerned. That is
to say, that inasmuch as all the territory —
with certain exceptions, which I shall
refer to hereafter—on the continent will,
if all the colonies join, be within the
states, it is quite plain that unless the
railways are absolutely vested in the
Commonwealth, the consent of the states
will be required to take over those rail-
ways, or any part of them, and power will
also be required to construct or extend
railways within the states. The Com-
missioner of Railways, Mr. Mathieson,
has made a report which deals with rail-
way matters. Honorable members will
find his report on page 315 of the volume
of collected papers. On this point Air.
Mathieson refers to these two sub-sections,
and honorable members will no doubt like
to read what he has to say with regard to
them. Mr. Mathieson gives it as his idea
that the Commonwealth should not be
permitted by the state—that is to say,
the state should not give its consent —to
take over the good-paying portions of the
railways and leave the state with only the
bad-paying portions. He is rather giving
a caution to the state for future use, than
objecting to the insertion of these provi-
sions to which lam now referring. It is
well that attention should be directed to
the matter in that way, because it enables
honorable members to see to what extent
they are going, and assures them that
they are perfectly safe in allowing these
provisions to form part of the Bill, because
the question of terms can always be dis-
cussed whenever the matter of taking
over the railways is raised.
Mr. Carter. —What about military and
naval defences, which are dealt with in


sub-section (6); and the borrowing powers,
dealt with in sub-section (4) ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.— Sub-section (4)
gives power to borrow money on the public
credit of the Commonwealth. It is a
mere power to borrow. You must give
that power to the Commonwealth; it
is an essential of its existence. And
you must trust the Federal Parliament as
to the terms on which it will exercise that
power.
Mr. Carter.— l only alluded to it be-
cause, if these sub-sections are to be passed
over, is it worth while to put them in the
Constitution ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—You must have
them in the Constitution, because if you
did not insert them, the Federal Parlia-
ment would not have power to legis-
late on these subjects. The Federal
Parliament will not have any powers ex-
cept such as are specifically given to it, or
are given by necessary implication. You
must place the powers of the Common-
wealth in this Constitution. For that
reason I passed over the sub-sections to
which the honorable member has referred
in order to deal with the subject of the
taking over the railways and railway con-
struction by the Commonwealth. I will
ask permission, as I am on the question
of railways and do not want to split up
the subject, to pass for a moment now
to clause 96, because railways are- un-
doubtedly concerned in the clause.
Mr. Gray. —And in clause 95.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Yes ; but clause 96
is the clause providing that the Parliament
may make laws constituting an Inter-State
Commission to execute and maintain upon
railways within the Commonwealth, and
upon rivers flowing through, in, or between
two or more states, the provisions of the
Constitution relating to trade and com-
merce. Honorable members will see that
it is contemplated to give the Parliament
power to create an Inter-State Commission.
It is left to the Parliament to say whether
there shall be an Inter-State Commission
or not; but if the Parliament chooses to
create an Inter-State Commission, that
commission is to have—-according to clause
96 and the succeeding clause—just such
powers as the Parliament may give to it,
but only with regard to the provisions of
the Constitution relating to trade and
commerce, and only in relation to railways
within the Common wealth, and rivers flow-
ing through, in, or between two or more
states—that is to say, really Inter-State
rivers. These constitute the limits of the
Inter-State Commission’s powers.
Mr. Staughton. —Might that not inter-
fere seriously with state rights in regard
to rivers?
Mr. 1. A. ISAACS.—The rivers referred
to are confined to those flowing between
two or more states, in two or more states,
and through two or more states. It seems
desirable—at least this w r as urged at the
Convention—that rivei'S that do not per-
tain solely to one state shall be under
federal control. For instance, there is the
Murray River. If New South Wales were
to have supreme control of the waters of
that river, she might, by means of irriga-
tion or otherwise causing the waters of
that river to flow over her own territory,
interfere very considerably with the navi-
gability of the stream, and thus affect
prejudicially both South Australia and
Victoria. It is with a view to have fair-
ness preserved in dealing with the rivers,
and the waters in the rivers, that this pro-
vision was put in. In that connexion I
may refer honorable members to clause
52, sub-section (31).
Mr. Higgins.— You cannot interfere
under this Constitution with any of the
tributaries of the Murray, such as the
Murrumbidgee, the Darling, or the Goul-
burn.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —No ; the provisions
only deal with the River Murray, where it
forms the boundary of New South Wales,
Victoria, and as it affects South Australia,
through which it flows to the sea. There
is large power of dealing with navigation
and shipping in sub-section (1) of clause
52 ; but, reading it as a whole, the inten-
tion is what the honorable member for
Geelong (Mr. Higgins) has just stated. It
was proposed in the Convention —and I
refer to this because it is necessary for
honorable members to understand it—and
by the Bill as originally drawn, that the
powers of the Inter-State Commission
should be limited, so far as railways are
concerned, to cases of railway rates which
were imposed having a preferential effect,
and made for the purpose of drawing
traffic to the railways of any one' state
from the railways of another state. The
wording of that clause seemed to Sir
George Turner and myself, and to other
members of the Victorian delegation, to
have i practically this operation—that it
would have allowed the Inter-State Com-
mission full power to interfere with any


rates on the Victorian railways which drew
traffic from the New South Wales railways,
but would give no power to the Inter-
State Commission to interfere with any
rates on the New South Wales railways,
although they might be cutting away the
Victorian traffic, because New South Wales
would be merely drawing the traffic from
its own territory on its own lines, and not
drawing it from the lines of another state.
Mr. Higgins.—ls not that the effect
still 1
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—I do not think it
is. I think it is doubtful; but if honor-
able members will look at this clause—
especially the legal members—they will
see that the commission is to have power
to carry out the provisions of the Consti-
tution relating to trade and commerce.
It must be assumed, according to sub-
section (1), that trade and commerce are
to be free.
Mr. Higgins. —Yes, but it is said in
America—“still you cannot interfere.”
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —But the American
Act is different; it is more like the Eng-
lish Act.
Mr. Irvine.— ls not this more a matter
for committee 1
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —It is, but I was
asked a question and had to reply. The
question of the freedom of trade is referred
to by Sir Samuel Griffith in the paper
which he has presented to the Queensland
Government. At the Convention I stated
that I doubted very much whether the
Inter-State Commission would have the
power of interfering, and I see that Sir
Samuel Griffith also raises the same doubt
as to whether the provision relating to
freedom of trade does relate to these
differential rates. Because if Victoria im-
poses a lower rate than New South Wales
it does not interfere with freedom of trade;
it is rather an inducement, a stimulation,
an attraction to trade to enter Victoria.
Mr. Outtrim. —The lowering of rates in
Victoria would interfere with the trade in
New South Wales.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. However, Sir
Samuel Griffith has pointed out that that
view might be taken by the commission or
by the Supi’eme Court, and we must make
the clause clear. But if the words originally
proposed had been used there could have
been no doubt whatever that Victoria
would have stood in a serious position ;
and, therefore, on the motion of Sir George
Turner, words were excised in order to
make clause 97 read as it does at the
present time. In order that honorable
members may understand about these
rates, I will brief!} tell them that there is a
distinction which they must bear in mind.
The complaint by New South Wales is that
the Victorian railways, while they charge
certain rates to Victorians who bring their
goods over the railways from Wodonga or
Echuca to Melbourne, allow residents of
New South Wales living in Riverina to
bring the same class of goods to the same
termini for transmission to Melbourne
and charge a lower rate. That is to say,
those inhabitants of Riverina get a rebate
or discount, varying according to the
locality —in some instances, applying to
far within Riverina, up to 66 per cent, it
is said. But there is no doubt about this :
That New South Wales is doing the same
thing, and we believe to a greater extent.
Mr. Irvine. —But in a different way.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —The New South
Wales Government does not complain that
we are charging their people too much, but
that we are charging too little. They say
to us—“We do not object to the Victorian
railways charging differential rates, but
we do object to preferential rates.” That
is to say, differential rates may be charged,
because a different rate per mile is allow-
able on longer hauls and over different
country, or under circumstances of diver-
gent costs to the railways. “ But,” they
say, “you should charge those rates,
whether differential or not, to everybody
without distinction who brings his goods
for transmission on your railways.” Pre-
ferential rates mean that different per-
sons are charged different rates for the
transmission of the same class of goods
over the same distances, and the
New South Wales people say that they
object to that. So far as concerns
the Inter-State Commission, the prin-
ciple of the establishment of such
a body is well known. In America
there is a Railway Commission, and in
England at the present time there is also
a similar body. Indeed, England, 1 think,
started that idea of equalizing (if I may
use the term, which roughly expresses the
idea) railway rates. Because railway com-
panies in England, not being State pro-
perty, frequently carried on their business
so as to give preference to localities and
to individuals. That was thought to be
wrong, so that in 1854 an Act was passed
providing, roughly speaking, that there
should be no undue or unjust preference or
discrimination. Later on, in 1867, a railway


committee was appointed which made
inquiries ; and there has been various
legislation since leading up to the estab-
lishment of a Railway Commission, which
exists at the present time. Similarly in
America, in 1887, complaints were made to
the same effect, and a commission sat and
made a report to the effect that the rail-
ways were pooling their charges and
operating against the public interest
generally. Accordingly the American
Inter-State Commission was appointed. So
that there is nothing new at all in the
idea. But it must be borne in mind that
the complaint comes in England, as in
America—at all events in the majority of
instances—from the person who says that
he is being charged too much. No man
ever comes forward to say —“ You are
charging me too little.” There are
many cases in the English law books,
as also in the American reports, where
a man comes and says—“ I have been
overcharged,” and he is able to get some
of his money back. But here the com-
plaint is turned the other way. New
South Wales says, not that we are charg-
ing her people too much, but too little;
and we have got to consider how far the
provisions which have been found applic-
able in America and England, so far as
concerns the Inter-State Commission and
the Railway Commission respectively, are
applicable to this case at all.
Mr. Carter.— Are there not complaints
that men are charged too much for the
..shorter distances 1 For instance, you can
send goods to Deniliquin for less than to
Echuca.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—But that is not the
complaint raised so far as concerns this
Constitution. The complaint made by
New South Wales is that the people in
Riverina are charged too little for carry-
ing their goods over the Victorian rail-
ways. They say also that we have no
right to take into consideration the fact
that there is competition for the Riverina
traffic. We have no right, they urge, to
say that Riverina is, geographically speak-
ing, more a portion of Victoria than of
New South Wales, and that Melbourne is
its natural outport. They say that there
is a barrier line—the River Murray—and
that New South Wales can do as she likes
on the one side, and Victoria can do as she
likes on the other, so long as she con-
fines her operations to that other side;
and they contend that, although we talk
of federation and of wanting to obliterate
this arbitrary line, we must preserve the
arbitrary line for the purpose of railway
traffic. This is a matter that deserves
very great attention and consideration.
They tell us that the mere fact that we
say that their lines are competing for the
Riverina traffic has nothing at all to do
with it, because they urge—“We have a
right to compete for the Riverina traffic,
which is our own.” For many years in
England it was doubted whether railways
could take that aspect into consideration,
but there is a recent case of Phipps v.
The North- Western Railway Company (de-
cided in 1892, and reported in 2 Queen’s
Bench Division, page 221), where the
English Court of Appeal, consisting of
Lord Herschell, Lord Justice Bindley, and
Lord Justice Kay, decided the other way
about. They had a complaint made with
reference to the London and North-West-
ern Railway Company giving the prefer-
ence to some furnaces, called the Duston
furnaces, over two other furnaces, both
situated on a line belonging to the same
company ; and the court held distinctly
that the fact of there being competition
in the matter between two lines of rail-
way was a circumstance that the railway
company could take into consideration in
determining the differential charges, and
one which the court ought to regard in
determining whether the charge made in
the particular case complained of was
just or unjust. The same point has been
referred to in a later case also. But 1
need not dwell upon that matter, because
I was going on to observe that the Rail-
ways Commissioner points out that it would
be disastrous to Victoria if she were to
submit to the proposal that we are not to
cater for the Riverina traffic.
Mr. Staughton. The New South
Wales people say the same thing; they
compete for the same trade.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —They say they
have a right to do so because the River
Murray is the political boundary between
the two countries, and Riverina is within
their boundary.
Mr. McKenzie.— Does the commis-
sioner say that we should compete for the
Riverina trade ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—Practically he does,
because New South Wales compels us to
do so. I will just refer briefly to what
Mr. Mathieson says. His remarks will be
found on page 317 of the papers on
federation, and I would like honorable
members to weigh them carefully, because


this is one of the practical aspects of the
federation question, and one that we must
take into our careful consideration. We
must not enter into the matter blindfold.
At the same time, this is not an argument
against federation. It is a reason why we
should examine the position as practical
men. Mr. Mathieson, after giving a good
deal of information, pointing out the geo-
graphical position of the Riverina, and
calling attention to the fact that Victoria
had opened her lines to Echuca, Wodonga,
and Wahgunyah years before New South
Wales had attempted to build lines to serve
the districts across the River Murray,
says
“ The result of charging the Victorian local
rates would be to divert at least 80,000 out of
the 136,006 bales of wool carried last season,
with consequent loss of revenue of £19,000.
The bulk of the balance of 56,000 bales of wool
grown close to the Victorian border is now
secured, and would probably be retained at our
local rates. The loss in connexion with the
goods traffic would be equally serious, as roundly
8,000 tons of merchandise now passing through
Melbourne and carried over the Victorian rail-
ways would be diverted, representing revenue
of £20,500. The effect of the diversion of this
traffic on the interests of Melbourne as a port
and commercial centre would be most serious. It
is estimated that the loss from the commission
on sale, storage, handling, &c., of the reduced
number of bales of wool, and the profits de-
rived from the supply and handling, &c., of the
stores would reach in round figures £160,000
per annum. Broadly stated, it would there-
fore appear that a gift by New South Wales to
Victoria of the whole amount of freight now
earned by the latter, conditionally that it made
no effort to secure the Riverina traffic would
not compensate for the contingent loss to the
city and port.”
Mr. Irvine. —That would follow in case
New South Wales were permitted to retain
her present low rates.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—That might be so.
It is very difficult to see how we could
interfere with the differential rates charged
by New South Wales simply on the ground
that they are differential rates.
Mr. Irvine. —l understood you to say
that the motion introduced by you or by
the Premier gave the Inter-State Com-
mission power to deal with the differential
rates imposed by the New South Wales
Government.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —The Premier’s motion
was to reject the words that I referred to.
Mr. Irvine. —The rejection of those
words gave the Inter-State Commission
that power.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —1 do not know how
far the words of the Constitution give
6402.—b
power over the differential rates to the
Inter State Commission. It gives power
with regard to freedom of trade.
Mr. Irvine. —The object was to give
that power to the Inter-State Commission..
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—I do not think ib
was.
Mr. McKenzie. —There cannot be free-
dom of trade if we substitute for a Cus-
toms Tariff a railway tariff.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—If we had a rail-
way tariff that prevented goods from,
coming into the colony there would not
be freedom, but if we had a railway tariff
that invited trade it might mean increased
freedom.
Mr; Webb.— Can there be any federa-
tion if the present cut-throat competition
is continued ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. The honorable
member will be able to answer that ques-
tion himself by-and-by.
Mr. McColl, — The question is whether
the farmers are not paying too dearly for
that trade now.
Mr. 1. A. ISAACS.—I would like to call
particular attention to one observation
made by Mr. Mathieson. New South*
Wales attaches a great deal of blame to
Victoria, says—
t-ngTiV'To'lneiglon \h ere that at a.
recent/coifffsrence on the subNct Vhh the New
QoiiMijfeeijqers,! when proposals,
were liiadAto avoid as tar as possible the cutting;
of rateBg'¥/ft&ggested for compari-
son, of iNty off the. rebates .on-Vcol granted last
season ; bufCto-this they did not see their way
to agree.”
Our lists are practically public. The list®"
of New South Wales are not public. When
complaints were made to Mr. Mathieson-
that we were acting unfairly, he offered to-
exchange lists for the purpose of com-
parison, but we have not yet been able to-
get the lists of New South Wales.
Mr. Webb. —Our rates are not public.
Dr. Quick asked for them and they were-
refused.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —They were dis-
tributed, and there is a map showing where-
they are charged.
Mr. Webb. —The lists distributed are-
not correct.
MONEY BILLS.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —1 pass now from*
clause 52 to the question of Money Bills,
because I think that the intermediate sub-
jects are tolerably clear. The provisions*
relating to Money Bills commence at
clause 54. As honorable members know.


this was and is likely to be one of the
centres of conflict with regard to the Con-
stitution. It was seriously contended for
some time, and I find that in one Legis-
lature it is seriously contended still, that
the Senate should have co-ordinate powers
with the House of Representatives.
Now, there is no doubt about it, that
if co ordinate powers were given to the
two Houses it would render federation
impossible. It is well to admit at once
that in a Federation, as in any other
form of government, one House must be,
to some extent at all events, subordinate
to the other. It is now fairly well recog-
nised all round that in relation to Money
Bills the Senate is not to have as great
power as the House of Representatives.
Of course, it would be absurd to seriously
contend that, as a result of equal repre-
sentation, the Senate should have equal
powers over money matters—that a state
having six representatives, with a popula-
tion of 160,000, should have the same
financial powers as a state having six repre-
sentatives, with a population of 1,300,000;
and yet those who maintain that the two
Houses should have co-ordinate powers do,
in fact, take up that position. The Senate
has therefore, after very serious conflict, as
honorable members know, not been ac-
corded the power of amending what are
known as Money Bills. That provision is,
however, subject to some exceptions. I
shall briefly state what I think was the
intention of these clauses, and I shall
also state, as I think I am in candour
bound to state, one or two respects
in which I am doubtful whether the
intention has been carried out. In
clause 54 it is sought to be enacted
that the Senate may not initiate any Ap-
propriation or Taxation Bill in which
appropriation or taxation is the main
object. In other words, the power of
initiation of all Bills having for their main
object either the appropriation of money
or the imposition of taxation is to be con-
fined to the House of Representatives. I
shall come back in a moment to that
power, because it is intended that the
Senate shall initiate Bills that do not have
for their main object the power of appro-
priating money or imposing a tax, even
although these Bills do in fact appro-
priate or do in fact impose a tax. It was
urged that this was a very difficult ques-
tion to decide, and it was a very difficult
question. What is the main object of a
Bill?
Mr. McCay. —Take the Mining Develop-
ment Bill of last year.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Yes, you might
take that. You might take a ease in
which the question would be very easy to
answer, or you might take a case in which
it would be very difficult to answer. I
can plainly see that occasions may arise in
which great controversy may take place
between the two Houses on this very
point. Clause 54 is the first clause dealing
with the initiation of Money Bills. Clause
55 assumes that a Bill has been properly
initiated, and now we come to the ques-
tion of what are the Senate’s powers of
amending, and what are the genexal
powers of the House of Representatives in
dealing with Money Bills. First of all,
clause 55 provides that the Senate is to
have “ equal powers with the House of
Representatives in respect of all proposed
laws ” —that, I suppose, must mean in re-
spect to the amending of proposed laws—
“ except laws imposing taxation and laws
appropriating the necessary Supplies for
the ordinary annual services of the Go-
vernment.” That does not refer to special
appropriations, but to ordinary appropria-
tions.
Mr. Higgins. —That will lead to ques-
tions also.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—It will lead to
serious questions. Then the clause pro-
ceeds—“ which the Senate may affirm or
reject, but may not amend.” In other
words, if the House of Representatives
sends up a Bill to the Senate, the Senate
may amend that Bill if it is not a Bill
imposing taxation or an ordinary Appro-
priation Bill, meaning by that a Bill in-
cluding only the ordinary appropriations
for the year. We shall have to be careful
not to put into any such Bill any appro-
priation that is not one of the ordinary
appropriations of the year. The clause
further provides—“ But the Senate may
not amend any proposed law in such a
manner as to increase any proposed charge
or burden on the people.” It is difficult
to know what that refers to, excepting a
special appropriation, because the Senate
is to have no power to amend a Taxat ion
Bill, and even in the case of a special
appropriation it is hardly applicable.
The next sub-section provides that laws
imposing taxation shall deal with the
imposition of taxation only. That is in-
tended to give freedom to the Senate to
discuss each proposal for taxation on its
own merits. For instance, we could not


then have a Land and Income Tax Bill in
one.
Mr. Irvine. —That subject is dealt with
in the next sub-section.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—The honorable
member is right. We must read the
two sub-sections together. Sub-section
(3) sets out that laws imposing taxation
shall deal with one subject of taxation
only. Reading the two sub-sections
together, honorable members will see that
a Taxation Bill such as the Land and
Income Tax Bill could not be brought in,
nor could any other subject be joined with
a Taxation Bill.
Mr. McKenzie. —lt could not be tacked
on.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—I will come to the
question of tacking presently. This pro-
vision is intended to prevent the tacking
together of a Taxation Bill with any other
Bill, and to prevent the tacking together
of two Taxation Bills.
Mr. Deakin. —You could not have a dog
tax and a bachelor’s tax in the one Bill.
Mr. ISAACS.—No. Now, I would like
in this connexion to call the attention of
honorable members to clause 54, from
which it will be seen that the Senate can-
not initiate Bills the main object of which
is the imposition of taxation. The Bill
provides, as I have shown, that no other
subject shall be joined with a Bill imposing
taxation, and therefore it is very difficult to
see how the Senate can initiate a Bill dealing
with taxation at all. I mention these points
because the matter is a serious one. If it
is intended that clause 54 shall stand, then
those who are anxious that the Senate shall
have these powers should carefully consider
whether clause 55 does not cut them out.
Mr. Irvine. —It is only a matter of
drafting.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Yes, but it is a very
important matter of drafting, and I do not
know that attention has been called to it
yet. Then the next sub-section is to pre-
vent laws imposing taxation from dealing
with more than one subject of taxation,
but an exception is, of course, made to
that provision. We need not have a Cus-
toms Bill for every item in the Tariff, and
therefore, with regard to customs, you can
mass your customs proposals together, and
so with your excise ; but you cannot put
excise and customs together. The next
sub section is intended to prevent tacking
with regard to an Appropriation Bill, and
I do not know that it goes as far as those
who framed it intended that it should go.
The expenditure for ordinary services is
not to be linked to an appropriation for ex-
traordinary services, but it will be well to
consider whether an ordinary Appropria-
tion Bill could not be joined with a Bill,
say, for the alteration of the banking law,
and whether there could not be a tack in
that respect. Then we come to a very
important sub-section, which provides for
suggestions being made by the Senate
in the case of a proposed law which the
Senate may not amend. The Senate may
return the Bill at any stage to the House
of Representatives with a message request-
ing the omission or amendment of any
items or provisions therein, and the House
of Representatives may accede to that re
quest, or may reject it. Now, it has been
said that this is an advantageous power
to give to the Senate ; that it is just as
advantageous as the power of amending
such Bills, but I do not think it is. If
the Senate has power to amend a Money
Bill it throws, with the amendment, the
whole onus of ultimate rejection or ac-
ceptance on the House of Representatives.
The Senate may say—“ We make our
amendments, and if you like to throw the
whole country into disorder by rejecting
them you can do so.” Then the House of
Representatives takes the whole burden of
responsibility. If the Senate has not the
power to amend, but merely the power to
suggest, then it has, if these suggestions
are rejected, to take the whole burden of
saying whether it will pass the Bill. There
is a substantial difference in the respon-
sibility that is cast upon the two Houses
of Legislature if the power of amending
Money Bills were given instead of the power
of merely making suggestions. The power
of making suggestions seems to be quite
beneficial in this respect, that it enables
the House of Representatives to obtain
any information or ideas that have not
occurred to them before, but it does not
give the power to the Senate to amend a
Money Bill in the slightest degree. Sir
Samuel Griffith draws attention to this
provision in his notes on the draft Federal
Constitution. He says—
Whether the mode in which the Senate
should express its desire for an alteration in
Money Bills is by an amendment in which they
request the concurrence of the House of Repre-
sentatives as in other cases, or by a suggestion
that the desired amendment should be made by
the latter House as of its own motion, seems to
be a matter of minor importance. A strong
Senate will compel attention to its suggestions ;
a weak one would not insist on its amend-
ments.”


His Honour, therefore, thinks that this
provision does not make much difference,
and the remainder of his observations on
the subject are well worthy of the atten-
tion of honorable members. Clauses 57,
58, and 59 are very plain. They are very
much on the lines of the Canadian Act.
Honorable members will find that this
draft Constitution, as far as some of its
main principles are concerned, resembles
the United States Constitution, whereas in
regard to the framing of the Bill and of
many of the clauses we are deeply indebted
to the Canadian Act drawn up by Lord
Thring.
THE EXECUTIVE.
I pass now to the provisions relating to
the Executive Government. There is to
be a Governor-General and there are to be
Ministers of State—that is to say, Minis-
ters of the Crown. There is a provision
in clause 63 which Sir Samuel Griffith also
challenges. It is as follows:
“ After the first general election no Minister
of State shall hold office for a longer period
than three calendar months unless he shall be
or become a member of one of the Houses of the
Parliament.”
In clause 66 it is provided that the appoint-
ment and removal of all other officers of
the Government of the Commonwealth
shall be vested in the Governor-General
in Council. Honorable members will have
to consider how far before Parliament
meets at all the Governor-General should
have the right of appointing Ministers,
and those Ministers should have the right
of appointing officers of the Government.
Clause 69 is a very important one. It
provides that on the establishment of the
Commonwealth the control of some very
huge departments of State shall pass at
once to the Executive Government of the
Commonwealth. These departments are
Customs and Excise, Posts and Telegraphs,
Military and Naval Defence, Ocean Bea-
cons and Buoys and Ocean Light houses
and Light-shipsand Quarantine. Then there
is a very important provision to the effect
that the obligations of each state in respect
of the departments transferred shall there-
upon be assumed by the Commonwealth.
That means, I apprehend, that all duties
performed by the states in connexion with
the departments that are transferred shall
thereupon be undertaken by the Common-
wealth.
THE JUDICIARY.
The next important subject is the Federal
Judicature. There is to be one Supreme
Court, and in this respect a change
has been made from the 1891 Bill.
Sir Samuel Griffith challenges the advisa-
bility of making this change. The 1891
Bill provided that the Parliament when
created might erect a Supreme Court. In
this Bill it is provided, as it is in the
American Constitution, that there shall
be a Supreme Court. The question of the
tenure of the Judges is also dealt with..
There is one very important matter for
the consideration of honorable members.
Under our Victorian practice, as in Eng-
land, a Judge holds his office for life
during good behaviour, but an absolute
power is given to the Crown to remove
that Judge if the two Houses of Parlia-
ment present an address asking for his
removal. The object of making him
secure for life during good behaviour was
to place him beyond the influence of the
Crown, because at the time when the
law was passed a couple of centuries ago
Judges held their office at the mere
will and pleasure of the Crown. If they
did not give their decisions as the
Crown wished it was thought that they
might be in some peril. And, on the other
hand, they were open to receive rewards
from the Crown. They were, therefore,
made secure in their tenure, and in order
that Parliament might have some control
over the matter independently of mis-
behaviour, or when ordinary official mis-
behaviour could not be proved, provision
was made that on an address of the two
Houses of Parliament, the Crown might
remove a Judge. An alteration is made
in this Bill in the provision that a Judge
is not to be removed except for mis-
behaviour or incapacity, and then only
by the Governor-General in Council, upon
an address from both Houses of Parlia-
ment in the same session, praying for his
removal. The difference I refer to is this,
that if this Constitution comes into opera-
tion, and if both Houses of Parliament
present an address, and the Governor-
General accedes to it, the -question will
still be open possibly for litigation as to
whether the Judge was guilty of incapa-
city or misbehaviour. Even if an Act of
Parliament were passed, and a joint ad-
dress concurred in by the Crown would
be substantially equivalent to an Act of
Par lament, the Judge could still say
that it was inoperative because he w 7 as
not guilty of misbehaviour or incapacity,
and he could litigate the question. , It
woi Id be litigated in the Supreme Court


of which he was a member, although, of
course, he would not sit in his own
case. His fellow Judges, however, would
fee there, and there would be no appeal, as
far as I can see, to the Privy Council. It
is a matter well worthy of the considera-
tion of honorable members whether this
provision should stand in its present form.
The argument in favour of it is that the
Judges of the Supreme Court will have to
decide not only possibly but probably, on
matters as between the Commonwealth on
the one hand, and the states on the
other. For instance, if a state passes a
law regarding trade and commerce, and it
is challenged as being unconstitutional,
and therefore utterly void, the Judges
will have to decide it. They ought, there-
fore, it is urged, to be left perfectly free
from any hope of reward or any fear of ill-
treatment in consequence of their finding.
It ought not be open to the Federal Parlia-
ment and the Federal Government to say
that because a Judge has decided against
the Commonwealth he should be dismissed.
Well, you have to assume a great deal if
you assume that any such conduct will
be indulged in by the two Houses of
Parliament and by the Government. And
there are considerations the other way.
However, that is a matter which, for the
present, I will leave without further ob-
servation, because I am sure it is a dis-
tinct departure from the lines of the
British course of procedure in such mat-
ters ; in fact, I think it goes further than
anything else I know of. In the same
clause it is provided that the remunera-
tion of Judges is to be such as the Parlia-
ment may fix from time to time, but it is
not to be diminished during their con-
tinuance in office.
Mr. Longmore. —Nor increased.
Mr. Higgins.—That ought to be in the
clause.
Mr. Longmore. —lt must be inserted.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—In clause 73 their
jurisdiction is given, and in the next
clause their appellate jurisdiction. Clause
75 will claim the careful consideration of
the Chamber. It is in regard to appeals
to the Privy Council. The law proposed
is that there shall be no appeal to the
Privy Council from any state court or
from the federal court except that the
"Queen may give special leave to appeal in
any matter in which the public interests
of the Commonwealth, or of any state, or
of any other partof Her Majesty’s dominions
are concerned. There will be no right of
appeal to the Privy Council, but leave
may be obtained in certain cases.
Mr. Moulb. —Was it ruled in the Con-
vention that that did not take away the
inherent right of Her Majesty to receive
petitions from any of her subjects? I
believe that the honorable member for
Geelong explained that he thought it
would not take away that right.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—There are Canadian
cases, with which the honorable member is
no doubt familiar, which show that, the
Crown being a party to this Act, the
words are quite competent to take away
the right of appeal to the Privy Council.
There is the case of Theberge v. Laudry
(2 App. Cas. P.C. 102), and there are
other cases which I do not intend to refer
to at the present time. Then the Bill con-
tains other provisions about the jurisdiction
of the court, and clause 79 states that—
“The trial of all indictable offences cognisable
by any court established under the authority of
this Constitution shall be by jury, and every
such trial shall be held in the state where the
offence has been committed, and when not com-
mitted within any state the trial shall be held
at such place or places as the Parliament pre-
scribes.”
Mr. Irvine. —ls not clause 79 a provi-
sion that ought to be left to the Federal
Parliament ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—That observation
would apply to a great many of these
clauses. Of course, if we look at the func-
tions of a Constitution it ought to lay
down merely fundamental principles, which
will be suitable to and adapt themselves
to every phase and stage of the nation’s
life ; and every step we go beyond that
puts fetters on our future progress. There
is not the slightest doubt of that. We do
not know what turn events may take; we
do not know to what extent our develop-
ment may proceed in the future. It is
difficult to forecast from day to day, much
less from year to year, or from century to
century; and, therefore, we must bear in
mind that every pi’ovision we put in the
Bill, however suitable we may think it is
to our present condition, may be a bar and
a stumbling-block to progress in the future.
Mr. Higgins. —lt was held in America
that this provision limits you to the old
jury of twelve men.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Clause 80 provides
that—
“No person holding any judicial office shall
be appointed to or hold the office of Governor-
General, Lieutenant-General, Chief Executive
Officer, or Administrator of the Government, or
any other executive office.”


Sir Samuel Griffith says, as to that clause—
“ A remarkable provision has been introduced
into this chapter of the Constitution. Section
80 provides that no judicial officer shall be
appointed to administer the Government of the
Commonwealth. The objections that may be
urged to a Judge holding such an office tem-
porarily are on the surface. What are the
arguments on the other side ? I will indicate
some of them. (1) If the Sovereign is to retain
any prerogative rights with respect to the
Commonwealth, the choice of her own repre-
sentative would surely be included amongst
them. (2) If it is desired by the Parliament at
any time that the prerogative should not be
exercised by the Sovereign in a particular way,
an address indicating their desires is more in
accordance with usage and constitutional theory
than an enactment purporting to limit its
exercise. (3) The appointment of an adminis-
trator is an act that is to take effect on a sudden
emergency, and it is necessary that the form of
appointment should be such that it is sure to
take effect when the emergency arises. In the
absence, therefore, of both Governor and Lieu-
tenant-Governor (if any), there must, in order
to insure the immediate occupancy of the office,
be a dormant commission in favour of some per-
son who is certain to be in existence. In most
of the colonies the Judges have for many years
been designated in succession in order of
seniority. In some Crown colonies the members
of the Executive Council are designated in like
order. In the case of the Commonwealth the
members of the Executive Council are mani-
festly not available. It is equally plain that
the President of the Senate and the Speaker of
the House of Representatives would be unsuit-
able. The commander of the forces, who used
sometimes to be designated, would be the
servant of the Executive. By a process of
exclusion, therefore, it appears almost necessary
to follow the precedents of so many years. ”
Mr. Irvine. Very strong reasons
against clause 80.
Mr. Staughton. —Do you think the
president of the Trades Hall will do?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—Let us deal with
this matter in a proper spirit.
FINANCE.
Now I come to the part that honorable mem-
bers will no doubt simply revel in. And I
may say, before beginning my explanation
of that part of the measure, that any one
who can solve the financial problem of fede-
ration will not only win for himself a crown
of laurel, but absolute immortality.
Mr. McCay.—He will be immortal by
the time he has solved it.
Mr. Carter.— He cannot know the un-
knowable.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—It may be a
matter of consideration for the Old-age
Pensions Commission. What I may call
the finance and trade clauses of the
Bill have met with a remarkable una-
nimity of opinion in one respect, and
that is that they ought to be consider-
ably altered. They cannot be accepted in
their present form. And although the
number of suggestions that have been
made is also remarkable, I do not think
that any two of them agree. As far as I
have been able to judge, the problem is
one that yet calls for solution. The
fundamental solution, such as it is, met
with in this Bill, I will endeavour, as far
as I can, to explain; but in this matter I
must really ask for the indulgence of hon-
orable members. Recognising the difficulty
of the subject, and the importance of hon-
orable members grasping, as far as possible,
this branch of the Constitution, I included
in the Blue-book every available observa-
tion made from authoritative sources that
was to my hand at the time, except the
articles that have appeared in our Vic-
torian newspapers, and I did not include
them because they are accessible to honor-
able members at once.
Mr. Murray.— And are not worth sub-
mitting to us.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—But they are.
Some of them, I do not care what side they
are on, are remarkably able. There is a
paper by Mr. Walker, one of the members
of the Convention, who gave a consider-
able amount of attention to the financial
question, which is not included in this
Blue-book, because it was not to hand at the
time. Honorable members have no doubt
received Mr. Walker’s pamphlet, however,
and will profit by reading it. Amongst
the papers that are in the Blue-book those
of Sir Samuel Griffith, and Mr. McMillan,
of New South Wales, deal with the finan-
cial question, and Mr. Nash, of the Syd-
ney Daily Telegraph , contributes some
very valuable articles, while Sir Philip
Fysh, of Tasmania, furnishes memoranda
and statistics on federal finance. Lastly,
and not least of all, I wish to express my
sincere thanks—and I am sure that will
be the feeling of the whole House —to the
Victorian Accounts Committee, who have
favoured the Government with their
opinions on the financial proposals. The
gentlemen I refer to are Dr. Wollaston,
Secretary for Trade and Customs; Mr.
Bruford, Deputy Commissioner of Taxes;
Mr. Allen, Accountant to the Treasury;
Mr. Gumming, Acting Accountant to the
Post-office; and Mr. Fenton, Assistant
Government Statist. Whatever view may
be ultimately taken of the matter,
their report is by no means second to
any papers I have been furnished with


on this question. The provisions as to
finance and trade in this Bill start with
clause 81. And the first thing that is
done is to constitute a Consolidated Re-
venue Fund. The Consolidated Revenue
Fund is charged with the expenses of its
collection. I pass on from that provision.
1 have already referred to clause 84, which
provides that the Parliament is to have
the sole power and authority, subject to
the provisions of the Constitution, to im-
pose customs duties and duties of excise,
and to grant bounties upon the produc-
tion or export of goods; but this ex-
clusive power is not to come into force
until uniform duties of customs have
been imposed by the Parliament. Now,
after uniform duties of customs are
imposed by the Parliament, there will
be no power whatever in any of the
states to impose, for any purpose what-
soever, as I read the Constitution, any
duties on imports between the colonies.
There will be a certain other power that I
will mention further on, but not the power
to impose duties on goods exchanged
between the colonies. And, as soon as
uniform duties of customs are imposed by
the Federal Parliament, all our present
state laws of customs and excise duties
and bounties, and all other laws of the
kind that we may make in the meantime
—that is up to the establishment of uni-
form duties of customs—will cease to take
any effect; they will become dead, and
the only customs laws, the only excise
laws, and the only bounty laws—and
the question of bounties is an important
consideration for honorable members—
which will have any operation will be the
federal laws on those subjects. But that
provision about bounties will not apply to
mining for gold, silver, or other metals.
Plainly, the reason of that exception is that
there can be no question of free-trade or
protection in relation to metals. It is not
so with regard to coal, because a bounty
on, say, Victorian coal would instantly
raise the question of free-trade or pro-
tection with regard to that commodity.
Consequently that is a matter confided to
the Federal Parliament. But with regard
to gold, silver, or other metals, there is no
reason whatever why each state should
not keep absolute control in the matter of
bounties. Until the establishment of uni-
form duties of customs, excise and boun-
ties laws, the state laws are to be in full oper-
ation, and the states are to have power to
make laws on these subjects too. But, as
soon as the Commonwealth is established its
Constitution comes into operation, and the
states cease to have anything to do with the
collection of customs or excise duties or the
payment of bounties. All that passes at once
to the Federal Executive. Clause 85 raises
a question with regard to the officers trans-
ferred from the employment of the states
to the employment of the Commonwealth.
Shortly stated, it provides that the officers
of the departments of Customs, Excise,
Post-office and Telegraphs who are now in
the service of the states will pass to
the service of the Commonwealth, and the
Executive Government of the Common-
wealth may say—“We will retain you.”
If the Government of the Commonwealth
do not say so, then those officers have
their rights protected in this way—that
the states in whose service they now are
will have to pay them whatever sum
they would have to pay them if their
offices w r ere abolished, either pension or
retiring allowance.
Mr. Murray. —ls it not possible to
transfer them to some other offices in the
same state 1
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —The honorable
member has just anticipated me. It is not
possible to do that under the clause as it
stands, but 1 was going to suggest that
the state, for its own protection, should
have that power. But if the Common-
wealth says—“We will retain you,” then
those officers’pension and retiring allowance
rights are saved. The officers will go on
in the service of the Commonwealth, and
when the time arrives at which they would
be entitled topensionsor retiring-allowances
under the state laws, they will get those
pensions or retiring allowances, but the
state and the Commonwealth will pay
them in proportion to the respective
lengths of service the officers have passed
in the employ of the state and of the
Commonwealth. The weak portion of
this provision, it seems to me, is the one
which the honorable member for Warr-
nambool has just suggested. If the Com-
monwealth says —“We do not want you,”
those officers can come down to the state
and say —“ Give us our compensation and
pensions.” But honorable members will
have to consider whether it would not be
just and fair to say—lf the Common-
wealth do not want you, we will retain
vou ; your rights shall all be saved, but
instead of working in the Customs, as
you have hitherto done, you shall work
in the Defence department or some other


analogous position.” Otherwise, it might
mean that an enormous amount of money
would have to be paid out at once by
the states in retiring allowances and
pensions, even although the Common-
wealth should directly afterwards re-
•ernploy the same officers. It will be
■a matter of consideration whether that
amendment should not be made. Honor-
able members will find that section 130 of
the Canadian Act deals with the same
subject. I now pass on to the provision
in clause 86 with regard to the transfer of
lands and buildings. This provision raises
a very serious question. The clause pro-
vides that all lauds, buildings, works,
vessels, materials, and things necessarily
appertaining to or used in connexion
with any depai’traent of the public ser-
vice shall pass over to the Commonwealth,
and that the Commonwealth shall pay for
them. This is a very serious thing, and the
financial members of the House will be able
to appreciate the difficulty that will arise
under this provision. The clause provides
that the fair value of these properties or
of the use thereof, according as to whether
the freehold passes from the state to the
Commonwealth, or mei'ely the use of the
properties, shall be paid by the Common-
wealth to the state from which they are
taken over. That value is to be ascertained
toy mutual agreement, or, if no agreement
■can be made, in the manner in which the
value of land, or of an interest in land,
taken by the Government of the state for
similar public purposes is ascertained,
under the Lands Compensation Act, in
short. Now, this is what is intended by
that clause : Assuming that to-morrow
morning the Commonwealth comes into
■existence, the whole department of the
Post-office passes over to the Common-
wealth instantly ; the buildings of the
Post-office pass away from the state to the
Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth
ewes Victoria the capital value thereof.
Well, if that has got to be paid for—sup-
pose we agree on the price—how is it to
toe paid for 1 ? It might be, and probably
would be, some very considerable amount.
The Commonwealth would either have to
a-aise the money by taxation or borrow
money in order to pay it, or it could be
arranged that it should be paid off in
instalments.
Mr. Carter. —They might take over
isome of our debts in exchange.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —That is another
matter. They might take over some of
our debts in exchange, but the buildings
have got to be paid for. Now, the Accounts
Committee, referring to this matter, have
pointed out the serious nature of that
obligation, and it is serious, because if the
Commonwealth says —“We will pay for
the buildings in cash, but we will tax you
to get the money,” Victoria would get the
amount with one hand, and have to pay it
out with the other. So that this is a very
important question; and when you contem-
plate that provision in conjunction with
other proposals for taxation, which I will
deal with presently, honorable members
will see that it is a matter that cannot be
lightly dealt with. A suggestion is made
in the Accounts Committee’s report which
is well worthy of our consideration
namely, whether the value of the property
should be capitalized, and the interest
charge taken together with a certain
amount for a sinking fund, so as to pay
the whole sum off in 30 or 40 years, as
the case may be. As the arrangement
rests at present it will raise a serious
obstacle to federation. It is a provision
that may be cavilled at by some of
the smaller states, because if the
Commonwealth, for example, pays an
enormous sum for the Melbourne and
Sydney post-offices, those buildings will
still remain where they are, you cannot
take them away, and Tasmania and
Western Australia might say —“It is all
very well for Victoria and New South
Wales, but we have to pay our share of
the cost of those buildings, which can
never belong to us any more than they do
at present.”
Mr. McColl. — Theirs are taken over as
well.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —But theirs are very
small in comparison. However, the ques-
tion deserves the attention of the financial
members of the House.
Mr. Moulb.—Who are the financial
members 1
Mr. J. A. ISAACS.—WeII, I do not want
to make any invidious distinctions. Hon-
orable members will regard with some
degree of satisfaction the provision in
clause 88, which states that uniform
duties of customs shall be imposed within
two years after the establishment of the
Commonwealth. It is taken for granted
that they will be imposed, but I need
hardly say that if they are not imposed
there is no penalty attached.
Mr. Irvine.— What about Sir Samuel
Griffith’s criticism of that clause—that it


takes away the power to do it afterwards,
if it is not done within the two years'?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—I must say that
I am not quite able to follow that criti-
cism. What is referred to by the hon-
orable member is this : It is being pro-
vided in the Constitution that uniform
duties of customs shall be imposed within
two years. Sir Samuel Griffith raises a
very important question. He states that
if those uniform duties of customs are not
imposed in two years they never can be
afterwards, according to clause 88. Still,
there is a general power given to impose
duties, and the mere statement that the
uniform duties of customs shall be imposed
in two years does not lessen that general
power in the slightest degree. If clause
88 went on to say “ and not afterwards,”
that would, of course, clinch the matter ;
but it does not say anything of the kind,
and it is put there, as I take it, rather as
a very urgent request —an intimation of
opinion —to the Federal Parliament that
they shall, if they can, establish uniform
duties of customs within two years.
Mr. Irvine. —ls it proper to include a
request in a Constitution ? It seems rather
an extraordinary thing.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—It does seem an
extraordinary thing, but still it is an indica-
tion of the desire of the people of these
colonies that we shall have uniform duties
of customs as soon as possible. I now
come to clause 89, and I would like to draw
the attention of honorable members to the
provisions of that clause. The intention
of the clause, as stated by most members
of the Convention —although some went a
little further, as honorable members will
see by reading the debates—is that as soon
as uniform duties of customs are imposed,
there shall be what is known as intercolo-
nial free-trade. Clause 89 stands, I believe,
just as it did in the 1891 Bill.
Mr. Harper.—lt seems to have been
altered.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —But very little. It
has the same sense exactly. There is no
material alteration there, and no alteration
at all in what I am going to draw attention
to. The clause provides that on the
establishment of uniform duties of customs
and excise, “ trade and intercourse through-
out the Commonwealth, whether by means
of internal carriage or ocean navigation,
shall be absolutely free.” Now, I drew
attention at the Convention to the
alarmingly large nature of these words,
because “ throughout the Commonwealth ”
is something more than “ between the
states.” It would mean “ internal ”as
well as “ inter-state,” and “be absolutely
free” means free of everything. Under
many American decisions, it might, and
probably would, be held to include “ free
of any licence whatsoever.” It means some-
thing very large.
Mr. Higgins. —lt would include even
hawkers’ licences.
Mr. Irvine. —Why did they not use the
words used in clause 52 ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—I urged that at
the Convention. lam glad to say—if 1
may be permitted to say so —that Sir
Samuel Griffith has pointed out, in like
manner, the largeness of the provision in
clause 89.
Mr. Higgins. —lt was in the Bill Sir
Samuel drafted.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —It was in the Bill
that Sir Samuel Griffith drafted, but at
page 354 of the Blue-book, he states —
“ I venture, before passing from this subject,
to suggest a doubt whether the words of section
89 (which are the same as in the draft Bill of
1891) are, in their modern sense, quite apt to
express the meaning intended to be conveyed.
It is clearly not proposed to interfere with the
internal regulations of trade by means of li-
cences, nor to prevent the imposition of reason-
able rates on state railways. I apprehend that
the real meaning is that the free course of trade
and commerce between different parts of the
Commonwealth is not to be restricted or inter-
fered with by any taxes, charges, or imposts.
Would it not be better to vise these or similar
words? ”
“ Among the states,” would, I think, carry
it out, but we ought to consider whether
“ parts of the Commonwealth ” may not be
better, because there may be “territories”
as well as “states” within the Common-
wealth. Territories would be parts of the
Commonwealth, but would not be states.
The words “parts of the Commonwealth”
are used in other sections. I asked the
Accounts Committee to state,.on the basis
of the American decisions with regard to
business licences, what this would mean
to Victoria, and I am told that it would
mean an extra sum of £350,000. Honor-
able members will see that in the Ac-
counts Committee’s report in the Blue-
book.
Mr. Motile. —What would that include?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Business, hotel,
auctioneers’, and carriers’ licences. Now
we come to clause 90, which provides as
to the accounts to be kept. This is a
part of the Bill in dealing with which I
feel considerable diffidence. I would like


honorable members to try to follow me, if
they can. But, first, there is one obser-
vation I omitted to make, with regard to
clause 89, about intercolonial free-trade.
That clause seems to have been adapted
from the resolution of the Sydney Confer-
ence in 1891. It was the third resolution,
and the wording there was—
“ That the trade and intercourse between the
federated colonies, whether by means of land
carriage or postal navigation, shall be abso-
lutely free.’
It is quite evident that the intention was
“intercolonial only,” and in Canada the
121st section provides, not as here, that
all intercolonial trade shall be free, but that
all articles of the growth, produce, or manu-
facture of any of the provinces shall be ad-
mitted free into each of the other provinces.
Of course, I need hardly say that a provi-
sion that there shall be intercolonial free-
trade is an acceptable addition to the
Bill, because I feel confident that the
colonies would not undergo all the trouble
of federation, with the attendant expense,
unless they had an assurance that there
would be intercolonial free-trade for the
rest of our political lives. Honorable
members are aware of the criticisms with
which the financial proposals of the Bill
of 1891 were met. 1 think that, while
some of the objections to the Bill of 1891
were undoubtedly good, new ones have
been created. The measure of 1891 pro-
vided that the revenue of the Common-
wealth should be applied in the first in-
stance in the payment of the expenditure
of the Commonwealth, and that the expen-
diture should be charged to the various
states according to the population, the
surplus to be returned in proportion to the
revenue contributed. The measure also
contained other provisions similar to some
which lam going to refer to. Sir Samuel
Griffith and others pointed out that the
arrangement which I have just men-
tioned was unfair to the colonies, and
particularly to Victoria, because, as Sir
Samuel Griffith said in his very destructive
criticism, the new expenses of the Federa-
tion were supposed to amount to £239,000
a year, and the effect of the financial pro-
posals I have alluded to would be that
Victoria would be £239,000 a year to the
bad, she having to bear the whole of the
expense of the Federation and the rest to
boot.
Mr. Heakin. ■ — That was only hypo-
thetical.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —But the substance
of the statement was not seriously chal-
lenged. None of the figures to which lam
going to refer can be accepted as absolutely
reliable; indeed, Sir Samuel Griffith and
others said that theonly certain thing about
thematter is that it is absolutely uncertain.
The whole thing is conjectural, and we
must take a considerable amount of risk.
We must minimize the cost as much as
possible, and then understand that we
must be prepared to be disappointed. A
serious objection was raised to the Bill of
1891, and it may be raised in respect to
the Bill now before us. When we have
uniform duties of customs imposed, the
states can no longer impose duties of cus-
toms and excise. From the time at which
the Commonwealth is established, every
penny of customs and excise duties goes
into the coffers of the Commonwealth.
This is the position : Every state says—
“We are transferring large departments.
The one department which gives us a
huge profit is that of Customs and Excise.
What guarantee have we that we are
going to get back a fair share of what we
are giving up?” In other words they
ask—“ How is the surplus going to be
distributed ? ” That is one of the crucial
questions which have to be dealt with.
What guarantee have we as states that
the Federal Treasurer and Parliament
will enable the states to get back their
fair share of the surplus? We know that
in America the Government had for many
years what was called a demoralizing
surplus—a thing for which we have long
looked for in this country.
Mr. Harper.— We have had it.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—We thought we had
it, but whether we had it or not is another
matter. In America the position was very
serious indeed. After the civil war the
revenue poured in, and, after strenuous
exertions, the interest on the national debt
was cut down, but a great surplus re-
mained, and the Government did not know
what to do with it. They had no power
to give it to the states. On one occasion,
60 years ago, in order to get i’id of such a
surplus, a scheme was devised of lending
money to the states, the money to be re-
called when Congress chose, and Congress
never chose to do it. After the civil war
a new plan of giving pensions was started.
What followed would have been amusing,
if it had not been so serious, because it re-
sulted in the expenditure of millions of
money. As it was put by Sir George


Turner on the platform and in the Con-
vention, it is not inconceivable that mem-
bers of the Federal Parliament, unlike this
Parliament, might go to the Federal
Treasurer and endeavour to persuade him
that certain works wei’e national works in
the highest sense. That is a possible con-
jecture. And the Federal Parliament
might also be disposed to remit taxation
in certain cases, and leave the state Trea-
surer in difficulties. To show that this is
a real question in America I will direct
attention to the following paragraph :
“ The striking features in the national expen-
diture during recent years have been the increased
outlay for naval construction, the immense
growth of the pension list, and the decrease of
the interest charge for the public debt. From
the end of the civil war to 1880 the amount of
pensions to the survivors of the civil war or
their families varied annually from $20,000,000
to $35,000,000 (£4,000,000 to £7,000,(XX)). In
1880 the classes were enlarged, and the pen-
sions jumped up to $56,000,000 (£11,200,000).
In the next eight years they varied from
$50,000,000 to $70,000,000 (£10,000,000 to
£14,000,000).
“In 1889 the old law was more liberally con-
strued, and in 1890 a new ‘ dependent pension ’
law was enacted. A« a consequence the pensions
grew enormously to $88,(XX),000 (£17,600,000)
in 1889, to $107,000,000 (£21,400,000) in 1890,
to $124,000,000 (£24,800,000) in 1891, and to
$135,000,000 (£27,000,000) in 1892. In 1893
they are estimated at $158,000,000 (£31,600,000),
and for 1894 at $166,000,000 (£33,200,000),
unless, as is probable, the new democratic Ad-
ministration will reform both the law and the
execution of the law. ”
Mr. Carter. —There were more persons
receiving pensions than there were in the
war.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—UnIess a large
number of persons who claimed pensions
were descendants of the persons who were
engaged in the war. 1 would like also to
refer to the message of President Cleveland
on this subject, because it shows how
important this question of the surplus is.
I find that in the Annual Register for the
year 1886 the following appears :
“ Regarding the financial condition of the
country, the President’s message pointed out
that the income of the Government was more
than ever in excess of the public necessities.
All the public debt now’ payable would be paid
if the present rate prevail within a year.
If the present revenue system continued, there
would be vastly more income than necessary to
meet expenses, thus creating an excess which
might be uselessly hoarded or lead to wasteful
public extravagance. The message argued at
length that the exaction of such a surplus resulted
from a perversion of the relations between the
people and the Government, and was a dan-
gerous depai’ture from the rules which limit the
right of federal taxation. ‘lt has been our
policy ’ said the President, ‘ to collect the prin-
cipal revenue by a tax on imports ; no change
in this policy is desirable, but the present con-
dition of affairs constrains the people to demand
a revision of the revenue laws, so that the re-
ceipts may be reduced to what is necessary to
cover the expense of economical administration;
and this demand should be recognised and
obeyed by Congress. In re-adjusting the bur-
dens of taxation we should deal cautiously with
industries dependent on present conditions, and
regard also the interests of American labour.
I recommend, keeping in view all those considera-
tions, that the revenue laws be amended so as
to cheapen the necessaries of life, and give freer
entrance to raw materials. To accomplish this
much-needed reform it is necessary to approach
the subject in a patriotic spirit of devotion to
the interests of the entire country, and with
willingness to yield something for the public
good.’”
That is a very important thing, because
many of these subjects are touched on by
the Accounts Committee. When we come
to consider what is best to be done, the
easiest thing to do is of course to provide
that directly the Commonwealth comes
into existence our expenditure and income
shall be treated per capita , and divided on
that basis ; but there are startling objec-
tions to that course being followed. We
say that, for some,time, at all events, the
and that
the starc®^f a certain
n some of
more per -Jihad than the people in other
colonies. Thbn there-afe considerations
allied to them, such as industries in
existence, which might receive a severe
shock if that plan were adopted. The
idea is to make the thing gradual for a
few years until the Commonwealth feels
its feet. It is suggested in this Common-
wealth Bill that until uniform duties of
customs are imposed the states shall be left
practically with their present income, less
their share of the new federal expenditure.
Assuming now’, as we must for the pur-
pose of definite that uniform
duties of customs will be imposed in two
years, if not before—for those two years
the Federal Commonwealth is to collect
all the customs and excise duties, which
are taken clean out of the hands of the
states. The Federal Commonwealth is to
have book accounts showing the revenue
of each state put down to its credit, and
showing on the debit side each state’s
share of the cost of collecting, called the
transferred services, and a balance is to be
struck. There is to be a proportionate


amount debited to the state for the new
expenditure on account of the original
services which the Commonwealth has to
incur. The state’s share is taken off, and
the monthly balance remaining is paid to
the state. The expenditure of the Com-
monwealth is limited during the first three
years to £1,550,000. £300,000 is the
limit of expenditure during those three
years for the new services. £1,250,000 is
supposed to be the cost of transferred
services.
Mr. Styles. —£l,2so,ooo will not pay
half the cost of the transferred services.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —I will refer honor-
able members to a table which will show
how the plan operates. The Accounts
Committee have taken the year 1895 as the
basis for the purpose of illustration, be-
cause that is the last year for which they
have got complete information. Honorable
members will find ample room for criti-
cising the figures which are presented here,
but the object is to give an illustration. If
honorable members will look at Table 2,
on page 254 of the book of papers which
has been circulated they will see what
takes place. Victoria receives for the year
1895 revenue from Customs and Excise to
the amount of £2,047,000, including
primage, which is included because the
other colonies if they have not primage
duties have other similar duties, such as
wharfage rates. In the ordinary expendi-
ture of states Victoria expends £73,673
for Customs and Excise, £52,630 for Post
and Telegraphs (net), so much for Defences,
and so much for Quarantine; the esti-
mated total expenditure for the Common-
wealth in respect of these services as re-
gards Victoria is £328,565. That is the
amount which Victoria would expend in
collecting £2,047,000, even if there were
no federation. The balance of that would
be £1,718,435 if there was no federation.
But inasmuch as there will be federa-
tion, the new federal expenditure for Vic-
toria is set down as £lOl,OOO. If that
amount is deducted, the Commonwealth
has to return to her £1,617,435. It is
merely a matter of bookkeeping, and the
position is the same with the other
colonies.
Mr. Outtrim.— ln making that calcula-
tion, has consideration been given to the
duties paid by the other colonies?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —What I have
stated is the amount of duties that were
actually received in 1895. Except with
regard to New South Wales, the calculation
showed what would be the return if the
present Tariffs were in force.
Mr. McKenzie. The honorable member
for Maryborough means —does the amount
include the duties charged on the goods
imported by the other colonies ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—Yes, for the first
two years until uniform duties are im-
posed. The great point is that until the
establishment of uniform duties every-
thing goes on as now, except that the
Commonwealth takes the collection in
hand, and returns the surplus to the
state.
Mr. Moule. —Then the cost to Victoria
will be about £lOO,OOO.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —It will be about
£lOl,OOO per annum for the two years.
Now we come to the establishment of the
uniform duties, and this is the point where
the difficulty arises. Let me remind hon-
orable members that the expenditure, as
lirnitedfor the first two years, is £1,550,000
a year. The expenditure is also limited
to that amount for the third year, which
is assumedly the first year of the institu-
tion of uniform duties. Assuming that the
two years have passed, that uniform duties
have been imposed, that there is inter-
colonial free-trade, state customs laws,
and that the new Federal Tariff is in full
operation, clause 92 of the Commonwealth
Bill provides what is to be done. In order
that the state Treasurer may know to
some extent what he is going to receive,
and in order that the state shall not have
its finances utterly dislocated, as might
happen if we take the average amount of
contribution and pay the state on that
basis from that time forth (because the
amount would drop down in the next year
in the case of some colonies), provision
is made here for a sliding scale, though
no one would ever expect it from
the wording of the clause. Working it
out literally there is no sliding scale, and I
think Sir Samuel Griffith has failed to ob-
serve the sliding scale at all. But the in-
tention plainly was that there should be
a sliding scale, as is shown in Sir Philip
Fysh’s observations. This is what is done
—For each of the five years after the uni-
form duties are established, from the third
to the seventh year inclusive, the Common-
wealth is under an obligation to return to
the states as a whole not less than the
total amount of the surplus which was
returned to them in the second year. I
am assuming that the uniform Tariff comes
into operation in the third year.


Mr. Outtrim.—Where does the money
come from 1
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —I will show the
honorable member presently. There is a
collective guarantee to the states that that
amount of money at least (and possibly,
under the wording of the Bill, at most)
will be divided between them during each
of those five years. During the first of
those five years there is a curious provi-
sion made applicable—a provision which is
intended to cure a great defect in the Bill
of 1891. In that Bill it was provided
that every colony should get back the
amount of duty collected by the Federal
Government at the ports of each colony
and something more. It wasperfectly plain
that if goods were landed, say in Sydney,
and duties were paid there, and the goods
were transferred to Victoria for consump-
tion, it would be very wrong to give
Sydney credit for duties which were col-
lected there, Sydney being only the port
of entry, whereas the duties were really
collected in Victoria, where the people had
to pay the prices for the goods, and also
the duties. It was therefore recognised as
perfectl}’ just that the colony which con-
sumed the goods should receive the benefit.
Mr. Murray Smith.—l always thought
that according to the protectionist theory
the importer paid the duties.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—I do not want to
enter into any discussion outside of the mat-
ter in hand. The justice of what I have
said was observed, and the matter was pro-
vided for in this way : The state is to be
credited in the books with the actual
amoftnt received. Statistical offices are to
be established on the borders, all the goods
which come from one colony to another
will be entered there, and the state will
get the credit of them. That will do away
with much of the benefit of intercolonial
free-trade, and it must be remembered that
the harassing work of making entries and
the delay and expense incidental to that
would at least minimize the benefits of in-
tercolonial free trade. To cure this diffi-
culty, provision is made in the Bill as
follows : We will keep those accounts for
the first year only; then we will judge from
the result how things are going to work.
We take the first year as a test, and apply
that to the next four years; then every-
thing is to be at the absolute discretion of
the Federal Parliament.
Mr. Outtrim.—Then you debit the
Commonwealth with duties which it has
never received for four years.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—The honorable
member is no doubt quite right in some
respects. To minimize the bookkeeping,
it is provided by this Constitution that it
shall be done for one year only. Entry is
made and credit is given in the books to
the Commonwealth. Taking the case of
Victoria, all the money actually col-
lected, less that for any goods which go
across the border for consumption, and the
value of all goods coming from another co-
lony to Victoria are credited to this colony.
The amount which has to be paid month
by month to the various colonies, is the
amount represented by the money actually
collected and by the money which has to
be collected. This is done on the assump-
tion that the goods do pay duty in New
South Wales; but they come to Victoria,
and the amount of money represented is
transferred in the books to Victoria on the
assumption that they are consumed here.
That amount is paid month by mouth to
the various states in the first year of
uniform duties. Then we take the total
amount, divide it by the population, and
determine the average amount per head
which that produces. In the next four
years we have to estimate the amount that
has to be paid to each of the states. We
then do away with the statistical offices,
and it is to be assumed henceforward that
each colony contributes the average amount
per head previously mentioned to the
total revenue of the Commonwealth.
Mr. Harper.—Exactly as in the first
year.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—That is so. The
amount I have indicated is the estimated
amount, and the amount which practically
has to be paid. If in the first year any
state has received exactly the amount
which it would be entitled to receive on
that basis, there is to be no sliding scale
at all. But if it receives more in the first
year than it would be entitled to on the
basis of average, it has got to come down
in the succeeding years on a sliding scale.
The first year one-fifth is to be taken off,
the second year two-fifths, the third year
three-fifths, and in the fourth year it comes
down to the average.
Mr. Harper.—The Bill does not say so.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —But that was the
intention of the four gentlemen who ar-
ranged the matter at the Convention. If,
on the other hand, the state in the first
year has received less than it would have
received on the basis of this average, it
has added to it one-fifth for the first


year, two-fifths for the second year, and
three-fifths for the third year. The honor-
able member for Maryborough has said
that some of the states will be credited
with amounts which were never paid. That
is quite true, and for a reason which can be
stated. The second year of the Common-
wealth would be the test year so far as
concerns the aggregate amount. The third
year would be the test as to the distri-
bution of this aggregate. And what is
going to happen in the second year of the
Commonwealth ? In that year —that is,
the year before uniform duties are put
on —importers will not import into Vic-
toria, where they will have to pay higher
duties, but into New South Wales. They
will make New South Wales a general
storehouse for their commodities, and as
soon as the third year arrives Victoria will
be supplied from New South Wales with
those commodities that have never paid
any duty in New South Wales, and will
not pay any duty on coming into Victoria
from New South Wales. Though Victoria
will be credited with that duty by the
Commonwealth, the Commonwealth will
not receive it. Not only that, but Vic-
torian merchants will be undersold, and
Victorian manufacturers most certainly
will suffer. There will be a general
disturbance, and, as the report of the
Accounts Committee puts it, it will be a
year of convulsions of trade.
Mr. Murray Smith. —l thought that
protection cheapens prices?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —The honorable
member knows that that is not an ob-
servation at all pertinent to this ques-
tion.
Mr. Outtrim.— Do I understand the
honorable gentleman to say that this so-
called surplus will have to be paid by
taxation ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—Of course the
money will have to be raised somewhere
and somehow in order to be distributed.
The problem is how to equitably return
the money that is raised. The obligation
is cast upon the Commonwealth to raise
the money. It will have to be raised by
means of taxation, and the Commonwealth
has unlimited powers of raising money by
means of taxation
Mr. Carter. —lf I understand the
honorable gentleman correctly, he says
that these goods will be poured in from
New South Wales, and sold cheaper in
Victoria than would otherwise be the case,
thus underselling people here. Then, in
addition, we shall gain the money which
would i-epresent the duty supposed to have
been paid on those goods ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—Is the honorable
member trying to criticise these proposals
or to get something for another purpose ?
The position is that we only want fair
play. We recognise perfectly plainly that
Victoria would, according to this scheme,
be entitled to a recoup from the Common-
Avealth of money the Commonwealth would
never get, and that the other colonies
would naturally raise a strong objection
to that. More than that, manufacturers
in Victoria would find that they were being
unfairly dealt with. However, that is a
question for the committee to consider
later on. It is referred to in the report of
the Accounts Committee. I would like to
point out to honorable members how this
sliding scale operates. 1 have already
referred them to Table No. 2, and I would
like to refer them to Table No. 4, on page
256. This table shows the surplus return-
able in the third year of the Common-
wealth—that is, the first year of uniform
duties. Of course, it is an estimate. Under
Table No. 2, in the first two years the
total surplus returnable is shown to be
£4,536,000. The Bill provides that that
sum at least shall be I’eturned in the
third, fourth, sixth, and seventh years.
So the Commonwealth has to see that
£4,536,000 is available for distribution.
That amount at least must be raised
altogether by the Common wealth, together
with other moneys, in order that it may
pay its expenses. These other moneys
are limited during the first three years to
£1,550,000, so that the total to be raised
must be at least £6,086,000. On a popula-
tion basis, under the uniform Tariff—assum-
ing unformity, as is assumed by the Bill—
honorable members will find in column 1 of
Table 4, that Victoria would have to be
credited with having received £1,760,000,
New South Wales with £1,891,000,
South Australia with £515,000, Tas-
mania with £286,000, West Australia
with £454,000, and Queensland with
£1,180,000. We should lose the Border
Duties, and should have to make up the
amount on various things. Then the
expenditure, on a population basis, accord-
ing to the Bill, is given in the other
columns of the table, the total amount
being set forth in the fourth column ; and
that amount deducted from the sum I
have already quoted shows that Victoria
Avould get back in the third year a


surplus of £1,238,000; New South Wales,
£1,331,000; South Australia, £359,000 ;
Tasmania, £215,000 ; Western Australia,
£4-14,000; Queensland, £979,000; making
a total returnable in the third year of
the Commonwealth of £4,536,000. The
Commonwealth is under an obligation to
raise that money somehow. Of course,
it must raise that money in each of the five
years succeeding the two first years. Then
1 have pointed out that when they have
got those amounts, and have found the
average according to the population per
head, they will have to adjust the matter
by a sliding scale. If the average, for
instance, would give Victoria a much less
amount than she had been receiving, she
would not like to drop down to that
amount straight off. If honorable mem-
bers look at Table 6, they will find that
in the second year of the Commonwealth
Victoria is entitled to £1,617,435, and
she would get on an average £1,530,000.
But some of the other colonies with a
higher contribution per head would have
to drop very considerably, and they
could not stand it if applied sud-
denly. For instance, Western Australia,
in the second year, would get £551,693.
On the average that I have mentioned
she would only get £116,000. That is
assumed to be a per capita rate. But it
would be a tremendous drop for Western
Australia, and she could not bear it at once.
So she conies under the sliding scale, and
the amount is to be taken down by fifths.
In the third year she gets £414,000, in
the fourth year £354,400, in the fifth year
£294,800, in the sixth year £235,200, in
the seventh year £175,600, and in the
eighth year £116,000. That is to give
Western Australia time to accommodate
herself to the new conditions; and, there
being only a certain 'amount to be distri-
buted among the states, wdien one goes
down another goes up. The one that goes
up is New South Wales. In the second
year she would be assumed toget £640,713.
But on the average she should get
£1,640,000. But you could not give her
that at once, because there would not be
enough to go round among the other
states. Therefore, we have the sliding
scale by which some colonies rise gradually
and others fall gradually. It has been
generally conceded that the position of
Western Australia is abnormal, and if she
is to come in we must have some scheme
which will operate very much the same all
round.
Mr. Murray. Would you alter a
scheme that suits the other colonies in
order to bring her in 1
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—I would prefer
that the honorable member would give
notice of that question. If honorable
members turn to Table 5 they will see that
that purports to show that the surplus
returnable to Victoria during the third
year of the Commonwealth is £1,238,000,
and the surplus that would be returnable
in the eighth year on a population basis
would be £1,530,000. It goes up by fifths,
that is, by £58,400 per annum. I would
like honorable members to read carefully,
if they have not already done so, the report
of the Accounts Committee. It is very im-
portant. It deals with Victoria especially,
and with the other colonies generally, and
is a most valuable document. Too great
thanks cannot be given to those gentlemen
who have .taken such pains to prepare it.
Now, having passed from the third and
fourth years after the imposition of
uniform duties, we come to the fifth year ;
and clause 93 comes into operation.
Thenceforth it operates for ever after-
wards. That is to say, that after the
expiration of five years from the imposi-
tion of uniform duties of customs, each
state shall be deemed to contribute to the
revenue an equal sum per head of its
population, and all surplus revenue over
the expenditure of the Commonwealth is
to be distributed month by month among
the several states in proportion to the
numbers of their people. That leaves it
absolutely to the Federal Parliament to say
what its expenditure shall be. It is no
longer limited in expenditure, no longer
under any fixed obligations to the states.
All the difficulties that have arisen in
America might come in here. No doubt
public opinion in this country, being in-
formed as to what has happened in
America, will help to check that to a
large extent, but still we have to bear in
mind the possibilities, and honorable
members will no doubt turn their atten-
tion to schemes which have been formu-
lated in such countries as Germany, where,
I think, the Federation collects some
£18,000,000 a year, but is only allowed
to spend some £6,500,000, and if it wants
more has to go to the states and get
further contributions. These proposals of
the Bill have met with severe criticism, and,
as I have already indicated, there is prac-
tically unanimity of opinion that they can-
not be accepted in their present form.


One gentleman, Mr. Nash (the financial
editor of the Sydney Daily Telegraph)
says that the problem is in effect how to
raise about £1,500,000 a year. He says
that if the Federation takes the railways
over it will get £350,000 per year from
that source, and that by consolidating the
debts of the colonies, £900,000 a year will
be saved. If he means that that will be
saved immediately, I should like to see
proof of it. He also says that by cutting
down the expenditure of the provincial
Governments there is room for a saving of
£lOO,OOO a year. Mr. Nash estimates that
altogether nearly £1,500,000 can be saved.
Mr. McMillan recognises that the system
of bookkeeping will hare to be continued
for two years after the uniform Tariff' is
brought into operation, because of goods
(owing to the causes already explained)
being stored in New South Wales, and
sent over during the next two years to the
other colonies.
Mr. Harper. —That would not alter the
case ; the duty would not be paid.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —lt might alter the
case to some extent.
Mr. Harper.—lt would not give the
Commonwealth the money.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—The duties would
be paid in the second year.
Mr. Harper. —Three years would be
better than two.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. Then Mr.
McMillan says it is questionable whether
the railways should be taken over or not,
and he would leave that matter to be set-
tled by the Federal Parliament. Sir
Samuel Griffith also says that the Federal
Parliament is the best authority to deal
with this question, which is too intricate
a matter to be embodied in the Constitu-
tion. The Accounts Committee point out
the difficulty in regard to the store-house
matter, and they say that the best course
would be for New South Wales to impose
duties in anticipation of the uniform Tariff;
or, failing that course, that there should be
a further period of two or three years during
which intercolonial duties should continue
to be collected on a general and uniform
scale. I have no doubt that honorable
members will be able and only too glad
to make a suggestion in this matter. I will
now pass from that subject to another.
EQUALITY AND FREEDOM OF
INTERCOLONIAL TRADE.
With regard to equality of trade, clause
95 provides that preference shall not
be given by any law or regulation of
commerce or revenue to the ports of
one state over the ports of another.
That provision must not be misunderstood.
Under the American Constitution a similar
provision does not mean that one state
is not to give preference to itself or any
state over another; it means that the
Commonwealth Parliament is not to give
preference to the ports of one state over
the ports of another. According to the
decisions of the American courts it even
goes to this extent—that it does not debar
the Parliament from giving special facili-
ties to any one port in a state over any
other port of any other state. It means,
I think, that the Parliament is not to take
the ports of one state as a whole and give
them a preference over the ports of any
other state as a whole—in short, that the
Commonwealth is not to prefer one state
to another. The next provision in the
clause is that any law or regulation made
by the Commonwealth or by any state, or
by any authority constituted by the Com-
monwealth or by any state, having the
effect of derogating from freedom of trade
or commerce between the different parts
of the Commonwealth, shall be null and
void. The effect of that will be to pre-
vent a state from interfering with freedom
of trade, but it does not debar states from
giving preference to certain ports. A
clause similar to the first part of this
clause was put in the American Constitu-
tion for this reason : There were states
having certain commercial ports, and there
were other states having ports which they
hoped would become commercial, or which
were commercial, but not to such an extent
as the others, and it was desired that Con-
gress should not give any preference to
one state over another in regard to having
ports of entry and so on.
Mr. Murray Smith. —Would a state be
able to give special privileges to goods
coming to its ports ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—That is dealt with
under another portion of the Bill dealing
with regulations of trade. I am only
pointing this out, because it was thought
that it had an intimate connexion with the
railway question.
PUBLIC DEBTS.
Clause 98 provides that the Parliament
may take over the whole or a rateable
portion of the public debts of the states
as existing at the establishment of the
Commonwealth. That means that if at


any time the Federal Parliament may
take over the debt of any state it must
take over the whole debt, or a rateable
proportion, as compared with what it
takes over of the debts of another colony.
It would not be allowed to take over a
million pounds of the Victorian debt, and
none from New South Wales.
Mr. Irvixe. —Why? What is the object
of that?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—It might be that
three states would command a majority,
and it would be unfair for the Common-
wealth Parliament to take over the debts
of those three states, and leave those of
the other two. That is the reason why
the provision is put in this way.
THE STATES.
The next clause deals with the continu-
ance of the powers of the Parliaments of
the states. Roughly speaking, I may say
that the next few clauses provide that
all the powers of the states and the
jurisdiction of the states and their Par-
liaments, except such as are expressly
altered, are to remain as at present; but
if the Commonwealth Parliament, in mat-
ters over which it has jurisdiction, makes
any law on any subject on which a state
has also made a law, the Commonwealth
law, so far as it comes into conflict with
the state law, is to prevail. Clause 105
deserves very critical examination. The
Accounts Committee have pointed out
what they consider to be a serious de-
fect in it. That is, that the clause pro-
vides that the Parliament of a state may
at any time surrender any part of the
state land to the Commonwealth. In-
asmuch as the Federal Parliament is not
limited with regard to the amount of terri-
tory which it may hold, and has unlimited
powers of taxation and of dealing with its
revenue, it might purchase large quantities
of land; and instances are given by the
Accounts Committee where investments
have been made very largely by some
Federations—to the extent of millions of
pounds, in fact. Clause 106 provides
that, after uniform duties of customs have
been imposed, a state shall not levy any
impost charge on imports or exports,
except such as may be necessary for
executing the inspection laws of the state.
That would probably be construed, if the
American decisions were followed, as
meaning that the state shall not. except
as therein specified, levy any imposts or
charges on imports or exports coming
0402.—0
from abroad. Because intercolonial free-
trade is absolute; and honorable mem-
bers will have to consider the position
of Queensland cattle and other cattle
coming to this colony, when the state
could not levy any charge on its imports
or exports. It would be a matter for the
Federal Parliament, and within its power,
to regulate trade or commerce among the
states. The states themselves, however,
would not have the power, even for the pur-
pose of inspection, of charging on imports or
exports between the states. Then there are
various provisions that bear their meaning
upon the face of them, and I do not think
it necessary to deal with them now.
NEW STATES.
Clause 114 seems a very necessary pro-
vision—that although equal representa-
tion in the Senate and proportional repre-
sentation in the House of Representatives
is provided for the various states if they
join the Federation at once, they are not
necessarily to be entitled to have the
same privileges if they come in after-
wards, but will have to come in on any
terms the Commonwealth thinks just.
Clause 118 provides that the federal
capital is to be fixed by the Parliament.
That very awkward question is thus
postponed.
AMENDMENT OF THE
CONSTITUTION.
As to amendments of the Constitution,
that matter is dealt with in the last portion
of the Bill. On coming to this, honor-
able members arrive at a very debatable
part of the measure. Because it is one
thing to say—“ We will enter into a Con-
stitution that is unequal and unjust, but we
hope hereafter to convert what are now the
smaller states to a just sense of the position
so as to obtain an equitable footing ; ” it
is one thing to say that, with a power of
doing what you would wish to do if you
obtained the necessary majority. But it
is quite another thing to say that we shall
enter into this indissoluble Commonwealth
from which we shall be unable to withdraw,
and be utterly unable to change the state
of things of which we complain even
though we may have an almost over-
whelming majority in favour of doing so.
This Constitution cannot, according to its
present provisions, be amended unless
there is an absolute majority of the
Senate and the House of Representatives
in favour of the alteration. No matter


what the state of public feeling may be,
no matter .if you had an absolutely
unanimous House of Representatives, and
the whole of the larger states were in its
favour, yet, unless you had an absolute
majority of the Senate, the alteration
would be impossible ?
Mr. Hancock.— Then it would always
be impossible?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—Practically im-
possible. And although there is embodied
in this Constitution what is called a refer-
endum, it is nothing more than an addi-
tional veto. It does not mean that if the
two Houses disagree the people of the
states may decide; it does not mean that
the two Houses, if in dissonance with the
whole current of public opinion for the
time being, can be compelled to give way
to that public opinion ; but it means that,
in spite of the will of the people (either
expressed in all the states, or in the
largely-populated states, or both), if the
Senate chooses to say—“ We will not pass
this proposed amendment by an absolute
majority” —if, instead of voting against
it, they absent themselves, and an ab-
solute majority is not obtained—there is
no power in this Constitution to change
it. Now, that is a very important
matter.
Mr. Madden.— There is nothing about
the referendum in this Bill, is there?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —I do not want to
alarm the honorable member, hut there is
what is generally called the referendum
in the Bill—that is, a reference to the
people.
Mr. Staughton. —How does the referen-
dum become an additional veto?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —I am not arguing
one way or the other about the merits
of the referendum at present, but I want
there to be no false impression abroad
concerning the Bill. I am aware that
there is at present a false impression to
the effect that some clause of the Bill
gives power to obtain an amendment of
the Constitution by means of the referen-
dum. I want to clear that up, and to
show that it is not the case. Unless
you obtain an absolute majority in both
Houses, no amendment of the Constitu-
tion, however slight, can take place.
Mr. Salmon. —Could that amendment
originate in the Senate ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—Yes, the amend-
ment could originate in either House.
Mr. Salmon. —Then if the people of
the smaller states and the Senate were
unanimous, it is possible for the House
of Representatives to be blocked ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —Yes, that is possible.
I would like also to point out one very im-
portant thing—that when we adopt the
Constitution with equal representation for
the Senate, it is not competent even for
the combined forces of the two Houses of
Parliament and of a majority of the people
to alter the Constitution in one particular
respect, namely, the proportionate repre-
sentation of a state in either House of
Parliament, or the minimum number of
representatives of a state in the House of
Representatives. In other words, if you
wanted to take out from the Constitution
the doctrine of equal representation, you
could not do it without the consent of
every state, no matter what your majority
was otherwise.
Mr. McCay.— Which of the federal
theories is that in harmony with ?
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —It is not in har-
mony with any. I should like to read on
that point from an American writer of
great distinction, who utterly discounte-
nances the idea that that should be irre-
vocable. I refer to the well-known work
of Dr. Burgess —Political Science and
Constitutional Law. He says, in volume
11., page 49
“ The principle of representation in the Upper
House, the Senate, is Commonwealth equality.
The Constitution secures this equality even
against amendment in the ordinary manner.
That is, the state, the sovereignty, as it was
organized back of the Constitution, undertakes
to secure the principle of Commonwealth
equality in the Senate against the state, the
sovereignty, as organized within the Constitu-
tion. This is confused and unnatural. It is
not possible that this restriction could stand
against a determined effort on the part of the
state within the Constitution to overthrow it.
It is a relic of confederatism, and ought to be
disregarded. It may be good political science,
now and in the future, that the principle of
Commonwealth equality should prevail in the
Senate, but the states, as organized in the Con-
stitution, must be the final judge of this. No Con-
stitution is complete which undertakes to except
anything from the power of the state as or-
ganized in the Constitution. Such a Constitu-
tion invites the reappearance of a sovereignty
back of the Constitution, i.e., invites revolu-
tion.”
I commend those words earnestly and seri-
ously to honorable members.
Mr. Irvine. —That is an argument
which, if carried to its logical conclusion,
is in favour of imposing no restriction
whatever on changes of the Constitution.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS. —This is the only
restriction there is. No doubt it is an


argument against having any restriction.
It is an argument that this nation, when
once constituted, shall have it in its own
power to say what its future shall be.
Mr. Harper.— That would be a very
dangerous thing.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS.—Then who should
have the power if the nation is not to
have the power ? lam being rather led
away to argue this matter. It is very
tempting, but I shall not pursue it further,
as I do not want to introduce controver-
sial matters into this question. I will not
be misunderstood, however, when I say
that it reminds me very much of the dis-
tinction which Mr. Gladstone draws be-
tween liberalism and conservatism, when
he says—“ Liberalism is trust in the
people qualified by prudence, and Conser-
vatism is mistrust of the people qualified
by fear.”
Mr. Harper. —Qualified by prudence.
Mr. I. A. ISAACS,—I do not want to
enter into a discussion on this matter,
but I do think that the state of things as
ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
prevailing in the American Constitution,,
and referred to by Dr. Burgess in another
portion of his work, where he points out
that if an amendment of the Constitution
—that is an ordinary amendment of the
Constitution—had been desired in the year
1880, 45,000,000 of American citizens
could have been withstood by 3,000,000,
a condition scarcely tolerable. That, how-
ever, will be a matter for discussion here-
after, and I shall have an opportunity of ex-
pressing my views upon it. lam afraid
that I have trespassed too much on the
indulgence of the Chamber already.
(Cries of “No.”) I feel very grateful
indeed to honorable members for the kind
and considerate attention which they have
given me. It has been somewhat of a
task, and I have endeavoured, I am afraid
ineffectually, to condense my remarks ;
but, at the same time, if I have succeeded
in at all placing the matter in a clear
light before honorable members I feel more
than satisfied.
On the motion of Mr. CARTER, pro-
gress was reported.


