

WESTERN AUSTRALIA.




WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
© IP EX R Gl FI
3'n tiic £c^u*Uttuu'
THE HON. SIR JOHN FORREST, k.g.m.g., m.1.a.,
PREMIER AND COLONIAL TREASURER,
ON MOVING THE SECOND READING
THE COOLGARDIE GOLDFIELDS WATER SDPPLY LOAN BILL,
On Tuesday, 21st July, 1896.
• ‘i
PERTH:
BY AUTHORITY ; RICHARD PETHER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1896.


s :p :e :e c :e:
IN THE
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
BY THE
Hon, Sir John Forrest, k.c.m.g,, m.la,,
PREMIER AND COLONIAL TREASURER,
on moving the Second Reading of the Coolgardie
Goldfields Water Supply Loan Bill,
on Tuesday, 21st July, 1896.
The PREMIER (Hon. Sir John
Forrest) : Air. Speaker : Sir, —In rising
to move the second reading of this very
important Bill, I may say that I do so
with a very great amount of pleasure,
but at the same time with a full sense of
the responsibility that is cast upon me.
First of all I should like to thank hon.
members of this House who have de-
ferred giving an opinion on this matter,
at my special request, until I had the
opportunity which I have to-night of
placing the whole matter before them.
To the hon. member for Perth (Mr.
Randell) my special thanks are due for
the way in which he dealt with this
matter, and his willingness to defer form-
ing an opinion upon it until he had heard
all that the Government had to sav in
regard to it. The same observation
applies to many other hon. members of
this House who have spoken upon the
subject. Of course it is not possible for
the Government to influence hon. mem-
bers in regard to when they should speak
upon a measure, but it seems to me that
before any extravagant terms are used in
regard to the action of the Government
in bringing in a Bill of this sort, and
in urging it upon the country, it is
only right, reasonable, and fair that the
Government should have an opportunity of
placing their views fully before the House.
Although I have introduced a good many
measures into this House during the last
six years, I have never had a better case
to place before hon. members than I have
to-night. If I am not able to convince
hon. members as to the wisdom of the
policy of the Government in regard to
this measure, it must be due, I am
sure, to my own inadequate advocacy
rather than to the merits of the case.
The Government desire to give the
fullest information to hon. members
in regard to this matter. We have
no desire to hurry it through the
House. The more it is discussed here
and throughout the country, the more
everything in regard to it is investigated,
the better the Government will be
pleased.


PROPOSE ONLY TO DEAL WITH THE QUES-
TION FROM A BUSINESS POINT OE VIEW.
I may say at once that I do not
intend to deal with this question of
supplying water to the Coolgardie and
Yilgarn goldfields from any other point of
view than that of a business one. I
hope to be able before I sit down
to-night—and I am afraid I will have
to weary hon. members to some ex-
tent —to prove that the work is
necessary, that the scheme proposed by
the Government is the best scheme that
can be adopted, and that the scheme will
pay. If I can show hon. members of
this House, and the people of this
colony, that these three things are
proven—(l), that the work is necessary ;
(2), that the scheme is the best that can
be framed ; (3), that it will pay —then I
think I have the right to expect that
the Government should receive the
support of both sides of the House. First,
then, as to whether this water supply is
necessary. I do not think it requires
very much argument to prove this point.
Ho one probably will get up in his place
in this House and say that the water
question is not the great question
that requires solving in regard to
the Coolgardie and Yilgarn gold-
fields. Everyone I think agrees in
regard to this. If anyone, however, has
any doubt on this point I should only
wish that he had travelled as I did over
the Coolgardie goldfields in December
last. There was not sufficient water for
crushing anywhere. Water was being
sold at the condensers at from fourpence
to sixpence a gallon. It cost a pound
to water my five horses. Ido not know
what small sum it would cost—l can
hardly calculate it—for doing the
same thing if the scheme we propose
were carried out. It certainly would not
cost more than a penny or twopence to
do what cost a pound in December last.
What did I see during my visit to those
goldfields in December last ? Absence of
water everywhere. I found a numerous
population of hard-working men, as dirty
as ever they could be. Ho water to wash
in—scarcely enough to drink. At one
place called Bardoc, I got there early in
the forenoon, and found about fifty men
waiting at a small inn, and I
asked if there was any water. They
said that there was not, and that they did
not expect any till evening, when a team
was coming in with water, but when it
would actually arrive they did not know.
They were in the greatest straits for
want of water to drink. The only mines
at work on the goldfields at that time
were three at Kalgoorlie and one at
Broad Arrow, at a mine called Hill End,
and they scarcely had sufficient water to go
on with the work on that mine, which
has turned out some of the richest quartz
in the district. They had to carry salt
water several miles in order to crush with
it, and then could only obtain a
small quantity at very great cost.
Things are very little better at the pre-
sent time on the fields than they were in
December, excepting that there has been
some rainfall, but I have no doubt that
anyone who visits the Coolgardie goldfields
in December next will find very little differ-
ence as compared with the state of things
I experienced there last year. I will ask
this House if this state of things is to
continue. Are the large centres of
Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie to depend on
condensed water at twopence or three-
pence per gallon for ever ? These two
large towns, if they develop in the way
we all hope to see them develop,
will want at least three-quarters of
a million gallons each for domestic pur-
poses ; and if the population we expect
goes there, and the mines prosper, as we
believe they will, how are these three-
quarters of a million gallons of good
fresh water to be obtained for the towns
of Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie ? Are they
to be obtained by condensing even at a
half-penny a gallon P Is that to
be the state of affairs that
is to go on for ever ? Is that to be
the permanent water supply for that
country ? I hope not. Ho stock could be
kept in all that territory in December last.
I did not see a single hoof except it was
round a condenser, or a small number
of sheep kept for killing purposes.
I did see, however, and it was painful
to see it, horses left on the roads tired and
jaded, left to die in the wilderness, and it
was only at the Government tanks, where
the water lasted —and there were
very few of them —that these animals
could get a drink. It was only while there
was water in the Government tanks that
there was any chance of these poor ani-
mals getting a drink, as no one else, ex-


cept the Government, would give them a
drink for nothing. There were no stock
paddocks —not a single stock paddock in
all that country; and if there had
been there was no water to sustain
the stock, unless owners were prepared
to pay for water at 4d. or 6d.
a gallon. The stock required for the
meat supply was sent up by rail, as far as
the railway ran, and was killed as quickly as
possible.
INTERIOR OF COLONY SUBJECT TO
DROUGHTS.
There is no doubt about it—l speak
from experience, and there are other ex-
perienced men in this House who will
support me —that there is in the eastern
portion of this colony, and in Central
Australia generally, a very small and
uncertain rainfall. It is an absolute
certainty that it is a droughty country.
We do not want anyone to tell us that.
Those of us who have lived here, and had
any experience in travelling in the interior
of Australia, know that as we go to the
eastward, when we get over the coastal
ranges, the rainfall decreases. Even in
our own eastern districts, at our very
doors, we know there is almost
always 10 inches difference in the rainfall
as compared Avith the rainfall in the Darling
Ranges, and as you go further eastward
we know from experience that the rainfall
is more uncertain and in smaller quantity.
Some people will say, and have said
whilst this matter has been under discus-
sion, that we can depend upon the rain-
fall in the interior for the water supply
on the goldfields. Have we not had
seven years’ experience of Southern Cross
and four years’ experience of Coolgardie ?
We know with what result —-that there
is not a single drop of fresh water
at Southern Cross unless it is caught
from the heavens, or unless it is
condensed, and if you catch all the rain
it is possible to secure there will not be
nearly enough. D uring the seven years that
we have known Southern Cross, the rain-
fall has not averaged more than five
inches, and we know from experience the
tanks that we have had constructed are
never full, that the tank at the “ 13 mile ”
from Southern Cross, which has a
good catchment, has never been half full,
and it has been constructed two or three
years. The tank at Hew Zealand Gully
has never been half full, and all along the
line, although these tanks have been con-
structed with splendid catchments, in
very few instances have they been alto-
gether full. The average rainfall of the
interior is not likely to exceed five inches.
It is five inches so far as our infor-
mation goes, and it is not' likely
year by year to exceed five inches.
[An Hon. Member: It may be less.]
Yes ; it may be less at times and it may
be more on some few occasions. Of course
thunderstorms will come, but they are
uncertain, and cannot be depended on.
Where are the catchments, and where is
the rain to fill them ? What I wish to
say is that there is no certainty, and
that all experience shows that the annual
rainfall you have to depend upon is not
likely to exceed five inches. It is my
opinion, founded on some experience,
that no scheme based on the rainfall in
the interior of Australia can be depended
upon as a permanent water supply for a
large population. I have some experience
of these matters. In 18741 crossed from
Champion Bay to the overland telegraph
line, from Adelaide to Port Darwin,
and on that route —the hon. mem-
ber for West Kimberley was with me,
and can support what I say —we passed
places Avhich were named as places where
permanent water was to be found. These
Avere Windich Springs, Weld Springs,
Port Mueller, Beare’s Creek, and Lungley’s
Gully, four places where there was run-
ning water. We thought that season
was a very dry one, and de-
clared that these places had per-
manent water, but we have heard
that the beautiful running streams
we saw were dry the year before last, and
that a surveyor Avho visited Weld Springs
had to dig for water. He found some by
digging. Port Mueller, we know, has been
absolutely dry, from the experience of
some explorers who have visited it since
I was there. Beare’s Creek, in the
Musgrave Ranges, where we could
hear the hum of running water
half a mile off:, has since been
dry, and explorers have had to dig
20 feet to get a drink. At Lungley’s
Gully, a stream that we saw running
between high hills, and which had every
appearance of permanency, has been
altogether dry since. We need not go so far
into the interior as the places I have been


speaking of. My friends, the hon.
member for the De Drey, and for
Beverley, who have had experience
in the Nor’-West in pastoral pursuits,
and where there are immense pools with
every semblance of permanency—have
they not found them all dry on some oc-
casions F What about other places F We
can go to the Gascoyne or elsewhere in this
country, and even in the Northern settled
districts within range of the coastal
rainfall, and what is the evidence F We
find there are droughts, and long
droughts. On a station on the coast,
belonging to my friend the Attorney-
General, only a total of five inches of rain
fell during five years, or an average of
about one inch a year. So it is wherever
you look, even comparatively near the coast.
Well, then, if these things have occurred
even close to the sea, how much more will
they occur away in the interior, where
there are no mountain ranges and no
rivers, for it must be always remem-
bered that there is no river system
in the whole of Central Australia F
Surely these are evidences that the House
will not set aside. In 1869, when I
travelled along by Lake Barlee and
Mount Margaret, through country which
has since become famous goldfields, there
were abundance of marsupials in that
country; but where are they now F
When I asked the aboriginals what had
become of the kangaroos and other
marsupials they told me that
drought had killed them all. Soon
after I was in the Coolgardie goldfields,
viz., in January last, every tank belonging
to the Government was dry. There was
not a drop of fresh water throughout the
goldfields in any catchment from the
rainfall, and the people had to depend
upon condensed water for their
sustenance. Notwithstanding all this
knowledge of my own, and the evidence
of others, people who have had no ex-
perience in these things in this colony have
come to me and propounded schemes,
saying they were prepared to raise funds in
the British market to carry out the work
of erecting reservoirs in the interior of
these goldfields, and from those catch-
ments to supply the large and increasing
populations that are going to these fields,
and also to provide the mines with water.
I am not going to be led astray by people
of that sort. I have my own knowledge
and the knowledge of other people, and
1 am convinced that any scheme based
upon the rainfall in the Coolgardie gold-
fields is not one that we can place
dependence upon, but is one that would
probably lead us into great difficulty and
great disaster.
CONSERVATION AS AT PRESENT CARRIED
OUT NOT ECONOMICAL.
There is no doubt whatever that
water for ordinary purposes in
small quantities can be conserved on
the Coolgardie goldfields; but even if
small reservoirs can be built and filled
say once a year—and that is the most that
our experience tells us can be expected—it
is already clearly shown by the figures I
have before me, and which I will place
before hon. members, that the plan is not
economical, besides being uncertain.
I will show hon. members how we
arrive at that conclusion. During
1895 tanks were in existence on the
Coolgardie goldfields with a capacity of
twelve million gallons. There were ac-
tually ten million gallons collected in
those tanks, but, after allowing
for evaporation, the cost of providing
this water was about ten shillings per
thousand gallons, that is counting the
interest on the capital cost of the tanks
and sinking fund —4 per cent, altogether
—also the cost of the caretaker, making
little or no provision for maintenance.
TheEngineer-in-Chief sums up the matter
thus : —“ It would appear, therefore, that
“ water can be supplied, by means
“ of the proposed pumping scheme, at
“ much less cost per thousand gallons
“ than by means of reservoirs of the
“ description herein described, and it
“ therefore becomes a question as to
“ whether reservoirs of this description
“ should continue to be constructed (un-
“ less for immediately urgent require-
“ ments) in the localities which would be
“ supplied by the pumping scheme, to
“ extent at present contemplated.” That
seems to me a rather startling piece of
information, that even if the tanks are
constructed on these goldfields, and the
water could be caught, it would cost
three times as much under the present
system to supply the same quantity of
water that is contemplated by the scheme
now proposed by the Government.
Mr. Illingworth : That would be


the cost in the first year only.
The PREMIER (Hon. Sir J.' For
rest) ; Ho; the cost every year.
Mr. Gleoege ; How many tanks P
The PREMIER (Hon. Sir J. For-
rest) : As many as you like. I do not
mean to say that if the tanks were very
large, and had many millions of gallons
hi them, the cost of supervision would be
proportionally the same, but when you
have built the tanks you have to obtain
the water to fill them. When we have
not been able to fill the tanks we have
to their capacity of twelve millions
of gallons, I think that this clearly
shows that there is no likelihood
of sufficient water being obtained from
the rainfall, and what can be obtained is
not only expensive but is also a very un-
certain supply. A scheme has been brought
before the Grovernment, to some extent,
by Mr. S. R. Wilson, which the hon. mem-
ber for Gleraldton referred to, and which
has for its catchment area the country
sixty odd miles to the north of Menzies,
the idea is that the reservoir area will
be filled annually, or two or three
times a year, I believe, by the rain ; and
that is the scheme which the hon. mem-
ber and those who think with him
would like to see made the scheme for
supplying all those goldfields with water.
Me. Simpson : How do you know it
is ?
The PREMIER (Hon. Sir J. For-
rest) : My idea is that the project is a
foolish one, and based altogether on in
experience.
Mr. Simpson : I will back Mr. Wil-
son’s experience against yours.
The PREMIER (Hon. Sir J. For-
rest) : I prefer my own opinion in
this case. I have had more experience
of the interior of Australia.
LIKELIHOOD OF OBTAINING ARTESIAN
WATER.
Now, sir, the next point I wish
to touch upon is the question of
the likelihood of obtaining an
artesian supply of water. That,
of course, is a favorite scheme with hon.
members, and with the general public.
They all believe that if you bore down
into the bowels of the earth far
enough you will not only get a sufficient
supply of water, but that it will be
perfectly fresh and good, and that there
will be sufficient pressure to raise it to the
surface and, therefore could be dis-
tributed at a very small cost. On this
question I cannot do better than quote the
Engineer-in-Chief, in his own words
which clearly express my own opinion
and that of the Grovernment: —
“ Coming now to the question of
“ various possible means of supplying
“ water for the requirements of the Cool-
“ gardie goldfields which have been sug-
“ gested other than by surface reservoirs,
“ there is the much talked-of possibility of
“ attaining artesian water : concerning
“ which, however, everyone who has
“ studied it, and who can be looked upon
“as in any way an authority on the
“ subject, has given his opinion that it
“ is in the very last degree improbable.
“ I think, therefore, that as regards
“ artesian water, in the ordinary accepta-
“ tion of the term —that is to say, water
“ under high pressure, which will
“ cause it to rise to the surface
“ or above the surface (and which, con-
“ sequently, has come from mountain
“ ranges of considerable height, and not
“ too far distant) —can safely be left out
“ of the question.
“ Before leaving this phase of the
“ question, I would wish to say that —
“ while it has, many times, and by many
“ people, been broadly asserted that
“ geologists have been more often wrong
“ than right in their predictions as to the
“ probability, or otherwise, of obtaining
“ artesian water, and that, especially in
“the case of the copious and famous
“ artesian supply in Queensland, they
“ predicted distinctly against the proba-
“ bilityof it, I have never, myself, been able
“ to find any important case which bears,
“ out these assertions; and, as regards
“ the case of the Queensland artesian
“ basin especially, I am altogether dis-
“ inclined to believe the assertion, as it
“ seems to me, from geological sections
“ which I have seen of the country there,
“ that they point in a most distinct
“ manner to the very great probability of
“ artesian water being found, and also to
“ the probability of its being found under
“ high pressure. I cannot, therefore, believe
“ that even any ordinary layman, having
“the most rudimentary knovvledge of the
“conditions which govern an artesian
“ supply, could have had any doubt as to
“ artesian water being likely to be found


“ under such conditions as tire geological
“ surveys show to exist in the Queensland
“ artesian area; and, if this would apply
“ to a layman, it would apply still more
“ so to a geologist.
“ Taking, again, one more instance,
“ viz., the case of the artesian water
“ which has been struck in the vicinity
“ of Guildford, I would wish to take this
“ opportunity of mentioning a fact,
“ which I do not believe is very generally
“ known, as regards that supply, namely,
“ that the undertaking of the bore there
“ by the Government was chiefly due to
“ the light thrown upon the conditions
“ existing there by Mr. Woodward, the
“ Government Geologist of Western Aus-
“ tralia, in the year 1891, and to his dis-
“ tinct opinion that artesian water, under
“ considerable pressure, was present there.
“ In this case, too, the geological condi-
“ tions upon which Mr. Woodward based
“ his opinion were distinctly less obviously
“ favorable than those which prevail
“ in the artesian district of Queensland.
“ While believing that artesian
“ water, in the true sense of the term,
“ will never be obtained in the Coolgardie
“ district, there are, however, several ex-
“perts who believe that underground
“ stores of water will be found there :
“ most of them probably salt, but some
“of them possibly fresh, or, at any rate,
“ drinkable —but which will not probably
“ rise to any considerable height, if at all,
“ above the level at which they are struck.
“In relation to these possible un-
“ derground stores of water, however,
“ we have to face the facts —
“ (a.) That they will only probably
“ be found (in large quantities)
“ at very great depths.
“ ( h .) That, in order to utilise them,
“ they would have to be pumped
“ from these very great depths.
“ (c.) That, if they are salt, they
“ would have to be condensed
“ before being of any use for
“ human or animal consump-
“ tion.
“ Taking, first, in reference to
“Item (a.) above, the question of the
“ bores necessary to reach such waters at
“ great depth, it is not, I think, generally
“ realised w T hat a length of time it takes
“ to put down such bores; and I
“ therefore enclose herewith (vide Appen-
“ dix A) an extract from a news-
“ paper showing the time which it took
“ to put down a bore of this description
“in Queensland (which, by the way,
“never reached water at all), the rate of
“progress being stated to have been
“ unusually rapid ; while the time taken
“ to bore 3,000 feet is stated to have been
“ two years.
“It is evident, therefore, that even
“ the first preliminary part of the busi-
“ ness, viz., the finding of the water at
“ depths of 3,000 ft. or thereabouts, would
“take a long time, especially if several
“ places had to be tried before such water
“ was struck.
“ Then, again, as regards Item (5.),
“ it is scarcely necessary to say that any
“ pumping which could be done from a
“ depth of anything like 3,000 ft. through
“ an ordinary bore-hole (if practicable at
“all) would be the merest trickle.
“ If, however, it is suggested that,
“ having found water, we should then put
“ down a large shaft, through which to
“ do the pumping, this shaft would take
“ probably several years to complete.
“ Besides this, too, if one is to
“ seriously contemplate the undertaking of
“ pumping from the bottom of a shaft
“ 3,000 ft. deep, it should be borne in mind
“ that the total head to be overcome, be-
“ tween a reservoir on the Greenmount
“ Ranges and the top of Mount Burges
“ (including friction head) on the basis
“ of the pumping scheme at present under
“ consideration, is only 2,605 ft.; and I
“ have no doubt whatever, in my own
“ mind, that the cost of pumping five
“ million gallons daily, against this 2,505 ft.
“in the open, would be much less than
“ pumping a similar quantity from the
“ bottom of a shaft 3,000 ft. deep.
“ Besides this, too, the amount which
“ such shaft might cost would be
“ utterly impossible to estimate, from
“ any data which we have got at present,
“ but it would, most assuredly, be very
“ large indeed.
“ Over and above all this, also, there
“is the still more serious considera-
“ tion that it would be utterly impossible
“to ascertain as to what quantity of
“ water there might be in such under-
“ ground reservoir, and consequently as
“to how long it would last, and, it
“ might consequently be found, after an
“ enormous expense had been gone to,


“ that it would run dry in a few weeks I think, how foolish it would be to trust
or months.
“ Such, in fact, has been our expe-
“ rience in a great number of cases
“ where we have found underground
“ reservoirs of water, at depths
“of from 100 to 200 feet, and from
“ which we have pumped steadily as
“ much as from 2,000 to 3,000 gallons a
“ day, for as long as a year or two, but
“ which eventually suddenly gave out
“ (their existence having probably been
“ due to long ages of accumulation), and
“ have never since returned to the condi-
“ tion in which we found them, and some
“of them have, in fact, remained appar-
“ ently quite dry.
“To adventure hundreds of thou-
“ sands of pounds, with the possibility of
“ such a result as that, would, I think, be
“ altogether unwarrantable.
“ Coming now to Item (c.) above,
“ it is scarcely necessary to say that if
“ the cost of supplying water from very
“ deep bores, or shafts, of this descrip-
“ tion would probably compare unfavor-
“ ably (as I believe it would) with the
“cost of supplying water from reservoirs
“ in the Greenmount Ranges, the com-
“ parison would be still more unfavorable
“ to the bores and shafts alternative, if
“ the water obtained therefrom were salt;
“ as it can safely be stated that the cost
“ of condensing such salt water (and it is
“ very salt indeed) as prevails in the
“ Coolgardie district would never be less
“than from £6 to £l2 per thousand
“gallons, whereas water could be de-
“ livered from the Greenmount Ranges,
“ at from 3s. to 6s. per thousand gallons.
“ With further reference to the
“ idea of procuring a sufficient water
“ supply for the Coolgardie Goldfields by
“ the aid of bores and shafts, I should
“ mention that the mere raising of water
“ in this way to the surface would be only
“ one item in the cost; the lifting of it to
“ a further height, in order that it might
“be carried by gravitation over a radius
“ of 50 miles or so, or (in the absence of
“ any such convenient height in the
“ vicinity) the pumping of it directly to
“ the surrounding places, being another
“ very considerable item in the cost.”
These words conclusively, in my
opinion and in the opinion of the
Government, deal with the question of
artesian water supply, and they show, I
to any other than the adequate and
certain scheme of the Government, which
is called by the Engineer of Water
Supply on Goldfields (Mr. Hector),
“ the surest, the best, and the most
economical.”
THE SCHEME PROPOSED WILL BE A
REPRODUCTIVE WORK.
Having now dealt with two impor-
tant questions as to whether the
work is necessary, and as to the
best scheme, and having, I think,
conclusively shown that the work is
urgent and necessary, and that the
Government scheme is the only
adequate and certain one, I now
propose to show not only that it is
feasible, butwhatis very much more im-
portant, that it will pay. The cost of the
works we propose to undertake, as hon.
members are aware, is estimated at
<£2,500,000. This is made up as
follows: Pumping engines and sheds,
£200,000; 90,000 tons of pipes, 30in.
diameter, £1,470,000; carriage of pipes
from Fremantle —I do not know whether
they will be made there. Personally, I
hope that the pipes can be made in the
colony as economically as out of it, and
that only the steel will be imported. The
carriage of the pipes from the Port will
cost £140,000; laying and jointing,
£220,000; reservoirs, £300,000; dis-
tributing 12in. mains 100 miles —from
Mount Burges —£170,000 ; making a
total capital cost of £2,500,000. I now
come to the amount of the annual work-
ing expense, interest, and sinking fund.
The interest on the capital of £2,600,000
at 3 per cent, £75,000; sinking fund 3
per cent., £7s,ooo—and here I may
mention that we propose a 3 per cent,
sinking fund instead of the ordinary 1
per cent.; maintenance, £45,000 ; cost of
pumping 5,000,000 gallons daily,
£109,000 per annum, all these calculations
are on a yearly basis ; general adminis-
tration, £16,000 ; making the total
working expenses £320,000. Por this
expenditure we will supply 1,825 million
gallons of water at a cost of 3s. 6d. per
1,000 gallons.
PRACTICABILITY OP THE SCHEME.
The practicability of this scheme has
been questioned both inside and outside
this House; in fact, some people have gone


so far as to say it was a maniacal
project. On that point I will read
the opinion of the Engineer-in-Chief:—
“ As regards the practicability of this
“ scheme there cannot, I think, be
“ any reasonable doubt, as it has been al-
“ ready declared to be quite practicable
“ by many competent engineers, even while
“ some of them deprecated it from other
“ points of view.
“To say, in fact, that it is not
“ practicable must surely involve a mis-
“ conception of the question, as there are
“ few people who do not know of an
“ equal quantity of water having been
“ pumped through a lesser height, and
“ for a shorter length, than is provided
“ for in this scheme; and, when it is
“ realised that this scheme, although
“ probably of larger magnitude than
“ others which are within the knowledge
“ of most people, is simply a repetition,
“ several times over, of schemes which are
“ within the knowledge of most people,
“ it is difficult to realise how anyone can
“ consider it to be impracticable.
“ Thus, for instance, if it were pro-
“ posed to pump, say, 5,000,000 gallons
“ daily to a height of, say, 300 ft., I
“cannot imagine that an}one would
“ consider that to be impracticable ; and,
“ if it is not impracticable to do that once,
“ it cannot surely be impracticable to do
“ it eight times in succession.
“As to what is practicable again,
“ it may not be out of place to instance a
“ fact which is known to many people in
“ this Colony, namely, that the dredge
“ ‘ Premier ’ has frequently filled her
“ hoppers with 600 tons of sand in 20
“ minutes; and, as it has been found by
“ experience that the quantity of sand
“ which can thus be pumped is about
“ one-fifth of the accompanying water,
“it follows from this that the pumps
“must be capable of lifting at least 3,000
“ tons of water in 20 minutes, which is
“ equivalent to 9,000 tons of water in an
“ hour, or 216,000 tons of water in 24
“ hours; and, as a ton of water is equal
“to 224 gallons, this would mean
“ 48,000,000 gallons (or, say, in round
“ figures, 50,000,000 gallons) in 24 hours.
“ The height to which the water
“is raised by this pump is only about
“10 feet; but, on the other hand,
“ 50,000,000 gallons of water is 10 times
“ as much as 5,000,000 gallons of water
“ and consequently the same power would
“ lift 5,000,000 gallons of water per diem
“ through a height of 100 feet; and, in
“this case, there is only one pump,
“ whereas it is proposed to have several
“ pumps at each of the 8 or 10
“pumping stations, so that there can
“ manifestly be no practical difficulty (by
“ the aid of several pumps at each of the
“ pumping stations) in raising 5,000,000
“ gallons per diem through the height of
“ 300 feet or so, which will intervene
“ between each pumping station and the
“ next one.”
This opinion, given by the adviser
to the Government, a gentleman
who bases his reputation upon it, seems
to me to be conclusive evidence—if we
want evidence —that the scheme is prac-
ticable. These words must commend
themselves to everyone here. It is most
simple that if you can raise water so
many feet by a certain force, then by
repeating that force the number of times
required, you can surely raise the water
to the height desired.
ADEQUACY OP THE WATER SUPPLY IN
DARLING RANGES.
There is an important matter which will no
doubt be referred to by hon. members,
as to the extent of the catchment area
on the Greenmount or Darling Ranges,
and as to the adequacy of the supply
which is to provide the five million gal-
lons of water per day. On this point the
Government obtained the opinion of Mr.
Hodgson, the Engineer for Sewerage and
Water Supply for towns, who says :
“ I have no hesitation whatever in saying
“ that at this stage the Helena River is
“ the source upon which our estimates
“ should be based. On the Helena I
“ have had several sites surveyed, and I
“ can with safety recommend one
“ situated about five miles south-west
“ of Sawyer’s Yalley. The site is almost
“ an ideal one ; the foundations of the
“ dam site are bed-rock, the valley at
“ that point is very narrow, and the
“ sides precipitous.” I may also inform
hon. members that the concrete dam,
which would be about 100 feet high and
650 feet wide, would back up the water
for seven miles, and would impound
about 4,619 million gallons, and the
quantity available, after making a
liberal allowance for evaporation, soakage,


&c., would be 3,380 million gallons, which
would amply provide for the consump-
tion of 5.000,000 gallons per day
throughout the year or even nearly
double that quantity. In addition
to this reservoir there are plenty of
other catchment areas available, some
large and some small. The height
of the proposed reservoir is 320 feet
above the sea. The water-shed area,
from which the water would be obtained,
is 350,000 acres. Assuming that we
have an absolutely certain rainfall of
only 20 inches in the year —of course
it is far more than that, nearly
double in some years past but as-
suming, for the sake of illustration,
that we have only 20 inches, it is a posi-
tive certainty that the reservoir would fill
every year if only 3 per cent, of the rain-
fall found its way into it. In addition to
these advantages the quality of the water
is excellent, and there is practically no
sediment in the catchment area, and no
danger of pollution. Surely nothing
could be more favorable for a catchment
area than this one, where a two-years’
supply could be impounded in a large
reservoir with a dam only 650 feet
long, with solid rock for the base and
ends, and I think Mr. Hodgson was per-
fectly correct when he said that it was
an almost ideal site, and the best possible
that he could choose out of dozens which
he has inspected throughout the Darling
Ranges.
Mr. Illingworth : How many feet
deep would it be ?
The PREMIER; 100 feet, if we want
a two-years’ supply. Of course that would
be more than is necessary, but still there
ought to be a sufficient supply for one
and a half or two years at least.
capital COST OF PROPOSED WORKS.
The next question is as to capital
cost, and upon that point the Bngi-
neer-in-Chief says: “As regards the
“ estimated capital cost, I believe that
“ the works can be carried out for
“ the amount stated.” There is no shilly-
shallying about that. The statement is
made by the Engineer-in-Chief of the
colony; it is a deliberate statement, and
should carry weight coming from an
officer of the status and experience of
Mr. O’Connor. The Engineer-in-Chief
goes on to say : —-
“As regards the pumping en-
gines, which constitute an important
item in the estimate, the amount set
down for them is based upon informa-
tion specially obtained from England
for the purpose. (Vide Appendix D,
hereunder.)
“As regards a still more impor-
tant item, namely, the pipes (weighing
about 90,000 tons), the estimate is sup-
ported by prices at which manufacturers
have offered to deliver the piping re-
quired.
“As regards the cost of the reser-
“ voirs, which is another very important
“ item in the estimate, there is ample
“ evidence that they can be constructed
“ for the amount set down. {Vide, inter
“alia, Mr. Hodgson’s memorandum to
“me, dated 15th instant, hereunder, Ap-
pendix E.)
“ As regards the other items in the
estimate, which are for works of an or-
dinary and every-day character,there is no
reason to doubt that the ordinary prices,
at which they have been valued, will
be found to be sufficient.”
WOEKIX6 EXPENSES.
Then, as regards probable working ex-
penses, the Engineer-in-Chief’s opinion is
that:—
“As regards the estimated working
“ expenses per annum, which include
“ interest and sinking fund, as well as
“maintenance and cost of pumping, and
“ general administration,
“ {a.) The amount set down for
“ annual interest and sinking
“ fund is sufficient to pay in-
“ terest on capital, and also to
“ pay off the said capital in a
“ period of about 20 years.
“ (6.) The amount set down for
“ maintenance is sufficient to
“ keep the whole of the works
“ and machinery in good going
“ order.
“ (c.) As regards the probable cost
“of pumping, this has been
“ deduced from various well-
“ recognised authorities on the
“ subject, notably, amongst
“ others, ‘ Unwin on the Do-
“ velopment and Transmission
“of Power,’ with due allow-
“ ance, of course, for the loca
“ price of coal, and labor, &c


“ ( d .) As regards the general ad-
“ ministration, it simply means
“ (in view of there being ample
“ provision for maintenance)
“ the collection of the revenue,
“ and the keeping of the
“ accounts, and it is believed
“ that 5 per cent, on the revenue
“ should be ample for that
“ purpose.”
PRICE AT WHICH WATER CAN BE PRO-
VIDED.
Then, as to the price at which water can
be delivered, the Engineer-in-Chief says:—
“ The estimated price at which the
“ water can be delivered, viz., 3s. 6d. per
“ thousand gallons, is simply an arith-
“ metrical resultant from the total esti-
“ mated working expenses per annum,
“ on the basis that five million gallons
“ (on the average) will be sold, daily,
“during 365 days in each year; but, as
“ regards the ‘on the average ’ element
“in the matter, it is only right to
“ say that this result would not accrue
“ if the five million gallons per diem failed
“ to be sold for several days running, as
“ the estimate only provides for a storage
“ reservoir at Mount Burges capable of
“ holding two or three days’ supply.
“It is, however, proposed to keep
“ all the reservoirs along the pipe line
“ continuously full by aid of the pump-
“ ing main ; and this would, to some ex-
“ tent, restore the balance, if the quan-
“ tity available failed to be sold for more
“ than two or three days at a stretch ;
“ as the working railways, for instance,
“ could then use the water out of the
“ reservoirs along the line, instead of
“ taking it from the pumping main.”
ADVANTAGE OF SCHEME TO WORKING
RAILWAYS.
We come now to a matter of great
importance—indeed, it is one which
hon. members will no doubt attach great
weight to, and that is the advantage of the
scheme to the working railways. I will
quote what the Engineer-in-Chief says on
this head: —
“As regards the working railways
“ element in the matter, it is shown, in
“ Appendix C hereinbefore referred to,
“ that the requirements would be about
“ 200,000 gallons per diem, for eight
“ months in the year, and that the sav-
“ing which would be attained by ob-
“ taining this supply by the pumping
“ scheme, instead of, as is done at
“ present, by hauling it in running tanks,
“ would be about .£30,000 per annum.”
I may mention that this £30,000 refers
only to our present requirements, and
not to the future. I have not consulted
the Engineer-in-Chief or the General
Traffic Manager concerning this question,
but, in my opinion, the traffic will be in the
future —I hope in the near future —
four times as much as at present, and, if
so, this scheme would save annually to
the Traffic Department alone £120,000,
almost sufficient to pay the whole of the
interest and sinking fund on the pro-
posed loan. I ask hon. members par-
ticularly to consider this advantage, as
it is one which affects all of us very
closely; for we are now spending£3o,ooo
per annum for water for our railways in
those districts, and as population increases,
as it undoubtedly will, and the demand
in consequence increases, the cost of the
water for the railways must increase in
proportion.
COMPARISON OP PRESENT AND FUTURE
COST OF WATER.
I will now show that water can be
delivered in the Coolgardie district by
the proposed scheme cheaper than by any
other method we know of. I will put it in
the words of the Engineer-in-Chief
“ Coming, now, to the question
“as to how the cost of water delivered by
“ this pumping scheme to the Coolgardie
“ district would compare with the cost of
“ water debvered by any other method, I
“ find, as is shown in Appendix E here-
“ under, that the cheapest of all the
“ water supplies hitherto existing in the
“ Coolgardie district, viz., the supply
“ from reservoirs constructed by the
“ Government, cost the country (exclu-
“ sive of the cost of maintenance of the
“ reservoirs themselves, concerning which
“ I have at the moment no actual data)
“ at least Bs. 6d. per thousand gallons ;
“ and, if the maintenance of the reservoirs
“ were taken into consideration, it would,
“ I have no doubt, bring the cost up to
“ fully 10s. per thousand gallons.
“It is manifest, therefore, that the
“ pumping scheme would attain a very
“ large reduction on even the cheapest
“rate at which water has hitherto been
“ obtainable (and there was, really, in all,
“ a very insignificant supply obtained at


“ that rate), and, that being so, it is need-
“ less to say that the pumped water would
“ be enormously cheaper than water ob-
“ tained from any of the other sources of
“ supply of which we have any present
“ knowledge.
“As compared with condensed
“ water, in fact, as already alluded to,
“ the cost of this pumped water would
“be only about half as many shillings
“ per 1,000 gallons as the condensed
“ water costs in pounds per 1,000
“ gallons, and often even less than that.
“ Looking at the matter from the
“pointof view as affecting the whole of
“ the community on the Coolgardie gold-
“ fields in the future, the difference
“in the cost at which they could
“obtain the quantity of water absolutely
“ necessary for human consumption, by
“ this pumping proposal, as compared
“ with the cost at which they obtain it
“ now, is simply marvellous, the figures
“ being about as follows :
“ That is to ' say, I have seen it
“ stated recently that there are as many
“ as 40,000 people in the Coolgardie dis-
“ trict,and, although I scarcely think that
“ that can be so, it is quite probable that
“ that number of people may be con-
“ gregated there by the end of the three
“ years which this pumping scheme
“ would take to complete.
“If we assume that each of these
“ 40,000 people has to pay even as little
“ as 6d. a day for water, which would be
“ only allowing them from two to three
“ gallons per diem, as prevails under
“ existing conditions, this would amount,
“ for the 365 days in the year, to £9 per
“ annum for each person, and the total,
“ for 40,000 persons, at that rate, would
“ be £360,000 per annum, whereas the
“ same quantity of water could be at-
“ tained, by proposed pumping scheme,
“ for less than 4210,000 per annum. It
“ is evident, therefore, that if pumping
“ from the Greenmount Ranges is adopted,
“ as compared with any local source of
“ supply that we know of, there would
“ be relief to these 40,000 people to the
“ extent of <£350,000 per annum, whereas
“ the whole annual working expenses of
“ the pumping scheme would be only
“ £320,000 per annum.
“ Besides, this, too, there is the
“ fact that, after all these people had
“ been supplied by the pumping scheme,
“with the same quantity of water which
“ they gol before, there would still be
“about 1,750 million gallons of water
“ per annum available for other purposes.
“ That is to say, the total quantity,
“ equivalent to 5,000,000 gallons per day,
“ for 365 days in the year, being about
“ 1,800 million gallons per annum, and
“ the quantity which would be consumed
“by 40,000 people, under the existing
“ conditions, viz., at the rate of, say,
“ three gallons per bead per diem, being
“ less than 50 million gallons per annum,
“ there would, as before stated, be 1,750
“ million gallons per annum, out of the
“ total of 1,800 million gallons per an-
“ num, still available for other purposes,
“ and, if the said 1,760 million gallons of
“water is sold, as it is assumed
“ that it will be, for mining and other
“ purposes, at the rate of 3s. 6d. per
“ thousand gallons, the relief to the
“ 40,000 people above mentioned, to the
“ enormous extent of <£350,000 per annum,
“ would be attained without any cost to
“ the country whatever
THE TIME THE WORKS WILL TAKE TO
COMPLETE.
The only other question dealt with in
the Engineer-in-Chicf’s report which I
intend to refer to is that concerning the
time which the works we propose will take
to complete, That is a matter which I
feel sure will have due consideration.
The Engineer-in-Chief deals with it as
follows ; '
“ There is, I think, only one more
“ point which I need touch upon, viz., as
“to the estimate that the work can be
“ completed in three years, concerning
“ Avhich I have to state as follows :
“ (a.) We have been assured by steel
“ pipe manufacturers that the
“whole of the pipes required
“ could be made in two years.
“ (5.) If the delivery of these pipes
“ were commenced within even
“ six months of the date of the
“ work being' authorised, and
“ completed in 30 months from
“ same, they could, I have
“no doubt, be all laid within
“ the three years.
“ (c.) If, again, the excavation of
“the pipe trench were started
“ almost immediately after the


“ work was authorised (as it
“ could be) there is no reason
“ that I know of why it could
“ not be kept well ahead of the
“ pipe-laying, and consequently
“ also completed within the three
“ years.
“ (d.) As regards the pumping en-
“ gines and sheds for same, there
“is no reason at all that I know
“of why they could not be
“ procured and erected and con-
“ structed, respectively, within
“ three years.
“ (e.) As regards the reservoir, or
“ reservoirs, they would, no
“ doubt, have to be designed
“ with great promptitude, and
“ put in hand as soon as pos-
“ sible, in order to be completed
“ within three years, but there
“is no reason that I know of
“ why they should not be com-
“ pleted within that time.”
I have now dealt with the evidence sup-
plied by the Engineer-in-Chief and other
officers in regard to this scheme, and
hon. members will not only be able to
judge from what I have read, but will
also have the opportunity of reading and
considering it themselves.
WHAT WILL BE DONE WITH THE WATER
AFTER IT REACHES MOUNT BURGES.
There is another point which has been
raised —I do not know whether by mem-
bers or not —but it has found its way
into the press and into the opinions
of the people outside—and that is the
question of what will be done with the
water when it reaches Mount Burges.
As I have already said, provision is
made in these estimates for reticulation
from Mount Burges for 100 miles by a
12in. pipe.
Mr. Moran : What centres do you pro-
pose to serve P
The PREMIER (Hon. Sir John
Forrest): Ko doubt Coolgardie and
Kalgoorlie will be two of the centres,
and I think I may venture to say that
the supply will be served to a good
many other places. I think I have now
got over that part of my duty which
consists of quoting the opinions of
others and reading extracts. In my
opinion, the authorities I have quoted
prove the whole case in favor of the Govern-
ment scheme. One very important con-
sideration is that, when we get the water
to the summit of Mount Burges, it will
naturally gravitate all over the Cool-
gardie goldfields, and the cost will
be small, as by gravitation the cost
of pumping will be saved. Mount
Burges is 416 feet above the town of
Coolgardie, 590 feet above the town of
Kalgoorlie, and 420 feet above the town
of Menzies. It dominates the whole
country, and it seems to have been placed
thereby a wise Providence for the purpose
of distributing water over these immense
auriferous but waterless regions. I
think that it is a very important
element in this matter that when you get
the supply to the summit of Mount
Burges there is no more trouble to dis-
tribute it, not only to Coolgardie, Kal-
goorlie, and Kanowna, but also to
Menzies, &c.
INFLUENCE OF THE PROPOSED WORK
OH THE COLONY.
Having now, sir, dealt with the
details of this scheme, I propose to
refer to the influence it would have on
the colony, and how it would affect its
indebtedness and welfare. This loan
would not be like an ordinary loan. As
a rule, when we construct railways,
buildings, or other public works, we have
to wait some time before they are re-
productive—in fact we know that in
many cases they will not be reproductive
for a long time. In others—for instance,
railways— I have been accustomed to say
that if they pay within five years I
shall be satisfied. But in this scheme
the works would pay interest, working
expenses, maintenance, and sinking fund
from the day they were completed, and
therefore I think it cannot be looked
upon in the same light as the ordinary
loan which we float for the construction
of works the success of which is some-
times more or less uncertain, although
our experience has fortunately been that
they have proved generally reproductive. I
would like hon. members to consider, in
thinking over this large scheme designed to
benefit these auriferous areas from which
we are receiving and have received so much
benefit, wfiat these goldfields are doing
for the colony. It has been said that


British and foreign capital to the amount
of between 50 and 60 million pounds
has been invested in this country. lam
not so foolish as to think that all this
money has found its way to this colony.
It is not likely it would, but I
do think that the British investors
who have put their capital into these
mines are looking for a return for their
money, and 1 sincerely trust they will get
a good return. What is going on at
present at Perth and Fremantle P
I can speak for Perth, for be-
fore my eyes every day it is being
rebuilt, and I have no doubt, to some
extent the town of Fremantle is
also being rebuilt. What is the reason of
the large increase in population, in the
revenue and the general prosperity P
It is not due to the three million
pounds’ worth of gold that have been ob-
tained from the goldfields of this colony,
but to the British capital that has been
invested in this colony. I wish everyone
in this colony to remember that it is
British and foreign capital that has in-
creased their population, made our rail-
ways pay, provided makets for our pro-
duce, and which has enabled the Go-
vernment to build that work which
is designed to give a commodious harbor
to the chief port of the colony, at Fre-
mantle. The hon. member for FTannme,
in speaking on the Address-in-Eeply
the other evening, made use of an apt
and appropriate phrase when he said “ We
have arrived at the “ parting of the
ways.” We are at the “ parting of the
ways ” to-day. Hot, perhaps, in the
sense that the hon. member intended
to convey. The investors are demand-
ing a return for their money, and it
is quite possiblefor us to give it to
them. But, while the gold is there in
abundance —and no one has ever said to the
contrary —they cannot extract it without
water. I have met hundreds of people
—men who have practical experience,
and who have visited our goldfields—and
they are all unanimous in stating that
the gold is there in abundance. I think it
is a most satisfactory thing that all these
experts from all parts of the world should
agree in this belief, which I am sure is
also shared by hon. members in this
House; but all these people have also told
me that the one great difficulty in ex-
tracting the gold was the scarcity of
water. The hon. member for West
Kimberley, who has just returned from
England, was interviewed by a reporter
from one of the daily papers the other
evening before he had had an opportunity
of discussing the question with me, and
on Monday morning the first thing I saw
was that, on being asked his opinion of
the proposals of the Government to
supply the Coolgardie goldfields with
water, he said : “ Certain details
“of it, as foreshadowed by the Prem-
“ier in his speech at the Coolgardie
“ banquet, were cabled to the London
“ Times, and aroused great interest. All
“ the London people interested in Western
“ Australia look forward eagerly to the
“ Government undertaking the work.
“ They regard it as the one thing neces-
“ sary to make our mines equal to those
“ in South Africa. I may say, however,
“ that if the Government was not pre-
“ pared to supply the fields with water,
“ and would grant the necessary con-
“ cessions to a private company, there
“ would not be the slightest difficulty in
“raising the capital. It is regarded as
“ impossible that each mine should find
“its own water supply, and therefore
“ some big scheme—whether provided by
“ the Government or by private enterprise
“ matters little—is an absolute necessity.
“ Until there is some certainty of such
“ a scheme being undertaken, I don’t think
“ that capital will flow into the colony
“ as freely as it has done in the past. I
“was very much struck with the confi-
“ dence which the London people have in
“ our mines. Many South African
“ dealers have lately come into the West-
“ ern Australian market, and it only needs
“ an assurance as to a speedy and suffi-
“ cient water supply, and some more good
“ crushings, to send things along briskly.”
That is the opinion of the hon. member
straight from London, and when he has
the opportunity of addressing this House,
he will, I have no doubt, be able to tell us
more about this matter. But it is impor-
tant that people Avho have invested so much
money, and to whom our prosperity is to
a very large extent due, should have ex-
pressed such a strong opinion on the
water question, and should be entirely in
accord with the Government as to the
necessity for this work. It is evident
that the capitalist is wdling to continue
to invest money, provided the Govern-


ment devise means for supplying water
to the goldfields. In our opinion the
water must be supplied immediately—l
do not think that anymembers of this House
will question that —or difficulties, great
difficulties, will most assuredly come upon
us. The Gfovernment can see only two
ways of dealing with this matter. One is
that the work should be undertaken by the
Government in the manner proposed, and
the other that it should be given over
to private enterprise. The work is
absolutely necessary if we intend to keep
this colony in its present career of pro-
gress, and in our opinion there are only
two ways —-the Government scheme, or
else to hand the whole thing over to private
enterprise. In our opinion it is perfectly
clear that there is only one perfectly
certain safe source of water supply for
these goldfields, and that is the supply
from the coastal ranges.
THE LOAN WOULD NOT BE A BURDEN ON
THE WHOLE PEOPLE.
I have already referred to a phase
of the question to which I will
again refer, and that is that the loan will
not be a burden on the people of the colony.
I want to impress that on everyone in this
House and out of it. It would be no
burden upon the people of the colony
any more than a self supporting concern
is a burden on a private individual. Here
we have a project which will pay interest,
working expenses, maintenance,and sink-
ing fund, and this being so, how can it
be considered as a burden upon the
people of the colony? We know very
well that there are many men in this
colony who have immense liabilities, but
who also have immense assets, and yet
who figure in the eyes of their fellows as
wealthy men. This scheme can only be
a burden upon the people of the colony
if the work is a failure, but the Govern-
ment see no chance of that. The
people who use the water will pay
for everything in connection with the
work. I repeat that it is an absolute
certainty that it must succeed, and that
it will be reproductive from the day that
it is finished, because the people who use
the water will pay not only interest on
construction, but the up-keep and main-
tenance. To state the idea more clearly,
I will take the case of the Fremantle
harbor works, which are at present a
burden upon everyone in the colony, for
they have cost about <£3 per bead of the
population, and before they are finished
will cost a good deal more. When they
are finished, as we all hope they will be
in a few years, they may be a paying
concern—but whether they pay or not,
they are a necessity, a great
national work, and must be carried
out. But here we have a work which,
while it will benefit the whole of the
colony, the peojde generally will not
have to pay for it. In this case the people
on the goldfields, who use the water will
have to pay for the whole work as well
as upkeep, interest, and sinking fund.
With this scheme, too, we are going to
have a 3 per cent, sinking fund, and in
about 22 years the principal will be repaid
by the sinking fund.
INDEBTEDNESS OP THE COLONY.
Seeing that this is going to be a
reproductive work, I see little reason
to consider the question of indebted-
ness. Still I can easily prove that
it will not affect the indebtedness of
the colony unless the scheme does not
pay, which, in my opinion, is impossible.
Our present indebtedness in round
numbers is If millions, and our popula-
tion is something like 123,000. It has
increased by 33,000 during the past 12
months—a very great and agreeable fact
—and if during the next three years it
increases the same, which I do not think
is an extravagant estimate, the population
will be nearly a quarter of a million.
I see no reason why it should not. I see
no reason whatever why the population
should not increase more quickly than
during the last 12 months ; and, if that is
the case, we can afford to borrow during
the next three years about four millions
of money, and yet not materially alter our
indebtedness from its present amount of
£37 per head. I say again that, if our
population increases during the next three
years to the same extent only as it has
increased during the past year, our popu-
lation will then have reached nearly a
quarter of a million, and we will be able
to borrow about four millions without
materially increasing our indebtedness.
INDEBTEDNESS OP AUSTRALIA.
In comparing our position with that of


other colonies of Australia—of course we
shoulclnot judge altogether as to whether a
colony is prosperous or not by the com-
parative amount of its indebtedness, for
we know that some colonies which have a
large indebtedness per head are yet more
prosperous than others which have a
smaller indebtedness I find that
South Australia at present has a debt
of about £64 per head of population,
Queensland has a debt of about £67 per
head, New South Wales about
£57 per head, Tasmania about
£SO per head, Victoria about
£4l per head, and Western Australia
£37 per head. There is little, therefore,
to fear on the score of our indebtedness
in reference to this scheme, especially
when the works we propose to construct
will be reproductive, and will pay from
the day they are completed. Our revenue
for the past 12 months ended 30th
June was <£1,858,694, and our indebted
ness is as I said, £37 per head, as
compared with £4B per head for the
whole of Australia. Our public debt on
the 30th June last was four and a half
millions, and it is important to observe
that this is only two and a half times our
annual revenue, as against the public
debt of the whole of Australia, which is
seven times its annual revenue. The
public debt of the Australian colonies is
about 170 millions, the annual revenue of
the Australian colonies is about 24 millions,
and, as I said, there is an indebtedness
of £4B per head of population as against
our £37 per head. If we compare the
position of this colony as shown by these
figures, I think there is great cause for
satisfaction in our present financial
position.
THE ADEQUACY OF THE PROPOSED WATER
SUPPLY, AND WHAT IT WILL DO.
I now come to a very important matter—
one that has been touched on by the hon.
member for Nannine, and which I have
very great pleasure in dealing with—and
that is the question of the adequacy of
the Government scheme for supplving
the Coolgardie goldfields with water. I
say this scheme is fully adequate for
the present, and I will prove it.
What will this supply of five million gallons
a day of good water do ? When I have
finished what I have to say on this point,
I think the facts will make hon. members
think seriously before they oppose
the Government proposals. This scheme
will supply abundance of water to
the people of the Coolgardie gold-
fields, and at the cheap rate of 3s. 6d. per
thousand gallons. I will say, for
argument’s sake, that two mil-
lion gallons will be used for
domestic purposes, and that ought
to be sufficient to supply the wants
of from 70,000 to 100,000 people. Hon.
members can judge for themselves of that
as well as I can ; but, generally, I have
understood that 30 gallons a day per
head is a liberal allowance in a large
city; but, be that as it may, it is a very
liberal allowance as compared with two or
three gallons a day that these people
have to put up with now. Two
million gallons will be, as I believe, ade-
quate for from 70,000 to 100,000 people,
and. there will then be three millions of
gallons a day remaining for mining pur-
poses. These three million gallons a day
will keep 300 batteries going, each battery
having, 20 head of stampers. I
have it on the authority of one of the
leading mine managers, Mr. Harper,
who was manager of Fraser’s Gold-
mining Company at Southern Cross, and
who is now manager of the Mount Robin-
son mine, near Kanowna, that 10,000
gallons of water is sufficient to keep a
20-head battery going for 24 hours, and,
if the quartz is clean, he told me that
6,000 gallons will do it. He also in-
formed me that a battery of 20 stampers
would crush 40 tons of ore in 24
hours. Therefore, each of these 300 bat-
teries could crush 40 tons a day, and if
they worked 300 out of the 365 days in
a year, going night and day, they
could crush in a year 3,600,000
tons of ore. [Mr. Simpson : That
would be a bad thing for some of
them.] Supposing the yield of that ore
to be only half an ounce to the ton—
and, as we all know, people won’t look
at half an ounce or one-ounce stuff up
there at present, for they want 3,4, or
5 ounces to the ton—at half an ounce to
the ton the output would be worth about
seven millions sterling a year; whereas, if
it were one-ounce stone the output
would be worth fourteen millions
sterling a year. If these figures
are anything near the mark, if
they are anything like correct this


colony would soon produce more gold
from the Coolgardie goldfields
than is produced from all other
parts of the British Empire put
together. The far-famed Transvaal
raised in 1894 only between seven and
eight millions sterling of gold ; and here,
by means of this water scheme —if the
gold is there, and everyone who has been
there tells us it is ; indeed, I have seen
it for myself, and believe the auriferous
deposits extend over an immense area of
that country besides the two
million gallons for domestic consump-
tion, this supply will keep all these bat-
teries going, and if they put through only
half-ounce stuff the output from these
goldfields alone would be seven millions
worth of gold per annum. Each battery
would only have to pay .£525 for
the three million gallons of water used
each year, which would probably be not
more than 1 per cent., certainly not more
than 2 per cent., of the value of the
gold obtained. Surely these are startling
facts, which ought to make the people of
this colony and the members of this
House think for a moment in regard to
what this scheme is capable of doing. Can
any results such as these be placed before
hon. members in regard to any other
scheme? If they can be, then I hope
the hon. member for Nanniue, or some-
one else, will place them before us, and
let us have the advantage of considering
them and judging of them. These
moderate figures I have placed before
you should dissipate all doubt as to the
wisdom of this great project, and should
surely raise enthusiasm in hon, members.
I should say, also, that it should raise
enthusiasm among the people of the
country.
THE COUNTRY BETWEEN NORTHAM AND
COOLGARDIE WILL BE ALL OCCUPIED.
Now, besides all the benefits and
advantages I have already referred
to, there is another advantage in this
scheme, and I am sure I will not
appeal in vain to those hon. members
of this House who have travelled
through the interior of this colony, and
have had some experience of the dryness
of the country through Avhich they have
passed. This scheme will transform
the country between Northam and
Coolgardie, and will really add a new
province to this colony. What is that
country now P As soon as you leave
Northam you pass through a favored spot
—the Muckering area—so often men-
tioned by my hon. friend the member for
Northam; but after passing that
place, with the exception of one or
two small spots near Moranopping,
what do you see ? A wilderness; an
unoccupied waste all the way from
Meckering to Coolgardie, to Menzies,
to Niagara—indeed, as far as you go what
do you find ? A waterless waste. But if
this scheme is carried out, some portion of
that country will be occupied in a short
time. The best portions of that country
will be ringbarked and occupied by
graziers, and inf some instancesjprobably
by farmers. The water will be a boon
wherever it goes. [An Hon. Member :
What about irrigation?] I said nothing
about irrigation. I said the country
would be stocked, and would probably to
some extent be farmed in good seasons.
It would be all improved, and water
would be supplied to the people settled
on it. Nothing more would be required
to supply that water than a meter, a
trough, and a tap. That country is
capable of growing grass and keeping
stock, if water is made available, but
in its present state it is absolutely worth-
less. There are also the Southern Cross
mines, which would|be supplied wilhthis
water ; and what a terrible experience we
have had there, for no fresh water has
been found there during|the last seven
years ! I know of one mine that has
scarcely worked for years because of the
want of water. We would supply all
those mines with water; the country
would be occupied, so that Southern
Gross would become one of our busy
mining centres. We would be able to
supply water by this scheme to
the towns of Newcastle, York, and
Northam by gravitation from Mount
Baber, which is much higher than
those towns are; and from it they
could be supplied with water for domestic
purposes.
PRIVATE ENTERPRISE.
I now come to another point that
I wish to place before hon. members,


and that is the question of private
enterprise. I have told you that, unless
this project is to be carried out as a
Government work, the alternative is that
we must hand it over to private enter-
prise, because the work must be done.
We have heard a great deal in this
House at one time or another about
private enterprise. The lion, member for
Hannine when lie first came into the House
was an advocate for private enterprise.
He wanted a railway built to Cue by
private enterprise, also a railway to
Coolgardie by private enterprise. [Mb.
Illing worth; You won’tfind that in Han-
sard] If my memory does not lead me
astray, I heard the hon. member say in
this House that private persons should
be allowed to build those railways. I
refer the hon. member to his
speech in Hansard on the Loan Bill
1894, and he will find that I
am absolutely correct. The hon.
member for- Geraldton, during this
session, has told us that this work
of supplying the goldfields with water
should be left to private enterprise, and
that he knew of good men who were
willing to take this matter up. I
stand here to-night opposed to private
enterprise in regard to this great work.
lam opposed to handing over this great
enterprise—for it is a great enterprise—
to private persons; even to those good
men who seem to be specially represented
by the hon. member for Geraldton. lam
not, however, opposed to minor works
being undertaken by private enterprise,
but I am opposed to a great project like
this, which would mean the necessities,
the conveniences, and even the lives of
people on these goldfields being
handed over to private control. I
am opposed to that altogether.
The hon. member for Geraldton referred
the other evening to the Government
having made promises to people to do
this work, and then coming forward and
cutting the ground from under their feet
by undertaking the work themselves
after such promise had been given.
I deny such statement altogether
We made no promise to anyone;
and to show that this is so, I will read
the only letter written on the subject,
which was a letter to Mr. S. E. Wilson.
On the 3rd June he was written to by the
Under-Secretary as follows:
“Under-Secretary,
“ To S R. Wilson, Esq.,
“ Weld Club,
“ Perth.
“ Sir, —1. I have the honor to ac-
“ knowledge the receipt of your letters of
“ the 26th and 29th of May, asking for
“ an assurance from the Government that
“ any Bill you might introduce into Par-
“ liament, having for its object the con-
“ servation of water for the Coolgardie
“ goldfields, would receive the favorable
“ consideration of the Grovernment.
“2. In reply, lam directed to inform you
“ that the data which you have so far
“ submitted are insufficient to enable
“ any accurate opinion to be formed
“as to the success of the undertaking,
“ especially in regard to the supply being
“ certain and adequate, and that until
“ much more complete data are obtained
“ the Grovernment must decline to make
“ itself in any way a party to the scheme,
“by any covenant or promise of any
“ kind.
“3. The Government has, however, no
“ wish to oppose any private Bill being
“ introduced by you or any other person
“ orcompany for the purpose above-named,
“ provided no monopoly is granted, and
“ that it contains the safeguards which
“ the Government may consider necessary
“in a work of the character contem-
“ plated.
“4. I am directed, however, to dis-
“ tinctly remind you that the Govern-
“ ment has in contemplation a scheme for
“ supplyug water for the whole of the
“ requirements of the Coolgardie gold-
“ fields by pumping from reservoirs to
“be constructed in the Darling Ranges,
“ and that any works that you may con-
“ struct cannot be allowed to interfere
“ with any project which the Govern -
“ ment may now or hereafter consider
“ to be desirable in the public interest.
“ I have the honor, etc.,
“ (Sd.) Oct. Bubt,
“ Under-Secretary.”
Is there any promise of any kind in that
letter F Is there any misleading of any-
one in that letter? The hon. member, in
saying we made a promise, has got his
facts wrong, as usual. I am not pre-
pared, and I do not believe the people
of this colony, are prepared to place
in the hands of private persons a
great project like this in order that the


bon. member for Geraldton, or any of
bis friends, may carry out schemes of
their own for making a profit. In
the last session, on the 10th October, 1895,
my friend the hon. member for Beverley,
moved a resolution in this House, which
I will read to hon. members. It
shows clearly the trend of his thoughts
at that time, and although the motion
was not carried, it had this effect, that
whereas in the Bill we brought forward
there was a provision for granting a
licence to anyone for supplying water to
the goldfields, which licence was to be per-
missive in every respect, the Bill was
amended in Committee so as to limit the
licence to projects of a minor character
on the goldfields. The hon. member for
Beverley’s motion was as follows :
“ That in the opinion of this House the
“ question of a water supply for the east-
ern goldfields is one of extreme import-
“ ance, and that the interests involved are
“so enormous that the Government
“ should at once examine into the feasi-
“ bility of pumping water from the most
“ accessible spot, and prepare all estimates
“of cost and working expenses of the
“ same, with a view of its being under-
“ taken by the State. ”
That was the hon. member’s proposition,
which, as I said, had the effect he in-
tended. The feeling of this House at that
time was distinctly against handing over
the water supply for the Coolgardie
goldfields to private speculators, and
the Bill was made clear on that
point. While, therefore, the Govern-
ment is carrying out its own views
in regard to this matter, it is also
carrying out exactly the views expressed
in this House, for the House practically
decided, last session, not to allow private
enterprise to have the control of this
scheme. The House declined to hand over
this great national work to a private
company. I will ask this House
again, and will ask the people of
this colony, whether this great auri-
ferous country that we have to the
eastward shall be handed over to private
speculators, to provide a water supply ;
whether we shall hand over that great
work to a pack of speculators, who can-
not manage it as well or as cheaply
as we can. Have we not had enough
of these promoters offering to do
our public works yet in this
country ? [Me. Simpson : No.] The
experience I have had with such persons
has all been unsatisfactory. I never had
any good experience in connection with
their projects. There is one that we
will perhaps have to deal with in a few
days; one of these projects which has
been carried out by private enterprise,
and which the Government will now be
asked to buy up in the interests of the
people. That is what it comes to
in the end. The Midland Railway,
also the Great Southern Railway, are not
giving that satisfaction which the people
of this colony were led to expect;
and do you want more of these
private projects P These promoters
make plenty of promises when
they come before you. They profess
they will do anything, and sometimes
they do make a start; but after making
a start they often get into difficulties
and have to come to the Government
for assistance. Delay ensues. There is
then perhaps a reconstruction, then ob-
struction, then threats to injure the
credit of the colony, and the last act of
the play is that we have to buy them
out. [Mb. George : Who makes
the agreement?] I do not care who
makes the agreement. Agreements are
of no avail in such cases. You were
told by the hon. member for Gerald-
ton that some mining experts—and
he named one friend of mine-had
expressed opinions adverse to the Govern-
ment scheme; but what do they propose
in place of it ? Nothing. They propose
to wait upon Providence, trusting to the
rainfall. They propose to trust to boring
in the earth, and to many other things ;
but I have an idea that those gentlemen
as a rule are interested in or have
a little project of their own to carry out,
which this scheme of the Government will
interfere with. Well, if they have,
I cannot help it, and do not
care a straw what they say. I am not
here as an advocate of private enterprise
for a great project like this. I am here
not only as the advocate for the people of
Coolgardie, but for the people of the whole
colony. We had a curious spectacle
during the debate on the Address-in-
Reply. We had the hon. member
for Nannine and the hon. member for
Geraldton the so-called friends of
the goldfields and of the working


man - opposing this great work.
lam not much surprised. I think they
have generally been in this House the
advocates of the private speculator, as
well as the opponents of the Govern-
ment.
SOME KEMAKKS ON PRESENT TAXATION.
We have heard a good deal about high
prices, and the cost of living in this
colony, and especially on the gold-
fields. We have been told that taxation
must be reduced, in order that people
may be able to live in comfort. But
what does all this taxation amount to ?
To £6 a head only ; and what is that as
compared with the taxation that people
on the goldfields have to pay for water ?
At present, a man has to pay £lO to £2O
a year for three gallons of water a
day, whereas under this scheme he
will have to pay for the same quantity
only about 3s. 6d. That is the position
of affairs—3s.- 6d. will then buy as much
water as £lO to £2O will buy under existing
circumstances.
REASON WHY MEN HAVING FAMILIES
DO NOT BRING THEM HERE.
There is another important point I
want to touch upon, and that is the
reason why men hesitate, and rightly
so, to bring their families from the
land they have left to the land they
have come to. It is said this is because
the cost of living is so high here. Well,
if that be the reason, what makes the cost
of living on the goldfields so great
but the cost of water ? How is
it that men are leaving their wives
and families in other parts of Australia,
and are living lonely, comfortless
lives on the goldfields? As I have
said, if they brought their families
here, they could not afford to supply
them with water on the goldfields,
and they would have to keep them there
in dirt, instead of in comfort.
POST-OFFICE ORDERS SENT TO EASTERN
COLONIES.
There is another very serious question
in regard to the large number of people
who are here seeking their fortunes,
and trying to build up this great
colony, and are living lonely and com-
fortless lives on the goldfields. For
the last four months the average
amount sent to the Australian
colonies from persons in this colony,
through the post-office, has been <£66,000
a month, and the amount is increasing.
The amount for June last was £62,143, or
something likeat the rate of three-quarters
of a million a year sent away, mainly, no
doubt, for the support of the wives and
the families of men who have come to
this colony. This large amount, I may
mention, is exclusive of sums that are
sent through the banks, no doubt by
persons in a better financial position.
Is this not a matter of moment p Is it
not a matter that requires the attention
of every member of this House, of every
one who takes an interest in this coun-
try P Should we not try our best to devise
some means of altering this state of
things ? I hope that lion, members will
take especial notice of this very important
fact, one which I regret very much to
have to mention, but it seems to me that
it is my duty to do so.
PROPOSALS WILL GIVE ENCOURAGEMENT
TO INVESTORS.
In bringing this question before
the House, I would like to ask
hou. members what will be the result
of this policy to those who have*
invested and taken an interest in our
mines ? Will it not give fresh hope and
confidence to the investors and show that
the people of this colony, and the Govern-
ment, and the Parliament of this country,
are alive to the pressing necessity of pro-
viding water for the Coolgardie gold-
fields P Will it not show we have faith
in the mines ourselves, and that while
they invest their capital we also are
willing to invest the money of the country
in providing a permanent water supply P
EXPORT OF GOLD.
There is another fact that I think I ought
to bring before lion, members. It is an
important one, and must be told,
that the output of gold for the last
twelve months is slightly less than it was
for the twelve months preceding. There
is no doubt that this is due to the falling-
off in the quantity of alluvial gold ob-
tained, but people in other places will
not look behind the fact that the gold
exported up to the 30th June, 1896,
was of the value of £895,135, as against
£910,456 for the year before. [Mr.
Moran : The battery gold has much
increased.] It is satisfactory that, dur-


ing the last month, the returns have
increased. It is of course well known to us
in this colony that the batteries
are only just beginning to work, but how
will the people in London and the foreign
investors look at it? What did the hon.
member for West Kimberley write to
me in regard to the effect the
reduced returns for the month
of April had in London ? He said it had
a very adverse influence upon the Lon-
don market. I am glad to say that the re-
turns for June are more satisfactory, but
there is still the fact that we did not pro-
duce quite as much gold last year as we did
the year before. lam sure that it is only
the want of water that is keeping back
the output of gold from the Coolgardie
goldfields. Instead of there being an
export of gold to the value of a million
for the whole of Western Australia, if
the fields had plenty of water, I should
not be surprised if five millions of gold
were exported, or even seven, as I said
before ; from the Coolgardie fields alone
MOKE REASONS WHY THIS WORK SHOULD
BE UNDERTAKEN.
The permanent supply of water would
also give confidence to British and foreign
investors in our mines. Now is our chance;
will we take it or will we cast it aside P
There is cheap money, there never was a
time when money was so cheap. No other
Australian colony has been able to raise
money at as cheap a rate as we have done.
We have cheap money, good credit, and,
what is more, the eyes of the world
are upon us. Are we to sit here
and do nothing under these favorable
circumstances? It would be unwise
when we have the opportunity to
throw it away, when we have the
opportunity of providing the goldfields
with the one thing needful to make them
still more prosperous. And we should
always remember that the project which
I am placing before you will not only do all
this good, but will pay from the day
the work is constructed. It will pay
not only the interest, but it will provide
a sinking fund and the cost of main-
tenance. Why, then, should we hesi-
tate ? It will also drive away sick-
ness, I am sure. When we see
so much sickness, so many valuable
lives lost on the fields, I believe that
it is due mainly to the want
of water, and it is our duty to
make things better for them. A
plentiful and permanent water supply
will drive away sickness—it will
make Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie like
other cities of the world, which they
can never be unless such a scheme as
this is carried out. As I said before,
the scheme will bring the land under
subjection from Northam to Coolgardie.
I do not suppose that it will ever be very
thickly populated, the rainfall is so un-
certain, but the land. is good
in many places. It can be utilised
for stock, and in good seasons
to some extent for farming. At
any rate, the land will be capable of
carrying stock when water is provided
for them, and a new area of occupation
will thus be added to the colony.
SOME OPPONENTS OF THE SCHEME.
I think I said the chief opponents
were those who have a little
water scheme of their own to
promote. However that may be,
there are other opponents, there are other
good honest men in this country who are
opponents. They are timid and afraid.
They have not been accustomed
to great projects. I find no fault
with these people, as I know
them to be honorably inclined, but it
seems to me that if they had had their
way during the last six years, since the
introduction of Responsible Government,
the colony would not be in the position it
is in to-day. To these good men
who are my friends, I say we are not
afraid. The members of the Govern-
ment and the supporters of the Govern-
ment are not adventurers, we have some-
thing to lose, and we believe that this is
a great and urgent work, and we also be-
lieve that it will pay. I will ask hon.
members whether they have found us
very much in the wrong during the
six years w T e have been working to-
gether for the good of the colony. And
if we have not been wrong in the past, is it
not probable that we shall be right in this
matter, as we have been in many other
projects that we have had difficulty in
carrying through this House? I wish hon.
members to remember that the expansion
of the revenue and the increase in
the value of land, which is enormous,
especially in the city of Perth —the good


market for tire producers —and I appeal to
producers especially and ask all those
who have producing interests in the
colony to rally round the Govern-
ment and support this scheme,
because we are going to provide
markets in the interior, which will be
sufficient for all you can supply for a very
long time —and the general prosperity of
the colony are all very largely due to the
goldfields. Besides these things we have
been able to build railways, construct
the Fremantle harbor works, and we pro-
pose to establish a deep sewerage scheme
in Perth and Fremantle, all of which
are works you so much desire, but none of
them could have been carried out before
the discovery of gold in this colony. Let
us all remember these things in dealing
with this question, and help that industry
which has been helping every other in-
dustry in the colony. What is there
to be afraid of ? I suppose I am
more intimately associated with the
finances of this colony than anyone else.
I have to look after them from year to
year, and know their details, and I am not
afraid of this scheme, which will be a self-
supporting one and will assist the
agricultural and every other in-
dustry in the colony. I think that
when hon. members come to reflect upon
this matter and consider it in the way I
have considered it they will be convinced
that there is no alternative. There is
really no alternative but to adopt it. The
proposal for conserving rainfall as a per-
manent supply for the fields is in my
opinion quite out of the question.
Concluding Remarks.
I have nearly come to the end of what I
have to say. I feel sure that I must
have wearied hon. members, but
it is too great and important a
question to be dealt with in a few
words. I will now finish the obser-
vations I have to make, and would
like to say to hon. members and
to the people of the country that,
during the six years that the Attorney-
General and myself have sat on this
bench and have been introducing measures
into this House, the same members
have as a rule opposed those measures.
There are not many of the hon. members
to whom I refer, but some have opposed
us on almost every great and good work
we have brought forward in this House.
I would ask has the Government ever
led hon. members of this House or, the
people of this country into any difficulty ?
Have we been reckless in our policy, or
have we not, notwithstanding the great
works we have carried out, the railways
we have built, the public works we have
instituted—have we not at the same time
in some degree—although I do not wish
to make a boast of it, but it is worth
mentioning—at the same time reduced
taxation P And we hope to do a little
more this year. Have we not some little
reason to look at the record behind us,
and to ask hon. members and the people
of the colony, from one end of it to the
other to rally round us and trust us P
Most of all, I think this Government can
lay some claim to the support of the
representatives of those parts of the
colony which are benefiting so much by
the Coolgardie goldfields, and if there is
one place more than another in this colony
which is being benefited, which is being
changed, being rebuilt, and becoming
another place altogether, it is the city of
Perth. I think, sir, in the remarks I
have made that 1 have proved that
this colony is in a position to under-
take this work. I have not the slightest
fear myself. We can build this work and
will never feel it. We will never feel this ex-
penditure any more than we feel a burden
the three millions or more we have
borrowed during the time I have been in
office. Are we not in a better position
to-day to pay the interest on the debt of
four and a half millions than we were
when the Government took office, and
when we had to pay only the interest on a
million and a half P We are in
a very much better position. It is no
trouble whatever for us to pay the interest
on our debt at the present time.
The interest on our public debt, even with
the proposed expenditure on this water
works scheme, I say again, will never
be felt by this colony, unless the gold-
fields of Coolgardie collapse. I do
not think anyone will use the argu-
ment that the gold is not there ; and that
is the only argument you can use against
the feasibility and practicability of
this measure. I have proved that the
work will pay; I have proved that it
will do good, and I have proved that it
will reclaim the wilderness to a great


extent, and spread comfort and plenty
along its course. In conclusion, I would
like to emphasise this point, that not only
are the mines languishing for the want
of water, and the output of gold is being
retarded, but our fellow-colonists who
are trying to build up this country are
also languishing —living in discomfort,
without even the necessaries of life in
regard to water. And when we remember
that dirt and disease are fostered by the
want of water, where health and cleanli-
ness should prevail, surely a strong case is
made out in favor of this scheme. I say,
sir, the scheme which I have had the plea-
£y Authority: lUchaed Pjjther, Government Printer, Perth;
sure and honor of placing before the mem-
bers of this House, and before my fellow-
colonists, is a project worthy of an enter-
prising people. I believe, if we carrv out
this great work, not only will the gold-
fields flourish, and not only shall we be
relieved from our present anxiety in
regard to the water question, but we
shall also be repaid a hundred fold.
Future generations, I am quite certain,
will think of us and bless us for our
far-seeing patriotism, and it will be said
of us as Isaiah said of old : “ They made
a way in the wilderness, and rivers in
the desert.”




