

J/ fii 77f '7rUu/uu
A,, & ,/, y . , . f>H-
SPEECHES
MADE IN THE
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL,
In JUNE and JULY, 1879,
BY THE
HON. SIR JOHN ROBERTSON, K.C.M.G.,
(Vice-President of the Executive Council,
&c., &c., &c.,)
ON THE
(From Reports oj the Sydney Morning Herald, corrected
to some extent.)
JSiNtncji;
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER.
1879.




SPEECHES
MADE IN THE
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL,
In JUNE and JULY, 1879,
BY THE
HON, SIR JOHN ROBERTSON, K.C.M.G.,
(Vice-President of the Executive Council,
&c., &c., &c.,)
ON THE
%mi% |in;t[{cp |)E
(From Reports of the Sydney Morning Herald, corrected
to some extent.)
fjdntij;
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER.
1879.
fi 4^7^


ERRATA, &c.
At page 6, line 6, for charges read “ changes.”
At page xo, line 13, the pre-emptive rights alluded to are of leasehold.
At page 29, line 4, after the word use, read ;—lt should be remembered
that many of the objected to transfers were made between very small holders.
At page 31, line 23, after the word inquiry, add ;—inquiry under legal form
and sworn testimony.


■




J_yEGISLATIYE pDUNCIL,
June 18 th, 1879.
LANDS ACT AMENDMENT BILL
PART I.
Sir John Robertson moved the second reading of the Lands
Act Amendment Bill. In doing so he felt assured that the main
objects of the bill would commend themselves to the approbation
of every hon. member of this Chamber. He should not think it
necessary to deliver a speech of any considerable length upon the
measure, but doubtless it would be his duty to point out the chief
provisions in the bill. It was not thought desirable by the present
Administration to make great changes in the present land law, but
it had been thought desirable by them, and also by the other
branch of the Legislature, to make certain changes in the law, and
he thought he was warranted in saying that the bill came from the
other branch of the Legislature with the almost unanimous assent
of its members. Indeed, there were only three dissentients, and
among the majority who voted for the third reading of the bill
would be found men of every section in the community, who
might fairly be thought to have had opportunities for knowledge
with regard to the question of the administration of the public
lands. If hon. members would look at the list of members who
voted for the third reading of the bill, they would find merchants,
traders, mechanics, squatters, free selectors, landholders; and so
far as he could see by looking down the list, the bill had
received the most comprehensive approval that had ever been
accorded to any change in this greatest of all questions —the land
question. He put this forward in no sense that it should be a
guide to the decision of this Chamber upon the bill, but to show
that the bill had met with the approval of every section of the
community, so far as that approval was exhibited by the represen-
tive Chamber of the Parliament of our country. With every
respect for gentlemen outside, and with every respect, so far as he
could respect, the Press of the colony —so far as he could trace it


to certain sections of the Press of the colony—he must say he had
not been able to find anything but a very small amount of excep-
tion to the bill. He thought, therefore, he might fairly say that
the bill had the accord and the approval of the country —of all
sections of the people. Doubtless none approved of every portion
of it, and who could suppose they would ? Among all the con-
flicting interests connected with land there must be some
difference of opinion respecting some of the provisions of the bill.
But every class of holders of land in this country, and not only
those, but the non-holders of land as represented in the Legislative
Assembly, had agreed to this bill, for when it came to the third
reading there were only found three men —not gentlemen of very
great importance, of any great experience in Parliament, or who
had taken any great part in our public life, or especially any part
in our land legislation —who voted against it. He had every
respect for those gentlemen, and more so because he had had in
his time to stand alone, and would not be afraid to do so
again; but they had stood nearly alone, each overpowered
by those engaged in similar interests by eight to ten to
one against him. That being so, he thought he was fairly
entitled to point out the manner of men and their proportionate
numbers who had supported the third reading of the bill. Who
were they? Why, every man in the representative branch of
the Parliament of our country of anything like reputation or
experience voted for the third reading of the bill, or abstained
from voting against it. No past Secretary for Lands had
voted against the bill, or abstained from voting for it, so far as his
memory went; no ex-Minister abstained from voting for the bill,
and no gentleman known to the country, or in any way an
authority in regard to this question abstained from voting for it.
Therefore he was entitled to say that the bill came to this
Chamber with the approbation of men of ability, of thought, of
character, and of experience, in a manner such as no bill connected
with land admistration ever came to this Chamber before. He
had no desire —and he was sure no one would accuse him of
desiring—that this House should not use its own judgment as to
what should be done with this question. On this land question
he had never swerved, and never given way to any influence but
his own convictions—not pretending for a moment that his con-
victions must necessarily be right—but claiming that no induce-
ment under Heaven would force him to take a course he dis-
approved of with regard to this land question. He defied any
man to show that he ever allowed party or any other associations
to swerve him from his own convictions as to what would be
desirable with regard to this question, and he would say that
many portions of this bill did not commend themselves very much
to him. He thought no gentleman here would suppose for one


moment that anything could possibly interfere with the course he
pursued when his conviction was that his course was a right one.
He was well aware that many of the clauses of the bill required
examination, and perhaps alteration —that some of them might
require excision. It might be right in some cases to strike them
out. But that was not the proposal now. As those matters came
on for consideration he promised hon. gentlemen that when we
came to consider the bill clause by clause he would deal with it
in no party spirit, but in that , spirit which a man like him, who
throughtout a lifetime now pretty well drawing to a close should
do, having no other object than to do that which was best for the
country, and so maintain his own reputation before the world for
rectitude with regard to this matter. (Hear, hear.) If hon. mem-
bers could show aught in the bill that could be made better they
would find him use any influence he had here or elsewhere to obtain
the best results. What desire could he have after all these long
years of what he would say had been success as a land legislator-
for no land legislation had passed during the last thirty years in
this country that had not had his support —to take any different
course ? Not wishing to boast, he would say that, with a certain
claim to success, he was not now, for any supposed party desire,
going to take any course that would not be honourable to him nor
what was due to the country. He only wanted to have justice
and fair play in the interests of the country in this matter, beyond
all Governments and all parties. This bill dealt with a variety
of minor details which did not as it seemed to him require any
observation. But it dealt with several matters of grave importance,-
and hon. gentlemen were fairly entitled to know what they were
and why the Government proposed them. There were five
questions of this kind. He did not pick out these five questions
as being of a character which in the other branch of the Legis-
lature would by their approval or disapproval be likely to effect
the position of a Government. But he brought them forward as
matters of the gravest importance to be discussed in a place where
it was generally assumed that party influences did not prevail, and
where he hoped members would be willing to consider them because
they were of importance. One of the most important provisions
of this bill was that relating to the amount of improvements which
ordinary conditional purchasers in future would have to make
before they had their right to complete a purchase. When the law
of 1861 was passed, a law which he should not be found to find
serious fault with —though he might find some fault with the Land
Bill of a previous session. (Hear, hear). It was a very extra-
ordinary thing —and he claimed the right to say it —that very little
fault had been found with the law of 1861; but a very great deal
of fault had been found with the administration of that law.
During the period he had the honour to administer the law there


were but few charges or complaints; and if there had always
been a vigorous, determined, and fearless administration of the
law it might have been carried out in an entirely satisfactory
manner. However, muddle, confusion, and difficulty appeared
to have sprang up when less cautious men took charge of the
administration, and so a cry arose for minor charges, but not
against the principles of the law, and the law of 1875 was passed.
He had had little reason to complain of difficulties arising from
ill-health during his life, and he did not remember being ill at any
time except during the period of the passing of this law of 1875.
But during that time he was on the point of death for weeks; and
he thought if it had not been for that we might have had even a
better law. He was not responsible for defects in that law, nor
did he take credit for the good in it, although he took a large part
in its original drafting, and was politically responsible for it. _ What
did the law of 1875 do? The only change of importance in the
way of improvement that that law effectedon the law of 1861, was
the establishment of courts where sworn testimony could be given
as to whether or not the free selectors had carried out the conditions
on which they took up the land. The law of 1861 provided that the
Minister was to be satisfied that the conditions had been fulfilled
before he concurred in the completion of a selection. He was to
be satisfied by the commissioner, land agent, or gentlemen known
to the Government in the neighbourhood of the selection. And
thus it was that very little wrong occurred. But at a later period
the bung hole was knocked out, the head knocked in, and the
whole thing went rolling along until a necessity arose for the law
of 1875, when this provision of sworn testimony given before
the commissioners in court was substituted. This bill did not
disturb the law of 1875, and it disturbed very little of the
law of 1861. The law of 1861 provided that the conditional
purchaser should be bound within three years to improve
to the value of jQi per acre. At the time of the passing
of the Act of 1861 the land selected by the free selectors
was almost in every instance coast land, timbered land, and there-
fore £1 an acre was not too much to expend on improvements.
He had observed that numbers of people had said that this
provision of the law of 1861 had been a failure —that it had failed
because the people had not grown wheat. But the law of 1861
was drawn by a man who was a free trader; who did not desire to
force any one to grow wheat, nor to grow cabbages, nor pumpkins,
or wool, or anything else; but would let him grow all, or any of
these, or any other things, or be a carrier, or do what he would
on the principle of free trade, so as to bring the greatest amount
of wealth that the work of his hands and of his mind could bring
to his family without the Government interfering in any way. All
this talk about growing wheat where it was not suitable to grow


wheat was mere balderdash; and what the law of 1861 required was
that in going upon the land the selector should expend per
acre in the way of improvements on the land. Well, another
charge against that law was that transfers had been made. If the
amount of land transferred by the selectors was as great as repre-
sented by these assailants of the law—if, for example, some of it
had been taken up by people who had been prosperous or half
starving, and who had transferred it—he should like to know
what harm there was in that ? He did not know whether hon.
members knew, but he knew, that the provision of annual transfer
was not in the original bill; but it was introduced in this chamber,
he believed, by the wisdom of hon. members. But where was
there to be found a word in the law of 1861 against any class of
men, storekeepers, tinkers, tailors, or even squatters —who seemed
to be the worst men in the country, although he never had that
feeling towards them, while they had a strong feeling against him—
where was there a word against these men who had taken up land
and performed their engagements to the Government, selling that
land, even though it had the effect of enabling other men to create
large estates? Nothing was to be found in the law of 1861 against
the aggregation of lands in the hands of those who chose to buy them.
It did not say that after a man had completed the conditions he
should not sell to another who had five hundred or even a million
acres. There was not a word in the law of that kind. There
was no injunction to grow barley, wheat, maize, sugar, or cabbages,
or anything that might or might not fail. But everything was.
left to the selector’s choice ; he was left to do what he thought
meet in order to make the best out of the land in his possession.
All that was asked of him was that he should pay a certain
amount per acre, and improve the land. From that policy
millions of money had flowed into the Treasury; indeed to such
an extent that land sales were checked by the last Government,
by way of increasing from jQi to 255., the minimum upset price
of land sold at auction. One of the objects of the law to
increase the value of the land, and without fear of contradiction
from any man who knew anything about the subject or of the
interior of the country, he hesitated not to say that this settlement,
this residence, these improvements by people going on the lands
had increased their value. Large sums of money, perhaps more
than was desirable, had flowed into the Treasury at the price of
£1 per acre as a minimum, which the wisest and ablest men of
the past would have looked upon as utterly wild, as it would be if
it were not for the increased value that people gave to the land
by their settlement on it. Where was the provision that these
people should remain there for ever ? Those who howled about
the transfer were part of those who would not bind settlers to remain
for three years, or to remain at all. These people had the right


given to them to better themselves if they chose to do so, by chang-
ing their location. Many who took up small areas had sold and
transferred to others wanting land more than they did, and they had
gone out further and had taken up larger areas. Who should say that
this was not in the interests of the country and people ? Provision
was made that the land should be improved, and who should
say that it had not been improved ? Was it to be said that
it was not improved, because it had not been ploughed?
Any one knowing as much of the interior as he did, would admit
that the lands of much of the grazing interior would have their
pastoral value destroyed by ploughing. To plough up the natural
grasses in many districts with the idea of planting some
new-fangled grasses, would be to destroy that valuable feed,
to do something which probably would be a failure. He saw
around him gentlemen who had been so far successful in using
the interior lands as to have made large fortunes, but none had
ploughed up the lands or disturbed the natural grasses as certain
Press critics about land legislation thought they should have done.
The right thing to be done had been done. One great journal
seemed to be knocking its head about on this subject of
cultivating the land. Why, this land had been improved in the
only way which much of it could be improved without involving
ruin to the improver. Water had been provided where it never
was before, and lands had been subdivided into paddocks, so that
stock did not roam over large areas. He did not know whether it
was a new thing to those critics who dealt with this question with
so much glibness and such little knowledge, to be informed that
sheep after a dry season and on a fall of rain destroyed by treading
the new grass with their feet and toes twenty times more than they
ate. They said the land did not carry more live stock now than
before it was sold. Here they made a great mistake. He asked
anyone acquainted with the interior, if the subdivision into small
areas did not enable the owners of sheep, by placing stock suc-
cessively in different paddocks, to prevent the trampling of the
young feed; and, whether the subdivision was not the greatest, the
best, and most important improvement that could be made upon
our interior land 1 ? [Mr. De Salts: Hear, hear; quite right.]
Yet we were told what they did in New Zealand. This was not
New Zealand; the two countries differed in climate and other
important circumstances. Subdivision of the land, providing water
in many places, and preventing the unnecessary trampling of the
feed, were the improvements that had been made here, and these
were the most beneficial to be made and to be remunerative. _ He
asked any gentlemen who had purchased pastoral land whether it did
not keep twice or even three or four times as much stock in con-
sequence of such improvements as artificial water and subdivision ?
No one knowing anything about this matter would disagree with


him on this branch of the subject. The Act of 1861 brought
about large sales of land, but none under £1 an acre. With
regard to leasing of land he was strongly in favour of a very low
minimum price for the inferior pastoral lands of this country.
When they found gentlemen satisfied to give £i o a foot for lease-
hold land in the city, doubtless they thought it was nonsense to
talk about £i a mile being a serious rate for pastoral land in the
interior. In some places it might not be dear at square
mile, in other places it may be dear at £i. It depended upon
where it was, and what the character of the land was. He had said
that the improvement upon conditionally purchased lands, as pro-
vided for in the Act of 1861, was contemplated mainly for timber
lands on the seaboard and western slopes, and could not have been
necessary for the plains. The amount of improvement then required,
in 186 1, of £,i per acre, was reasonable; they wanted to ensure
residential occupation. When they went to the plains ios. an acre
for improvements was a higher rate than an acre for the timber
lands. There never was an idea in the minds of those dealing
with the law of 1861 that there was a necessity to make people
spend money, except in the use of the land. For the same reason
that people should spend £i per acre on heavily timbered country,
ios. per acre on lands on the plains was as much an indication of
bona-fide occupation and residence. It was said that the State
was going to lose so many hundred thousands of pounds, if not
millions of pounds by the proposed reduction in the amount of
expenditure on conditionally purchased land. But the State had-
nothing to do with that. The bill proposed no reduction of pay-
ment —no reduction of the payment to the State ; it only proposed
that now the settlement of the land did not require the £i per acre
for improvements, ios. worth should be held sufficient. He claimed
the assent of every gentleman who understood the question to his
assertion that ios. an acre on the clear untimbered land was
quite enough to afford a proof of the bona-fide settlement as
was an acre for timbered land. The Government proposed
the matter to the representative branch of the Legislature, including
all the gentlemen who had had Ministerial charge of these things,
and who might be considered to be peculiarly well-informed with
regard to the public land question, and every man of them joined
in voting, not only for the third reading, but also for this clause.
Another provision in this bill was extending the time for residence
and improvement from three years to five years. A little more
time had been given to these people. Then there was the matter
of transfer. Some seventeen or eighteen years ago it had been
proposed to give such an extension of right to conditional pur-
chasers as should enable them to transfer without waiting for three
years’ occupation. That had been proposed, he believed, in this
chamber, and afterwards it had been made penal to dummy. It


was surely fair that when you gave people land without going into
the market to buy that land under competition that you
subject them to the necessity of standing by their land during a
period of years, as the law provided. He felt quite certain that the
Legislature would agree to the clause that had been introduced
here, and say that in future there should be no transfer under five
years, and that in all past cases where the holder claimed to come
under this new law he should come under that obligation also.
There was then this clause as to pre-emptive rights with which the
law of 1861 dealt. He had never been a friend of pre-emptive
rights. He had been aware in iß6x that he had tremendous
difficulties to contend with, and that he would not get what he
wanted without leaving pre-emptive rights practically as they were,
and therefore he had done so. But what about that. He defied
anyone to show that he had ever said a single word that could be
construed into meaning that he was an advocate of pre-emptive
rights; but he found that the pre-emptive right of lease under the
Old Orders in Council was allowed only in virtue of 640 acres of
freehold, and he reduced the freehold necessary to 40 acres in the
interests of fair play. On this matter he did not feel called upon to
justify the policy of pre-emptive rights, which had certainly never
originated with him. It was part of the law under the Orders in
Council anterior to 1861. Taking a pre-emptive lease out of a
pre-emptive lease seemed to the judges to be something that never
could have been contemplated. But by the law of 1861 it was
provided that a sale, conditional or otherwise, of any portion of
land under lease, shall cancel so much of the land as relates to the
land so sold, and three times the area thereof adjoining thereto.
It might be said that this 12th clause related only to lands within
the first-class settled districts, but if they turned to clause 18 of the
law, which related to the rest of the colony, they would find the
words : “ The sale conditional or otherwise of any land within any
lease granted under this Act in the second class districts, or in the
unsettled districts, for pastoral purposes, shall cancel so much of the
lease as relates to the land so sold, and to three times the area
adjoining thereto, which last-mentioned area may be held by the
new purchaser under pre-emptive lease, to which all conditions and
liabilities attached to pre-emptive leases under the first-class settled
districts shall apply.” He did not see how anyone could come to
any other conclusion than he had, and that was the reverse of the
Judges’ decision. If he held 10,000 acres and another man held
640 acres, he would have to give out of his lease three times the
amount of the 640 acres. He thought that was the law. He was
not a lawyer, but he had enough of the instinct of roguery about
him to qualify him for being a lawyer. Common sense people
took the view that he did about this. He did not care what
Judges said or what lawyers said ; he would not be afraid to give


his own opinion anywhere. He knew that a learned Judge, for
whose opinion he had the highest respect, had given a different
opinion upon this matter, [Mr, Barley : The full Court.] Fifty
full Courts would not make him believe that two and two made six
He was sure the hon. and learned gentleman, Mr. Barley, if he
would talk it over with him for an hour would say that he was
right and that the full Court was wrong. He knew what the
intention of the Legislature was, and he knew what was the prac-
tice under the old Orders in Council. He knew what the clear
words of the law were, and what cared he for what the full Court
said, except that he had great respect for their learning, but he
marvelled at their want of judgment in this matter. No matter
what the words might now be said to mean, it was as clear as day-
light what the Parliament intended. He was sure that the
President, who was in Parliament when this Act was passed, never
dreamed that the pre-emptive rights people were to have greater
rights than the squatters. He would like to know from the Judges
whether they found any difference between Crown lands leased for
pastoral purposes under pre-emptive right, and Crown lands leased
to squatters for pastoral purposes 1 If the hon. and learned
member, Mr. Barley, would favour him with half-an-hour, he would
convince him that the Judges were wrong. He knew that it was
the intention of the Legislature to follow the old Orders in
Council. The manner in which he proposed in the law of 1861 to
settle the rent question between the Crown and the lessees of the
Crown, he thought at the time a most equitable mode. It was a.
mode which he had, pretty well by himself, maintained during all
these years because of its rectitude and its thorough fair play.
But two years ago he was obliged to state that, in his reliance on
the honour and well-meaning of the people who had the fixing of
these rents, he had been willing to put a kind of Utopian estimate
on the manner in which this matter would be dealt with. No
man who knew anything of the country as he claimed to know it,
could look with satisfaction upon the mode in which appraise-
ments had been made. (Hear, hear.) Of all men in this land at
the time of the passing of the Act of 1861, no one met with more
hostility from the squatters than he did. As a rule, they were
gentlemen and men of high character, and many of them were old
friends of his; but differing as he did from them in what they
thought the interest of their class, and taking a broader view,
as it seemed to him in favour of the public interest, he encountered
a bitter antagonism, which could not have come upon any man
sprung from the agricultural or of any other class than that of the
squatters themselves, and which would never have come upon him
had he not been bred a squatter. At that time, when there
was not a squatter in the country who would not have hanged,
drawn, and quartered him if they could, he watched with great


carefulness the interests and prospects of that grand pastoral
interest which he had always looked upon as the greatest of all our
industries. Even the journal which had ever been an enemy pf
his was obliged to admit that, in this matter of squatting runs, in
the Occupation Act, he stood firmly between the parties, and
defended everything that could be rightly defended in the interests of
the pastoral tenants. He had then great confidence in the honour
and integrity of those gentlemen, and he proposed that they should
have a full share with the Government in the appraisement of
runs, because he hoped that they would see how wise it was for
them to see that fair play was done to the State regard to these
runs. He had not seen sufficient reason since to justify his confi-
dence in that regard. He knew of cases where the rent had been
fixed by the Government appraiser at a year, by the squatter s
appraiser at and by the umpire at (Mr. Holt:
Hear, hear.) He had battled for the continuance of the mode of
appraisement under the law for sixteen years, and had hoped
against hope that better things would come, but he had given it up
in hopeless despair. Every year the dealing with the appraisement
was worse than the last, and the time had come, and the Assembly
had almost unanimously agreed to it, when the fixing of the rent
should be in the hands of the Government, and not of the Crown
tenant. He did not go with those who thought that individual
runs should continue to pay the same rental as that paid in earlier
days. How could we expect a run of 100,000 acres, the owner of
which had, perhaps, bought 50,000 acres, to pay the same amount
of rent that it paid before! At 5 per cent, the man would have
to pay a shilling an acre for the 50,000 acres; or he might have
used money of his own, on which he could have got a much
larger return; and, therefore, it would be unreasonable to
expect him to pay the same rent that he paid before. But
an increased rental ought, in some way, to f pllow the
augmented amount of land taken up under pastoral holdings.
It ought to have some reference to the advantages of roads,
railways, and other facilities provided by Governmental expendi-
ture, which must necessarily increase values. The law provided
for all that; it enjoined the appraiser to consider all these things.
But it had not been so. No one would deny that there had been
an utter misconception of the proper amount of rental from
individual holders of these runs to be paid to the State, and it had
become necessary for something to be done. And in the same
way with regard to improvements on land —to the valuation of
land bought by virtue of improvements —no one was satisfied
with the appraisements. Look at the Campbell Wharf affair.
The Government appraiser valued the land conveyed to the
A. S. N, Co. at or something like that. The
gentlemen acting for the A.S.N. Co. valued it at or ,-£4OO,


or something like that. But what did the umpire do ? He valued
it at ;£ioo, and had the audacity to write a letter to the news-
papers. giving as a reason for this valuation that the Campbells
might have got this land fifty years ago for nothing. But what
had that to do with the appraiser ? What he had to do with was
the law as he found it. It was impossible that such a valuation
could have been made —that such a thing could have happened
if the law as it was now proposed had been the law of the land.
The Government appraisers would have had to fix some reason-
able value; and according to this bill, if the value should be an
unfair one there would be an appeal to the Minister to allow
another appraisement. He ventured to believe that even on the
higher value put upon this land the A.S.N. Co. would rather have
paid the valuation of the Government appraiser than risk another
valuation; and if that were so the State had lost over
The time had come when these appraisements must be dealt with
in some way other than that in which they had been, and he asked
this House for a measure to put some restraint on the kind of thing
he had described. If this branch of the Legislature would show
some mode of dealing with this particular matter better than
the Legislative Assembly proposed, he felt convinced there would
be no disposition on the part of the Assembly, and certainly not
on the part of himself, charged as he was with this bill, to object
to any reasonable mode of putting a stop to the terrible imposition
to which the State had been subjected in these valuations.
It was the same with regard to improvements made by all
manner of people who were entitled to buy in virtue thereof.
It did not apply to one man or the other: this provision
made this mode of appraisement—the mode in all cases —
wherever appraisement under this law was made it was
supposed to be done in this way. It must be apparent to
every hon. member who heard him that something must be done
to put a stop to these frauds —that was a hard word, however —to
the losses which fell upon the State by the mistakes of this
description in connection with these appraisements. (Hear, hear.)
Now, with regard to minimum rents. That was another point;
and he avowed that he gave his assent to so high a minimum as
£1 per square mile for pastoral lands with great reluctance. _ He
remembered that when the Farnell Bill was brought in, highly
desirous as he was that the Farnell Government should remain
in office and that they should deal with the land question,
especially as they did not attempt to interfere with any of those
things which were supposed to be peculiar favorites of his, he
could not see how he could give his vote, or allow the bill to
pass, fixing a minimum of 14s. an acre to the back lands or
other inferior lands. If the appraisement were made honestly and
honorably it did not seem to be absolutely necessary to have any


minimum. He knew that the value proposed in this bill of
was higher than much of the land in occupation was worth, or
that the people in occupation ought to be called upon to pay. The
people who held back blocks were at a great disadvantage, and
£1 per square mile was quite enough for those people to pay.
But there were people in a worse position than those who held the
back blocks. The people who held the back blocks held good
land, and all that their land required was water; but the people
who held the inferior land between the good land of the coast, and
the good land on the western slopes, including the hilly country
between New England and Grafton, and all along those country
ranges, held land that nothing could make highly valuable. On
that land the sheep required large quantities of salt carried up to
them to enable them to live there at all, and the occupiers of this
land had this staring them in the face as long as they occupied the
land. It was not so with the back blocks. All they wanted was
water, a tremendous difficulty, but then there case was not hopeless;
but those people between the good land in the interior and the
good land on the coast, occupied land where there were tens of
thousands of acres which were of a kind, having an abundance of
water and grass, but the grass without food in it, without means
of sustenance for the stock, without the introduction of salt, and
even then —with the aid of salt in large quantities —only
store stock —not fat stock —could be reared. Well, it might
be asked why he advocated so high a minimum as ? He
did not think he should have done so had it not been that the
Government preceding the Government of which he was a member
proposed £2 14s. as the minimum. It was all very well to say,
“ you have nothing to do with what they did,” but we had some-
thing to do with getting a bill through the other branch of the
Legislature, and it was by the mere skin of its teeth that so low a
minimum as £1 got through the other branch of the Legislature.
To have made it below that would have been a signal failure,
and he did not think £1 was a very much higher minimum than
was fair. By the law of 1861 the minimum price was block
of twenty-five square miles, with an assessment of jQ 2O in all,
a block. That was for twenty-five square miles. That
was the minimum in 1861. The present proposal was £25 for
twenty-five square miles. But by the law of 1861 the minister
was authorised to allow where there was no water, where there was
some pecularity of a kind greatly detrimental to the value of the
land, four blocks of twenty-five square miles to count as one block,
and thus 100 square miles were let for a year. Well, we had
not that in this bill, and that was a fair reason why the minimum
should be a little higher than it was in 1861. On the whole he
thought the present proposal might be considered a fair one of
dealing with this matter. But it must be remembered that the


for the block of ten miles square —IOO square miles—of land
after the land was taken up was found in many instances too high,
and many of the squatters who took it up abandoned it. It
was left for years without any rent at all. It was then, under the
law, offered at auction, with open competition, in
minimum per hundred square miles, without anybody offering
a penny for it; showing that those people who went out
then were entitled to some consideration, and the rot we heard
about these people’s rents having been unjustified, at a lower
average than the old rentals of valuable land used to be, simply
springs from ignorance, and not from knowledge. For years these
lands were offered at auction for £lO per hundred square miles,
and they were open to selection at that rate for years and years
before they were taken up. They were then taken up, and now
they were nearly all in occupation, and they had been in occupation
on the average for somewhere about ten years. This law
provided that on their reappraisement, which would not be
for some years more, the minimum should be £1 per square
mile. He did not think that this was very hard on these people.
He confessed, however, that he was not wedded to this provision.
His sympathies were greatly with those people who went out to
these distant interior lands. He remembered when he used to go
out on the dry arid country, meeting men who had sunk a well or
tank, and thus enabled a drink of water to be got, and white men
to live where even an aboriginal could not live before. Believing
that they deserved well of the Government because they opened
up the country and enabled travellers to pass, benefiting others
as well as themselves. He thought that these men ought to
have a certain extent of freehold for that, and therefore he never
had any disposition to look askance at the claim of these people.
He should be very happy to soften their path in the taking up of
these back or inferior lands. He did not know that there was
anything else in this measure of sufficient importance for him to
refer to in moving the second reading of the bill. Bit by bit as the
measure went into committee he should endeavour, in the spirit of
the greatest fairness he could command, to bring about that change
in the law which should be of the most benefit to the whole country
and the fairest to individual interest. And that being so, he should
now simply move the second reading of the bill. (Cheers.)
The house divided on a motion for the adjournment of the
debate until Tuesday, as follows: —
AYES, 11.
Foster White Macleay
Docker Marks Ogilvie ) T ~
Busby . E. K. Cox De Sails | leuers -
Watt Darley
NOES, 5.
Robertson Innes Holt ) rp ~
Samuel Grahame Tellers *


PART 11.
Sir John Robertson, who was cheered on rising to reply, said
it had been suggested, if not in the debate, yet quite loud enough
to be heard throughout the Chamber, that, inasmuch as almost
every hon. gentleman had intimated his intention to vote for the
second reading of the bill, he should think little of making any
reply, or of dealing with the matters which had been put forward
by hon. gentlemen who had spoken in the debate. But he took
an entirely different view of his duty. He thought it would be
necessary for him to occupy a considerable portion of time, now
that he was on his legs, in reply; and he thought the time would
not be wasted because it might prevent the necessity of explana-
tions in committee; and, at any rate, he was desirous that his
views upon this matter—and no man in the country had a greater
right to it than he had—should g*o forth to the country. There-
fore he would occupy some time, and he hoped he would be
pardoned by hon. gentlemen for so* doing. Now, what had
happened during this debate ? The land laws as they existed
he meant the land laws of 1861, and the amendment of 1875 —
the whole position of our agrarian law had been assailed all round;
and therefore he apprehended that, if he took rather a wide range
in its defence, it would not be in the power of hon. gentlemen to
call him to order. There had been an assault made on the whole
of our agrarian law, and he would claim the right to defend the
whole or any part of it. (Hear, hear.) It had been attempted to be
shown that the country had been injured by those laws; that, there-
fore, instead of making amendments and alterations to improve
them, we should sweep them away, and seek new lines of policy.
But it was a remarkable thing that these detractors, like all the
rest of them for the last twenty years, had come forward
with no measure of their own that would be of any use.
[Mr. Holt; Hear, hear.] He would like to know what was the
value of their assaults upon these great measures, when not one
of them had had the capacity or the industry to bring forward
any proposal to deal with the question. True, a proposal
was brought forward by the Government of which his hon. and
learned friend, Mr. Foster, was a member; but he would like to
know whether any member of this Chamber would not sooner
have the law of 1861 and 1875, with this amendment, than the
propositions of that Government ? Before he felt called upon to
accept a fair contest with those hon. gentlemen, he thought he
ought to be shewn some one or other of them who would submit
a bill to the Parliament and the country, in order to have it de-
termined what ought to be done ; who would take something
like the course he took when he entered Parliament nearly
a quarter of a century ago, submitting a scheme of com-


prehensive legislation, and fearlessly going to the country
on a general election and fighting for it before the people;
then carrying it through Parliament and putting it into practical
form, which would be better than the carping, miserable manner
in which they dealt with this question. He did not think we
should see them doing that; they had been prating in this way for
the last 20 or 25 years, and nothing had come of it. It seemed
that under these laws strife had occurred; that people had
quarrelled; that people had cheated; that they had done many
things wrong. He would like to know what law there was in the
history of the world, dealing with the partition of land, under which
there had not been strife ? Go back—and he intended to go a little
further back than was usual—go back to the time of Abraham and
Lot. (Laughter.) What did Abraham say to Lot ? (Laughter.)
“You go to the right and I will go to the left,” and it ended
that they could not live in the same country with each other.
(Laughter.) We came down again to the time of Tiberius Gracchus
(laughter)— 3000 years ago or so. This distinguished gentleman
tried to distribute the land. He found it in the hands of the
Patricians, and he endeavoured to obtain some portion of it
for the people—and we all knew, in that early history, what
occurred. And what was the difference between those times and
ours? The squatters, before 1861, had so got possession of the
Crown lands of this country that they practically claimed the whole
of them. Was it not within the memory of hon. gentlemen—it
was in his memory —that the squatters went to Sir George Gipps
in deputation to complain of the Orders in Council and the then
land administration; and on Sir George asking them what they
wanted, Mr. Boyd, their spokesman, answered—
“ It seems more clever
To me and to my heirs for ever ” (laughter),
and the would-be Patrician assumption was exhibited by their
attempt to create, practically for their class, a system of hereditary
legislators, which probably would have been carried out had it not
been for the influence of the Right Hon. Robert Lowe, Sir James
Martin, Sir J. B. Darvall, Sir Henry Parkes, and others, then
members. The squatters then were our Patricians. But the
people wanted some of the land, and the Patrician, or squatting
class, being in possession, disliked, as his hon. friend, Mr. Ogilvie,
disliked, to see any free selector coming upon the Crown lands he
had held for years and done very little with. He would like to
see the man who could frame a law that would please Mr. Ogilvie
or his class —a law that would take any of this land and give it to
the people of this country. It was not in the power of man to
frame a law to allow the people to make use of the Crown lands
of this country which had been all these years in the hands of the
squatting class —it was not in the power of man to frame a law


which would not be disapproved of by the one side or the other,
or even by both. The new ones would want more than they
ought to have, and the old ones would like to swallow up the new
ones; and it became men like him to steer such a course as
would be fair between the two classes, fearing neither; and no one
could say that he had ever feared either the one class or the other.
(Hear, hear.) No one could say that, in all the years he had
dealt with the land question, he had ever swerved to the right or
the left in the way of favouritism to the one class or the other in
dealing with it. No doubt it brought about a lot of ill-feeling
against any man who dealt with it. It was impossible for any
man to deal with a question of this kind, so largely affecting
men's interests, without coming in for condemnation. We had
heard to-night, and we had heard everywhere before, of a great
many faults in the law, but no practical or substantial proposal had
been brought forward to make it better. He could not understand
how gentlemen who could bring in equity bills could not
bring in a land bill, and pass it through the House and insist
on it at the next general election. This was the way he pro-
ceeded : When he came into Parliament he found a law that he
disapproved of. He battled with the Government and endeavoured
to get the law he wanted. He brought forward a proposition of
his own, went before his countrymen with it, and obtained what
he desired, or nearly what he desired. That was the way to deal
with the matter. What was the use of this continual haggling,
this continual misrepresentation of the position of the country,
these continual assaults upon the law ? Why did not some of
them bring forward a proposal, and grapple with the question, and
go before the people and endeavour to carry it? They would find
in him a fairer opponent than he had found in any of the hon.
gentlemen who had been carping, during the last week, at the
present state of the law. Hon. gentlemen had told us that free
selectors cheated, and no doubt some of them did ; and he could
tell them that some squatters cheated too ; but he did not think
there was any great proportion of the people of this country, either
squatters or free selectors, more given to cheating than any other
people—than merchants, doctors, or lawyers, for example. But
had this cheating arisen since the laws of 1861 ? He knew that
the hon, member, Mr. Campbell, knew better. He knew that the
hon. gentleman remembered very well that, in the early days, when
grants were given free, there was a little cheating, a little favouritism,
and a great deal of rascality. (Hear, hear.) People got grants
who ought never to have got them, and a great deal of dodging was
done by the pure merino class in those days. A man applied
for a grant of 100 or 200 acres, as the case might be; it was
laid before the Governor, who wrote, “Approved, T. 8.,” putting
the amount in figures, and that was all at the time ; but it was well


known that another cypher in many cases was added after the
Governor left the colony. In those days there were persons who
knew something about the means of jostling the people out of
their land, but they were individual cases, and such cases of in-
dividual roguery would always exist. Then his friend spoke of
bribery that took place at auction sales. He had known a man
come and say, “If you will give me I will not bid against
you.” That was done long ago, and is done now, but was in no
sense a peculiarity springing from the law of 1861. He defied any
one to provide an auction system to prevent bribery of that kind.
He could tell the hon. member that he could remember when nine
of the leading colonists were prosecuted by Mr. Plunkett, and
convicted, and sent to gaol, for fraud and conspiracy in a Crown
lands auction room, and that was about 30 years ago and, of
course, long before the law of 1861. They went to a sale room,
having agreed among themselves that one should buy the whole of
the land at the upset price. Then they went into a private room
and had what they called a “knock-out.” They sold the
land and divided the profit of it above the upset price among
themselves. But it was only a swindle that was carried on
by individual people, and was not done by the people of
the nation. Well, as to how free grants were obtained, as
referred to by Mr. Campbell. He was old enough to remember
what took place. A man on arriving in the colony would be met
by some knowing individual who desired to get more land. This
person would ask the new-comer, “ Are you going to remain in the
colony 1 ” “ Oh, no, I only came to have a look.” Then it would
be said to him, “ But you had better apply to get a grant of land.
You apply fora grant of land, and I will give you £ 100 or as
the case might be, for it.” But, then, the man found out that he
must have some money in the bank before he could get it. Mr.
Campbell told them how that was arranged. Money was put into the
bank to the credit of the new man who would get the land, and
transfer it for a consideration. would be placed to the man’s
credit in the bank. There would be no bolting with it in those days, for
there would not be a ship leaving more than once in three months.
The man when he had in the bank to his credit would be
entitled to 2500 acres free grant and the right to an additional
grant of 1280 acres. This land would be then transferred to the
originator of the scheme by the man who received the grant, and
then the matter was all arranged, and the money placed in the
bank got back to him. It was in this way the old pure merino
class got possession of the large estates which they heard of them
now possessing. Then they came again to the time of the Orders
in Council, and to what had been said in reference to Mr. Legar,
the Surveyor-General of Victoria. He would not have mentioned
that gentleman’s name had it not been referred to by hon. gentle-


men opposite. Well, what did Mr. Legar do ? Knowing the
modus operandi well, he chalked out the whole of the country on
the map from the Victorian to the Queensland border, or nearly
so, in parcels like the divisions which appeared on a draft-board,
but without marks or distinctions on the ground. When the
Government sent to have it allotted he had friends with the Com-
missioner’s party, and this was what he used to do: For what was
good he paid his money into the Treasury, and what was not good
they passed by and did not pay for. That was, he thought, in 1858.
Almost one of the first things he did when he became Land Minister,
in January of that year, was to issue a regulation to the effect that the
Government would not deal with these squatting cases unless the ap-
plicants paid 50s. for each squattage into the Treasury as a guarantee
of their bona /ides, and the effect of this was that some 1500 of these
applications were set aside for non-payment. These things were
all done under the old Orders in Council, and nothing of so dis-
reputable a kind had been done under the law of 1861. In all
times the division and parceling of land among purchasers had
caused disputes, disagreements, and strife. That was the case
everywhere. Why, was there not strife now going on in New Zea-
land between the British authorities and the New Zealanders?
No one pretended that all was fair that had been done to the New
Zealanders. Were the British not wresting the land from them
in some way? Were some of the New Zealanders not doing
injustice to some of our people ? There would be always strife
were the lands required distributing. Let them look at the Zulu
war. What was England doing ? They were not robbing these
Zulus of their land. Oh, no, they would not do that. They only
wanted scientific boundaries. Some of his squatting friends in the
early times only wanted scientific boundaries to their runs. They did
not want to take the land from any one—not they ! Just in the
same way England was carrying out a war in Afghanistan. She
wanted scientific boundaries. The words are prettier than to say they
wanted to plunder the people of their homes and there lands and
put them under contributions. But it was strife from beginning to
end —from the time of the earliest distribution of land known
until to-day : and because he had not been able to alter human
nature this law had been assailed. The arguments had all been
simply against humanity. Several gentleman in the Chamber
had said that he (Sir John Robertson) considered the law per-
fect. That kind of thing had been said for 15 years. He was a
very poor man, but he would give anyone who could show
that he had ever said so. They only heard of the cases of dispute
between the squatter and the free selector, between the free selector
and the free selector, between the auction purchaser and the
squatter —and yet there were not many of them. They heard
nothing of the thousands of cases which passed through the books


of the Lands Department without any trouble, delay, or difficulty to
anyone. And these were in number twentyfold more than the
cases that were dealt with after dispute. [Mr. Docker : Without
inquiry.] No, not without inquiry. He would refer to that,
and not leave the hon. member a rag to cover his arguments
with. (Laughter.) They had been told that some of
these free selectors had forfeited their selections through
non-compliance with the conditions. Well, from the first
occupation of land known in the world until the present time,
there had been breaches of conditions. Adam and Eve were
turned out of the Garden of Eden for a breach of the conditions.
(Laughter.) [Sir George Innes ; And reduced to the condition
of breeches.] And he dared say that our selectors had in some
cases done wrong. But he believed that none of them had been
so mean and shabby as to say, “ Oh, my wife tempted me to do it.”
(Laughter.) How many cases were there in history of persons
getting land from the Crown for immoral considerations, and for
undertaking to do things which they never did, while others acted
fairly in the matter ? So he believed the majority of people in this
country had acted fairly. Many grantees in the old times had
broken the conditions too. His hon. friend, Mr. Campbell, told
them of some 8000 acres of land which he held. He did not
know whether he bought it from the Crown. He thought the hon.
gentleman should not put personal cases. But this he knew, that
in almost every instance the old settlers broke the condition of
paying the quit rent. He would be bound that there was scarcely
a gentleman in the Chamber who had a grant of land under the
condition of quit rent that ever paid it all. (Oh, oh.) He did
not know whether his friend opposite
Mr. Campbell, said, in explanation, that the land of which he
spoke was purchased land which he bought from others. Those
who sold paid the quit rent.
Sir John Robertson, said that gentlemen had better not talk
of their own land. But the fact was this, that from the continual
pressure by the owners of these grants with the quit rents upon
them the Government of the day reduced the quit rents twice.
He was sure every one who was there knew that very well;
and it was rather late for these gentlemen who held these enormous
estates, and who never paid any quit rents, or only after a reduc-
tion, to talk about repudiation or retrospective legislation in a
matter of this kind. There was no doubt about this, that selfish-
ness and dishonesty had existed ever since the world began; but
that dishonest selfishness, though widely spread, had not infected
the great majority of the people. Most of the people had been
fair-dealing in their transactions. Those gentlemen who talked
about this dishonesty must know that it occurred in all classes ; but
it was only sprinkled lightly here and there. People had heard


of men going to church to steal prayer-books, yet no one would
suppose everyone went to church for such a nefarious purpose.
Because some free selectors or squatters were dishonest, was it to be
assumed that the whole system under which they operated should
be abandoned 1 One might as well talk of not going to church
because some persons went there to steal prayer-books. The hon.
and learned member (Mr. Barley) said a good deal on the subject
of these laws that was deserving of attention, for he was much
fairer in debate than some other gentlemen; he was an open
and avowed opponent, and very seldom put forward anything
that was not worth listening to. (Hear, hear.) The hon.
member told the House that the law of 1861 had had he
did not know how many coaches and sixes driven through it, and
he thought the hon. member said through this bill he could
drive a coach and six. Well, it was to be deplored that gentlemen
learned in the law, gentlemen of high accomplishments, gentlemen
of high repute, in every other regard, should be willing to allow their
talents to be prostituted as they had been to enable dishonest people
to override the laws of the country with regard to lands belonging to
the people. But we knew it was so. Gentlemen of the highest
character in this country, of the highest culture, were arrayed
doing battle to obtain a perversion of the laws which they knew
were not intended to be turned to the advantage of the dishonest.
They succeeded in driving coaches and sixes through the law in
some cases; but people in so driving had to pay the toll. The State
received as forfeit money for these attempts to drive
coaches and sixes through the law of iß6x. These people who had
attempted driving coaches and sixes through the law not only paid
that money to the state, but also pretty fat fees to those lawyers who
endeavoured to get them through. The ingenuity of the lawyers
had not been sufficient to get them through without tollage to the
extent of .£325,000 to the State by way of forfeiture, or without
a very considerable amount paid to the coach-drivers in addition.
In this game there had been food for the lawyers, but he did not
think the game had been very good for those who had had to pay the
piper Take the case of Joachim v. O’Shannassy, a notorious case.
Joachim took up six blocks of land on a dummying principle on
O’Shannassy’s run. He was allowed to retain one only, the con-
ditions of which he fulfilled ; the other went back to the State with
the money paid thereon. What happened next? Children of
O’Shannassy took up the same blocks, and there was another
attempt to dummy. That failed also, and the money of these
dummying children went back to the State after payment by the
two sets of dummiers to the extent in all of 10s an acre. Both
these sides employed the highest skilled lawyers in the country, who
fought out their battle between them, and he hoped, and did not
doubt, they were paid well for it. Neither had his hands clean in


the transaction. The State got ios. an acre in the matter, and
retained the land from these people, who had tried to drive their
coaches and sixes through the law. The hon. and learned member
said that could be done again. [Mr. Darley : Hear, hear.] Then
he (Sir John) thought it a pity that the hon. and learned member
did not lend his ingenuity to prevent it. Holding his position, a.nd
being a man with a cast of mind singularly adapted for meeting
and grappling with cases of this kind, it might be thought that he,
knowing this thing to be going on, would see the opportunity in
the present bill to endeavour to put a stop to it. Yet the hon.
member would vote against the second reading of the bill and
strangle it, and thus perpetuate this state of things, and the
driving of coaches and sixes through the law. Well, having
avowed that there had been individual cases of trickery under
these laws in the distribution of the lands, let them see now what
they had achieved from the passing of these laws by the Govern-
ments of the country under the present agrarian system. He
would ask hon. members to consider well what had happened in
the country in the way of advancement during the existence
of those laws. He should show that in every regard the
country had advanced at rates infinitely more rapid than even
he ever contemplated when he introduced the laws of 1861. He
never anticipated the amount of success that had arisen from those
laws. It was all very well for newspaper writers and others to be
irritated because they saw people did make their way in the world
in spite of their prognostications. It was rather the expression of
a wish that it were not so than the fact that it was not. Those
who opposed the law of 1861 had misled people into wrongdoing,
and then turned round and found fault with the law and its
administration. He would show what had been done under the
law, and quote from papers facts certified by the highest officers
of our country —by the authorities who kept the records. He
might avow that in reading these facts he was them
in his own way. He was not mean enough to ask any officer of
the Government to arrange his papers, or to take any responsibility
with regard to them. As to the facts, he spoke only from official
authority, and, in doing so, he should go over some figures relating
to the land, and the land refunds must be excluded, because they
could not be satisfactorily got at; but they were so far immaterial
as to the whole interest as not to make much difference. He went
back to 1857, because in the first month of the following year he
took charge of the department. In 1857, the whole revenue of
the country, including land revenue, was In 1861
the whole revenue was That showed a decrease, but
in the meantime the colony of Queensland, with some 26,000
people, was cut off from this colony, and this was a fair reason for
the reduction during that period. In 1861, the year before that


dreadful legislation of which they had heard so much about
lately had come into full operation, the whole revenue of
the country was £1,432,406, or practically a million and
a half. In 1878, the whole revenue was £4,991,919, or prac-
tically five millions. The average of the two previous years of
1876 and 1877 was £5,394,770. Now, let them look what the
land revenue was. The land revenue of 1857 was £480,832, and
of 1861 £397,845; showing a small reduction, attributable doubt-
less to the severance of Queensland. In 1861 the land revenue
of this colony alone was £397,845. In 1878 it was £2,355,713.
The average of the two previous years was three millions of pounds.
There was an indisposition for purchasing, doubtless partly on
account of the increased upset price put upon the lands, and partly
owing to the terrible drought through which the country passed.
But in the first year of those droughts the land revenue was
up to ,£2,325,713. What was done with the money? He would
take the opportunity of saying that there were hon. gentlemen in
that Chamber and in the other Chamber who said, and sometimes
also they heard persons out of doors say, that because certain of
the waste land had been sold the country had been ruined. It had
been dealt with in a highly beneficial manner, which he would show
before he sat down. He ventured to believe that the land having
been sold, the fact of its having been sold had increased its value —
(hear, hear) —and the country was the richer. The gd. per acre per
annum which they still received on three-fourths of the price of
conditional purchases was a greater profit to the State than it
would have received had the land remained unsold, and true
statesmanship was to put the lands of the colony into the hands
of the people on as fair terms as possible, and make it yield a fair
return. It had been held that the land had not produced more
than it had before it was sold. Persons who made such an asser-
tion were ignorant of the facts of the case. The true mode of ob-
taining the most from the land in the arid districts of the interior
was utilizing the natural grasses and creating water supplies there,
and by subdividing the lands and not by ploughing them. Every
hon. member who knew anything of the interior would agree with him
that if lands in the Albert and other like districts were cultivated
the natural grasses there would be destroyed, that no fresh grasses
would yield a profit, and that the land would fall into disuse. If
they were ploughed the natural grasses would not return for many
years. He had shown the amount of land sold and the large
amount of money received for them. It had been suggested that
the money had been wasted. Let them see what had been done with
some of it. On the 31st December the unexpended balance —
the surplus of the land fund —was £2,474,924. (Hear, hear).
The balance due by conditional purchasers on December 31,
1878, was £8,498,843. Of course a large proportion of that


amount was not due and payable until the expiry of the
period allowed by law for the payment of the balance
namely, three years in the case of each sale from its date.
It must be observed, however, that this large sum had to be
reduced by 15s. per acre on certain purchases forfeited, and
this he had ascertained would lead to a reduction of
What else had they done with the money 1 They had paid off
worth of old debts—debentures and other liabilities —
as they had fallen due. The account stood thus: Putting the
amount paid off old debts to the at the credit of the
Consolidated Fund, and the « win g b 7 the selectors
and secured on their land —land upon which they had already paid
ss. an acre —they had to the good, after sixteen years’ operations,
nearly (Hear, hear.) And what else had been
done 1 Why, look at the public buildings, the roads, the bridges,
the railways and improvements from one end of the country to the
other. These had been paid for partly out of the fund. But
irrespective of these improvements made during the operation of
these agrarian laws, great improvements had been made through
the length and breadth of the land, and they had to
the good. And now let them see how the country had increased in
population, and in other respects during the period of these very
wicked laws. In 1861 the population was 358,278, and in 1878 it
was 693,743. Let them inquire into the matter of cultivation. In the
year ending March 31, 1862, there were under maize, wheat, barley,
oats, hay, sown grasses, 284,391 acres, and in 1879, 573,185 acres.
During the period between these dates a remarkable change had
been going on in the country, and the figures he had quoted did not
show the advance to which agriculture had extended. Lands in
the vast valley of the Hunter had gone out of wheat culture in
consequence of rust there. They knew not the plough now, and
were used to fatten bullocks and sheep. The old farms were eaten
up with rust, and the valley of the Hunter had gone out of wheat
growing. The same might be said of the Hawkesbury and of other
settled districts in the colony. A large increase of agricultural in-
dustry had gone on notwithstanding, and the increase which he
had referred to was in no sense an indication of the extent to
which agriculture had advanced. Had it not been for free selectors
taking up land and clearing it wheat-growing would have died out.
(Hear, hear.) It was as true as they were alive that wealthy men
never grew any wheat. Now let them see what had been the result
in regard to their sheep and their cattle and their pastoral business.
In 1862, the first year of the operation of the law of 1861, there
were 8,120,167 sheep in the colony, and in 1879, 27,067,068. This
increase—and it was a very large one —took place notwithstanding a
drought, during which a vast number of sheep and cattle perished, and
the average increase in stock was arrested. The number of sheep


was reduced by 5,000,000 or 6,000,000, and the number of cattle
was almost in equal ratio. These reductions occurred during the
three years; while in the antecedent years before the drought com-
menced sheep were increasing at the rate, he thought, of 4,000,000
a year, and cattle at somewhere about the same proportionate rate.
So that we came down to something like 20,000,000 lower for
sheep and ratably for cattle than we would in all probability have
come had it not been for the tremendous drought. Let it be
remembered that our country people had been placed under great
privations, but had manfully borne up against their difficulties.
There had been very little insolvency in this country during this
period. There had been very little insolvency or failure coming
upon us even now. Though people might have as much as they
could struggle under, they had hope and the country before them,
and they felt that they would surmount their difficulties. But
suppose they had a drought of three years in any other country —
suppose twenty per cent, of the whole sheep and cattle died of
starvation, and that this kind of thing wenton for years, he wondered
what state that country would be in ? Our country had borne up
against it well; and if our land laws had been so objectionable as
hon. members had endeavoured to make it appear, this country
could never have stood under the pressure. What had been the
difference in our trade ? Our imports in 1861 were 555 ; in
1878 they were Our exports in 1861 were
and in 1878 We had been told that
by the operation of these laws our people became demoralized,
that our country had become degraded in the eyes of the world,
that we were a mark to be avoided. Let us see what had happened
within the last few months in connection with our country, and
with the opinion that English capitalists had of us. He would
read a very brief comparative statement of two borrowings of three
millions of money—one by Victoria, and the other by New South
Wales. The 4 per cent, debentures of New South Wales realised
the other day an average of j£gß 9s. 2d. per cent., while the
per cent. Victorian debentures averaged £gg is. 7d. per cent.
Now, what did this come to ? It meant that in 30 years this
colony will have paid away for interest on every ;£ioo,
while the Victorians will have paid for each £IOO.
The Victorian people would pay for the same period for jQioo,
interest, of course, with the principal, for the
100 as against our and unlike us had to submit to the
indignity of giving a specific pledge that they would not seek any
further borrowing for a long and fixed period. He supposed that
was proof of the manner in which we stood degraded before the
whole world as compared with one of the greatest and wealthiest
of England's colonies —Victoria.
Mr. Docker : Is the difference owing to the Land Law ?


Sir John Robertson said of course it was, and he was surprised
the hon. member asked the question. The reason our debentures
were so high in the market was, because of our tremendous
revenue—because people knew we could pay—because we had
paid off during the period of the existence of these laws
of old debts as they fell due—because we had sur-
plus unexpended—because we had secured on land, of far greater
value, ,£7,373,843 —because we could pay easily and speedily all
our liabilities from our land revenue with very little skill of finance,
not only without any pressure on our people, but without taxation of
any kind, and alone from our land revenues as dealt with under
our land laws. (Cheers.) Well, the difference on the transaction of
which he was speaking when his hon, friend interrupted him—the
borrowing of three millions by this colony, and three millions by
Victoria, for a term of 30 years—was a saving to our country of
.£451,125 as compared with the rate paid by Victoria. (Hear,
hear.) We borrowed for the thirty years for 1,125 less
than the Victorian people borrowed the same amount for; and*
he did not think it would be out of place here to say we
had borrowed at as good a rate as any nation in the world,
except the grand old parent country. (Cheers.) That was the
position we had risen to. Let us see now what our position was
before the law of 1861 ? We borrowed, in iB6O, at par,
at 5 per cent, interest. According to the statement of an ac-
complished accountant, par for 5 per cents., with thirty years’
currency was equal to eighty for 4 per cents. We had got 98
now for 4 per cents. According to this we would have got 20 less
than that if we had borrowed before the law of 1861 was passed.
That was as clear as daylight. Par for 5 per cents, was equal to
jQ BO for 4 per cents. In other words, if we had sold our recent 4
per cent, loan at £BO for debenture, instead of £9B 9s. 2d.,
the price we did sell at, the sale would have been as good as the
sales of iB6O and 1861 at par for 5 per cent, debentures. Again, if
our debentures had sold in iB6O and 1861 as well as they have
sold in 1879, the 5 per cents, would have realised not less than
;£i22 Bs. per cent, instead of par. Now he would refer to some-
thing else. None of the land had been sold for less than £1 an
acre.
Mr. Docker : How is it there are eight millions owing ?
Sir John Robertson : That was the law. It was not desirable
that we should have all this money, but that we should have the
interest from time to time, so as to leave something to our posterity
from the alienation now to individuals of these estates. It was
well that we had this revenue, a large revenue, an annually increas-
ing revenue, coming in from these lands; and let it be remembered
that, though we had anterior to the existence of these laws, the
highest authorities in the country —some of the ablest men —


declare that our interior lands were not worth 6d. per acre, and
that persons would be ruined by going on them, yet people had
gone out on this land, improved it, developed the resources of it,
and thus increased the value of adjacent land so much that
population had been willing to buy at jQi an acre, and upwards, to
such an extent that the last Government thought it their duty to
increase the minimum price by 2 5 per cent, avowedly to check
the sale of land. A complaint had been made that people had
bought more land than was desirable for them to buy. There had
been a rage for buying land in this country. This country was
peculiar in that regard. Sometimes we had a mining mania and
at other times a land mania; but this rage for buyiug land had not
been confined to pastoral or Crown lands —it had been everywhere,
in the cities, in the bush, on the seaboard —go where you would
there had been a rage for buying land. All round the city the land
had been cut into small parcels, and the wonder had been where
all the money had been found to buy thjs land. But was this the
'effect of the law of 1861? The law of 1861 had nothing to do
with that; and men of intelligence who put forward the statement
that it was owing to that law put forward what was not fair and
what they knew was not true. Then we had been told that too
many transfers of conditional purchases of land, bought under con-
ditional purchase, had been made. Had there been more sales by
conditional purchasers than sales by other people 1 No man would
be hardy enough to say there had been a greater proportion of sales
by conditional purchasers than by other people ; and if the con-
ditional purchaser was pleased to sell and had complied with the
law in a way that warranted him to do so, who would say he should
be interfered with by hon. members who thought the world was
made for them and their class ? It was not right to say that these
transfers were evidence of a failure in the law. No man said it
was a failure of the law when people transferred land bought at
auction, or when they cut up land into pieces and sold it. He
could see around him hon. gentlemen who had had large grants of
public land given to them for nothing; he saw hon. gentlemen
around him who had thought it not wrong to sell the land they had
got for nothing; and why should not the conditional purchasers
sell their land if they pleased, so long as they complied with the
law? [Mr. Holt ; Hear, hear.] We were told that too much land
was in the hands of individuals. What did that mean? The men
who had the most money would have the most land, the most
ships, the most houses, the most bank shares, the best establish-
ments, carriages and servants, the most of the good things of this
world of all kinds, with one exception —they could, like a poor
man, only have one wife. (Laughter.) Who were these gentlemen
that said this 1 Were they the free traders we heard of who were
howling about the aggregation of land ? He held it was no part


of his duty to restrict anyone in the quantity he might think it best
for him to buy, and in this country, where we had much land and
few people, he did not think much harm would be done so long as
the land was kept in use. His hon. friend Mr. Docker inquired
very pointedly of him while he was speaking—and seemed to think
he was making a great hit in the inquiry—in whose hands were
the conditional selections ? He presumed they were in the hands
of the rightful owners, whether the original selector, a transferee
selector, or other transferee. Mr. Docker did not ask in whose
hands the auction-sold land was ? In whose hands the land sold
to the squatters on improvement conditions was; or in whose
hands the lands originally granted in full payment was ? It was in
the hands of those with whom it suited the original holders to place
it. He happened to know, from his connection with the Lands
Department, that the greatest holders in the country were in the
habit of placing all their securities in the hands of their bankers,
who made them such advances as they might, from time to time,
desire to have made. Was that wrong ? And who would say that
a free selector, having complied with the conditions of residence
and improvement, and wanting money, had not the right to do the
same thing, or to do whatever else they considered profitable to
them. But because these men had transferred, they were black-
mailers, forsooth ! Because they were poor and in humble po-
sitions, no better word could be found to describe them than
black-mailers. He believed that there was no greater proportion
of these people blackmailers or wrongdoers in regard to the land
than any other class in the community. He believed they had as
good a right to be dealt with as honest men until they were proved
to be dishonest as any other men in the community had. Another
hon. member complained of the introduction of a bill in this
session making a reduction of ios. an acre on improvements
necessary to completion of a conditional purchase. But the hon.
member’s memory must be very bad. He was sure the hon.
member knew that, at the time he was last in the Government, he
was busily engaged in the preparation of a Land Bill which was
printed at the Government Printing Office. That was the bill
which the Government of his hon. friend, the late Attorney-
General, had the benefit of. That bill contained the provision to
reduce the value of improvements to ios. an acre. The Govern-
ment of which he was a member never brought in that bill. About
that time, while he was still in office, certain free selectors waited
on him, and he showed them this bill with this clause; and sub-
sequently, when out of office, he wrote a letter to the secretary of
one of their associations, which letter was printed in the Herald
of that day. Those gentlemen had thought he had said that this
would be at once in operation. In answer to that he wrote :
“ Indeed I could not have made such promise, for the simple


reason I could have no power in the matter, unless it were given
by the authority of Parliament.
“ Doubtless, I intimated my willingness to endeavour to obtain
legislative authority for the reduction, and perhaps let you see a
clause I had drawn to enable it; but further than that it is impos-
sible I could have gone.
“ Under the same cover with this note you will find a bill in
print, which I had drawn, and had printed by the Government
Printer before I last left office. It deals with certain changes in
our land law, which I thought desirable, and to which I had ob
tained the assent of my colleague, Mr. Baker, the then land minis-
ter, and, if I remember rightly, of my other colleagues. The
clauses relating to changes with regard to squatting rentals, not
having been agreed to at the same time, were not, I think, ever
printed.
“ The 3rd, 4th, and sth clauses of the bill I enclose would, if
enacted last session, have made all necessary provisions for dealing
satisfactorily with the matter which is the subject of your appeal to
me, and doubtless would long since have been the law if die Govern-
ment of which I was a member had been permitted to go on with
the question. I need not here allude at length to the manner in
which we were removed from power. The cabals, conspiracies,
and acknowledged falsehoods which brought it about are now
matters of history.
“ It seems to me that all that would be wanted, even now, to
carry out your wishes to benefit conditional purchasers, without
injuring the interest of the general public, would be to add some
such proviso as the following to clause 4 of the bill :
“ ‘ And, provided, also, that in any case where final action for
forfeiture has not been consummated by the Government, for non-
performance of the above-mentioned conditions, or either of them,
the Minister may grant such extension, notwithstanding that the
time may have elapsed during which by law they should have been
performed.” ’
Hon. members had suggested that this question had been taken up
at this time for the purpose of conciliating certain classes of people.
Well, he had shown that he took that view when no election was
pending. Now what did his leading opponent on the land question,
Mr. Farnell, do in the other Chamber? He brought in a bill
making the same provision with regard to the 10s., but not making
any provision for retrospective action. [Mr. Docker : Hear,
hear.] He wished to show that the leaders on the land question
of each party in the Assembly took the same view—that it was
desirable that the charges on conditionally purchased land should
be reduced to 10s. ; and, during the debate on Mr. Parnell's Land
Bill—and it was long and ably debated —no one put forward a
single objection to that reduction. With regard to the retrospec-


tive action, the bill only went back to deal with those lands
which were running their three years during the period his bill
and Mr. Famed's bill would have had operation if they, or either
of them, had passed. The two bills came out nearly together,
as the Government changed speedily, and he thought that unless
they were now to invoke the aid of Parliament to deal retrospectively
with the matter, so far as related to those men, whose cases would
have been covered by those bills, or either of them, if they had
been passed at the time, they would not be acting fairly
and justly by them. Of course if the Parliament refused to
do it, that would in no way cast any blame upon him. He did
not tell them he could do this ; he only told them he would be in
favour of doing it, and Mr. Farnell brought in a bill to do it. He
thought there was a sufficient justification for him to invoke the
Parliament to deal with the matter in one way or the other. But
hon. gentlemen talked about retrospective legislation as something
very bad. Did they recollect in 1875, when the Government of the
day, of which he was a member, brought in a bill to deal with sworn
inquiries as to whether or not the conditions had been complied
with, and to establish Commissioners’ Courts and sworn testimony ?
The bill originally brought in only dealt with cases in prospective,
but this House made it retrospective throughout, and that was
the reason why we now heard of so many cases of inquiry. The
present Lands Minister read the law somewhat more stringently
than Mr. Garrett read it, and held that every case in which the
Minister had not finally given his approval should go before the
Commissioners. That was done in this Chamber, and he presu-
med that, if the House created one retrospective action, they
would not object to creating another. But the bill, as the Govern-
ment introduced it, was not so open to that objection as it was as
coming from the Assembly. His hon. friend Mr. Docker said the
improvements necessary under the law were not on the land.
If it was found that the improvements were not made, the
selection would be forfeited. But it was not true, as had
been alleged, that there was no care taken in this matter
before the law of 1875. In the earlier days of the working
of the Act of 1861 he had charge of the business, and
whenever an application came in for the final sanction of the
Minister, inquiry was made as to where the place was, and some
gentleman known to the Government —a commissioner of Crown
lands, a police magistrate, a land agent, or a private gentleman—
but usually where he could be got, a gentleman in high position—
was asked to be good enough to let the Government know what
the state of this matter was. And thus, as the law stated, the
Minister had to be satisfied. He went out of office, and time
went on, and a cessation of care took place in this regard. For
some three or four years a considerable neglect occurred in


regard to this watchfulness, and at last, without any new
law, inspectors of conditional purchases were appointed. They
were appointed under the law. That was found not to be suffi-
cient, and thus the bill of 1875 provided for the taking the sworn
testimony before accomplished men —gentlemen who had long
held the position of magistrates. His hon. friend Mr. Dailey, at
great length and in the most minute detail, with that ability for
which he was so remarkable, described the case of a person who
declared that he had stopped on a free selection, that there was a
man residing there with his wife, and with a comparatively com-
plete farming establishment, and that on the Minister saying
he would like the testator thereof to be put to the proof, he went
to the police office, and made a declaration before the police
magistrate that he had seen all this. And yet it was all false.
His hon. friend did not say what he might and ought to have said,
“ That that man did not get the land.” It was an unsuccessful
attempt at fraud. Mr. Dailey and other hon. members had spoken
of the land legislation as being only for'squatters and free selec-
tors. He wondered where that was found out. Where was there
anything in the law to prevent any man from buying land at auc-
tion. Millions of acres of the finest land in the country had been
put up to auction. What was to hinder any persons from going
and buying any number of thousands of acres. The law was fair
for all parties, and all classes had a chance of buying land at auc-
tion. Then his hon. friend spoke of the back blocks. He thought,
in introducing this bill, he had shown that he had as much sym-
pathy with the people holding back blocks as his friend, Mr.
Dailey, had. (Hear, hear.) True, he did not pile up the agony to
anything like the same extent as his hon. friend did, and everyone
knew that there was a great deal of exaggeration in the statement
made by the hon. gentleman, and that he was simply putting a
highly polished case. What was the position of the people hold-
ing these back blocks 1 In coming to a conclusion that the rent
should be a pound per square mile he was very much influenced
by the course of the previous Government, who proposed to make
the rent £2 14s. per square mile. Yet hon. members seemed to
think £ 1 per square mile was very shocking. Did not hon. members
know that in order to carry any matter you must have some mem-
bers of Parliament to agree with you 1 He supposed that hon.
members were under the impression that he had some magic wand
that would enable him to carry this thing wholly his own way. If
he had had his own way he should have relied on the appraisers
without restricting them. But Parliament would be unwilling to
trust any of these appraisers without a minimum. They had a
minimum in the law of 1861 a block and £2O assessment.
The blocks were 16,000 acres ; for 25 square miles was the
minimum. But there was placed in that bill a provision that in the


case of dry arid land, the Minister might allow of the leasing
of a block of four times the ordinary size, or roo square
miles, at the ordinary rate of ;£io, and £2O assessment.
He had said, and now said again, that these low rentals were only
defensible in these cases, and he pleaded them only in mitigation
of the attacks that were made. He had pointed out that when
these 100 square miles were leased at jQio, and £2O assessment,
many of them were forfeited, and that under the law these
were then submitted to auction at an upset price of £lO,
without the £2O assessment; and in many cases no one
bid for them. And this was in some sense a justification
of the low rents, and showed that the lands were not so
much valued as those ignoramuses who wrote on this question
had endeavoured to put forward from time to time in the leading
journal of the city. In 1861 they fixed a minimum rent for dry
blocks of 100 square miles at But at the present time he
believed that there was hardly a block that had not been taken up,
so that it was all balderdash talking about the lands that could be
taken up in future, because practically there was no more to be
taken up. Now, if in 1861 was a moderate rent for 100
square miles, he did not think that in 1879, eighteen years after
that, £xoo was so very objectionable a rental as appeared to some
hon. members. Let them see what had happened ? These people
who had taken up back blocks had nearly all of them held these
blocks for ten years or more at ;£io per 100 square miles. They
had had a pretty good innings at this rate, he thought. These
blocks had been appraised again, and the right to hold them again
had been given for a further term at the same minimum. They
had entered the third term of five years. And what said the law 1
It said that if during the period of their holding they made these
blocks bear 40 per cent, more stock than they bore originally, they
were entitled to another five years at the same appraisement that
they had it on now. That would give them twenty years’ pos-
session at the appraisement based on the low minimum. He was
not so sure whether this was open to so much attack as had been
made. He did not think that hon. members who spoke so glibly
on this matter knew all the history of it. He thought that this
House would be wise—and he was sure the House desired to do
what was fair—to make some provision that after the second ap-
praisement, and only after the second appraisement, should come
in the provision for the alteration of the minimum. Now, he
thought that that would be a reasonable settlement of the matter,
because they could not deal with these matters like a rule-of-three
sum. You could not arrive at anything but a rough-handed kind
of justice. You could not afford to have a thoroughly accurate
survey and examination, because it would cost more than you
would get for the land. He had very much more reason to know


the difficulties of these people, and to have sympathy for them,
than Mr. Dailey, and perhaps than almost any member of the
House, except it might be two or three. He had travelled through
miles and hundreds of miles of country that could not be occupied
without artificial water, and he thought that the man who sank
wells and made such country habitable was entitled to a great deal
of consideration. He did not think that the Parliament or the
Government could be considered wrong in giving to men reason-
able proportions of this arid country which, at considerable ex-
pense, risk, and danger, they had taken up and settled. It had
been stated in one of the papers that the bill of Mr. Farnell pro-
posed to exclude these dry blocks from the operation of the rental
of £2 14s. per square mile. That was not true. He noticed that
his friend, Mr. Campbell, seemed to think more of the law of 1861
than even he thought, because that gentleman considered it should
not be altered until the suffrage was altered. That would never
be. He was not therefore so much in love with the law of 1861
as the hon. gentleman was. He should be very glad to alter the
law himself or to help others to alter it. It was capable of being
altered, but not by people whose hands were not fit to deal with
the work. Let it be altered by reasonable men, by all manner
of means, and now they had an opportunity of doing so in this
amending bill. That was the way to deal with matters of this
kind, not to run one’s head into the sand like an ostrich. Let
them not say they would not try to do anything until the suffrage
was altered. In all phases of life to battle against what was bad,
as it presented itself, was always the best. The other branch of
the Legislature had thought it was their duty to deal with this
matter of the lands, and had been doing their best for three months
to make the most of it. We had two Houses of Parliament he
supposed for our sins. At any rate, we had two Houses, and we
must just endeavour to exercise patience and moderation, and give
our minds to the bill, to some extent influenced by the fact of the
action of the other Chamber, and make only alterations which hon.
members, owing to their great knowledge and learning, might be
able beneficially to effect. The hon. member, Mr. Ogilvie, spoke at
great length on the impoundings. What that had to do with the bill
he was at a loss to understand. Some selector impounded the cattle
of the squatter, and he dared to say squatters had done the same
to selectors. There were bad neighbours everywhere—and a bad
neighbour was a nuisance. But this annoyance of pounds had not
arisen under the law of 1861. He thought the hon. member would
remember that as youngsters they lived within twelve miles of each
other, and that a good deal of impounding and annoyance went
on then. And there was a good deal of ill-feeling in consequence.
Why he (Sir John) knew, and Mr. Ogilvie also knew, of a son,
belonging to one of the oldest families in the colony, who


-43 years ago put his father’s milch cows in the pound at
Merton, in the district where Mr. Ogilvie lived. Surely neither
free selectors nor squatters of recent days had done worse
than that. Some people were a great trouble to their neighbours.
This had been so ever since the world began. It was not the law
of 1861 which brought it about. Certain people talked a great
deal about growing wheat, and the prosperity derived therefrom;
yet we managed to get on in this country without being great
wheat-growers. Let us look at the difference of the colonies in
Australia in that respect. Taking the year 1877, our exports per
head of population —man, woman, and child—were
6s. 4|d., and those of Queensland, a colony growing less wheat
than "we, £22 7s. ijd. We were not a wheat-growing country;
we found something better, as more profitable, to do. South
Australia, a wheat-growing country, exported in the same year
country, exported £l3 6s. per head of population; and New
Zealand, the wheat-growing country above all others, exported at
the rate of 9s. rofd. per head of population only, notwith-
standing an expenditure of loan money there which doubled the
amount per head of the population that ours did. Let the per-
veyors thereof bring the comforts and necessaries of life to a man’s
home, and let him earn the means of paying for them by the
labour best suited to his circumstances. Other colonies grew
wheat, barley, potatoes, &c.; he was content to get what we required
by the means our colony placed at our disposal by home growth where
it would best pay, or from elsewhere where it will best pay. Why
should he make shoes when he could find the means of purchasing
those made by others with less labour. It was all trash, this talk
about growing wheat. The hon. member, Mr. Charles Campbell,
spoke of the people of our interior as being very dishonest. The
hon. member was not correct. The hon. member said that they were
more dishonest than the townspeople. He (Sir John) had had as
much experience all over this country as any man, and he averred
that these charges were not warranted. [Mr. C. Campbell : The
hon. member has misunderstood me. I did not say, or I intended
to say, that they were not generally dishonest, but that the exacting
of the conditions tended to make them indifferent to truth.] He
was glad to hear the hon. member repudiate what he said, what-
ever he intended. But he (Sir John) had shown already that from
time to time there had been strife, disputes, wrong-doing in the
distribution of the lands of the world, but that these disputes and
wrong-doings had not been the act of the majority of the people,
or of any considerable portion of them. It had been done in the
way of dummying in the interests of great merchants in the city,
as well as in the interests of poor young people who lived in
country districts. He could never have sympathy with those who


assailed the character of whole classes of people. Let each man
be charged with what he did, and let him answer for it; then the
blame might rest where it was deserved. The hon. member ob-
jected to the sale of mineral lands, and another said it was un-
desirable and indefensible. How came we by' the sale of mineral
lands? It was not in the bill he (Sir John) brought from the As-
sembly to the Council in 1861. If wrong had been done in the
matter, upon this House be the wrong. It was done in this
Chamber, and in spite of what he could do. [Mr. Charles
Campbell : More the pity.] Many other things had been done
here, more the pity, and very probably with regard to this bill things
would be done about which they might hereafter say, more the pity.
His bill with regard to minerals provided only for the leasing of
the lands, and eventually they would have fallen into the hands
of the Crown. The country owed that loss to the bad legislation
of this Chamber. Then the hon. member spoke of the compli-
cations and perplexities of the land law. Why he (Sir
John) had in his box the 58th edition of the regulations under the
Orders in Council. Any complication of the present law existing
arose from amendment and from the decisions of the law courts ; but
the whole were in the very small pamphlet which he held in his
hand. It might be desirable, as he thought it was, when there was
time on the hands of Parliament to deal with the question by con-
solidating the law, to make it clear wherever difficulty had arisen;
not to alter the wording which had already been determined by
the Privy Council. Let that remain to be consolidated, but if the
law required further amendments, let them be made, and when a
consolidation bill was brought forward, that would be a convenient
time to do it. That was what he meant by consolidating the law.
His hon. friend read a letter from a working man, but it seemed
to have been a dummy working man. It did not deal with the
sentiments of workmen ; it was by one of the gentlemen who wrote
to the Press in an assumed name, and pretended to be what they
were not. [Mr. Charles Campbell : The same working man’s
letter was not in the newspapers. I understood from the writer
that the Herald refused to insert it.] He (Sir John) did not think
that was doing justice to the Herald. He was no friend of that
journal, but he did like fair play. It was remarkably like the one
in that journal; it was first cousin to another dummy working
man. The hon. member, Mr. Darley, seemed to take a high view
of the present land laws by refusing to agree to the second reading
of this bill; he wanted to go on doing mischief—if mischief was
being done —for some time longer. If the thing was wrong he
would not grapple with it now. This bill was prepared by a gentle-
man who had exhibited as great a knowledge on this land question
as any man in the country —by Mr, Hoskins. It had received
examination, and had been dealt with by every gentleman in Par-


liament who had held the office of Land Minister ; and, that being
so, he did not think it should be treated as so unworthy that we
might not go into committee to endeavour to pass it into law with
the amendments which the accomplished gentlemen here would be
able doubtless to suggest. The hon. and learned member com-
plained that there had been no commission of inquiry to investigate
the working of the law, and that was one of his reasons why they
should not go on with the bill. What kind of a commission did
the hon. gentleman desire 1 They had had an inquiry by the whole
of the representatives of the people—merchants, lawyers, free
selectors, artizans, tradesmen, medical men, all manner
of persons with the advantage of their being chosen by the people
and coming from all parts of the country. [Mr. C. Campbell :
Where’s the evidence 1] In their brains, and the inquiry consisted
of their knowledge of the matter and its exposition in their debates
in the other Chamber; and with the exception of some three of
their number these men had sent the bill to this House seeking its
assent to it. They could not be the creatures of the Government, as
any commission which the Government could appoint would be
opened to be called. With regard to what had been said concern-
ing pre-emptive leases, he would read some notes he had made in
reference to the decision of the Judges, and as a reply to Mr.
Barley’s remarks in connection with pre-leases :
“ Up to the publication of the Orders in Council, in September,
1847, Crown lands were occupied under licenses renewable an-
nually. These Orders contained provisions for the classification of
the lands of the colony into settled, intermediate, and unsettled
districts, and for the issue of leases for specified terms of the
Crown lands occupied under license in the two latter classes of
Crown lands. Chapter 4, relating to Crown lands in the settled
class, empowered the Governor to grant leases, for terms not ex-
ceeding one year, exclusively for pastoral purposes, and to make
rules under which the holders of purchased land might be per-
mitted to depasture free of charge any adjacent Crown lands.
The Regulations 29th March, 1848, were issued by the Governor,
subject to the approval (afterwards signified) of the Secretary of
State. In pursuance of the foregoing, the first 15 clauses of these
regulations set forth the conditions of lease, which by clause 12
were (subject to approval by the Governor) made renewable an-
nually, unless the land should be required for sale, or for any pub-
lic purpose, or for the satisfaction of any new claims of the
character next to be described.
“ The most important provision of these regulations was con-
tained in clause x 6, allowing holders in fee-simple to obtain pre-
emptive leases of adjoining Crown land to the extent of three
times the area of their freeholds, the right being limited to holders
of not less than 640 acres. The clauses immediately following


contain provisions for the settlement of conflicting applications by
mutual agreement or by arbitration.”
“ Extract from sub-instructions of the Regulations of 29th March,
1848.
“ ‘ Clause 28. Applications either under pre-emption or auction
are to take precedence according to date, and not otherwise,
unless the pre-emptive application be for a new claim, as provided
for in clause 12.’
“ As the lease primarily contemplated and provided for in these
regulations was a lease by pre-emption, and the renewal of any
lease was contingent upon there being no new claim to be satisfied,
these provisions were unquestionably designed to give preference
to new claims as they might arise. This was the state of the mat-
ter when the Acts of 1861 were passed.
“ The Occupation Act of 1861 substantially embodied the prin-
ciples of the previous regulations as pre-emptive leases, and ex-
tended them to unsettled districts, and also the privilege to any
freeholds (including conditional purchases) down to 40 acres (and
must have applied to pre-emptive and auction annual leases, be-
cause no other leases were provided for in the settled districts),
as set forth in terms (see section XII. and subdivision XII) that
< the sale, conditional or otherwise, of any land under lease should
cancel so much of the lease as related to the land so sold, and to
three times the area thereof adjoining thereto/
“ This provision could have been required for no other object
than to provide for the satisfaction of new claims out of pre-
emptive leases and auction leases. Leaving out of sight any such
consideration, the Legislature plainly declared its intention to be
that, immediately on the sale of a portion of a lease, that lease,
as regards the land sold and three times the area adjacent, should
terminate. Whatever may have been wanting of detail or pre-
cision, the intention is expressed in plain terms, and could hardly,
as between the lessee and the Crown, have been questioned.
How much plainer does it become when it is seen that the pro-
vision for withdrawal of the area from the existing lease goes hand
in hand with the concession of a right of lease to the new pur-
chaser ; and the Department of Lands, even up to the time of the
judgment in Chisholm and Macaulay, worked under the reading
of the Act, allowing a pre-emptive lease out of a pre-emptive lease.
At that ruling of the Court every one of the chief officers of the
department looked upon it, and did not fail to express, that the
Court had put a new clause in the Act.
“ The policy of the measure is another thing. I am now
speaking only of the law. Ihe decision of the J udges in the case
of Chisholm and Macaulay perhaps made a beneficial change in
some regards. But it has always been clear to me that the pro-
vince of legislation was thereby invaded in exploring that of


interpretation, and that the intentions of the Legislature were as
the Act expressed, and not as the decision interpreted, them.
“ Some claimant may again raise the issue, and then the
matter might have to go before the Privy Council. Any such
case probably would have the effect of cancelling even the i 960
acres which this Bill would secure if passed.
He had not had the assistance of a lawyer in the preparation of
this exposition, yet he was sure he was right regarding it. His
hon. friend Mr. Barley objected to a sole appraiser—[Mr.
Barley: I objected to the Minister being the appraiser] but
the law provided for one or more
ative that there should be only one appraiser. 1 hen his hon.
friend said the law allowed the Minister to alter the appraisement.
He found that it did so, but that had not been intended, and was
not what was originally arranged. No one wanted any injustice
done to anyone; for the only object the Government had was a
good one, and something that would be creditable to them here-
after. He had felt very much humiliated indeed at being com-
pelled to give up the mode of appraisement of the law of 1861,
which he maintained was the fairest mode ever devised in the
history of the world between landlord and tenant that whereby
the Government appointed one person, and the lessee another,
and these a third. He never doubted that there would be fair
play and honour enough among gentlemen to deal with this
question in a manner creditable to them, and fair to the country.
(Hear, hear.) But had we not seen the rentals fall year by year,
and the appraisements becoming more and more unsatisfactory 1 ?
Was there any member of this Chamber satisfied with the appraise-
ment of the runs 1 And let hon. members look at the instance
of the appraisement relating to freehold at the A.S.N. Co. s
Wharf. There the Government appraiser valued the land at
; the appraiser of the A.S.N. Co. valued it at between
and ; the umpire at £ xoo; and £ioo was all the
State received for what, under a fair appraisement, would have
come to or 000, There had been dishonesty in
many of these appraisements. His hon. friend Mr. Barley had
been good enough to read a paper by a first-class officer in the
Lands Bepartment, Mr. Blackman, condemning certain action
with regard to the land. His hon. friend read a great deal of
this paper, but not this portion of it, or much of the sting would
have been taken out of it“ A state of things which would even
now bring about a great change in the relations between those
parties whose collision up to the present has been, it is alleged,
the source of vast social and economical evils —a collision, how-
ever, due far more to ‘ defective administration’ than to imperfect
law, and would farther put an end to much of the complications,
circumlocution, and difficulties inherent and inevitable in things


as they are.” [Mr. Darley: I read that.] He did not hear the
hon. member read it. In his observations, when introducing this
Bill, he mentioned that during the early part of the time he held
office as Lands Minister matters with regard to the conditions
being fulfilled were attended to with more care than they were for
some years after his going out of office; and he ventured to
think that if he had continued in charge of the Lands Department
the evils, to such an extent, would never have occurred. What
did his hon. friend, Mr. Dailey, then say with regard to that?
He endeavoured to make it appear that he (Sir John Robertson)
had said something highly disparaging to the whole of the Lands
Ministers who had succeeded him; whereas throughout his long
career he had ever spoken in the highest terms of the Lands
Ministers, he believed, in every case. They were his intimate
friends, and men for whom he had the highest respect, and the
highest confidence. But in another part of his speech that
hon. gentleman was inconsistent enough -to twit him for speaking
in very high tone of the Land Ministers who had voted for
the third reading of the Bill. The hon. gentleman seemed to
be under the impression that he (Sir John Robertson) had repu-
diated the law of 1875. He did not know what authority the
hon. member had for coming to that conclusion. How could
he repudiate a law which he had taken so large a share
in framing? But he had said, and said again, that he believed if
he had not been ill during the period when the bill was passing,
some errors that crept into it would not have appeared there. The
bill was mainly the work of his hon. and exceedingly able friend
and then colleague, Mr. Garrett—a gentleman who in his opinion
was the ablest man who ever filled the office of Minister for Lands
in this country. Repeatedly throughout the debate charges of this
being patchwork legislation had been put forward ; but it would be
impossible for any one to show that any law in any country,
dealing with such vast and varied interests, had had so little
alteration. Jeers and sneers were put forward as to the existence
of “ smiling homes ” on the conditionally purchased land. He
ventured to say, and he spoke from as large a knowledge of the
settlement of the people of this country as any man in it, that there
were many tens of thousands of homes, “ smiling homes,” homes as
industrious and as virtuous as the home of any gentleman in this
Chamber, established on this land. This view of the matter was
substantially supported by disinterested persons of the highest pos-
sible rank in the country, including his Lordship the Bishop of
Sydney; and not in a cursory way, but in prepared papers which
must become historical; and whatever might be said about the
difficulties with regard to the working of the law, the fact remained
that it was easier to obtain land here by any man requiring it than
it was in any other of Britain’s colonies. He thought that he had


now answered everything that was necessary to be answered, and
dealt with the whole case throughout. At any rate, if he had not
made out a thoroughly good case in support of the course the
Government were taking, it was not because he had not a good
case in his hand, but because of his failing powers to make the
most of that case. (Cries of “ No, no !”) But he submitted that
he had made out a case such as no man in this country could
gainsay. If any hon. member would give his aid to improve this
bill in any way that it could be improved to make it better for the
administration of law in this country, or better for the welfare of
the people, he would not only be glad to see it done, but he would
be grateful to those energetic gentlemen who had so helped to do
it; and he was sure that his hon. friend, Mr, Hoskins, who had in-
troduced the bill, and whose name it must bear, and his other
colleagues, would be equally pleased with him at every improve-
ment that might be made. What more could they want in taking
all the trouble they had and in going to so much labour in dealing
with this matter, but the benefit of the people at large, and their
own credit in the future ? (Hear, hear, and cheers.)
The House then divided on the second reading of the bill with
the following result: —
-AYES, 14.
Robertson Marks Innes
Holt Watt Busby
Samuel Ogilvie Thornton ) 'T , e n f . rs
Lord E. K. Cox A. Campbell j 1
Grahame Foster
NOES, 6.
De Sails C. Campbell Moore ) T ~
Docker Gordon Darley )
Pair. —For: Mr. F. Lord. Against: Mr. Dailey.
The bill was read the second time.
The House went into committee to consider the bill in detail.
The title and the preamble were postponed.
Progress was reported, and leave given to sit again on the
following day.


PART 111.
Wednesday, July 2.
The House went into committee for the consideration, in detail,
of this bill.
Clause 1, dealing with the repeal of certain sections, was post-
poned.
Clause 2 was proposed as follows
“ So much of sections one, thirteen, and eighteen of the ‘ Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1861/ and of section twenty-two of the
‘Lands Acts Amendment Act, 1875/ as ma 7 require that improve-
ments should be made by the conditional purchaser upon land
conditionally purchased to the value of one pound per acre is
hereby repealed; and it shall be sufficient for all the purposes of
the said Acts, or of this Act, if such improvements upon land con-
ditionally purchased shall be of the value of ten shillings per acre.
Provided that the reduction of the value of improvements shall not
apply to conditional purchases which have been declared forfeited
or otherwise finally dealt with, except in cases where such forfeiture
shall have been revoked by the authority of the Government.”
Mr. Darley said this was the important clause in the bill,
being the one which had the retrospective effect. It had been
pretty well debated on the second reading, so that he thought that
it was only necessary to call attention to the fact that it was the
retrospective clause. He intended to move an amendment which
would get rid of that retrospective effect, and then he would vote
against the clause altogether. With regard to the prospective
effect, he asked if the committee was satisfied with any reason
given by his hon. friend Sir John Robertson, why the value of im-
provements should be reduced to 10s. an acre 1 Had there been
any petitions or any statements in the Press or otherwise, pointing
out that an acre was too much ? What reason was there then
for reducing the amount to 10s. He moved that the following
words be introduced after the word “ repealed : ” “ with respect to
lands conditionally purchased after the passing of this Act.”
(Hear, hear.)
Sir John Robertson looked upon this amendment as carrying
the fate of the bill—as meaning the same as rejecting the bill on
the second reading. When he was a member of a previous Govern-
ment, he intimated his willingness to propose the reduction of 10s.
an acre, and when the hon. gentleman who led the party in op-
position to him in the Assembly upon this question (Mr. Farnell)
brought in his bill, it contained a provision to reduce the value
necessary for improvements to 10s. an acre. Both parties having
agreed to that, the people who then took up land under conditional
purchase had a fair right to expect some consideration in regard
to this matter, and the Government, in their bill, proposed


to go back as far as the ist of January, 1875, a period which
would include all those who might fairly be supposed to have been
misled by the action of two Governments. [Mr. Darley : What
Governments does the hon. member allude to ?] The Government
of which he was a member, and the Government of which Mr.
Earn ell was a member—he and Mr. Garrett, and Mr. Baker
agreeing, and Mr. Farnell, and Mr. Fitzpatrick also agreeing. He
was therefore of opinion that those people, whose three years were
then current, had a fair right to expect consideration, and the
present Government proposed to go back as far as the ist of
January, 1875, so as to include all those persons. But the As-
sembly, the representatives of the people, thought it desirable Jo
carry the provision back much further than the Government in-
tended, namely to all undetermined cases. If his hon. friend
chose to make an amendment, carrying it back as far as the
Government proposed, he would be quite prepared to concur, but
if not he would not go on with the bill. The Assembly had great
reason for the course it took in thus extending the retrospective
operation. It was not a course which, as a member of a Govern-
ment, he would have proposed, but he was not sure that it was not
a course which he would have supported as a private member.
With respect to retrospective legislation, he hoped hon. members
would recollect that the first piece of retrospective legislation that
ever occurred with regard to the land laws, was forced upon the
Government and the Assembly by this House. When the Govern-
ment of which he was a member, in 1875, proposed to establish
Commissioners’ Courts, with sworn testimony, it was the action of
this House which made that kind of inquiry retrospective. He could
not see then why the House, having gone back in regard to the Com-
missioners’ Courts, could not also go back in this matter. He
certainly would not be found consenting to limit the time beyond
the ist of January, 1875, as proposed in the original bill of the
Government.
After remarks from Mr. Docker, Mr. Foster, Mr. A. Campbell,
Mr. Dailey, and Mr. Samuel,
Sir John Robertson pointed out that the proposal of Mr.
Darley was important mainly, and in accord only, with those who
voted against the second reading of the bill. They had pre-
viously done all they could to strangle the measure, and now
they came with a proposal to get rid of it by another mode of
procedure. He was bound to say that Mr. Darley had been
candid and fair in the matter. He said that if he carried his
amendment still he would vote against the clause. That was not
very encouraging to those whom he sought to influence. Other
hon. members took exception to the reduction to 10s. only on the
ground that it was retrospective. But he' (Sir John) submitted
that those who were willing to make the reduction in future


had given up the whole question as one of public policy. They
who were of opinion that the reduction might be made in the
future could not contend, as a matter of public policy, that it
would be right to extort 20s. per acre for improvements from
prior purchasers. The question of public policy was applicable
alike to the future and the past. Refusal to make the reduction
retrospective seemed like an act of vengeance against the people who
were now the holders of the land; and we had no right to
inquire whether they were squatters, tinkers, tailors or farmers.
If the amendment was made applicable to cases only where there
had been transfers he could understand it. Still he should object to
it. But that was not the proposal. They had to consider what was
best as a public policy, and best for the general interest. The
hon. and learned member, Mr. Dailey, talked of crimes and
penalties on the one hand, and contracts and property on the
other, when he adduced objections to retrospective legislation.
The book to which the hon. member referred only went to show
that one may not retrospectively put in a contract anything that
might be prejudicial to another; but it did not say there might
not be inserted something in his favour. Again, he urged that
the Parliament had full power under the Constitution to do this
thing, and no one could deny it. When the Government brought
in the bill in the other Chamber, they proposed by retrospection
to go back only to the Ist January, 1875 ; an d wou ld be quite
willing to concur in altering this clause so as to go to the period
that the Government then proposed. If this amendment were
carried, the bill would not go any further in the Assembly. If
such an alteration were now made in the operation of the bill,
they could not hope to carry it through the other branch of the
Legislature. He should be surprised if the Chamber consented to
vote with Mr. Darley, to do with a sidewind that which they did not
allow him to do in the more correct, straight, and usual manner,
by throwing the bill out on the second reading. A great deal had
been said about this retrospective legislation ; but he reminded
hon. members that in 1868 an Act was passed to increase the
rent of squatters. That was retrospective legislation, not in the
direction of remitting a charge, but in the way of increasing a
charge.
After further debate, Sir John Robertson gave this final inti-
mation :
Sir John Robertson wanted to make it perfectly clear as to
the course he felt it his duty to take in case this amendment was
carried. He was willing to bring the clause back to its original
state —that was, to make it only so far retrospective as 1875 ; or,
following Sir John Hay’s view, to the date of the last Act. This
amendment, however, was intended to be followed up by others
even more objectionable. He, therefore, saw no other course


than to throw up the bill, although he had no other authority than
his own for doing so. He, therefore, intended, should the amend-
ment be passed, to move the Chairman from the chair, with a
view to consult his colleagues.
On the question “ That the words proposed by Mr. Darley be
inserted,” the Committee divided as follows :
AYES, 13.
A. Campbell Ogilvie Macleay
Dailey Busby parley j Tellers>
Foster Marks G-. H. Cox \
Moore E. K. Cox
Docker C. Campbell
NOES, 5.
Robertson F. Lord Holt ) Tellers
Samuel Watt \
Pair.— For : Mr. Russell. Against: Mr. Gordon.
The amendment was therefore carried.
On the motion of Sir John Robertson, the Chairman left the
chair, and the House adjourned till the following day.
Thursday, July 3.
MINISTERIAL STATEMENT THE LAND BILL.
Sir John Robertson said he thought that hon. gentlemen on
both sides of the House would bear with him for a very few
moments, and he would not detain the House long while he stated
the course that the Government and himself intended to take with
regard to the Land Bill. (Hear, hear) It might be thought that
in doing this he was interfering with private members time, but
he would not waste very much of it. The bill introduced by the
Government was believed, and is still believed, to be of very great
importance to the people in the country districts—nay, to the
whole people of the country. It seemed to him that there were a
number of gentlemen who had voted for the amendment on the
previous evening who did not seem to desire that the bill should
be abandoned altogether, and that being the case it became him
to consider the position, and the position was this : That they
found a provision had been carried which would occasion the
utter destruction of the bill. But, further than that, when they
found the views of the hon. and learned member who had led—
[Mr. Darley : No, no,]—then the others followed. He was not
saying now what his hon. and learned friend had said,
but he said that when they had found that the amend-
ment had been carried on the motion of a gentleman who
had made use of these remarkable words: —“ The land laws
of the colony were a subject which he had occasion to
consider very frequently and very carefully for many years past, and


with respect to this particular bill he thought he had given it a
consideration, which he might almost say amounted to a painful
consideration, because he had endeavoured to look at it clause by
clause, not contrasting it with the legislation which at present
existed, but to ascertain if there was a single clause in the bill that
commended itself to his judgment. For if there were one clause
which he thought would be an improvement on the present land
law, he should feel it his duty to vote for the second reading, in
order that, by amendments, they might possibly improve the other
clauses of the bill. But he avowed that, so far as his judgment
enabled him to form an opinion, he was not able, from the first
word of the bill to the last, to find a single clause or line which
was likely to prove very beneficial to the country, or likely to
prove an amendment of the very bad laws we now possessed.
The bill was no amendment in the administration of the law, and
no amendment of the law itself.” Well, this was the statement
that his hon. and learned friend had- put forward, and he was
bound to say that the hon. gentleman had all through been very
candid; but in view of the importance of this great undertaking,
and of the man from whom it had sprung —
Mr. Docker was sorry to interrupt his hon. friend, but he
wished to know whether he was in order, there being no question
before the House, and no hon. member being able to reply 1
The President said he understood that if there were any
debatable matter introduced, it would be in the power of any hon.
member to make a motion.
Sir John Robertson said if the hon. member or any other hon.
member had anything to say against what he had stated he had
the power to move the adjournment of the House. Well, they
found from the report in the Herald , and it was a singularly cor-
rect one, everything that was required being there, and one or
two things very judiciously omitted, that his hon. friend spoke as
follows ;—“ He intended to move an amendment which would get
rid of that retrospective effect, and then he would vote against the
clause altogether.” The clause he had prepared to substitute for
that in the bill was as follows :—“ So much of the Crown Lands
Alienation Act of 1861, and of the Lands Act Amendment Act ot
1875, as require that improvements be made by the purchaser
upon land conditionally purchased, is hereby repealed with
respect to land conditionally purchased after the passing of this
Act, and in lieu of making such improvements it shall be incum-
bent for the purchaser of all lands conditionally purchased after
the passing of this Act to enclose such lands (to the satisfaction of
an inspector of conditional purchases) with a substantial sheep
and cattle proof fence within six months from the date of his con-
ditional purchase, or within such extended time (not exceeding
three months) as the Minister shall, on application, allow. And


in default of compliance with the requirements of this section, the
land shall revert to her Majesty, and the deposit shall be forfeited.
Provided that it shall not be lawful for any such purchaser to im-
pound any stock from off such lands until such fence as aforesaid
shall be fully completed and finished.’ 5 What he (Sir John)
intended to move was, that after the words that had been added
to the clause on the motion of Mr. Darley, the following words
should be inserted—“ And also with respect to all lands con-
ditionally purchased since the ist day of January, 1875. 5 The
clause would then read as follows :
“So much of sections one, thirteen, and eighteen of the ‘Crown
Lands Alienation Act of 1861,’ and of section twenty-two of the
‘ Lands Acts Amendment Act, 1875, as may require that improve-
ments should be made by the conditional purchaser upon land
conditionally purchased to the value of one pound per acre is
hereby repealed with respect to lands conditionally purchased
after the passing of this Act, and also with respect to all lands
purchased since the first day of January, 1875 3 and it shall be
sufficient for all the purposes of the said Acts, or of this Act, if
such improvements upon land conditionally purchased shall be
of the value of ten shillings per acre. Provided that the reduction
of the value of improvements shall not apply to conditional pur-
chases which have been declared forfeited or otherwise finally
dealt with, except in cases where such forfeiture shall have been
revoked by the authority of the Government. 55
It would thus be seen that he desired to give the Council a further
opportunity of considering the matter when there was a full House,
and they were aware there had been a very small one last night.
He felt indeed that he would not be doing his duty if he did not
give the House a second opportunity of dealing with this question,
which would doubtless be done by the intention he had stated.
He would now read a letter from Mr. Windeyer with regard to the
amendment which Mr. Darley had alleged Mr. Windeyer moved.
[Mr. Darley : It is in the “Votes and Proceedings.” Mr. Docker:
It is a historical fact.] He had never heard yet of a Minister who
was about to abandon an important matter interrupted in making
a statement of what was intended to be done. He only intended
to state facts; and surely no one would object to that course,
more particularly his hon, friend Mr. Docker. He was bound to
say that such interruptions were unfair in the face of the fact that
they felt they had been defeated on this bill. He would now
read Mr. Windeyer’s letter. It was as follows :
“July 3rd, 1879.
“My dear Robertson,—l see by the report of the debate in
the Herald of this morning that Mr. Darley is represented as saying
in the Legislative Council that I moved an amendment in the
second clause of the Land Bill like his, with a view to making it


prospective in its character. If he is correctly reported, he is
under an erroneous impression if he supposes that I ever intended
to abandpn the idea of making the bill retrospective as far as
January 1875. When the clause came on for discussion I stated
the amendments that I intended to move, and which were
framed to except from the operation of the measure conditional
purchases made prior to January, 1875. I further stated that when
the fifth clause was discussed it could then be decided how far
the reduction in the value of improvements could be made
retrospective. This fifth clause of the original bill was withdrawn
in consequence of prior amendments, and consequently I had no
opportunity of making the further amendments that I intended.
It is consequently unfair to represent that I proposed any
amendment having the same object as that proposed by Mr.
Barley or to suggest that the Government m any way supported
an amendment similar in character to his. Mr. Barley, lam sure,
will be candid enough to admit this if he reads my amendments
by the light of my speech. If you refer to my remarks, as very
briefly reported in the Herald, you will see that the of my
amendments was to make the bill deal with future selections in
the second clause, and to past selections m the fifth, as I con-
sidered it undesirable to deal with past and future conditional pur-
chases in the same clause. —Yours, faithfully, W. C. Windeyer.
He was certain Mr. Barley would not think of saying that this
was not what Mr. Windeyer thought. [Mr. Barley ; I will have
occasion to refer afterwards to the Votes and Proceedings.] He
had not and he did not intend to say that Mr. Barley had acted
unfairly, and he did not think Mr. Windeyer thought so either.
Mr. Barley had said that the land laws of the colony were a
subject which he had had occasion to consider very frequently,
■and very carefully, for many years past. It was true he had,
not in the spirit of a statesman, however, but m the spirit of an advo-
cate doing battle mainly for the purpose of obtaining to
individuals, and certainly not primarily with the object of obtaining
the best results to the state under the law. when the Land
Bill was called on he intended to move the chairman out of the
chair with the view of his going into the chair next Tuesday night,
when he hoped that there would be a full House to consider the
amendment he had announced, and on the result of that amendment
would depend whether he went on with the measure or not. He
desired to make no unnecessary remarks, but only to explain what
was intended to be done, and to give the large majority who had
voted for the second reading a further opportunity of giving
expression to their opinion, and he only asked to propose some-
thing that would have a qualifying effect.


Tuesday, July 8.
The House went into committee for the further consideration
of the Lands Acts Amendment Bill.
Sir John Robertson moved that the words, “ with respect to
all lands conditionally purchased since the first day of January,
1875/’ be inserted in clause 2, to follow the words “after the
passing of this Act,” introduced on the motion of the hon.
member Mr. Barley. His object was to give the Council another
opportunity of considering this very important question. The
issue the Council had now to consider was whether the provisions
of the second clause should be carried back as far as 1875 or not.
He proposed the Ist of January, 1875, but he would not mind if
the committee limited the time to the passing of the Act of 1875.
The representative branch of the Legislature had determined the
matter by a tremendous majority. [Mr. Barley : Of one.] _lt
was far more than that. The second reading of the bill, which
provided for going back to 1875, was carried by a large majority
of the Assembly. The amendment providing for going back to
all past time was carried by a majority of one, and the hon. mem-
ber was welcome to whatever advantage he could obtain from
that majority; but the Government voted against the amendment.
The Government did not want to go beyond 1875, but the
Assembly insisted on going back to the commencement. Some
hon. members would perhaps say that the Council had nothing to
do with what the Assembly had done. But he took a different
view. He thought that hon. members misconceived their position
who took that view—namely, that the fact of the Assembly’s
having passed a measure by a large majority was useless as
an argument in favour of it in the Council. He knew that
a bill going from this Chamber to the other with only two
or three objectors would go well recommended. The majority
in the Assembly included, he believed, all the gentlemen in
the House who had ever held office in the country, and,
believed, all the ex-Land Ministers; and he regretted that that
should be regarded as something not worth considering. He
moved the amendment in order to bring the question back into a
position that would enable Parliament to go on with the bill.
No one opposed the reduction of the expenditure on improve-
ments from £1 to 10s. an acre; the only difference was as to
whether the proposal ought to have a retrospective effect that
was to say, whether it would apply to those who took up their
land a little earlier than the rest, or whether they should be
compelled to make an unnecessary expenditure. Hon. gentle-
men were willing to admit that 10s. an acre was quite high
enough; then what ground had they for insisting upon a larger
expenditure in the case of past selectors except that of \ engeance
against them 1


AYES, 8.
Sir John Robertson Holt
Samuel F. Lord
Grahame Byrnes
NOES, 17.
Dailey Blaxland Barley
Gordon Busby Hay
J. Campbell Macleay De Salis
C. Campbell Marks
'(h
After debate, the question was put that the words “ and with
respect to all lands conditionally purchased since the i ith day of
August, 1875/’ proposed to be inserted, and the committee divided
\ TeUers -
G. Lord E. K. Cox Moore ? tellers
C. Campbell Marks Foster )
Docker Ogilvie
Sir Johnßobertson moved that the Chairman leave the chair.
The motion being agreed to, the Chairman left the chair.


3 1508 01515590 1


'VC-'.
4 .V
I "r.H- }
y.) ' ~
