

SPEECH
(Im i\t oemsitg of ak|tino a .fiscal fjficir
THAT WILL PROMOTE, ENCOURAGE, AND PROTECT OUR
NATIVE INDUSTRIES.
On Saturday afternoon, at four o’clock, Mr. David Buchanan
addressed a large meeting of the working-men in the Victoria
Theatre. As a great deal of falsehood has been published about
the attendance, it is as well that the exact truth should be known.
The pit and stalls of the theatre were crowded, every seat occupied,
and people standing in all the passages. There were not many
people in the dress circle. The attendance was undeniably large,
and the audience very enthusiastic.
The chair was taken by Mr. John Vicars, the President of the
League, and on the platform were the following members of that
body—Messrs. W, Tunks, G. Richardson, E. Taylor, D. J. Monk,
J. Watson, J. M. Dalveen, Joseph Devenport, jun., W. Watson,
G. Garton, J, J. Shipley, G. R. Maclean, J.P., J. Burton, E.
Rdmington, J. Minto, H. Stephens, J. Mason, H. G. Clyne, D.
McCathie, W. Edmonds, W. Kerridge, Button, Walker, W.
Stewart, Brown, J. B. Douglas, James Milne, Wilson, and J.
Button.
The Chairman having opened the meeting in a few well chosen
remarks in support of the wisdom of encouraging our native
industries, called upon Mr. Buchanan to address the meeting.
Mr. Buchanan on rising was received with rounds of applause,
again and again repeated. On silence being restored he addressed
the audience as follows—
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen, I have taken the liberty o*
calling you together to speak to you on matters deeply concerning
your vital interests. The earnestness with which I believe in the
truth of what I have got to say will, 1 have no doubt, palliate, if
it does not altogether excuse, my apparent presumption in calling
you together for such a purpose. One thing I may say, if an
apology is wanted, that I have represented the people for twenty
years in Parliament, and that I have there been, during all that
time, continually voting and acting, and I now say that I chal-
lenge any man to point to a* sentiment uttered, or a vote given
by me against the interests of the people. (Loud cheers.) lam
a republican, and a thorough democrat in my political creed, and
I cannot imagine any one supposing that 1 have any purpose to


serve in advocating the opinions I am about to lay before you,
other than a sincere desire to advance the best interests as well as
to increase the prosperity and happiness of the people of this
country, (Loud cheering.) The position and prospects of our
mechanics have always appeared to me in the highest degree
unsatisfactory ; large bodies of them continually idle and unable,
however willing, to find any regular or continuous occupation.
Everything having the semblance of a local industry either strug-
gling for bare existence, or finding itself suddenly drowned and
extinguished by a flood of foreign importations. (Cheers.) All
workers in wood, iron, leather, cloth, and many other materials
thrust aside and condemned to enforced idleness, while the corres-
ponding workmen of other countries are kept busy aud comfortable
with our money. (Continued cheering). Is there a man amongst
us so blind as not to see, that if we import all we want in manu-
factured iron, wood, leather, and cloth goods, the workers in those
materials here must, of necessity, remain idle ; while all the money
which we pay for these foreign importations goes, mainly, as wages
to the foreign workmen, while our own workmen stand at the
street corners in pitiable idleness, watching the dray-loads of
foreign goods rolling past them, and the manufacture of which
goods here should have given them full and constant employment,
good wages, and all the comfortable happy home accompaniments
of a state of things so benificent and so just. (Loud cheers, and
cries of “ True, true.”) I say again, emphatically and truthfully,
that if the people of New South Wales resolve to employ foreign
workmen for all they want in the shape of machinery, furniture,
clothing, boots and shoes, and many other articles, let them not
be the least surprised it they find large bodies of their own
mechanics condemned to lives of idleness and poverty. Let them
not be the least surprised if they find the country destitute of
manufacturing industries, and the people unemployed, hopeless
and despairing. Let them express no wonder if they see our male
and female youth growing up with no means of employment open
to them, and their prospects for the future dark and lowering.
How is it possible for these to be otherwise when a fiscal system
is in force, by which our whole manufacturing and mechanical
community is supplanted by the mechanical and manufacturing
community of some other country. (Loud cheers.) And this state of
things is justified by Freetraders j forsooth, by the shallow pretext
that we can only be producers of the raw material. If there is
any truth in this most iniquitous assertion, we want no mechanics
here, we want no skilled workmen of any kind. Slaves from the
South Sea Islands will do our turn. (Cheers, and cries of “ That’s
what it’s coming to.”) As far as I can gather, all that the Free-
traders have to say in justification of the state of things here
described is a few phrases such as “ Buy in the cheapest market


and sell in the dearest“ Free Trade benefits the many, Protec-
tion the few.” But I put it to the common sense of this meeting,
even supposing that you can buy the imported article a little
cheaper than if it were manufactured here, is this cheapness in any
way to be looked upon as a compensation for your armies of idle
mechanics, and the desolation of your industrial population 1
(Enthusiastic cheers.) But we deny the alleged cheapness under
Free Trade. We say that by a wise system of encouragement to
all our native industries the competition amongst ourselves would
keep prices fair and equitable. In fact, in the neighbouring pro-
tected colony of Victoria almost every article can be bought there
cheaper than in Free Trade New South Wales. The four-pound
loaf is twopence cheaper in Melbourne, as compared with Sydney,
although there is a duty on imported wheat, and flour in the
neighbouring colony vastly to the advantage of the Victorian
farmers, and essentially to the advantage of the people of Vic-
toria, as compared with their Free Trade brethren of New South
Wales. It makes me melancholy to think of the narrow-minded
and narrower-hearted argument used by Freetraders, that Protec-
tion can only benefit a few manufacturers. Protection calls into
existence every industry that the country is capable of. It origi-
nates manufacturing enterprises, employing thousands and thou-
sands of our men, women, and children. It keeps our mechanics
engaged doing all that the surrounding population wants done.
It circulates all the money that went to pay for foreign imports
amongst ourselves. Who, therefore, can truthfully say that it is
a system that benefits the few at the expense of the many 1 If
Protection enables a manufacturer to rise amongst us who employs
•5000 hands, and pays them wages which keeps themselves, their
families, and their homes in every comfort, how gross and igno-
rant a thing it is to say, as Freetraders say, that Protection only
benefits the few manufacturers. Just look for a moment at this.
Suppose we had no manufactured furniture imported, no boots and
shoes imported, no ready-made clothing imported, no cloth imported,
no saddlery imported, no machinery imported, and that the manufac-
ture of all of these commodities, including coach-building and many
other industrial articles, afforded full and constant employment for
every worker in the community, what a revolution would be created
in our whole industrial system ! What an absorption of all idle
hands. What an infusion of fresh energy and strength into every
conceivable manufacturing enterprise. What an accumulation of
wealth among ourselves, and what a startling metamorphosis
would be effected in the whole interests, prospects, advantages,
and rights of labour. (Great cheering.) I assert that one year’s
experience of a system which brought about this state of things—
and I further assert that a judicious encouragement to our native
industries would go far to bring it about—would so change the
5


industrial aspect of this country, would so enhance its prosperity,
progress and wealth, would so invigorate and stimulate labouring
enterprise at its very heart and centre, that the best and oldest
friend of the country would not know it after one short year’s
experience of a system so sound, wise, and benificent. (Cheers.)
Mr, Justice Byles, in his remarkable and most able work on the
“ Sophisms of Free Trade,” says—and to make it more clear to you
I will substitute the word “ Australian ” for “ British ” —Mr.
Justice Byles speaks thus :—“The entire price, or gross value, of
every home-made article constitutes net gain, net revenue, net
income to Australian subjects. Not a portion of the value, but
the whole value, is resolvable into net gain, income, or revenue,
maintaining Australian families, and creating or sustaining Aus-
tralian markets. Purchase Australian articles with Australian
articles, and you create two such aggregate values, and two such
markets for Australian industry. (Cries of “ That’s clear.”)
"Whereas, on the contrary, the entire net value of every foreign
article imported is net gain or income to the foreigner, and creates
and sustains foreign markets. Purchase foreign articles with
Australian articles, and you then create only one value for your
own benefit, instead of creating two, and only one maiket for
Australian industry instead of two. You lose by this policy the
power of spending the entire value on one side, which you might
have had as well as on the other, and you lose a market for Aus-
tralian industry to the full extent of that expenditure. It is not
a small difference in price that can compensate the nation for the
loss. For example, suppose New South Wales can produce an
article, say an engine, for £IOO, and can import it for £99. By
importing it, instead of producing it, she gains £1 ; but though
she pays for it with her own manufactures, she loses (not indeed
by the exchange-itself, but by not producing at both ends of the
exchange) £IOO of wealth which she might have had to spend by
creating the value at home ; that is to say, on the balance, she
loses £99, which she might have had in addition to the £IOO by
producing both commodities at home.” (Hear, hear, and cheers.)
You will remember that when this was quoted at the great Free
Trade v. Protection controversy, at the Masonic Hall, Mr. Reid
shrieked out, in tones that resembled the crowing of a spasmodic
cock, “ But what becomes of the engine 1” (great laughter,)
evidently not seeing that under Free Trade whatever paid for the
engine went away from us; while, under Protection, both the
engine and what purchased it remained as wealth among our-
selves. (Cheers.) I do not think that this reasoning of Mr.
Justice Byles can by any possibility be refuted. Let us take another
illustration from the same high authority, merely using Australian
names, for the sake of a better understanding of the matter. Sup-
pose we had manufactories in this country of any importance—


which I regret to say we have not, and never will have under a
system of Free Trade, —but suppose the day came when this state
of things was altered, and that under a Protective system manu-
factories sprung up in every district, —well, then suppose woollen
stockings to the value of £500,000 a-year are made at Bathurst,
and exchanged annually for gloves to the value of £500,000
a-year made in Maitland—the landlords and tradesmen and work-
men of Bathurst and Maitland enjoy together an annual net
income of £1.000,000 sterling from this source. Suppose now that
from some real or supposed !• dvantage in price or quality the
Bathurst people, instead of exchanging their stockings for gloves
from Maitland, exchange them for gloves from some foreign
country, say from Calais, thus depriving the Maitland people of
their Bathurst market—what is the consequence 1 It is this, that
Maitland loses what Calais gets; that Australia loses and France
gains half a million a-year by the new locality of the glove manu-
facture—by its transference from Australia to France. Australians
have half a million a-year less to spend, Frenchmen have half a
million a-year mere to spend. Australian markets, of which
Maitland used to be one, fall off to the extent of half a million
a-year ; French markets, of which Calais is one, are augmented by
half a million a-year. (Loud cheers.) The Australian glove
manufacture, with its half-million of national net income, is gone
from Australia, where it used to maintain Australians and Aus-
tralian markets, to France, where it now maintains Frenchmen
and French markets. Nor does the mischief end here. On the
Maitland glovemakers were dependent bakers, millers, grocers,
butchers, tailors, shoemakers, &c., with their servants and fami-
lies. The migration of the glove trade from Maitland to Calais
ruins all; they are destroyed like a hive of bees. (Loud cheering,
and cries of “True.”) Let me illustrate this subject a little far-
ther, by recording a little bit of trade history, which will enable
you to see clearly what a disaster Free Trade is to a young
struggling country like this. When last in England I met a
gentleman who was carrying on business as a merchant in a small
sea port town. He told me the following story. He said he had
orders from Melbourne—at this time Victoria was under Free
Trade principles—for certain machinery to be manufactured at a
certain fixed price. He asked some engineers if they could execute
the order; they declined to do so at the price. He then had
recourse to a clever blacksmith of the town, whose prospects were,
at this time, at the lowest ebb, probably not worth £lO. Well,
the blacksmith undertook the work willingly, and executed it
with cleverness and alacrity. The result was that the blacksmith
got a prodigious quantity of this work, his fortunes rose, large
workshops were erected, and numerous hands employed. In about
ten years the blacksmith had made a large fortune, and he resolved


to see the country that had been such a benefactor to him. He
consequently took his passage in the ill-fated London for Australia,
and unfortunately met the fate of almost all concerned in that
disastrous voyage. He had appointed the gentleman already
spoken of, and who opened up this splendid prospect to him by
first employing him, as his executor, and that gentleman informed
me that his estate realised £87,000, besides the cost of large and
extensive works. He had employed numerous hands in carrying
on this trade, who drew high and regular wages. Now, I ask this
audience to reflect on this for a moment. All this work might,
and should, have been done in Melbourne. (Loud and continued
cheers.) It went away from Melbourne to employ foreign work-
men and to enrich the foreign manufacturer. If Victoria, at that
time, had adopted the wise and salutary principle of protecting its
own people, and encouraging its own industries, the £87,000 that
was realised at home in ten years would have been realised by a
Melbourne manufacturer, instead of by an English one. The
extensive and expensive workshops that were erected to carry on
this trade would have been erected in Melbourne, instead of the
English sea-port town referred to; the hundreds of workmen
employed to execute this extensive work would have been Mel-
bourne workmen, instead of English workmen. (Great cheering.)
So that the prodigious loss to the colony by this little bit of trade
history is so palpable that a blind man might see it. (Cheers, and
cries of “True.”) No doubt it will be said that the English
manufacturer could do the work cheaper than the Victorian.
Probably he could, at a time when Free Trade had struck every-
thing in the shape of manufacturing industry with paralysis, and
laid waste the whole industrial prospects of the country. But
Victoria has awakened from the delusion of Free Trade ; and I
know as a fact that, at the present moment, Victoria could turn
out the same machinery cheaper than it was at the time im-
ported from England, and cheaper than it could now be imported
from that country. (Cheers.) Freetraders cannot answer argu-
ments of this description, they prefer to pass them by in silence.
But just let us look a little into the history of this great question,
with a keen rapid glance which time necessitates. As far back as
the time of Queen Elizabeth, and anterior to that time, no country
was so environed by protective laws as England. She was pro-
tected at all points, and under this system she achieved whatever
wealth and greatness was hers up to the time when she adopted
the principles of Free Trade. England’s policy seemed to be to
create markets abroad for her manufactures, and to protect herself
strictly at home from any injuries by importations. Although she
herself was wedded to Protection she enforced Free Trade upon all
her colonies, including America, then a colony of hers. Ireland
was treated in the same way, and looked upon merely as a market


for England’s manufactures, as was- also India and the Cape of
Good Hope. At the time spoken of England’s treatment of her
colonies was very different to what it is now, and the most
unpalatable things were forced upon the colonies until open
rebellion brought about emancipation and freedom as in the case
of America. The very same spirit shews itself in some quarters in
England at the present time, and may be seen in the angry spirit
in which the colonial protective laws are condemned—shewing
that England has no consideration for the interests of the people
here, but merely wishes to use the colonies for her own advantage,
or, in other words, as markets for the absorption of her manu-
factures. (Loud cheers.) England turns a deaf ear to the fact
that Protection is undeniably benefitting Canada and Victoria;
but what is that to her, they have closed their doors against her
manufactures, and that is an unpardonable fault, no matter what
prosperity it brings to the colonies named. The time was when
England would not have permitted this, but in these enlightened
times the colonies can govern themselves, and seem to be resolutely
bent to study their own interest in whatever legislation they
adopt. England may grumble as much as she likes at the loss of
colonial markets, but if the colonies are wise they will resolutely
secure those markets for themselves (loud cheering), and employ
their own work-people in the manufacture of all they want, and
who for a moment doubts their ability to do this 1 (Cheers.)
Under Free Trade this will never be done. That system means
abundance of work for the foreign workmen, paid with our money,
and total idleness and poverty for our own people. Horace Greeley
calls Protection a system of national co-operation for the encourage-
ment and elevation of labom’, and who can deny that this is a
sound and true definition 1 its truth and wisdom illustrated by
the practice and experience of every nation on the face of the
earth excepting England, and England itself seems, for some time
past, to have been feeling most keenly the injury to herself by her
ports being open to every protected country on the face of the
earth while theirs are strictly shut against her. In the days imme-
diately preceding the declaration of American Independence the
colonists of America were kept in great poverty and distress by
all their industries being destroyed as soon as attempted, by
importations from England. No sooner was an industry started
than ship-loads of English manufactures pouring in swamped and
destroyed it. The people were consequently idle and impoverished ;
but no sooner was their independence declared, than their first
President, the illustrious Washington, in his first message to
Congress, most earnestly exhorted them to adopt a stringent system
of Protection if they wished to save their country from absolute
ruin. But even before this those sagacious men, the authors of
the federal constitution of the United States, urgently recom-


mended the adoption of the principle of Protection, as an absolute
necessity to the well-being of the State. All the early Presidents
of the United States were equally earnest in their recommenda-
tion of Protection, as the only policy by which the country could
rise to wealth and power. (Continued cheers.) That extraordi-
nary man, Benjamin Franklin, one of the most accurate and
powerful reasoners that ever lived, writes the following letter to
his countrymen —it is written from London in 1781. He says—
“ Every manufacturer encouraged in our country makes a market
for provisions within ourselves, and saves so much money to the
country as must otherwise be exported to pay for the manufactures
he supplies. Here in England it is well known and understood,
that wherever a manufacture is established which employs a
number of hands it raises the value of land in the neighbourhood
all around it. It is, therefore, the deep interest of our farmers
and owners of land, as well as of the State itself, to encourage and
protect our young manufactures in preference to foreign ones if we
ever wish to grow in wealth and greatness.” Benjamin Franklin
you all know was distinguished for the deep subtle character of
his reasoning, which led up to his marvellous discoveries in
science ; he was a thorough practical man as well as a profound
philosopher. It may be said of him that he plucked the lightning
from the thunder-cloud, and wrenched the sceptre from the tyrant’s
grasp. (Loud cheers.) This is no poetical flight, it is a literal fact
accomplished by the renowned Franklin, and may well be looked
upon as the most remarkable fact in the world’s history. Well, then,
here we have this great reasoner and eminent man of genius, most
earnestly exhorting his countrymen, at the very birth of the nation,
to adopt without delay a system of Protection to their native indus-
tries, if they wished to grow in wealth and greatness. The policy was
adopted by the universal voice of the people, every statesman of
note, from that day to this, adhering tenaciously to the principle,
and such men as Clay and Webster spending their best power’s in
proving its soundness and truthfulness and defending it against
the attacks of enemies. Well then we sometimes hear Free
Trader’s talk of the wealth and advancement of England since
she adopted the principle of Free Trade. But is thei’e in the
the history of nations, any approach to the miraculous and swift
advance to greatness and power made by the United States during
her short existence. She is about one hundred years old, and, at
the present moment, she stands at the very head of the nations of
the world, and outstrips them all in her gigantic wealth and in her
continually swelling proportions. If any one doubts this at the
present moment, there will be no room for doubt after the lapse of
a few years. This great nation owes her present position largely
to the wisdom of her statesmen who would not suffer their people
to be kept in idleness while the money that should have paid them


wa«es, went to enrich the workmen of another country. The
<rreat statesmen of America, from its foundation up to the present
hour, did not believe in supporting the manufacturers of England
while they left their own to perish. They saw at a glance that
they would have no manufactures without Protection. They also
saw that if everything they wanted was manufactured abroad, they
must of necessity have an idle and impoverished people at home,
with one emphatic voice they enacted protective laws, and at the
present moment, as well they may, they cling to those laws with
more determination than ever. (Great cheering.) Well, here is a
country that has had a large experience of the advantages ot
Protection. It has grown in every conceivable way as no other
nation has done. It is composed of a keen, shrewd, sagacious,
people, alive and sensitive to every injury, and just as clear sighted
in discerning an advantage, and therefore, those who know tins
great people must know that if Protection was an injury to them,
it would not stand twenty-four hours, or rather would never have
been adopted, as the Americans are far too clever a people not to
know what is best for them—but written on the mind and heart
of the nation, in characters that cannot be erased are these words,
“ Protection has been our salvation, and is now our highest hope,
(cheers ) and the whole nation, while I speak, is more wedded to
it than ever. Can it be that a nation like America is wrong in
adopting the Protective principle after a hundred years experience
of its advantages, and after every one of her great statesmen and
writers in different eras of her history, viemg with each other in
extolling the soundness, wisdom, and absolute necessity ot its
adoption, surely a fact like this should teach your flippant shallow
Freetrader a little modesty and lead him to the belief that it is
just possible that a nation like America may know what is tor
her advantage and what is for her disadvantage. And above all
that shrewd people after long years of practical illustration ot the
benefits of a protective policy may be allowed to continue it with-
out bein<* called “lunatics,” the civilist word that Freetraders have
for those who differ from them. America has grown _to
unprecedented wealth and power under Protection, and the nation
seems to be at the present moment more thoroughly satisfied ot its
immense advantages than ever. But how extraordinary a thing it
is that we should have the case of Canada alongside of this
State to illustrate at once the injury and ruin worked by Free
Trade, and the prosperity and wealth brought about by Protection.
I assert that the history of Canada mathematically demonstrates
the truth of both of these propositions. Canada has had a long
and dismal experience of the results of Free Trade in the fullest
sense of the word, and after a most extensive and all-embracing
trial of this principle, she has condemned it and abandoned it.
(Continued cheers.) Under Free Trade Canada found that she


could not prosper. No sooner did she attempt to establish a
native industry than an inundation of imports from the United
States and England swept it away. Canada struggled hard
to establish manufacturing industries of her own and
again and again attempted to do so but was always
defeated and destroyed by ship loads of importations. She
struggled on in this way till hope was at last extinguished and
desperation took its place, and the nation demanded in a voice,
the tones of which could not be mistaken, either Protection or
annexation to the United States. (Loud and continued cheers.)
Under Canada’s long experience of Free Trade, the people were
idle—everything that their mechanics should have made was
imported—distress was everywhere the consequence. No manu-
facturing industries of any kind existed, and the nation was
drifting fast towards utter ruin, when the people, awakened to
intelligence by the powerful lessons of fact, rose in their majesty
and might, and scattered to the winds a Free Trade Parliament
and a Free Trade Government. (Loud cheers.) The Government
and people of Canada have now, and for some time past,
adopted the protective principle with almost electric advantage to
the best interests of the people. The moment Protection was
adopted by Canada, one man came forward with £IOO,OOO to
again set up an industry that had been previously twice, or thrice
ruined by Free Trade importations. That industry now flourishes
in Canada, and employs many hands ; those hands would be idle
but for this beniticent principle of Protection. Other industries
have started up in every Canadian district, and the country
prospers and grows in wealth and greatness; while her formerly
idle people are now well employed—earning good wages. Just let
us pause for a moment to contemplate the significance of this small
piece of Canadian history, and see with what irresistible force it
comes to the aid of the advocates of Protection. Canada had
done all she could with Free Trade; she had tried it for years and
years, and, under it, her whole fiscal and industrial system was
crushed to utter ruin, and her people left in idleness and penury.
She saw alongside of her a stupendous nation which had grown
to her unparalled dimensions of wealth and power, by the adoption
of a fiscal system which she claims as the main cause of her
unexampled rise. Canada looking, with the eyes of intelligence,
at all this, roused herself from her lethargy and apparent stupor,
and with one supreme effort, revolutionized her whole system and
adopted Protection as the only means left her to ward off im-
pending ruin and to save the nation from inevitable decay. (Loud
cheers.) The nation is, beyond doubt, saved by this policy—
Canada, no longer having her markets swamped and ruined by
foreign importations—witnesses now, her own mechanics and her
own manufacturers supplying the wants of her own people. She


witnesses a busy, well-employed people thriving and prosperous,
just because she has come to see the advantage of keeping the
work to herself, instead of sending it, and the money to pay for it,
to keep busy and to enrich the labourers of other countries.
One would think that a child could see the reason and the force of
all this, but Freetraders seem unable to see anything. I notice
one of them, a Mr. Broadhurst, writes to the Trades snd Labour
Council of Sydney, which letter was published in the Herald , in
which he says something to this effect: “ That those people who
cannot see the advantages of Free Trade—those Protectionists
who cannot understand the blessings of Free Trade after reading
what can be said in favour of it, must be knaves, or something
else.” Now I ask you, in all candour, what answer can one make
to a poor blockhead of this description. (Loud laughter, and
cries of “ None.”) That is just my own opinion, and therefore
I will leave him to continue his enlightened correspondence with
the members of the Trades and Labour Council. But since I
have spoken of the Trades and Labour Council, I may be allowed
here to say all I desire to say about that body. In an agitation
of this description I should have thought that the Trades and
Labour Council would have been in the van struggling, on our
side, for the triumph of our policy. The Trades and Labour
Council, at their congress, put forward encouragement to native
industries as one of the main objects of their organization; but
now, as a body, they decline to interfere because, they say, they
are a non-political body. Their principal object is, they say, to
guard the rights and interests of labour; this involving the just
solution of some of the most difficult political problems of the day,
yet this is the prime purpose and object of the Trades and Labour
Council, and, wonderful to relate, they say they are a non-political
body. The great political question of State assistance to immigra-
tion calls forth the most active zeal of the Trades and Labour
Council. I suppose in consequence of its being a non-political
body, and I suppose it is because it is a non-political body, dis-
carding politics from its thoughts, that it actually aims at getting
itself represented in Parliament, and threatens to put forward its
secretary—Mr. Boylance, as a candidate for that high position.
(Great laughter and cheers.) Now I ask you is not this a funny
non-political body ; the inconsistency and absurdity of this could
only be equalled by a teetotal society saying, that while they had
nothing to do with the drink traffic, their main purpose was to
shut every public-house in Sydney. (Roars of laughter.) I have
no objection to the Trades and Labour Council putting forward a
candidate for parliamentary honours, and if he is a Protectionist,
I will support him. But Mr. Roylance is neither one thing nor
another, who says that with general politics he will have nothing
to do but only give his attention to labour questions. Now what


is this but saying that he will not enter Parliament as a representa-
tive of the people, but as a mere delegate of the Trades and
Labour Council. Mr. Roylance may rest assured that he will
get his eyes opened when he first confronts the people. (Loud
cheers, and cries of “ We’ll settle him when he shews up.”) So
much for the Trades and Labour Council—as a political body it
might do incalculable good, and whatever it may say to the con-
trary, it is a political body, and nothing but a political body, and
that to the backbone so long as its objects are what they say they
are. (Cries of “True.”) Before I made this slight digression
I was speaking of the remarkable rise of Canada since she adopted
the principles of Protection. Need I remind you that every
country of Europe is strictly guarded by protective duties; and
that all the great continental statesmen, such as Bismarck, have
never dreamt for one moment of even giving Free Trade a trial,
so satisfied are they of the immediate ruin that would follow.
What a country would India be if Protection gave it a chance to
rise to manufacturing greatness. But as long as England rules
there, India will be reserved as a great market for her manufac-
tures, utterly regardless of the poverty and idleness that this
brings on her people. No country in the world offers such advan-
tages to the establishment of native manufactures, and if they
were established by India protecting herself against foreign
importations, that country would speedily become one of the
richest countries on the face of the earth in industrial enterprize
and manufacturing wealth. As it is he* enormous population are
in the most abject poverty and ruinous idleness. England compels
them to keep their ports open, and supplies all their wants, —how
is it possible, under such circumstances, for any industries to start
there, or the people to thrive there ? But now, just let us enquire
how England herself is thriving under Free Trade. She is the
only Free Trade country on the face of the earth, or, to speak
more accurately, in Europe. According to Freetraders all England’s
greatness dates from the day she adopted Free Trade j but sensible
people know that England was a great nation centuries before
this. All England’s manufacturing wealth grew under a system
of strict Protection. The nation was made what it is by the adop-
tion of a protective policy, which existed up to our own times, and
I question if England would have ever thought of Free Trade but
for the tax on corn. This, was an impolitic and an unjust tax,
simply because England could not grow half as much wheat as
would supply her own wants ; and, in the face of a famine and a
starving people how could such a tax be for a moment maintained?
It was abolished amidst a ferment of angry feeling, the people’s
passions being lashed into fierce agitation at the bare thought
of such a tax, and, in the public turmoil of the time the
system of Free Trade, which now prevails in England, was


adopted. No intelligent reader of the history of those times
fails to observe that the leading advocates of Free Trade
imagined that if the principle were adopted by England, every
other country would have followed England’s example; and
if this had taken place, every other country would have speedily
found how completely they had cut their own throats, and how
essentially they had served England. But every other country
had more sense, and instead of following England’s example, they
redoubled their protective guard, and set themselves earnestly to
the perfecting of themselves in manufacturing art, so that they
might, as soon as possible, take all due advantage of England’s
open door to pour in their own manufactures on her markets.
(Loud cheers,) There is not much use in Freetraders producing
statistics of England’s exports and imports, during her Free Trade
history, to prove her great increase of trade, and her great pros-
perity. What is the use of this, unless they can prove that pro-
tected countries, of equal wealth and power, fell away during the
same period in a corresponding ratio. We all know that England
advanced, with giant strides, during the last forty years ; so did
also America, France, and other countries. The Freetraders say
Free Trade did this for England. If this is so, will they kindly
tell us what did the same thing for America, where Free Trade
has no existence 1 I apprehend that increase of population, the
discoveries of science, the improvements in locomotion, and the
wonders that time works, had much more to do with England’s
prosperity than Free Trade, Well, as a Free Trade country
England is left alone in her glory ; and instead of even her own
young colonies imitating her example, they jump at Protection as
essentially necessary to their existence, and thrive and prosper
under it, as they had previously sunk towards ruin and decay
under their experience of Free Trade. No question about this,
that it will take an enormous amount of injury inflicted on
England before she cries out ;* her inate strength, her colossal
wealth, her vigorous and energetic people, the rare spirit of enter-
prise that impels them, and which seems characteristic of the
nation, will always enable it to put a good face on the worst of
times. But that England has, of late, cried out in tones of utmost
distress is a fact that cannot be denied. There is at present
serious calamity in the manufacturing districts of England, and
her trade is weltering in a state of stagnation. A child might
ascertain the cause of this, and it is a comfort that the English
people are not blind to it. They say they are fighting an unequal
battle, inasmuch as, while their manufactures are excluded from
every country on the face of the earth, so far as heavy protective
duties can exclude them, yet our ports are open and free to the
entry of the manufactured goods of every one of those protected
countries, and on these terms we can no longer continue the


battle. This is true, whatever Freetraders may say to the
contrary. In one year £64,000,000 sterling of manufactured
goods comes into the free port of England from protected coun-
tries. If England had been protected that year she would have
sold £64,000,000 sterling of her manufactured goods more
than she did do. Is it not clear that England’s Free Trade
brings her the loss of this enormous sale and consumption of her
manufactures ? And is it in the least degree wonderful or surprising
that the English manufacturers cry out when they find their
own manufactures thrust aside, to the extent of £64,000,000
sterling in one year, and see the manufactures of foreign countries
to that amount bought in preference? (Loud cheers.) No wonder
the call for reciprocity is loud and long, at the present moment, in
England ; and it will be louder still as the imports from pro-
tected countries flow in upon her, in a stream continually increas-
ing in breadth and depth. The protected manufacturer, in America
and other countries, is guarded against foreign competition, and
has the home market entirely to himself, supplying which clears
all his expenses and gives him his profit ; but seeing England’s
door gaping wide open, and a free entry, he, with the zeal of a
keen man of business, takes instant advantage of the position, so
favourable to himself, works his plant to its fullest capacity, sup-
plies the home market, and pours an immense surplus into England’s
open door. If the English manufacturers can stand this much
longer, I will be greatly surprised. It is already causing them to
cry out in much agony and even shutting up many of their
manufactories, while many are working half time. One of two
things must take place, either England must be armed with the
same weapon wielded by her competitors, that is Protection, or she
must go to the wall as certainly as I speak. England cannot
perform miracles, and if other nations have now reached the
same perfection, skill, and ability, in the manufacture of every
commodity, that England has long’ been distinguished for, how is
it possible for England to continue a fight so unequal, which must
be the case as long as her ports are free and open to the manu-
facturers of every nation in the world, while every nation of the
world most carefully shuts the door against a single ounce of
England’s manufactured goods doming in upon them without
previously paying a heavy and impassable duty. (Continued
cheers.) Can any one doubt that England will very soon be com-
pelled to listen to the voice of distress, which rises from the
manufacturing districts, and resort again to protective duties if she
has the slightest notion of preserving her great manufacturing
interest from total ruin by being supplanted by the enormous
importations of the manufacturers of other countries. If the late
Mr, Cobden had been alive at the present time, judging from what
he said during his life, who can doubt that he would have been an


earnest advocate of reciprocity. Listen to those words of Mr.
Cobden, uttered not many years before his death. “ What,” he
says, “is the cause of England’s enormous wealth ? the answer is
the cheapness of her manufactures. What is the cause of hex-
great max-atime strength and power? the answer again, is, the
cheapness of her manufactures. What is likely to wrest this wealth
and power from her? I answer only the superioi’, or greater
cheapness of the manufactures of other countries.” Now this is
exactly what has happened. Other countries, assisted by energy,
zeal, and activity, and the all-powerful weapon of Protection, and
seeing England, through her Fi-eetrade and open ports, in a
position of enormous disadvantage, have, greedily, seized the
opportunity to inundate the English markets with their own
surplus manufactures, made for the purpose, and so ixndersell hex-
on her own ground to her palpable injury and distx-ess. (Loud
cheers.) Freetraders, in deep chagrin, may shut their eyes to
this, but the eyes of the English manufacturer, as well as those of
the English people, are being opened wider and wider evex-y day,
until the ruinoixs and destructive fact has emerged from dim
shadowy obscurity into the clear light of day, carrying
with it lessons of wisdom, neither to be contradicted
or explaixxed away, and which are at present working
out their purposes on the practical, thoughtful, and intelli-
gent portion of the English nation. (Cheers.) The statistics
that Freetraders generally trust to, bearing on Englaxxd’s
present position, prove little. Since the advent of Free Trade in
England, axxd for a long time afterwax-ds, other natioxxs, in their
manufacturing skill, were not in a positioxx to do her much harm;
but as time rolled oxx they gave their whole attention to perfect
themselves in xxxanufactux-ing skill and industry, and now, and fox-
some years back, America, Belgium, France, and Germany are not
far behind her in manufacturing expertness and ability, if they are
not actually abx-east of her. And, consequently, it is only withixx
the past lew years that England has begun to feel keenly the
tremendous results to hex- prospects in the continually incx-easing
flood of manufactured goods that is constantly flowing in upon her
from those strictly protected countries. Well, then, here are
statistics that carry some meaning with them as bearing upon the
present argument. In the year 1877 the expox-ts of England
decreased to the extent of £46,000,000 sterling, while hex-
imports increased to the enormous extent of £66,000,000
sterling. This, to my mind proves, that while the protective
duties of other countries reduced her exports, as stated, her own
free ports iixcreased her imports by £56,000,000 sterling—ox-
in other words, Free Trade in England, without reciprocity, cut
down her expox-ts by £46,000,000 sterling ; while her open
ports enabled protected countries to destroy her home markets in


her own goods to the extent of £56,000,000 sterling. (Cheers,
and cries of “ Quite true.”) If this game is continued much
longer, on the same terms, it requires not the assistance of inspira-
tion to predict that a great change must speedily take place in
England’s policy, or she will find herself driven to the wall,
wrecked and ruined in the notoriously unequal contest—a contest
that would ultimately overwhelm England were she ten times
what she is in point of stability, wealth, and greatness. (Cheers.)
I have now said almost all I desired to say, although the subject
is one so large that if I broke other ground the time allotted me
here would not admit of me doing anything like justice to the
matter spoken of. I will have many other opportunities, I hope,
of enlarging upon this, to you and to us all, intensely interesting
subject, which, if it were dealt with in accordance with its import-
ance, every man in the country, and notably the working man,
would challenge every candidate for parliamentary honours as to
his opinions on this vital matter. I may congratulate you on the
fact of Mr. Reid having come forward to uphold the cause of Free
Trade, and for having published his speech, carefully revised,
corrected, and added to. I say I may congratulate you on Mr.
Reid having done this, because now you know all that can
be said for Free Trade by this Free Trade essayist and honorary
member of the Cobden Chib. I desire to say nothing disrespectful
of Mr. Reid —far from it, but I appeal to the intelligence of Sydney
whether Mr. Reid’s speech is not pre-eminently false in principle
as well as reasoning. (Loud cheers.) I have no time to go into
detail to prove this, but I saw a letter by my friend, Mr. Hammond,
a letterwhich he read to me which left Mr. Reid without a leg to
stand on, and utterly demolished him by a systematic exposure of
his false statistics and falser reasoning. (Cheers.) Mr. Reid does not
grapple intellectually with the subject and aim at solving problems
by the force and strength of his own thoughts; any capacity he
shews, in dealing with this subject, is not intellectual capacity, but
the mere result and offspring of a continuous plodding among the
dry details of blue books which prompts him to attempt to prove
his cause by putting forward figures that could be made, with ease,
to bear the very opposite construction that he strives to put upon
them. As a sample of the puerility of Mr. Reid’s reasoning
qualities, he says this:—“The Protectionists say that labour is
capital; well climbing a greasy pole is labour, therefore climbing
a greasy pole is capital,” Mr. Reid means this for a very felicitous
illustration, and the best argument he can bring against the
undeniable fact, which to me seems strange that Mr. Reid should
deny, that labour is indeed capital. The answer to Mr. Reid is a
very simple matter, and is this : climbing a greasy pole is capital
if you are paid for it. Mr. Reid’s entire speech might just be
as easily knocked on the head as this portion of it, and my friend


Mr. Hammond, has done this most powerfully and effectively in
the letter mentioned, and which I trust he will publish in some
paper Avith larger views than the Sydney Morning Herald. To shew
you how ignorant Mr. Reid is of the state of things under his
very nose, he says in the preface to his published speech,—“ If
any one talks to you of Protection, point him to your well employed
mechanics, their high wages, and their comfortable homes.”
(Cries of “ I’ts not true.”) Well may you say that. I tell Mr.
Reid that he is utterly and shamefully ignorant of the subject, I
say without the slightest fear of truthful contradiction, that there
is not a country on the face of the earth which could, in proportion
to its numbers, turn out so many idle impoverished men as New
South Wales. (Loud and long continued cheering.) The labour
reports of the Herald and Evening News prove this beyond
controversy, and my own personal knowledge more than
corroborates those reports. What faith can you put in anything
that falls from Mx\ Reid after a statement of this description.
But I will now leave Mr. Reid to learn and to know better before
he puts forward statements as facts that have not a vestige of
foundation in truth. (Loud cheers.) Well then, gentlemen, if
you believe in the soundness and truth of the opinions I have put
forward, in this, somewhat lengthy address, act upon them if you
are wise, resist, with your whole force, a system which leaves you
a prey to the cupidity of foreign countries—act like the Avorking
men of Canada and Victoria and assert your power at the ballot
box—return men to Parliament who look forward to a higher
destiny for this country than merely groAving the raw material to
be manufactured by other nations. Rise in your might, against a
system that necessitates the idleness and impoverishment of well
nigh half the people. Let our mechanics and farmers and all who
Avish to see this a thriving manufacturing country, aim their
deadliest blows at the system which at present prevails and which
transfers your labour and its emoluments to the hands and pockets
of foreign workmen. (Loud cheers.) Never let this great fact
be absent from your minds, that open ports mean work for the
stranger and foreigner, and poverty and idleness for yourselves,
accompanied by stagnation and national decay. (Great cheering.)
Look to your children and the dark prospect before them under
a system Avhich encourages and prospers the workmen of other
nations, while it leaves our own people in poverty and idleness.
Never relax your efforts to destroy this system, but continually
increase the emphasis of your protest against it. The truth is with
you, and in the end victory will crown your effoi’ts. In the mean-
time let all earnest souls combine in the devoted advocacy of this
great cause—the very life of the country is involved in the
struggle, and our triumph, which is certain at no distant date,
will realize advantages for our people which will challenge the grati-


tude, and obtain the blessings of our own and after ages. (Loud
and long continued cheering, again and again repeated, in the
midst of which Mr. Buchanan resumed his seat.)
As soon as the enthusiasm and applause had somewhat sub-
sided, —
Mr. George Garton moved—“ That this meeting heartily thanks
Mr. David Buchanan, M.P., for his eloquent and powerful address
in advocacy of the principles maintained by the League for the
encouragement of native industries, by means of duties levied on
foreign articles that can be made here ; and pledges itself to sup-
port the League in its endeavour thus to effect an increase of our
present manufacturing trade, and act as an encouragement to
other manufactures to spring up in all parts of the country.”
Mr. William Edmunds seconded the motion, which was carried
unanimously, amidst great cheering and waving of hats.
A vote of thanks to the Chairman brought the proceedings to a
close.
A very earnest invitation was given to Mr. Buchanan to repeat
his speech at a more convenient hour for the working men,
namely, at night. Mr. Buchanan at once agreed to this, and the
meeting took place at the Temperance Hall on Friday night, the
9th April, at 8 o’clock. The hall was crowded to the door by a
most intelligent audience, mainly composed of the working men
of Sydney. Mr. Vicars again occupied the chair, and the plat-
form was crowded by influential gentlemen connected with the
manufacturing interest. Mr, Buchanan delivered his speech
amidst even greater enthusiasm than on the first occasion. He
was much applauded throughout, and received a perfect ovation at
its close. The same resolution that was carried at the former
meeting was moved and carried with perfect unanimity and great
cheering. A vote of thanks to the Chairman closed the pro-
ceedings.


THE RECENT DEBATE—PROTECTION v. FREE TRADE.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE SYDNEY DAILY TELEGRAPH.
Sir, —It was said during the above debate that Victoria only employed
one-ninth part of a man per cent, per head of her population more than
New South Wales. Even so, let us see in plain language what this ninth
part-of-a-man really means. The population of Victoria for 1878 was
879,442 ; employed in manufacturing, 33,278 persons. Population of New
South Wales for the same year was 693,743; employed in manufactures,
25,452. Thus Victoria, with a population greater than New South Wales
by 185,699, employed 7826 more persons than we did. It will be seen,
then, by striking the per centage, that with a much larger population to
provide employment for, she has not only done so equally with us, but has
a clear balance of upwards of 1000 hands employed over and above New
South Wales, which, I think, for the young colony of Victoria, speaks
volumes, and proves very conclusively that, although we had fifty years’
start, she is fast leaving us behind in manufacturing, notwithstanding all
our natural advantages and superior resources. Even coal to drive their
machinery with has to be imported from here ; and yet, in so short a time,
she has surpassed us in local industries.
The same gentleman stated that “ the balance of trade against Victoria
from 1873 to 1877—that was the imports exceeding the exports—was
£7,000,000 as against £lBO,OOO for New South Wales.” He stated “these
were facts.” Now, in quoting the above figures, I think Mr. Reid has
fallen into error. I find from the statistical records of the two colonies
respectively for the years named inclusive, that Victoria did import over
£7,000,000 worth in excess of her exports, but I cannot find the £lBO,OOO
for New South Wales. What I find instead is that we exceeded our exports
by our imports to the extent of nearly £2,000,000, the figures being as
follows—Victorian imports for the period stated was in value £82,241,373 ;
exports, £74,864,711 ; excess of imports over exports, £7,376,662. Now
for New South Wales—lmports, £63,534,792 ; exports, £61,534,816 ; excess
of imports £1,999,976. But why refer to the years of 1873 to 1877, when
we have later statistics ? Perhaps it did not suit Mr. Reid’s argument to
take the figures of 1878, from which I find that Victoria imported to the
value of £16,362,304, and exported £15,157,687; imports over exports,
£1,204,617. New South Wales for the same year imported in value
£14,768,873, exported £12,965,879; imports over exports, £1,802,994
nearly £600,000 sterling over Victoria.
Now, if the figures quoted by Mr. Reid (1873 to 1877) are'intended by
him as an argument against Protection in Victoria, how will the figures for
1878 argue for New south Wales. He infers, surely, that then the small-
ness of our imports over our exports were as a virtue against Victoria.
And yet, a minute before, he said—“ During the period from 1867 to 1876,
England imported £800,000,000 worth in excess of her exports.” This was
to prove progress for England, but the £7,000,000 for Victoria was to prove
retrogression. If the latter be the case we must, as I have shown for 1878,
be retrograding too, for we have exceeded for this year our exports by our
imports far more than Victoria.
Mr. Reid went on to show that New South Wales was fast exceeding
Victoria in her imports, bank deposits, &c. ; but he made no mention
about the rapid increase of Victorian manufactures over New South Wales,
as a set-off against the imports spoken of. He got away from this by
slightly referring to the ninth part of a man. I further find from the
Statistical Registers for 1878, that we imported boots and shoes to the
value of £296,767 ; Victoria, for the same year, imported same to the value
of £213,435. Thus, with a population of 185,699 more than we had, she
imported less boots and shoes by £83,332 worth. Add to this £65,000 more
to make up for the extra population of Victoria, at the rate of our own


imports of boots and shoes per head which would represent a total of
£148,332. Now let us see how many hands she employed in boot and shoe
manufacturing. We find 2615. New South Wales for the same year
(1878) employed 1883—a balance for Victoria of 732. Thus showing that
this £83,332 deficit in the imports, as well as the £65,000 for extra popula-
tion, was made up by providing employment for 732 persons within the
colony, thereby employing an extra proportion of capital, machinery,
implements of all kinds, makers, and repairers, &c., &c. Then these 732
persons required houses to live in ; houses require land to build them upon ;
the building of them gives employment to masons, carpenters, brickmakers,
bricklayers, &c.; and after this they require the butcher, baker, tailor,
doctor, &c., Ac. So although 732 persons at first sight do not appear many,
still when you look fuither, it must be seen how the earnings even of that
small number tend towards benefiting thousands of others. Mr. Reid said
that in the best manufacturing countries only 10 per cent, of the population
were engaged in manufacturing ; but if he had shown how throughout the
whole ramifications of trade that 10 per cent, benefited all, or even the
contrary—that this 10 per cent, retarded the development of other resources
in the country —he would have done some service. It certainly would have
been very interesting to have known what the other 90 per cent, were
constituted of—how many idlers, drones, non-producers—how many
women, children, and others out of the 90 per cent, who were benefited
indirectly or otherwise, or depending upon the earnings of this simple 10
per cent. We might then have been in a position to have seen whether
there was another clear 10 per cent, in the community of any other class
doing as much good for the nation as this manufacturing one. I imagine
not.
As a further evidence of the growth of manufacturers in Victoria, let
me mention one or two more by way of example. In 1876 they had six
woollen mills, employing 611 persons; in 1879 they had nine mills, em-
ploying 817 hands. New South Wales for the latter year had also nine
mills (woollen), employing 198 persons.* Victoria for the first-named year
had 91 tanneries and fellmongering establishments, employing 965 persons ;
in 1879 they had increased to 118, employing 1531. And so with many
other industries, which surely is sufficient to show any reasonable person
how rapidly they are going ahead in providing employment for their people.
New South Wales for the same year (1879) only gave employment to 963
hands in her tanneries and fellmongering, as against 1531 for Victoria. Is
this not strong evidence of the encouragement given to her industries ?
And yet the taxation of Victoria, at per head per annum, was only (for
1878) 15d more than the Free Trade New South Wales—viz., Victoria,
£1 19s lOid ; New South Wales, £1 18s 7£d.
There will be no reason in a few years more to talk about the ninth
part of a man—if indeed, there is now. This ninth part of a man is as the
sun appearing above the horizon, only to ascend higher and higher towards
the zenith, until we shall find New South Wales sitting back in the shade,
compelled to fight her troubles over again. Of course, at present we have
an apparent prosperity, while we are principally living upon the sale of our
lands. Happy-go-lucky. It is not one of the strongest admissions of our
political weakness, that, with all our great territory and wonderful natural
resources over Victoria, we should be found stooping to make a comparison
with so young a colony. Yet with all this development of mechanical
industries in Victoria, can it be said that she is neglecting the proper use
of her lands ? Let us look at the following figures, and see what we can
glean from them :—Up to 1878, out of a territory of 88,191 square miles,
she had alienated 11,458,634 acres, and had under cultivation 1,609,278
acres, with a wheat produce of 6,060,737 bushels. New South Wales,
* In giving these figures, I have to mention that one woollen manufacturer gave
no information.


with a territory of 310,938 square miles, nearly four times greater than
Victoria, sold 30,039,977 acres, and had under cultivation only 013,642
acres, one million less than V ictoria, with a wheat production of only about
one-half—viz., 3,439,326 bushels. These figures require no comment
from me; they speak plainly for themselves, and perhaps will account
to some extent for the 41b. loaf of bread being 4d. in Melbourne,
while in Sydney it is 6d. This being the case, how about the poor man’s
loaf and Protection ? Perhaps we may be told that our land is not as
suitable as theirs, or that we are crippled with bad land laws, &c. If such
be the case, why expect from, or depend so much upon, such a source ?
Surely it would be one of the very best reasons why we should encourage
other industries, so as to provide employment for the increasing population,
in place of telling the poor mechanic to go back into the interior without a
pound in his pocket to take up land and settle upon it. Would it not be
much better for this man to get profitable employment at his own trade, so
that by steady work and accumulation he might provide himself with the
necessary means to go back, if he so desired, into the country, and make a
home for himself. It is a well-known fact that a man cannot take up laud,
clear, plough and sow it, without money. To think this can be done is an
utter absurdity. If we are not to encourage the establishment of manu-
facturing industries in the colony so as to protect them from being unfairly
nipped in the bud, why bring out from home the mechanic to allow him to
stand about the streets in want and hardship ? lam in earnest when I say
that 1 have no sympathy with the man who will not do a fair day’s work
for a fair day’s pay ; but I believe at this moment there are plenty who
are willing to do this, and cannot get it.
I do not think we should attempt to foster industries that are not
strongly adapted to the country ; to try and create them by such means
would not, in my opinion, be honest Protection, but wicked obstruction,
which I feel certain is too often confounded the one with the other. On
this point I am quite satisfied to accept the concession of the great I ree
Trade advocate, John Stuart Mill. He says: “ I have therefore conceded
that in a new country a temporary protective duty may sometimes he econo-
cally defensible, on condition, however, that it be strictly limited in point
of time, and provision be made that during the latter part of its existence
it be on a gradually decreasing scale.” I feel perfectly satisfied that if
some such course as this was adopted the colony would be well repaid for
the consideration. As I have largely dwelt upon Victox’ian-statistics, it
might by some be thought that I approve of her entire policy. Such 1
have plainly shown is not the case. Protection, as it is called in Victoria,
is in my opinion carried much too far, leading thereby to useless obstruc-
tion, which to a very great extent neutralises the good effects of true Pro-
tection, ox', in other words, encouragement to her native industries. Free-
traders point to the depressed state of the labouring classes in Victoria,
inferring that Protection has had something to do with it. How can this
be when we find nearly 8000 more people employed manufacturing there
than here ? Would it in any way relieve their distress to put this 8000
out of employment ? I think not. The inference is that, fast as their
manufactories are growing, the absorption of labour is not fast enough.
Any step that would discourage the development of her industries would
be no cure for the present evil, but would only be an aggravation of it.
In conclusion, to make New South Wales a prosperous nation, we
must discover the way to make use of the great resources at our disposal,
not only one of them, but all of them, and by sowing the seeds now so that
some of the wealth derived from one pursuit may be profitably employed
in developing another, and so on, thereby reaping the golden harvest here-
after. Thanking you for your valuable space,
I am yours truly,
Ashfield. MARK J. HAMMOND.


