

COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH
BY
Rt. Hon. H. V. EVATT, Q.C., LL.D.,
D.Litt., M.P.
ON
ROYAL COMMISSION ON ESPIONAGE.
[From the “Parliamentary Debates," 19 th October, 1955.]
Dr. EYATT (Barton —Leader of the
Opposition) [B.l]. —The report of the
Royal Commission on Espionage requires
forthright analysis and plain speaking.
What is the upshot of this Petrov affair ?
Two foreigners, the Petrovs, and one
foreign-born Australian spy, Bialoguski,
have made a lot of money. The forum
in which they appeared cost the tax-
payers £140,000, plus unlimited security
service expenses. The nation has suffered
heavy loss in trade, and the breaking
of diplomatic relations with a great
power. There has been the attempted
smearing of many innocent Australians,
grave inroads have been made into Aus-
tralian freedoms by attacks on political
non-conformity.
Honorable members interjecting,
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER (Mr. C. E.
Adennann). —Order! I ask honorable
5577/55
members to maintain silence. These
interjections must not continue.
Dr. EYATT.—But after eighteen
months of inquiry, at this great cost
to the nation, no spies have been dis-
covered. Hot a single prosecution is
recommended.
It is now clear that the Prime Minis-
ter (Mr. Menzies) must have known,
when appointing the commission, that
there would be no legal evidence fit to
warrant the prosecution of any person,
that there was in fact no security ground
for the inquiry itself. Indeed the
inquiry has in many ways been destruc-
tive of the national security of Aus-
tralia. Furthermore, it is now abundantly
clear that the Prime Minister knew many
months before the 13th April, 1954, when
he made his melodramatic and coldly
calculated announcement to the House,


that Petrov’s defection was being
deliberately organized by security agents
under his ministerial control. He
waited, and sprang the announcement on
the House on the very last sitting night
of the Parliament prior to the May
general elections. He completely
deceived the House into rushing through
legislation to appoint a commission. In
the apparent emergency, there was no
opportunity of examining any of the
basic facts. His statements should be
re-read in the cold light of the facts which
have since been established during the
last eighteen months since the 13th April,
1954. Let it all be read.
In some circumstances, a debate on a
report of a royal commission can be
confined to a short discussion of its
recommendations. But in this case the
surrounding circumstances, the way in
which the commission itself was estab-
lished and conducted, and, above all, the
proved evidence, make it essential to have
a close examination of the whole affair,
not merely of the report, but also, so
far as possible, of the evidence before
the commissioners. The report itself is
a very long document of some 450 pages.
It is absolutely essential to pay regard
to the whole of the transcript of evidence.
The length and complexity of the case
will prevent us from dealing with the
vast number of details, and inconsis-
tencies in evidence, all of which are
important to a complete study and a fair
judgment on the Petrov affair. On this
occasion, I propose to concentrate on
some of the major issues arising out oi
the evidence and of the report. One
outstanding question is, of course, the
genuineness of documents A to F—that
is, the Moscow letters of 1952 —and the
G documents, the alleged Sadovnikov
letters.
Determined to ascertain the truth of
these grave matters, I took two steps, as
follows: —First of all, I communicated
with His Excellency the Foreign Minis-
ter of the Soviet Union. I pointed out
that most of the Russian language docu-
ments in the Petrov case were said to
be communications from the M.Y.D.,
Moscow, Jg Petrov, M.Y.D. resident in
Australia. T penned put that the Soviet
Government or its om£frre were undoubt-
edly in a position t» reveal the truth as to
genuineness of the Petrov document^.
I duly received a reply, sent on behalf
of the Minister of Foreign Affairs of
the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics,
Mr. Molotov.
Honorable members interjecting ,
Dr. EYATT.—Honorable members
may laugh, but they have to face some
facts to-night. They will not put me
off by their organized opposition. They
have to listen to this because this is the
truth of the affair. The letter to which
I have referred informed me that the
documents given to the Australian
authorities by Petrov—
Can only be, as it had been made clear at
that time and as it was confirmed later,
falsifications fabricated on the instructions of
persons interested in the deterioration of the
Soviet-Australian relations and in discredit-
ing their political opponents.
I attach grave importance to this letter
which shows clearly that the Soviet
Government denies the authenticity of
the Petrov documents. It seems to me
that in these circumstances the matter
cannot be left where it is, and that, if
possible, some form of international com-
mission should be established by agree-
ment with the Union of Soviet Socialist
Republics to settle the dispute once and
for all. The Soviet Union was not
represented at the hearing. It will be
in a position to prove clearly, definitely
and unequivocally, that the letters are
fabricated.
I subsequently took a second step to
check the authenticity of one document
at least produced by Petrov as part of
exhibit G and alleged by the Petrovs
to have been written by Sadovnikov.
The photostat of one of the G documents
was made available to me by the solicitor
for one of the witnesses called before
the royal commission. At the same time,
two other persons who had both been
witnesses before the royal commission,
courteously made available for inspection
undoubtedly authentic specimens of
Sadovnikov’s handwriting.
An official photostat of the alleged
Sadovnikov document, exhibit G, and
photographs of two specimens of
Sadovnikov’s genuine handwriting were
submitted to Dr. Charles Monticone, an
outstanding Hew South Wales expert on
handwriting. Early in this month Dr.
Monticone certified that the result of his
2


analysis of the handwritings was as
follows:—Documents A on one side, that
is, the alleged Sadovnikov handwriting in
exhibit G, and documents B and C on
the other side, that is, the authenticated
specimens of Sadovnikov’s real hand-
writing, “ have been written by two en-
tirely different persons”. This opinion,
if correct, as I most certainly believe it
is, means that the Sadovnikov document
produced by Petrov and now included as
part of the vital G series was not written
by Sadovnikov at all and was an un-
doubted fabrication. If so, of course, the
foundation of the case built up in relation
to the G documents is broken and it
collapses. These two separate matters
provide overwhelming ground for my de-
manding —and I do now demand—that
all the documents in the Russian language
produced by Petrov should be immediately
tabled in the House and made available
for inspection by honorable members.
These arc vital matters. ISTobody can
deny their importance to the relationship
between this country and other countries
and also to the internal affairs of this
country.
her us now look at the real origin <
this sensational episode. The fact i
that early in 1954, shortly before Petrov’s
defection, the Menzies Government faced
an uncertain position in relation to the
forthcoming elections.
A gallup poll on the 7th March
predicted a majority against the
Government. The Government had
done its best, of course, to keep
the Communist issue alive, having
snatched electoral victory on that false
electoral issue in 1949 and again in 1951.
But it had been defeated in the referen-
dum of September, 1951, and over-
whelmed in the Senate vote of 1953. I
think that Government supporters frankly
admitted the desperate need to produce a
rabbit out of a hat if they were to succeed
at the general elections, and there was
undisguised glee on the part of Govern-
ment supporters after the announcement
in the House on the 13th April, and the
insinuations of misconduct against un-
named Australians. The “ red ” bogy
was to be exhumed again in a slightly
different form.
As I have emphasized, the Prime Min-
ister’s Petrov statement was made on the
very last night on which the House of
Representatives was to meet before the
general elections. If the public had
known, on that night of the 13th April,
one-thousandth part of the facts subse-
quently revealed in the evidence or, in
one form, or another, made public, the
Prime Minister would have been dis-
credited for political chicanery. He
would have been overwhelmed at those
elections by a nation which values highly
the integrity of its electoral procedures.
Let me turn now to the speech oi
the Prime Minister on that night. He
said that “ some days ago ” Petrov had
applied for asylum in Australia. He
further referred—and I quote his words
—to the “ comparatively few days ” tha 1:
had elapsed since Petrov “came to ou.
security people ”. These carefully
worded phrases are now shown by the
established facts to be untrue and de-
liberately misleading. “ Some days ago "
was, in fact, nearly two weeks, and the
phrase “ comparatively few days ” was
also deliberately misleading, even if i;
was meant to refer to the mere fact tha!'
Petrov had formally—and quite unneces-
sarily—signed a document asking for
asylum. On the most conservative esti-
mate, Petrov had come to security and
was under the control of Bialoguski, the
security agent, at least seven months pre-
viously. Bialoguski had been working
towards Petrov’s defection since the
middle of 1951, a period of three years.
Moreover, Petrov never came to security!
Security came to Petrov!
During that period they gradually per-
suaded him to desert his own country
under circumstances which have to be
examined. There is evidence that Petrov
had formed a general intention to defect
as early as 1952 and, that by the middle
of 1953, the security service was calling
the whole movement “ Operation Petrov ”.
Richards and Spry both knew, late in
1953, not only that Petrov was desirous
of staying in Australia, but also that the
go-between, Bialoguski, had by means of a
wire recording, organized by Richards
himself, placed Petrov in so compromis-
ing a position that he would be faced with
utter ruin if he failed to leave the
Russian service as and when required.
The scene, described by Bialoguski in his
writings, is sheer, downright, roguery
and will long be remembered in the


annals, not of security, but of crime.
As a matter of fact, one well-informed
paper, News Weekly, had said on the
28th January, 1953, that there would
be startling disclosures affecting the
third secretary at the Russian Embassy.
That was before the Senate elections of
1953. It was, of course, a reference to
Petrov. For some reason—l do not
know why—most newspapers like to make
a scoop. That was their scoop, and after
the defection News Weekly said, “We
tipped you off fifteen months before ”, I
am only mentioning this to show that
“ Operation Petrov ” was a long, sus-
tained effort by a government agency of
this country to cause the suborning of
a servant of the Soviet Union.
Remember the Prime Minister’s state-
ment that “ a few days ago Petrov came
to our security service ”. But the
security service had been after Petrov for
three years! They “ had him in the
net”. That is the phrase used. The
wire recording was taken under circum-
stances, set out in Bialoguski’s writings,
which were indescribable and disgusting
from the point of view of ordinary
decent Australians. The plan for
Petrov’s reception was communicated to
the heads of Commonwealth departments
on the 17th February, 1954. Did the
Prime Minister not know that? It went
to the head of his department. Did he
not know of the instruction that if Petrov
came to any of their offices he was to be
given protection if he wanted it? That
was 50 days before the Prime Minister’s
announcement to the House. On the 4th
March, 1954, Richards received from
Spry, 40 days before the announcement
in the House, the sum of £5,000 for the
very purpose of paying it to Petrov.
That is the position. It was dangled
before Petrov just as a sign of good faith
that if and when he did what was required
of him he would get the cash. Is any
one in the House or the country prepared
to believe that the Prime Minister knew
nothing of this great and elaborate coup;
of the careful government planning
involved in organizing “ Operation
Petrov ”, and the use of £5,000 of Com-
monwealth money? I say that if Spry
used money like that for such a purpose,
without informing the responsible Minis-
ter, he does not deserve to stay another
moment in his job.
Further, from some subsequent sub-
missions made by the Prime Minister
in answer to questions on the 12tb August,
it became clear that, in fact, be bad
interested himself very directly in the
arrangements following Petrov’s defec-
tion. He then admitted that be knew
of the payment of £5,000 at least nine
days before the opening speech at the
first sitting of the commission at Can-
berra where the rule was, “ Expense is
no object The Albert Hall was set
up for the occasion. It cost a great deal
of money, but the commission never sat
there again. The whole of the arrange-
ments, including the broadcasting of pro-
ceedings all over the world, were simply,
of course, to give special publicity at this
very short time before the general elec-
tions—there were only twelve days to go.
On the instructions of the Prime Minis-
ter, counsel in the commission was
deliberately told not to tell the public in
the opening address of the payment of
£5,000 and that vital fact was kept back
from the public of Australia until the
elections were over.
Mr. McMahon. — Nonsense!
Dr. EYATT.—I hear the little voice
commenting, but that is the statement.
The date was fixed by the Prime Minis-
ter’s own statement. Head Hansard of
the 12th August. Recently there has
come to light further information as to
the intimate connexion of Bialoguski with
the Prime Minister. In the published
account of his part in the Petrov affair,
Bialoguski reveals that he made a special
visit to Canberra to see the Prime
Minister. His only job was to secure the
defection of Petrov. He had no other
security job and he was discontented with
his status. He had had trouble with
security. He said he was going to appeal
to the Prime Minister and he came to
Canberra. Of course, no one would
accept Bialoguski’s account of anything
unless it was independently corroborated,
but the facts and date of his visit to
Canberra are set down in the sealed letter
to the Prime Minister which was
handled on his behalf, by Mr. Yeend, his
private secretary. With the letter open
in front of them, the matter was dis-
cussed by Bialoguski and Mr. Yeend.,
4


The date of that interview with the
Prime Minister’s secretary, on behalf of
the Prime Minister, is set by the fact that
it took place on the day on which the
former Soviet Ambassador, Mr. Lifanov,
was taking his leave at Canberra. Mr.
Lifanov left Australia in September, 1953.
The visit and the letter related solely to
the activities of Bialoguski and his re-
muneration and status as a security agent
in his long-sustained—nearly three years
old—attempt to nurture, corrupt, black-
mail and trap Petrov with a view to
seducing him from his allegiance to his
own country. It is obvious that the Prime
Minister knew of Richards’s “ Operation
Petrov” at least seven months before his
first announcement to Parliament on the
13th April, 1954. Yet, when I asked in
the House on the 12th August, after the
general elections in May, whether there
had been an intermediary employed to
bargain with Petrov in 1953—and all the
dates I have given so far in relation
to Bialoguski are in 1953 —the Prime
Minister answered, “ I do not know ”
and he knew all about it!
Mr. McMahon. —He did not!
Dr. EYATT.—He knew all about it.
He gave the decision on it.
Mr. Mbnzies. —Oddly enough, he did
not.
Dr. EYATT. —He knew all about
Bialoguski nearly twelve months before
that date in August to which I have
referred. The plain truth is that Spry
and Richards and a number of trusted
persons had known of this. There were
dozens of written reports by Bialoguski in
the operation designed to cause Petrov’s
defection. The operation was conducted
over a period of nearly three years, and
involved 200 written reports from
Bialoguski. I believe that this slow and
elaborate cultivating and corrupting of
the officer of a foreign government for the
purpose of using him, not only for
security, but, as the facts show, as a
political pawn, is quite unprecedented in
British countries. Nothing like it
occurred in Canada. Nothing of that
kind was done with Gouzenko. Gouzenko
rushed for help in his emergency and
distress. He received no money. There
had not been anybody trying to entice
him away from his own allegiance. It
was a completely different case. Neither
did he receive any payment of money such
as the £5,000 that was paid to Petrov.
It is clear now, and I submit it to the
judgment of the House and the people,
that the Petrov affair was saved up for the
1954 elections. The wire recordings show
that Richards and Bialoguski were using
his chicken farm as bait for Petrov. That
is the very phrase that Bialoguski used
in his Saturday Evening Post articles.
It was bait to catch Petrov. In their
conversations the date was fixed on which
Petrov, who was then in the position that
he had to do what he was told, should
defect. The date was fixed as the sth
April. It was two days out, because the
date of his actual defection was the 3rd
April. Her Majesty was due to leave
Australia a couple of days before, and
that was the date which was fixed, when
the election date had been practically
fixed for May.
Once that conclusion is reached—and
it is inescapable —the Petrov case, as I
said in August of last year, will rank in
history as far worse than that of the
notorious Zinovieff letter which was pro-
duced from anti-Labour sources on the
eve of the 1924 elections for the purpose
of defeating the British Labour Govern-
ment. The only difference is that the
Petrov case was on a bigger scale.
The main impression of the report is
that some of its findings bear little rela-
tion to the published evidence. The com-
missioners’ findings imply attempted
espionage in one or two cases, yet they
recommend against prosecution. They
insinuate the inadequacy of existing laws,
but a study of the evidence shows that it
is not the inadequacy of the laws that
prevents prosecution, but the complete
absence of any legal evidence of espionage
or criminality that makes prosecution
impossible. Indeed, some of the findings
of the commissioners are in absolute con-
flict with the published evidence and with
certain well-established rules of British
legal procedure. I shall mention one or
two examples. There are hundreds of
such cases in this great hearing which
should be analysed, but I shall take just
a few cases. Ido not want to be mis-
understood, and therefore I shall take a
case at its strongest and highest. I refer
to the case of a Communist named
5


Clayton. He was a known Communist,
and had been a Communist official until
1951. He has been accused in the report
of attempted espionage against Australia.
It is asserted that he acted as a link
between Commonwealth departments and
Soviet agents centred in the Eussian
embassy. Attempts were made to support
these allegations by the cross-examination
of witnesses and by reference to docu-
ments —the Eussian documents that are
disputed—and by the reliance on hearsay
evidence that no British court of law or
tribunal of inquiry would use. In this
connexion I refer to the Lynskey tribunal,
which is the generally accepted model in
Great Britain. In the royal commission
that we are debating, hearsay evidence
was used repeatedly. Nevertheless, in
spite of all these attempts there was no
real evidence that Clayton was associated
with espionage, still less that he was the
head of an organization. There was no
evidence that he received any confidential
document. There was no evidence that
any Eussian had any contact whatsoever
with him, still less any evidence that he
furnished any material to any Eussian.
The commissioners, however, arrived at
the general conclusion that Clayton was
an active agent of the M.Y.D.
It is elementary justice, surely, that no
man, whatever his views, should be pre-
judiced before the courts because of his
political views, however extreme or un-
popular they may happen to be. In the
great ease of Hobbs and Tingling, Lord
Justice Scrutton was not dealing with a
Communist, but with a convicted crimi-
nal, a man named Hobbs who had
defrauded Mr. “A”, which was the nom
de plume or nom de guerre of an Indian
rajah. This was a famous case in its day.
It is perhaps as well to remember the
words of Lord Justice Scrutton, in these
days of pseudo-McCarthyism. He said —
The worst of criminals is entitled to a fair
hearing according to the rules of law . . .
He is entitled to be presumed innocent until
he is found by a trial according to rules of
law to be guilty; and I regret to say
Speaking of Hobbs—
Ido not think he got such a trial. Mr. Hobbs
is entitled to justice, and I hope he will get it.
He was hoping that justice would be done
after the judgment of the Chief Justice
had been set aside and a new trial ordered.
I refer also to the approach of Mr.
Justice Lowe as a royal commissioner,
which was completely different from the
approach in the present case.
There is a second principle, which may
sound technical, but I ask the House to
bear with me for a moment while I
direct its attention to this principle,
which was disregarded by the commis-
sioners. There was an alleged meeting at
about Easter of 1950 of Clayton with a
junior officer of a government department.
Clayton and another witness, also a Com-
munist, had positively denied that Clayton
had met the junior officer. The officer
concerned, despite persistent questioning
by security officers and by the commis-
sioners, refused to identify Clayton as the
person she said she had met. But in their
report the commissioners say that in
spite of the denial of Clayton and the
other Communist, and in spite of the
officer’s failure to identify, they were
satisfied that on the probabilities Clayton
was the person. That finding is made
in the teeth of the second principle stated
by Lord Justice Scrutton, that where the
credibility of a witness is shaken or
destroyed the court or jury is quite en-
titled to reject his evidence on matters
that are material. But, as Lord Justice
Scrutton said—
By destroying that evidence you do not
prove its opposite. If, by cross-examination
to credit you prove that a man’s oath cannot
be relied on, and he has sworn he did not go
to Rome on May Ist, you do' not, therefore,
prove that he did go to Rome on May Ist;
there is simply no evidence on the subject.
It is the technical rule, in one sense; it
is the basis of justice on the other, and
well recognized in English law. It is
wrong to argue that a commission of in-
quiry is at liberty to brush aside the safe-
guards which are expressed in the basic-
rules of law and justice. Where there is a
statutory investigation or inquiry, of
course there are no parties, no defendants,
and the field of evidence is wider to the
extent that hearsay is admitted in the
first instance. But at the crucial point
where a finding of misconduct is to be
considered, the procedure has been laid
down by Mr. Justice Lynskey in the great
inquiry in 1948 in England. He said —
In coming to a conclusion as to the conduct
of any individual witness, and in particular
whether any allegation made in reference to
him has been justified, we have had regard
6


only to such evidence as would properly be
admitted in a case in which he was a party
and his conduct was in question.
Apply those rules to the case against
Clayton and the finding is insupport-
able for the following reasons:—First,
whether Communist or not, Clayton was
entitled to justice and the just pro-
cedures laid down by British law, and
the practice of public inquiries set forth
by Mr. Justice Lynskey. Secondly, the
Petrov document submitted to the com-
missioners would have been utterly
inadmissible in a court of law as hearsay
many times removed. Petrov did not
say it was a correct document. He said
somebody else told him it was a correct
document; and that somebody else would
say that somebody had told him it was
a correct document. It was hearsay
thrice removed. Thirdly, there was no
legal evidence whatsoever that the meet-
ing between Clayton and the Government
official took place.
Then there is a similar case, that of
the alleged receipt. It is, again, a case in
which there is no sympathy on the part
of anybody with the people concerned,
but, still, they are entitled to justice—
an extraordinary proposition, I know, to
some people. They are entitled not to
have findings against them unless those
findings are supported by evidence. That
is the famous case of the 25,000 dollars.
Just imagine, 25,000 dollars received in
a parcel about the size of a telephone
book by Petrov! In his first statement,
he said two telephone books, two
Melbourne telephone books. I do not
know whether it is possible to get that
amount in such a parcel, but Petrov’s
story was that this 25,000 dollars con-
sisted of 25-dollar notes and 10-dollar
notes. Subsequently, it was found that
there are no 25-dollar notes in existence,
that there never have been 25-dollar
notes. Therefore, Mr. Petrov had to
come to the second edition. But that
was not all.
Mr. Mullens. —A coincidence?
Dr. EYATT.—Yes, that is right.
That is a very curious coincidence. They
are trying to mimic the honorable mem-
ber for Gellibrand (Mr. Mullens) in a
very odd way. Let me add one more
point to that. The money was supposed
to have been paid to Sharkey at 8 p.m.
on the 16th October.
Mr. Mullens interjecting,
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER. —Order!
The honorable member for Gellibrand
will remain silent, or I shall deal with
him.
Dr. EYATT- —The money was sup-
posed to have been paid to Sharkey,
according to Petrov’s evidence, at 8
o’clock on the 16th October, 1953. Prior
to that, the security officers had given
him details of his movements, as to where
he had been. At any rate, he went for
the 16th October, 1953, at 8 o’clock, and
that is when he said that the money
was to be paid over. Hot by Petrov!
He never comes in directly. It is always
somebody else who does it, but, still, that
was the time.
Then the commissioners had a look at
it, and counsel for the commission said
he had to tell the commissioners that on
the 16th October, 1953, Mr. Sharkey was
attending a meeting of his party, and
was under security surveillance and,
therefore, the payment could not have
been made at that time. So there had to
be a third edition of the story, and the
third edition was cooked up by Petrov.
Then where are we left? Hot with the
statement of any person on oath that any-
thing was paid to Sharkey—and this is
the keynote of Petrov’s evidence through-
out the case—but to Antonov, and
Antonov is not here; he is in Russia, pre-
sumably. At any rate, he is not in Aus-
tralia. He says the payment was made
to Antonov, and that there is a receipt,
but he cannot produce it. Had that ques-
tion been decided by a court of law, the
court of law would have found that not
one penny was paid to Sharkey. But
because it was hearsay before a royal
commission, there is a difference. The
commissioners say that on the prob-
abilities it was; and I regret to say
that in order to support that amazing
proposition, they quoted two High Court
judgments, one of which happened to be
my own, but it was completely misunder-
stood.
Honorable members interjecting,
Dr. EYATT. —At any rate, I was very
pleased to see that I was quoted for one
correct proposition in a report by this
particular royal commision. Unfortun-
ately, the commissioners failed completely
to understand the decision. I am taking
7


these two cases of Clayton and Sharkey
merely as illustrations of the great diffi-
culty in this case. These two men were
Communists and it was very difficult to
convince the commission. Cross-examina-
tion ranged all over the globe. In some
respects,, it was really a very unsatisfac-
tory hearing; indeed, so unsatisfactory
that I believe a court of appeal, if there
were a court of appeal from royal com-
missions, could not have allowed some of
these findings to stand. There was no
evidence that Sharkey had been in receipt
of any money, yet there is a finding that
he got 25,000 dollars. Many other
illustrations could be given; but there,
taking two unpopular sides for the
moment, and looking at the matter fairly,
no juryman could have listened to such a
case, and these judges should not have
done so, either.
The absence of any sound evidential
support for two of such findings, taking
them as typical, raises the question
whether there was any evidence to justify
the inquiry, and what was its real purpose.
There was nobody to be prosecuted. There
was no breach of law. The law is quite
sound. It is very clear. Had there been
evidence, a prosecution could have been
launched. The ordinary security way
of attacking a problem like the Petrov
case, in order to decide whether there is
a possibility of a breach of the law, is to
let security in the first instance act, search
and see whether it can find evidence on
which to prosecute. That would have
been the normal thing. We pointed out
that fact in the House at the time. But
that was not done, and, of course, there
was no evidence, as I have said. It is a
clear feature of the report.
I want honorable members, if they will
—it is not possible for me to do it in the
short time available —to look at the open-
ing address of counsel, no doubt prepared
after consultation with the Prime Minis-
ter who gave the instruction that the
£5,000 was not to be mentioned in the
opening address.
Mr. Gullett. —Ah!
Dr. EYATT.—It is no good ah-ing
about it. The people of Australia would
say “ Oh ”, not “ Ah ”, When we have
a man like this who has £5,000 —5,000
good reasons for doing this —is it not
relevant to tell the jury? Why is that
information kept back on the eve of an
election? It is a perfectly scandalous
thing, and it has never happened
before
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—Order!
There is whistling in the House. If I
find out who is whistling, he will be
named.
Dr. EVATT. —I ask the House and
the country to compare that opening
address with the sworn evidence. In his
opening address, counsel forecast the find-
ing of spies. He referred to “ traitorous
activities ”, “ a spy-ring ”, and “ a sys-
tematic and organized group ”. That
was a dramatic opening, conducted
dramatically. It was melodramatic. Ho
expense was spared, as we know. The
old Albert Hall was converted into &
great film house for the time being, and
public servants in certain degrees were
told they should go down and show their
loyalty. The press was there, and the
broadcasters were there. Hever was there
such a sensational opening.
Mr. Waed. —The Hollywood touch.
Dr. EYATT. —The Hollywood touch!
We have had it before here. We had it
on the night the Prime Minister intro-
duced the Communist Party Dissolution
Bill, which the people subsequently
rejected. The Australian people were told
to expect that there would be evidence of
widespread espionage. Window-dressing
statements were made referring to the
Soviet Government in such terms as a
“ tyrannical government ” and “ des-
potic ” and to certain Australians as
persons “ not troubled by conscience or
by scruple” and “who have no firmly
anchored religious faith”. Just imagine
it, coming into a cold inquiry into espion-
age ! It had nothing whatever to do with
the case if facts only were to be presented.
I wonder who was the draftsman of this
last phrase?
Mr. Keon.— Lockwood.
Dr. EYATT.—I am quite sure the
honorable member would think that was
possible, because he would credit any-
thing to the people whom he hates and
whom he fears. All these and other
loaded terms of praise and blame should
be re-examined by the people. The allega-
tions of active or attempted espionage of
8


a treasonable character were not justi-
fied by the evidence. Looking back, it is
plain that the proceedings were devised
and built up to assist the Government in
the then-existing political situation. This
occurred just twelve days before the elec-
tion. Of course, reference was not to be
made to it during the campaign. The
Prime Minister did not refer to it, but
other Ministers did, and, of course, the
newspapers did. One of them had a
report under a Washington date-line about
facts which subsequently came out in
evidence in certain respects. It was
obvious that systematic leakages came to
the press from Canberra all through that
period. It is clear that the Prime Minis-
ter, who brought up this matter on the
eve of the general elections, must take
personal responsibility for all the exag-
geration and deception. Of course, he
gave specific instructions, as I have said,
that the £5,000 was not to be mentioned
until after the elections. As a result, the
Australian people were completely misled,
just as the Parliament was misled on the
13th April, 1954. The concealment of
that payment from the people in those
circumstances will always remain a blot
on the inquiry.
It is not surprising that, after the elec-
tions, an early opportunity was taken to
play down the more serious implications
of the opening address. Counsel rather
went down from the level at which the
opening had taken place. He stated that
evidence would be adduced to show that
on occasions, there had been communi-
cated information that would have been
useful even if it was of no importance.
The chairman of the royal commission
was taken aback by this great anti-climax
and interjected: “ I trust we are going
to track down some spies ”. Though a
stream of virulent condemnation had been
directed at the Soviet Government, coun-
sel, in his opening, failed entirely to
mention the activities throughout the
world of certain embassies, and, indeed,
of Australian intelligence organizations
acting here and abroad. Of course, there
was no mention of Bialoguski’s long-sus-
tained and officially-supported endeavour
to corrupt, blackmail and seduce a Soviet
representative in Australia. The above
facts show that the opening address was
not justified by the evidence. A fair
conclusion is that the opening was in-
tended by the Government and the Prime
Minister to be part of a deliberate
political move, or that the security ser-
vice was grossly inefficient and misin-
formed and that it gave completely wrong-
ful advice. In any case, the Prime
Minister was guilty of a gross betrayal
of trust in giving the allegations wide-
spread publicity here and throughout the
world without first finding evidence to
support them. I know of no previous case
in which that kind of thing has occurred.
We can find a starting point of im-
portance, and that is the extraordinary
affair that commenced in this House in
May, 1952. Perhaps it provides a clue
to the political and security policies be-
hind the Petrov affair. I refer to the
charge made by the present Minister for
External Affairs (Mr. Casey) in this
House in May, 1952. The honorable
member for Mackellar (Mr. Wentworth)
on that occasion asked the Minister a
question based upon a statement in the
Tribune to the effect that there was under
negotiation a trade treaty between Aus-
tralia and the United States of America.
The Tribune published a condemnation of
that treaty by Chiplin, who signed the
article. Six months after the article was
published, the honorable member for
Mackellar asked the Minister for Ex-
ternal Affairs about it. Having regard
to certain aspects of the Petrov case, in
which the same type of thing was dredged
up in a slightly different way, it is very
important to see what really took place.
The insinuations that high public servants
had been responsible for a deliberate leak-
age of what was obviously confidential
information were so important that one
might think the Minister would have
asked for notice of the question, but he
was quite ready. He said, “ The state-
ments that the honorable member has
made are all substantially true He said
also that the leakage of the information
that had been published in the Tribune
six months before was very grievous.
However, that was not enough for the
honorable member for Mackellar, who
raised the matter again during the debate
on the motion for the adjournment of the
House the same day. He mentioned the
possibility that the former secretary of
the Department of External Affairs, Dr.
Burton, could have been implicated in
the leakage.
9


Mr. Gullett. —As lie well could have
been.
Dr. EYATT. —The honorable member
for Henty (Mr. Gullett) apparently is
ignorant of the fact that the royal com-
missioners, in their report, have com-
pletely cleared Dr. Burton of any implica-
tion whatsoever. I do not think the
honorable member believes for a minute
that Dr. Burton was involved.
Mr. Gullett.—l do believe it.
Dr. EYATT.—The honorable member
ought to be thoroughly ashamed of him-
self.
Honorable members interjecting,
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER—Order!
I ask the House to come to order.
Dr. EYATT. —I think the honorable
member for Henty is ashamed of himself,
because he was laughing while he inter-
jected. During the debate on the motion
for the adjournment of the House on the
occasion in May, 1952, to which I have
referred, the Minister for External Affairs
was again ready. He said he thought it
improbable that Dr. Burton had been
responsible for the leakage of informa-
tion, and that the disturbing feature of
the business was the fact that some senior
public servant had been so treacherous
as to give the draft of the treaty to a
Communist journal. He added these
dramatic words: “ There are traitors in
our midst, and the Government is doing
its utmost to uncover the nest of traitors
that exists in the Public Service ”. What
happened subsequently? Day after day
in this House for months the honorable
member for East Sydney (Mr. Ward),
the honorable member for Eden-Monaro
(Mr. Allan Fraser), the honorable mem-
ber for Parkes (Mr. Haylen) and other
Opposition members demanded that the
Minister act, because action obviously
was possible. A newspaper had published
confidential information from a depart-
ment. There was a clear breach of the
Crimes Act, and Opposition members
demanded that action be taken. I shall
not go through all the questions that
were asked. A dozen or fifteen questions
were asked, but they all were evaded by
the Minister for External Affairs, who
dealt with them in a blustering way. On
no occasion did he indicate that any
action would be taken about this obvious
breach of the official secrets provisions of
the Crimes Act. Let us see why the
Tribune and Chiplin were not prosecuted.
I shall not quote all the comments that
were made in this House. There were
many newspaper comments. The Sydney
Morning Herald stated that the refer-
ence to a nest of traitors in the Public
Service would cause serious disquiet at
home and abroad and that action must be
taken.
The matter went before the royal com-
mission, and these facts emerged: It
turned out that Mr. Chiplin of the
Tribune, had been provided with material,
and not from the Department of External
Affairs, to which reference was made, not
obscurely, and not by any high level public
servant, or by Dr. Burton, who had by
that time left the department. It was
stated in evidence that material was
systematically handed out to Chiplin by a
person whose name was not mentioned
before the royal commission and who was
employed as a security agent in the
Department of Yational Development,
which the Minister for External Affairs
had previously administered. In the
evidence there is the extraordinary and
amazing conflict between that witness
and Chiplin. Chiplin thought that she
handed out the material because she was
politically friendly, but she was a security
agent and acted throughout, according to
her, under the control of one of the
highest officials of the security service.
It is perfectly true that the royal commis-
sioners, as they did in respect of practi-
cally every person who was a Communist,
refused to accept Chiplin’s evidence.
Chiplin was evasive because he was
obviously trying to protect his source of
information. When the matter was raised
in this House, the woman in question
asked Chiplin to go to Melbourne,
obviously because she was worried. The
fair inference is that she either gave the
information to Chiplin for publication or
knew all about it. At any rate, the Go-
vernment knew of the publication. It
was an obvious breach of the Crimes Act,
but nothing was done. Chiplin was known
to be responsible, because he signed the
published article. The article was seized
by Detective Inspector Wilks under a
seizure order made by a magistrate. But
there should have been a prosecution.
10


After the affair in this House, as I
have stated, Chiplin went to Melbourne,
because the lady concerned was worried.
Naturally she was worried, because she
thought her name would come out. There
is no other explanation. As I have said,
Chiplin did not know that. That ex-
plains how the material came to be pub-
lished in the Communist newspaper.
What is the situation then? The Prime
Minister, representing the Government,
suggested to the people that there had
been a leakage through high government
officials, and the Department of External
Affairs was mentioned. The Government
found out that the department could not
have been implicated, because the report
of the investigation came before the royal
commission. It is obvious from that that
it came from the Department of National
Development, because of the references
to it, and tbe Public Servic at a high
level was allowed to be smeared for
political purposes by the Minister for Ex-
ternal Affairs, the implication being that
Dr. Burton, and persons associated with
him, were responsible. I say that that is
one of the most serious things that has
ever occurred in this country. Nothing
was done to prosecute the author of this
article, which is most injurious to and
slanderous of Dr. Burton and officers of
the Department of External Affairs. The
Government knew that they were all per-
fectly innocent, yet it allowed them to be
slandered in the House and to remain
under a grievous slur for three years, and
it has not even yet remedied the position,
even though the. commissioners in the re-
port cleared Dr. Burton completely.
Honorable members interjecting,
Dr. EYATT.—I am perfectly well
aware that there is an attempt from cer-
tain quarters to prevent my speaking
to-night. I think tbat the public is aware
of it. One cannot get away with these
tactics in Australia, although one may
do so for the moment. They are sheer
tactics of fascism and McCarthyism. A
report was made by the Commonwealth
Investigation Service, and the Govern-
ment should produce to the House that
report, which was included in the
evidence. I believe that it will show a
deliberate frame-up of the worst descrip-
tion to pretend that there was a leakage
of confidential information from the
Public Service to tbe Communist party
and to tbe Russians, when it was in fact
only a frame-up in an attempt to create a
situation, when it was manufactured and
fabricated. I tbink that tbat is an illus-
tration of wbat took place in other aspects
of tbe commission’s inquiry. Instead of
yielding to tbe Labour party’s demands
to prosecute, tbe Government did nothing.
It did not even declare tbe innocence of
people who it must have known were inno-
cent as soon as tbe inquiry was made.
It is a fair inference from tbat, and tbe
other circumstances, tbat this Govern-
ment bad prior knowledge, not merely
of Petrov’s probable defection, but of tbe
nature of tbe evidence of leakages which
might appear from bis documents. His
intending defection was anticipated by
Security throughout tbe whole of 1953,
and all tbat Bialoguski and others were
concerned with was bow to make tbe best
use of it.
The matter goes even deeper, because
when the Prime Minister took office from
the Cbifley Government in 1949, be knew
that information was coming to Australia
from overseas intelligence sources, which
suggested some possibility of leakages of
official information from Australian de-
partments. He knew then tbat informa-
tion, or rather suspicions, had been con-
veyed to Australian authorities tbat
several Australians might possibly be in-
volved as having been tbe source of in-
formation, and tbat some of these persons
could have been given code names. In
fact, of course, at that time, real evidence
in tbe legal sense was lacking. No action
was advised against any person, but a
warning bad been sounded, and strong
and appropriate action was taken in
respect of any person about whom there
might be tbe slightest suspicion. Indeed,
action tbat was most drastic was taken
by the then Secretary of tbe Department
of External Affairs, Dr. Burton, who has
been smeared for years by these people.
It is undoubtedly true that in respect of
some quite unsubstantiated suspicions he
took far-reaching action, with the appro-
val of Mr. Cbifley. No risks were taken.
The precautions taken were not dramatic
from a public point of view, or calculated
to injure the careers of officers who were
completely innocent. Because of the steps
taken, the matter was regarded as closed
11


by the time the Menzies Government took
office and the security organization, under
Mr. Justice Heed, a Supreme Court
judge, was fully established.
An extraordinary thing happened in
1953. I beg the House to follow this
closely. In 1948 this alfair took place.
Bialoguski watched and nurtured Petrov
in 1951, but in 1953 a few of those
persons who had been mentioned years
before were interviewed and interrogated
by security—Richards included —and
statements were obtained from them on
one pretext or another, and, in some cases,
after considerable pressure. That emerges
fairly clearly from the evidence.
Attempts were made to persuade some of
them
Mr. Keon.— Who were they?
Dr. EYATT. —Perhaps the honorable
member might read the evidence instead
of relying on his proteges. I have tried
to avoid mentioning the names of people
whom I believe to be innocent. I think
that is the correct attitude to take. Cer-
tainly I am not going to mention the
names of people against whom there was
suspicion,
Mr. Keon. —What about Dr. Burton?
Dr. EYATT. He is absolutely
innocent. The attacks on him by the
honorable member and his coterie are a
scandal and a disgrace to the Parliament.
Some of these people were promised
immunity if they talked, and freedom
from further investigation. All this took
place from six to twelve months before
Petrov’s defection. It seems certain that
evidence was then being collected and
collated, having in mind the probability,
or certainty, of his defection. I repeat
that vital statement, that this indicates
that twelve months before the actual
defection evidence was being prepared to
deal with the situation in the event of his
defection. Those cases are all-important
in themselves. The 1953 inquiries are
vital to an understanding of the Petrov
affair. They show that security officers,
including Richards, were seeking to collect
information, some of which learned by
security for the first time in 1953 by a
miraculous coincidence, had found its
way into the Sadovnikov documents pro-
duced by Petrov in 1953. There is an
extraordinary coincidence, which is so un-
usual or so nearly impossible that it could
not be a mere coincidence. Late in
March, 1954, just on the eve of Petrov’s
defection, an envelope which had been
sealed for three years in the embassy,
according to Petrov, was opened by him.
He had promised Richards to help him
on external affairs; Richards gave this
evidence as well at Petrov. This was at
the time that negotiations were going on,
when the money had been dangled before
him. He promised Richards that he
would help him on external affairs, if pos-
sible, by producing documents. When the
documents produced by Petrov, which
were given to him not by Sadovnikov but
by somebody else, and the seals of which
had not been disturbed for three years,
were opened, they were in accord with
some of the circumstances suggested
merely by way of suspicion in 1948, and
with the additional information obtained
by security during 1953, twelve months
before the defection. That is quite a
remarkable series of coincidences, having
in view the further coincidence of the
false allegation of a nest of traitors,
made by the Minister for External Affairs
in the House in May, 1952. There was
a sequence of events starting from vague
information received in 1948 and 1949
and sound precautions taken before this
Government took office. Arising from
that, the false “ nest of spies ” allegation
was made against the Public Service in
1952. Then there was the interviewing,
in 1953, of persons who were not then
known to be security risks, the cultivation
and coaching of Petrov from early in
1953, the formal defection of Petrov on
the eve of the elections, armed with docu-
ments containing some information which
was, for the most part, already on the
security files of Australia, and some of
which had been collected by security
officers from persons in 1953.
I ask the House to look through these
documents dealing with the particular
cases and see the nature of the particulars
that are supposed to come from Moscow.
Could that information have been
obtained from Moscow; or is it obviously
information collected from official sources
in Australia? Date of birth, place of
birth, address in Townsville, Perth or
some other city, telephone number—the
12


particulars are so clearly of a local
character that some of these documents,
on the very face of them —that is what
I mean by internal evidence —are
obviously not genuine documents.
It should not be necessary to go
further than this to suggest that the
genuineness and significance of the
evidence given before the commission
should have been tested far more care-
fully than it was. The commissioners
knew that the Chifley Government had
certain vague information in 1948, that
it had set up a security service under
impartial judicial leadership, that all
necessary action had been taken, that no
continuing suspicion remained and that
Petrov’s possible defection was known to
security in 1951 to be likely in 1953.
The commissioners never sought any
explanation of why high-ranking security
officers should suddenly renew their
interest in some of these persons in 1953,
twelve months before the Petrov docu-
ments were produced. On the bare facts,
there was a strong argument furnished
that all Petrov’s documents should have
been most stringently examined to see
whether they contained any information
which security acquired or placed on its
files in 1953. Under the present security
control, its files include, not only those
of the Australian Security Intelligence
Organization, but also those of military,
naval and air force intelligence and of
the Commonwealth Investigation Service
as well as selections from aliens’ and
immigration files. All that information
was available. But the commissioners
failed to do that. On the contrary, time
and again they argued—this was a very
important part of their argument —that
because the so-called Moscow documents
contained information which security
files showed to be correct, they must be
authentic documents of Moscow origin.
That was an absurd conclusion. In fact,
one commissioner actually said that, even
if Petrov swore that the documents were
false, he would not believe him.
If the information was true, it must
have come from some source. What was
the source ? A careful study of these
documents will show that the source of
a great many of them was certainly not
Moscow. These Petrov documents were
handed over after the payment of £5,000
m notes. On the 20th March, Richards
had shown Petrov £5,000 in notes while
Bialoguski was present. He was living
in a luxurious flat, partly subsidized by
Commonwealth taxpayers. On the day
before, that is the 19th March, Petrov
discussed with Richards the time of his
defection. He agreed with the chairman
of the commission that at that time he
was very anxious to learn what arrange-
ments would be made for his future and
his wife’s future in the event of defection.
On the next day, Richards and Petrov
met in Bialoguski’s flat. The tran-
script of the evidence of Petrov on this
point reads as follows:
Counsel. —You were there for an hour. Was
anything said about any information which
you had? —Yes; just only shortly.
What was said? —-I said to him that I would
help him about external affairs.
You said you would help him about external
affairs? —That’s right.
Did you give him any information? —I did.
(Interpreted)—What did you tell him?—
(Interpreted) —I did not give him any infor-
mation then —not yet.
Did you tell him you would give him infor-
mation later? —I did.
The Chairman. —If suitable arrangements
could be made to look after your future; is
that it? —That is so.
That was tbe bargain. Wby all tbis bum-
bug about saying there was no arrange-
ment for tbe payment of money and the
furnishing of information or documents
in return? There was the admission out
of Petrov’s own mouth. It was confirmed
by Richards in his evidence. Richards
wanted to get something tangible—that is,
documents; but Petrov wanted to get
something tangible, too. The evidence of
Richards on the point was as follows: —
Counsel. — On that day you told us you
formed an impression that his physical well-
being in this country . . . was a factor
in his mind? —Yes, I felt that.
And that he needed something tangible to
assist him in his decision?—l felt that he did.
Did you report that impression on the
same night, or Brigadier Spry?—l did.
You received, the next day, a report from
Bialoguski?—Yes, I did.
That he had formed the same impression,
but not in those words ? —Yes. He put it more
bluntly.
He said that Petrov would probably want
some indication of a sum of money—That
is so.
Then an account was given of a draft,
which was obtained and cashed as early as
the 10th March. Richards went to see
13


Petrov at Bialoguski's flat, and the money
was shown to Petrov, who said that he
was gathering something together in order
to meet the requests that Richards had
been making. So a conversation went on
about documents. The transcript of the
evidence given by Richards in cross-
examination reads as follows:
Counsel. —However, just let me get it again.
You did, undoubtedly, have in the forefront
of your mind the existence of some tangible
corroboration of what this man had in his
head? —I think he had suggested
He had suggested the documents? —That is
what gave rise to my comment.
And, of course, you are not going to tell us
that you were disinterested in that, are you?
—I was most interested.
Of course you were. And you made it clear
to Petrov, did you not, that you were very
interested in documents ? —I also made it
clear to him that it was his decision; he knew
the risk, and he would make his own decision
on that.
Mr. Hawoeth. —Who said that?
Dr. EYATT. —That is the evidence
given by Richards in reply to questioning
by counsel. Those are the circumstances
surrounding the bargaining that was
going on. For some reason, those appear-
ing in the interests of the Government
would not admit that there was bargain-
ing. But it was clear that bargaining
had been going on ever since the occasion
late in 1953, when the bait was set for
Petrov. He made his statement on the
wire recorder and fixed the date of his
defection at a certain date, subject, of
course, to the arrangements being satis-
factory. These discussions went on.
On the 3rd April, Petrov produced his
documents. By a remarkable coincidence,
they included the exhibit G documents —
the very things that Richards was so eager
to get. Petrov’s evidence was that when
he finally made up his mind to leave the
embassy, he went to the safe, where —
lo and behold! —he found a sealed docu-
ment. He did not know it was there.
He had not noticed it before. When he
opened the safe, he found, without any
effort on his part, not only the envelope,
but the contents. He became one of the
luckiest finders in history. As an illus-
tration, the name of a lady typist inter-
viewed three times by Richards in mid-
-1953 was written three times in the docu-
ments that Petrov miraculously discovered
in 1954. The document by Sadovnikov said
of her that “ K ” —“ K ” in the end was
shown to mean Clayton but, according to
Petrov’s evidence, “ K ” meant quite a
different person —received “ interesting
information ” from her —the one fact
which Richards persuaded her to say in
1953. So Petrov so easily managed to
discover documents eagerly desired by
Richards that he might well adopt the
motto, “ I never seek but I always find ”.
One of the most important exhibits pro-
duced before the commission was not in
Sadovnikov’s writing, not in Petrov’s
writing, but in Richards’s writing. That
was the statement made by Petrov on the
night of his defection. It was dictated
by Petrov, but written in the handwriting
of Richards. That was the document
dealing with the alleged situation of a
serious nature in the Department of
External Affairs between 1945 and 1948.
It was a statement by Petrov, who could
have known nothing about the matter, and
who put that down because he knew what
his masters, the people who were paying
him the money, would like to hear. It
was an outrageous statement for Petrov
to make. When he was cross-examined,
he said only that somebody told him about
it. Ho direct evidence was produced.
This utterly hearsay evidence, valueless
from an evidentiary point of view against
any person, produced in extraordinary
circumstances, was the basic foundation
of the finding of the commission. After
my reading of the legal procedures of the
English inquiries tribunal, one can see
how severe would be the judicial criticism
directed against basing any inference
whatever against anybody on so worthless
a foundation. Moreover, the evidence
establishes that the questions put to
Petrov were leading questions from
Richards. That was quite improper in
the circumstances, when Petrov was trying
his best to do what was wanted of him.
The history of the defection, the cir-
cumstances surrounding it, including the
desire of Petrov to defect, the payment
to him of a large sum of money, the
political occasion, the inconsistent state-
ments of the Prime Minister, the sinister
and dishonest activities of Bialoguski, the
over-dramatized opening by counsel and
the admitted correspondence between the
information held by security and much
material in Petrov’s documents, all point
to one conclusion, from which I have
14


never shrunk —that is, the existence of
political fraud in this case. I shall
cite one example only, but dozens could be
cited. The multiplicity of examples
tends to show that, by some means not
fully ascertained, many of the Petrov
documents reproduce details about persons
which could only have been contained in
official documents recording their careers.
As I have stated, I could cite case after
case to illustrate my point. Cross-
examination of persons who were in
possession of the security documents
indicated their sources of information. A
study of such cases and of the details
that are given even in the Sadovnikov
documents proves that almost beyond
doubt. The details could not have come
from any source outside Australia. I
refer to such information as the date of
birth, telephone number, and details of a
university career, all of which are matters
of no import to any other country, even
if it had any hostile intent towards us.
Such details are contained in the par-
ticular document to which I refer, which
purports to be a Russian document. A
fair inference is that these documents are
not Russian documents. The two state-
ments that I made to the House earlier in
my speech, and which were so scandal-
ously greeted by those honorable mem-
bers who are opposed to what I am
saying, prove that there is a grievous
doubt about the documents. The Soviet
Government says that they are not
authentic documents.
Mr. Keon. —Who said it?
Dr. EYATT.—I read out who said it.
What kind of people are these who, in
a national parliament, are not prepared
to hear a case ? Is the House not entitled
to have a proper investigation of the
matter instead of being insulted by a lot
of people who reduce themselves to a
level that has scarcely been known in a
responsible parliament? Will any one
suggest that a proper examination of the
handwriting is not warranted?
Mr. Mullens. — Molotov!
Dr. EYATT. —Yes, Molotov. Molotov,
of course, meets the highest representa-
tives of the British Commonwealth of
Hations and of the United States of
America. He is not great enough for the
honorable member for Gellibrand (Mr.
Mullens). I have had my fights with
Molotov, but I have the right and the
duty to refer to his statement in support
of independent conclusions to which
reasonable people may come, and the
honorable member cannot get rid of that
outstanding fact. I was directing atten-
tion to individual cases of detailed state-
ments of careers referred to in the report
of the commission. Fancy a Russian
M.V.D. document showing a date of birth
as being 1923, a particular university
degree, and the like! That is the type
of thing that is always found in Aus-
tralian security dossiers. This is a matter
which must be cleared up, and I believe
that it will be cleared up and cleaned up.
In the absence of positive evidence that
Sadovnikov wrote the document from a
Moscow letter, which is one of the G
series of letters stated to have been written
in 1948 or 1949, a fair prima facie con-
elusion is that it was built up of extracts
for the_ most part truly stated in the
Australian dossiers, and therefore with a
probability of security origin. Moscow
could not have had any concern whatever
with most of those details. The ex-wife
of Bialoguski says that from time to time
Bialoguski obtained from the security
service information which she furnished
to Petrov, so there is a possible source of
information to Petrov. Petrov and
Bialoguski were joint operators over a
very long period.
The case to which I have referred
exposes the fallacious assumption by the
commissioners who said, in effect, “ The
statements in the documents are true;
therefore, the documents are genuine ”.
But that does not follow. The truth of
the statements shows that they must have
proceeded from some source which had
collected them in an organized way.
What source would that be? The
irresistible inference is that it could not
be Moscow entirely, and I challenge any-
body to examine the documents from that
point of view. The particular document
to which I am referring deals with the
man’s university and military careers.
Why are such details contained in a
document like that ? Why should Moscow
know? Why should it want to know?
Why should Moscow collect that informa-
tion if it thought that it might be
treacherously or dishonestly given? All
15


those particulars are beside the point.
Moscow only wants something by which
to identify the person, but far more in-
formation than that has been given.
A great deal of factually incorrect
evidence was placed before the commis-
sion. I refer to one example which honor-
able members may have forgotten but
which they will remember when I men-
tion it —the salaries and allowances of the
Petrovs. In order to excuse the payment
of £5,000, evidence was led that Petrov
was a very highly paid and important
person. That was an important piece
of evidence, and the commissioners re-
garded it as being very important in
determining the reliability of the witness
and, therefore, the authenticity of these
alleged M.Y.D. documents of 1952. A
learned economist associated with an
Australian university has made a com-
mentary on that matter, the substance of
which was that the commissioners based
their calculations on official or normal
exchange rates, which are completely
artificial and have no relevance in a
calculation in Australian terms of Soviet
salaries. The economist stated that a
careful calculation based on the exchange
rates adopted by the Australian Govern-
ment in the payment of its own officers,
and by the British Government in the
payment of its embassy staff, showed that
the Petrovs were receiving a remunera-
tion which was less than that of the
most junior Australian diplomatic
official.
Mr. Menzies. —Who said that?
Dr. EVATT.—I am saying it.
Mr. Mbnzies.—l thought the right
honorable gentleman said that an
economist had said it.
Dr. EVATT.—He did.
Mr. Menzies. —I am courteously ask-
ing the right honorable gentleman the
name of that economist.
Dr. EVATT. —I deliberately did not
state his name. The information can be
cheeked. Let the Prime Minister get his
own people to check it, otherwise he will
have a visit from some of his friends.
That observation shows that the Petrovs
were receiving a remuneration which was
less than that of the most junior diplo-
mrit’c officials of Australia, and about one-
third of the remuneration received by the
most junior diplomatic officer of the
British embassy in Moscow. On those
realistic calculations, the remuneration
received by Petrov indicated that his
status was in fact the official status with
which he arrived in Australia, that is,
junior to a third secretary. His rank
was the lowest referable to a man of his
seniority, and his salary was appropriate
to that rank. This alleged M.V.D. dicta-
tor with vast powers had a status and
salary which, considering his age, indi-
cated that his career was almost finished
—a view which was supported by the
terrors he experienced when he got into
argument with the ambassadors, who,
according to part of the case, had to
shrink before him. I do not say that
merely to rub in the fact that he was of
inferior status, but in order to answer
the suggestion that he had a high salary,
which, according to one of the commis-
sioners, was better than that of a Supreme
Court judge. That is nonsense, and the
Government had information at its dis-
posal which could have shown that it was
nonsense.
Mr. Joshua. —How much did Petrov
get?
Dr. EVATT. —He received a salary
which was equivalent to that of an officer
junior to a third secretary. That is the
information that has been placed before
me, and I believe it to be true. One of
the most serious aspects of the commis-
sion’s procedures was that misleading evi-
dence of a general character could not
be corrected while the inquiry was being
conducted piecemeal. The witnesses came
in one by one, there was no general dis-
closure of the case. We had the eclat of
the Albert Hall opening, but there was
no analysis of the whole of the evidence
that was to be placed before the commis-
sion in order that the issues could be
determined. That is why the Parliament
and the people generally must carefully
examine it now. If counsel assisting the
commission had been free from instruc-
tions by the security service, or if
arrangements had been made for a general
address on all these matters, I believe that
many of the commission’s conclusions
would have been different. Then, of
16


course, there were the other occasions
when hearings were held in camera. I
suppose that, in some instances, that
would be justified on security grounds.
But the proceedings at these hearings
in camera were published later, some of
them at a date much later, when it was
quite impossible for them to be dealt with.
1 need give only one illustration. Codes
and code names were features of this case.
In the opening address much mention was
made of the word “ bank ”, not a real
bank, but as meaning “ secret hiding
place ”. Another illustration of these
codes is that “ dispatch office ” meant
“ Department of External Affairs ”.
These are two illustrations of the use of
code words to describe certain places. Yet
in a key document of the Gr series, the
one which purported to list the contacts
of Clayton, the word “ bank ” also is
used. But there it was interpreted by
counsel as meaning “Department of Ex-
ternal Affairs ” and not “ secret hiding
place ”. The word “ bank ” was there
taken to mean “ Department of External
Affairs ” instead of the words “ dispatch
office ”, which it had been stated earlier
were used to refer to that department.
One would have thought that any exami-
nation of those inconsistencies could have
been made in public. But no, it was
done in secret session, and the two Petrovs
were recalled for further examination.
On any fair judgment of the proceedings
the Petrovs were being forced, under
pressure, both from the chairman of the
commission and counsel assisting the com-
mission, to state on oath that “ bank ”
could, in fact, mean “Department of Ex-
ternal Affairs ” as well as “ secret hiding
place ”. Both, however, were most re-
luctant to commit themselves to such a
statement, Mrs. Petrov having very firmly
stated in a similar connexion that Moscow
did not make mistakes of that kind. That
matter is dealt with in portions of the
evidence which I shall not read to the
House in full, but it is most important
for honorable members to see this am-
biguous meaning given to a word. The
evidence in this connexion was taken
in camera on the 20th July, 1954, but the
transcript was not published until August,
1955—thirteen months later, and after
all evidence had been concluded. Con-
trast this extraordinary evidence with
5577/55.-2
the dynamic assurance of counsel assisting
the commission in his opening address
in which he said—
Similarly, only a short period of study of
the documents and of the internal evidence
in them will show, for example, that “ dispatch
office ” is “ the Department of External
Affairs
So it was, in connexion with people with
code names, all through the documents.
There was no evidence to show who were
the other persons referred to by code
names. They were simply used —not used
in the Russian letters in the sense that
there is to be a direction to the person
of that code name, although code names
occurred quite frequently.
In regard to “ secret hiding place ”, I
think the comment made by London
Punch is most devastating. It said, refer-
ring to Petrov —
When he slipped up was in consenting to
pass on information about such petty profes-
sional details to the H.Q. of the M.V.D. in
Moscow. A spy’s reports to his Chief (or to
the M.V.D. or to Room 6 as the case may be)
should consist of the weight of tanks, plans
of guided missiles, etc., not of pitiful self-
congratulatory memoranda beginning " I have
hit on a plan for hiding secret messages in a
crack in a board of the embankment of a
railway bridge ”.
That railway bridge was a bridge near
Canberra. Punch then refers to the
instruction from Moscow that Petrov
must test hiding places first by inserting
articles like newspaper cuttings and
cigarette papers to determine whether the
hiding places were suitable. Some one
was pulling somebody’s leg on some occa-
sions, in some of these letters. I think
that Punch’s comment sufficiently
crushed the genuineness of such an absurd
and ridiculous document. Similarly, I
have mentioned the reference to “ bank ”
partly to illustrate the extraordinary use
made of secret hearings. It was impos-
sible in a hearing in camera for these
things to be checked in the way that they
should be.
Hot only that, but there is the addi-
tional fact that there were many occa-
sions on which there was leading of
witnesses. I mean by that that leading
questions were asked of them. People
misunderstand what the term “ leading
question ” means. They think that a
leading question is a difficult question,
whereas, of course, it is really a question
17


that suggests the answer. Such ques-
tions were asked over and over again.
For instance, Petrov was asked about
leakages. He had made the statement to
Richards, which I have criticized, because
Richards was leading him when he made
that statement on the night of his defec-
tion. He admitted that. In the sworn
evidence, when Petrov was asked about
leakages, he was asked when they had
occurred. He said, in substance, that
they had occurred all through. Then he
was taken in hand and a series of ques-
tions made him go back to the statement
made on the night of his defection when
he was paid £5,000, and the answers to
the questions in that series of questions
were, “ That is right ”; “ That is so ”;
“ That is right ”; “ That is possible ”
and so on. In other words, he was
answering the very questions put into
his mouth, in the affirmative, and taking
them away from his statement. I say that
this was improper leading of a witness to
build up a case which counsel was putting,
especially of a witness who should have
been closely cross-examined on all points,
as the two Petrovs should have been. The
fact is that, from the outset, it was
intended to assume, or assert, the honesty
of the Petrovs, and it came to be almost
heresy to criticize them. In the opening
address one of them was described as
“ educated, attractive and intelligent ”,
something which had not the slightest
relevance to the matter. It was for the
commissioners to find out such things for
themselves. Whilst the case was proceed-
ing there was held the notorious Christ-
mas party at which the guests were the
three judges and the two Petrovs. I say
that that is a completely wrong procedure.
If it had happened in the administration
of justice in the ordinary way, the
judicial proceedings would have been
invalidated. Normal people would look
with reserve at the glamorizing of the
Petrovs that went on. They had made
charges of a vague nature against Aus-
tralian people, very few of which have
been substantiated on legal evidence.
They were not entitled to any advantage
in the hearing of the case. We do not
treat spies or informers in that way
according to the ideals of English law
and jurisprudence. Why were they
treated in that way? Why were they
glamorized before a court which should
have been concerned only to get at the
truth? The glamorizing was started in
this chamber on the 13th April, 1954.
I venture to say that a reading of the
speech of the Prime Minister on that
occasion will show that from beginning
to end there was hardly a correct state-
ment in it. I say that it was completely
misleading and started the atmosphere
of building up the Petrovs. If the Prime
Minister had told all the facts, especially
about the £5,000 paid to Petrov, there
would have been a very severe reaction,
I believe, from the people of Australia.
The normal attitude to self-confessed
spies and informers would be to check
very carefully whether what they had
to say was accurate or inaccurate, to look
on them with suspicion, and to check
their motives for giving information.
Petrov was destined to come over to this
country after he had been trapped by
the wire recording. If that had been
sent to his ambassador by Bialoguski,
who was at that time parading as a
Communist, the result would have been
serious for Petrov. Bialoguski also went
to the American consul and offered his
services. That fact is recorded in his
book. But Petrov had no chance after
he was trapped by Bialoguski, acting in
co-operation with Richards, the deputy
head of the intelligence service. Just
imagine the use of a wire recorder to
get this wretched man! He said he liked
to live in Australia, and therefore, he had
decided to settle here. What kind of life
did he live in Sydney? The evidence on
that is clear enough in Bialoguski’s book,
which shows that he was living a life
in which he became a sodden drunkard
practically under the control of
Bialoguski. It is of no use going into
all these aspects of the case, but they
should have been brought out and ruth-
lessly exposed by the commission. Con-
sider the Ollier case. Consider those two
witnesses who, at a secret hearing, gave
false evidence against the representative
of France, Madame Ollier. Both of them
were obviously guilty of false swearing
and of making conflicting statements
although both carefully avoided direct
conflict of testimony wherever possible.
This is one of the instances which I ask
the House to read. The evidence in rela-
tion to it was published only later. It
is possible to see from the evidence the
18


way in which these two people acted to
protect each other. When one would
make a positive statement the other would
try to come to the rescue. One illustra-
tion refers to the letter from Moscow
which concerned the giving of £75 to
Madame Ollier and the making of an
excuse for giving it. Did they do it?
No. Petrov said that the reference did
not mean that Madame Ollier was to
get £75, but that it meant that he was to
take £75 and buy a watch for her. A
complete misrepresentation, and no one
was present to cross-examine! It was put
only by a representative of the commis-
sion who had brought these wit-
nesses forward as witnesses of truth.
Their evidence could have been torn
to ribbons. They said that Pakhamov
gave her a watch. The question was
asked, “Did you see Pakhamov give her
a watch?” The answer was, “No. I
never saw it.” They gave heresay evi-
dence so that they could not be charged
with perjury. On that evidence, the
commissioners were influenced to make
aspersions on Madame Ollier which were
not justified. What a disgrace to Aus-
tralian justice that such a case should
be heard in camera while the woman
was held incommunicado in Noumea by
connivance between the Minister for
External Affairs (Mr. Casey) and the
French Ambassador. Because 1 took that
case up, I was excluded from the com-
mission. I did not act for her pro-
fessionally. I cannot possibly look on
that state of affairs without being horri-
fied and disgusted. Madame Ollier has
now been cleared of the serious imputa-
tion of subversion that was made against
her.
Mr. Mullens. —She has not.
Dr. EYATT.—I ask the honorable
member not to say that, because I do not
think that he is a person who is inten-
tionally unkind. Madame Ollier has
been cleared of the major charge. The
only charge remaining against her is
one of neglect, in that she did not report
on Petrov. In that connexion, it is pos-
sible that she might have thought that
this man who was importuning every one
ought to be treated as being beneath
contempt. Ido not know. But the case
of Madame Ollier is scandalous and it
5577/55.—3
is a complete disgrace that it was heard
in camera, and worse than that, the pro-
ceedings published without her case hav-
ing been put. The evidence was broad-
cast throughout the world, although she
had not been heard in her own defence.
Of the enormity of this the commissioners
are apparently unconscious. It is a dis-
grace to British justice, and could never
have occurred in the United Kingdom or
any other part of the British Common-
wealth.
As I have said, the circumstances lead-
ing up to this inquiry are sufficient to
cast the gravest suspicion upon the whole
episode. The procedures adopted by the
commission and the handling of the wit-
nesses were most unsatisfactory. But
it is when critical examination of the
documents is made that the most
desperate wickedness of the whole Petrov
atfair becomes fairly evident. In fact,
it is not possible even yet to make a full
examination of the documents because a
lot of them have not seen the light of
day. The key ones are buried away
still, not having been examined, tested
or compared. All the exhibits from A
to G should be laid on the table of the
House. I demand that this be done.
The Moscow series are in Russian; we
should see these original documents. I
have asked to see these documents, and
have been refused the right to see them.
Why should the Parliament be ignored?
The Prime Minister has said that the
Parliament should not see more than
the royal commissioners were prepared
to reveal. I agree with that on one
point. It is true that a secret annexure
has been included for the information of
the Executive Government and of the
Governor-General only. I do not think
that that procedure was right, but I can
understand that it might be excusable
on security grounds. But the Parlia-
ment must see the other documents which
have been interpreted. One of the
greatest handwriting experts in this
country who has served in Commonwealth
and State courts for twenty or 30 years is
of the opinion that one of these G
documents was not a Sadovnikov
document.
Mr. Mullens. —What is his name?
Dr. EYATT. —I have mentioned it.
19


Mr. Mullens. —Monticone?
Dr. EYATT.—-Has the honorable
member something against him, too?
Surely the honorable member is not
serious ! I think that, at heart, the honor-
able member does not have anything
against the gentleman to whom I have
referred. He has not examined the
matter. Dr. Monticone is recognized in
all the courts as perhaps the most able
and prominent man in that particular
field. I say that the documents must be
made available to all honorable members.
Honorable members interjecting.
The DEPUTY SPEAKER—Order!
The House is getting out of hand.
Dr. EYATT. —-I cannot go through all
these documents. I have given only one
or two illustrations. But there is one
document in particular that I must
mention in another connexion. The date
on one of the alleged Sadovnikov docu-
ments is the 10th November, 1949. It
contains the names of a number of Aus-
tralians. The names of some members of
Parliament and public figures are set out
with some descriptions of them. There
are statements in that document which
are completely untrue as at that date.
The age of one man is given. Age seems
to be completely irrelevant. Why would
they want to know his age? But the
man’s age was wrongly stated by seven
or eight years, and that seems to me as if
those particulars have been derived in
some way from Bialoguski from security
documents of ten or eleven years’ stand-
ing. That would be the natural inference
if one looks at the surrounding circum-
stances. Here is a case which is of special
significance. It is a description, con-
tained in the alleged Sadovnikov docu-
ment, of an Australian who is said to be
aged “ about 40 years ”, and a “ former ”
member of Parliament. In this case,
there is a double error. The person in
question was not a “ former ” member of
Parliament; but at the alleged date of
the alleged Russian letter he was a sitting
member of Parliament. That is rather
a different thing, as honorable members
know particularly well. Only afterwards
was he defeated as a candidate for Parlia-
ment. At the time of the alleged letter his
correct age was not “ about 40 ”, but about
36. In other words, the reference in the
alleged Russian letter of Sadovnikov
would have been true of this person, not
in November, 1949, the alleged date of the
alleged letter, but in 1953. In other
words, this letter predicts what is going
to happen to this man’s parliamentary
career. That is what happened in the
famous Dreyfus case. There was a clue.
After all, he must be a good forger who is
guiltless of any error of fact. A predic-
tion, in a letter, of what will happen in
the future is generally regarded as stamp-
ing that letter as a forgery or fabrication.
I give that illustration. Others can be
given, but I think that is a striking one.
Now I want to come to the M.V.D.
letters of 1952. The bulk of these letters
were written between January and Decem-
ber of 1952. On the night of his defec-
tion Richards asked Petrov in relation to
these letters, “ Are you an M.Y.D. man ? ”
Petrov answered, “ Yes. They came from
the M.Y.D. Moscow and I was the M.Y.D.
resident in Australia and received them in
that capacity ”. Documents Ato F con-
tain 200, 300 or 400 references to the
M.Y.D., stating or implying that Petrov
was an M.Y.D. Officer and that the
M.Y.D. in Moscow was sending him the
letters. What are the facts? That was
the way in which the case was opened, but
when the Petrovs were called upon to give
that evidence on oath, they would not
swear to it. The fact is that these M.Y.D.
letters of 1952 are not M.Y.D. letters at
all. I am not basing that statement on
any inference, but on the sworn evidence
of the two Petrovs when they were
pressed. Neither of them had anything to
do with the M.Y.D. during any part of
1952. On their own sworn statements,
made after some prevarication, they could
not have become members of the M.Y.D.
before April or May, 1953, when the
letters were finished. Yet the whole ease
for the authenticity of the Moscow letters
of 1952 is that M.Y.D. Moscow sent them
all to Petrov as the Acting Chief Resident
of the M.Y.D. in Australia throughout
the year 1952. That is of vital impor-
tance, and in his sworn evidence, this is
what Petrov said —
In one envelope are a group of photostats.
These photostats were printed from negatives
sent to me from the M.V.D. head-quarters,
Moscow, U.S.S.R. I printed and developed
them myself. They were sent to me personally,
by courier with diplomatic mail. They were
sent to me because I was the Chief M.V.D.
20


representative in Australia. Except for my
wife, no one else has knowledge of them.
My wife knew of them because M.V.D. Moscow
arranged for her to receive them here —she
was a cipher clerk at the Embassy for M.V.D.
Section.
That is what Petrov said in his written
statement, which was prepared by
Richards. Richards thought he was with
M.Y.D. While they were pressurizing
Petrov, he found out that they thought
he was an M.Y.D. officer at this particular
time and he did not mind them thinking
it. When he came to give evidence on
oath, he said the reverse, as I shall show.
If his assurances as to the alleged M.Y.D.
letters from Moscow are false, it is obvious
that the 1952 letters are utter shams in-
tended to bluff and deceive the people
who were over-eager for him to assume
a false role —the role of a 1952 M.V.D.
officer. He could not discharge it in 1952
because he then had no connexion with
the M.Y.D. That appears over and over
again in the evidence and is brought out
by Mr. Windeyer, after all the evidence
has settled down. Petrov was not an
M.Y.D. servant, according to his own
statement, until after March, 1952, when
the M.G.8., which is another organiza-
tion, run differently—a different depart-
ment of government —and the M.Y.D.
were merged. I quote further from the
evidence —
Mr. Windbyeb. —The service in which you
served was known to you as the N.K.V.D.
from 1934 to about 1943? —Yea.
And the N.K.G.B. from 1943 to 1946?'—-Yes.
The H.K.G.B. is a different department
again. I quote further—
And the M.G.B. from 1946 to March, 1953?
Yes.
He had no connexion with M.Y.D., which
is simply the Russian name for the Minis-
try of Internal Affairs, until March,
1953. Therefore, apart from every other
consideration in the ease, all the docu-
ments of 1952 are clear fabrications.
I hope that honorable members follow
what I am saying because one has to
read letter after letter. The instructions
say, “ The M.Y-H- this year must be care-
ful . ... The counter-intelligence is
doing very well . . . Mr. Richards
and his people are so difficult, therefore
the M.Y.D. this year ” —1952 —“ must be
bold and show initiative ”. They are
told to do all these things. They were
phoney letters because they could not be
true. Petrov had nothing to do with
that organization in 1952, and it had
nothing to do with Australia in that year.
What happened after March, 1953, is
irrelevant; All the letters are 1952
letters. The sworn evidence of Petrov,
showing that he lied to Richards when he
handed him the documents, is conclusive
evidence against them. What sort of
inquiry is it when that evidence is not
brutally pointed out, but, in fact, is kept
back? If one looks carefully one finds
little references to it. I have stated the
facts. I challenge any one to prove that
what I have said is in any way inaccurate
on that point. If it is not, the conse-
quences are devastating.
I wish to refer now to a point that I
thought would have been obvious to all,
on the genuineness of the letters. This
M.V.D. organization, or whatever it is
called, is supposed to be ruthless, cen-
tralized and efficient. Over and over
again it gave instructions to Petrov.
There is no dearth of instructions in
these documents. Let us assume for a
moment that there is no doubt about their
authenticity. It is very difficult to find
any case where instructions given to
Petrov were carried out. He is told to do
something. He simply treats the instruc-
tion as though he had never received it,
and I think that is the answer. He did
not carry out any instructions because
there were no instructions to carry out,
and if a man is going to fabricate docu-
ments, including instructions, he is in
difficulty when he is faced, after the event,
with the necessity of showing that he
carried them out. I will give one illus-
tration. He was asked to consult certain
people. He had to look up a telephone
book. What did he do ? He did nothing
except write a few answers to questions.
The House has been very generous in
listening to me, but the importance of this
is obvious. Here is another illustration.
I shall quote again from the transcript
Petrov’s answers to questions—
(lnterpreted) You notice the paragraph
recommends that you should personally under-
take the study of S. (Interpreted) Yes, that
was so, but I was unable to visit him or make
contact with him.
21


His answers were given in a sing-song
way—
(lnterpreted) Did you try? (Interpreted)
X had his address but I was just unable to visit
him.
(Interpreted) Why? (Interpreted) Well,
there were various reasons. When you come
here you have an awful lot to do, and I just
had not the time.
This was his answer to the ruthless
M.V.D., which was supposed to give him
the power of life and death over Lifanov
and Generalov. The evidence continues —
The Chairman. — (Interpreted) When you
come to Sydney —is that what you mean when
you say “ When you come here ?”
(Interpreted) The thing is that when 1 came
to Sydney I was given various tasks to do by
the Ambassador sometimes and those tasks
were limited as to time, they had to be done
within a certain time, so 1 had not the possi-
bility of doing them all.
He must obey the Ambassador because he
is the third secretary, but not the
M.V.D.!
Mr. Windeyer. — (Interpreted) You have
told us that you could come to Sydney on
M.V.D. duties whenevei you wanted to—
couldn’t you, after Pakhomov bad gone?—
(Interpreted) Yes, I certainly had tlm right,
but these visits were always uea up with
various Embassy matters.
(Interpreted) S. you knew lived at Drum-
moyne ?
(Interpreted)—Yes, I knew, because the
task had been assigned to me and 1 knew his
address.
(Interpreted) Did you write down his
address ?
(Interpreted) Yes, I wrote it down.
(Interpreted) Where did you write it
down ?
(Interpreted) Possibly in my diary.
(Interpreted) You had bis address, then,
when you came to Sydney?—Ves.
(Interpreted) So you remember getting this
letter and you made a note of his address;
is that so? —(Interpreter) Yes, I lernember.
Then he is asked this question by Mr.
Windeyer—
(lnterpreted) So the position ir that you
got the letter, you had the instructions, but you
actually did not do anything about it; is that
so? —Yes, that is so.
That happened in almost every case. It
became something of a public joke, as
well as a public scandal. The students
of the Canberra University College had a
little skit on it, which sums up all these
cases. It was as follows;
Scene 7. Royal Commission.
Three judges sitting at table facing
audience. Petrov in witness box, Counsel at
Bar table.
Counsel. —Can you tell us about a man called
Ivanawfulkoff ?
Petrov. —Yes, I know Ivanawfulkoff. He was
a spy. He was a member of the M.K.V.D.
He wrote me a letter from Moscow. He asked
me to make contact with Mr. Smith.
Counsel. —Did you make contact with Mr.
Smith, Mr. Petrov?
Petrov. —'No, I was too busy.
Counsel. —Mr. Petrov, six months ago you.
told us about Ivanawfulkoff. Three months
ago you told us about Olga Orloff. I under-
stand you now have some important evidence.
Petrov. —Yes, I have some very important
evidence. I would like to tell you about
Vladimir Bumpemoff. He was the head man:
in the N.K.V.D. He wrote me a personal letter.
He asked me to make contact with Mr. Brown.
He said Mr. Brown would be very important
in our work.
Counsel. —Did you make contact with Mr.
Brown, Mr. Petrov?
Petrov. —No, I was too busy.
Mr. Keon. — What has this got to do
with Petrov?
Dr. EYATT. —It has a great deal to
do with it. The honorable member was
out of the chamber and would not know.
He must seek the help of those who
extended me the courtesy of remaining—
Counsel. —Did you do anything in Australia,
Mr. Petrov?
Petrov. —Oh yes, I did something in Aus-
tralia.
Counsel. —What did you do in Australia, Mr.
Petrov ?
Petrov. —I collected £5,000.
That is about all he did do. This all
relates to the genuineness of the docu-
ments. Did he get instructions from
Moscow—from this sinister and cen-
tralized force that was so unyielding in
its discipline, and so determined to put
people in their places that, according to
Bialoguski, at a frown from Petrov,
Lifanov and Generalov would have been
dismissed, and all the officials in the
Soviet Embassy down-graded? Nothing
of the kind happened. The evidence shows
failure to observe instructions. There are
only two alternatives. Either he dis-
obeyed the instructions, in which case one
presumes that this centralized body would
have dealt with him, and recalled him.
There is no evidence of that. The other
alternative is that he never got them,
and this is the more logical explanation
in view of the other matters that I have
mentioned. 1 have in mind the fact that
he was not in the M.Y.D. and that they
were M.V.D. letters. There is also the
fact that the internal evidence shows
22


information that could not be Moscow
information, in many respects, but which
comes, in all probability, from an Aus-
tralian source. There is also, of course,
the other evidence to which I have re-
ferred. I have also referred to the code
names. I shall not develop that matter.
I think that it has never been properly
examined. The fact that there are two
different code words to describe the one
thing shows, perhaps, that there were two
different minds operating on the transla-
tions, or perhaps bringing the letters into
existence.
The fact is, as I have implied, that we
must look at the part played by the intel-
ligence and security organizations in this
affair. Even if one were to assume that
the Prime Minister had no knowledge
until a few days before the defection, as
he said, the Government is open to the
most severe criticism for permitting
intelligence organizations to pursue poli-
tical ends. I refer to the statement of
Dr. Burton after the tabling of the
report, in which he pointed out the
struggle that had been going on between
the Department of Defence and the
Department of External Affairs for the
initiative in shaping foreign policy in
this country. He referred to Sir
Frederick Sheddon’s position in the
matter. There was a feeling that the
Department of External Affairs was
taking too much initiative in carrying out
the objectives of the United Nations, a
policy which, of course, might very well
be frowned upon by the Department of
Defence.
All those things are behind this matter.
I have not time to develop that aspect
to-night, but it is extremely important.
Dr. Burton’s statement will be available.
I have some copies of it and I think it
should be studied. I ask honorable mem-
bers to call to mind the scene in this
House when the Treasurer of this Go-
vernment (Sir Arthur Fadden) came
into the chamber, supported by the Yice-
President of the Executive Council (Sir
Eric Harrison) and the Speaker of the
House (Mr. Archie Cameron) and pro-
duced to the House part of a Cabinet
document of the United Kingdom Go-
vernment, suggesting that atomic secrets
could be safely kept only in the United
States of America —not in England and
not in Australia. That is very impor-
tant. Mr. Chifley said that the document
was either stolen or forged. It is quite
possible that there is another explanation
—that the document was planted. The
Treasurer did not give an explanation.
When he was asked by security officers
he pleaded that a breach of privilege had
been committed. It may have been tech-
nically a breach of privilege, but one
would have thought that he would have
told the facts. He never did so. At that
time a struggle was going on with military
intelligence, which had been deprived of
the terrific power that it had in war-time
of internment of civilians. When I
became Attorney-General in 1942 I found
that 7,000 people had been interned in
this country by military intelligence.
Thousands of those people should not
have been interned. Mr. Curtin, together
with Mr. Mackay, who was the civilian
security director at that time, and I
appointed the then Deputy Leader
of the Opposition, now Yice-Presi-
dent of the Executive Council (Sir Eric
Harrison), to a committee to go through
those cases, and after exhaustive inquiries
extending over a period of twelve months
the number of cases was reduced to 700.
Sir Eeio Haeeison. —Does the honor-
able member recall what he did to the
Australia First movement?
Dr. EYATT.—Yes, and I remember
the Australia First movement in Western
Australia, where Richards was chief
organizer of the prosecution, and he had
his agents provocateurs in that affair, too.
I was thanked by the present Prime
Minister for my action in that matter,
and even by the present Yice-President
of the Executive Council, at a time when
he had some decencies and knew the right
thing.
Those are background matters, and I
cannot possibly deal with them at length,
but I ask that they be studied. The
hatred and jealousy of the new Depart-
ment of External Affairs, which was built
up from nothing, has reached such a
degrading level that there is an attack
on the administration of two men. I do
not intend to mention their names. I
do not believe that either was guilty, but
there was suspicion of them. Dr. Burton
took drastic action to clear up the matter.
23


The three secretaries of the Department
of External Affairs who were involved
were Colonel Hodgson, Mr. Dunk, the
present chairman of the Public Service
Board, and, for a few months, Dr. John
Burton. Why were those gentlemen not
brought before the royal commission and
questioned? They are the ones who were
responsible for the original employment
of the two men named in the report. Of
course, the responsibility lies with the
permanent heads, to act on the informa-
tion they receive. I feel that this has
been, in some respects, a deliberate and
malevolent attempt to injure the reputa-
tion of the Labour party, which estab-
lished the Australian Security Intelli-
gence Organization, and because military
intelligence did not like a judge being
appointed as head of that organization
it has never forgiven those responsible for
it. They include, of course, Senator
McKenna, Mr. Chifley as Prime Minis-
ter, and myself. We were responsible
for everything necessary for the security
of this country, and action was taken
of a most proper and drastic character.
That is an illustration of the viciousness
and wickedness of this matter, and it
must be cleared up. And it will be cleared
up. I shall not allow innocent men to be
degraded by royal commissions. A court
of law would tear some of these decisions
up, because they are not supported by
any legal evidence. The commissioners
say that they acted on hearsay because
I said something in a certain case. That
decision has been completely misunder-
stood. It was quite a wrong legal
interpretation.
There is a threat in this matter to the
freedom of the people. That threat is evi-
dent in the whole Petrov episode, Mr.
Chifley was alive to it. We fought it in
1951 at the time of the anti-Communist
referendum. The same threats were made
even on that occasion.
Mr. Mullens interjecting,
Dr. EYATT.—I think the honorable
member for Gellibrand (Mr. Mullens)
was with us then. He may not have been;
I do not remember. MoCarthyism is
evident in this matter. Consider the
case of the cross-examination of one of
the young men from the Department of
External Affairs. It was most disgrace-
ful. His mother is iwe of the greatest
authoresses in the world, and his father
the winner of a Victoria Cross. This
young man was charged with guilty asso-
ciation —a son associating with his
mother, and the son not a Communist.
Mr. Mullens. —Not true!
Dr. EYATT. —I do not like to mention
names, as the honorable member for
Gellibrand does. This young man is not
ashamed of his name. lam merely say-
ing that that is the situation. We must
be careful with a security service. A
security service must be limited to its
proper field, which is protection against
subversion or sabotage. Do not let the
security service become a collector of non-
conformists or radicals, or Communists,
or left-wing adherents, or people who
believe in peace. “ Peace ” is a dangerous
word, according to Richards and Spry.
There is nothing against half the people
mentioned in these documents, except that
they advocate some form of peaceful co-
operation with Russia.
Mr. Mullens. Tell us about
O'Sullivan.
Dr. EVATT.—He is one of you; you
gave evidence for him. You went down
to help him. When I attacked him you
defended him. I suppose that you
thought, “ If you are going to attack him
you are quite mistaken ”.
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—Order !
The right honorable member must address
the Chair.
Dr. EYATT. —I say that the whole
matter involves a threat to freedom, and
1 believe that we can resist the attacks on
freedom. There must he a unity of the
people not to be deterred from pursuing
peaceful relationships with other coun-
tries. That is the spirit of to-day. The
Government does not know it yet, but it
will get to know it. That does not exclude
Russia; it includes Russia and China.
Secondly, and equally important, we must
beware of setting up a security organiza-
tion which has political views, and which
regards the left-wing man at the union
meeting, who says something, perhaps
boisterously and perhaps wrongly, and
who goes too far to the left, as being a
criminal. An example of that was seen
at the University of Sydney recently,
when security officers went there to ask
a lecturer to inform against his fellow
24


lecturers and students. The same thing
occurs in relation to trade unions, broad-
casting stations and the press. We must
prevent any attempt to set up an espionage
system for spying on our own people. In
the long run the country is more secure
and safer for free people if we have a
properly functioning security system.
The security service was never intended
to be a secret police organization. It was
supposed to advise Commonwealth de-
partments, but now it wants to run the
police of Canberra and everything else,
and it is only kept from doing so by
public opinion.
I thank the House for its great patience
in listening to me. This is a complicated
matter, and if I had been in a court of
justice or before a commission it would
probably have taken me twelve days to
finish my remarks.
Mr. DEPUTY SPEAKER.—Order!
The right honorable member’s time has
expired.
PRINTED POE THE GOVERNMENT OF THE COMMONWEALTH BY MBffiBDR.
AT THE GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE, CANBERRA,* J MUU j/
25
