

(-c. o u
p 0W
sou-
SPEECHES
MR BOUCAUT,
PREMIER OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
RAILWAYS
PUBLIC WORKS,
SEPTEMBER AND OCTOBER, 1875.
FROM THE NEWSPAPER REPORTS.
Printed at the “Advertiser” Steam Printing Offices,
King William Street.
1876.




SPEECHES
MR. BOUCAUT,
PREMIE 11 Of SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
RAILWAYS
PUBLIC WORKS,
SEPTEMBER AND OCTOBER, 1875.
FROM THE NEWSPAPER REPORTS.
Printed at the “ Advertiser” Steam Printing Offices,
King William Street.
1875.


✓






SOUTH AUSTRALIAN PARLIAMENT,
HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY,
Tuesday, September 28th, 1875.
SPEECH IN INTRODUCING THE RAILWAY POLICY.
THE RAILWAY POLICY.
The COMMISSIONER OF CROWN. LANDS (Hon. J. P.
Boucaut) presented a message from His Excellency the Governor.
The Speaker read the message as follows ;
“ The Governor recommends the House of Assembly to make
provision by Bill for the repayment, with interest, out of the
General Revenue of the sum of £3,000,000, to be raised by way
of loan, for the several purposes herein set forth, viz.—
I.—The construction of the following new lines of railway :
1. Port Augusta to Yudanamutana, the sum of £915,262.
2. Pichirichi Pass to near Mount Brown,. £85,725.
3. Gladstone to Wirrabara North, £92,517.
4. Gladstone to Jamestown, £95,228.
5. Green’s Plains to Barunga Gap, £83,897.
6. Hamley Bridge to Balaklava, £lOB,BlO.
7. Burra to Gottlieb’s Well, £152,506,
8. Gottlieb’s Well to south of Waukaringa, £177,337.
9. Rivoli Bay North to Mount Gambler, £200,997.
10. Baker’s Range to Cockatoo Lake, £59,462.
11. Kapunda to the North-West Bend, £318,259.


lI.—To the following public works
1. Main Roads, £200,000.
2. Erection of schoolhouses, £60,000.
3. Jetties at Yorke’s Peninsula, £lO,OOO.
4. Breakwater at Victor Harbour, £35,000.
5. Improvement of other harbours, £75,000.
6. Completing Kadina and Port Wakefield Railway, £55,000.
7. Completing Kingston and Narracoorte Railway, £45,000.
8. Erecting the Murray Bridge so as to be able to carry a rail-
way, £lOO,OOO.
9. Completing and extending the South-Eastern Drainage
Works, £55,000.
10. Northern Territory purposes, £75,000.
Total, £3,000,000.
The COMMISSIONER of CROWN LANDS (Hon. J. P.
Boucaut) moved that the message be immediately taken into con-
sideration.
Carried,
The COMMISSIONER of CROWN LANDS (Hon. J. P
Boucaut) —I move
“ That the Speaker do now leave the Chair, and the House
resolve itself into a Committee of the whole for the purpose of
considering the message of His Excellency the Governor.”
In doing this I will take the opportunity of explaining to
the House fully, so far as my ability will enable me to do, the
policy of the Ministry on this most important question. First of
all I must apologise for being somewhat late. I would have liked
to have made this announcement at a somewhat earlier period, but
the illness of one of the gentlemen in the offices of the Engineer-
in-Chief who was engaged in getting out the quantities prevented
me doing so last week or earlier to day, and in order to enable
me to do so to-day I am much indebted to the Engineer-in-Chief
for special work which should not have been performed by him.
I must also claim the indulgence of the House in no small degree
owing to the very peculiar circumstances in which, as leader of the
Government, I stand at this moment. Hon. members know to


what I allude—the rejection of a measure of importance in another
place. The policy of the Government, as the House well knows,
was put before the country at the recent general election in the most
unmistakable and marked manner, and was endorsed generally,
almost universally, by the country, and afterwards, I am proud to
say, it met a very unusual amount of approval and approbation in
this House. And it is impossible to conceal from myself, and it
would be impossible for my colleagues to conceal from themselves,
that a very important part of our policy is, for the present at all
events, subject to very considerable doubt, owing to the rejection
of that particular measure. I wish the House to understand that
however difficult may be the position which is forced upon the
Government we will be true to this House at all events. (Hear,
hear.) Whatever may happen we will be true to this House in
which we are, by which we hold our position, and by the confi-
dence of which we alone can hope to maintain our position. I
hope the House will understand also that we will endeavor to be
true to the country, and I will promise that we will be true to
the principles of responsible government. I have said two or
three times to the House, and the Treasurer has said, that the
Government feel that in going into the London market to borrow
such a large sum for carrying out the public works we have indi-
cated, we must show that we are men capable of looking difficulty
in the face and dealing with it, and I do not think it would do for
us to go into the London market, and show that we are incompe-
tent in this respect. Ido not intend to go into the London
market and announce that we are unable to grapple with
this difficulty. We would rather that other persons who are not
so thoroughly alive to the difficulties of the position, if such per-
sons there are, should go into the market and borrow this money
than that we by doing so should injure the credit of the colony,
because if there is anything that this Government wish to
maintain, it is the high credit which has been constantly accorded
to the colony in London and in other places. It has been said in
various parts of the country that we are taxing particular classes.
Now. if I were never in the Government again, if I went out


to-morrow, I would be no party to taxing a particular class under
clamour. (Cheers.) I appeal on behalf of that principle to the
House and every thinking man in the colony, and the Government
will not be a party to taxing any particular class except in common
with other classes. That is the great principle of responsible
government which it will be our pleasure as well as our duty to
maintain. I have already told the House that we do not intend
to attempt any remission of Customs duties this year, or any
increase of the revenue in that direction, and the country knows
that it is impossible for us to do it. That being the case, of course
Iron, members will see that the difficulty thrown upon the Govern-
ment is no light one. I make these remarks now because I have
only just received the information I have mentioned to the
House, and I wish the House to understand that we are fully alive
to the gravity of the position. In pursuance of the principles I
have indicated we have seriously to consider whether we will be
justified in going into the London market, unless we are able
clearly to show the public creditor that we have the means of
meeting the loans we propose to raise. (Cheers.) I need say no
more than that we feel the difficulty in which we are placed, and
I assure hon. members that I am fully aware of the gravity of the
situation and the consequent responsibilities of office. I say this
now, because it will be undoubtedly more difficult for me to make
the speech which otherwise I should have had very great pleasure
in delivering. I have had some little doubt, after what I have
heard as to the rejection, of the Stamp Bill in another place, as to
whether I should make my speech to-day; but bearing in mind
all the circumstances of the case, I think the House and the
country have a right to know what the policy of the Government
would have been—whether right or wrong—if we had had the
possibility of carrying out the policy which the country seems to
have I’ecently endorsed. On this matter it will become me on the
present occasion to say no more. I propose now to deal with the
question of our railway policy, and I ask the clerks to be kind
enough to hand round the lithograph plans which I have had pre-
pared in the Survey Office. One question I wish to mention,
without going at any great length into it, is the reason which


has influenced us in bringing our policy before the country,
because that has been discussed in the House before. I must say,
that it seems to me absolutely necessary if we are to
develop the resources of South Australia to rely largely on rail-
ways. We have every advantage in South Australia which it is
possible to have. There is a lightly timbered soil, and a soil which
responds readily to the efforts of the agriculturist. What the
poet said is here literally true, “we tickle the soil with a hoe
and it laughs a harvest; ” and it is impossible for any man to say
to what extent South Australia could produce if proper means
were provided for bringing the produce to market. I recollect 27
years ago shepherding sheep within a stone’s throw of Gawler, and
I was often told then that wheat would not grow north of Gawler.
During the present year, however, I have seen at Caltowie and
other Northern settlements some of the most glorious crops it
is possible to look upon ; and it is just as likely that those per-
sons who now say corn will not grow north of Melrose will be as
much in error as those persons who 27 years ago declared that
wheat would not grow north of Gawler. (Cheers.) I say on the
authority of the Surveyor-General that there is as splendid country
north of Melrose as there is north of Gawler. We are in favor of
railway extension because we feel strongly that with main roads it
will be impossible to carry on. It would have been impossible
that the wheat could have been brought down last year from the
Burra if the railway had not been constructed. Hon. members
will excuse me, perhaps, if I quote figures. Ido not usually weary
the House by doing so, but inasmuch as my remarks will be read in
the country and in other places where we may seek to borrow
money, I will ask your indulgence if I occasionally quote figures.
I wish you to take note of the quantity of wheat alone which has
been brought down the Burra and Kapunda lines during the last
three or four years. In 1873 101,626 tons were carried, in 1874
53,811 tons, in 1875 86,580 tons ; and it is estimated by persons
well able to give an opinion that 180,000 tons of wheat alone
will be brought down this next year, and a total tonnage of
220,000 tons over the Burra and Kapunda lines. The country
beyond these railways is as rich as that served by these railways,
and this is the country we now seek to develop. I shall not go at
length into the question of railways versus roads ; but it is clear


that railways pay and roads do not pay. Every hon. member
will accept it as positive that it is impossible for us to carry out a
system of roads, not only because of the inadequacy of the means
to bring the produce down, but also of the expense of making and
maintaining them. I might naturally be asked, “But how about
the railways paying ? ” I will say that the railways yield a con-
siderable sum to the revenue of the State, and the railways never
showed so advantageously as during the last year. For the last
six months ending 26th June they show a net revenue for the
six months of £29,842. The gross revenue is £89,170 ; the
working expenses £55,090 ; reconstruction, £4,237 ; leaving a
net revenue of £29,842 for the six months, or about £60,000 for
the year. This is a handsome sum, and shows what encou-
ragement we should gain from these figures. I also have some
statistics on the same subject, which were prepared by the Gov-
ernment Statist before I showed him the return I have just quoted,
which is from the Engineer-in-Chief. These statistics are impor-
tant as showing how railways developed the traffic, and they ought
to stimulate us to proceed with and extend our railways where
practicable. During the first year that the Kapunda line was
opened in 1860, 58 miles in length, 106,000 tons were carried,
which in seven years had increased to 173,000 tons, or 63 per cent.;
and on the completion of the line to the Burra, on 133 miles,
149,942 tons were carried, increasing during four years to 235,059
tons, or 60 per cent, in four years. The passenger traffic likewise
in 1860 was 300,000, in 1870 350,000, and in 1874 785,000 —
(cheers) —showing the general development which has taken place?
viz., an increase of 160 pier cent, on 15 years, or 150 per cent, on
the last four years. In connection with this also there is another
matter which I think is not unimportant. The debt outstanding
on these lines—the lines to the Burra and Kapunda—is now
£721,000 or £3 10s. per head of the population, whilst in 1870,
four years ago, it was £802,000, or £4 10s. per head. So that
the liability has been reduced £1 per head during the same period
that the traffic and goods have increased 60 per cent, and the pas-
sengers 150 per cent. I think that gives us great cause for con-
gratulation for the past. I wish the House now to understand
why the Government propose one Bill. Hon. members will see
that even at an earlier period of the session the Government could


hardly have taken upon themselves the labour and burden of
bringing down 13 or 14 Bills. We have deemed it proper to put
all the works in one Bill, so that we might have an opportunity of
explaining at one time the whole of our policy as one general
scheme, and so that hon. members may look at it and deal with
it as a whole. In one or two respects the lines proposed may
appear as mere branches, but if hon. members will look at the
map they will see that these branches are simply parts of one
general scheme which will be dovetailed into one large system of
railways. We therefore think it desirable to have the works all
in one Bill rather than to have a number of Bills. As hon. mem-
bers would like to know what the Government propose to do, I
will inform the House first of the lines which we propose to
reject. We reject the line through the Mount Lofty Ranges to
the Murray Bridge. We have been twitted with suddenly making
up our minds to do this; but when before my constituents I
resolved to adopt this policy —Railway Commission or no Rail-
way Commission—for I hold that one mind is as capable of grasp-
ing questions of policy as seven minds or seventy minds, and in
respect of that the Government are prepared to take the responsi-
bility of doing what they believe to be right. (Cheers.) I believe
we will receive the approbation of the House and the country for
what we have done. I recognise the advantages which would be
derived from that line—(Mr. Smith—“ Hear, hear”) —and I
believe that sooner than many anticipate that line will be carried
out; but when we are only beginning the process of railway
development we are not justified in spending half the money we
propose to raise on this single line through the hills. (Cheers.)
Another line which the hon. member for Wallaroo will feel inter-
ested in is the line from Ardrossan to Moonta. With regard to
this line I recognise the importance so strongly urged of the
Moonta population obtaining a supply of fresh vegetables ; but I
think it more important to give means to settlers about Wirrabara
to take their wheat to market than give facilities for getting
vegetables to Moonta. I hope, however, before many years the
Moonta population will be able to get the vegetables they require.
I have reasoned the matter with a gentleman from the Peninsula,,
and he was bound to confess that the arguments I have used were
worthy of a good deal of consideration. Under the scheme we


propose to introduce, every settler on the Peninsula will be within
16 or 18 miles of a jetty or railway, and therefore there is no
ground for complaint for our not adopting the railway to Ardros-
san. The extensions to the Victorian Boundary will fall along
with the Murray Bridge and the Mount Lofty line. I hope at
some future day we will be able to go by express speed to Melbourne,
but we do not propose to go there just yet.
The hour for adjournment having arrived the sitting was sus-
pended. On reassembling,
The COMMISSIONER of CROWN LANDS (Hon. J. P.
Boucaut) resumed—l was saying that it appeared to me that the
direct line to Melbourne would fall with the line to the Murray
Bridge, although I recognise as much as any member of the House
the advantages of railway communication with Melbourne, But I
will say calmly, and without attempting any flights of oratory,
that it will be truer policy for South Australia to look forward to
a junction by rail with Sydney at an earlier period than Melbourne.
(Cheers.) So far as I have had any influence in advising on the
policy of the Government I have looked at the policy and progress
of New South Wales as contrasted with the policy and progress of
Victoria, and I must say that if any one considers the large
quantity of level land between the Sydney railway, which will
be finished next year, and our borders, where I hope before long
our railways will go—to Menindie—he will see the possibility that
before many years we will be able to join the railway system of
New South Wales. (Cheers.) Nothing paid a higher tribute to
the prescience of the late Justice Boothby than that some 10 or 15
years ago he advocated this plan almost in the same words as I
have just used. Again, I venture to say that I look upon this
as a possibility that will come much sooner than most people
anticipate. (Cheers.) There are some small branch lines we have
got which I shall not mention. I may, however, say that every
line recommended by the Commission has been thought over by
my colleagues and myself. There is one line which is not in the
policy of the Government, and not recommended by the Commis-
sion, to which I feel bound to refer on account of the influential
deputations that have urged its construction, and that is the line
from Riverton to Clare. This is no part of the Government
scheme, and with all respect to my Clare friends I venture to assert


that it should not be. The line we suggest has a main trunk
line on each side of it, with the furthest distance to Clare
from the main line on the east of 10.^miles, and the distance on
the west from the main line, the narrow-gauge system, is only
six and a half miles. We are therefore not justified in
saying we will support the construction of such a line. How-
ever much logrolling is to be deprecated in the matter of roads it
would be an unbearable cui’se to be influenced by logrolling in the
matter of railways. (Cheers.) Hon. members will see that it
is impossible for any Government at the present time to recommend
such a line as the one suggested—it is like the middle prong of
a three-pronged fork—and such a thing would not be endured in
England. It is all very well to say that such and such would be
the carnage on the line, but that could be demonstrated every ten,
five, or two miles, if all other traffic were neglected. But we
must recollect that if that railway would carry so much it must
be diverted from two main systems already in course of construc-
tion. No Government would therefore be justified at present, or
even for years to come, in recommending this. There is another
line, from Salisbury to Port Wakefield, which has been in my
mind, and which I have mentioned to the House, and thought to
be practicable, which has been dropped. Hon. members will see
that all the advantages of that line will be got by the line from
Hamley Bridge to Balaklava, and communication will thus be ob-
tained with the metropolis. As the Salisbury and Port Wakefield
line will run close to the sea, and will not open up as much
country as the other line, and as the one is nearly finished, I think
the Government will not be justified in recommending the line
from Salisbury to Port Wakefield. Then there is another line,
from Georgetown to Port Pirie. I am anxious to make that
line, as it is impossible to ignore the settlers about Georgetown, and
if there had been any chance of making it at a reasonable cost it
would have been included in the Government policy. But owing
to the hills and the heavy expense that would have to be incurred
the Government feel they would not be justified in recommending
it. Other provisions will hereafter have to be made. The next
line to which I will refer is that respecting which a petition has
this day been presented to the House, namely, the purchase of the
Wallaroo and Kadina line. The Government do not include that in


their policy, nor I in my speech to-night, because I do not think it
necessary that we should ask for the money at once, as that might
lead to an injustice to the people of the colony. The Government
believe they will have to buy that line eventually, but no sort of
pressure will induce us to do so before we think it would be for
the benefit of the colony. A matter of that sort must be fairly
settled by arbitration, and the Government will not have it forced
upon them by clamour or pressure. Ido not suppose the proprie-
tors of that Company will be unreasonable, and it would not be to
the interest of the Government to be illiberal when the proper
time arrived. (Hear, hear.) There is another matter we
have postponed, and upon which we have had grave
consideration. Lieutenant Goalen has spoken of the shallow
soundings of the Port and over the bars, and lion, members will see
that if the English Company to which I the other day referred do
not do something soon that it will have to be taken in hand by the
Government. (Cheers.) In the face of what I have been told the
Company will probably be doing, we do not feel justified
in demanding the amount of money required for such a purpose, or
asking the House to pass such a sum just at present. It is a
matter, however, which will have to be carried out soon,
and that without any injustice to the Port. The difficulty
is not only in getting the produce down to the Port,
but in sending it away in fine ships when it arrives. I only
mention the matter to show that it is under the consideration of
the Government, and with the view of calling attention to it
hereafter. The first of the lines we have adopted is
the Kapunda and North-West Bend line. There are various
reasons why we should propose such a line as that. The Bailway
Commission recommended us to go to Eudunda for the benefit of the
large number of settlors there; they must have a railway or road, and
the railway was cheaper, and when another £120,000 would
take the line from Eudunda to the River Murray we
decided to go thus to that river. There could not be a better spot
to tap the Murray than this, and the distance will only be sixteen
or seventeen miles longer to the river via Eudunda than direct by
Mount Lofty, whereas the direct route would be more expensive,
winding about among the intricacies of the Mount Lofty Range,
and there will be actually less expense coming down from the-


North-West Bend. We will go to the bend of the river, and
extend the railway in the direction of Wentworth, on the Murray
side of the river, without the expenditure of £200,000 in a bi'idge.
Several engineers have reported that this is the best line, and
almost every engineer has pointed it out as the cheapest and most
advantageous line if the line of railway is to tap the Murray.
I think that I have said enough to show some reason for the faith
that is in us in this respect. Hon. members will excuse me for
debating this point when I have so many other matters to refer to,
but I have touched lightly upon some of the reasons in favor of
it. The line from the Burra to Gottlieb’s Wells and from
Gottlieb’s Wells to Waukaringa I will next touch upon. This
was promised two or three years ago, and the Railway Commission
have recommended it; and no person who knows the state of the
Mount Bryan-road, on which some time ago a mail coach took
eight hours to go 23 miles, will say that it is not required. All
the way up to Gottlieb’s Wells is settled by farmers, and therefore
a line is absolutely necessary. It is further to be urged in its
favour that the line will tap a squatting country further on, on the
eastern side of the Mount Bryan range. The railway it is then
proposed to push on for 40 miles further up to the south of
Waukaringa. This is a line of development. The other lines are
lines of necessity. This is wanted in consequence of the large
number of settlers in that neigbourhood. In speaking of the
bush, I of course mean a neighborhood two or three hundred
square miles, as such a country cannot be judged in the same way
as one where farmers each have only a square mile of land. The
line is also necessary in consequence of the gold discoveries being
made at Waukaringa, and I look upon it as part of a line that the
Commission recommend to Menindie. And when we consider
that a great many persons engaged in this country in squatting
who live in Melbourne —such as Sir James McCulloch—come by
Adelaide and in this direction to reach their stations, I think the
importance of opening up this connection will be apparent. The
Warden of the Gold-fields has made a very favourable report upon
the Waukaringa Gold-field, and has pointed out that the ground
is likely to be rich, and consequently that the field will afford
employment for a large number of persons. He has spoken
particularly of the Alma Mines yield, and states that from 30 to


40 miles up has been taken up for mining. When asked he
said, and others who are able to judge have said, that they believe
that there is a rich gold-mining district in the neighbourhood of
Waukaringa. If the claims are only to be worked for a year or
two it will be necessary to encourage those who do so, but when
the gold-field is considered in connection with the traffic that
will go beyond it we must come to the conclusion that it is a line
that ought to be encouraged. The line still further towards the
Barrier Ranges is one that may be taken up a few years hence.
I will now take the Rivoli Bay and Mount Gambier line. It
is necessary in common justice to the South-East. There
must be a road provided to Millicent half way, and I think
that this being the case the best policy is to at once go in
for a railway. I have some figures before me supplied by the
Government Statist. It is there shown that by the Census
of 1871 the population of the country to be taken in by
this line was 6,798. In 1875 the land cultivated amounted to
36,551 acres, and the number of sheep depastured is 440,034.
The returns of the trade and traffic in this direction also argue
very strongly in favour of the line. With the development of
the country the quantities will be very gx-eatly increased, and the
figures show that the line is necessary, I will now refer to other
minor lines. There is a line through Pichirichi Pass to Mount
Brown, one from Gladstone to Wirrabara, one from the same place
to Jamestown, one from Green’s Plains to Barunga Gap, one from
Baker’s Range to Cockatoo Lake, and a line from Halbury via
Ashford. At present we are not doing anything that is orna-
mental merely, but only propose to carry those lines that will give
accommodation to the settlers ; and we think that if we can bring
the settlers on the Western Plains within 10 or 15 miles of a
railway we need not fill up the gap. If the lines I have named are
carried out we will when the system is complete have a railway from
Yudanamutana via Arkaba to Port Adelaide on the narrow gauge.
And now I come to the most difficult nut, so to speak, that
we have to crack, namely, the line from Port Augusta to
Yudanamutana. On this we have had a good deal of difficulty.
The public and the House well know that for some years past this
has been an admitted necessity, and there have been many resolu-
tions in the House in favour of it. It is quite true that a line


somewhere in this direction is unanimously deemed necessary by
the people of the country. The line originally proposed ran along
the Western Plains, and it was a comparatively easy engineering
route. The Railway Commission have recommended that we
should go through the Pichirichi Pass ; and here I will again ask
the attention of hon. members to the map. In the neighbourhood
of Wirrabara and Mount Brown there is some of the most beau-
tiful land in the colony. All about Mount Brown and between it
and Willochra, within ten or fifteen miles of the railway, there are
large and magnificent plains. This land is being opened up now,
and will soon be put up to auction, and it will increase the
demand for the land if this line is opened up. The settlers
there, if they do not get through the Pichirichi Pass, will only
reach the seaboard by Port Pirie. This is the case because the
ranges are so intricate. If the line will serve those who took up
land here I think that it is a strong argument in favour of a line
through the Pichirichi Pass. From Willochra to Kanyaka and
Wonoka there are rich flats which will also be served by the rail-
way. The Government propose that the railway from Port
Augusta to Yudanamutana shall therefore be earned out as far as-
Wonoka, but that beyond this place it shall not be carried out till
the plans have laid on the table of both Houses for one month,
because we have not found a route to Yudanamutana yet by the
Eastern Plains. We are engaged now in surveying several lines,
and the surveyors are out there now. In one case the surveyors
have reported that they got into a place but could not get out,
while in another they have reported that they could find an outlet
but could not get in. (Laughter.) It would, I know, have been
much easier for me to come down and say that the difficulties that
have to be contended with require that the line must be carried out
at all hazards by the Western Plains; but I think that it is much
better that in a matter of such great importance to at once ask
the House, subject to the power given to us as to the plans, to say
that a line should only be fixed upon to Wonoka, until we find
that a passable route cannot be had in the Eastern Plains. If a
route cannot be found on the eastern side of the range we will
have to come down to the House and propose to carry a line by
the Western Plains, which would be at no great comparative-
expense. I believe that the hon, member for Victoria will say


that it is wise for us to stop there and searcli for another route
before going by the Western Plains, and that it is wise to go the
eastern side of the range if we can. I hope now that I have put
forwai’d reasons enough for the policy that we have with regard to
this line. I will not now speak of the mines in that country
which are working, and some of which are paying under the disad-
vantages of all the cartage that has to be paid for. The map that
I am now looking at is an old map, on which the lines of railway have
been laid down, but I see that it is there stated that the ranges
abound in minerals. I hope that in this the policy of the Govern-
ment will be satisfactory both to the House and the country.
Next comes the question of gauge. I have spoken to the Chairman
of the late Commission and the Engineer-in-Chief, and have read
every paper that has been printed on the subject in South Australia,
and I have analyzed every one of the papers, and have found the
differences in the prices and rolling-stock, etc., on the different
gauges. The evidence before the Commission brings out the
difference between the cost of the broad and narrow gauge in bold
relief. The pi-ices are variously estimated from £4OO to £I,OOO on
average country. On the authority of Messrs. Mais and Patterson
and other engineer officers, the working is in every respect more
inexpensive on the narrow gauge. Before learning to grapple or
attempt to do so with this question for the purpose of dealing with
it under the responsibilities of office, I confess I was a broad-gauge
man. I did not like the narrow gauge. I had lived in the West
of England where they were proud of their high speed and railway
engineering, and my sympathies—having a fondness for railway
engineering so far as I am able to grasp it—my sympathies were
with the broad gauge ; but on coming to deal with the responsi-
bilities of Government I had to look at the question apart from
sympathy, and being led by the officers’ reports and the facts that
stared me in the face I am bound to say that the narrow gauge is
the future gauge for this country. lam guided a great deal by
the Engineer-in-Chief, whose recommendation is to continue the
broad gauge as at present so far as the Burra, and also to continue
on to the Murray. I asked Mr, Mais if he would recommend
broad-gauge lines to the Murray and from Port Wakefield to
Balaklava if he were the absolute owner of this country and had
the railways to carry out. Mr. Mais felt himself in a difficulty,


•and would not say that he would not alter the gauge throughout
the colony. Ido not say that the Engineer-in-Chief said that he
would alter the gauge, but I rather think he holds that view.
Looking at the question as Mr. Mais did, and at the large
quantities of rolling-stock, and the difficulty the Go /eminent have
in dealing with such questions as compared with private persons,
and at the trouble, expense, and annoyance of changing the gauge
between here and the Burra, the advantages to be gained by doing
this, although they are many, would not be equal to the expense.
I will therefore ask the House not to alter the gauge up to the
Burra, although I am not by any means sure that even that would
not eventually be the wiser course. Beyond the Burra the line will
be on the narrow gauge. Mr. Mais stated that the expense and
annoyance of breaking the gauge at the Burra will be comparatively
little, as the narrow-gauge trucks can discharge into others by the
aid of a small staff of men, and the inconvenience will not be very
great. lam satisfied that the great advantages of pushing these
back lines on the narrow system is infinitely greater than the
advantage of continuing the line from the Burra northwards on
the broad gauge simply for the sake of having uniformity. Let it
be considered where Redruth and Kooringa are situated, and
how immediately north there will be a long narrow-gauge line,
and how the Commission propose to extend the line from Gottlieb’s
Wells to Lake Boolka, and it will be seen that in opening up the
country it will be very inconvenient to have two gauges beyond
the Burra. I hope that at no distant time a line will be constructed
in the direction of the Darling stations by a line a little to the
south and west of the Barrier Ranges, and that will have to be
upon the narrow gauge. This line will ultimately be connected
with the Western narrow-gauge system. That being so the traffic
will not want to go 150 or 160 miles to Port Adelaide when it
can be taken on 60 or 70 miles—probably 60—to Port Pirie,
and therefore there is no reason for forcing the produce down 140
miles or so on a broad-gauge line when it can be taken with a
little expenditure half the distance over a line on the narrow-gauge
system. In reference to this narrow-gauge question I tele-
graphed a little while since to the Queensland Government in
consequence of a rumour that there was dissatisfaction with the
narrow-gauge there, and 1 have a reply stating that it is not the
B


intention of the Government of that colony to alter the gauge.
They are very well satisfied with their present system, which
works admirably. Then the other line that we propose to con-
struct on the broad gauge is from Hamley Bridge to
Balaklava. I was anxious, from the point of view I have men-
tioned, to go upon the narrow gauge, but the Engineer-in-Chief
pointed out that the traffic between Alma Plains and Hamley Bridge
has a tendency to flow to Port Adelaide. Very little of it except
passenger and business traffic goes northwards or to Wallaroo.
In fact, there is a tendency for wheat a mile from Balaklava and
nearer to Port Wakefield to go to Port Adelaide. This advice
seemed so reasonable on the part of the Engineer-in-Chief that the
Government adopts the broad gauge for that line without hesita-
tion. 1 have seen a statement in one of the Melbourne papers
that the Commissioner of Crown Lands has been—l forget the exact
words—inhaling the heterodox views of the Surveyor-General as
to cheap railways. I wish to say that I have fully considered with
the Commissioner of Public Works the position of the Engineer-
in-Chief. Wo look to the Engineer-in-Chief for carrying out these
railways and keeping us right in our estimates, and we respect his
power and ability ; but there are two or three questions where the
Government have to decide their policy for themselves, and I feel
that I am not infringing upon the position of the Engineer-in-
Chief by consulting the Surveyor-General, who was Chairman
of the Railway Commission, and whose ability and
power are thus recognised. One of the papers I have before me
in answer to a question put to the Surveyor-General related to the
question of gauge. The Engineer-in-Chief had a similar question
submitted to him, but 1 have not received his answer yet because
he has been pressed with work in getting up reports for the Gov-
ernment. Mr. Goyder referred to his views as stated in a minute
of the Railway Commission. He said he did not consider it desi-
able to continue the two gauges on the proposed new lines. He
considered it would be best to have them upon the 3 feet
6 inches gauge, and pointed to the memorandum of Mr. Patterson
upon that point. I have also consulted the Surveyor-General in
reference to the questions of expense and timber supply. These
are the only points upon which I have inhaled the very heterodox
opinions of the Surveyor-General. The Engineer-in-Chief knows


well that I have consulted the Surveyor-General upon these points,
because I have had a conference with both these most able officers
before the Treasurer mentioned in his financial speech an approxi-
mate cost of the lines the Government proposed. I hope that hon.
members will not think tha t I would go behind the Engineer-in-Chief
in any way to consult with the Surveyor-General, except in such
a way as I could mention to the Engineer-in-Chief, to the Surveyor-
General, and to the House. With regard to the question of cost,
a great quantity of rolling-stock, rails, and other materials will
have to be ordered, and a large amount of money will have to be
paid to English and colonial contractors, and that fact will make
a great difference in the estimates of cost. The estimates men-
tioned in the Governor’s message were framed upon the present
system, which is a somewhat unsatisfactory one. The expense of
the contracts which have been carried out has not been so much
owing to the price of labor as to the impossibility of getting work
done. I have already informed the House that within six months
in nine cases no tenders for public works were sent in, and twenty
others had to be readvertised. You cannot get a hundred men to do
the woi’k of a thousand men, and as the contractors are subject to
fines and penalties, they ensure themselves against risk by very
high tenders. The Engineer-in-Chief told me that if two or three
engines were wanted, the manufacturers would scarce look
at the order ; but if twenty-five were wanted, there
would be a material alteration in the price. So it would
be with trucks and rails, for English and Victorian con-
tractors would go in for a work of £3,000,000, whereas
they would not touch one of £50,000. If the works are carried
out in the way we propose, the contractors will not need to charge
insurance-money, and the cost will be brought down very nearly to
what the Treasurer stated, viz., £1,948,000. The Engineer-in-
Chief’s estimate of the cost is £2,297,000, and statements have
been made in this House that the cost will be £2,834,000, so
that the present estimate and that made by the Treasurer do not
differ very greatly. With reference to the cost of sleepers as given
in the report and evidence of the Commission, I have asked the
Surveyor-General some questions on the subject, and I think it is
desirable that the information should be printed, becanse the Sur-
veyor-General has pointed out that in many places sleepers can
be got on advantageous terms. In these estimates fencing is


included, but not expensive stations. We are not going to
put a big station at every seven miles. Hon. members will bear
in mind that the Government propose to have terminal stations,
and we have given instructions that platforms should be erected at
convenient places, and that they should be considered as inter-
mediate stations. (Hear, hear.) The Engineer-in-Chief in framing
these estimates felt pressed, and in justice to him I must say I
believe that he felt this difficulty that he has given estimates to
the House before, and that afterwards when the lines have been
carried out and finished other items have been added, and expenses
greatly increased by local pressure. I took the liberty of assuring
the Engineer-in-Chief, and I now assure the House that the
Government will not submit to lo#l pressure with regard to
stations. We will consider the benefit of the colony at large, and
hon. members will see if these 500 miles are to be made and ex-
tended, as I hope will be the case before many years, that it cannot
be done if we are going to have expensive stations at every seven,
ten, or fifteen miles. I would point out that when we have 500
or 600 miles of line laid the Government will bo able to resist
local pressure. Having these long lines we cannot have stations
at every mile, and it is one of the main features which I hope the
Government have reason to be justly proud of that we will push on
our lines into the interior free from expensive or numerous
stations, and develop the country rather than construct expensive
lines and erect huge and costly stations at every mile. (Hear,
hear.) If the Government had had time, which we have not had,
to go through the estimates of railways which have been recently
constructed, or are now being proceeded with, we would have
stopped some of the stations. If we had had time we would have
stopped some of the work being proceeded with, and have come to
the House to justify our action. The Government would even do
so now if we saw a fair chance of doing so without prejudice to
interests which have sprung up in consequence of promises to
erect stations at certain places. I must therefore be understood to
make no promises in respect of stations authorized in the past. I
do not know whether the House will adjourn the debate, but I
will point out that there is nothing very extraordinary in the
framing of the Bill. There is one section —and I think the House
will justify the Government in its provision—that where we are


making railways through Crown lands we will not fence them.
The House, I think, will not want us to do so. But where settlers
have afterwards bought land along such lines and their land is
improved thereby, I think the settlers should fence the land.
(Hear, hear.) This is a policy which I think will commend itself
to the House. (Hear, hear.) Then there is another important
principle, namely, how compensation should be assessed. We have
therefore inserted a clause to provide that compensation under the
Lands Clauses Consolidation Act shall not mean that compensa-
tion upon lands bought before the passage of the Bill, if it be
passed, shall bo claimed at an extravagant rate, but that it shall
be assessed at its value on the 30th of June last. There are a
great many people who would offer the land for nothing if a
railway were made to their doors, but who after the railway has
been made would declare that their lands were ruined and would
demand an extravagant compensation. It is therefore just to the
State when contemplating a large system of railways to fix the
price of land at the value it had on the 30th June before the
details of the Government’s proposal is published. In order to
prevent attempts being made to do an injustice to the State the
Bill authorises the Government in certain cases to go beyond the
limits of deviation, so that if Tom Stiggins declares the railway
would ruin his land, and Josiah Smith says he would give the
land if the railway were made, the Government will leave Stiggins
out and visit Mr. Smith. I think this will commend itself to the
House as being just and fair. That is with regard to land
previously alienated. With regard to land alienated from the
Crown after the passing of the Act, the Bill proposes that
the owners shall be compensated to the amount they have
paid to the Government, with 10 per cent, added and
an allowance for their improvements—an arrangement which I
think will also be considered fair and just. The next matter to
which I wish to allude is the question of Victor Harbour, and
I ask some slight indulgence at the hands of the House. If you
look at the Railway Commission’s report, paragraph 26, you will
see that it stated that all the witnesses said that the true way to
develop the Murray trade was to open up Victor Harbour. (Hear*
hear.) Mr. R. Barr Smith is exceedingly emphatic on this ques-
tion, and his remarks deserve great consideration at the hands of


the House and the country, because Mr, Smith is an Adelaide
merchant who is interested in Adelaide and Port Adelaide, and
who will be necessarily benefited by a railway from North-West
Bend, Yet he in his evidence (Question 1206) and in a memo-
randum forwarded by him is very emphatic as to the question of
developing the Murray trade by way of Victor Harbour. Mr.
Boothby, whose ability is generally recognised, has proposed a
scheme to construct a canal from Goolwa to the sea, and although
I am not very sanguine about that scheme, thinking the develop-
ment of the mouth of the Murray would be preferable, yet it will
be necessary in any case to have shelter at Victor Harbour, On
this question, although I represent the district, I hope hon. members
will not think I am adopting these views simply on that ground,
(Cheers.) The hon. member Mr. Hawker knows that the address
which I issued to the electors of that district when first written was
addressed to another district, and it is now in MSS. in the newspaper
office addressed to that other district. lam not influenced there-
fore in any way by the fact that I represent that district; for in
justice to my colleagues in the Government and in order to prevent
a suggestion of favouritism I am dealing with somewhat of illibe-
rality with a work which I believe will be the great work of the
future, because for long distances it is impossible for railway
carriage to compete with water carriage. The same views were
propounded by Captain Ferguson, Mr. Mais, Colonel Sankey,
Captain Lipson, and Captain Hart, the latter of whom it will be
remembered was largely interested in Port Adelaide. The sum
proposed to be expended at Victor Harbour is the estimate of the
Commission to construct a breakwater from Granite Island 100
yards in length, viz,, £34,064. A lesser sum is proposed for a
similar work, viz,, £29,000, and if hon. members will look at the
Parliamentary Papers they will see that the hon, member Mr.
Lindsay has from time to time established the cost at conside-
rably less than that. I refer to Parliamentary Papers No. 95,
1871, No. 243, 1871, No. 194, 1869-70, No. 95, 1871, and 207,
1857-8, and if hon. members will look at these Papers they will
find what I now state is abundantly verified as to the expense of
the work and the probable amount of traffic to be expected. I
have this day recived a telegram from Victor Harbour showing
the progress that has been made since the present Government


inaugurated their policy, and I think T have reason to be proud
of it. It states that from the 18th July to September 25th, 1874,
there has gone up the river 337 tons, while during the correspond-
ing period this year there has been 1,583 tons, or nearly five times
the former quantity. That can be taken as an index of what
may be expected. On the other hand, the traffic outward does
not show an increase, but a little decrease, the figures being 870
tons against 687 tons. But this is easily accounted for. We
would not have an opportunity of getting outward traffic until the
wool season commenced. At present the inward traffic of the river
has only felt the benefit of the present policy, and we cannot
expect to benefit by the traffic down the river until our policy has
had more opportunity of being felt. From 10,000 to 12,000 bales
of wool are expected at Victor Harbour this season, and this is
an important fact. lam told that Messrs. McCulloch & Co. do
not care for South Australia excepting so far as it suits their con-
venience as mercantile men. They "will no doubt do the best they
can for themselves either when dealing with South Australia or
Victoria, but it is the duty of the South Australian Government
to give every facility for encouraging the traffic into its natural
course. It will be ten times harder to take it out of that course
if it were once in. The Government have taken some responsi-
bility on themselves by having at work two steam-engines on the
wharf at Port Victor, and one is being put up at Goolwa. Other-
wise it would have been impossible to have had the increased
amount of traffic that has been secured. We are told that the Mel-
bourne people laugh at the slowness with which we South Austra-
lians conduct our business. It is said they can discharge ten ships in
Victoria sooner than one here. I would not stop in the Govern-
ment and have such a thing continue. I throw myself upon
the House, and say the Government has done their -duty, even if
we have not had an opportunity of consulting the House first.
Hon. members will recollect the struggles that have occurred to
get the command of river mouths, for when the population of the
United States was no more than that of these colonies at the
present time they were prepared to go to war with France for the
mouths of the Mississippi, and when you now read of the Euro-
pean dispute about the mouth of the Danube, and other disputes
about the free navigation of rivers, you ought to recognise the


importance of having good river traffic. If lion, members will
only look at the map of this continent they will see there are
from 800 to 1,000 or 1,500 miles of country towards Victoria,
New South Wales, and Queensland —almost to the shores of the
Pacific—shut out from that ocean by almost impenetrable ranges,
but connected, with South Australia by the rivers which flow
into the Murray—and there is thus the possibility of obtaining
traffic from, good land thirty or forty times the extent of the
settled districts of South Australia. All the products of this
country will have a tendency to come down through South Aus-
tralia. With wise government here, I look forward, and recognise
what is to be done by encouraging traffic of this nature. In
speaking of Victor Harbour the Surveyor-General in a minute has
referred to the hold on the River district which we would
obtain by a line of railway for passenger and light goods. The
proposed extension of the Kapunda line to the North-West Bend
will open, up not only 1,500 squai’e miles of South Australia, but
also 450,000 square miles, or 288 million acres in New South Wales
and Queensland, exclusive of the valleys of the Lachlan, Darling, and
Murrumbidgee. A great quantity of the land in these districts is rich
and arable, and I therefore say we ought to encourage any tendency
to bring the produce down to South Australia, and I repeat that
we should throw no impediment in. the way of what would prove
such a manifest advantage. The total number of lines of railway
made and in progress is 318 miles, opening up 6,100 square miles
or 3,408,000 acres of country. The lines the Government propose
will open up 19,200 square miles or 12,288,000 acres irrespective
of the Riverine districts mentioned. Considering these facts lam
sure hon. members will agree that the Government are not unrea-
sonable in asking that the report of the Commission, so far as
regarded the 100 yards of breakwater at Victor Harbour, should
be carried out. It might be said that we do not require a break-
water at Victor Harbour, and also a railway to the North-West
Bend. I have already shown that the railway to the North-West
Bend is necessary for the settlers between Kapunda and the
Murray; but if that were not the case, it is necessary to impress
the settlers of the Darling and Murrumbidgee with the fact that
the Government of South Australia are in earnest. If we delay
till we get the breakwater —which is necessarily a slow work —


finished, they would be inclined to say, “ These men are laughing
and playing with us, as they have been for the last 10 years.” But
if we show an endeavour to meet them, and that we are not only
making them a breakwater at Port Victor, but also a railway to
the North-West Bend to give them passenger traffic, and bring
down their goods as rapidly as possible to Port Adelaide, and that
we are prepared to expend money on them and give them the right
hand of fellowship, these settlers will see we are in earnest, and
will see that the South Australians are not as sleepy as they were
thinking, and that we really mean something. The tendency to
look upon us coldly will be taken away, and they will see that
there is some chance of benefiting themselves. I hope that many
a man who has hitherto been forced into dealing with Melbourne
will ultimately turn his attention here. The idea alone justifies
the proposed railway, irrespective of the many settlers
we have to serve in our own districts. The other works
to be carried out include a large number of main roads, but the
money will not be expended without an assignment being brought
before the House. I think we are justified by precedent in bor-
rowing for the construction of main lines of road. The erection
of schoolhouses might be a little more open to question, but I
know how anxious this House and the country are to get the
education policy into active play ; and I feel that the policy to erect
the schoolhouses will be generally approved. There should be no
delay in this respect, and the Government will use their utmost
zeal and energy in having schoolhouses erected and brought into
use as early as possible. With regard to jetties, I may say, if only
in self-defence, that, notwithstanding the many deputations —
pleasant deputations, I may say—from Yorke’s Peninsula, and
the interminable communications we have had with regard to that
most important district, which contains 1,460,000 acres of level
land, lam still alive to their interests. I am informed by the
Surveyor-General that by making jetties at Stansbury, Ardrossan,
Port Victoria, near Point Peirce, and Point Turton, the whole of
Yorke’s Peninsula will be accommodated, and no settler will have
to go over 18 miles to the seaboard. They may have their railway
to Ardrossan at some future time. Other jetties in other districts
are required, including probably one at Point Macleay. Expendi-
ture will also be required at Port Broughton, Port Pirie, and Port


Wakefield. Drainage is also a work of necessity. It is a disgrace
and a pity that we should allow a system which has been inaugu-
rated at great expense to fall into disuse. It should be remembered
that the settlers are called upon to pay an extra price for the land
they buy in the drainage districts. There are two unpleasant
things we have to face. One is the Murray Bridge, which has
been discussed ad nauseam. The Government are making it fit
for a railway, and the sooner the railway gets there the better it
will be. I think, all the circumstances considered, that we would
not be justified in putting the bridge into the river, as some sug-
gest, because in that case it would impede the traffic : nor in
carting it to Port Adelaide, as others desire, because then it would
have to be taken down and would be a white elephant. Being
half up it will be better to finish the job. I think it will be a
better job than many hon. members expect. There is another
important question upon which the House will have an oration
from one of my colleagues, viz., the Northern Territory. There
are 345,000,000 acres of land bearing copper and gold, and suit-
able for the cultivation of coffee, sugar, and other things, but the
resources of the Territory will be more eloquently depicted by the
Minister of Agriculture than I can depict them. I believe no part
of Australia will ultimately be more powerful or influential than
the Northern Territory, but I approach this question with mis-
givings because of the difficulties existing there. It has been
stated by the Treasurer that £40,000 which has been borrowed for
South Australia has been appropriated for North Australia. It
will be necessary to recoup South Australia that loss, for which
the present Government are not responsible, and also to provide
£35,000 expenditure, for which we shall be responsible. We have
had a great deal of anxiety and trouble in various matters, but
nothing has caused us more trouble and anxiety than this. We
can grapple with other difficulties, but in this case, because of the
distance of the Territory, and the pressure of the session, it was
not easy to overcome the difficulties which existed, and we must
ask the indulgence of the House. We are not prepared at this
moment with any statesmanlike policy with regard to the Northern
Territory. Wo have thought of everything that the mind of man
could devise except the running of a railway from Port Augusta
to Port Darwin. I think the least we can do will be to offer


one or two large bonuses for the production of sugar so as to start
that industry. (Cheers.) The establishment of a free port there
will encourage trade, and it will take the shipping of the Archi-
pelago, as it is easier to go to Port Darwin than other ports because
of the monsoons. It may perhaps be desirable to give a guaran-
tee to sugar growers and perhaps to other industries, but hon.
members will not expect me to dwell upon that at length. I feel
that our policy in reference to the Northern Territory is one of
which we have no more reason to be proud than other Governments,
but I hope we will be able to put that part of the country in a better
position at the end of next session. The next matter I will touch
upon is how we propose to carry out the works to which I have
alluded. I have already referred to the system of little contracts
in which the contractors ensured themselves against loss, owing to
the scarcity of labour, by tendering at a very high price. Perhaps
that is an incident of carrying out small works. Some works
have been carried out by the Government better and at a less cost
than by contract, and if it comes to the worst the Government will
take the responsibility of carrying out the works themselves, and
we hope to be able to cheapen the estimates in that way. I speak
with all respect to contractors; but South Australia was not made
for contractors, and if I find that they are charging high prices as
a sort of insurance premium, the Government will adopt the plan
I have mentioned. Then there is another course open to us—that
of advertising for tenders in other colonies. We have two or
three offers from contractors outside the colony; and we have had
a communication from one of the largest English contracting firms
which induces the Government to think that they will seriously
look at such works as are proposed. If hon. members will look at
the telegrams and English correspondence in the Adelaide papers
they will see that lam borne out in what I say. As I said the other
day, I believe the sum down for immigration on the Estimates will
be absorbed by the ordinary industries of the colony if our policy is
carried out, because I believe now that we are endeavoring to go ahead
a little the people have greater confidence in the country. If
this policy is carried out there will‘be greater confidence still, and
works of all sorts will be prosecuted in every direction, and there-
fore the immigration provided for in the Estimates will be absor-
bed by the ordinary industries of the country, and there will bo


nothing •to spare for the large public works. The Government
therefore take power in the Railway Bill to recoup foreign con-
tractors for bringing the necessary labour into the colony. This is
a matter which we have gravely and carefully considered, and I do
not think that the most determined anti-immigrationist will object
to this immigration for the purpose of pushing forward these
works. The Bill provides that the words “ colonial industries ”
in the Act of 1872 shall include railways. That Act provides
that land-orders to the value of £ls shall be given to persons'
introducing immigrants who have resided in the colony for two
years. And we have a right to consider the making of good rail-
ways as colonial industries as well as other works. Our policy
will therefore assure contractors that when there is a dearth of
labour they will be able to provide for it, and will assure the work-
ing classes here at the same time that no possible harm can happen
to them through these provisions, because there will be works to
find them employment. The Engineer-in-Chief said to me
to-day that it is not a question of wages; it is a question of
whether or not there is to be a deadlock here if something is not
done. (Hear, hear.) I do not at the same time agree with Mr.
Strangways that we should include £500,000 in the loan to be set
apart for immigration. I think that many hon. members would
see objections to that course being adopted. We have our own
people to consider as well as the London money market, and if we
borrow money for immigration in that wholesale way merely to
satisfy the London market the people would very probably think
that they were not being done justice to. We have the
two things to look to together, but I am sure from what
I have heard outside that there is not one of the working
population here who does not see how much he would be
benefited by the carrying out of this policy, and I do not think
that I am unreasonable in thinking it possible that in ten years’
time every workman here with frugality might be in the position
of a master. If such a state of affairs were to come about it
might be said what are we to do; but the Government are
ready to face the position like men. In reference to this immigra-
tion policy the difficulty is to get enough without getting too much,
and as we are in communication with London by telegraph it will
be easy to stop the further supply if such a thing be found neces-


saxy. There is one matter of considerable importance that I
have not before noticed. We will have to pay <£ls per
head to bring immigrants here, but in the first y6ar‘
each adult will pay as much as £4 to the revenue, a halid-
some interest. We have a country here capable of supporting all
the people of England, so long as we are able to introduce them
without destroying the prospects of those who are here, and I con-
sider that if we had 10,000,000 in South Australia at the present
moment we should be a million times better off. By a policy of
this kind we will be bringing about and serving to foster a
dominion of Australia, and, that being the case, I think we will
be very unwise not to adopt it. Ido not wish to speak with an
attempt at oratorical effect, and it is known that I am not a san-
guine man ; but looking on what has been done in the last
four years here and what has been done in Queensland and
New South Wales in the last few years I do not see that it is at
all improbable that we may soon bring about a dominion of these
southern dependencies. (Hear, hear.) I should be sorry if any
of my friends said to me that thoughts of this kind are not
worthy of consideration. From figures which I intend to quote
further on it will be seen that we are forging ahead vexy much
faster than some of the other colonies, and that the progress of
South Australia has been something really astounding. This brings
me to the very important question of the security we are to give
for the money borrowed, because men who lend money look upon
that with a very critical eye. And I wish the House to bear in
mind, and the countxy also, that in this matter the Government
have given fair consideration to the policy of their predecessors.
It would be unbecoming for me to say anything disparagingly of
those gentlemen, whom I respect, and with some of whom I am
on friendly terms; but lam obliged to allude to one matter, and
it has reference to the remarks of my friend Mr. Glyde at Smith-
field. When this Government took office we had no means of
knowing as we now know what the policy of the late Government
actually was. I confess to a surprise at finding from Mr. Glyde’s
address that my speech at Goolwa had frightened the London
money market ! lam surprised that any remarks of mine should
have caused any tremor in the London money market ; but those
remarks caused me to feel that it appeared as if I was somebody,


and that South Australia was not such a small place after all,
when the remarks of a member to his constituenoy while not in
office should have such an effect. Mr. Glyde said that if those
remarks at Goolwa had frightened money-lenders, what would be
the fright they would have if as the head of the Government I
attempted to carry out the policy I had enunciated ? My answer
to these remarks is that as a matter of fact, when we sent home
our first telegram for the purpose of advertising the colony, so to-
speak, we had a letter from the Agent-General, in which he
pointed out that on the day after that telegram was published in
the Times the 4 per cent, bonds rose to £ per cent, higher than
they had been on the previous day. (Hear, hear.) Ido not
think the remarks of Mr. Glyde need any further comment; but
when that gentleman talks of the rash way in which the Govern-
ment are proceeding, and warns the people that we are unwise in
our proposals, and when he was cheered in doing so by the very
intelligent gentlemen he was addressing, I think we are bound to
carefully pause and think before we take action in this matter.
Recognising Mr. Glyde's great anxiety, I do not think I would be
justified in asking the House to give me power to borrow
£5,000,000 at present; but if I were Dictator of South Aus-
tralia, apart from the idiosyncrasies of the people whom Mr.
Glyde was addressing, I would consider it a sound policy to borrow
£5,000,000. (Cheers.) Ido not do so because I think it would
frighten Mr. Glyde and his supporters ; but as showing that the
Government are looking the matter fairly in the face I will
tell them that I will come to them to borrow £3,000,000 more,
only when I have shown them the use to which I have put the
amount I am now seeking to borrow. When the London money
market sees that we are facing a difficulty like men, when they
see that the people are getting less frightened, and that the
Treasurer is not skipping about in a terrified manner like a cat
in mittens or a bear on a hot iron, and when they see the wise use
we are making of the money, they will be much readier to respond
to our application for loans. Small loans have been the curse of
this colony. It has been said why did I not mention it before the
policy which I now propose ; but I will say that I have indicated
it. London was not built in a day, and I have gradually brought
it to its present stage in consequence of what has been lately


occurring in the other colonies. If hon. members will take the
trouble to look at “ Hansard,” and see what I had the honour of
saying to them within the last two years, since Mr. Blyth took
office, it would be seen that this policy has been alluded to. I
told Mr. Blyth that he was frittering away a great opportunity,
but it was not for me from the other side of the House to initiate
a policy. I gave them indications from time to time, and if they
had put together what I gave them separately they would have
found the whole of that policy. And it will be remembered that
at the end of last session I attempted to indicate it more fully. I
say this because I consider it unjust to myself to hear remarks
that I have not been trying for some time past to bring before the *
public a policy such as I have now indicatd. With all respect to the
feelings of the Railway Commission and the unanimous feeling of
the country I believe that my remarks at the end of last session
had a great deal to do with giving greater confidence to the people
of this country, and rendering a policy of this sort justifiable and
necessary. I do not feel any vainglorious vanity, but I have a
sense of pride in knowing that the policy just enunciated has
received such kind consideration from this House and has met the
general approbation of the country. I mention these things in
order to impress upon the House and the country that this policy
is not the mere flight of a man whose wings melt in the sun,
but a deliberate policy which has for its aim the sure and steady
advance of the colony. Then I come to the securities we shall
have to offer—which brings me to the jocular remarks of Mr.
Bray regarding my remarks as to our annexation of Victoria.
I wish to say that what I have said upon that subject was said in
all seriousness. (Laughter.) Hon. members will know that great
stress has been made of what some of the statesmen of Victoria
are going to do. There have been threats of secession by the South-
East, and that Victoria insisted on having increased territory,
and even last week a Victorian paper said it waa
absolutely necessary to push their boundary up towards
the Darling and Murrumbidgee, and South Australia
was to receive some of the advantages of that enforced
junction with Victoria. I hope that Victoria and South Australia
will be annexed and form a part of a great dominion—a dominion
that should be paramount on the Southern and Pacific Oceans.


I proclaim myself a federalist, and maintain that it will be a great
mistake if we allow a war of tariffs and local jealousies to interfere
with the development of such a policy. It will be a disgrace to
allow the English speaking peoples on this continent to grow up
with hostile feelings and opposing interests. . I hope therefore
ultimately that we shall be annexed to Victoria; but I think with
the progress that South Australia has made and is likely to make,
compared with the progress Victoria has made and is likely to
make, that if there is to be an annexure the annexure will
more likely be of Victoria to South Australia than of South
Australia to Victoria. (Cheers.) We may be overshadowed by
New South Wales, and rivalled by Queensland, but in the end we
are bound to beat Victoria. (No, and cheers.) Persons who
visited Victoria, and Victoi’ians themselves, expressed that opinion.
I do not say this in any unpleasant state of feeling towards Vic-
toria or Victorian statesmen. There is a paper which I have before
me giving a comparison of the progress made by Victoria
and South Australia from figures given by Mr. Langton, lately
Treasurer of Victoria, which paper is entitled to very careful
consideration. This statement shows that from 1871 to 1874 the
increase of population has been—in Victoria 6J per cent., in South
Australia 10 per cent. The acreage under cultivation, 75,000 acres,
or 8 per cent., in Victoria ; and 285,000 acres, or 27 per cent., in
South Australia. The revenue has increased 12 per cent, in Vic-
toria, and 29 per cent, in South Australia. The tonnage has increased
29| per cent, in Victoria, and 43 per cent, in South Australia ; and
the imports have increased 75 per cent, in Victoria, and 85 per
cent, in South Australia. When you read figures like these, given
by a prominent leading statesman in Victoria, it is nonsense to be
told that the tendency of population would be from this colony to
Victoria, or that this colony was likely to be swamped and over-
powered by our neighbour. If the contrast shows so great
during the last four years under the smaller policy which has
previously prevailed here, how much more favourably will it be
likely to show when this colony carries forward a greater
and more vigorous policy. A gentleman told me only on Saturday
that he could not go to Melbourne without being pressed to do
business with Victorian houses, as South Australian paper was
considered so much better than Victorian, and Mr. Turnbull told


me that it was startling to observe the want of confidence in
Victoria and the tendency to slowness as compared with six or
eight years ago. Ido not rejoice in this, because I should like to
see Victoria progress as well as South Australia. I rejoice, how-
ever, in the greater progress of South Australia, and the contrast
must necessarily be a matter of great satisfaction to us. lam
not called upon to say how much or how little the extreme
protectionist policy of Victoria has had to do with this result, but
I believe it has had a considerable effect, and some of the Victorian
people are waking up to that opinion also. 1 confess that until
lately I had been rather disposed to follow the Victorian policy
and to put ourselves under the shadow of the Victorian wing.
I, however, now see that we do not want their help, but that we
can stand alone. If, however, we should want any assistance, we
should stand by New South Wales, and look to that country as
the one we should most emulate, and the country which was the
more prone to extend to us the right hand of fellowship. Whilst I
believe that, however, I feel that it is impossible to force a
federation of the colonies until people are ripe for it. A free-trade
tariff in Victoria would necessitate a free-trade tariff in South
Australia; and I had believed hitherto that a protectionist policy in
Victoria necessitated a protectionist policy in South Australia.
(No, no.) I had thought so ; but I now see that I was wrong,
because South Australia is able to forge ahead without protection
and without Victoria, and I endorse with pleasure the remark of
Mr. Parkes, that financially and socially we are the most solvent
and substantial of the colonies. The House will excuse me in a
matter of this importance in again referring to figures. I wish to
call attention to a return of indebtedness and taxation per head of
the population as prepared by the Government Statist. In South
Australia the taxation is £1 16s. per head, in Queensland £3 45.,
in New Zealand £3 19s. The nearest to us is Tasmania, which
every one knows is a slow-going country, and the taxation there
stood at £2 Is. per head. The respective positions of the colonies are
more marked in the return of indebtedness per head. The indebt-
edness of South Australia last year was £ll 13s. per head ; Tas-
mania, £l4 3s. ; Victoria, £l7 65.; New South Wales, £l9 7s. ;
and New Zealand, £4O 6s. I do not wish to emulate New
Zealand—(cheers) —and the policy proposed by the Government
c


will not do that. Sir Julius Yogel may have done great things
for New Zealand, but I do not feel justified in following his
example with regard to this colony. I would rather show a little
more of the caution of Mr. Glyde. Queensland stands at £32 25.,
or nearly three times the amount of the indebtedness of South
Australia, and it is this very indebtedness, incurred for public
works, which has given that colony the position she now holds.
With regard to our money powers, I have another return prepared
by Mr. Boothby, which shows that we owe less for railways, tram-
ways, harbour improvements, and roads than we did in the year
1870, which is a very encouraging circumstance in relation to our
borrowing powers. The rate per head was for railways in 1870
£4 7s. 4d., in 1874 £4 6s. 2d. ; for tramways in 1870 14s. 3|d.,
and in 1874 12s. 10;|d. ; harbour improvements in 1870 10s. 4d.,
and in 1874 9s. ; and for roads in 1870 £1 ss. Bd., and in
1874 £1 3s. Id. Our whole indebtedness is £1 per head greater
than it was in 1872, but that arises largely on account of the
Northern Territory, which will recoup us ultimately. In
the meantime the House and the public creditor will be
glad to know that we owe less for public works now than
we did four years ago. I may be asked what security we have for
this proposed loan. Well, there is £2,296,367 due to us for
land, and with 2\ millions of money due to us, and with a ten-
dency to an increasing revenue with an immense territory to say
we are not justified in proposing a loan of three millions is perfect
nonsense. (Cheers.) There is another return which is important
on this point, prepared for me by Mr. Boothby, the Government
Statist, showing the progress of South A ustralia during the past
five years. I only give the totals showing the increase in some of
the most important of the various matters dealt with in the return.
That increase has been as follows ;—ln population, 13 per cent,;
land cultivated, 56 per cent.; revenue by Customs, 66 per cent.;
in imports 45 and exports 48 per cent.; tonnage, 60 per cent.;
in railways 122, main roads 46, and telegraphs 359 per cent.;
in horses 26, cattle 55, and sheep 38 percent.; and I specially ask
honorable members to study the paper for themselves. There is
another matter also which must not be put altogether out of
consideration, and that is the extreme conservatism of the South
Australians. There are no more conservative people on the


Continent than the people of this colony—none more wishful to
abide by vested interests and the general principles of conservatism
than this community. I mention this subject with pride, because
it is a matter which visitors to the colony, high or low, have
referred to. This is a point which persons who looked to
securities would regal’d as being worthy of consideration. I do
not take credit to South Australia at present for any large degree
of richness of the Waukaringa gold mines, because it is not
possible at present to gauge the full importance of the discovery
made there. I assure hon. members that there are many points
which I should like to have greatly elaborated, but I have limited
myself as far as I possibly could with justice to South Australia
and with justice to the importance of the subject I have had to
deal with. I have felt bound to call attention to the figures I
have quoted, not because I like to quote figures, but because it
was my duty to those interested to show what the resources of
the colony were. I have alluded in the most meagre manner to
the policy which this morning I had hoped to have said we would
carry out, but which I now can only say we hope to see carried
out —and a policy which I hope we may yet see our way clear to
carry out. I have alluded also to the reasons which, in my
opinion, justifies us in coming to the conclusions shadowed forth
in that policy. The Government have a policy which they intend
to stand by, and although I do not say this in any spirit of
boasting, I wish to emphasize it, because I have been told we are
only canning out the policy of our predecessors. It would ill
become me to depreciate my predecessors ; but I notice from the
printed papers that in December last Mr. Glyde, in writing to
Mr. Dutton, said it was probable a million of money would be
borrowed in the course of two or three years, and that probably
the national debt would be doubled before the end of 1880. We
believe in doubling the debt long before 1880, and, as His Excel-
lency’s message shows, in borrowing more than a million in less
than two years, and I only say this in justification of the present
Ministry. In speaking on this question I wish I had the
eloquence of my friend the Minister of Agriculture, and could
dilate upon it with the rhetoric of that hon. gentleman. When,
however, you recognise the marvellous richness of our Northern
Plains ] when you know the great resources of this colony lor


producing the finest wheat, wine, and olive oil ; when you remem-
ber its capabilities with regard to silk, tobacco, and other products
which only require tillage, population, and skilled industry to
develop to an extent equal to supplying the whole of Europe, I do
confess that I hope for great things in the future, and I would
rather be punished for having those aspirations than be rewarded
for endorsing the fears of some of my predecessors. (The hon.
gentleman resumed his seat after a speech of nearly three hours’
length, amidst loud cheers.)
HOUSE OF ASSEMBLY.
SPEECH IN ANNOUNCING THE PROROGATION,
sth Day of October, 1875.
THE POLITICAL SITUATION.—REJECTION OF THE
STAMPS BILL.
The COMMISSIONER of CROWN LANDS (Hon. J. P.
Boucaut) said—Sir, I beg to lay on the table of the House a re-
turn to the order of the House on the motion of the hon. member
for Wallaroo (Mr. Duncan), carried on the 11th August, of land
alienated in the Hundred of Para Wurlie, and in the western half
of the Hundred of Moorowie ; and while on my legs to move that
that paper be printed, I shall take the opportunity of giving to
the House some information, which I think the House ought to
have at the earliest possible opportunity, in reference to the diffi-
culty and embarrassment in which the Government are placed by
the rejection of the Stamps and Succession Bill in another branch
of the Legislature. Ido not propose upon the present occasion to
discuss the power of the Legislative Council to reject that Bill—
(Hear, hear) —a power which I admit. I do not invite hon.
members upon the present occasion to discuss the right of the
Legislative Council to reject that Bill. Upon that question I ex-
press no opinion. Ido not propose to discuss the wisdom of the
other branch of the Legislature in rejecting a Bill of that particular
nature and of that important nature upon this particular occasion;
but I do intend to lay down as a maxim that a Bill of that sort
should not be rejected except very deliberately, and with a full


appreciation of the difficulties of the situation—in short it should
only be wisely rejected. Ido not wish to say anything or do any-
thing which will weaken the power of the Legislative Council in
this country. Many hon. members here present know that
although I have been always willing and ready to stand by the
rights and privileges of this House, yet upon many occasions—
sometimes, Mr. Speaker, although always very respectfully, in
opposition to you—l have advocated the privileges of the Legisla-
tive Council, and therefore I should be exceedingly sorry to do
anything that would weaken the just and proper influence of the
other branch of the Legislature. But, nevertheless, there are
times when a public man must recollect that the Legislative
Council was made for the country, and not the country for the
Legislative Council. (Cheers.) When the two Houses are at
issue upon a small matter, it may become a question whether they
cannot meet each other, and whether this House may not yield to
the wishes of the other branch. In our history there are
numerous instances where this House, in deference to the other
branch of the Legislature, has yielded in measures of which we
were greatly in favor. When, however, the case is one of
exceedingly great importance, this House and the Government
have to consider whether or not we can meet the other branch ;
and secondly, supposing we cannot meet them, whether it is
possible for us to yield. Hon. members will see that upon this
occasion it is impossible for us to meet the other branch of the
Legislature. The opportunity of meeting them has been removed.
The Bill has been rejected. It was competent for the other branch
according to a compact between this House and the Legislative
Council to have made suggestions. That, I believe, has been done
on some occasions—(Hear, hear) —and I appeal to the House and
the country, to say whether this Government and this House have
shown any disposition not to pay every attention to every sugges-
tion given for their consideration in respect to the Stamps Bill as
a whole, or any part of it when any question was brought under
our notice. (Cheers.) But it is impossible for us now to con-
sider that, because owing to the action in another place that Bill
has been rejected. Ido not propose upon the present occasion—
and I hope hon. members will excuse me from doing so—l do not
propose to go into any questidn of policy in reference to that


Stamps Bill. I can only affirm that it is a general Bill—it is not
a special Bill. It was framed by this Government most anxiously
and earnestly with the view of making it a general Bill, and I think
most people of this country will come to that conclusion. Ido
not propose, nor is it necessary upon the present occasion, to go
into any elaborate argument. That is not the question. The
Government introduced the Bill, and this House passed it—l
believe with the approbation of the country—certainly it was
passed by a great majority of this House. Therefore in that state
of affairs there are two alternative courses before us—either to
yield or to stand by our measure. (Hear, hear.) I will ask the
House whether they would yield, whether they would wish us to
yield. I will ask the country whether they would wish us to
yield ; and if all these persons wish us to yield I will ask whether
we can yield. (Cheers.) We cannot, and dare not. If all the
great interests of the country pressed upon the Government to
yijsld, the Government, whatever the consequences, could not and
dare not yield. (Cheers.) We believe in our policy, endorsed as
that policy has been by a large majority of the House and by the
country; and undoubtedly we should be false to ourselves, to the
House of Assembly, to the people of South Australia, and the
best interests of the colony if we showed for the least moment
any hesitation or any weakness, and therefore yielding is out of
the question. The ultimate tribunal on all these occasions is of
course the people. How by the people of South Australia—l
don’t mean the squatters—(Hear, hear) —I don’t mean ten or
twelve Hindi ey-street merchants, nor one nor even two Bank
Managers—(Hear, hear) —I mean the whole people of South
Australia—(Mr. Hawker—“ Hear, hear.”) It has been denied
that the people of this colony have endorsed this stamp policy, but
without elaborating that at any great length I venture to say that
the people of this colony have endorsed it. (Cheers.) It was put
unmistakably in the address which I had the honour to issue to the
electors of the district which I now have the honour to represent,
and it was endorsed by them. It attracted attention in the PreSs
and throughout the colony, and my friend the head of the late
Government, Mr. Blyth, intimated in answer to a question which
was put to him by his present constituents when he was seeking
their suffrages that if there were to be taxation that was the form


in which it would be applied—(cheers)—and this Government
found upon the files, prepared by our predecessors, a Stamps Bill.
After that it is impossible to say that the Stamps and Succession
Bill has not had the approbation of the colony. I affirm most
undoubtedly that it has. I am not dealing with the question
simply because of the Stamps and Succession Bill. Important as
that matter may be, it is of much less consideration than that
which lies behind it. I look upon this Bill as part of an entire
policy —as part of one general scheme which can only be carried
out as an entire policy—and if you break down one part of the
scheme, it all falls together ; and therefore to me the rejection of
that Bill becomes very important. We propose these railways and
other public works for the purpose of developing the resources of
South Australia, and we must borrow money to carry them out.
It has been said to us, it has been said here, and I understand it was
very elaborately argued in another place, that we should bring in our
general scheme at once. I have said before that we cannot bring
it in this session, and I say it is impossible—(cheers)—and further,
I say that this Government will not do so, and therefore the
rejection of that Bill by the other branch of the Legislature means
the postponement of our Railway Bill, and the postponement of
our Loan Bill certainly for a time. If we are to judge by the
wishes of some gentlemen, it means a postponement till next
session in the ordinary acceptation of the term, and possibly much
longer; and once postpone a Bill of that kind you don’t know
how long it will be postponed. Yarious questions in the country,
political agitation, difference between public men, a bad season, a
difficulty in borrowing money in the London market, and other
contingencies may arise; and unless the policy of the Government
is taken in its integrity, or almost in its integrity, it may become
impossible to adopt it in the sense in which it is possible now.
(Cheers.) Therefore, it is to the Government, the House, and the
country a matter of exceedingly great importance. I will venture
to say also in regard to my argument, when I say it is impossible
to introduce one general scheme of taxation at once, that it is
impossible in England. If you look at the utterances of Gladstone,
Disraeli, Lord Palmerston, and other great statesmen you will see
that they say it is impossible to bring in a general scheme at one
time, and if you look at the schemes of taxation in England you


will see that they have been introduced in the way this Govern-
ment introduced theirs. I see there are some rumours, not founded
upon any utterances by the Government, that when we have this
Bill it will not be necessary to apply for any other Bill; but I
venture to assert that this Government do not mean this Bill as a
finality, and we distinctly pledge ourselves and we mean to carry
out that pledge, to deal with the whole fiscal system of the colony,
I only say this lest any hon. member, or any subject of Her
Majesty in this country, may have any misunderstanding as to the
intentions of the Government. The Bill being rejected, we have
two alternatives, one to go to London to borrow £3,000,000 with-
out showing that we have means to pay the interest, or on the
other hand we may quietly do what I hear is suggested, and to
stop further mischief, as it is put, prorogue Parliament and
postpone all matters of importance till June or July. With
regard to the suggestion that we should go to London to borrow
three millions without showing that we are prepared to pay the
interest, we don’t mean to do so. (Cheers.) The strength of this
Government, and therefore the strength of the people of this
country, the prestige and credit of South Australia would be
exceedingly damaged by going to London to borrow £3,000,000
or a sum nearly approaching £3,000,000 without showing that we
have the means to pay interest. It means either a refusal to let
us have the money except upon disadvantageous and unfair terms
or a depreciation of the whole of the bonds of South Australia,
and therefore we do not mean to do that. The country, Ido not
hesitate to say, shall not be put in such a position as that while
we administer the government. The other alternative is to post-
pone the Railway Bill till next June or July, but from the remarks
I have made it will be seen that it is possibly a case of now or
never. We do not think it is our duty to do that, because we
have faith in our policy, we have faith in the colony and its future*
and we would be false to ourselves if we thought for a moment of
adopting such a policy. That brings me to the next consideration,
whether it is desirable to have the opinion of the country upon
this most unfortunate difficulty between the two branches of the
Legislature. Of course we cannot dissolve the Legislative Council.
(Hear, hear.) Ido not say “ fortunately we cannot dissolve the
Legislative Council.” (A laugh.) Ido not say “unfortunately.’


I simply assert the fact that we cannot dissolve the Legislative
Council ; and I think that after the support we have had in the
House, and the general approval we have had from hon. members,
it is entirely out of the question at present to think of dissolving
the House of Assembly. (A laugh.) But still there is one way
to obtain some slight expression of opinion in this matter without
adopting a policy such as that. My learned friend opposite who
laughs (Mr. Bray) has extended such a liberal and kind support
to the Government that I should be sorry to put him to any
inconvenience, I will not say any expense. (Laughter.) I think
nevertheless, and I say this with all seriousness, I certainly do
think that some consideration might have been shown to the
resolutions and the majorities of this House so soon after a general
election. (Cheers.) There might be a crisis where the Ministry
would be justified in appealing to the people against both Houses
of Parliament, but in a case where the House of Assembly,
the Government, and the people are at one, it certainly seems to
me a very different question. Bearing that in mind, we have
advised His Excellency the Governor to prorogue this Parliament,
and His Excellency has decided to follow our advice ; and there-
fore I have to announce to this House, and the hon. the Chief
Secretary will announce it to the other House and the country,
that this Parliament will bo prorogued for the purpose of endeavour-
ing to find some solution of the present difficulty. I can inform
hon. members that with regard to the prorogation nothing will be
hastily done. There are several Bills before both Houses of Parlia-
ment which I should be sorry to see dropped, and although we
would be justified in saying that we advise His Excellency to pro-
rogue this very day, I think hon. members will consider that I am
not doing wrong in endeavouring, so far as I possibly can, to aid in
passing through several Bills of importance. Therefore not this
week, probably not till the end of next week, and possibly not until
Monday or Tuesday of the week following the prorogation will
take place. There are several very important Bills which I should
not like to see lost. There is the Education Bill, I shall only
echo the feelings of the House when I say I should exceedingly
regret if any hasty prorogation should prevent that Bill becoming
law. I shall give a contingent notice of motion presently with
the view of making the session as useful as we possibly can. The


Parliament being prorogued, the opportunity T have suggested the
people of this country will have if they feel any interest in the
policy of the Government; and if I and my colleagues have not
mistaken the wishes of the people of this country it will be com-
petent for them to express their opinions by public meetings and
petitions. I feel that the members of the Legislative Council are
men as honourable and as likely to be influenced by patriotic
motives as we ourselves, and I have no reason to suppose that if
the country is with us on the present occasion the members of the
other branch of the Legislature will not be as willing as the
members of this House would be to yield their views and wishes
and perhaps personal interests to the wishes of the people of this
country. Of course if the people of the country have no wish and
no desire in this matter, or if they are apathetic, I should be sorry
to invite them. It would be disrespectful to the Legislative
Council to invite the people of the colony to express an opinion in
that case. If they have the opportunity of which they can avail
themselves in the constitutional mode and are. apathetic we shall
consider that we have made a mistake, hon. members will consider
that in the generous and liberal support they have given to the
progressive policy of this Government they have made a mistake,
and I shall consider that my old and respected friend Mr. Glyde
has in this respect better gauged the views of the people of South
Australia and the power and ability of the colony to progress than
I have. Upon that matter it is unnecessary for me to say any
more. I believe, I say, in the future of South Australia, and we
shall in this matter be not at all slack. There can be no great
advancement without railways, there can be no railways without
borrowing money, there can be no borrowing money without pay-
ing the interest, there can be no paying of interest without taxa-
tion—(cheers)—there can be no other possible taxation this session
and possibly for a long period except this scheme of stamp and
succession duties, and therefore I say it is now or never to my
mind with regard to these railways. When I say there can be no
borrowing money without paying the interest, and no paying the
interest without taxation, I do not mean that it is impossible to do
it. It is possible, and the position of this colony will enable us to
do it; but there is no possibility of doing so without cramping our
resources, without cramping the operations of District Councils,


the construction of roads, bridges, and other public works, and that
is the sense in which it is not possible, because although the
revenue has proved very elastic and better than was anticipated,
the Treasurer will have to bring down £30,000 or £35,000 more
in the shape of Supplementary Estimates, which will require con-
sideration as against any anticipated increase in the revenue. I
have touched upon the whole of the situation without any wish or
desire to elaborate it. In fact, I think I may venture to say that
I have been thinking aloud on this question. I feel very deeply
grateful for the consideration I individually and my colleagues have
had at the hands of hon. members. I will only repeat that we
believe in the future and in the progress of South Australia. We
do hope, and we hope confidently, that we may have some share in
the honour of inaugurating and carrying out a policy which will
tend very greatly to advance the colony ; but I will also confidently
say this, that if we are not permitted to aid in advancing it we
will be no active participators in its ruin. (Cheers.)
SPEECH TO THE ELECTORS OF ENCOUNTER BAY,
AT GOOLWA, 22nd OCTOBER, 1875.
Mr. BOUCAUT, who was received with prolonged cheering, in
responding said—lt is a matter of no small pride and very great
gratification to me to be present this night under such circum-
stances as bring me amongst you, especially when I consider the
large and representative gathering, and the warmth of welcome
that has been given to me. Many years ago, when I was sub-
jected to attacks of greater vindictiveness than any public man in
South Australia has been subjected to, I looked forward to and
determined on some such occasion as this—which I knew must
come—to vindicate my political career. That time has come, but
I feel it is not necessary to vindicate myself when I recollect the
most generous and extraordinary support I have received from the
House of Assembly, the people, the press of the colony, and the
approbation of the sister colonies —a most unusual thing for them
to extend to public men in this colony—l feel that this approba-


tion and support are my best and sufficient vindication. (Cheers.)
X may be permitted, however, to say it is that very independence
which led to occasional unpopularity which has enabled me so to
carry myself as to attain to the position which as a member of the
Government I now hold, and to obtain the approbation which has so-
generally been accorded to me. There are other matters to which
I might refer, but there is one in particular, I have been accused
—and I think I may say wrongfully so—but a public man must
expect to be more or less wrongfully accused—of a rash opposition
and an inability to wait. This is one of the last accusations
which should be brought against me, because more than any man
on this continent, not excepting Mr. Higinbotham, I have refused
honourable offices under honourable circumstances in this colony
because I determined to wait. This is a matter on which I will
not enlarge, although as your representative I might do so. As
your steward you will naturally expect me to give some account
of my stewardship. Not to speak boastfully of the last session I
may refer to some things which the Ministry have done. I may
be permitted to speak with pride of the passing of the Education
Act. Just the measure which I indicated to you prior to my
election has been accepted by my colleagues, and has become
almost unaltered the law of this province. (Cheers.) I feel proud
to have introduced this scheme; proud that it met with the
strong support of my colleagues; proud that it received the
universal approbation of the country. I believe that it will be
an incalcuable blessing to the people of this colony, (Hear,
hear.) The Minister of Education is engaged with all the ability
he has in endeavouring to bring the Act into operation at a
very early period—l hope not later than the commencement of the
ensuing session. I may also refer with pride to the action of the
Ministry with regard to special votes. (Hear, hear.) If the
Government have done nothing else they have done good in
putting a stop to the special vote system, which was becoming a
nuisance—cramping the energy of the colony, upsetting the
finances, injuring our credit, weakening the Government, and
tending to gross political corruption. (Cheers.) It would have
been impossible for the Government to have carried on business
under such a system as had sprung up in the past, and which
would tend to make Governments as corrupt as has been the case


in some parts of America. Gladstone, Disraeli, Lord Palmerston,
and many other great statesmen whom I could name have empha-
tically protested against such a system. I regret that in Canada,
New South Wales, and Victoria it has not been stopped as early
as it should have been, although it has never attained such bad
proportions there as in South Australia, but I hope South Australia
will now be able to set an example to the other colonies as well as
other places in this respect, as she has done in many other matters.
No Government would dare serve its friends under the new system
as it did under the old, if future Governments continue as firm as
we have been and adopt the same line of conduct as the present
Ministry. The whole of the public works will be scheduled and
placed before the representatives in the Assembly, and the public
money will thus be treated with as a whole, instead of being dealt
with in small amounts and without regard to other necessary
grants. There will be no more sending in representatives to
hamper a Ministry if they cannot get exactly what they desire, and
I hope we will see no more wasting of large sums of public money,
as on the Murray Bridge and works of a similar nature. (Cheers.)
The ultimate tendency of logrolling is bankruptcy or the impos-
sibility to borrow, and without borrowing it is impossible to
develop. (Hear, hear.) By such a system the general resources
of the colony become damnified. Under the system laid down by
us we will take the responsibility of allotting the money, and I
venture to say that we will be able to do so more advantageously,
and public works generally will be more fairly considered instead
of the money being voted away piecemeal. If the Government are
right in allotting the money the House will approve, and if we are
wrong no doubt we will be censured. (Laughter.) The finances and
system of finance were becoming rotten under the system of logroll-
ing; and it was impossible for any Treasurer to deal with the public
funds properly. There is no principle better settled in England than
that the Government alone should be responsible for the expendi-
ture of the public moneys. The next great question is the ques-
tion of the hour—that which has enabled me to meet you and
address you under the present circumstances. It is the question
of the rejection of the Stamps Bill by the Legislative Council. I
wish to correct one error which I see has become somewhat
general. It has been stated in the House of Assembly and else-


where that I said that I admitted the right of the Legislative
Council to act as they have done. I deny most emphatically ever
having made such a statement, and will say further that I refrained
most unequivocally from expressing any opinion upon that ques-
tion. I did admit that the Legislative Council had the power to
reject the Stamps Bill, but I never expressed an opinion as to their
right to do so. Ido not deem it necessary to go into the reasons
for expressing no opinion, but simply to state the fact. Those who
have a knowledge of constitutional learning, may perhaps wonder
at my hot expressing an opinion. I have tried to understand the
working of constitutional government, and some pei'sons have
thought that I should have expressed an opinion as to the right
of the Legislative Council to do as they have done, and I am not
absolutely confident that I was wise in not doing so. If the crisis
had been a lesser one I would have felt bound to have done so at
whatever inconvenience, but the present was a very serious posi-
tion, and if I had expressed an opinion one way or the other it
might have been very momentous to the country. The expressing
of an opinion in a certain direction and acting thereon would
inevitably have led to delay—a delay lam anxious to avoid—
through perhaps a long and bitter agitation being awakened. I
felt that difficulty in expressing an opinion, and therefore I have
taken the constitutional right to prorogue with the view of res-
pectfully asking the Legislative Council to reconsider their
decision. I accordingly advised the Governor to prorogue Parlia-
ment. In doing so no disrespect was shown to the Legislative
Council, whom I have sought to treat respectfully. I had as much
right to advise a prorogation as the Legislative Council had to
reject the Stamps Bill. It has been said that I have asked for
public clamour against the Legislative Council, but I emphatically
repudiate such a charge ; and I am pleased to see that my advice
to the contrary has been followed by remarks of a respectful
nature at the meetings which have been held, saving in one respect,
I regret to say, at the meeting held by my own constituents this
afternoon. Ido not blame you for so expressing your views—it
would not be respectful of me to do so—indeed I fully excuse you
under your peculiar circumstances; but I will say that so far as
those remarks are concerned I express no sympathy with them.
It has been said that the Government ought to have taken another
course, and not prorogued with the view of calling Parliament


together again immediately. We might have done this if we had
followed the example of some men in this colony who have only
considered their own political position. If we had waited and
come down next year with this policy, meeting as it does with the
approbation of the entire people, we would then have been in a
tenfold greater degree masters of the situation, for the people
would be at our backs, annoyed and disappointed at the delay of
an advancing policy. In an ordinary political sense we would then,
be stronger than if our policy had become law, for the people
would have come round us as one man to carry out that policy.
That course, too, would have been much more pleasant to the
Ministry, considering what would be before us after a six or seven
months’ recess, and considering that by this course we would have
avoided the trouble and responsibility of our present position, of
watching the opinion of the country on such a momentous issue as
the present. But my colleagues and I feel that delay under exist-
ing circumstances may be fatal to the people of South Australia,
and therefore that it is our duty to launch our policy, which we
believe will be for the advancement of the people, rather than
consider our own interests. (Cheers.) This is why I ask of you
to approve of what has been done by the Government. I regret
the action of the Legislative Council, because the Stamps Bill is
necessary to the Government policy. I believe that for about two
hundred years no other Upper House where there is constitutional
government has rejected a taxation Bill passed by the people’s
House of representatives. (Cheers.) While speaking on the
subject I may be permitted to say how deeply I feel the position
of ray friend the Chief Secretary, who has shown a breadth of
thought and ability in ruling in no ordinary degi’ee. Considering
how Mr. Morgan has in the past always fought for the privileges
of the Council it is a matter of great regret to me that he has not
had extended to him that liberality which was his due. The
Legislative Council ought so far to have considered him as to have
given the Assembly the customary and constitutional opportunity
of reconsidering the Stamps Bill, which they might have done by
suggestions. It will not become me to speak disrespectfully of
Sir Henry Ayers—whether he is right or not will hereafter be
seen ; but the public have begun to recognise the influence he has
had in the opposition to the Government measure. While not


wishing to speak disrespectfully of Sir H. Ayers, I will tell the
people of this country that they have in Mr. Morgan a man
infinitely superior in power and grasp of thought to Sir Henry
Ayers. He is not his equal in red tape, or in tying up papers and
keeping them in order, nor in debate. These things have been the
practice of the life of the one, and not of the other; but in
breadth of thought and ability for statesmanship there is no
possible comparison between the two men; and I would sooner
govern all Australasia, and govern it easier with the aid
of Mr. Morgan, than South Australia alone with the aid
of Sir Henry Ayers. (Loud cheers.) Speaking of the past session
I would remind you how, in February last, when I appeared
before you, I endeavoured to show that what I then proposed
and what the Government now proposes is one policy, and that
one part so fitted in with the other that if a portion were broken
down the whole would fail. That has been jeered at, and you
have been told that stamps were not part of the Government
policy. Surely we who devised this policy have a right to be
heard on the point. You have seen this stated in letters in the
newspapers, and as Mr. Goode has told you many people opposed
the stamp duties because they were told or understood that they
formed no part of the Government policy. Again and again I
have stated that they do, and once more I will repeat, in the hope
that it may be thoroughly understood, that the stamp duties are a
material part of the Government policy—in fact the very keystone
and foundation of the progressive policy of the Government.
(Cheers.) We propose railways to develop the country, immigra-
tion to carry out the railways, money to be borrowed in England
for this purpose, and taxation to insure the London money market
that we are able to pay interest on the money borrowed. (Loud
cheers.) How childish therefore it is of those who say the raising
of revenue to pay interest on borrowed money has nothing to do
with the Government policy. Again I repeat that it is the key-
stone and foundation of the policy, and the fact cannot be too
often impressed upon the people. There are very few who do not
admit that the public works policy of the Government will be
greatly to the advantage of the colony. I will not spend words
over those who deny this fact, or who deny that South Australia
must go ahead. But there are two classes who oppose the


Government in the stamps —one who say the interest on the
borrowed money will be too great to pay, and the others who say
the Government have promised to bring in a comprehensive
scheme of taxation next session. Both these classes join in urging
that the Stamps Bill has no reference to the general scheme
proposed. Those who say we promised a comprehensive scheme of
taxation next session utterly misrepresent us. Neither the Govern-
ment nor any members of it ever said that we would bring in a com-
prehensive scheme of taxation next session in the way our opponents
have ventured to state. What the Government do say is
what I said to you, and in judging of the conduct of the Govern-
ment it is well to consider what was actually said by me some
time ago. What we said was that we wanted the Stamps Bill for
carrying out railways, and that when we have carried them out
we would look forward to free trade —or at all events in a free
trade direction, as absolute free trade probably cannot come for
many years yet—and in order to encourage free trade it will be
necessary to take off some of the Customs taxes. Any man can
see that, and then the revenue will have to be made up. Then it
is that the Government say—when we have taken off the
Customs taxes, in order to give greater freedom of trade, we will
take the responsibility of bringing before the House of Assembly
a scheme of taxation for the purpose of recouping the revenue
that which it will have lost by so giving the people greater
freedom of trade and reducing Customs duties. Not that the
Government said we will bring in a whole scheme of taxation
next session. No man, either in England or in the colonies, could
do that. If the agony is so great at one of the easiest systems of
taxation, how bitter would be the agony if every one were touched
at the same moment? (Cheers.) Those who talk thus speak
absurdly, and are trying to force upon the present Government
what they could not and would not do themselves, and what I feel
sure my colleagues will never try to do. (Cheers.) Personally I
may have been to blame for looking a little ahead, as that has not
hitherto been the custom in South Australia, (Laughter.)
Perhaps I have too much endeavoured to say all that is in me,
but I do not want to conceal anything so long as I am governing.
Maybe if I had not looked forward to free trade the opponents of
the Government would not have had the opportunity to twit
D


us with “the broad and comprehensive scheme of taxation.”
(Laughter.) I assure you that the two schemes are quite distinct.
We might have introduced remission of Customs duties and free
trade and the necessary taxation for the purpose of meeting the
remission of the Customs duties before we commenced the railways
as the two do not bear on one another the slightest bit in the
world. We could have gone for free trade and a property or
income tax without stamps and without railways, as we actually
go for stamps and railways without remission of Customs duties,
the two schemes being quite distinct. I look forward to the future
advancement of the colony beyond the moment, and I think I
have shown that my Ministry will stand to all the broad principles
of our policy. Ido not say that because we may meet with some
rebuff that we will resign. We must submit to many defeats, but
we will not submit to indignity—we will not submit to any defeat
that we ought not to without credit. We will not gratify our
opponents by resigning through any action of the Legislative
Council (Cheers.) lam surprised at the opposition of the
merchants of A delaide to our Stamp Bill, who I think will have
much to gain by a free-trade policy, and should therefore have
helped the Ministry. I little thought that the genuine merchants
would have been so shortsighted and false to themselves. They
ought to see that if a property tax were applied to railways they
would get no free trade, because there would then be nothing to
recoup the loss of Customs. I believe that the merchants will
find that for every sixpence they spend in stamps they will, if the
Government are enabled to carry out their railway policy, receive
seven shillings and sixpence. It is the very maddest thing of
them to oppose such a scheme. You have been told that the
Stamps Bill will tax the poor man. That is simply a misleading
statement, and contrary to fact. Many men have had their
minds directed from the true state of affairs in regard to the
stamp duties. Ido not wish to be sarcastic, but there would be
a fine opportunity of being sarcastic at those who have purses
with money, and make so much of the statement that the stamp
duties would tax the poor man. I will just allude to the Schedule
of the Bill which I have in my hand. Look at the succession and
probate duties, and you will see that where the value of an estate
exceeds £5,000 and does not exceed £IO,OOO there is a tax of five


per cent.; that where it is upwards of £20,000 it is ten per cent.,
and I ask yourselves whether that tax is so likely to affect the poor
man. (Laughter.) Then for transfer or sale of any run or station, or
of any horses, cattle, or sheep, where the number of horses shall
exceed 50, or the number of cattle shall exceed 100, or the
number of sheep shall exceed 1,000 —I do not think many poor
men are likely to be called upon to pay very much towards the
taxation in such cases ! Then, again, look at the marriage settle-
ments ; I do not think the poor man is likely to be taxed very
much on that account! (Renewed laughter.) Then, further,
there is the tax upon the conveyance or transfer on any property,
real or personal. Ido not think the poor man likely to be much
affected here in such cases ! Nor is the poor man likely to be
greatly victimized by the two > per cent, upon bank notes ! I
simply refer to these to show what is the intention of the written
law as against the arguments of those who oppose the measure on
the ground that it is oppressive to the poor man. With regard to
the receipt stamps, they have never proved oppressive in England,
New South Wales, or New Zealand. Even with respect to a tax
on bills of exchange and receipts, although at first they might be
found to be a little harassing, yet after the people get used to them
I think they will be as easily managed as are postage stamps on
letters. I have no doubt if postage stamps were not now used and
it was proposed to introduce them there would be just such an
opposition as the stamps meet with, because that which is
imagined is always worse than the reality when it comes. I am
sure no greater difficulty will be experienced than is felt with re-
gard to postage stamps on letters. It is only fair that the wealthy
man should pay according to the money he makes and his
business profits. The Stamps Bill will reach that class in
proportion to their means and business done, and that
is fair and just taxation. (Hear, hear.) There are no two
men in the country who would be more harassed or suffer
more loss, if such was to be the effect of the Stamp Bill, than the
Chief Secretary and the Treasurer. Where men of their position
and business say to the people of the country “We will submit to
be taxed for the good of the country, I contend that the least
their brother merchants could have done would have been to have
supported them in this matter. (Cheers.) Some wish, how ever, to


wait. Tiie waiting people comprise the cowards who are afraid of
taxation, and are like the man who is about to jump into a cold
bath but is afraid to do so, although he knows it would be for his
good. Then there are the opponents of the succession duties, who
would ruin the colony to protect the millionaire’s bequests ; then
there are other opponents of stamps, who think that the farmer
by his section and the labourer by his sugar and tea ought to pay.
Any one but themselves. (Hear, hear.) Two of the members,
Mr. Simms and Mr. Smith, who on other questions have been good
supporters of the Government, opposed us on the stamp duties.
Mr. Simms, however, admitted that the general policy of the
Government will be good for the country, and has therefore
swallowed his prejudices regarding the Stamps Bill. I will fear-
lessly say to these gentlemen that if there is any class of men who
will be benefitted by the increase of Adelaide, the greater traffic
and the greater business there, consequent upon our policy, it is
the class Mr. Simms and Mr. Smith represent. There is another
class who have greatly opposed the Government policy of taxation-
I will not mention names, but they are the agents of the absentees.
(Hear’, hear.) If you look through Schedule B, you will see that
their transactions, which hitherto have escaped taxation, will be
reached. These are the principal classes who with a few others
have thrown out the Bill. I wish you to recognise clearly why
the Ministry desire to have a second session. We feel that we
ought not to wait—that now or never is the time. (Hear, hear.)
If you only look at the situation and think upon it, you will see
the danger of waiting. If the Government have a good policy,
let the country adopt it at once and for ever ; and if it is not a
good policy, shovel it off and have done with it. Taking it that
the circumstances require the Ministry to retire—l do not say that
is necessary—(Hear, hear) —and I do not think any one of my
colleagues will hang on to office, but will rather retire if necessary
with the honour we have won—l ask whether a new Government
would immediately take up our policy, and if they decided to go
into the English market to borrow, would they introduce a Stamp
Bill noticing the fate of ours 1 No, it would be a postponement,
1 .ook at it either way. If stamp duties are refused and the present
Ministry retire, the incoming Government will do nothing till
June. Considering the first aspect—the retirement of the Ministry
■no one can ensure a scheme that will be accepted other than


stamps. Probably there would be great opposition to any scheme,
a number of crises, and possibly a dissolution. A new Government
would probably take a six months’ recess, as they would be entitled
to time to consider their system of taxation, and that would carry
us into 1877. The Ministry then would be in the same position
probably if crises are to arise as this Government would now be if
we are left without our Stamps Bill j and it is impossible for any
man to tell how such agitation would end. We therefore think we
have done right in insisting that the difficulty shall be met and
settled as soon as possible. Having the stamps, we can then
appeal with justice and strength for other sources of taxation
towards our ultimate policy. Without them and the power to
carry out other taxation, the life and soul of the policy is
gone. When people speak to me, as some do, about bad times
coming, and our not being able to bear the burden, and that
the interest would be too much, and that therefore we should not
try to borrow so largely, I say it might as well be argued that one
should not attempt to climb because he was afraid to fall. Ido
not hesitate to say that the colony would get more good out of a
loan of £3,000,000, introduced and expended as the present
Government propose to expend it, and in the time we hope to
expend it, than out of £5,000,000 in double the time. (Cheers.)
In these days promptness is everything, and there will be twice
the gain in spending £3,000,000 now than in spending £6,000,000
during twice the period. I hope the people of the colony will not
forget to take this into consideration ; and as soon as the Govern-
ment are able to spend £3,000,000 advantageously we will then
spend other millions if necessary when we show we are able to do
it with care and advantage. (Cheers.) If we do not launch out
a little bit we shall be stopped for want of supplies and population
and development, and then we shall really become what the
Melbourne people have taunted us with being—“ a mere farinaceous
village.” (Laughter.) Some of our opponents say the action of
the Legislative Council will not delay the policy of the Govern-
ment, but it has already done so, for if the Council had met
the Assembly by suggestions, I have no reason to suppose the
latter House would have been unreasonable; and by this time
therefore we woidd have been half through our railway policy.
(Hear, hear.) One good feature in the proposed taxation is that it


will be levied in proportion to the property held and also to
the business done. Do those who accept the cry for all the
revenue to be raised by direct taxation realize what it
will be for the taxgatherer to be constantly coming for a
tax in proportion only to the property they hold and not to the
business done 1 That ought fairly to be considered, because
many of those who are opposing stamp duties do it with
a view to direct taxation. It is more to the interest of
the country that some proportion of the taxation should
be levied in reference to the business done, and not by direct
collection at our doors every quarter or six months, whether we
are conveniently prepai’ed to pay it or not. It is only fair and
just in thinking over this matter to consider that side of the ques-
tion, and that the merchants of Adelaide and those who are
engaged in trade will only pay stamp duties in proportion to the
business done. (Hear, hear.) I know that the Murray Railway
is not popular in this district, but the general interest of the
people require it, and the general voice of the people desire it.
Twelve years ago the Assembly passed a Bill for having a railway to
the River Murray near the North-West Bend. It was thrown out
by the Council, and Sir H. Ayers is now the only one present in
the Council who then opposed it. If that railway had been
carried out you would not have had the Echuca line, or at all
events it would never have obtained the hold it now has on the
Riverine settlements. Do not be jealous of the Murray Railway,
but get the traffic down the river as far as you can, resting assured
that so soon as there comes a large and heavy traffic water carriage
will be generally adopted, and Goolwa and Victor Harbour will be
in a good position for that. (Cheers.) No railway ever did
or can compete for heavy goods traffic with water carnage, as said
by Mr. R. B. Smith in his evidence before the Select Committee.
What the people of South Australia have to fear is the great
struggle between Victoria and ourselves. If only we once get the
traffic down the river it must ultimately come to Goolwa and
Victor Harbour. You have already some evidence of the fact
by the presence amongst you of the eminent Melbourne firm of
McCulloch & Co., who, I presume, did not come for any other
purpose than that of securing a reduction on the freights paid in
Melbourne, but who arc finding I think that with the facilities


the Government are proposing to give them it will be their best
policy to get the traffic down to Victor Harbour and the Goolwa,
(Hear hear.) Therefore I say, by all means get the traffic from
Victoria. If you cannot get it at your doors, get it as near
as you can, and then eventually it will come here. (Cheers.)
Another question touching on that traffic is that of introducing
population for making our railways. Ho Government would
dare to introduce anything like the amount of population
without railways that they would with them. What we
are doing at present is starving for population. It is no question
of wages, but men—Anglo-Saxon mind and body—that we want.
(Cheers.) If we had 2,000,000 of people here we should be
a greater and a better country ; 200,000 here is perfectly ridicu-
lous. We hope to see this policy carried out. If so, in addition
to the .£120,000 we have to spend this year on immigration, you
will find that the railways will, with advantage to the working-
classes themselves, enable the Government to double and even
treble that amount. I never will be a party to immigration
merely for the purpose of reducing wages, and no Government
dare do so in the face of the colony. Just before I commenced
speaking the Treasurer received a telegram stating that the Lady
Jocloyn left London on Saturday last with 504 immigrants.
(Cheers.) I would like to see a shipload like that come in every
week if we had work to give them. (Cheers.) We have £120,000
for immigration purposes, the additional £20,000 comes forward as
an unexpended balance from last year. The interest upon that
will be £5,400. The revenue we shall get from the immigrants,
according to the ordinary rate, over and above the interest on the
money, supposing we borrowed it, would be from £25,000 to
£30,000. So that in a mere monetary point of view there is no
investment so good, at least so long as we have the means of employ-
ing our Anglo-Saxon brethren here. (Cheers.) I do not wonder
that Mr. Strangways said we should borrow £500,000, especially
when he put it in this way—that we should have difficulty in
borrowing £3,000,000 unless we were prepared to spend £500,000
out of it on immigration. I do not think it would be wise, however, to
borrow money for the pupose of spending it on immigration ; but
I venture to say that the sum of money the Government propose to
expend in immigration during the next three and a half years, or


perhaps a little longer, in carrying out what we propose, if we are
authorized to carry it out, will he more than equivalent to the
£500,000 mentioned by Mr. Strangways. (Cheers.) I say this
because the revenue will be advancing, and the Government will
be able to put aside safely sufficient to expend in immigration.
(Cheers.) The country will then go ahead, business in Adelaide
will prosper, and farmers will be better off, for trade will then
have life and vigour infused into it, and the merchants will have
a life and energy to which for some time they have been strangers.
(Cheers.) It is our duty as a Government first to consider South
Australia, but I cannot help feeling proud of being an English,
man, and feeling how glad we should be if greater numbers of our
English brethren were out here helping us ; and I hope the time
will come when we shall be able to help them. I recollect what
England did in extending assistance to the Americans in the time
of their trouble, to the French in the hour of their bitter experi.
ence, and to other distressed nations ; and I hope the time will
come when we shall be able to assist our English friends from
some such motive as that. (Cheers.) At present we are too poor
and too busy in, so to speak, reclaiming the desert ; but if we are
bold the time will come. I do not look upon this colony as a
mere appanage of Victoria. We may to some extent have been
excused in the past for saying it was no use trying to go ahead
while Victoria had such gold and wealth as she possessed. But
now I ask the people of South Australia to be bold instead of
quietly sleeping on and resigning themselves to being outstripped
by Victoria. Let us recognise that we have got the Murray-mouth
and a larger and grander country than Victoria, and in the course
of a few years—perhaps not five or ten, but in the life of many
now living—we are bound to beat Victoria; and it is in this
spirit, calmly looking at the whole question without thoughts of
rhetoric, that I ask the people of this colony to grapple with the
task and to put on their armour. (Loud cheers.) It was pointed
out to me only the other day how peculiar were the advantages
possessed by South Australia. We have Western Australia
on the west, the Northern Territory on the north, Queensland
on the north-east, New South Wales along our eastern border,
and Victoria to the south. In fact we are the very centre
of the colonies, and from all the best producing districts of


Queensland, New South Wales, and Victoria the great river
draining these districts must naturally bring the trade down
to our ports. This more than anything induces me to look forward
to a great future for South Australia —this urges me to endeavour
to open ixp the country. There is no harbour of importance
between Port Victor and King George’s Sound excepting
Port Lincoln, and the whole drainage of the interior of these
colonies will naturally come down to South Australia if we are
wise. Under such circumstances it would be madness not to show
we are men and mean to open up the country. (Cheers.)
Especially does this appear important when we consider how the
Victorians are awakening up to their geographical position. No
man in his dreams has ever ventured to realize fully what the
River Districts may and ought to do for us. From this point of
view it is that I look forwards towards the greater freedom of
trade—freedom of trade not only to benefit South Australia, but
as ultimately leading to federation. (Cheers.) I think it is a
disgrace that as an Anglo-Saxon people we should continue to
have a war of tariffs existing amongst us. The colonies at present
are a bundle of sticks. Federated we would even now be a nation,
and a nation which could feel that we could lift up our heads
with other nations of the world. (Cheers.) If we are to continne
free-born Australians we must have federation. We are bound to
look abroad and beyond to-day. Colonies becoming nations cannot
afford to think only of to-day. The Dutch, in the war on Acheen>
are thinking of the pressure this new Anglo-Saxon empire will
hereafter bring on their settlements. And here I may express my
intense regret at the treaty which delivered Acheen over to them.
The Japanese, after a sleep of 2,000 years, are rousing themselves
and looking ahead. Even now we have Japanese Commissioners
visiting us and the neighbouring colonies in order to acquire
information. The French in New Caledonia are also thinking
beyond the day, while Prussia, Russia, and France are looking
eagerly at New Guitiea and other islands near our coasts. With
the whole East seething and boiling with awakening energy, and
with threats of war and rumours of war,* it would be criminal if
we continue asleep, and, as portions of the British nation,
do not consider the importance of defending ourselves against
foreign attack. To do this there must be federation. Although


we have nothing to fear from Japan—a great race and nation
whose dispositions will be friendly—yet there is a nearer and
still more powerful nation—the Chinese—who may give us trouble,
who may hereafter overrun this continent like locusts unless
we federate. It will be a disgrace therefore to us as a British
people if we do not look forward to making ourselves a nation.
These thoughts have urged on me a yearning for advancement.
If South Australia is developed that will lead us on to
free trade, which will bring federation, and federation will
make us a nation, and being a nation we shall be able to
protect ourselves from the spoiler, to maintain ourselves as worthy
sons of a race to which we are proud to belong. (Cheers.)
Then we shall dominate in the Southern and Pacific Oceans.
(Cheers.) This is a future we should look forward to with pride,
and towards the accomplishment of which we should not be
neglectful. The pressure will be as great on us in no distant years
as that which brought about the union of the northern colonies of
America, and we can do no harm in following the example of the
wise men who brought about that. (Cheers.) On this question I
have no fear whatever, I have no fear for the future of this
colony. lam not alarmed by any doubts, if we be only bold. I
venture to say to you in the words of Longfellow, uttered only
in August last to the American people :
“ Write on your doors the saying wise and old—
Be bold, be bold, and everywhere be bold.
Be not too bold ; yet, better the excess
Than the defect —better the more than less ;
Better, like Hector, on the field to die,
Than, like the perfumed Paris, turn and fly.”
(Cheers.) I ask you to be bold ; I ask the people of this country
to be bold ; I ask you to gird on your armour, and carry you like
men, to make use of your talents —not like the man with one talent,
who returned it useless to his master, but like the man with five
talents, who returned to his master other five talents. (Cheers.) You
have five talents ; no C(funtry on earth has better advantages.
(Cheers.) We have here beauty and fruitfulness equal to the
gardens of the poets. (Cheers.) We can grow the rose of Cash-
mere, the orange of Portugal, the almond of Palestine, the olive of


Spain, the mulberry of Italy, and the vine of France in a manner
which those countries themselves cannot surpass. (Cheers.) Our
hills are full of copper, of iron, and of gold ; and I ask the people
of this country to assist in developing these grand resources ; I
ask the thoughtful men of South Australia to look a little ahead,
and to teach their fellow men to look ahead. (Cheers.) I asked
the House of Assembly to be true to the people, and I ask the
Legislative Council —I respectfully ask the Legislative Council—
to put some faith in their country. (Prolonged cheering.)
Page 24, line 26—For 3,408,000 read 3,904,000.
“ 32, “ 26—For 29f read 14|.
“ “ “ 27—For 75 read 17.
Printed at the Advertiser Office, Adelaide, South Australia.


■
-r
'
4 ! ‘




■, .;-■■ ‘ ■
s:
