

r HUv
SPEECH
DELIVERED IN THE
XiEGtISIjATIVJE ASSEMBLY
IN HEDLY ON THE
MOTION OF WANT OF CONFIDENCE
IN THE
ROBERTSON MINISTRY
DECEMBER 22, 1868.
HENRY PARSES, M.P.
SYBNifiY :
E. OTJNNINGHAME & CO., 186 PITT STREET.
1869.




On Wednesday, December 9, the following Resolutions were moved
in the Legislative Assembly by Mr. Parkes :—(1) That the
present Administration does not possess the confidence of this
House. (2) That the foregoing Resolution be communicated by
Address to His Excellency the Governor.
Mr, Robertson, as the leader of the Government, followed Mr.
Parkes, and from the beginning to the end of his speech, indulged
in the most rancorous abuse of his predecessors in office, but
advanced neither fact nor argument in support of his own position.
The example of the Premier was copied by his colleagues in con-
tinuing the debate, which was protracted over twelve days, and
repeatedly interrupted in its course by irrelevant discussions,
apparently raised by members on the Ministerial benches, with the
sole object of throwing discredit on the mover. These tactics,
though little calculated to raise their authors in public estimation,
had their desired effect in allowing time for influences to be brought
into play to restrain some members opposed to the Government
from voting, and to induce others to vote against their expressed
convictions. The result was a majority of votes, coupled with an
expression of no confidence by several of the gentlemen who voted,
for the Robertson Ministry.
At the conclusion of this irregular and unprecedented debate,
December 22, the following Speech was delivered by Mr. Parkes
in reply. It is republished in the present form at the request of a
number of hon. gentlemen who voted for the Resolutions.
Sydney, December 26, 1868.




SPEECH.
Mr, Parkes, after a pause, rose to reply, and was received with
cheers. He said, a stranger witnessing the proceedings of this
House for the last fortnight would naturally come to the conclusion
that the Government had moved a vote of want of confidence in the
member for Kiama. (Hear, hear.) He did not think the idea
would dawn upon any man’s mind that the Government itself was
challenged to prove its title to power. (Hear, hear.) For his own
part he had listened with as much patience, as much calmness, and
as much attention as he could command to discover the defence of
the lion, gentlemen occupying the Treasury benches, hut he had
listened in vain ; for this long and unprecedented debate had been
characterised not by any single word of defence on the part of these
Ministers, but by a striking absence of all defence. (Hear, hear.)
Indeed, the only speech that was delivered on the Government side
of the House in which any attempt was made to meet this motion
was the speech of the hon. member for East Sydney, Mr. Neale.
That gentleman, in the few words he addressed to the House,
avoided all the faults of those with whom he sat, and in those few
words he put forth the only case which the Government had to
show. He told the House that any change made at this season of
the year must necessarily lead to a good deal of confusion in the pub-
lic business; and no doubt this was the only case that the Ministers
could put forth. There had been much mis-statement of fact and
much vilification of their opponents, but no argument, no declaration
of policy in support of the position of the Ministers. It was idle
to call the statement put forth by the hon. gentleman at the head
of the Government to forestall this motion—so as to have some-
thing to go to the country—a declaration of Cabinet policy. What
was the policy of a Government ? He apprehended that it was the
declaration of a definite course of action based upon some clearly
defined set of principles. But did we find anything like that in the
loose statement which was put forth on the 9th of this month by
the hon. member for the Clarence ? On the contrary, we simply
found a number of loose utterances, the hon. gentleman saying in
so many words that they would endeavour to do certain things if
they were permitted to do them | and we all knew well enough from
a long past experience of the hon. member in former Governments
that if they could only ascertain what was the will of the House,
they would do any mortal thing under the sun to conform to the
will of the House. (Cheers.) But that was simply shifting their


own views so as to suit those of the majority. A very large amount
of abuse was directed against him, and he found himself rising to
reply upon speeches delivered in this long debate in reference to
which he should have to make two speeches instead of one, —for he
had to defend himself against the aspersions so unnecessarily and
inopportunely cast upon him, and he had also to reply to the little
that had been said on the subject of his motion. He had to defend
himself against a series of attacks, which, taken as a whole, and
coming from the leaders of this Government, conclusively shewed to
every fair and reasonable mind that, if for no other cause, these
men were unfit to govern the country. (Hear, hear.) The hon.
gentleman at the head of the Government thought well in his
attempts at disparagement directed at him, to say that Mr.
Duncan’s matter was not the cause of his retirement from the late
Government. He should like to know whether there was a single
fair-minded man in the country who had considered the proceeding,
as revealed in the explanations of the late Premier and the corres-
pondence read to the House, who could possibly arrive at such a
conclusion as that. Did the hon, member himself ever hint that he
had arrived at any such conclusion until he confronted him with
the present motion ? The hon. member went on to charge against
him that through the whole course of his life he had acted from
double motives—one set to be paraded before the public, and
another to be kept within his own breast, but he had failed to
adduce any instance of conduct that would justify such a
charge. The hon. member next charged him with carrying
papers from the Colonial Secretary’s office, and we all
heard the hon. member’s boast that he would issue a search warrant
and obtain the papers by the hands of a policeman. What had
become of the hon. member’s ridiculous threat ? The hon. member
then charged him with withdrawing papers from the Government
printer, when by the hon member’s own showing he left the matter
in type to be disposed of in any way the Government thought fit,
and that the distribution of the type took place by the direction of
the Government after he had left it The next charge was based
on some minute of the hon. and learned member for the Lachlan in
reference to a minute of his affecting Mr. Halloran, the Under-
secretary in the Colonial Secretary’s office. Why this matter had
been dragged before the House he was entirely at a loss to under-
stand, and as it appeared to have caused some misapprehension
out of doors he should occupy some two or three minutes in ex-
planation. Mr. Halloran proceeded on leave of absence to
Victoria and Tasmania, and that gentleman represented to him
that he should be disposed to devote a portion of his time to a
personal inspection of the Industrial Schools in Victoria, and the
Asylums for the Insane in Tasmania, so as to obtain the most
accurate information concerning those institutions. The Asylums
in Tasmania had a very high reputation, Mr. Halloran’ s


duties had much to do with the practical details of similar
establishments in this colony, and he thought the informa-
tion would be of value, and he authorised the payment of Mr.
Halloran’s travelling expenses, some thirty pounds, on condition
of his obtaining this information. Before Mr. Halloran returned,
he had left office, and the hon. and learned gentleman at the head
of the Government thought fit to disallow that expenditure, not-
withstanding that he had authorised it. The money was therefore
not paid; and he thought he had not been handsomely treated by
his late colleagues in the matter. Then, with respect to his own
travelling expenses, ho had already explained that these charges
were actually founded upon an instance in the hon. gentleman’s
own Ministerial career. They related to only two journeys ont of
eight or ten which he undertook to different parts of the colony
during the time he held office. Then it struck him that the hon,
gentleman at the head of Government when he made the charge
about the suppression of a despatch must have had an enormous
amount of hardihood to venture on such ground. The despatch
had not been suppressed. His Excellency questioned, by his
minute, whether it was worth while to publish the despatch, and
the Ministers decided that it was not worth publishing. It had
since been published, and anybody could see that there was nothing
in it which could render its publication at all necessary or im-
portant, Not one in fifty of the despatches which arrived in this
colony were laid before the House. Then the hon. gentleman at
the head of the Government, followed by the Treasurer, had uttered
a tirade of abuse against him for having spoken in terms of dis-
respect against his late colleagues, Mr. Eaoar and Mr. Wilson.
The hon. member was the last man who had any title to speak of
Ministers using terms of disrespect towards their colleagues. He
had never heard more opprobrious terms coming from one man
towards another than the terms he had heard applied by the hon.
member to his former colleague, the hon. member for the Glebe, and
he had heard the hon. member speak in terras of greatest contempt
of the gentleman whom he now in public delighted to call his
“ distinguished friend.” The hon. member made a great parade of
some supposed rupture and subsequent reconcilement between him
and his late colleagues ; but there never was a rupture. He dis-
approved of some part of the conduct of the Government, and he
told the Premier so in clear terms; but when he left the Cabinet
for the last time, he shook hands with Mr. Eagar. We never had
had any open quarrel. The hon. gentleman seemed to think that
it was impossible for men to disapprove of some course of action
without going into a violent personal quarrel about it. He was
prepared to have given his support to the Government he had left,
and he did support them on the only occasion that he had an op-
portunity of doing so. It did not follow because he did not choose
to sit in the same Cabinet with Mr. Eagar, that, therefore, he


could not support a Government of which that gentleman was a
member. The hon. member charged him with endeavouring to
prevent him from making his statement; but the fact was, that
he immediately gave way when he saw that the hon. gentleman
desired to make a statement. He was called out of the
House during a part of the hon. gentleman’s speech, and
for that the hon. gentleman indulged the House with a tirade of
childish abuse against him for running away from his attacks.
These things were not in themselves worth notice, and he only
mentioned them to show how little were the subjects which the hon.
gentleman stooped to in order to traduce the character of an
opponent. Then it was said that the motion had not been brought
forward in good faith, but simply to cloak the misconduct of the
late Government. How could that under any circumstances be
possible ? The hon. gentlemen opposite, with their ferret-like
propensities, with all their ingenuity for discovery, had been in
office sufficiently long to detect any misconduct of the late Govern-
ment', and if they were put out to-morrow, they would have the
means of making any such misconduct public to the world. As far
as he had been able to collect the opinions of thinking and
respectable people, the attacks they had already made, altogether
unjustifiable as their own supporters admitted them to be, had
recoiled in odium and disgrace upon the heads of authors.
The Premier did not conclude until he designated him (Mr.
Park.es) as an impostor and a person altogether unfit to hold a
seat in this House; and then the Treasurer followed, by charging
him with profiting by the receipt of money for travelling expenses.
These were the words the hon. gentleman used. At other times the
Treasurer said that he did not intend to impute anything improper
to him. He did not know whether he was to understand that the
hon, member really did not know the meaning of the language he
uttered, or whether he wished the imputation to go forth to the
world, while at the same time he attempted to conciliate the support
of his (Mr. Parkes’s) friends by saying that he did not mean to
impute anything improper. Notwithstanding several collisions
between the hon. gentleman and himself, they had preserved hitherto
a very friendly acquaintance; but so long as these imputations on
his character were unretracted, the hon. member and himself must
henceforth be separated. Then the late Government were openly
charged with acts of corruption. These charges had dwindled down
to two —a charge of some £2O for cab hire, and the expense of a
lunch on the occasion of the opening of the line to Marulan. [Mr.
Samuel : “ And the gratuities.”] He knew nothing about the
gratuities. He was sure the hon. member must see that he could
not have known anything of them. The hon. member for West
Sydney (the late Treasurer) would no doubt have gone fully into
that matter the other night but for his indisposition. The only
tangible things in the shape of improper expenditure, which had


been alleged against a Government who had been two years and
nine months in office, and which had often been described as one of
the most powerful Administrations which had ever existed —were
that £2O had been spent in cab hire, and that something less than
£IOO had been spent for a lunch on the opening of the railway to
Marulan. The cab hire, he said again, was indefensible. He did
not in any way pretend to defend that expenditure, and he thought
the money ought to be refunded. With regard to the lunch at
Marulan, he thought that was a justifiable expenditure, and that
the only mistake made was that invitations of the same character
were not issued to all members of Parliament. But to attempt to
mix up the expenditure of some £9O for that lunch at Marulan
with the various entertainments given by the late Ministers, was
another of the disgraceful artifices to which the present Ministers
had resorted for the most unworthy purpose of traducing the
characters of their predecessors. The hon, gentleman at the head
of the Treasury knew full well that in all those various entertain-
ments given by the members of the late Ministry not a shilling ever
came out of the public Treasury. He took exception to a turn
which had been given to some remarks of his in regard to the
Collector of Customs. It had been stated that he said Mr. Berney
was appointed because he would be subservient to the Treasurer’s
purposes. He never intended that his statement should have such
a personal application as that.
Mr. Samuel : The hon. member stated (and is so reported)
that the late Treasurer told him he appointed Mr. Berney to the
office of Collector of Customs because he would be subservient to
him.
Mr. Eagar : I never said such a thing.
Mr, Samuel : Perhaps the hon. member will allow me to read
from the Sydney Morning Herald, “ It was quite true that his hon.
friend argued Mr. Duncan’s case to the last moment, and then, to
his (Mr. Parkes’s) amazement, stated that if the Treasurer would
not give way, he would. When this decision to dismiss Mr.
Duncan was arrived at, another decision also was arrived at, and
that was to reduce the salary of the Collector of Customs—not for
the purposes of economy, but, as it was avowed, in order to degrade
the office, and to make the officer more subservient to the
Treasurer. [Mr Eagar : It is not so.] The hon. member must
not contradict that, because he had heard it from his own lips.
He stated that hitherto the Collector of Customs had been too
important—too unmanageable an officer, and that it was de-
sirable to have a person who would be more easily managed.”
Mr. Parkes : Surely the hon. member must see the difference
between that report and what he alleged the other night. He
confined his statement to the office of Collector of Customs. lie
was so reported. What he said was that the salary of the office was
reduced with the avowed object of degrading the office, and making


the officer more subservient—more easily manageable. The hon.
Secretary for Lands, following suit, commenced by deprecating the
abuse which had been one of the characteristics of this debate.
He (Mr. Parkes) would like to know whether the hon. gentleman
and his colleagues did not set the first example in their printed
addresses and in their speeches to their constituents ? For the
first time in our Parliamentary history, in-coming Ministers in
their addresses to their constituents, rested their whole claims on
abuse of their predecessors, and not on their own merits. This
was followed up when they went before their constituents
—in the case of the Premier, by employing a whole address ex-
tending over three hours with such abuse. But he (Mr. Parkes)
denied that he set any such example. He denied that the obser-
vations with which he introduced this motion travelled beyond the
fair limits of parliamentary debate. He certainly told the
House what the chief Ministers had said of each other on previous
occasions ; but that was strictly pertinent to his position, because
those gentlemen had with a flourish of trumpets told the country
that they were acting in harmony, that they were brought together
by the ties of Parliamentary action, and that they were about to
restore constitutional Government. They thus fairly challenged
him to show the contrary— that so far from being entitled to put
forth any lofty claims like these, they, in a manner more re-
markable than their predecessors, had been opposed to each other,
not on one or two occasions only, but through a long series of
years—in fact from soon after their entrance into this House until
the time, of recent date, when they began to find that they had a
common interest in endeavouring to get into office together. Then
the hon. Secretary for Lands indulged in some extraordinary ob-
servations upon what he described as a “ picnic where this motion
had been concocted under the influence of champagne and beer !”
(A laugh.) He should imagine that it was no unprecedented
thing for gentlemen acting together in public life to meet at a
dinner or at a picnic or on other similar occasions ? (Hear, bear.)
He could not forget that on the very day of this so-called picnic,
the members of this harmonious Government invited their own
supporters, and their opponents too, (hear, hear), to a dinner
within the precincts of this House. (Hear, hear) If there were
champagne and beer at the picnic of the Opposition, they had the
good sense to confine it to their own members. But at this great
ministerial dinner, held on the same day, where, he supposed, if
there was not champagne there was at least ginger-beer, (laughter),
every hon. member of the Opposition, except himself and one or
two others who were too far gone (laughter) were invited, and the
beauty of the sequel was, that not one of those hon. gentlemen
attended. (Cheers from Opposition benches.) His hon. friend
for Parramatta (Mr. Parnell) was addressed in the most loving
terms. (Laughter.) The hon. the Premier was quite satisfied


that that young man from the country would give him a fair trail,
(Laughter.) And so north and south and far west, these missives
of invitation, bearing the message of love and peace, were sent to
all but a few grey-headed sinners who were too far gone for pardon.
(Laughter.) It was rather too bad of the Government to
try to entrap the members of the Opposition. The hon.
member opposite declared that he (Mr. Parkes) came to the House
with twenty votes in his pocket ? Well, that was a serious charge
against a man in the position he occupied at present ? He could not
retort the same charge upon the hon. member, for he did not believe
there were two men in the House who would follow him anywhere.
Then the lion, the Secretary for Lands gave them the following
definition of a faction. A faction, he said, was a number of persons
banded together for purposes neither public nor political! If that
were a correct definition of the term faction, he should think that
if they ever saw a faction in Parliamentary life in this colony they
saw it now on the Government benches, because they had there a
number of persons drawn from the most opposite corners of our
political world, with the most opposite opinions—with sympathies
never in common. They were banded together certainly not for
any purpose of government, because the elements among them were
so conflicting as to render it impossible to carry out any kind of
government policy. They were banded together for purposes neither
public nor political, and what those purposes were some of them
could guess pretty well. It was said that several conspicuous
members of the House had always been opposed to Governments
of which they were not themselves members, and if that charge
applied to any one man more than another, it applied most forcibly
to the hon. member for the Hastings. He could not recollect the
time after the first six months which followed the inauguration of
responsible government, when that gentleman was not a violent and
inveterate opponent of Governments, except he was in office. He
had this unenviable distinction that he turned round on his former
colleagues in office as fiercely as he attacked others. He had this
pre-eminence over all other obstructionists. We all knew, very
well, how vehemenently he denounced, year after year, the hon. and
learned member for the Lachlan, We all have an acute remem-
brance of how readily he took office under that hon. and learned
member where he had the opportunity. And we all knew that the
moment another Government was formed by the hon. and learned
member, and he was left out, that he then turned round again and
was as violent and unprincipled as ever in his attacks upon the
Government. They had never had an exhibition of that kind,
except by the hon. member for the Hastings (Mr. Forster.) It
must be admitted to his credit that the hon. member at the head
of the Government supported his friends both while in office and out
of office. The hon. member (Forster) alone attacked the friends
with whom he had served in the same cabinet, just as bitterly, and


with as much hostility, as he attacked, in turn, all other men.
And he (Mr, Parkes) did not believe there had been a single month
of the hon member’s history, after the first six months of responsible
government, when he had not been in arras against any Government
of which he happened not to be a member himself. It did not
matter whether the Government did or did not bring in measures
which the hon. member approved of; his hostility was in no way
abated because the measures of the Government were in accordance
with his own professed principles. Then the hon. member with
unpardonable impertinence, alluded to what he called the semi-public
events in his (Mr. Parkes’s) career before he entered the House.
Suppose he were to allude to certain events in the hon. member’s
career. He had heard him charged with murder by an hon. member
who was now sitting in the same Cabinet with him. He had heard
the Postmaster-General taunt the hon, member with having been a
murderer of his fellow creatures. Then, again, the hon. member
had been pleased to allude to the circumstance that he (Mr. P arkes)
had accepted an offer to proceed to England on a mission for pro-
moting emigration, and he characterised that mission as one of the
greatest delusions that had ever taken place. He alluded to it as
something that was to cover him (Mr. Parkes) with disgrace.
Well, supposing it was all that the hon. gentleman said it was, —
supposing that that circumstance was capable of the construction
which the hon. member put upon it, —did the hon. member not see
that the odium would fall equally upon a friend of his own Govern-
ment. Hid not the hon. member see that all he had said of him
must also be said of Mr. Halley. He must surely be aware that,
if there were any truth in the allegations he made, they would affect
Mr. Halley in the same way and to the same extent as they did him
(Mr. Parkes.) Was the hon. member prepared to visit upon his
friend Mr, Halley the same amount of censure and odium ? But
what were the facts? Whether it was a mistake or not to send
persons to Europe to promote emigration, it was strictly in accord-
ance with views which he had entertained for many years. As far
back as the year 1854, when he was a member of the late Legislature,
before the Constitution Act became law, he was a member of a com-
mittee on emigration, which committee was presided over by
Mr. James Macarthur. And any one who would take the
trouble to look through the evidence given before that
committee would see that he entertained then precisely the
same views that were embodied in his motion in 1861. He
always believed it would be wise to have agents of this colony
in Europe to explain the advantages which the colony possessed as a
field for emigrants ; and that if efficient, zealous persons, who were
acquainted with the circumstances of the country, were maintained
in Europe permanently, the result wmuld be more substantially
beneficial than any result that could be obtained for the same
amount of money in payment of immigrants’ passages. He had


always maintained that view; lie maintained it still. But when
he submitted to the Legislature a motion—which, if he remembered
right, was carried unanimously—he had not the slightest idea that
one of the situations so created would be olfered to him. The
person who pressed him to accept the offer was Mr. D alley him-
self. If it had not been for the continuous exertions of that
gentleman in pressing him to accept the offer jointly with himself,
he never would have accepted it. He was offered the situation by
the hon. member opposite in very handsome terms, and when he
was recalled, he received a letter of thanks from the hon. member’s
Government. In speaking of this matter, he might say that he
always made a very wide distinction between an office of that kind
and the acceptance of permanent employment under Government.
He went to Europe as a semi-representative of the colony ; he knew
it could not be a permanent position. He was sure that the present
head of the Government, notwithstanding his hostility, would admit
that he (Mr. Parkes) had never at any time of his life made any
overture with a view to obtain employment under the Government
of the country. (Mr. Robertson, hear, hear.) As remarked by
his hon. friend, the late Solicitor-General, the present hon. Secretary
for Lands was quite willing at one time to forsake his constituents,
and go on a mission to New Zealand. (Hear, hear.) The Govern-
ment of New Zealand, soon after he (Mr. Parkes) went into office,
applied to the Government of this colony to recommend some person
to assist them in devising a better system for working their Govern-
ment. He (Mr. Parkes) recommended the hon. member for the
Hastings, who had been twice in office as Colonial Secretary and
had once occupied the position of Premier. He represented to the
New Zealand Government the advantage of having such a gentle-
man. But as soon as the New Zealand Government came to
understand who it was that he recommended, they said they were
much obliged, but they could do without him. [Mr. Samuel : Did
they say that in writing?] They said it in effect in writing. [Cries
of “ Oh, oh.”] He thought he had a perfect right to put his own
construction upon the case. [Mr. Robertson : They did not carry
their reform out.] They did carry it out, and the New Zealand
Government were assisted in their work by a gentleman who was
recommended by the Victorian Government. The hon. Secretary
for Lands had talked of him (Mr. Parkes) having violated con-
fidence, by dragging forth a letter written seventeen years ago.
He presumed the hon. member referred to a letter which was
written to him by the hon. member at the head of the Government.
He never dragged forth the letter. [Mr. Robertson : That’s just
what I complain of; you misrepresented the letter.] The letter
was addressed to him, and urged him to become a candidate for
Sydney in opposition to Mr. Cowper. He supposed the hon.
member would not deny that. [Mr. Robertson ; 1 ask you to
produce the letter.] He scarcely thought there could be much


confidence in a letter of that description. The lion. Secretary for
Lands wound up his speech on Friday night by a very characteristic
peroration, in which he charged the members of the late Govern-
ment with being plunderers of the public treasury. The hon.
member was famous for his abusive perorations. The members of
the late Government were in no way amazed or confounded when
that thunderclap fell upon their ears on Friday night, because they
had often heard the same kind of thing before; and it was done
much better when the hon, member’s denunciation fell upon the
head of the hon. member who was now his chief, when he described
the present Premier as sitting upon a dunghill of corruption—when
he described him as a thing so odious that he could only venture to
touch him with a pair of tongs. Well what did we see on Friday
night? They then found the hon. member for the Hastings climbing
up this dunghill of corruption to embrace the hon. member at the
head of the Government —and he embraced him without the assis-
tance of his famous pair of tongs. (Laughter.) They had heard a
good deal both in the house and out of it about his hon. and learned
friend Mr. Windeyer reading to the House a letter marked
“ private and very confidential.” It appeared to him to be a new
way of marking a letter ; he never saw a letter marked " very
confidential ” before. He would like to know in what the dis-
honourable conduct of his hon. friend consisted. In marking the
letter “private and very confidential,” was it intended to deny the
contents of the letter, and then to seal Iris hon. and learned friend’s
mouth as to the truth of its contents. The hon. and learned member
preserved the contents of the letter in strict confidence until the
terms upon which the offer was made to him of a high office in the
country were denied in that House. When the letter was spoken of
as containing something quite different to what had been alleged by
the hon. Premier, the Premier himself told his hon. and learned friend
to read the letter. First of all the offer which was made to his hon.
and learned friend was represented to be very different to what it
really was. His hon. and learned friend resented that. He was then
told to read the letter, by the writer himself, and with tnis per-
mission he did read it. The hon. member had the fullest
possible justification for reading the letter. The hon. Secretary
for Lands had been pleased to expend some of his bitterness upon
the hon, and learned member for West Sydney, and told the House
that the hon. member had not the capacity to understand a
principle 3 that the only capacity he ever exhibited was a capacity
for being made a tool of. The hon. Secretary for Lands then went
on to observe that the hon. and learned member was capable of
attachment, and that so were dogs and horses. Well, if that were
true with regard to the hon. and learned member for West Sydney,
how came the members of the present government to offer him the
high office of Attorney-General, with all its dangerous and conflicting
powers of grand jury, public prosecutor, and member of the


Executive ? (Cheers.) Nine years ago the hon. Secretary for
Lauds, who now gave such a low character of his hon. and learned
friend, pressed him to accept office as Solicitor-General. After nine
years’ experience they again pressed him to accept the office of
Attorney-General, and yet when he declined to be associated with
them, they turned round upon him and said he had not the
capacity to understand a principle—that he was only capable of
being made use of, and that his attachments were only such as those
of the lower animals of creation. We had not to look far for the
real offence of Mr. Windeyer, Ilis real offence consisted in this—
that ho understood principles and men too well—that he resisted
the offers of designing persons to make use of him, that he had an
honourable attachment to one with whom from his youth he had
continued to associate. What were we to think of gentlemen
holding these high offices who could be prepared to place the
destinies of the country in the hands of this gentleman, with all
manner of expressions of respect and confidence, and who, when he
declined their offer, could denounce him in the scurrilous and un-
justifiable terras hon. members heard on Friday evening. [Mr.
Robertson : I never denounced him.] The hon. member at the
head of the Government in the course of his attacks upon him (Mr.
Parkes) had many times and oft insinuated rather than stated that
he had in some way deserted him or his party. He might truly
say he never belonged to the hon. member’s party. The fact was,
that at this moment on the benches to the left of the chair there
were gentlemen sitting with him who were his oldest political
associates, and the hon. member opposite was surrounded by
comparative strangers, most of whom, if they had not been violently
opposed to him, had never been in accord with him unless it were
in a few exceptional cases. He (Mr. Parkes) certainly never
owed to the hon. member any political allegiance. He had received,
sometimes directly, sometimes indirectly, offers from the hon.
member, but had at all times declined them. The hon. member
himself many years ago represented him as possessing a position and
influence in the country which he certainly believed he never did
possess. [Mr. Robertson : Because I wished to get up a
subscription.] The time alluded to was the occasion when a
proposal was made to present him (Mr. Parkes) with a public
testimonial. In January, 1857, a public meeting was held at the
Royal Hotel to consider the propriety of presenting a public
testimonial to him. [Mr. Robertson : I subscribed <£2so ] The
hon. member was wrong altogether, A committee was formed at
that meeting, and a subsequent meeting was held on the 24th
January, when he (Mr. Parkes) wrote to the secretary declining to
receive the testimonial. At the second meeting, the hon. member
himself attended and spoke in opposition to a resolution moved
by Mr. Cowper, in these terms:
“ That this meeting desires to express its unfeigned sense of admiration of


the motives by which Mr. Parkes has been actuated in the just read,
and in sensitively shrinking from the acknowledgment of his public services,
which his fellow colonists were prepared to offer to him ; and, while
reluctantly acquiescing in Mr. Parkes’s determination to let those public
services speak for themselves, desires to put on record an example so
eminently worthy of imitation.’’
The hon. member (Mr. Robertson) moved an amendment on
Mr. Cowper’s resolution, and in doing so spoke of him in these
unwelcome terms of eulogy :
He could not accede to the resolution now before the meeting. Ho was not
at all surprised that Mr. Parkes, like other great men, should his
own services to the public, but he thought it was the duty of that meeting,
as it was of the country, to mark, at the present time, the remarkable services
which Mr. Parkes had given to the country. (Hear, hear.) What had been
Mr. Parkes’ career ? It was perfectly idle to talk about Mr. Parkes being a
young public man. He had for many years been a public writer of great
influence, and he had always written, and always worked upon that side
which was for the welfare of the people. Had he not been absolutely more
in the House of Assembly than most other gentlemen in it, since his election'r
(Cheers.) Talk about his services not being sufficiently ripe to claim a rc-
ward from the people of this county! Why, he knew of no man connected
with this country, in or out of it, Mr. Wentworth or any one else, who had
more claims than Mr. Parkes. (Cheers.) He had always stood by the
people and the best interests of the country. (Cheers.) He, at leapt, had
never sought any personal aggrandisement. He, at least, in devoting his
great talents to the public welfare, had abstained, at all times from seeking
any advancement whatever. (Cheers.) He believed they would be doing
very wrong if they were to allow the services of this great man, who under-
rated his own claims upon the country, to pass unrecognised —if they
abandoned this movement. (Hear, hear.) He was quite sure, from his
knowledge of the district ho came from,-and of the whole Hunter River
District, that this would not bo a matter that would stop the colonists. Ho
was quite sure that, throughout the length and breadth of the land, Mr.
Parkes was held in higher estimation than any gentleman in the community,
or who had ever been in the community (cheers) ; and ho was quite sure that
efforts would bo made to make this a national matter, and not simply a
matter of the citizens of Sydney. There were, he might be allowed to state,
many of them in that meeting who were not citizens of Sydney ; and there
were enough of the representatives of the liberal country districts there to
mark their high appreciation of the claims of Mr. Parkes. (Loud cheers.)
He would conclude by moving the following amendment; —‘That while
this meeting desires to express its unfeigned sense of admiration of the noble
and patriotic motives by which Mr, Parkes has been actuated in writing the
letter just read, and in sensitively shrinking from any acknowledgment of
public services, it is of opinion that those services have been such as to de-
mand the public recognition which it was determined at the previous pre-
liminary meeting of Mr. Parkes’s friends should be given to them.’
Mr. Robertson rose to order. The hon. member for Kiama was
referring to matters not before spoken to in the debate, and therefore
was irregular, there being no possibility of answering him. The
hon. member made reference to him when he had no opportunity of
reply, and ought not to be allowed thus to override the rules of
Parliament. His (Mr. Robertson’s) object in the circumstances
alluded to was to obtain money to pay off the mortgage of Sir
Daniel Cooper on the Empire newspaper, and he collected
XU, 500,


Mr. Parkes : The circumstances he was speaking of occurred
six months before those alluded to by the hon. member. Another
meeting was convened on the 2nd February, the other having been
on the 24th January. This was the advertisement:—
“Testimonial to Henry Parkes, Esq.—Pursuant to resolutions unanimously
passed at two public meetings held at the Royal Hotel, a public meeting of
the friends and admirers of Henry Parkes, Esq., will he held at the Lyceum
Theatre, York-street, this day, Monday, the 2nd February, at 2 o’clock pre-
cisely. The Honorable Charles Cowper, Esq., M.P., has kindly consented to
take the chair. The following resolutions will be submitted tothe meeting:
—l. That the meeting is unanimously of opinion that the public services of
Henry Parkes, Esq., in the patriotic efforts which he has made for many
years past to advance civil liberty, social progress, and good government, de-
mand the sincere and grateful acknowledgment of every Australian colonist.
2. That upon Mr. Parkes’s retirement, probably for a long period, from
public life, this meeting desires that a suitable and permanent memorial
should ho established of the high estimation of his public virtues by his
fellow colonists, and that a subscription be opened for the purpose of raising
funds for the purchase of an estate, to be vested in trustees for the of
Mr, Parkes's family. 3. That the earnest co-operation of the Australian
colonists, in promoting the objects of this meeting, bo solicited, and that
gentlemen favourable thereto be invited to aid in forming local committees,
and in soliciting subscriptions in aid of the proposed testimonial. C. G.
Reid, Honorary Secretary.’’
This proposed testimonial he declined, and it came to an end. It
was in promotion of this testimonial that the hon. member de-
livered the speech quoted. He attended the third meeting at the
Lyceum Theatre, and delivered another speech, from which the
following was an extract: —
“What had been the career, and what was the course taken by Mr.
Parkes ? It had been said that he was a young man, and that he had not
yet earned his laurels. What had been the position of that gentleman i
During the last thirteen or fourteen years he had been a public writer of the
greatest possible influence, and had done everything for the welfare of the
people of the colony. This great man, who had spent so many years of his
life advocating the rights of the people, had peculiar and great claims upon
the country. (Loud cheers.) But whilst they bowed to the determination
of that great man, he appealed to them and to the country, was it not their
duty to rally around the Empire ? (Loud cheers.) He appealed to them
whether it was right, or well, or proper, or commonly honest, that this great
man should have the interest of his family sacrificed, whose only object had
been to maintain their rights and the rights of their children, (cheers.) He
had declined to accept the demonstration proposed; well, then, there was
another course open to them, and that was to support the Empire. (Cheers.)
And to stand by it. They could do that without asking Mr. Parkes’s con-
sent. He was quite sure from his knowledge of the interior, that in every
hamlet, village and town, the most popular man was Mr. Parkes. (Loud
cheers.) Not only was he the most popular, hut it was a libel on the
pastoral and agricultural interests to say that Mr. Parkes was only the friend
of those resident in towns; for he was the friend of the whole country.
(Cheers.) And it was their duty to stand by him, as he hoped would do
every man in the country. (Loud and continued cheers).
Six months afterwards the circumstances of which the hon. member
spoke occurred, and which now required some explanation from
him. He (Mr. Parkes) was then connected with the Empire


newspaper. There was a mortgage on the paper of some £II,OOO
to Sir Daniel Cooper, and a number of persons proposed to take it
up from that gentleman, but in a manner to which he (Mr. Parkes)
objected. He stated his objections in writing, and was never a
consenting party to the transaction, except in endeavouring to
work it out after it was done. He wished to be left alone to deal
with his estate as other people did with theirs. He remembered
when Mr. J. L. Montefiore requested him to name persons who
would assist in the movement, that he declined to name anyone,
not believing that any good could result from the course being
taken, and he said he could not approve of it or be party to it.
The hon. member was one of a number to release the paper from
Sir Daniel Cooper’s mortgage, and what became of it ? He (Mr,
Parkes) had spent seven years of his life to create this paper as a
great independent public journal, acknowledged to be so by much
higher personages than the hon. member. But what did the gen-
tlemen do, who thus by their own voluntary interference, and with-
out his concurrence or approval, placed themselves in Sir Daniel
Cooper’s position in relation to the property ? They converted the
paper into one of the vilest party organs that ever existed in the
country. That was the matter to which the hon. member alluded.
These were matters, however, having little relevancy to the subject
under the attention of the House, but he thought on account of
what had been urged in attacks upon him, he was entitled to
some latitude. [Mr. Robertson : And no one else.] After the
insinuations indulged in and repeated aspersions cast upon him,
he had a perfect right to take liis own course in meeting those
various charges. The hon. member had accused him of nearly
every species of conduct that was unworthy. He had insinuated
that he had always had some object of self-advancement in view in
the discharge of his duties in this House, and hinted that he had
always been seeking some office from or association with the hon.
member. The hon member had at different times made offers to
him—on more than one occasion had offered him permanent em-
ployment, and on those occasions he (Mr, Parkes) had refused it.
[Mr. Robertson : that is not true —neither one nor the other.]
The hon. member must surely recollect that he came to his (Mr.
Pakkls’s) place of business and offered him places of great emolu-
ment in very direct terms; indeed the offer could be established
by writing. The hon member knew that he offered him the In-
spectorship of Prisons in direct terms. The hon. member knew
very well that he (Mr. Parkes) took very little time to decline it.
The hon. member must know that at different times he made some
other offers, though not in such direct terms, and he must know
that he was offered a place in the Government with which the
hon. member was identified, and that he declined this also.
Mr. Robertson again rose to order. The hon. member was
putting forth a number of statements not referred to previously in


the debate, and not true. He was quite sure it was irregular. Mr.
Speaker was permitting the hon. member to put forward those
statements. He submitted that it was contrary to the rules of
Parliament to make use of those statements; every one of which he
(Mr. Robertson) could contradict, and prove to be erroneous.
Mr. Speaker said he did not think the hon. member was
exceeding the ordinary rule. He had been attacked, and surely he
was justified in making statements in explanation.
Mr. Robertson : But not in introducing new matter. It was
the practice in the House of Commons not to introduce new matter
in a reply, and it used to be the practice here. This matter was
not introduced in the debate. The allegations were new and they
were false.
Mr. Speaker thought the hon. member was entitled to proceed.
Mr, Parkes said he was not in any way surprised at the conduct
of the hon. gentleman. On this motion being submitted, he
delivered a speech, in which he made an attack as irrelevant and
unparliamentary as was ever made. [Mr. Robertson : You had
the right to reply.] No doubt, it was consistent in the hon. member
to endeavour to prevent him from replying to the host of aspersions
cast upon him in this debate. He hoped he knew the limits within
which he might travel, and he was satisfied that the Speaker was
only doing him and the House justice in allowing him to adduce
such facts as were within his knowledge to rebut the statements
which had been made to damage him in the opinion of the House
and the country. No one was so blind but that he could see the
object of the hon. gentleman opposite. He repeated the hon.
member at different periods had sought to place him in permanent
employment, and these offers were made—at least some of them—
when he was a representative of the people; but he rejected them
all. To say that he was not offered office in the Government with
which the hon. member was connected was to deny what was known
to some of his colleagues and to many of his supporters. In
connection with these offers, there was one circumstance which had
had considerable influence on his public life, which he would
explain to the House. Soon after his election for Kiama in 1861,
it began to be known that the Ministry, of which the hon. member
for the Hastings and the hon. and learned member for the Lachlan
formed part, was about to come to an end. Parliament was in recess,
and as the opening of Parliament drew near, hon. members began
to predict the fall of the Ministry. The hon. gentleman opposite
waited upon him (Mr. Parkes) and asked him to move an amend-
ment to the Address, which amendment was subsequently moved by
Mr. Cowper, and resulted in the defeat of the Ministry,
Mr. Robertson : Is this all right too, Mr Speaker ?
Mr. Speaker said the hon. member in the course of the dehate
had been attacked, and surely he was entitled to bring forward


facts iu explanation of his conduct. The hou. member (Mr.
Robertson) seemed to think he was not entitled to say anything
that had not been said before.
Mr. Parkes : The hon. member had repeatedly said in this
debate that he (Mr. Parkes) was actuated by some bad feeling
towards him because he was not offered a seat in his Government,
or because he was not consulted, and he wanted to show that he
could not have taken office with him. Well, the hon. member
asked him (Mr. Parkes) to move this amendment on the Address
in 1864, but he told him that he was not prepared to take any such
course, and that although he disapproved of much that the Govern-
ment had done, he could not say how he should vote. The amend-
ment was moved by Mr. Cowper, the Ministry were defeated, and
a dissolution followed. During the time that the elections were
going on, the hon. member saw him (Mr. Parkes) several times,
and showed him lists or mentioned names of gentlemen who were
to form the new Government, and in all those lists his own (Mr.
Parkes’) name was included. [Mr. Robertson : Never ] It was
included with expressions anything but complimentary to some of the
hon. gentleman’s late colleagues. He (Mr. Parkes) never encouraged
or replied to these overtures. Eventually the new Parliament met,
Mr. Martin was defeated, and Mr. Cowper was charged with the
duty of forming a new Ministry. Mr. Coavper called upon him at
about 9 o’clock on the morning after receiving his commission, and
asked him (Mr. Parkes) to meet him at the Doctor’s (Laughter.)
He (Mr. Parkes) asked him what-Doctor’s, and he replied Dr.
Lang’s. He (Mr. Parkes) was occupied just then, but an hour
or so afterwards he went to Dr. Lang’s, and found the Doctor
and Mr Cowper in consultation. Mr. Cowper said he had sent
for him, as one of the oldest of his political friends, to consult him
as to who should be his colleagues. He produced a list of about
twenty names of gentlemen who were anxious or eligible for office.
Upon this list were the names of Mr. Lucas, Mr, Caldwell, Mr.
Cunneen, and about eighteen others. (Laughter.) Mr. Cowper
said “you see my difficulty is in having so many friends eligible for
office—in having such an overwhelming support. (Laughter.) If
I had not so many friends it would be comparatively easy, and
many of my friends think that the best way to get out of the
difficulty will be for the members of the former Government to go
back to office in a body.” Dr, Lang made some reply, but the
purport of it was that he thought some new blood ought to be in-
fused into the Ministry. (Dr. Lang : Hear, hear.) But the hon.
gentleman was so much embarrassed by his large support that he
could not afford to adopt the view of Dr. Lang. (Laughter.) Al-
though this conversation took place on the morning after Mr. Cowper
received his commission, the hon. gentleman took four or five days
to complete his Ministry, and during that time he (Mr. Parkes)
saw nothing of the hon. member, Mr. Robertson, On the last day


he met the hou. gentleman, who said he desired to see him. He
(Mr. Parkes) requested him to call upon him that evening, and he
did. He came and sat with him for an hour or so between 6 and 8
o’clock. He stated many things, and among others that the Govern-
ment was not yet formed, but he thought that something would be
done at 8 o’clock that night. Next morning he (Mr. Parkes) learnt
that the names of the new Government had been submitted to the
Governor at 3 o’clock on the previous afternoon, and he (Mr.
Parkes) determined then that under no circumstances would he
politically associate himself with the hon. gentleman. He had
stated this before to some of his friends, and he now made the
statement publicly. It was impossible, as hon. members would
see, for him to have associated with the hon. gentleman in the
present Ministry. Had the hon. gentleman not charged him with
some improper feeling towards him for not being included in his
Ministry, he should not have made this explanation. If he lived
fifty years he could not politically associate himself with the hon.
gentleman in any way. Coming to the resolution before the House
he submitted this motion in the exercise of his right, and in the
performance of his duty as a representative of the people. It was
clearly his right, and if he made a mistake in judgment he would
have to pay the penalty by the disapproval of the members of the
House. No question of his right or his duty in this matter could
be entertained. Personally, he was not desirous of making this
motion, but suggested the names of other gentlemen to move the
resolutions. It was the unanimous wish of many hon. gentlemen
with whom he had been long associated that the motion should be
placed in his hands, and he could conceive of no position more hon-
ourable than this. (Hear, hear.) He could shew clear reasons
why this motion should be made, and be carried. He was perfectly
certain that the division would show that the Government did not
possess the confidence of Parliament, and unless he was much
mistaken it did not possess the confidence of the country.
(Hear, hear.) An hon. member —he thought it was the hon, and
learned member for East Sydney, Mr. Burdekin —stated that the
decision of the electors showed that these gentlemen had the con-
fidence of the country, and that the results of the popular contests
ratified the choice of his Excellency in calling these gentlemen
to his councils. He (Mr. Parkes) did not think so. Two con-
tested elections were going on when this motion was placed upon
the business paper; one in West Sydney, and one in an electorate
not far from the metropolis. The result of the election for West
Sydney was the return of a gentleman who it was understood would
support the present Government, but he did not think that the result of
that election showed in any manner that the voice of the con-
stituency was against the Parliamentary Opposition. (Hear, hear.)
The election was carried by 193 votes, so that less than 100 votes
on the other side would have given the defeated candidate a


majority. On the side of the winning candidate the Roman
Catholic electors were massed as one man, (Hear, hear.) There
was the largest family influence in the colony, the wealth of the
candidate, the licensed victuallers who were banded together
by circular, many members of the Church of England, of which
the Campbell family had been munificient supporters, and then,
there was all the influence of the Government, and the influence
of the Cowper party. On the other side was an unknown man,
with nothing but his avowed principles to depend upon, and yet
this untried man, whose name had no public weight whatever, was
within 193 votes of the successful candidate. There were on the
side of the winning candidate certain circumstances which were
not very creditable—that for instance, which took place at the
doors of this chamber. In the election for Central Cumberland
the Roman Catholic electors were massed as one man under the
direction of the priests; and, to his own knowledge, there was all the
Government influence brought to bear on the same side. One
minister, thinking that he was a little borough-monger, went up to
canvass at Liverpool under the delusion that he had a sort of
right to drive his own workmen to the poll. Notwithstanding all
this, the gentleman supported by the Government was not re-
turned ; but the electorate which formerly returned the strongest
and most inveterate supporter of the present Government (Mr.
Macpherson) now returned Mr. Lyons. Who then was to say
that the popular voice was in favour of this Government ? It was
certainly not proved by the result of these two elections. The
Secretary for Lands the other night thought proper to make what
he considered a very severe attack upon the hon. and learned member
for the Lachlan for something that hon. gentleman did many
years ago; but the hon. member forgot that since these oc-
currences the hon. gentleman accepted office in the same Cabinet
with Mr. Martin and served under him for sixteen months.
What were we to think of the mental and moral organisation
of a gentleman who could thus traduce the character of his
old associates, not resting his case on anything that had come to his
knowledge since his union with them,but raking up something which
occurred at a time long previously. But the hon. gentleman (Mr.
Forster) appeared last night in an entirely new character, as an
apologist for the Governor. The hon. member approached the
subject with “ bated breath,” with soft honied words, entirely new
as coming from lips so notably given to spurts of “dunghill”
eloquence. Among other things he told us that we should learn to
regard his Excellency with the same reverence as the Queen was
regarded by the British Parliament. “By speaking of the Governor
with greater respect,” said this constitutional teacher, “ we should
infuse into the minds of the people a greater reverence for the office
and a better feeling towards the law and the constitution.” lie
recollected another occasion when the hon. gentleman spoke of


another Governor (Sir John Young) who had just left our shores
full of honours, only to receive still greater distinctions at the hands
of his sovereign, and who/he did not hesitate to say, lived in the
affections of the whole people of this community, excepting only the
hon. member. The hon. member was now going to teach the
country how to speak of the Governor; but possibly he forgot that
in 1802 he indulged in one of his characteristic, coarse, and vulgar
attacks against Sir John Young, and included under his condem-
nation his present colleague the hon. member for the Clarence.
There was then a question under discussion of some expenditure
for Government House not authorised by Parliament. The hon.
member (Mr. Forster) spoke upon that occasion, and this was the
language he then indulged in in speaking of the Representative
of the Crown,
“ The Governor was himself the cause of the reference (members had
deprecated any disrespectful reference to His Excellency) by degrading
himself, as he had done since his arrival in the colony, into the position of a
partisan. From the very moment of his landing he had thus degraded himself
to suit the views of a particular party—going about as a sort of appendage to
dinners and ovations, where it was a standing condition of the programme
that the Ministers’ healths should be drunk or they would not attend. By
these and similar proceedings he had degraded himself into the position of a
partisan—a miserable tool—and now the House were begining to find the
cause. When they saw the public money thus devoted in defiance of the
expressed will of the House, they had a right to denounce the conduct of the
Governor, and to stigmatise the procedure as an act of jobbery. The Governor
must have been aware of the unconstitutional nature of the proceedings and,
if he was not, he was unfit to be the Governor of this or any other colony.
He must have known that it was no part of his duty to take money from the
public purse without its expenditure having been authorised by the Parliament
of the country. It might suit the Government to laugh at what they had
done, but the time was when they would have denounced such conduct more
strongly. They now understood what Liberalism meant—it meant putting
their "hands into tho public purse and expending the public money without
the consent of Parliament.”
We thus saw that this respectful language of the hon. member was
adopted very late in life, for when it suited his purpose he could
indulge in the coarsest strains against the Queen’s representative as
he now did against the members of the Opposition; and we saw
also that the charge of robbing the public treasury, which had been
levelled against the late Administration, had been levelled with
equal vehemence against the gentleman under whom he now
served. The hon. gentleman had told us that the Governor repre-
sented the people out of doors! Was this the new Constitutional
doctrine to which the country was to be restored by these gentle-
men ? He always thought that the members in this House
represented the people out of doors. He should like to know
where the hon gentleman’s new doctrine was picked up, —in what
part of the proceedings of the English Parliament, in what work
of authority on Constitutional Government did they find it enun-
ciated ? Some observations were made with respect to the practice


of the Governor in receiving advice to dissolve Parliament, to which
he should like to refer. He entirely agreed with the hon. and
learned member for the Lachlan that there was no such rule as
that a dissolution should not be granted twice to the same
Ministry. He thought that that had been proved by the late
Solicitor-General. He also agreed with the hon. and learned
member (Mr. Martin) that if any such rule existed, it could not
be applied to the late Administration, because that was essentially a
different Administration from that formerly in existence, under the
leadership of the hon. and learned member for the Lachlan. He
did not think that any such rule could be found in the practice of
the Imperial Parliament, or was ever acted upon. But he could
not help dissenting from the view of the hon. and learned member,
that the advice of the Minister should be acted upon as
a matter of course. It seemed to him quite clear that
the Governor as representing the Crown should act upon his own
judgment of the situation, in the light of existing circumstances,
on receiving such advise, and that he should be guided in his
decision by a full consideration of questions pending before the
country, the position of parties, and the state of the public mind.
The Secretary for Lands asserted that the present Ministry was as
constitutionally in office as the last. He did not think that that
was the case. Of course he admitted that the hon. member for
the Clarence was constitutionally commissioned to form a Govern-
ment; but the question arose whether it was constitutional for any
hon. member, having a proper sense “of the responsibilities of his
situation, and a due regard for the interests of the country, to form
a Ministry which he must be sensible had not a Parliamentary
support. The difference between the two Ministries consisted in
this, that while hon. members occasionally voted against measures
of the late Ministry, they at the same time declared their con-
fidence in the Ministry as a whole ; whereas hon. members who
were now going to vote for what they called fair play in the case
of this Government, at the same time declared that they had no
confidence in them. (Cheers.) The late Government, from the
time they took office, had a decisive majority. Even on the occa-
sion of the defeat of the late Government on the land bill by a
majority of two, that defeat was followed by a vote reposing confi-
dence in the Government, carried by a majority of ten. The pre-
sent Government had at the outset been met by declarations of no
confidence, which, whatever might be the result of the vote on
this occasion, sufficiently proved that they had not the support of
this house. He objected to the present Government on grounds
which could be fairly and openly stated. After what he had seen
of late, he had no confidence whatever in the Government on the
land question. The hon. gentleman at the head of the Govern-
ment had gained a popularity in the country for his Land Acts of
1862, which he was afraid was not as strong as it used to be.


The country had not failed to observe that, in the administration
of those Acts there had been very suspicious circumstances. The
country had not failed to observe that throughout the hon gentle-
man’s public course since he had repeatedly endeavoured to obtain
seats in this House for gentlemen opposed to his Land policy.
The hon. gentleman had now placed at the head of the Lands-office
a gentleman who had always been a direct opponent of the Land
Acts —(No) —who voted against free selection. (Hear, hear.)
The present Minister for Lands voted for Mr Hay’s amendment.
He voted against the principle of free selection before survey,
and the hon. member knew it very well. ( u No, no,” and “ Hear,
hear.”) And the treasurer did the same.
Mr. Samuel :—That question was not involved in the amend-
ment at all.
Mr. Piddington :—That was the amendment.
Mr. Parkes : He thought all those circumstances, and the
crowning circumstance that the hon. member was now one of the
largest squatters, should induce the House not to place much
reliance on him in regard to the land question. One of the
promises of the hon. member was that he would introduce a
measure for promoting immigration. We certainly did not want a
system analogous to that which existed formerly under the hon.
gentleman’s auspices, and which had been fraught with the greatest
evils to the country. He objected to the present Government
because the principles of its leading members, if acted upon would
tend to the disruption of our institutions altogether, and the extin-
guishment of liberty in the country. If the hon. member for the
Clarence and the hon. member for the Hastings were known for
any opinion that they had held consistently, it was that they held
in common, the dangerous doctrine that we ought to only a
single chamber of Legislature. He feared those visionaries that
would abolish the Upper House. So far as he could form an
opinion of those hon. gentlemen, he doubted their public honesty
in relation to our Public schools. He did not think they were
entitled to credit for any assistance they gave the Government
in the passing of this measure, excepting only his hon. friend the
Minister for Works. The House had been told by hon, members
opposite that but for their assistance the Act would not have been
passed. The hon. gentleman at the head of the Government had
said he kept a House together and helped to pass the bill. The
authors of the Act owed little to him (Mr. Robertson), little
to his hon. colleague the Treasurer, and still less to the hon.
member for the Hastings. The bill was read a second time on the
10th October—ayes, 36, noes 14. The only members of the Oppo-
sition who voted in the majority were Messrs. Forster, Joseph,
Neale, Eckford, Driver, Garrett, and Alexander. If those seven


were taken away, there would still be left a majority of 29 to 14.
They could therefore have carried the bill, in spite of those hon.
gentlemen. Then it was said that Mr. Robertson kept the House
together, when, in fact, Mr. Robertson did not vote.
Mr. Robertson said he paired off with Mr. Cunneen on the
second reading, and with Mr, Forlongb at a certain period on the
remainder of the bill.
Mr. Paekes : The hon. member for the Hastings made a power-
ful speech on the second reading. In the course of this speech
the hon. member with mock enthusiasm, exclaimed: “ Let the
Government bring forward measures like this, and he, for one, would
follow it to destruction.” (Laughter.) He told the hon. member they
were much obliged to him, but that they did not think of going to
destruction. (Laughter.) The most conspicuous part of the hon.
member’s speech was an attempt to identify the Public Schools Bill
with State-aid to religion. He saw at once that while the hon.
member was going to give them his vote, the whole power of his
reasoning and eloquence was directed to rouse up the advocates of
State-aid who formed the majority, to vote against the Bill. It was
impossible for any one with an analytical mind not to have seen
the drift of that remarkable speech. The Bill was read a second
time on the 10th October, and on the 25th Mr. Forster made a
motion to adjourn the adoption of the report for a week, thus
playing into the hands of the enemies of the measure. The Bill
came on for a third reading on the 31st October. Again the hon.
member made a motion to obstruct and, delay the Bill. When the
Bill, at a later period, came from the Legislative Council with
amendments, those amendments were considered by this House,
which agreed to some and disagreed from others. A message was
moved by himself on the 18th December, to send the Bill back to the
Legislative Council, whereupon Mr. Forster raised a question of
order to obstruct the message, and on the Speaker ruling against
him, he actually proposed a motion in these words:
“ That this House dissents from the ruling of the Speaker to the effect that
a vote of this House can he communicated to the Legislative Council hy a
message accompanied by an elaborate statement of reasons of a debateable
character, of which no previous notice has been given.”
When he could not get support to this obstructive motion, he
voted against the message. Such was the support they received
from that hon. gentleman. The third reading was carried by a
majority of 40 to 5, and in that majority were Messrs. Forster,
S. C. Brown, Driver, and Alexander only, of the Opposition.
Deducting these four, there would still be a majority of 36 to 5.
It would be seen that all through this bill could have been carried
without the assistance of hon. members opposite, even if all had
been base enough to vote against their own convictions on the
subject. During the progress of this bill, through committee, there


were 37 divisions. There was continuous obstruction by the hon.
gentleman who was now Postmaster General Mr. Forster voted
with the Government eight times out of the 37. What did they
owe then to Mr. Forster in regard to this bill ? The hon. mem-
ber was one of its most dangerous enemies. In committee on the
Ist clause, the hon. the Postmaster-General moved as an obstructive
motion that the Chairman leave the chair, Mr. Forster voted for
that motion. In the Bth clause, which provides for the establish-
ment of Public schools, the blank was filled up with “ forty.” The
Government, upon fuller information, had arrived at the conclusion
that the minimum of forty would virtually prevent the establishment
of Public schools, and it was proposed to fill up the blank with
“ twenty-five.” Mr. Forster voted for the retention of the word
“forty.” That was such an important feature of the bill, that he
did not hesitate to say that if the hon. member had been successful,
he would have rendered it impossible to establish Public Schools in
districts where they were most wanted, and where it is difficult to
get together twenty-five children. It would have been impracticable
to have established Public Schools at all in new districts. Mr.
Forster voted with such friends of the bill as Mr. Hart and Mr.
Hurley for retaining the word “ forty.” (Hear, near.) Then
afterwards the hon. gentleman voted with Mr. Buchanan in
minorities of two against majorities of 42, 41, and 33, against the
Government. That was the assistance the Government got from
Mr. Forster. [Mr. Garrett : Because the bill was not secular-
enough.] He supposed the extraordinary remark of the hon. gen-
tleman applied to the -vote of Mr. Forster to prevent the
establishment of Public Schools at all. Well, what had been the
hon. gentleman’s conduct since ? Ever since the bill had been
the law of the land, the most conspicuous opponent of it had been
the hon. member the Secretary for Lands. The hon. member had
endeavoured to embarrass the administration of the Act in every
conceivable way; by all kinds of motions in that House j by
laying hold of all sorts of stories from dismissed schoolmasters ; by
trumping up any ridiculous charge; and by attempting in every
way to throw discredit upon it. How could it be said that the
authors of that bill, or the Government who were responsible for its
becoming law, owed anything to that hon. gentleman ! [An hon.
member; The hon. member attended Mr. Adams’s lecture, and
moved a vote of thanks to him.] He (Mr. Parkes) had forgotten
that circumstance. The hon. member had actually attended, in
company with Mr. Macpherson —an arch-enemy of the Act —to
do honour to a public lecturer, who, so far as he could, was
attempting to destroy the Act. But the oracle had spoken since he
accepted the responsible position he now occupied. And what did
the hon. gentleman tell the electors of the Hastings? What did
this great advocate of secular education—this great supporter of the


Public Schools Act—tell the electors of the Hastings ? He would
read an extract from the speech delivered by the hon. gentleman
to his constituents :
“ Now he desired to see Protestantism extended, but not by unfair means,
not by wresting the laws to purposes not intended by the Legislature. And
as it was clear Denominational schools were meant to be maintained, he (Mr.
Forster), though in favour of purely secular education in Public schools, yet
would insist on the independence of Denominational schools being preserved,
and that they should be allowed to teach what they pleased in their own
way, providing they reached a certain standard of education set up by the
Government.”
Was not that directly opposed to the provisions of the law as it
existed ? Had the hon. member not announced to his constituents
that he would play into the hands of a great denomination in
destroying the Act ? What was it that that great denomination
required ? That they should have power to appoint teachers, that
they should have the money in their own hands to spend, that they
should have their own books, and their own inspectors! And the
hon member told them that, so far as he was concerned, they
should have them. But what was said by the hon. member for
Paddington, in whose honesty he (Mr. Pabkes) still had full belief.
That hon. member was not so skilled in the art of deception as the
hon. member to whom he had before alluded. When the hon.
member for Paddington was addressing his constituents, he was
asked a question about the Public Schools Act, and he spoke as he
never would have done had he not been in bad company. The hon.
member could not conceal what his h&iorable chief would have
concealed. Well, what answer did this hon. member—who was a
sincere supporter of the bill, who was a sincere advocate for secular-
instruction, who was desirous of seeing the Act maintained in its
integrity— [“ Hear, hear,” from Mr. Sutherland.] —what answer
did he give the electors? The hon. gentleman said,
“ Every one knew his feelings in regard to the Public Schools Act. As far
as the present Government were concerned, they would do nothing to inter-
fere with the working of that Act until there was a dissolution of Parliament.”
And there the plot came to light. Would the hon. gentleman
have said that a year ago? Would any hon. gentleman in his
senses, who was a sincere supporter of any cause, impose a condi-
tion of that kind upon his belief? He had always been accus-
tomed to think that men when they believed in a cause would
endeavour to maintain it. “ Come one, come all, this rock shall
fly,” and so on. The hon gentleman says in effect that he will
maintain the Schools Act until it may be convenient to alter it.
(Hear, hear.) The hon. gentleman then went on to say—[Mr,
Robertson : Shame, shame.] Was it a shame to read the hon.
member’s own words ? To show that he had acted fairly in the
matter, he read the extract to the hon. gentleman a week ago, and


told him then he intended to read it to the House. [Mr. Suther-
land : You may tell the House what I said to you then.] Well,
the hon. gentlemen went on to tell his constituents :
“ Whenever that dissolution took place, it would he for the public to in-
struct their members on that point, and it would be for those new members
to do what they thought proper with the Act. As long as the present Parlia-
ment lasted, that Act must be maintained in its integrity.”
(Cries of (t hear, hear/’ from the Government benches). He was
very glad to hear the cheers on the other side of the House. He
could understand very well that the hon. member spoke the views
of the Cabinet in the first instance, and his own determination in
the second. (Hear, hear.) Well, the hon. Treasurer never voted * i
for the bill, either in the House or in Committee. [Mr. Samuel :
I paired off with Mr. Hay on the second reading.] Now, he ap-
pealed to the common sense of hon. members to say how that
could possibly have been the case when Mr. Hay voted repeatedly,
and the hon. member never voted once on the bill. The hon.
member voted neither on the second nor the third reading, or in
any of the thirty-seven divisions in committee. The hon. Premier
never gave the bill his support. The hon. gentleman said he
paired off with Mr. Cunneen on the second reading, and with Mr.
Fohlonge on the other divisions on the bill. The hon. gentleman
voted twice, but not on important provisions. [Mr, Robertson :
I voted once; the hon. member will remember ray being locked in
here, and I voted as I thought Mr. Forlonge would have voted.]
The hon. member voted with the Government twice; Mr. Forlonge
would never have voted with the Government on that bill. Sup-
posing they accepted all those explanations to the fullest extent,
what did they amount to ? Did they show that any of those gen-
tlemen were in earnest in their support ? [Mr. Robertson : I sat
here night after night.] When the Electoral Bill was before the
House, was that the kind of support he (Mr. Parkes) gave to it—
was that the kind of support he gave to the Land Bill? Would
any men who desired the success of the Schools Bill have absented
themselves on the plea of pairing off or any other plea, and not
have allowed their names to have appeared in the divisions. With
regard to the hon. Secretary for Lands (Mr. Forster), that gentle-
man absented himself at times from the House, as he (Mr.
Parkes) believed, in order to break up the House on this bill, so
far as his absence would assist in doing it. And the hon. member
at the head of the Government, by speaking on one or two occa-
sions on unimportant features of the bill, and by sitting in the
House and making a quorum on one or two occasions, could not be
said to have given his support to the bill. The hon. the Post-
master-General met the bill with one of the most rancorous opposi-
tions ever witnessed either in that House, or in any other Legislature.
Those were the gentlemen who claimed credit for being supporters
of the Public Schools Act. He asked whether it was safe to


entrust the Act to those gentlemen ? He thought that he had con-
clusively shown that five members of the present Government were
either direct opponents to the bill, or lukewarm and dangerous
friends. And the only member who supported the bill was the
hon member for Paddington, and he then belonged to this side of
the House. It was well understood what these utterances of the
Ministers meant. It was very -well known that there was one sec-
tion of the community who were opposed to the bill. The Act, as
passed by the Legislature, provided that the same secular instruc-
tion should be carried out, and the same inspection enforced, in
Denominational as in Public Schools, There was one portion of
the community who resisted the law. Only yesterday a case was
brought under the notice of the Council of Education where one of
the nuns who were now being employed in the Denominational
schools of this colony belonging to the Roman Catholic Church, re-
fused to examine her school at the request of the inspector ap-
pointed to inspect the school. That was not the first instance of
the kind. The inspector (Mr. Flannery), who was a member of
the Roman Catholic Church, visited the school at Balmain in the
performance of his duty, and this lady, though receiving the
Government money, and appointed by the Council of Education
according to law, actually refused to examine her classes at the
request of this inspector. Now that was one of the alterations
sought for in the Act—that the inspection, which was considered in
all parts of the world so necessary to ensure results where public
money was expended—that such inspection should be got rid of
and that persons should be foisted upon the schools of the colony,
and be paid from the public Treasury, who should not be amenable
to the authorities established by law. (Hear, hear.) That was
one of the alterations which the hon. Secretary for Lands, in lan-
guage plain enough, told us he would bring about if he had the
power. (Hear, hear, and cheers from the Government benches.)
Another alteration desired was that they should select their own
books. And the hon. Secretary for Lands told them, in so many
words, that they should have their own books. In the course of
the present debate, and on other occasions, he had been accused of
exciting religious animosities. He denied the charge, as he had
always indignantly denied it. He had never, in any way what-
ever, attempted to excite religious animosities in this country.
One thing he had done; he had insisted upon equal justice being
done to all. He had resisted aggressions, come from what quarter
they might. So long as the public money was devoted to the
promotion of education, the public ought to have guarantees that
teachers were properly trained, that the inspection was sound and
searching, that the children should be reared without any sectarian
interference, and that the schools should be open to all classes.
He had said that, and he had refused to pander or to bend to any
priest or ecclesiastical authority. But he denied, for the hundredth


time, that any single instance could be adduced to show that he
had in any way endeavoured to excite religious animosities. But
what were those gentlemen now in office doing ? Could it be
denied that they were the mere instruments of an aggressive and
insolent priesthood, without whose support they could not retain
their places for a single day? We knew the plan of operations.
Now, when the general elections came round, a deeply-designed
attempt was to be made, to abrogate this great Education Charter
of the people, and to secure power for sectarian purposes to this
priesthood. After an ecclesiastical agitation throughout the
country, they had come to the conclusion, that in open field, and
with fair means, they would be powerless, and they had decided in
all instances when the general election came on to adopt as their
candidates, liberal Protestants—what he (Mr. Parkes) called
accommodating Protestants, persons who had not thought on sub-
jects of government, who had not given any attention to the public
business of the country, who had no particular public object
before them in life, and no special motive to guide them, but who,
for the sake of getting a seat in the House would privately pledge
themselves to see “justice done to this priesthood.” We knew
very well what were the objects aimed at, and what \vas the plan
agreed upon for the attainment of those objects, and if ever there
was a time when the thinking people of the country should exert
themselves to preserve its Protestant character, because all liberty
was rooted in our common Protestantism, it was the present. There
was an old watchword, often on the lips of Englishmen iu the
historical struggles of the past, which present circumstances would
revive, “ When bad men conspire, the good must unite.” We had
for the first time an organization perfectly formed, which had been
deliberated upon and decided upon, under ecclesiastical authority,
to pack the Legislature; and this powerful religious faction had a
plan of operations promulgated, and wherever the “ accommodating
Protestants” could be found, the word would go forth to vote for
them to a man. We knew this was the case in West Sydney and
in Central Cumberland at the recent elections, and we knew it
would be the case in every election at the general appeal to the
country. What was the position of the Government in this great
conflict that was before us—aiming at the propagation of one par-
ticular sect in the country at the expense of the public. We knew
well enough that by means we should not see or be able to prove,
the present Ministers would get the support of this compact force,
with the Catholic priesthood at its head, and we knew that they
dared not do anything that would forfeit that support. [Mr.
Robertson : It’s false.] Something had been done already, and
as the hon. member for Parramatta stated, a feather was sufficient
to show how the wind blew —something had been done by them
already. Some year ago a good deal of excitement was caused by
the resistance made by himself (Mr, Parkes) to the pretensions of


a set of gentlemen who represented themselves the Committee of
Management of the Roman Catholic Orphan School at Parramatta.
He discovered what satisfied him, that they were not a committee
at all, but trustees appointed by the Crown to apprentice the chil-
dren, and he refused to acknowledge them as a committee of
management. Rut what had these gentlemen in office done with
regard to this Roman Catholic Orphan School ? There was a
person employed in this school of the name of Cullen, and that
person was suspected of conveying information to him (Mr.
Parkes), although he had never seen him ; and these gentlemen,
calling themselves a committee of management, were desirous of
getting rid of him. They asked him as Colonial Secretary to dis-
miss this teacher. He caused an invesitgation to take place, which
satisfied him that there was no sufficient reason for it.
Mr. Samuel rose to order. He submitted that these statements
were out of order, and could not be made, as the Government had
no opportunity of reply.
Mr. Piddington : They are true.
Mr, Samuel : They are not.
Mr. Piddington : Too true.
Mr. Speaker thought the hon. member was going beyond the
scope of the debate.
Mr. Windeyer said there was no definite case to prove, except
this vague proposition of want of confidence, and therefore there
was nothing to prevent any hon. member from stating any facts
that went to that issue.
Mr. Speaker said the hon. member was not now quoting from
records before the House open to all, but from records of the
authenticity of which hon. members had not an opportunity of
judging, and they might claim the right to make explanation.
Mr. Parkes : There were charges—this and others —against
the administration which he wished to state in support of his motion,
and he could not help thinking that he was in order in stating them.
But he submitted to the ruling of the chair. He would come to the
Duncan case to shew that this Government were unworthy of their
present positions. That case was one which in all its bearings
ought to awaken the suspicion of hon. members on both sides of the
House. The Treasurer, on the first day that Parliament met, gave
notice of a motion to the effect that the late Government committted
an act of injustice in their conduct towards this officer, and that he
ought to be reinstated. The Government had now been nearly two
months in office, and this case, which certainly might have been
disposed of in a few days, was jusc in the same state as that in
which they found it. (Mr. Robertson: No.) This gentleman
was a leading member of the Roman Catholic Church, and it would
not do for the Government to say they would not restore him, and,
on the other hand they had failed in 'taking any visible step for his


restoration. At the same time, an hon. member, a supporter of the
Government, came down to the House with a motion couched in
almost the same language as the speech of the Secretary for Lands,
and asked the House to affirm that Mr. Duncan ought to be rein-
stated, and the other persons in the Customs affected by his dis-
missal restored to their former positions. Could we for a moment
suppose all this time would have been consumed if it had not been
for the conflicting circumstances of this gentleman being related in
society in the manner referred to, [Mr. Robertson ; We are not
going on with that matter when this question is pending.] The
hon. member had six or seven weeks to deal with it before the
present motion came on, and, as far as the outside world could see,
no decision whatever had been arrived at. This reminded one
of the course which it appeared probable the Government, if per-
mitted to hold office, were prepared to take on all questions, first
discovering the feeling of the House and then adapting their
views to the prevailing current. In the shadowy outline of policy
put forth the other day there was one noteable feature—that was
the repeal of the newspaper postal charge. It was difficult to
understand how this could be effected by a Government which con-
tained as Treasurer and Secretary for Lauds two gentlemen who
had voted for it, a Government which contained a former Minister
who was a party to its introduction. But that was not the ground
of exception he took to this Government, in this particular. The
ground he took was that a permanent supporter came down to the
House with a motion to justify them in their policy in repealing
this postage charge. This was the order of the day some years ago,
when a so-called great Minister was accustomed to tell the House that
if he could only know what the House wanted he would be prepared
to deal with it. Instead of carrying out their own views on their own
responsibility, they wished to put forward the means of ascertaining
the sentiments of others, so that they might propound measures
without reference to consistency, to meet the views of a majority.
That is the way constitutional government was to be restored among
us; but that was not the way he should like to see it carried out.
(Hear, Hear.) The Secretary for Lands observed that alternations
of Ministries were healthy for the body-politic as the alternations
of winter and summer were to the physical world. This hon.
member might have gone a little further and have informed us
whether the present Government was to be regarded as the winter
or the summer of our political life, and whether, if these alternations
were really beneficial according to the special qualities of successive
Ministries, their use in the present case had not been already
exhausted, in their ability to clean out rat-holes and ferret out
official delinquencies, and whether it was not already time for
another alternation, with men who understood the interests of the
country. They had disclosed during their short tenure of office a
moral unfitness to be entrusted with power, and appeared utterly


unconscious of the responsibilities they had undertaken. He (Mr.
PARKEs),like the hon. and learned member for the Lachlan, objected
to the hon. member at the head of the Government as a leader
of the country; he did not think the hon. member was fitted
by character for that position. Of all men in the Parliament that
hon. member was the most notable for loose talk. During
this very debate he had given utterance to the most undignified,
senseless, and vulgar observations which would be discreditable to
any person, and were in an especial manner discreditable to a person
at the head of the Government. The hon. member told the
House that he used strong terms in speaking of Mr. Forster twenty
years ago, whereas the hon. member, we knew, was constantly using
this language. (Hear, Hear.) He told them that his colleague
Mr. Sutherland had been two or three times Mayor of Sydney,
whereas he had been once in that position. He said he had been
in more Governments than any one else, whereas he was never
offered office except by Mr. Cowper, and he always accepted it when
offered. (Hear, hear.) He said he had been associated with
twenty-two colleagues, but he (Mr. Parkes) thought it was not
creditable to have been associated with so many colleagues in so
short a time. He told the House that the hon. member (Mr. De
Salis) was elected by his assistance, whereas he was elected in the
face of his opposition. He had continually boasted of his influence,
but only three years ago he was defeated in West Sydney by his
hon. friend (Mr. Windeyer) whojwas absent, and who stated he would
not sit if elected. He was elected two years ago for the Clarence, but
was opposed by a gentleman who said he would not sit if elected and
this gentlemen polled within fifty-five votes of the hon. gentleman.
He went back to the Clarence the other day and made more
promises to expend public money than had ever been made before
to any constituency, to secure his election. Not long since, there
was an election for the Northern Gold-Fields, and the hon. member
sent up a candidate with a letter of recommendation under his own
hand and seal. This letter was read on the Hustings with a flourish
of trumpets as coming from the great John Robertson ; but the
opposing candidate, though no favorite with the electors, was re-
turned by a majority of three to one. (Hear, hear.) This was
strange evidence of the hon. member’s public influence. The hon.
gentleman’s popularity had nearly expired, and he was now gene-
rally regarded as the most insincere of all our public men. The
hon. gentleman’s name was connected with the land laws, but with
nothing else that reflected credit upon him as a man of ability and
discernment, and he had done more than any other man to damage
our institutions, and to render a seat in this House undesireable to
men of laudable ambition. (Hear, hear.) The Secretary for Lands
(Mr. Forster) had only been remarkable for his steady impractic-
able character. He had been described as “ disagreeable in opposition,
insufferable as a supporter, and fatal as a colleague.” The Solicitor-


General, who displayed a great deal of innocence in his speech, said
he could not understand how a vote of want of confidence could be
carried against a Government that had done nothing. He (Mr.
Paekes) thought there was some ground for want of confidence in
that very circumstance. But if it were shewn that they were
incapable of doing anything to benefit the country, that would be a
fair ground for want of confidence. The Solicitor-General piteously
appealed to us to wait for their measures, and the hon. gentleman
told us that " measures not men ” had become a constitutional
proverb. This, in his opinion, was a catchword for unthinking
politicians, and it generally covered incapacity and unacquaintance
with public affairs. He should like to read to the hon. the Solictor-
General the opinion of an English statesman as to the value of this
''constitutional proverb,”—the opinion of a statesman almost as
illustrious as the hon. gentleman himself—he meant Mr. CANNING.
(Laughter.) This was what Mr. Canning said :
“ I do not subscribe to the doctrines -which have been advanced, that, in
times like the present, the fitness of individuals for their political situations is
no part of the consideration to which a member of Parliament may fairly turn
his attention. I know not a more solemn or important duty that a member
of Parliament can have to discharge than by giving, at fit seasons, a free
opinion upon the character and qualities of public men. Away with the cant of
measures—not men—the idle supposition that it is the harness , and not the horses,
that draw the chariot along. No, sir ; if the comparison must be made, if the
distinction must be taken, measures are comparatively nothing—men every-
thing. I speak, sir, of times of difficulty and danger, of times when systems
are shaken, when precedents and general rules of conduct fail. Then it is
that not to this or that measure, however providently devised, however
blameless in execution, but to the energy and character of individuals, a state
must be indebted for its salvation.”
In the early days of responsible Government a journal of great
influence in this country, the Sydney Morning Herald, described
the hon. member for the Clarence and the hon. member for the
Hastings as the leaders of the Ripocracy—as the wild cats of
political life. The terms were not unhappy nor inapplicable at the
present moment. The member for the blastings was specially
distinguished at one time as the Robespierre of this colony, at
another time as the Jack Shepherd of our political life. Sub-
sequent events had proved that if he was a Robespierre in cunning
and cruelty, he was destitute of the purity of that remarkable man, and
if a Jack Shepherd,he waswithoutthe open daring of the highwayman.
He had been characterised as crotchety, but honest; but he believed
he was now the most dishonest of all our public men. He had
been described by his present chief as “ holding with the hare and
running with the hounds,’ ’ and such had been the whole course of
his political life. He (Mr. Paekes) had been charged with desert-
ing the late Government He left it when it was powerful, and
when it might have continued to be powerful in Parliament but
what did the present Secretary for Lands do ? When associated
with the hon. and learned member for the Lachlan, and when, after


defeat in a general election, lie saw his ministerial death staring
him in the face, he sneaked away on a pretence of some appoint-
ment not being made to the Upper House, and that too a day or
two before the vote of censure on the Ministry was carried. Was
this gentleman in a position to taunt him (Mr. P Arkes) with desert-
ing the late Ministry ? He questioned whether this gentleman
ever possessed the confidence of this House the country. This
gentleman introduced the question of education, in order, as it
seemed, to enable him to indulge in some disparaging comments on
his defects in this particular. He (Mr. Pabkes) had never made
any pretension in this respect—had never made any charge of the
kind against others. Whatever might be his education, owed
it entirely to himself; and after the position he had obtained in this
House and the country, he hoped this circumstance would not be
set down to his discredit. (Cheers). The hon. member for the
Hastings went on to ask what this outcry about education meant
except the exclusion of the working classes from power. He
(Mr. Parkes) never heard baser claptrap than that. (Cheers).
He knew the working classes well. If you wanted examples of
probity, of delicacy of feeling, of a fine sense of honour, you must
go to the best part of the working classes to find these qualities;
and he was perfectly satisfied that the self-educated mechanics
of Sydney would never desire to see any member of their body
elevated to a position which, if he were unfitted for the post, would
expose his deficiencies. He thought that the motion which had
been entrusted to his hands would -do more towards restoring
responsible government and correct party action than any other
motion which had been submitted for a very long time past. If the
Government obtained a majority, so far as he was concerned, he
should accept it. It was not one, two, or three, who, while they
told us that they were going to vote on the Government side to-
night, had delivered speeches in severe condemnation of the Govern-
ment. What could be more condemnatory than the speeches of the
Rev. Dr. Lang, Mr. Hoskins, Mr. R. Stewart, and other hon.
members ? The House was about to divide on (his motion. Of
course hon. members would vote as their consciences and their
judgments directed them. They would vote in view of the
public interest; and it was not for him to question the propriety of
the course they took or the motives by which they were influenced.
As he denied that it was open to any gentleman to question his
motives in any course he thought proper to pursue, so it was not for
him to call in question the motives of others. But it appeared to
him that if we regarded Government in its highest sense, if we
looked to the general interests of the public, if we wished to
maintain those portions of our laws and institutions which we held
to be of highest value, and which wo had won after many struggles,
we should bo slow to give our votes so as to maintain the present
holders of office in power. He thought that after a dispassionate


review of the present situation of the country, a just regard to its
interests would lead to an opposite conclusion. He, for one, denied
that this was any question between the late and the existing
Governments. He denied altogether that it necessarily followed
that, if this motion were carried, he should have anything to do
with an incoming Ministry. The simple question was, were the
gentlemen now in power the best men which this House could
supply for managing the affairs of the country? It would be
strange to him if hon. members, on a due and dispassionate
exercise of their rights, and in a calm and deliberate view of the
public interests, could arrive at a conclusion favourable to the
present holders of office. He believed that the sense of this
Assembly was very different; and he called upon those gentlemen
who believed with him that, an administration might be formed,
much more acceptable to the country, and much more capable of
managing our affairs, and which would receive in a larger measure
the confidence of the people out of doors, to vote on his side in
displacing from office the present feeble, shifting, creedless, degene-
rate Government. (Cheers.)


For.
Against,
Ryan
.. ., Hannel.
Roberts
.. ., Hoskins.
///
McKay ..
,. ,, Stimpson.
Brown, E. G.
,. .. Cooper.
APPENDIX.
Division on Mr. Park.es’ Resolutions
Ayes, 25.
Air. Martin, Mr. Walker,
Mr. Parkes, Mr. Tunks,
Mr. Windeyer, Mr. Piddington,
Mr. Wilson, Mr. Parnell,
Mr. Eagar, Mr. Lackey,
Mr. Burns, Mr. Tighe,
Mr. Byrnes, Mr. Isaacs,
Mr. Rodd,
Mr. Lucas, Tellers.
Mr. Lee,
Mr. Galley, Mr. De Sails,
Mr. Wisdom, Mr. J. Stewart,
Mr. J. Campbell,
Mr. Dodds,
Mr. Nowlan,
Mr. J. Sutler,
Noes, 29.
Mr. Robertson, Mr. Neale,
Mr, Forster, Mr. Alexander,
Mr. Samuel, Mr. Morrice,
Mr. Josephson, Mr. Macleay,
Mr. Egan, Mr. W. Campbell,
Mr, Sutherland, Mr. Cunneen,
Mr. Smart, Mr. Gordon,
Mr. Burdekin, Mr. Garrett,
Mr. Cummings, Mr. Thornton,
Mr, R. Stewart, Mr. S. Brown,
Mr. Hill, Mr. Driver,
Mr. Hurley,
Mr. Lloyd, Tellers.
Mr. Eckford,
Mr. Bell, Dr. Lang,
Mr. Terry, Mr. Hart,
PAIRS.
The nine members whose names follow did not vote, viz.. Hangar, Dignam,
Graham, Laudale, Lord, Lyons, Mate, Phelps, and W. H. Suitor. Six of
these gentlemen had expressed themselves in favour of the resolutions.
Another (Mr. Lyons) was known not to be favourable to the Government.
MR. ROBERTSON’S POPULARITY.
Allusion is made by Mr. Parkes to the defeat of Mr. Robertson in West
Sydney, and the circumstances under which he was afterwards elected lor the
Clarence. The following are the facts :
Mr. Robertson appealed to the electors of West Sydney for re-election, on
accepting the office of Secretary for Lands, in January 1866. Mr. Windeyer,
who refused to become a candidate, and who was absent from Sydney, was
nominated in opposition and was returned at the close of the pollthe num-
bers were: —
Mr. Windeyer .. .. •.
Mr. Robertson .. .. •• 789
Majority for Windeyer .. 80
Some months afterwards a vacancy occurred in the representation of the
Clarence, when Mr. Robertson was proposed as a candidate. Mr. Alexander
Mackellar was proposed in opposition, but this gentleman caused the
fullest publicity to be given to his determination not to take his seat if
elected. The result of the poll was as follows :
Mr. Robertson .. .. .. 219
Mr. Mackellar ~ .. .. 164
Majority for Robertson .. 55
The Clarence district contains large number* of free selectors.




