

Delivered in the Legislative Assembly,
May 3, 1874, on Resolutions moved p.y Mr. Combes,
EXPRESSING DISAPPROVAL OF THE PROPOSED RELEASE
OF CERTAIN PRISONERS.
CORRECTED FROM THE REPORT OF THE
“SYDNEY MORNING HERALD.”
PRICE, SIXPENCE
Nutmeg •
GIBBS, SHALLAUD <S CO., General Steam Machine. Printers,
10S Pitt Street, next Union Bank.




SPEECH
THE HON. HENRY PARKES, M.P.,
COLONIAL SECRETARY.
Delivered in the Legislative Assembly,
May 3, 1874, on Resolutions moved by Mr. Combes,
expressing disapproval of the proposed release
OF CERTAIN prisoners.
CORRECTED FROM THE REPORT OF THE
“ SYDNEY MORNING HERALD.”
PRICE, SIXPENCE.
•Sa® «fs :
GIBBS, SHALLARD & CO., General Steam Machine Printers,
108 Pitt Street, next Union Bank.




On the Order of the Day for going into Committee of Supply
being read Mr. Combes moved :
“ (1.) That the Question be amended by omitting all the
“ words after the word 1 That,’ with a view of inserting in their
“ place the words, ‘ this House disapproves of the release of the
“ ‘ long-sentenced prisoners whose names are set forth in the
“ ‘ Return laid on the Table of this House by the Honourable the
“ * Colonial Secretary, on the 22nd May, 1874, including the name
“ 1 of the notorious prisoner Gardiner.’
“ (2.) That the foregoing Resolution be presented to the
“ Governor.”




SPEECH.
Mr. Parkes : The lion, member for Bathurst had made a
speech which he took the liberty of saying was in tone hardly be-
fitting the large subject the hon. member had taken in hand. He
scarcely thought it was becoming to present to the House sensa-
tional pictures of some particular phase of crime. Crime, he
supposed, in all its phases was repulsive, and a thing of which we
might draw the most vivid and deterrent pictures ; but the ques-
tion with which we had to deal was one which ought to be
approached in a very calm, patient, and thoughtful manner. The
hon. member had given a very wide range to his speech, and had
brought under review the whole question of prison management,
and the whole system of carrying out the sentences of the Courts
of Law, The hon. member had said some things which he thought
would have been better left unsaid. He did not think that the
hon. member had any fair ground for accusing him of disingenu-
ousness in these proceedings. (Hear, hear.) He thought that
hon. members on both sides of the House must admit that he had
offered every information in his power. [Mr. Forster : Oh, oh.]
The hon. member was a single exception. [Mr. J. Robertson,
Oh, oh.] Then there were two hon. members, both of whom had
a special interest in any question which might be supposed to
embarrass the present Government, and who, unlike leaders of
opposite sides in the House of Commons, eagerly took advantage
of any occasion which would bring about what they most desired.-
If hon. members persisted in interrupting him, they must not be
surprised if they elicited from him replies of a similar character.
He was disposed to deal with this question without saying a single
word to which any one could take exception if he was allowed to
proceed. The hon. member told them that it was his fixed deter-
mination to do all he could to prevent what he called a “ great
wrong.” He need not have told them that, for although he had
manifested no great determination on any other question, he had
certainly given evidence of a determination to do something now.
The hon. member told them they might suppose they were still


living under prerogative government. Well, so far as this ques-
tion—the exercise of the Royal prerogative of pardon —was con-
cerned, he would simply say that whatever form of government
they lived under, that power hitherto in this colony had been
exercised independently of the Minister. (Hear, hear, and Ho.)
He would prove it from the lips of successive Governors, and,
what was of more importance, from the action of different
Ministei’s. [Mr, Forster : Hear, hear.] The hon. member quoted
from “ Broom’s Commentaries,” and said that in Sir Erskine May’s
book they were told that the House of Commons had the right to
advise the Crown, and that Mr. Canning described the House of
Commons as a Council of control; and that Mr. Pitt, as far back
as nearly a hundred years ago, spoke of the House of Commons as
having a Constitutional right of inquiry. The hon. gentleman
quoted from a number of similar authorities to the same effect.
Not a single person had denied these powers of the House of
Commons or similar powers on the part of the Legislative
Assembly. (Cheers, and cries of Yes.) Then the hon. gentleman
said that it was admitted that the House had a right to advise and
control the exercise of the Royal prerogative, and he quoted again
from a number of text books, and from the utterances of distin-
guished men who had given general opinions on questions of Con-
stitutional principle ; but he had failed to produce one solitary
instance where the House of Commons had attempted to control
the exercise of the Royal prerogative. (Cheers.) He simply
defied the hon. gentleman, or any other hon. gentleman, to pro-
duce one solitary instance where either House of Parliament
within the present century had attempted to control the exercise
of the Royal prerogative. (Hear, hear.) One solitary case would
be more to the purpose than fifty authorities in these general terms
on matters of principle. They knew well enough that the House
of Commons had power to do anything. It was shown that it
once had power to behead a king. It had power to do anything
if it thought well ; but in the practical business of governing
England the Imperial Parliament had learned to impose upon itself
wise and accepted restraints, which were now a part of Constitu-
tional practice ; and it would be much more to the purpose to show
them where it had ever endeavoured to control the Royal preroga-
tive of mercy, (Cheers.) It certainly had interfered by asking
questions, but scarcely ever to the extent of calling for papers, and
in most cases it had interfered in the cause of mei’cy, when there
had been an attempt to use the prerogative precipitately or harshly.
The hon. member spoke of Lord Brougham’s resolutions; but he
could not understand any application that the carrying of those


resolutions could have to the present case. The Assembly carried
a resolution the other night winch was directly in the teeth of the
Constitution Act. (Cheers.) But would that override the pro-
visions of the Constitution Act ? It was one thing to carry a
resolution expressing opinions as to how things should be done,
and it was quite another to control the doing of these things,
especially ,in the exercise of the Royal prerogative. The lion,
member for Bathurst occupied some little time in telling them
what were the powers of the Secretary of State. No one
doubted the powers of the Secretary of State, nor did the hon.
gentleman’s observations in that regard in any way touch the
question they had to deal with in any of its branches. No one
had called into question the powers of the Secretary of State.
Then the hon. member alluded to what he called the direct instruc-
tions to the Governor by Lord Kimberley’s circular despatch, and
as far as he (Mr. Parkes) could judge—and he said it with great
deference—the hon. member entirely misunderstood the drift of
that despatch. In the first place he ought to have been aware that
the whole of these despatches together formed correspondence
which, instead of proving that the practice of England existed
here, as the hon. member put it, incontestably proved that the
matter was in a state of doubt and required instructions. The
despatch of Lord Belmore in 1869 was written for no other rea-
son than to obtain instructions. It was written for no other pur-
pose than because things here were in a state of doubt, and that
neither the Governor nor his Ministers knew what to do. The
very despatch which originated this correspondence proved incon-
testably that the matter was in an unsettled and unsatisfactory
state. The effect of these despatches was not to leave the question
in the state in which the hon. gentleman appeared to think it
always ought to have been in, but to remove it from the ordinary
category of the business transactions of the Government. There
was no other possible reading of these despatches than that the
Governor was in a marked and peculiar manner to exercise his own
power and to act upon his own judgment in his intercourse with his
Ministers on this subject, and to regal’d the advice he was instructed
to seek from them in a special and in an exceptional sense. And,
moreover, there was certainly no reason to suppose that the
Governor was instructed to ask advise of his Ministers except
when he thought of granting a pardon. The hon. member had
failed to read the despatches, or if he had read them he had failed
to understand them. Then the hon. member complained in detail
of his (Mr. Parkes’) answers to his questions. He did not see
how the answers he gave to the hon. gentleman were justly open to


complaint. He answered him as fully and as explicitly as it was
possible for him to do; but the hon. member took special excep-
tion to his saying in answer to his fifth question, “ The date for the
case to be re-submitted to his Excellency is the Bth July.” That
was strictly the case. His Excellency’s decision was that the case
might be submitted at the end of ten years, and his (Mr. Parkes’)
office was so guarded and scrupulous in communicating this deci-
sion of his Excellency that it was given in precisely the same
terms in the communication made to the gaol authorities. The
only communication made to the gaol authorities, and the only
communication, therefore, made to this prisoner according to the
ordinary practice, was this : —“ lam directed by the Colonial
Secretary to state, for your information and guidance, that his
Excellency the Governor has been pleased to approve of your
bringing the prisoner’s case forward for consideration when he
shall have served ten years of his sentence.” That was precisely
the decision arrived at by his Excellency. It was very true that
his Excellency, on some subsequent petition, appeared to have
written a minute which was never acted upon, because the office
had acted upon the decision when it took place. Under some im-
pression that he had done more than he really had done, his Excel-
lency wrote the following minute : —“ I have already decided to
grant a conditional pardon at the termination of ten years’
imprisonment.—H.R., 7-12-72.” That minute rested just where
the Governor wrote it; but the communication to the gaol autho-
rities in the ordinary course of business was by the letter he had
already read, and precisely adopted the language of his Excellency’s
first minute. His office, which was the medium for making this
communication, considered its duty discharged in communicating
the first decision. The hon. gentleman stated, also, that he firmly
believed pressure had been used with his Excellency, and he (Mr,
Parkes) sxipposed the hon. member meant that the Ministry had
in some way urged this decision. [Mr. Coombes : No.] He was
very glad to hear the hon. member say it was not so. That was
all he had to say on the speech the hon. member had made, and he
now came to the case upon which the House was asked to pro-
nounce an opinion. He would like to bring the minds of hon.
gentlemen, if he might be permitted to do so, to as undisturbed and
calm an examination of the whole matter as was possible. (Hear,
hear.) In the first place, he was inclined to ask what it was that
had been done in the cases of those prisoners who now formed the
subject of the hon. gentleman’s motion. He made no complaint
whatever of his moving a resolution other than the one of which
he gave notice. He thought the hon. member did all that could


be expected, in giving notice that he intended to bring this subject
before the House. They, must bear in mind that he was not now
raising the question whether it was right or whether it was wrong
—whether the House might deem it expedient or inexpedient,
wise or unwise, to grant these remissions of sentence ; but he main-
tained that what had been done was directly in accordance with
the prison policy of the British nation. (Hear, hear.) There had
been no extreme act of mercy in these cases—there had been no
exti'aordinary release from punishment which was not in accord
with the principles, tendency, and policy of the mother country in
the treatment of prisoners ; and he thought if he at all established
that, he should establish a great deal in justification of the course
taken by his Excellency the Governor. He should in the course
of his observations show—and he thought he should show to the
satisfaction of every hon. member whose mind was open to con-
viction—that in this colony, up to the present time, the Governor
had exercised the prerogative of mercy without reference to his
Ministers as a rule. Of course he did not mean that his Excel-
lency had not referred occasionally to Ministers for further
information, or to the Attorney-General, for his view of the law,
but he should be able to show that the prerogative of mercy in this
colony had been exercised by the Governor on his independent
judgment, and that Ministers had not practically interfered. He
should be able to show that the release of prisoners and the mitiga-
tion of punishment had been going on under all Governors and
under all Administrations. In the year 1870, when the hon.
member for West Sydney was in office with Sir Charles Cowper,
there were fifty prisoners released in a shorter time than the regu-
lations would admit. One was Vane, who under a sentence of
fifteen years was released in five years. In the year ending on the
30th April, 1872, the year when the hon. gentleman was inoffice with
Sir James Martin, fifty-two prisoners were released in the same man-
ner. He thought he should be able to show that what had been done
in this case was in accord with the course of the administration of jus-
tice in this respect in the mother country, and that it was in accord
with the practice here, and that prisoners had been continually re-
leased before the expiration of the terms of their sentences by all
Governors and under all Administrations. He now came to what
had been done in this case. The petition in Gardiner’s case must
have been got up two and a half years ago, because it was two and
a half years ago, at the very least, since he saw that petition when
it was brought to him for signature. This petition was written
on a uniform kind of paper, which was not always the case with
documents of this kind. The petition itself was from the two


sisters of the prisoner Gardiner—Mrs. Griffiths and Mrs. Gale—
and all the other sheets attached to it had this heading—there was
no signature signed to any one of the sheets that had not this
heading :—“ We, the undersigned, beg most respectfully to recom-
mend the foregoing petition to your Excellency’s merciful con-
sideration, and more especially from the desire to reform evidenced
by the prisoner before capture, and his conduct since his
incarceration, and trust that your Excellency may be pleased,
under all the circumstances of the case, to deem the period of the
sentence already expired sufficient for the ends of justice.” That
was pretty clear. It would not be denied that the persons who
signed their names were of opinion that the prisoner Gardiner
ought to be released at the end of seven and a half years. That
could not be explained away. Every signature was added to sheets
that had this heading preceding the signature. If the lion, member
for Bathurst or the hon. member for West Macquarie had been
asked to sign a petition of this character, and they had thought it
their duty to state any facts they were aware of in the prisoner’s
favour, while at the same time they could not agree with the
recommendation of the petition they would have taken care to say
that they could not join in the recommendation. If those hon.
members knew some favourable facts which they thought they
ought to state, they would guard themselves from being supposed
to concur in this heading. They would do as he had often seen
done in similar petitions, they would take objection to the recom-
mendation, and then state what they wished to state. They would
say that they could not concur in the prayer of the petition, but
that they felt it their duty to state so and so. Mr. Forster’s name
was written to his minute on one of these sheets, and it was written
without any exception to the recommendation of the petition which
preceded it. That was the fact, and he did not wish to place any
forced construction upon it. Was not the minute itself equally as
strong as the preceding recommendation 1 There were only two
signatures to the original heading recommending the instant release
of the prisoner Gardiner, and the third signature was that of the
hon. member Mr. Forster, preceded by his own minute, which he
(Mr. Parkes) looked upon as an additional recommendation. He
desired to treat the case as fully and as fairly as he was capable of
doing. (Hear, hear.) Mr. Forster’s memorandum was in these
words : —“ Having been referred to in a petition for the mitigation
of the sentence of Francis Christie, as holding the office of Colonial
Secretary when an outbreak occurred in Darliughurst Gaol, I have
much pleasure in testifying to the fact of Christie’s good conduct
on that uccasion, as well as to his general conduct during the entire


period of liis incarceration, so far as it came under my notice in
either case. lam glad.to record this opinion, so that it may
operate as it ought in the prisoner’s favour. And so far as these
and other circumstances mentioned in the petition entitle his case
to the favourable consideration of the Government, 1 am willing
to add my testimony and recommendation.” [Mr. Forster :
Hear, hear.] Well, the petition was for the prisoner’s instant
release. (Hear, hear.) What was meant by an ex-Premier writing
that he states these facts with a view that they may operate in the
prisoner’s favour, without any qualifying words in reference to the
prayer of the petition—without saying a single word that he did
not agree with the recommendation 1 “So far as these and other
circumstances mentioned in the petition entitle his case to the
favourable consideration of the Government, I am willing to add
my testimony and recommendation.” He supposed if you added a
recommendation to something else, it was to be presumed that it
was added to another recommendation. Was it not adding to the
recommendation of the petition 1 That was the meaning he put
upon it, and the meaning that he thought would be put upon it by the
country. There was a gentleman of wealth, education, and high re-
finement, who had held the office of Solicitor-General, who signed this
recommendation, that “We trust your Excellency may be pleased,
under all the circumstances of the case, to deem the period of the
sentence already expired sufficient for the ends of justice.” That
was when the prisoner had served seven and a half years. This
petition was signed by a number of persons of undoubted reputa-
tion ■, by several members of Parliament; by a gentleman who
had filled the position of Solicitor-General of the colony, and
had therefore been answerable for the due administration of criminal
justice. It was signed by another gentleman who had been in the
position of a Minister of the Crown —who had been twice Colonial
Secretary, and once Premier. Was it not likely, then, that this pe-
tition would receive every consideration at the hands of his Excel-
lency. And was it not intended to be viewed with consideration ?
Did any one put his name to that paper without intending that the
weight of his name, and of his standing in the country, should attach
to the recommdation 1 [Mr. Forster: Hear, Hear.] Hedidnotthink
that any one who signed that petition could be justified in any way
trying to explain away the fact. To his mind it had always appeared
that men should pause, and think very deliberately before giving
the weight of their names and of the position they occupy to a
document of this kind. And, although he was neither in office
nor in Parliament at the time, and because he had filled the
of Colonial Secretary, he refused to attach the weight of the office


he had been permitted to hold to the recommendation of this
petition when it was brought to him.
Captain Onslow : What were your private sentiments ?
Would you have signed it if you had not held office 1
Mr. Parkes : He would not have signed the petition under
any circumstances. (Hear, hear.) But even if personally he had
been disposed to sign it, he should not have done so for the reasons
he had given. Some observations had been made upon a minute
that he had thought it his duty to write on sending these papers to
his Excellency the Governor. That minute simply pointed out
the names and the standing of the most conspicuous persons who
had signed the petition. It seemed to him that he was bound in
justice to the prisoner to point out to the Governor, who was then
a stranger in the country, the positions which those gentlemen
occupied. And he should act in the same way to-morrow, or at
any other time. It seemed to him that it was his duty to point
out any circumstances he knew which appeared to be in the pri-
soner’s favour, at the same time stating the crime he had committed,
the reputation he held, and all the circumstances of the case as well
as he knew them. He had befoi'e described, in a speech he had
occasion to make on a previous evening, that he did make it his
business to see his Excellency in reference to this case, and enter
into a conversation with him, not for the purpose of giving advice,
but to place his Excellency in possession of all the information he
could affecting this case. He told his Excellency that this man
was the most remarkable prisoner in the history of this country.
He explained to his Excellency that this prisoner was reputed to
be the ringleader of a series of gangs of bushrangers that had in-
fested the country some years ago, and that he was reputed to be
the organizer and leader of the band of men who robbed the gold
escort in the year 1862. He told his Excellency that this man
had been arrested for offences of a very heinous character, and had
received the sentences which the paper showed. He explained at
the same time that this man appeared to be connected with a family
of good character, as far as he could learn. He explained that
there was a number of persons of standing and high reputation
who appeared to take an interest in this case; and he also explained
that the prisoner’s conduct had been uniformly good ever since he
had been in gaoL That was the substance of his conversation
with his Excellency. He explained all he knew on both sides, and
he conceived that it was his duty so to do. It was only right for
him to say that since these discussions had taken place his Excel-
lency had told him he was under the impression that he (Mr.
Parkes) was not unfavourable to a merciful consideration of this


case. (Hear, hear.) But it was right also to say that his Excel-
lency admitted, in the most direct terms, that he never offered any
advice; and that his Excellency never asked any advice from him
in reference to this matter. His Excellency might have formed
such an impression as he had alluded to, for they often found, after
explaining a matter in the simplest manner possible to their own
minds, that, an impression had been obtained which very much
surprised them. All he could say was that what he wished to do,
and what he thought he did, was to explain both sides of this case
—to give the gaol history of the prisoner, the nature of his crime,
and the sentence he had received; and on the other side, his good
conduct in prison, the real character and standing of the persons
who seemed to be in his favour, some of whom had undoubtedly
signed this petition for his release at the end of seven and a half
years, and the character, as far as he knew, of his relatives, who
had petitioned for his release. With regard to the prisoner Gar-
diner, he felt it necessary to say that perhaps he, of all men in this
country occupying a similar public position, knew least of him.
When the gold escort robbery took place he was 13,000 miles away.
It took place in June, 1862. He did not leave England on his
return to the colony until the October following. He did not arrive
here until the end of January, 1863. He then remained in private
life for a considerable time, paying little attention to public affairs.
He believed that he never read the report of the trials of the escort
robbers. To account for thafc, he might explain that as a rule he
never read the reports of trials of this character. But there were
other reasons. He was immersed in transactions of his own which
occupied his attention entirely for a considerable time after his
arrival, and he paid little attention to Gardiner; and he well re-
membered feeling surprise on returning from England that this
man, whose name he had never heard of prior to his leaving the
colony, had become a kind of criminal hero. Well, things went
on, and he never thought of Gardiner until he took office in 1866,
because he had no occasion to think of him. While on his first
visit to Darlinghurst Gaol, Mr. Read, the principal gaoler, pointed
out a prisoner to him and told him that was Frank Gardiner. Of
course he looked at the prisoner, but from that day he had never
exchanged a single word with him, though he had visited the gaol
probably forty times, and for this very reason that he had imposed
upon himself as a rule of his life never, while - Colonial Secretary,
to enter into conversation with prisoners, even though he had
known them before their imprisonment. It appeared to him that
this was a right rule; but he found that this rule was not observed
by others. The late Chief Justice who tried this case visited the


prisoner, and entered into a long conversation with him. He found
that others, including membex's of Parliament, often did the same
thing. He had felt it right to state that, as far as he was con-
ceited, he knew less of this prisoner than any one who had occu-
pied the same position as himself, and it had not been until recently
that he had given himself the trouble to try and get information
respecting him. As far as he could understand, there did not
appear to be legal evidence that he was engaged in the escort rob-
bery. The Attorney-General of the time (Sir James Martin)
declined to put him on his trial because, as he said in a minute, the
evidence was insufficient. The evidence against Gardiner appeai’ed
to have been that of the approver, Charters, uncoxTobox’ated by a
single circumstance except the sergeant of police stating that he
thought he could swear to Gardiner’s voice. The hon. member for
Illawari’a (Mr. Forster) must know a great deal more about this
case than he did, because the hon. gentleman was Colonial Seci’e-
tary in 1859, when the prisoner was released after five years’ im-
prisonment, from two cumulative sentences of seven years each.
Mr. Forster : That was his fix’st offence.
Mr. Parkes : He admitted that Gardiner had not then
acquired notoriety, and that the hon. gentleman’s attention might
not have been specially called to the case. Nevertheless, it was
a remarkable release of a prisoxxer convicted of two offences of
enormity, for which he x*eceived two cumulative sentexxces of seven
years each, to be let out of gaol after five years’ imprisonment.
This was a more remarkable release than any other he knew of.
From a report of proceedings in the Assembly, some years ago,
which he had occasion to x*efer to that day, he noticed that the
hon. member (Mr. Foi’stei') said, ixx x*eference to this qxxestioxx of
pardoning, that no act of the kixxd was done when he was in office,
without his advice and coixsent. If that was so, he nxxxst have
advised and consented to the libex-atioxi of Gardiner, though the
papers did not say that. The hoxx. gentleman probably acted in
the same way as every one else. The hoxx. gentleman was Colonial
Secretaxy agaixx, some four years afterwards, when the Government
refused to put Gardiner xxpoxx his trial for the escort robbexy, and
the hon. gentleman was also Colonial Seci’etaxy for some consider-
able time after Gardiner’s impx’isonment commexxced. Now,
recently, it had come to the kxxowledge of the Government that
there was x*eason to suppose, thoxxgh it did xxot appear proved,
that this prisoner was idexxtical with a person who, ixx 1850, com-
mitted a. robbexy ixx Geelong, Port Phillip at that time being a
pax-t of this colony, axxd was coxxvicted and sexxtenced to sevexx
years’ imprisonmeixt, axxd subsequeixtly escaped from Pentridge.


This was unknown to the Government, and unknown to the Compt-
roller of Prisons until about eight or nine days ago. This know-
ledge appeared to have been in the possession of the police for
some time past, but hon. gentlemen who knew anything about
police operations knew that it was one principle of effective police
action to keep everything secret unless there was some necessity for
making it known. This was necessary, for the promotion of
efficiency in the Police Department, and it was necessary, also,
that prisoners, when they were let out of gaol, might have an
opportunity of getting an honest livelihood. A policeman in
England would be dismissed from the service if, without good
reason, he made known that which would tend to prevent the
reformation of a criminal on leaving gaol. He thought this
explanation was due to the police; but he found (and he was
going to allude to this matter in order that the hon. member for
Illawarra might have an opportunity to state what he knew of
this Pentridge affair) that when the hon. member was in office,
and immediately after Gardiner’s conviction, Mr. John Thomas
Smith, then Mayor of Melbourne, applied to him for permission
to see the prisoner, to ascertain whether he could identify him as
thepei’son who had been contined in Pentridge, and escaped. The
hon. gentleman granted the following order to Mr. Smith :
To the Gaoler, Darlinghurst.
Dear Sir, —Mr. J. T. Smith, Mayor of Melbourne, is desirous of seeing
the prisoner Gardiner, with the view of ascertaining his possible identity
with a person of his description some time ago confined in Pentridge
Stockade, Victoria. You will, therefore, be good enough to afford Mr.
Smith such facilities as may be consistent with your convenience and duty.
I am, &c.,
ADLLIAM FORSTER.
He could easily understand that the hon. gentleman might not
have attached much importance to this at the time, and that he
might never have come into conversation with Mr. Smith after his
visit to the gaol. And what he should like to know and if
time had permitted he should have communicated with Mr.
Smith on the subject—was whether Mr. Smith, after this visit to
the prisoner, in 1864, informed the hon. member for Illawarra
that Gardiner was the same person who had escaped from Pent-
ridge.
Mr. Forster : It will be upon record in the office.
Mr. Parkes : It is not on record.
Mr. Forster : Surely the result is known in the gaol,
Mr. Parkes : It was very improbable that the result would
be known there. Mr. Smith would not be likely to tell the
o-aoler that Gardiner was the man who had broken out of Pent-
O


ridge. He would be more likely to go back to tlie Colonial Sec-
retary and tell him.
Mr. Forster : He certainly told me nothing that I recollect.
Mr. Parkes should consider it his duty to communicate
with Mr. Smith, to see what was the result of this interview.
The case of Gardiner came before his Excellency the Governor in
the way he had explained. His Excellency decided, not that the
prisoner should be liberated at the end of seven and a half
years, but that, if the prisoner’s conduct continued good, after ten
years the case might then be brought before his Excellency
again. That was the decision arrived at upon the case submitted.
This decision had been spoken of as if it was an unconditional
release —a release under some extraordinary circumstances. The
punishment was an imprisonment of ten years, in the face of uni-
formly good conduct, accompanied by banishment for twenty-two
years afterwards. Now, he ventured to say, that that was a
severer punishment than any sentence short of death in the former
days of darkness in England, when sentences of transportation
were inflicted upon persons found guilty of crimes of equal magni-
tude. The punishment of persons in England in the last century,
and in the early years of this, was transportation for life for
offences of equal magnitude, but that was nothing to be com-
pared to the punishment of ten years’ close imprisonment, with
twenty-two years banishment afterwards. And he learned, on the
highest authority that could be obtained, that, a few years ago,
there was not a single prisoner out of all the many thousands in
the gaols of England, who had been in detention ten years. To
shew that he was not making this statement recklessly, he would
produce his authority. That authority was Sir Walter Crofton,
an Imperial officer, who stood second to none in his knowledge of
prison management and penal discipline, and as a witness of expe-
rience on a subject of this kind. And how was that evidence
given 1 It was given before a Royal Commission, with the Duke
of Richmond at its head, and comprising Mr. Gathorne Hardy,
Sir John Taylor Coleridge, Dr. Lushington, Mr. Bright, Mr.
George Ward Hunt, and other gentlemen of equal standing and
eminence. Sir Walter Crofton, in giving his evidence, in answer
to the Chairman, the Duke of Richmond, said :
The convict system in this country, and in Ireland, was devised without
anyregard whatever to the possibility of keeping men for their lives, or for any
very long period in confinement, in England particularly—they were always
sent to the colonies after certain periods of detention ; and I do not believe
that, at this moment, you have men who have been ten years under deten-
tion in the convict establishments of this country. In Ireland we have had
them for periods ranging from ten to fifteen years under our notice.


have known men, and have particularly observed them, who have been
fourteen and fifteen years under imprisonment. I obtained, within the last
few days, from Captain Whitty, who is now at the head of the convict
establishment in Ireland, a return of the number of men who are at present
under detention in the Irish convict prisons, and have been so for a period
exceeding ten years. . , . There are now, in the Irish convict prisons,
70 male convicts under life sentences, and 9 female convicts. Exceeding
10 years under detention, there are 28 males and 7 females ; exceeding 12
years, there are 18 males and 1 female; exceeding 13 years, there are 13
males and 1 female; exceeding 14 years, there are 3 males and 1 female ;
exceeding 15 years, there are 2 males. There is one man, I understand,
who has been 15 years and 8 months.
And that was the only instance in the United Kingdom, or Ire-
land, of a man having been more than fifteen years in confinement.
On the cessation of transportation a statute was passed to punish
criminals within the United Kingdom, and the highest sentences
that could be imposed under that statute, in lieu of the old sen-
tences of fifteen years, or any longer period of transportation, was
imprisonment for not less than six years, nor more than ten. What
was it that the prison reformers, from Howard down to our own
day, had been contending for 1 and the rank of prison reformers
of the present century had included men of the highest and purest
character, the most profound learning, and the most distinguished
position. And what had been their object? Their object had
been to ensure the punishment of offenders being carried out in
accordance with the dictates of humanity—that, for example, the
health of the prisoners should not suffer from their being put in
unhealthy situations. Whilst the law was considerate in pro-
tecting society, it had been contended that society was not protected
by any revengeful law, or by any indiscriminate severity of punish-
ment. It had been contended, that it was the duty of the State,
in the highest interests of society, to hold out hope of redemption to
every prisoner who came under the sentence of the law. Statesmen,
philanthropists, jurists, and all who had given the subject prac-
tical consideration, had unanimously held the opinion that hope
should be held out to every prisoner. (Hear, hear.) And so
much was that practice recognised in other countries that in Bel-
gium, where capital punishment had been abolished, and where
imprisonment for life had taken the place of capital punishment
for such crimes as murder, imprisonment for life was frequently
reduced to imprisonment for twelve years. That was the evidence
given before the Royal Commission. Well, on the testimony of
such authorities as he had quoted, it was clear that the spirit of
revenge had passed away from the laws of civilised countries; such
a spirit as he had seen in these discussions had no part in the con-
sideration of these questions by enlightened men. Society had no


interest in immuring men in prison for their lives. Better by far
take them to the gibbet; better by far put them to death than
imprison them indiscriminately for life. The opinion of eminent
men in our own country was entirely opposed to that vindictive
spirit in the administration of the law. Without exception, the
opinions of persons who had thought upon the subject were
unanimous in this view—that offenders against the laws of the
country in which they lived ought to be divided into two distinct
classes. He did not know any person, whose opinion was entitled
to the slightest weight, who dissented from that view—that
offenders ought to be divided into two separate classes, habitual
offenders and casual or accidental offenders. (Hear, hear.) There
was a class of persons in the mother country —he hoped there
were none answering to the same class here—who were born to
habits of thieving, trained to it as regularly as children in purer
circumstances were trained to habits of industry. They lived by
depredations upon property throughout their lives, and died thieves.
Undoubtedly there was a large class of such persons inthe*raother
country ; and hon. gentlemen would be astonished to hear, upon the
authority of Mr. W. R. Greig, that no less than one hundred thousand
prisoners were released unconditionally in England every year.
In addition to those releases there were not fewer than two thousand
released under tickets of leave every year, whose crimes ranged up
to those of the highest enormity. The police took cognizance of
their proceedings, but did not inform people who they were, in
order that the liberated persons might have a chance of self-
redemption. He had alluded to the enormous ci’iminal class in
England in order to draw a comparison highly favourable to this
country. Mr. Matthew Davenport Hill, a very high authority,
stated that amongst the habitual criminals detection was so seldom
that it was supposed that not more than one conviction took place
to some sixty depredations. Mr. Hill gave the police returns on
the proportion of convictions for forging Bank of England notes,
and according to that return,.during a period of thirty-two years,
the convictions for forging Bank of England notes had been only
as one to one hundred and sixty-four cases of forged notes pre-
sented to the bank for payment. But what he desired to call
attention to was that in this country there was good reason to
suppose that comparatively few offences took place where detection
did not follow, and that arose, not from the superiority of the police
force, which, however, was quite equal to that of England, but
from the circumstances of the country rendering detection much
more easy than it was in a dense population of thirty millions. He
now came to the list of the twenty-four cases which had attracted


so much attention here. The great majority of the men in that
list answer strictly to the category of criminals who were other
than habitual criminals. It could not be doubted that the greater
number of those young men, natives of the country, had, until
they were inveigled into the crime of bushranging, lived industri-
ous and reputable lives, and he was somewhat amused at the hon.
and learned member for the Western Gold-Fields (Mr. Buchanan)
who was continually interrupting him, and by his interruptions
expressing his opposition to the statements he (Mr. Paikes) was
making. The hon. and learned gentleman, nine years ago a few
months after the conviction of two of the men in the list moved
a resolution in favour of the release of those two men at that time.
The hon. and learned member, on the 7th March, 1865, moved the
following resolution :
That an address be presented to the Governor, praying that His Ex-
cellency will be pleased to cause the instant release of the prisoners Bow
and Fordyce, found guilty of robbing the gold escort from Forbes, and sen-
tenced to death, but reprieved by His Excellency, against the advice of his
Ministers, on the ground that it was contrary to the practice of the English
tribunals to accept the unsupported testimony of an approver, and stating
that the release of those prisoners is also desired in consideration of the
irregular and improper, if not illegal nature of their trial and conviction.
He now came to what had been done in regard to the proposed
release of these persons ; and then he should proceed to show what
had been the course taken in this country in the exercise of the
prerogative of mercy under other Governments. The cases of
these persons had been considered mainly on the ground that foi
the most part the offenders belonged to an exceptional class. It
was beyond doubt that in most cases these young men had never
come under the observation of the police, or been known to offend
against the law r before they had taken to bushranging. And what
had been done 1 With respect to the proposed release of these
twenty-four men, the remissions of sentence by the express exercise
of the prerogative of pardon did not, in the majority of the cases,
greatlv abridge the period of sentencelrelow what might have been
obtained under the legal regulations. The difference was this . by
the gaol regulations, a man who was sentenced to ten years was
entitled to his release at the end of eight years; but under the
exercise of the prerogative in this instance, he was released at the
end of seven years and six months, or only six months short of the
legal term. The man who was sentenced to fifteen yearns penal
servitude would be entitled by the regulations to be released at
the end of eleven years and three months j by the exercise of the
prerogative he was released at the end of eight years and nine y


months. A man who received a sentence of thirty years could
claim his release with good conduct at the end of twenty-two years
and six months ; but under the special mode of treatment these
men had received, he would be able to claim it at the end of
seventeen years and six months. Of the twenty-four men whom
it was proposed to release, ten only would be liberated in the
colony, leaving fourteen to be exiled : and this exile meant not
merely banishment from the colony, but banishment from all the
Australian colonies and from New Zealand, whilst if they returned
they were liable to be arrested and made to serve out the remain-
der of their sentences. On inquiry he had found that there was
scarcely a case known of an exile returning to the colony. Now
let them see what had been done by other Governors, and before
the arrival of Sir Hercules Robinson. In the year commencing
June 20, 1864, and ending June 20, 1865, there were 80 persons
released in the same manner. Within one year no less than 190
applications for remission were submitted, of which 110 were
refused and 80 were granted. In the year 1870, in Mr. Cowper’s
last administration, no less than 44 prisoners were released uncon-
ditionally, and 5 exiled, making altogether 49 ; and amongst these
was Yane, the bushranger, who had been sentenced to fifteen
years’ imprisonment, and was released at the end of five years.
In the year between 1871-2, 49 prisoners received unconditional
pardons, and 3 were exiled, making a total of 52 ; and this system
■of release had been going on year by-year unmarked by the House
until the present moment. He was speaking now solely of per-
sons in whose favour the prerogative of mercy had been exercised.
In the year 1862, Mr. Cowper, who had held office as Colonial
Secretary longer than any other person in the colony, and whose
great administrative ability was universally acknowledged, had a
letter read to the prisoners at Cockatoo, Darlinghurst, and Parra-
matta, pointing out to them that the door of hope was not shut
against them, but that by good conduct they might open it at any
time through the exercise by His Excellency of the prerogative of
mercy. He should take exception to the adoption of so unusual
a course as this, of having a letter written specially to be read to
the prisoners, making the official announcement that the preroga-
tive of mercy was open to them. On one occasion Mr. Cowper, at
a time when the hon. member for Sydney West (Mr. Robertson)
was his colleague, actually released nine pei'sons in order to cele-
brate the Prince of Wales’s birthday. On another occasion, he
released twenty-nine prisoners, or rather the Minister submitted
their cases for the consideration of His Excellency, who assented
to their release. [An hon. member : “ What were their crimes 1”]


It had been asked what were their offences 1 One of them was a
sentence of fifteen years for rape. Perhaps hon. gentlemen might
think that a trifling offence. He did not know what importance
hon. members attached to it, but he knew that most persons re-
garded it as a serious crime; and yet this man, who was convicted
in 1862, and was sentenced to fifteen years, was one of the pri-
soners released in 1870 by the Ministry of which Mr. Robertson
was a member—thus serving eight years instead of fifteen yeais,
through the exercise of the prerogative of mercy. Another of the
men was sentenced to ten years for robbery under arms, and was
released at the end of five years, being relatively a much shorter
term of imprisonment than any of the prisoners in this list had
undergone. These were two of the cases, and there wa& a long list
of similar cases which he might go through did he think proper.
The hon. member who made this motion had contended that Min-
isters in this country occupied the same position as the Home
Secretary in England : and this assertion had been cheered by the
hon. member for Sydney West (Mr. Robertson), but that hon.
gentleman when in office had never occupied that position, nor, as
the hon. gentleman knew well, had he ever occupied anything like
it. The question was not whether it ought to be so, but whether
it really had been so. He was prepared to show conclusively that
it had not been so. In these despatches they had the statement of
Sir Alfred Stephen, who, having been Chief Justice during the
term of office of every succeeding Administration, ought to Ije in a
position to know the practice that had prevailed. They had also
the statement of Sir Hercules Robinson, who had now been two
years in the colony, and who had had every oppoitunity of con-
sulting persons of authority on the matter. On this testimony the
state of things in this colony was that the Colonial Secretary had
been solelv the instrument of placing before His Excellency all
the facts of the several cases, and that His Excellency exei’cised
the prerogative of mercy without advice. He had himself filled
the office of Colonial Secretary close upon five years, and he could
say that such had been the course of practice during the whole
time he had been in office. He had adopted that course because
he had always understood that it was that which had been adopted
by his predecessors in office ; and he could readily understand how
in a country like ours, which was a dependent country and merely
a part of the British Empire, there must necessarily be defects in
our Parliamentary government. We had no treaty rights, there
were very many things we had not the power of doing, and it was
not in the nature of things that we should have complete indepen-
dent powers so long as we remained the mere colony of a natioii.


That being so, he was content to leave this solemn and sacred
power of the exercise of the prerogative of mercy, of abridging sen-
tences which had been arrived at upon sworn testimony in the
Courts of Law, entirely with the representative of the Crown ; and
as far as his opinion went, he believed it would be best to leave it
so. (Loud cries of No, no ! and Yes, yes !) As a member
of this community, and as one who had taken as active and sub-
stantial a part in the affairs of the country as any other person in
it—as one who was more anxious for the character and permanent
good of the country than for any other tiling in life, he declared
that, in his opinion, this power of pardon would be more safely
and more beneficially exercised by the Governor than by anyone
else. (Hear, hear.) That was his individual opinion, and he
would come to the constitutional part of the question just now.
He need not go beyond what Sir Alfred Stephen and Sir Hercules
Robinson said, to show that this, as he had stated it, had been the
practice in this country. Sir Alfred Stephen, at the time he was
writing, was the acting Governor of the colony, and he said :
The Colonial Secretary, in whose department all correspondence on the
subject of crime, after conviction, is carried on, does not in the first instance
express any opinion on a petition for pardon or mitigation. He may have
done so in a few cases, but as a general rule he certainly does not. The
mode of dealing with the petition is determined, and in effect all references
concerning it are directed by the Governor, a very considerable portion of
whose time is occupied (I may say in every week) in the investigation of
and deliberation upon such cases. Neither does the Governor, in general,
confer with any Minister on them.
They must bear in mind who this witness was. He was for
over thirty years the Chief Justice, and at the time he spoke he
was the acting Governor of the colony. If this learned gentleman
did not know what the custom was, who was to know ? Well,
His Excellency the present Governor said this :
Hitherto the practice here has been for all applications for mitigation
of sentences to be submitted to the Governor for his independent decision
thereon. Some are sent to him direct through the post by the petitioners,
others are presented personally by influential persons interested, whilst the
remainder reach him through the Colonial Secretary’s Office, without any
expression of opinion from the Minister. Taken altogether these applica-
tions are numerous. I have not kept any count of them, but I should
think that a weekly average of twelve would certainly be below the number.
All are carefully perused by the Governor. Some—in which the grounds
stated, even if proved, would be insufficient to justify remission—are
summarily rejected; others, upon which inquiry may seem desirable, are
referred for the report of the Sheriff and the sentencing official, and some-
times the opinion of the Crown law officer is asked for. Previous
petitions and papers in each case, if any, are carefully perused, and
eventually the Governor gives his decision according to his own independent
judgment.


Hon. members opposite perhaps questioned the authority of Sir
Alfred Stephen; perhaps they questioned the authority of the
Governor. Neither of those gentlemen were likely to know so
well as hon. members knew ! But, if so, let us see what Mr.
Cowper said on the subject,—Mr. Cowper, who was the chief of
the hon. gentleman who had cheered the very opposite doctrine.
In the year 1860, nine years ago, and when Mr. Cowper had
passed through his great and powerful Administrations, he delivered
his opinion on this subject in his place in this House, he could have
no doubt amidst the cheers of the hon. member for Camden, Mr.
Garrett. (Laughter.) A motion was brought forward about the
case of two men named Levey and Shoveller. The motion was
brought forward by the hon. member for the Western Gold Fields,
and was seconded by the Hon. John Bowie Wilson, who was no
longer a member of this House, but who had previously held office
as Secretary for Lands. Mr. Cowper, in his speech on that occasion,
said that he was not surprised at anything the hon. member for the
Western Gold Fields might say, but he was astonished that a
motion like that should be seconded by a gentleman who had held
office as a Minister of the Crown.
Mi*. Buchanan ; What was the motion 1
Mr. Parkes : For papers.
Mi-. Buchanan ; Condemning?
Mr. Parkes had no doubt it was condemning. (Laughtex*.)
The hon. member would not hesitate to bring forward a nlotion
condemning the universe, and would be prepared with irrefragable
proof that it was strictly in accordance with the principles of
Christianity. (Laughter.) Mr. Cowper on that occasion, as
x-eported in the Sydney Morning Herald, said :
He was not surprised at the motion from the quarter it emanated; he
was surprised that a gentleman who had occupied the position of a Minister
of the Crown, and ought to know better, should have seconded the motion.
The hon. member must know that Ministers very rarely interfere with
matters of this kind ; and when the House is asked to pass a censure
against the Government for exercising the prerogative of mercy, it is more
particularly levelled against an individual who was not there to defend
himself. There were hundreds of prisoners whose petitions were received
by him, but he never looked at them, because he thought this was one of
those matters with which the political Ministers should interfere as little
as possible. These papers came before him every day, and he simply
initialed them and sent them on to the Judge who tried the case, and then
they came before his Excellency, who decided the matter on his own respon-
sibility. He thought the charges that had been made so recklessly this
afternoon might have some foundation; therefore he said that the hon.
member (Mr. Wilson) knew well that these papers were seldom seen by the
Colonial Secretary, therefore the Act was one almost entirely in the pro-
vince of one individual. But he was not going to shelter himself with that


argument, because the House might say he was responsible and that these
were matters which he ought to interfere with and ought to be held respon-
sible for. In this particular case, so far as he recollected, his Excellency
did ask his opinion, and he found that in February a petition for the
remission of sentence was refused. He thought he understood the hon.
member to say it was refused by the Government who preceded him, and
whom he had so lauded ; but that was not the fact, because the petition was
dealt with soon after he came into Office, and the letter written soon after
the death of Mr. Elyard proved this, therefore it must have been his (Mr.
Cowper’s) act, and not that of the hon. member for the Lachlan. The hon.
member wished to know why the petition was refused in February and was
granted in April. He understood the Jewish Rabbi had been to his Excel-
lency in this particular case, because, when the gentlemen composing the
deputation came to him, he assured them he had no power, and they then
went and saw his Excellency personally, and he believed the Jewish Rabbi
was one of those who interested himself in this case. His Excellency had,
however, conversed with him on this case. And Mr. Darvall, who was
Attorney-General at that time, also stated his opinion, and the decision of
his Excellency came after that discussion. But the hon. member seemed
to think this case was one of extraordinary atrocity and that no interest
had been made sufficient to justify the Executive Government in the course
they took. Here was a petition, signed by 250 persons, including a clergy-
man of the Church of England, the Church of Rome, and other respectable
persons, and this went to the Judge, who made his report, and it then
went to his Excellency. He used no influence with his Excellency, and
never spoke to him on the subject until he asked him. He took no interest
in the matter. He had interfered on one or two occasions but he had made
no impression. He did so in the case of Spicer, although it was publicly
stated that he did all he could to keep him in gaol. He complained of
Spicer being kept in gaol, but his Excellency refused to abate his sentence,
and it was only after repeated remonstrances that he pardoned Spicer ; and
yet he had been accused of having hept him in gaol. He thought that
it was hardly fair that he should be accused of tyranny in one case and
corruption in the other. He believed this discussion would be most injuri-
ous, and that this interference with the prerogative was injurious. It
would not affect the individual aimed at, nor would it affect
him. He cared not whether the House passed this vote of
censure or not, because he had never taken any interest in the matter. It
was possible that some persons might have spoken to him about it, but he
distinctly asserted that his Excellency asked him about it after the petition
was sent in February, and that in April the Governor gave way and exer-
cised the prerogative. In the case of Shoveller, a longer term of imprison-
ment elapsed. The petitions were signed by respectable persons who had
known the prisoners for some time.
He had, he thought, clearly shown that the system which had pre-
vailed in this colony until now, through all Administrations, had
been for the Minister to inform the Governor of all the facts of
the case, and to leave the exercise of the prerogative of mercy
entirely to his independent judgment. (Hear, hear.) In some
cases, as had been stated by his Excellency, and as he had stated
the other night, and as he stated now, the Minister might point
out any new features, or any new facts ; and in some few cases—


and they were very few—the Governor might ask for the advice of
his Minister. The Minister never advised unless he were asked
for an opinion. He had proved on the authority of Sir Alfred
Stephen, of his Excellency the Governor, and of Mr. Cowper who
had held office as Prime Minister longer than anyone else, that in
this country the prerogative of mercy had been withdrawn from
the range of ordinary Ministerial functions. The Minister had
supplied the facts, had obtained the reports, and submitted them ,
and if at any time he had been asked for his opinion, the Minister
gave that opinion ; but that in nearly all cases when an opinion
had been sought, it was that of the Attorney-General, on some
point of law. He interfered very recently in one case in this list,
and that was the case of the boy Brookman, the circumstances of
which had been already explained to the House. The boy was
inveigled into a gang of bushrangers when he was only fourteen
years of age ; he was apprehended and tried for a capital offence.
His conduct in gaol had been very exemplary. He was now
twentv years of age. He had learned to read and write, and had
been thoroughly educated as well as the gaol school could educate
a man. On account of the pleading of his mother, who was
undoubtedly a reputable woman, and who had pleaded very hard
that the boy should be released in the colony, he being her only
son, he (Mr. Parkes) had expressed the opinion to his Excellency
that he thought it would be better to release him in the colony
rather than that he should be exiled. He thought this youth
would be much more likely to commence a new course of life
under the influence of his mother, his home, and his friends, than
he would be if he were thrown adrift upon the world. He simply
expressed that opinion, and that was the extent of his interference.
In another case, where a man was imprisoned for cattle-stealing, a
number of new features had been brought before the Government
which made the case somewhat peculiar. One was that this person
had been informed that he would be tried at a given date, and
that in place of that he was tried several weeks earlier, and at
another place, where he could not obtain his witnesses nor engage
any one for his defence. In that case the opinion of the late
Attorney-General was taken, and, on that opinion, his Excellency
released the prisoner. Except in cases of this kind, where some-
thing peculiar presented itself, no advice had been offered by any
Minister. The papers proved that. All the papers he had looked
at showed simply that they were referred to the Governor without
advice. They simply had the initials upon them of “W. E., C. C.,
H. P.”, or whoever it might be. They simply showed that they had
been referred without any opinion being expressed upon the papers.


Mr. Forster : No ; they do not show that; certainly not.
Mr. Parkes : Now he came to the despatches which had been
laid before the House. In July, 1869, a despatch was written by
Lord Belmore to the Secretary of State for the Colonies, which
showed clearly that the matter was in that state of perplexity and
doubt that both the Minister (Mr. John Robertson) and the
Governor desired explicit instructions. In Lord Belmore’s words
he wanted to know what weight the recommendation of the
Colonial Secretary ought to have with the Governor—whether, in
fact, the latter was bound by his instructions to act upon his own
independent judgment or not. He need not go through the replies
of Earl Granville and Lord Kimberley of a later date, or the
despatch which reached the colony about twelve months ago from
Lord Kimberley in answer to Sir Alfred Stephen. It was suffi-
cient that these despatches to anyone who would patiently read
them, showed that what was contemplated by the Secretary of
State was that the Governor should continue to decide these cases
upon his independent judgment—(No)—but that before pardoning
he should seek the advice of his Ministers. [Mr. Garrett : Hear,
hear.] But did not that place the case entirely out of the ordinary
range of Ministerial advice 1 The Minister was not to be called
upon to advise in the case unless the Governor proposed to pardon.
What position would a Minister be in in such a case as that 1 If
he dissented from the Governor’s advice he would be placed in the
most objectionable light of objecting to mercy being extended.
What position would he be in as a responsible Minister to come in
when the matter had been considered by some independent
authority that was not responsible to parliament.
Mr. Hoskins : The Governor is responsible.
Mr. Parkes : What, the Governor 1
Mr. Hoskins ; Yes.
Mr. Parkes: The hon. gentleman has to read up another
chapter upon constitutional law.
Mr. Hoskins: We will find out whether he is responsible
or not.
Mr. Parkes : The Governor was responsible to his masters
(hear, hear), and was not responsible to that House. (Hear, hear).
A Minister would go into the consultation, when he would simply
be employed to confirm and support the decision of the Governor,
but he had no voice in the consideration of cases where a pardon
was refused in the first instance. He, for one, would not take
that position (hear, hear) ; and all the Parliaments in the world
would not compel him to take it. (Cheers). There was one
thing—he was master of his own course of action ; and neither the


fear of Parliament, nor the edict of the Secretary of State, would
induce him to take the position of giving advice where he would
be responsible without any adequate authority. The case, as
raised by these despatches, came before him in this perplexed
state; and on account of the pressure of Parliamentary business
throughout this long session, he certainly would have deferred it
until the recess in order to give a more calm and undisturbed con-
sideration to the whole matter; but under these discussions he
became very sensible of the awkward part of the situation as
affecting the Governor —a gentleman of distinguished ability who
had filled every position he had occupied as a servant of the
Grown with honour, and who, as Governor of this colony had, he
believed, as lively a sense of his obligations as a constitutional
Governor as any man who ever lived. (Cheers). Here was this
distinguished man, the Governor of the country, exercising upon
the whole as he thought he had conclusively shown, the Queen’s
prerogative in accordance with the principles of the criminal treat-
ment 0 in the mother country and other parts of the empire,
(Hear, hear). And he had been ruthlessly attacked in that House
where he had no power of defending himself, and where he had no
position which would enable him to explain his conduct. He was
.attacked recklessly in most ungentlemanly terms, and his Ministers
were comparatively helpless in defending him or in keeping his
name out of these intemperate parliamentary conflicts. (Cheers
and laughter). He had one way of doing it by taking uporf the
Government the whole responsibility; and he met the question so.
He declined to accept this divided responsibility, he declined to
exercise this inferior kind of advice, but he was willing to meet
the thing fairly in the light of the constitution, and to be answer-
able for his decision upon every case, accepting as a consequence
that if in any case their advice was not accepted Ministers would
resign office. (Cheers). But the question had never been in that
position before. The Government placed it in that position now.
(Cheers). The case in this country had been exactly what he had
stated, and until now a Ministry had never stepped into the
position of being directly responsible to Parliament in cases of
pardon as in all other cases.
Mr. Forster : I have listened for two hours to the hon.
member, and have not heard a single case to show the truth of
what the hon. member states.
Mr. Parkes : Does the hon. gentleman say that Mr. Cowper’s
speech did not show it.
Mr. Forster : I do not know what the practice was in Mr.
Cowper’s time.


Mr. Parkes : In the hon. gentleman’s time he did not believe
he could show it. He did not believe the hon. gentleman could
find one case in a hundred where he had himself given his advice
and opinion.
Mr. Forster : I had the right to do it and never gave it up.
Mr. Parkes : The hon. member must have given it up in
practice by not doing it.
Mr. Parkes : Even now the difference between the Minister
in this country and the Home Secretary would be very material.
The Home Secretary virtually decided the question; but the
Governor, as an Imperial office!', would have to examine each case
himself; and the advice of the Minister might at any time be
refused, the Governor, of course, taking the consequences. This
was not the case in England. There was no instance of the
advice of the Home Secretary being refused. The Crown had
practically delegated the prerogative to the English Minister; and
he thought it would be better for him to show what was the
position of the Home Secretary. The absolute power which the
Secretary of State exercised had been made a matter of complaint by
a number of eminent lawyers and jurists, and all kinds of expedients
had been suggested to take what was considered a dangerous
power out of his hands. Many persons of considerable eminence
had proposed a Coui’t of Revision, or a body of assessors composed*
of retired Judges, to consider these cases, instead of the Home
Secretary, on account of what had been supposed to be abuses in
the Horne Office. The Royal Commission, which sat to consider
the question of capital punishment in 1868, examined Mr.
Walpole who had presided over the Home Office; and they
examined Sir George Grey, who at that time had at different
periods filled the office of the Home Department for twelve
years. The following were passages from the examination of Mr.
Walpole:—
483. Duke of Richmond : Will you be kind enough to state what is
the general practice at the Home Office ? The practice at the Home Office
may be stated very shortly. Wherever there was a case of a man found
guilty of murder, or of any other offence for which Capital Punishment was
inflicted, before murder was the only offence for which it was inflicted, the
practice was, when the matter was brought before the Home Office, to ex-
amine the memorial which was sent with reference to that case; to
consult the Judge who had tried the case ; to have a report from the
Judge of the evidence ; to lay before the Judge any new facts or any
facts which had been brought under the notice of the Secretary of State, and
to request from the Judge a report as to his opinion upon that new evidence,
or upon the matter. Upon all those materials being brought before the
Secretary of State, he was then in a position, not in the least degree to rehear


the case, but simply to advise the Crown whether there were any circum-
stances which would justify the exercise of mercy either in an absolute or
in a qualified sense ; that is to say, either pardon or a commutation of
punishment.
484. That brings me to the point of the possibility or the advisability
of establishing what is called a court of appeal, or a new trial. Has that
subject occupied your attention at all ? It has very much occupied my
attention.
485. First of allj I understand you to think strongly that there must
be, as is generally admitted, a final appeal to the Sovereign in all cases ? I
expressed that opinion very strongly indeed, and I do not see how you can
possibly avoid it. I think that there must be that prerogative vested some-
where, that is to say, in the Sovereign, and I cannot conceive how it would
be so well exercised, so well as by and through the Secretary of State acting,
of course, upon his responsibility in making a recommendation. lam very glad
that your Grace has mentioned that point, because one of the circumstances
which induces me to think that you ought not to have a Court of appeal in
cases of murder or in any criminal cases, as a matter of right, would be this,
—that when you have had your appeal, you will leave the parties still as
free as they are now to go on pressing upon the Home Office, that is to say,
upon the Crown through the Home Office, to alter the punishment ; and all
the objections which are urged against the exercise of that prerogative by
the Home Office now (such objections as that the Home Secretary is rehear-
ing alone, which is not accurate, what has been determined by the J udge
and jury) would be ten times aggravated, because he would then be rehear-
ing also what had been determined by the Court of appeal and by all the
Judges who had decided the case in the Court above. That is one reason
why I think that a Court of appeal would be most objectionable. The other
reason given by Lord Wensieydale I entirely concur in, namely, that it
would be really an appeal for the rich and not for the poor. Another reason
is, that I cannot conceive, if you once admit an appeal on the part of the
criminal, how you can refuse tojgrant an appeal on the part of the prosecutor;
it would be the most one-sided justice in the world, and society, in my
opinion, could not be secure if you were to say that an additional chance of
escape should be given to the criminal when you did not give to society an
equal power of saying, “You have escaped improperly, and now we will
have you brought to trial again.”
He (Mr. Pai’kes) read this evidence because he was fully aware of
the objections which were raised to the exercise of this power by
the Home Secretary, and these objections would be made with
stronger force hereafter. It seemed to prove that the last and
final appeal must be to the Crown.
501. Mr. Gathorne Hardy : In fact, a great deal of matter comes
before the Home Office which is not calculated to come before a Court at
all ? It could not be done.
502. Matter which is very proper for inquiry before the tribunal of
mercy, but which would be very unlit to be brought before a Court of
justice ? Yes. If the public would only bear in mind that the Home Office
is not a Court of appeal, but a Court of mercy, and that its function is
merely to ascertain whether circumstances justify an alteration or mitigation


in the punishment, I think that their opinion with reference to the practice
of the Home Office would be very materially changed.
503. Dr. Lushinqton : But sometimes it operates as a Court of appeal,
take Smethurst’s case ? It may operate as a Court of appeal.
504. Mr. Waddington : In a few cases where the question is one of
guilt or innocence it must act as a Court of appeal ? Yes.
505. Not judicially, but of necessity, it must advise the Crown whether
the case is sufficiently clear to justify the sentence being carried out ?
Quite so.
506. Not only in capital cases, but in all other cases ?' Quite so.
507. Mr. Gathorne Hardy : And in effect it must tfontinue to exist
whatever intermediate Court you may have ? lam confident it must.
508. Mr. Neate : In your experience is it not very unusual for the
Home Secretary to act at variance with the recommendation of the Judge
who tried the case ? Ido not think that it is usual to do so in one sense,
because I really believe, from my experience at the Home Office, that there
is no necessity to differ from the Judge who tried the case. Now and then
there is such a necessity, and then the Secretary of State does take upon
himself the responsibility of differing.
509. There is no settled rule at the Home Office that you will not act
at variance with the recommendation of the Judge after you have put the
case before him ? Certainly not.
510. Duke of Richmond : The judgment of the Secretary of State is
entirely unfettered ? Absolutely unfettered.
511. He decides according to his own judgement and conscience ? I
think you may take it that everything which is done by the Secretary of
State in revising the punishment, is done entirely upon his own responsi-
bility, but with all the aid which he can get.
* * * * *
He had had a purpose in reading the views of Mr. Walpole, because
they seemed to indicate the course that should be taken, and the
rules that should be applied in examinations of the kind in this
country. The evidence seemed to prove also that whatever scheme
might be devised for the consideration of these cases, you could
not get rid of the necessity for a final appeal to the Crown. He
had another extract from Sir George Grey, who had been in office
for twelve years.
* * * *
* *
1502. Duke of Richmond: I apprehend that each case which comes
before you for the exercise of mercy must stand upon its own merits ?
Certainly.
1503. It is very difficult to define what ground would actuate you in
recommending the Crown to exercise the prerogative of mercy ? Certainly;
but I may say, generally, that there are a number of cases so clear that
although there are very few in which there not some petition, yet they
admit of no doubt whatever, and the petition is not entertained.
1505. In these cases, has the Secretary of State invariably a commu-
nication with the Judge? No; but when the memorial states facts or
circumstances, or considerations which, upon the face of them, might be
regarded as having an important bearing upon the case, that memorial is
invariably sent to the Judge, and he always answers it in writing ; but if


any doubt remains, or if his answer is not a very decided one, he either
offers to come to the Secretary of State, or the Secretary of State requests
to see him, and then the subject is very fully discussed ; and I should add,
with the assistance of the Under Secretary, Mr. Waddington, although the
undivided responsibility of the decision exclusively rests in all cases with
the Secretary of State.
1507. Mr. Ewart : Do you think that the Home Office should state
their reasons when they grant a reprieve ? I have done so occasionally,
where it has been possible to do it. In the Worcester case, I gave my
reasons to the Mayor of Worcester ; but generally speaking, they are not
given.
1508. You would not recommend that it should be done ? No, not in
all cases.
That seemed to be the position of the Secretary of State, and the
practice that obtained in England upon the authority of
two men of eminence, who had held the office of Home
Secretary, one of them for a period of twelve years. He
now came to another part of the subject, which was rather a
delicate one—the extent to which the House of Commons has
interfered in cases of this kind. That interference did not in any
way correspond with the representations made of it by the hon.
gentleman who moved this resolution. The House of Commons
occasionally asked questions, but he had not found a case where
they went the length of pressing for the production of papers.
A question might be asked, and the Secretary of State might
answer it, and motions had been made for the production of papers,
but he had not found a case where the motion had been passed.
He wotild give four quotations, not from text-books, or from
writers on government, where the object was to lay down general
rules, but in the words of distinguished members of both Houses
of Parliament, engaged in the practical business of government.
The first opinion was from the Marquis of Normanby, in the
House of Lords, who said :—“ I think it would be inconvenient
and unusual, as a general principle, to lay before the House the
grounds on which that discretion proceeds which dictates leniency
or severity on the part of the responsible advisers of the Crown.”
The Marquis of Westmeath asked—“ 1 again ask whether this
commutation has taken place under the sanction of the Judge who
tried the prisoner.” The Marquis of ISTormanby replied—“ I
must decline answering the question, because I could not do so
without discussing the whole subject.” The Duke of Newcastle,
on another occasion said :—“ It was a most delicate matter for
either House of Parliament to interfere in any matter connected
with the administration of justice, and still more with regard to
the exercise of the prerogative of mercy which belonged to the


Crown. He thought it would be most improper of him to give
any other answer to an inquiry, that ought not to have been made,
than that in this case the usual course would be followed by the
Government in respect of any representation which might be laid
before them.” Sir George Grey, in the House of Commons,
speaking upon a motion for the production of papers, which was
not pressed, said :
It is a solemn responsibility—a most painful duty ; but, at the same
time, I cannot accept the doctrine of the hon. member that the Secretary of
State is bound to consider the verdict of a jury in a capital case as absolu-
tely final, and to refuse to investigate any alleged facts which may be stated
to him tending to alter the view of the case submitted to the judge and
jury. The duty of a Secretary of State would be easy, if in all cases he
refused to receive any appeal for mercy founded upon facts not stated at the
trial. But he cannot shrink from the performance of the duty which is
now imposed upon him, however painful it may be. If he did, his conduct
would meet with universal condemnation. In the present instance I could
not, consistently with the discharge of my duty, have taken any other
course. The case was most extraordinary, and the hon. member has only
partially stated the circumstances; but I am not going into the evidence,
because this House is not competent to sit as a court of appeal.
Well, then, on another occasion, Lord Macaulay used these
words in the House of Commons, speaking to a motion respecting
the conduct of the Secretary of State in the exercise of the pre-
rogative of pardon:—
I have no hesitation in saying, with regard to this power —the preroga-
tive of mercy—that I would rather entrust it in the hands of the very
worst Ministry that ever held office than allow it to be exercised under the
direction of the very best House of Commons. (Hear, hear.)
What then became of the House of Commons being a Coun-
cil of Control over the exercise of the prerogative of mercy? It
had been said, on the authority of Mr. Canning, by the hon.
gentleman who moved this resolution, that it was so; but Lord
Macaulay went on to say, that he did not know a case where the
House of Commons would be justified in interfering ; if any such
case could be conceived, it would be some case of monstrous
oppression. Lord Macaulay’s words were these :
I do not know a case in which, as a member of the House of Commons,
I should be disposed to interfere with the Ministry in advising the Crown
on this matter. If I could contemplate such a case, it would be some case
of most momentous necessity—some flagitious and monstrous case of
oppression—something like the severity that had been exercised in the
reign of King James, the Second against those who had taken up arms
against him in the Mon g outh rebellion—some case the mere mention of
which would be enough to make the blood boil—to make the hair of one’s
head stand on end.


That was the only case —some extreme cases of oppression,
where he could conceive of the possibility of the House of Com-
mons interfering with the exercise of the prerogative of mercy.
In this country, where he supposed Ministers in future would be
held directly responsible for advice in every case, the number of
petitions for mitigation was perfectly startling. He did not know
what the number might be, but the Governor, who had dealt with
all these cases hitherto, said they must be quite twelve a week.
And in every case the personal influence brought to bear had a
tendency to regard every case as an exceptional one. In other
words, there was very little disposition on the part of any one to
consider these cases upon any general principle, but in the light
of special circumstances, known to the individual in the particular-
case. Every set of petitioners, or single individual, who interfered,
considered that at all events the present case was a case that ought
to be complied with, and used every influence they could command
to obtain compliance with it. He had stated before, and he stated
now, that even in looking through the papers in these cases, and
sending them to the Judges or to the Benches, or to get other facts
in order that the fullest information should be placed before the
Crown, and seeing persons who interested themselves in the cases,
even in this mode of treatment, fully one-fourth of his available
time for office work, apart from the business of Parliament and
purely political duties, was taken up. If this system of petitioning
was to be kept up, it would be almost enough to fill up the Vhole
of one Minister’s time. He mentioned these things because he
trusted that members of Parliament, at all events, would impose
some little restraint upon themselves in pressing Ministers—(hear,
hear) —whether he was in office or out of office. One thing he
thought the change was likely to lead to, to a harsher treatment of
prisoners. (Hear, hear.) He was speaking now not for himself,
or for his colleagues, but for the Ministers who might succeed them.
When they had to exercise virtually the whole power, they ought
to be left free and unfettered to act upon their own judgment and
sense of duty. All men were liable to influence, often uncon-
sciously ; but it would be necessary for the Minister, whatever his
purpose or his object might be, for his own sake, to be as cautious as
possible, and to resist all importunities for the mitigation of sen-
tences. He did not say that he should refuse all applications ; but
he should resist until he could resist no longer from the force of
the facts. (Hear, hear.) He thought he had shown that the par-
ticular cases which had led to this discussion were not very unusual,
according to the practice in this country, except that in one feature
there had been twenty-four cases grouped together for considera-
tion at one time. But with that exception the course was not


very unusual or in disaccord with the practice of remission that
had prevailed in this country. He thought the discussions that
had taken place would produce a great deal of harm. These dis-
cussions to the extent that they had gone, without definite con-
sideration and without careful thought, must produce harm. It
must injure the reputation of the country if it went forth that
there was an immunity for criminals here which was inconsistent
with the treatment of prisoners in other parts of the Empire, and
which, if it went forth, would not be a fact. It must do harm as
far as it interested and stirred up discussions among persons who
sympathised with prisoners; and it must do harm where, as in one
case he had noticed, resolutions were submitted by persons who
had inconsiderately busied themselves, which were negatived at a
public meeting. It must do harm to awaken any manifestation of
feeling which would seem to be unfavourable to the repression of
crime ; and loose and intemperate conduct upon all matters of this
kind must result in mischief to the community. With regard to
this resolution, it appeared to him, to say the least of it, a most
ill considered and injudicious resolution, which could produce no
good effect, and which affirmed in part what very few persons
would desire to affirm. It affirmed, for instance, that the House
disapproved of the release of Bow and Fordyce, notwithstanding
that a number of hon. members said that they ought to have been
released seven years ago. (No, No).
Mr. Garrett said the resolution was negatived unanimously
one time, and only four members voted in favour of it at another.
Mr. Parkes : When the statement was made in the House
that they ought to be released, several hon. members had cheered.
Then the resolution affirmed that this boy Brookman should not
be released. He did not believe that there were many persons
who understood this case who would not be in favour of the
release, and he unhesitatingly said that this was as proper a case
for the exercise of the prerogative of mercy as was ever submitted
to the Crown. This return also included a number of cases of
persons whose release would be favourably received by nearly
every one in the community, and which would be treated leniently
in any part of the British dominions. If it was right to release a
bushranger after serving five years, how could it be wrong to
release these young men who stood in the same position after they
had served double that period. It seemed proper for him to state
that, as far as he could learn from the police authorities, and from
the authorities in charge of the prisons, that comparatively few
persons released after long imprisonment returned to a course of
crime in this country. He did not say that none did.
Mr. Webb : Six out of twenty-four.


Mr. Parkes : He did not tliink that this was a very large
proportion among the worst class of cases. There was every
reason to believe that of all those who had been exiled, as far as
any knowledge had been obtained of them, by far the majority had
adopted a reputable course of life under new circumstances. He
had seen papers within the last day or two addressed to Mr. Read,
of the gaol, from several of these men, showing that they adopted
an entirely new course of life, and in many instances were now
living as respectable members of society, and they knew that that
was the case in former days under transportation from the mother
country. Some hon. gentlemen appeared to be under the impres-
sion that sentences imposed in course of law under English rule
were carried out according to the letter of these sentences. That
was not the case.
Mr Buchanan ; The more’s the pity.
Mr. Parkes had nothing to say to a gentleman who said that.
He had heard the expression in that House “ what was the use of
sentencing men to thirty years’ imprisonment if it was not
intended that they were to serve thirty years.” It was never
contemplated in the whole scope of their criminal jurisprudence in
any part of the British Empire. If it were, it would lead to the most
calamitous results, for there would be no distinction made between
the well-conducted and the ill-conducted. It would remit them to
the old times of darkness and rude justice, which happily had
passed away from the face of England and of the whole civilized
world. He had already shown that by the Statute law of England
which was passed on the cessation of transportation, that for the
longest sentence of transportation the period of imprisonment in a
gaol in England, was not to be less than six, nor more than ten
years ; and for shorter periods of imprisonment, the punishment
substituted was correspondingly shortened. He had already shown
that in all the gaols of England, with the multitudes of prisoners
passing through them, there was not supposed to be one single
person imprisoned over ten years. He had shown that in an
enlightened country, Belgium, where constitutional government,
and laws similar to those of England prevailed more perfectly than
in any other continental nation, that imprisonment for life which
took the place of the punishment for death, was very frequently
commuted to twelve years’ imprisonment. The very object, the
very essence of the modern system of treating prisoners was to
recognise good conduct —to hold out a hope to the prisoner that
•would lead to his reformation. What would be the state of things
if this merciful and enlightened system did not prevail 1 Suppose
all their prisoners were immured in dungeons for the terms to
which they were sentenced without reference to conduct in prison,


their gaols would be twice as large as they were, their prison
population would be twice as large as it was. It was only by this
merciful and wise exercise of authority in consideration of good
conduct that the penal establishments of the country were kept
within reasonable bounds ; while at the same time there was a
second and sometimes a third chance held out to a prisoner to
abandon the pursuit of crime and take to an honest life. But the
effect would not stop here. Besides doubling the expenditure of
money, the prisoners, being without hope, would be driven to
despair. (Heai', hear). They would be savages within iron cages.
The slaughter of their keepers would be of frequent occurrence,
and they would produce in this land—lighted up with the living
principles of Christianity—something of the pandemonium that
existed in Norfolk Island, and in Tasmania, in the convict days
now happily passed away. (Hear, hear). Was it to come to this
that they were to fan the flame of revenge in the execution of
their laws and drive the criminal population to desperation by the
severity of their punishments, for their prisoners were men and
women after all 1 While he was and always had been in favour
of severely dealing with the prison population of the country—
while he was and always had been in favour of the Government
devising every safeguard for the protection of life and property, he
did not believe that the best interests of the country would be
answered by carrying out any such harsh, un-English, unen-
lightened views as he had heard propounded in this House since
these discussions commenced. He believed that it was a duty in
dealing with these sentences under the law to respect the opinions
of the Judges. It was a duty also to place the prisoners under
the healthiest state of prison management, to employ them so as
to compel them to contribute as largely as possible to their main-
tenance, to instruct them as tar as was practicable, and if their
conduct proved that they were deserving of consideration, to
enable them before they were overtaken by old age, and before
they became helpless, if possible, to start on a new career, and
live honestly. That was the view taken by the first statesmen in
England —that was the view taken by the first statesmen in
America —and that was the view taken by the first statesmen
among continental nations. And he, at all events, whatever
others might think, was content to follow humbly in the footsteps
of those enlightened men. (Cheers).
Gibbs, Shallabd, and Co., General Printers, 108 Pitt Street, Sydney,




