

SPEECH
THE POLICY OF THE REID
MINISTRY
AS OPPOSED TO
FEDERATION
Delivered in the LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
Mat 30th 1895,
JSIP PNPY PPKE& (i.C'.fie
Parramatta:
Printed at the Office of the Cumberland Times,
George-street.
1895.


■ ■ )


THE
POLICY OF THE REID MINISTRY
AS OPPOSED TO
FEDERATION.
Sir HENRY PAPKES: I trust that I need not say
that I have no sympathy with the sentiments uttered by the last
speaker. I rise now in order to make my position as clear as I
can, and Ido not intend to occupy more than a few minutes. I did
the utmost in my power to oppose the imposition of the Dibbs tariff.
The very language 1 used in opposition to that tariff was quoted
against me the other day in order to show my inconsistency now. My
course now is perfectly consistent. I opposed that tariff, and for a
time, if there could have been any means of repealing it, I should
have voted to repeal it; but, as everybody knows, I have for some
years set before me a greater, a far more overwhelming object, and
the time must come when in any such process of contemplation
we must decide as to the future in dealing with a new
and entirely greater subject than we have ever yet had
to deal with. Long before the termination of the last
Parliament, I came to the conclusion that the true wisdom of the
people of New South Wales, and of the people of all the other colonies,
was to put their hands to the great work of federating these great
colonies, and that any other question whatever was comparatively
trifling as against the one question of all, making the Australian
people a nation, I therefore determined that I would have no more
to do with what I described as fiscal tinkering. 1 described that as


fiscal tinkering all through the elections, and I won my election with
that open avowal of my sentiments. At every stage, not only at my
meetings at St. Leonards, but in other parts of the country, I used
the language that the time was come when we ought to cease this
continued game of battledore and shuttlecock on this fiscal question.
Why? Because, if we federate, these states can have no custom-house
whatever. I put it now as I put it before, if gentlemen are in favour
of uniting these great colonies and making them a nation, they can-
not be in favour of a state tariff. The two things cannot exist side
by side. The states in a great federation must throw up their pro-
vincial custom-houses for once and for ever, and they are reduced to
the condition of national electors in choosing the federal Parliament,
and their time will come to fight this great battle when they elect
that Parliament. Now, the gentlemen here may call themselves
what they like. I call them pseudo freetraders and anti-federationists,
because they cannot attempt to shape a freetrade tariff, nor can the
gentlemen there establish a protectionist tariff, and at the same time
be sincere in their advocacy of Australian union. All through the
elections I held precisely the sentiments I hold now, right or wrong,
wherever I went. I held exactly these sentiments,
Mr. Wise: If the lion, member had-not, he would have been
Prime Minister to-day!
Sir HENRY PAKKES: It is really no matter to me who is Prime
Minister, and I, for one, would hail the hon. member for the King-
Division with plaudits if he showed that he understood the country
and what the country wanted. It is because I am satisfied that ho-
does not —and he will find out he does not before six months have
rolled over his head—it is because I feel that he is ruining this young-
country, that he is making our poverty still more striking, that he is
making our bad name still worse, that he is dissipating our energies
and bringing us into disaster after disaster that I think he ought to
be driven from office. It matters not to me who succeeds him so
long as the man understands what the country wants and wiiat the
principles of true government consist of. I have said that the gen-
tlemen sitting here, every one of them, whether they know it or not,
are not promoting freetrade, but they are doing the utmost in their
power to prevent federation from taking place in this century. I will
prove what I say. The condition of several states coming together
under a bond of federation is that there shall be one groat national
Government. The states, hitherto separate and independent, become
parts of a congeries of states. The custom-houses they have had
hitherto must be swept away. There can be only one custom-house
in tfie federation, and that must be the custom-house of the federal
Government; therefore any person, I care not whether he is a mem-
ber of this Assembly, or a member of the Council, or a newspaper
editor, or a merchant or a lawyer, I care not what his position may


Le, if he wants to unite these great colonies and to give us a name
and reputation and power in the civilised world, lie cannot do that
and go on paltering with provincial ta riff laws for a single state. It
is a simple, moral, and practical impossibility. Well, I for one,
have made up my mind. I have said I will serve with none, I will
aeeept service from none, who will not place the flag of federation
above all other questions whatever. Why ? The time is come when
avo are entitled to federate. Again, the time has come when it is
fraught Avith danger to neglect to unite. The time is come when
federation would open new avenues of employment, neAV avenues of
investment, new avenues of enterprise, which cannot be seen now,
and which will never be discovered until there is a great powerful
Government taking possession of the whole of Australia. That
being my case, then my course is perfectly clear. What has been
my course in the cause of federation Y In less than two years 1
awakened throughout the colonies a strong federal spirit. I brought
together the whole of the Australian colonies, including New Zeal-
and, in a conference at Melbourne, to see whether the time was or
was not come to ask the parliaments of the several colonies to take
stops to bring it about. That conference, held, 1 think, some time in
1890, came to a unanimous conclusion that the time was come, and
they went to their several parliaments, and at their invitation those?
parliaments elected a convention for one thing only: to frame a bill
for a federal commonwealth. That hill was framed. I brought it
here. I gave notice instantly of a motion for its consideration, when,
unfortunately, I had to retire from office. All that was done—that
spirit was awakened, the consent of all the colonies was given to the
conference, the conference decided to appeal to the parliaments to
elect a convention, the convention was elected —in two years. Noth-
ing has been done since. Why ? The Government which succeeded
me in their wisdom imposed this tariff Avhich we are asked to repeal,
and which, according to my freetrade principles, ought to be repealed.
I warned that Government in a friendly way, for I did not want to
go into violent opposition, against the danger of the step they were
faking. They disregarded my warning and went on. The tariff
was enacted. That was a great blow to federation, and I hope the
members of that Administration will forgive me in calmly and
quietly making these references. It proves to all the world that so
far from cultivating the federal spirit, we were cultivating a senti-
ment in direct opposition to it. No one deplored that more than I
did. I hear men talk—and I think I have heard the hon. member
for Deniliquin at some time or other talk—of making some intercol-
onial arrangement by which the borders shall be free. That has been
tried under the very best auspices, and it has signally failed. Even
in itself it is unjust, because it establishes a differential scale of duties
as against our own traders along the coast. If you could make any


arrangement of that kind, you would have no certainty of its contin-
uance. One ministry might agree, but another ministry might dis-
agree and abolish it. But if you rise sufficiently high to see the
overwhelming duty that lies to your hands now, and which, say what
you may in trying to pacify your consciences, you cannot longer ne-
glect without a great national sin—if you rise to that high plane and
unite all the colonies, then Australia from sea to sea, east and west,
nort h and south, is absolutely free to the traffic of the Australian
people—you have freetrade without any impediment or any detri-
ment. But you can have it by no other means. As to whether the
importations from abroad should be admitted free, or whether the
tariff should be for revenue purposes only, or whether there
should be duties imposed in order to promote certain industries, —that
difference of policy, I suppose, will prevail so long as we have cus-
toms ; but clearly to every man who can rise to the occasion, to
every man who can see the great future of Australia, to every man
whose soul can be touched by its glorious destiny, to every man who
can see beyond the petty squabbles of the hour, it must be apparent
that only the Parliament representing the whole of Australia can settle
the Federal customs policy. Then will come the time for those who be-
lieve in it to vote for freetrade, and for those who believe in it to vote
for protection. But what you propose to do jiow, if you pretend to be
in favour of federation, is mere tinkering with a doomed tariff, creat-
ing impediments to union, and making yourselves ridiculous in tlie
estimation of wise men all over the world. I shall have to say two
or three words on this proposed tariff, though T do not intend to de-
tain the Committee long. 1 want to speak first as to how this federa-
tion question stands. It has been left in a bad plight—not by me.
The whole world admits that I was eminently successful so long as
it was in my hands. How can we expect federation with this passage
which I am going to ask you to engrave upon your memories, to
hang up before the eyes of your children, from what has been called
a financial statement. I do not know why it is called a “ financial
statement,” because, although I do not wish to be personal, the thing
] irinted here is the most slipshod, incoherent, inconsequential, illogical
patchwork that ever I saw in the shape of a speech. lam quite cer-
tain that the great newspapers of Europe will so represent it if it ever
falls under their criticism. But I have no time to indulge in
any criticism of the financial statement beyond those words. Can
any one of you, can the last speaker, who said so much about federa-
tion, and has done so little
Mr. Willis : Give it to him !
Sir HENIIY PAPKES : Ido not want to give it to him. lam
dealing with facts and principles. How can you hope for federation
in view of this memorable passage from Mr. Eeid ? I will read it:
Ido not at all propose to stop at the remission of the Dibbs customs. I aim at a
permanent tariff.


What do the words “ permanent tariff ” mean ? What dees the hon.
and learned member for Flinders Division understand by a “perma-
nent tariff ?” He does not understand a tariff which is to be
abolished, does he? What does the late Premier 'understand by the
words? Surely it is a thing to last, to be permanent.
I aim at a permanent tariff for this country very much smaller than the tariff of
threat Britain. I hope in a short time, and I put it before the Committee as mv per-
manent tariff, to have the tariff of this country upon five leading lines oulv. This is
'he tariff which I submit to this country as its permanent tariff.
Surely words cannot be plainer unless they are used improperly. The
lion, and learned member submits what he is going to submit as the
] •ermanent tariff of the state of New South Wales.
I submit this tariff to this country as its permanent tariff—spirits, wine, ale, beer,
and porter, tobacco, cigars, cigarettes, opium. That is the tariff of the Reid Admini-
s< ration.
The Reid Administration is to be immortal. This is the tariff which
is to accompany its immortality. This is the tariff which has to be
drawn at the chariot wheels of this triumphant statesman. Having
given his ideas of what his tariff is, the Prime Minister goes on to say
that he intends by all the power he has, to carry it into effect.
Mr. Reid : blear, hear !
Sir HENRY PARKES : Very good. As a freetrader I should
not have much cause of complaint of his consistency if the hon.
end learned member would only go a step further and declare for
maintaining this colony as an isolated, separate colony for ever and
ever, and not talk with a view of deceiving the public about federa-
tion.
Mr. Reid : I do not think that freetrade means isolation !
Sir HENRY PARKES : The hon. and learned member cannot
intend to bring these colonies into a federal union if he persists in
this tariff. I pointed out the other day that it would be almost crim-
inal to go on distressing these industries which are spoken about, but
of which I have not spoken. It would be most criminally disturbing
file whole country, upsetting all the calculations of people who direct
money, upsetting all the relations of trade to go on for six or seven
years building up this tariff, unless the hon. and learned member
means to keep it in existence. Nothing could justify putting ns to
this great trouble, disturbing everything in the country, except, to
quote the hon, and learned member’s own words, making it perma-
nent. Four years have elapsed since my hand was taken from the
federal cause, and seven years will he consumed by building up this
tariff, that is eleven. As I said the other night, less than ten years
will not afford sufficient time for seeing how this model tariff
will work, so that you have twenty-one years, during which the cause
of federation is absolutely helpless. I defy any casuist, if there is
such a creature in the ministerial camp, to show me how it is possible


i o unite these col -ir -s, and, at the time, wall them round by
state tariffs. Wn i ver the colonies federate the state tariffs must
go to the winds. N other the protectionist nor the freetrader can
promote his cause as a provincialist under federation. The whole
customs of Australi must go to the federal Parliament of Australia,
and though I, for c ie, should fight to the utmost of my power for
the principles in wr oh I believe, still if the majority of the people of
Australia decided against me, I say now, as I have said
before, that I would, loyally accept the decision. There is no
other way of entering into this bond of union. You cannot
advance a step by making conditions. You cannot go to your
espials laying down rules for thoir guidance. You must
go free yourselves, dealing with your neighbours as equally free
with yourselves. I 1 here is no other possible way of uniting
these colonies. Therefore if the hon. member will go one step fur-
ther and say that he is in favour of disunion, that he is in favour of
promoting this border warfare, that he is in favour of keeping men
of the same blood, the same faith, possessing the same inheritance of
jurisprudence, and literature, and science apart, and training them as.
foreigners to one another—if he is prepared to hoist the disunionist
Hag, then he is consistent as a provincial tariffist, but not otherwise.
How can I or any man here, how can the people of this country who
have trusted him so far, believe that his proceedings on this question
of federation, have any other design than to delude and betray the
people, while he is 1) nil ding up this tariff, because I have conclusively
shown that he cannot federate, that he cannot promote federation one
inch, if he still adheres to the course he has pointed out.
Mr, Haynes : The people did not vote for federation at the last
general election. They sent in a party to put the hon. member down I
Sir HENRY PARKES : I must ask to be protected from the-
unseemly interruptions of a gentleman whose character amongst us is
known to he too clever for any one.
Mr. Haynes : Too clever for the hon. member!
Sir HENRY PARKES : lam very glad to say it is. lam ex-
tremely glad to say that it is. I have one or two words to say on
this tariff, and what it is proposed to do. lam one of those who do
not believe in taxation as a blessing, and never did. I am one of
those who do not look upon the tax-collector as a most heavenly
visitor. I never did, and the country would be most happy which
was left to its own resources and saw the least of the tax-gatherer.
I never imposed a customs duty in my life. My work has been to
remit customs duties. I mention that not that there is any particular
merit in it ; but that will account for those inconsistencies being left
in the tariff after hills were passed by Governments over which I
presided removing duties. Then again I never set myself up as a
scientific freetrader. I told you that the other night, and I say so-


still. lam in favour of making the tariif practically free for all the
ordinary purposes of trade and personal enterprise, and I do not go
in for any fanciful construction of a tariff. I never did, nor did the
great statesmen, far better than I, in the mother country. But there
are other laws regulating the imposition of customs duties besides the
law of open competition. There is a law which says that a duty
should be imposed in accordance with the power of the person on
whom it falls to bear it. There is another law which says it should
be imposed on articles which are everywhere consumed. Now, let us
take the model tariff which we are to have if this Minister has the
power which is to transcend all the tariff handiwork of other nations,
especially Great Britain. To a large extent under that model tariff,
the taxes will be levied on the poorest classes of the population, who
are least able to bear them. It would not affect me, because, as many
of you know, lam not a consumer of tobacco. But everybody here
does know that tobacco so intimately enters into the expenditure of
working-men that many men would rather go with a slice of bread
less than lose their tobacco. Those persons, the poorest classes of all
the workers, would have to contribute a very heavy share under this
model tariff. But there is another defect. By those criminal exemp-
tions in these direct taxation bills —because I, for one, say there
ought to be no exemption whatever, there cannot be an exemption it
the law is just—by those exemptions, if you succeed in repealing the
customs duties, all the people in this country enjoying incomes under
i* 300 a year will be absolutely free of all taxation whatever, with the
exceptions I have mentioned. They wall be exempt under the direct,
taxation bills, and the burden of customs duties wall be taken off theii
shoulders. Why should any large number of the population of this
country bo free of all customs duties? That surely is a strange way ol
carrying out taxation legislation successfully on equitable lines, lhat
would be the effect if these strange proposals were carried out. May
I say a word about this retrenchment ? Ido not sympathise with
this cry for retrenchment. I do not think that any one will mis-
interpret that observation. I have always held that in the civil service
of this or any country the best men for the discharge of the duties ol
the offices should be selected without regard to any influence what-
ever, and that they should be handsomely paid. Ido not agree with
a beggarly payment of our civil service. I have no sympathy with
it whatever. There is one way by which retrenchment can be carried
out. It has been suggested before, and it has been suggested by me,
that is, not to make appointments when offices become vacant. Ido
not think the civil service would suffer if all vacancies were left
unfilled for the next two or three years.
Hon. Members : Five years ?
Sir HENBY PABKES : I say two or three years. Then no one
could be seriously hurt. It would only be the seekers of places who


-would be hurt, for whom we need not have much sympathy. But do
the gentlemen either on the Ministerial benches, or sitting in this
House as private members, ever think how much towards the greatness
and prosperity of a country consists in its reputation? Will it help
the reputation of New South Wales if it is to go forth by every mail
that we are obliged to cut down clerks’ salaries, that we cannot afford
to pay the members of our civil service ? Will it help the reputation
of New South Wales, shall we stand bettor in the world—and to me
this is a great consideration —by putting a number of men on our
public parks to work for their bare subsistence ? Is not that an accu-
mulated evidence that would tell against all the glowing pictures hi
our favour in the mind of every sensible man capable of estimating
the condition of a country ? I therefore can have no sympathy with
gentlemen who come here and occupy our time hour after hour in
talking of protection. I think, in the present state of things, it would
bo far better if those who have even the remotest agreement with the
views I put forth would agree to hold a truce, and set their hands to
this noblest work of all, a work that can only come to a people once,
the divinest of all earthly work —that of creating a nation. Bet me
'Once more tell you that you cannot go on without peril neglecting
this great question. The monitions are so spread abroad, they speak
with such ringing voice from all quarters of the compass, that the very
deaf might hear. Your New South Wales, with your fanciful tariff,
Victoria with the grass growing in her streets —another bless-
ing of' protection—these colonies can never do the mighty things
which it is necessary to do in advancing the progress of Australia,
Until you have created a Government Avith power extending to ever}'
inch of the soil between the peaceful seas which wash that coast of
8,880 miles, until you have a Government than can stretch out its
hands full of blessings to the people, without regard to border differ-
ences, without regard to any detriment whatever, you will never have
a Government that can deal with the pregnant and mighty questions
which, if left untouched, will be a millstone around your necks and
sink you into perdition. You are not the small plantation which you
were, you are not the small colony which you were when I first took
my seat in the legislature of the country ; but you, here alone, are u
million and a quarter of people. The six colonies, including Tas-
mania, are far greater in population, in resources, in moral force,
than the United States were when they won their independence ;
greater than Canada when they consolidated their dominion; and
you have all the elements of a nation except public-spirited, far-
seeing, determined men. I counsel you not to waste your energies
upon fleeting advantages under the delusion that you are serving the
people who you think will applaud you, because whenever the full
light bursts upon this people, instead of giving you blessings they
will curse you for your pams ; instead of pouring upon your ears cheers,


they will pour upon your ears stinging disapproval. It is impossible for
the heart of this people to be dead to the mighty claim which springs out
of our very destiny, and which, wherever the people have a chance, they
give utterance to in no mistaken tone. I have, as much as most men. ad-
dressed bodies of men in all parts of Australia, in the far western colony,
in different parts of South Australia, in Queensland —and wherever the
language of truth was used in support of the union of these great colonies,
it was met with ringing cheers such as no local subject ever elicited. I
dare say other members have experienced the same thing. I have often,
and it cannot be otherwise. It is to assume that the people are dead to
their destiny, that they are dead to their kindred, that they are dead to the
glory of bringing the people together in one golden bond —it is to assume
that they are"indifferent to all that, to suppose they are not fervent on this,
question of federation. The hon. member for the Barwon, by an interjec-
tion, has reminded me of one thing. If it be the case that there are men
and women who cannot get food- —-and I do not doubt it, because, if I may
be pardoned for saying so, I often share my own meals with people in that
condition, and I never turn them away—federation more than any 7 thing
else, if it could sweep over the land with its beneficent wings, would find
new occupations, would multiply opportunities, would open new fields
which no one state can open, and, I believe, more than any other cr' e
whatever, would exhaust, would destroy the cancer that is raging in our
midst, of the unemployed, I firmly believe that nothing would have such
a beneficial effect in finding occupation for the whole of the people of all
the colonies. For myself I have made my choice. I have chosen my 7
post. I will oppose every anti-federationist, whatever he professes ; and
by every means in my [tower, even to the sacrifice of my life I will do my
utmost to awaken the one great, flaming, irrepressible fire of a union of
this Angio-Australian people under the shelter and under the power of one
great national Government. Therefore, call me what you will, you cannot,
without falsehood, call me a deserter from freetrade; you cannot call me
a deserter from the standard of Australian union. I place that standard
above and before every thing else, and while I have strength, even if I
sink in the struggle,'l will keep it waving with rny last breath.
The speech was cheered all through, and at the conclusion the
speaker resumed his seat amidst loud applause from all parts of the
House.


