

SPEECH
OF
MR. WILLIAM NEWTON,
Member of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers , &.C.,
DELIVERED AT A PUBLIC MEETING HELD IN QUEEN STREET HALL,
EDINBURGH, ON 11th NOVEMBER, 1859;
IN REPLY TO THE LECTURE OF
ADAM BLACK, ESQ., M.P.,
ON
“WAGES, TRADES’ UNIONS, & STRIKES.”
London
PRINTED FOR THE AMALGAMATED SOCIETY OF
ENGINEERS, &c.,
(CHIEF OFFICE, 238. BLACKFRIARS ROAD, S.),
B Y.J KENNY, HEATHOCK COURT, 414 STRAND, W.C.
1859.


£
s.
d.
£
».
d.
Under 25 years of age,
0
15
0
Under 36 years of age,
1
17
6
„ 26
ff
0
16
6
„ 37
if
2
0
0
„ 27
ff
0
18
0
„ 38
tf
2
3
0
„ 28
ff
1
0
0
„ 39
2
6
6
„ 29
1
2
0
„ 40
ft
2
10
0
„ 30
))
1
4
0
,, 41
a
2
14
0
„ 31
ff
1
6
0
„ 42
a
2
18
0
„ 32
ff
1
8
0
„ 43
if
3
2
0
„ 33
ff
1
10
0
„ 44
if
3
6
0
„ 34
if
1
12
6
„ 45
ft
3
10
0
„ 35
ft
1
15
0
Amalgamated Society of Engineers, &e.
Scale of Entrance Monet to be Paid on Joining the Societt.
Candidates above thirty-five years of age must produce a certificate
or other satisfactory evidence of age.
Contributions, Is. per week.
The following are the principal benefits which members are entitled
to receive:—
Any free member thrown out of employment under circumstances
satisfactory to the Branch to which he belongs is entitled to 10s. per
week for fourteen weeks; 7s. per week for thirty-four weeks; and a
further sum of 6s. per week so long as he remains out of employment,
being £l9 IBs. in one year. 1_£35,390 was paid to unemployed members
in 1858.]
Any free member, through sickness, being unable to follow his employ-
ment (provided such sickness has not been brought about by his own
misconduct), is entitled to 10s. per week for 26 weeks, and a further sum
of ss. per week so long as he continues ill, being £l9 10s. in one year.
[£6,778 was paid to sick members in 1858.]
Any free member meeting with an accident, or through Apoplexy,
Epilepsy, Paralysis, Blindness, or Imperfect Vision, and is for ever dis-
abled from following the trade, such member is entitled to the sum of
£lOO, provided the accident, &c., did not result from the member’s own
misconduct. [Fourteen members received this benefit last year.]
Any member fifty years of age, who has been eighteen years suc-
cessively in the society, and who is not capable of earning the ordinary
rate of wages paid in the district to which he belongs, is entitled to 7s.
per week for the remainder of his life; and, in addition, is allowed to
earn half the average rate of wages paid in his district. [At present
there are 118 in receipt of this benefit.]
On the death of any free member, his widow, nominee, or nearest of
kin, lawfully appointed to receive the same, is entitled to the sura of £l2.
Or on the death of a member’s wife, such member is entitled to £5,
the remaining £7 being retained to defray his own funeral expenses.
[During the year 1858 funeral benefit was paid at the death of 147
members and 131 members’ wives.]
igg" All free members, while in receipt of any of the society’s benefits,
are exempt from payment of contributions.


AMALGAMATED
SOCIETY OF ENGINEERS, &c.
The members of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, &c.,
have no doubt seen the report of a Lecture delivered in Edin-
burgh by Adam Black, Esq., M.P. for that city, on “ Wages,
Trades’ Unions, and Strikes.” In that lecture Trade Societies
were much misrepresented, and our own society was in parti-
cular the subject of a serious attack, as will appear from the
following extract from Mr. Black’s lecture. He says—
“ By the last annual report of the Amalgamated Engineers, and their
rules, as revised in 1857, the combination purports to be a friendly
society or- benefit club only, but the middle of the preface contains a
paragraph in defence of ‘restrictions against the admission into our trade
of those who have not earned a right by a probationary servitude.”
After enumerating the trades comprehended within their scheme, the
preamble sets forth its provision of brandies. No brancli is to consist of
more than 300 members, or to have more than seven officers, three officers
being allowed to a branch of twenty members; every member is re-
gistered, age, trade, married or not, that the details may be recorded in
the general registration book in London. The fines imposed on the
members for neglecting to notify to the union authorities their marriage
or removal, or change of service, show the strictness of the supervision
under which they are living. There is nothing like it anywhere else in
this country. The executive council consists of twenty-five members,
appointed by as many branches or districts, nine of which are in or near
London. The ordinary business is transacted by the council of nine
London members, five forming a quorum; their powers are very great
and very vague, and they determine anything wherein the society’s rules
are silent. This is in itself a tremendous power. In case of any dispute,
the inquirer may ask what is the rule on the subject; he may be told
there is no rule: the council settles those matters on which the rules are
silent. He is in the hands of the council, who may fine him, or expel
him if they think proper, and he has no means of redress. This power,
in the absence of law, is evidently too formidable to be resisted. The
central council avoids the responsibility of taking care of the funds. It
simply draws on the branches for what it wants to pay expenses, salaries
to itself, grants to strikes, &c. If the central council asks for money,


the branch must send it, and at the end of the financial year the affairs
arc settled by equalisations, thus exercising a despotic control over the
funds of the members. Then the members are liable to numerous fines
of 55., 2s. fid., Is., &c„ for not giving information on a multitude of
subjects; and several other provisions show that every man is living under
a spy system from the hour when he becomes a member and a victim
of this despotic organisation. With the working-man who has entered
the trades’ union there often occurs something that he can’t do, mustn’t
do, daren’t do, because it is against rules, or would be found out. There
is always the idea that somebody would tell on him. The yoke seems to
be upon him wherever he goes.”
A meeting of delegates from the various trades of Edinburgh
viewed with much regret and indignation the charges alleged
against them, and determined upon holding a public meeting
to correct the errors into which Mr. Black had fallen, and to
expose, the fallacy of the arguments he had used. The meeting
was convened for Friday evening, the 11th of November. On
the Tuesday evening previous to the day of meeting a telegram
was received at the general office in London, from the Secre-
tary of our Edinburgh Branch, requesting the Council to ap-
point some person to represent our Society at the meeting.
The Council was at once convened for the following evening,
(Wednesday) when Mr. Newton was appointed to go to Edin-
burgh to attend the meeting on Friday night. After some
hesitation he agreed to go. and did so at only a few hours’
notice. He most successfully defended the society against Mr.
Black’s misrepresentations; and also refuted his arguments on
the general question relating to employers and employed.
The result of the Council’s proceedings in reference to the
meeting at Edinburgh has been that of unqualified approval;
and amongst the letters of congratulation and thanks they have
received, the following, from the Trades of Edinburgh, will
show how much their conduct is appreciated :
Burden’s Coffee House, Iligh-st., Edinburgh,
30tb November, 1859.
To the Council of the Amalgamated Engineers’ Society.
Gentlemen, —I am instructed by the Trades’ Delegates’ Association of
Edinburgh to send you a copy of the following resolution, which was
unanimously adopted at their meeting on the evening of Tuesday, the
22nd instant; —
“ That the Trades’ Delegates of Edinburgh take the earliest opportu-
nity of recording their high appreciation of the handsome manner in
which the Amalgamated Engineers’ Society acted with reference to the
meeting held in Edinburgh on the 11th instant, on the question of
Wages, Trades' Unions, and Strikes; especially in sending so able an


advocate as Mr. Newton from London, who most completely answered
Mr. Black’s lecture, and eloquently defended the rights of labor.”
I am, Gentlemen, yours most truly,
JOHN IVERACH,
Interim Sec.
The Council has been applied to by several of the Branches
for reports of the Edinburgh meeting, and, through the general
interest that is taken in the subject, has been induced to reprint,
in pamphlet form, the speech of Mr. Newton on the occasion—
the report of which is extracted from the Scotch Thistle, and
revised by himself. A number of copies will be sent to each
Branch, for distribution among our members and others who
may take an interest in our Society’s welfare.
By order of the Executive Council,
W. ALLAN, GEN. Sec.
THE MEETING.
On Friday evening, November 11th, a public meeting of
working men was held in Queen Street Hall for the purpose of
considering resolutions and hearing addresses in reply to the
recent lecture -of Mr. Black, M.P., on Wages, Strikes, and
Trades’ Unions. The hall was crowded, and among those on
the platform were the Lord Provost, Bailie Thomas Russell,
Mr. Thomas Knox, Mr. Newton, engineer, from London ; and
twenty-six delegates from thirteen trades in the town, consisting
of the president and secretary from each trade society. On the
motion of Bailie Thomas Rdssell, the Lord Provost was called
to the chair.
The Loud Provost, who was received with loud cheers, said
that when he was waited upon two days ago by a committee of
the Trades’ Delegate Association, requesting him to take the
chair at that meeting, he complied with that request with the
greatest pleasure—(applause)—and that for two reasons. First,
having been elevated by his fellow-citizens, through the Town
Council of Edinburgh, to the honor of tilling the chair of Chief
Magistrate, he felt it his duty, as he trusted it would be a
pleasure, to preside at public meetings of that kind for the dis-
cussion of important subjects in which a portion of his fellow-
subjects might feel interested. (Hear, hear, and cheers.) And
he assured them that that pleasure was not diminished


when he knew that that was to be a meeting of the working
classes of Edinburgh, in whom he had long felt a very great
interest—(applause)—and of whom he could honestly say that
from what he had seen of them he had been led to form a most
favorable opinion. (Applause.) He also rejoiced to take the
chair because it had been alleged that there were certain secret
rules under which trades’ unions act, and it appeared to him to
be a very desirable thing that the objects which they had in
view ‘should be discussed in public, in order, if possible, to
remove that impression if it was not correct, and to bring those
rules before the bar of public opinion, the best and safest test
in such a matter. (Applause.) Another reason why he re-
joiced at being requested to take the chair at that meeting was
the importance and interest of the subject to be discussed—a
question on which, as on almost every other important question,
there were two sides. He had the pleasure of reading Mr.
Black’s able lecture, in which one side of the question was
discussed—(hear, hear, and cheers) —and they were there that
night, he understood, for the purpose of hearing the other
side of the question, which he doubted not would be as faith-
fully and as fully discussed. (Hear, hear, and cheers.) There
were two sides to the question raised in the lecture given by
the respected member for Edinburgh, Mr. Black, On the
one side it was said that, through means of trades’ unions, there
was an undue interference between employers and employed,
and that the main object of these unions was to introduce into
labor the evils of the protective system, which had been
abolished in agriculture and in trade. On the other hand it
was said that the parties did not receive their fair share of the
benefits received from capital and labor, and that, although
they are the more numerous, they are the weaker party, and
that combination among them becomes not only important, but
absolutely essential. (Cheers.) It was not for him to express
any opinion upon either of these two views, and he did not
take the chair as expressing an opinion either one way or
another. He wished to take that opportunity of mentioning two
subjects on which—if they fairly came within the scope of the
resolutions which were to be moved—he should be glad to
receive information : and he might say that some of his brother
magistrates would gladly have attended the meeting had they
not been engaged to attend a festive meeting. The first point
which he desired to see cleared up and explained was, whether the


operation of unions in certain trades was to enforce a uniform
rate of wages. He had heard it said, for example, that in
several shops in Edinburgh there was only one rate of wages
allowed, whether the workmen were more or less skilled. If
that was true, it did seem to him to be an unfair protection of
the less-skilled workman, and he should be glad to have a little
explanation. (Cry of “ Not true.”) He was expressing no
opinion of his own—he was merely saying what he had heard.
The other point on which he wished a little explanation related
to the subject of strikes. Now, nobody objected to strikes;
and there were strikes, they knew, in all kinds of professions
and in all kinds of trades. He noticed in the papers that day
that there was a strike in the Town Council of Norwich,
(Laughter and cheers.) A Liberal Mayor and a Liberal Sheriff
were appointed in Norwich, upon which the Conservatives in
the Corporation all struck work and went out of the Corpora-
tion, leaving it to elect all the magistrates Liberals. "Well, there
was no objection to that. People were striking everywhere.
He hoped such a calamity would never happen in the body over
which he had the honour to preside; but if it should un-
fortunately take place, he should be delighted to hear
the arguments on a question of that kind, which might guide
himself and his friends how to deal with such a calamity.
(Laughter). But while there was no objection to strikes, there
was an objection to what he saw stated in the lecture of Mr.
Black, and what was stated in a very able article in the Edin-
burgh Review which was lately published—namely, that not
only did men in large numbers refuse to work themselves, but
by most improper means they compelled others to refrain from
work. He should like to hear an explanation on that point.
Before sitting down he wished to say how much he approved of
the remark made by a very respected clergyman of this city on
the occasion of the lecture given by Mr. Black—that the posi-
tion of the working man was far safer and stronger behind a
small sum accumulated in a savings’ bank than behind a strike.
(Applause). After expressing his regret that, by a Parliamentary
return recently issued, nine counties in Scotland had no savings’
banks, the Lord Provost concluded amid loud cheers by calling
upon Mr. Iverach to move the first resolution, —Daily Scotsman.


Mb. W. Newton, from London, a member of the Amalga-
mated Society of Engineers, rose, amidst loud cheers, to second
the following resolution :
“That this meeting is of opinion that the statements of Mr. Black
regarding trades’ unions are generally inaccurate, and that they reflect
very injuriously upon the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, &c.”
In supporting the resolution he said—l have been deputed by
the council of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers, in London,
to attend this meeting—(cheers)—to tell you, in the same city in
which Mr. Black’s remarks on that body were made, what the
council think of their truth. (Hear, hear.) I crave a patient
hearing, for I feel, and have nodoubt you feel, that the society 1 re-
present —a society possessing 17,000 members—has been grossly
misrepresented and maligned, and that it should no longer
than is possible lie under the stigma which has been most
unjustly thrown upon it. (Loud cheers.) It has become the
fashion of late for public men to stand upon public platforms and
deliver lectures to the working people—(hear, hear) —and
certainly great men have occupied those positions, men whom
we could listen to, and take advice from, even if it were unpala-
table to us—men of historic name, and of great ability as states-
men ; hut I think the working people are not, however, content
to see mere popinjays of men—(laughter and cheers) —who have
not entitled themselves to stand upon any very high pedestal, to
lecture at working men upon duties which they know fully
better than they can be told by such gentlemen. (Hear,
hear.) That happens to be precisely our position at this time;
for, in carefully reading Mr. Black’s lecture, which has evidently
been carefully prepared, and which commenced with a great
flourish of trumpets in favour of “ much examination ” and
“ great impartiality,” I think it must he evident to all who have
read it that it was a lecture spoken from one point of view, and
that only in the interest of the capitalists. (Cheers.) Why,
what did our excellent chairman say in referring to that lecture,
which professed to be impartial and philosophic ? The Lord
Provost said “ that you had heard Mr. Black on one side of the
question—(cheers)—and you had called this meeting to hear the
other.” I think Mr. Black must take that remark of the Lord
Provost as a censure upon himself—(hear, hear, and cheers).
That he who came before a public meeting to deliver a lecture
upon a great principle of philosophy from an impartial point of
view—and professed to draw his facts from authority, should


have presented his subject from such a partial point of view
that the present chairman could come to no other conclusion
than that the lecture given by Mr. Black was delivered in the
interests of the employers alone, and against the interests of the
employed, was certainly, to say the least of it, very strange and
very inconsistent. (Applause.)
To some of Mr. Black’s remarks I intend to reply. They are
those reflecting on the constitution and conduct of the Amal-
gamated Society of Engineers. I shall show to you that Mr.
Black, so far from treating the subject impartially and philosophi-
cally, has much misrepresented facts and distorted principles, until
there is but little reliance to be placed on what he said. (Hear,
hear.) In defending the Amalgamated Society my object is to
show to you and the world the completeness of its arrangements,
the justice of the principles upon which it is based, in fact to hold
it up as a type of what trade societies ought to be, and to defy any
one to stand upon this platform and to prove anything in its con-
stitution or practices that violates any just principle. The
charges alleged against the society by Mr. Black are somewhat
numerous, but I shall divide them into four sets of charges, and
deal with them under four separate heads. Mr. Black says—
“ By the last annual report of the Amalgamated Engineers, and their
rules as revised in 1857, the combination purports to be a friendly society
or benefit club only, but the middle of the preface contains a paragraph
in defence of ‘restrictions against the admission into our trade of those
who have not earned a right by a probationary servitude.’ After
enumerating the trades comprehended within their scheme, the preamble
sets fortli its provision of brandies. No branch is to consist of more than
300 members, or to have more than seven officers, three officers being
allowed to a branch of twenty members; every member is registered, age,
trade, married or not, that the details may be recorded in the general
registration book in London. The fines imposed on the members for
neglecting to notify to the union authorities their marriage, or removal,
or change of service, show the strictness of the supervision under which
they are living. There is nothing like it anywhere else in this country.”
That part of this quotation that refers to the society requiring a
“probationary servitude,” I propose to leave at present; I shall
have to enter fully into that question presently, and will now
deal with the other strange charges. We are told that the
number of members which each branch shall contain is re-
stricted ; the number of officers to each branch is restricted;
fines are imposed for neglecting to perform certain duties, and
these are summed up into a strict supervision, there being
nothing else like it in this country. Now Mr. Black must be


an exceedingly simple-minded man if he thinks that a society
of such magnitude, and representing such varied interests, can
be regulated without rules and restrictions, and even fines for
neglect of duty. I shall presently show that we give large
benefits to our members in certain cases. For instance, there
is a funeral benefit for members, and a sura paid at the death of
a member’s wife. Members are admitted into the society by
different entrance fees, regulated in amount by their age at the
time of admission. How, then, can these conditions be carried
out, the principles upon which the society is founded, unless
members state their age, and inform the officers whether they
are married or not. There is no hardship nor anything un-
usual in that. It is precisely what every society of men in the
kingdom does. All friendly and benefit societies necessarily do
so; and if Mr. Black understands anything of assurance com-
panies he will know that precisely the same class of information
is required by them, in a much more stringent form. (Loud
cheers.)
These particulars are registered in a book kept by
the council in London, and Mr. Black looks upon this as a
heinous crime. Yet if Mr. Black had known—as he ought to
have known, for the information is contained in the book from
which he garbled extracts —that the rules guarantee to every
member who is fifty years of age, and has been 18 years a
member, either of the Amalgamated Society or of any one of
the societies that amalgamated together in 1851, who may need
it, the sum of 7s. per week for the remainder of his life, he
would have seen the necessity of registering the names, ages,
&c., of the members, and keeping that registration in some
central place. The puerility of these objections exhibits great
weakness, and if the impression they are calculated to make was
not wickedly false, they would be simply absurd. (Applause.)
We do not allow any branch to have more than 300 members.
We have found that branches having more than that number
were not properly conducted, and the members themselves fixed
that as the most convenient number. The rules of our society
prescribe also that a certain number of officers shall conduct
each branch; that each shall have its president, vice-president,
secretary, and so on. Experience has taught us that all that
care is necessary; and when I tell you that there are 190
branches of the society, all the officers of which are elected
by the members; that the business throughout is regulated


by the members themselves, and not by any general council,
you must acknowledge that such a society is at least great in its
operations, and entitled to respect. (Applause.) Another
statement made by Mr. Black in reference to the restrictions
placed upon members is very important. He said—
“ The executive council consists of twenty-five members, appointed by
as many branches or districts, nine of which are in or near London. The
ordinary business is transacted by the council of nine London members,
five forming a quorum; their powers are very great and very vague, and
they determine anything wherein the society’s rules are silent. This is
in itself a tremendous power. In case of any dispute, the inquirer may
ask what is the rule on the subject; he may be told there is no rule, the
council settles those matters on which the rules are silent. He is in the
hands of the council, who may fine him or expel him if they think proper,
and he has no means of redress. This power, in the absence of law, is
evidently too formidable to be resisted.”
As a matter of order, societies must be governed in some
form or other. A body of men without order and systematic
regulation would be a confused mass, and a reason for such
gentlemen as Mr. Black to lecture them on their incapacity for
self-government. But when Mr. Black reads through our rules,
and finds complete arrangement and compact organization, he
calls it “restriction,” “a tremendous power,” “vague and
formidable.” (Loud cheers.) Now, what are the facts? Twenty-
five members form a general executive council, and nine a
local one. The local council transacts the ordinary business of
the society, and the general council the extraordinary business.
In any emergency of moment, the local council has to summon
the general council, and that is composed of representatives
from different parts of England, Scotland and Ireland—from
Glasgow, Greenock, Aberdeen, and Edinburgh; from Birming-
ham, Bradford, Liverpool, Manchester, Leeds, and London ; from
Belfast or Dublin, and numerous other places; and we find that
to be the most complete form of transacting the extraordinary
business of the society—as to the conduct of which we are
prepared to justify ourselves before the world. (Applause.)
Mr. Black has also stated that
“ The central council avoids' the responsibility of taking care of the
funds. It simply draws on the branches for what it wants to pay expenses,
salaries to itself, grants to strikes, &c. If the central council asks for
money, the branch must send it; and at the end of the financial year the
affairs are settled by equalizations, thus exercising a despotic control
over the funds of the members.”
That is also a misrepresentation, either wilfully or carelessly


made, for the rules of our society distinctly state that the.
executive council has no power to touch the funds of the asso-
ciation without the sanction of rule or the consent of the mem-
bers—(applause)—and they could not support any strike of any
other trade, nor even of their own members, without the matter
going before the whole of the branches, and the consent of
members being obtained. (Applause.) Now when a public man
stands upon a platform to lecture the people, he should at least
understand the meaning of the terms he uses. (Laughter).
When Mr. Black uses the term ‘‘despotic powers,” if he means
anything at all by the expression, he means that the council
have powers greater than, and irrespective of, the rules and the
recorded judgments of the members of the society. To say
any such thing is a flagrant misrepresentation. You know that
a despot is not bound by laws of others’ making, that he is of
unlimited authority, and a law unto himself. You have heard
of the Emperor of Russia issuing a ukase, and you have also
heard of the Emperor Napoleon issuing an order in council.
But you never heard of the Society of Amalgamated Engineers
doing anything of that kind, simply because they are bound by
the laws which are agreed to and promulgated by the whole body
of the members. (Applause.)
Mr. Black further says that the council decide in cases where
the rules are silent, and from that decision a member has no
means of redress. Such is not the case ; for the rules distinctly
state —and Mr. Black must, or ought to have seen it—that
“Any branch feeling aggrieved with the decision of the executive
council, shall have the power to appeal to the branches or delegate meet-
ing, against such decision by giving notice to the executive council of
its intentions.”
It is evident, again, that Mr. Black, either intentionally or
through carelessness, misrepresents the Amalgamated Society
of Engineers. (Applause). Sir, it is monstrous for a gentle-
man in Mr. Black’s position, a member for the city of Edinburgh
in Parliament, and in so far a public man, to appear before the
people of this great city and traduce, so flagrantly as he has
done, an institution that is working more real benefit than he
could possibly do if he were to live for a thousand years. (Loud
cheers).
To be more particular upon that question of fines, which
appears to Mr. Black so strange and tyrannical. His wonder
is only an evidence of bis want of information in respect of


those regulations under which men unite together. We do
impose fines, and very properly so. If a member is elected to
an office, the dutiea of which he neglects, we fine him. If on
changing his residence he does not inform the secretary, we fine
him. To Mr. Black, who seems to know nothing of these in-
stitutions, that may appear hard; but if he had for a moment
remembered that we give large benefits to men when out of em-
ployment and when sick, and that members are often required
to attend specially-summoned meetings, he would have seen
that there could be no safety for our funds, nor any complete-
ness in our organization, if we did not know where to com-
municate with members when it was necessary. We visit the
sick, obtain employment for the unemployed, remind our mem-
bers when they are in arrears—none of which things could we
do if that looseness of management obtained among us that
would satisfy the objections of Mr. Black. (Applause).
If Mr. Black is a member of any of those societies common in
London among political men, called clubs, the Carlton, Reform, or
Brooks’s, or any other, is he not subject to its rules, and is lie
not required to make good his character to satisfy those who
are members that he is worthy of being accepted among them ?
Does he not know (whicli he must do if he is a member of
any of them) that the ballot is used there, and sometimes
members are black-balled because of a private quarrel with
some of the members? But those are restrictions that it did
not suit Mr. Black to put in comparison with those lie reproached
us for. (Cheers). We too have our restrictions, but they are
based upon rational grounds. We say, first, that members
joining shall be of good ability as workmen; second, that they
shall be of steady habits; and third, that they shall be of good
moral character. Is there anything wrong in these propositions ?
If the member proposed is not a good workman we do not
admit him. I mean, if lie, under ordinary circumstances, is not
able to earn a living at the trade. The reason for that is obvious:
we pay large benefits to members out of employment; sucli a
man would be almost continuously without work, and a constant
burden on the funds. The same reason holds in the case of
men of unsteady habits. Our funds are intended for other and
higher purposes than to maintain such persons as the lazy and
dissolute in idleness. Surely there is nothing tyrannical,
nothing wrong in that. (Applause).
Then we say that an applicant for admission must be of


good moral character. I maintain we have a perfect right
to insist upon that. (Hear, hear). In saying tills, I do
not mean that we trace a man’s career from his earliest
days, and take into account every peccadillo of his whole
life. No; but we inquire into the general tendency of his
character and conduct, and reject him if we find that he would
in all likelihood bring a disgrace upon the society. We say
to him—“No, sir, you must mend your manners before you
are admitted amongst us.” (Great applause). We have
surely a perfect right to say with whom we will associate, as
well as those who move in a higher sphere of life. (Hear, hear,
and applause). These, then, are some of the rules of the Amal-
gamated Engineers’ Society, and I would ask Mr. Black to state
the principles of the societies which exist in the circles in which
he moves, and to tell us if they conduct their business on the
same or better principles. (Hear, hear).
Now, our society has been in existence as an Amalgamated
Society since 1851. At that time there were many societies
existing throughout the country, but they were not united
together. We determined, however, to make an effort to
get them all to unite together, and thus make them more
useful to each other. This they did in 1851, from which
lime to the present is nearly nine years. During that time
we have paid of our funds to members out of employment
£104,343; we have paid to sick members £43,858; in
superannuation allowances, £6,715; to members suffering
from accidents, and disabled from working at their employ-
ment, £4,800 —giving large donations to members entirely
disabled, in order to enable them to set up in business; on
benevolent cases we have spent £1,122; for funerals of our
members we have paid £13,052 —making a total of £173,890.
We have also given to other trades, by way of donation, about
£4,500. (Loud cheers). On the Ist of January, 1851, we
had about 5,000 members, and at the present time we have up-
wards of 17,000. But what, it may be asked, does all this mean?
Why, it means that we have performed a work equal to the
maintenance of one thousand families at the rate of £2O a-year
each for the last nine years; and I ask Mr. Black what machinery
he has by which he can perform a tithe of the benefit % (Loud
applause). Let me ask you to endeavour to realise to your own
minds the vast amount of misery prevented by the expenditure
of that money. Consider for a moment how many sick beds


have been soothed, how much woe has been assuaged, how
many sorrows have been alleviated, and, possibly, how much
crime has been prevented. (Applause).
It will be recollected that not many months ago there were a
very great number of men out of employment in your own city,
and that the Town Council took steps to provide them with food;
but I know I am stating a fact when I assert that not one of the
members of the Amalgamated Society of Engineers has ever made
an application to the town council for support. The town council
has not been asked to supply bread or boil soup for any of our
members. (Hear, hear, and applause). When I speak of these
things, however, as connected with our society, I only take it as
the type of a class, and I venture to say that many good, steady
men, with families, who have drawn upon the funds of the
society in England, were kept from the workhouse thereby, and
that in Scotland, in consequence of men being connected with trade
societies, the authorities have been enabled to give more assist-
ance and support to those who were less fortunately situated
than themselves. (Applause). Even as provident institutions,
then, I think such societies should have commanded the support
of any member of the legislature, and if not his support, they
ought at least to have commanded his respect and esteem.
(Great applause). I think that the sentiments expressed by
Mr. Black in his lecture give evidence of a vindictive spirit,
and that that gentleman has taken up and enunciated what he
considered the popular side of the question, although it was
done at the expense of truth and justice. (Applause). The
gentleman who proposed the amendment that did not find a
seconder, said very truly, “ that he never found the leading
writers of the time in that country support trades’ unions.”
No; unfortunately, they nearly all support the capitalists’
side of the question. But if it were as much for their interest
to write for working men as it is to write for capitalists, they
would soon write for working men; and I suppose our friend is
not a trades’-uuionist because the great writers of the day—
(laughter)—do not write in favour of trades’ unions. (Laughter
and reiterated applause).
Considerable reference has also been made in the discussion
of this subject to the question of supply and demand. Now,
every one seems to talk about supply and demand in reference
to labor, and hold an opinion respecting it. I have my opinion
on the subject too. I do not know what the gentleman to


whom I hare just referred meant, when he said supply and
demand were the “complication of the concrete phenomena.”
(Laughter and applause.) To my mind the principles of supply
and demand are exceedingly clear. They are not at all
mystified, and if I can make it as clear to you as I have done
to myself I have no doubt that you will agree with me.
(Applause). Mr. Black has said “ that labor was as much an
article of commerce as corn or sugar; money or capital was
likewise an article of commerce. Both were necessary to pro-
duction.” I wonder if Mr. Black knew what he meant by
labor. What is labor—l mean such labor as a working-man
has to sell ? How does it take the form of such commodities
as corn and sugar ? It has no existence. A man does not
carry about with him something to be measured or weighed.
No such thing; labor is a human quality, a product of time, brain,
and sinews, without which there can be no such thing as labor.
When a man offers to work, he offers to devote his skill and
time, and physical energies, to a service for which he must have
the means of existence. It is himself, a human frame, imbued
with thought and aspiration, that is to be bought, if anything is.
In all things it differs from the commodities corn and sugar. If
they are not sold at a price to-day, they may be kept till to-
morrow ; but time being an element in labor, where it is wasted
the labor is lost, and lost for ever. (Loud cheers). Those
human qualities, the ability to labor, is what the working man
has to sell, for labor when performed becomes capital, and
subject to laws governing ordinary commodities. To reduce a
human quality to the condition of corn and sugar, is to debase
the moral constitution of man, and to lower his estimate of
himself. (Applause.)
Now, if Mr. Black had been possessed of a logical mind, he
would have at once seen that the position he has taken is in-
compatible with proper reasoning throughout. First of all,
Mr. Black says that labor is a commodity like corn and sugar,
and might be bought and sold in the same way; and then he
speaks of the evil effect of twenty workmen demanding a rise
in their wages from 20s. to 205., if the employer said he could
only give them 205., and profit would not allow a greater
amount. But if labor is only a commodity, what right has the
workman to take into consideration the employer’s ability to
pay at all? (Applause). Did the merchant or capitalist ask
the corn and sugar if it would agree to be raised ? (Laughter


and applause). Does Mr. Black not see that when he calls
upon the laborer to consider his employer’s profits, and not
demand more than he can afford to pay him, he invests labor
with higher attributes than those possessed by corn and sugar,
aye, or even by the owners of corn and sugar. If labor, like
corn and sugar, is a thing to be only bought and sold, it will be
bought and sold, as those commodities are. Does the buyer of
corn ask the seller to consider his profits, his ability to pay,
to take so much off because he made only 2 per cent, by the
last bargain instead of 5 per cent.? No, there is no other
consideration there than that of bargain-making. One
strives to buy as cheap and the other to sell as dear as
possible; and if the result of the transaction is bankruptcy
to the one or the other, it is no matter, the bargain is
concluded on just the same terms. Is it wanted to reduce the
condition of master and servant to this ? If so, then indeed
you divest humanity of that mutual dependence which obtains
in our moral as it does in our physical constitution. (Loud
cheers.)
It would have been much better if Mr. Black had
said that it was impossible to take from humanity that which
God had given it, than to have told an audience that corn,
sugar, and labor were precisely similar commodities. (Hear,
hear). The one has feelings, the other has not. The one is
consulted, the other is not; and that makes the difference be-
tween a mere commodity on the one hand, and a human quality
on the other. (Applause). Some political economists have
told us that labor is a commodity and subject to all the fluctua-
tions of value that other commodities are, and yet at the same
time have spoken of the duties of masters and servants. But
when they have succeeded in reducing labor to the condition of
corn and sugar, then there is neither master nor servant in the
case. (Applause). If I enquire the price of any article sold
in the shops of Edinburgh; being a purchaser, I should not
think of arguing with the shopkeeper upon my ability to pay
for what I wanted. If I complained that the profits of my
business would not enable me to satisfy his demand, and if I
then quoted Mr. Black’s principle of political economy and told
him that he would injure my family if he endeavoured to ex-
tract from me so much of my profits, and the evil would
ultimately recoil upon himself, I fancy the seller would quietly
tell me he had nothing to do with my profits, my means of


payment, or my family. He had an article to dispose of; if I
did not like the price I might leave it. (Hear, hear).
When mere commodities are in question, that indicates the
nature of the transaction between buyer and seller; but it is
different when a man offers his labor. A different principle
obtains then, and the employers themselves acknowledge it
when they say to men, “ You should not have imposed upon
me these restrictions; insisted upon this or that rate of wages ;
you should not have struck work ; you should have considered
our profits and our ability to pay what you asked.” Whenever
such language as that is used in reference to the employment of
labor, it is an acknowledgment that there is something more in
it than there is in the purchase of a simple commodity ; that
the laborer is a member of the great human family, and that at
once removes him from the category of a simple commodity.
(Great applause). And that brings me to what I consider the
solution of the whole question. It is this—and it must come
to pass sooner or later—that employers must cease to treat their
workmen as mere serfs or as slaves—they must be content to
meet them upon equal terms for the purpose of arguing these
questions together. If working men make demands that are
unreasonable, it is the duty of employers to show them that
they are unreasonable. (Applause). That duty I contend is
reasonably thrown upon the employers. The workman has a
right to demand the highest possible wages he can obtain; that,
prima facie, is a good claim; and if the employer is not in a
position to comply with that demand, I contend it is his duty to
prove that to the workman, and then he may safely rely upon
his good sense and justice. (Applause).
Now the real state of the case is the reverse of this. Em-
ployers of labor are imperious towards their work-people.
They are jealous to a degree of their own authority, and any
attempt at reason on the part of a workman is styled dictation.
If a man objects to the rules he works under, he is at once told
“if you do not like my rules, go about your business.” But is he
to go about his business simply because an employer fixes the
rules to regulate his labor, and the wages of it, without any
consultation with him at all? rules fixed by one who is only his
superior in having the advantage of capital. Well, does he go
about his business ? No ; he sees others placed in similar cir-
cumstances to himself, and hears them complaining. Between
them they say, this is tyrannical conduct; we must make a


united representation against it, for it affects us all alike. That
is the way in which strikes are made. (Applause). But if
both parties were allowed to have a voice in the arrangement; f
workmen were treated as human beings instead of as corn and
sugar; if employers would condescend to explain and reason
with their workmen ; then strikes would for ever cease to exist
—(great applause)—for nine-tenths of all strikes that take
place are attributable to the off-handed, supercilious conduct of
the employer. (Applause).
Mr. Black has also said, —
“We sometimes hear ill-informed reasoners speak of capital as an-
tagonistic to labor, whereas it is the very life-blood of labor, and must as
certainly circulate through the whole body of the laborers as the blood
from the heart circulates to the extremities of the human frame.”
That is very true, but the converse is just as true. If Mr. Black
had been willing to do the same justice to the working-man’s side
of the question as he was to do ample justice to the other side, he
might just as well have said the converse. (Applause). He
might have told his hearers that, labor was essential to capital :
that it was its very life-blood, and that without it capital would
be a useless dross. (Cheers.) lam not going to say that labor
can do without capital, or that capital can do without labor; but
I will remind you that there was a time when there was no
capital, and that labor has produced the capital which now
exists; and if it did that once, it is perfectly able to do it again.
(Great applause). Again, in speaking of labor, I must remind
you that it is only an abstraction, until it is exercised; it is
tangible only in its results. In its realization it becomes wealth,
and wealth masters the world. Wealth is not accumulated
labor, but the accumulated results of labor. On that basis
future labor rests. Take it away, and the world would have to
begin over again. (Hear, hear).
But does not this prove that labor is not a commodity having
no higher claims than corn and sugar ? I know that the value
of labor is influenced by supply and demand, but not wholly
so. There are other considerations entering into a bargain for
the employment of the laborer, that are nowhere thought of
when a mere commodity is in question. Let us then establish
and maintain this broad and clear distinction, that whilst corn
and sugar arc valued solely in reference to their plenty or
.scarcity, that labor cannot be so dealt with. In addition to its
scarcity or redundancy, there are the physical and moral re


quirements of men to be considered, and they ought to go for
something in the employment of labor. Whenever that prin-
ciple shall be truly recognised and acted up to, strikes will be
seldom heard of, and the good feeling between employer and
workman will be greatly improved. (Applause.)
It is often said that working-men have no right to combine.
Now I wish to show you from an authority which has stood
now for a century—that of a man who has made a great
name for himself, and is an honor to Scotland—the idea
which he formed on a subject which is now beginning to be
more studied by working-men than it has hitherto been—l
mean the science of political economy. And I will take the
liberty of telling you that you have delayed the study of that
subject too long, for if it is wished to make it a science of prac-
tical use to yourselves, each one must endeavour to contribute
his quota of facts to the general stock, so that philosophers may
be enabled to deduce from those facts a system by which you
and future generations may profit. (Applause). Adam Smith,
writing on the subject of combination, says:—
“We seldom hear, it lias been said, of the combination of masters, though
frequently of that of workmen. But whoever imagines on this account
that masters rarely combine, is as ignorant of the world as of the subject.
Masters have always and everywhere a sort of tacit but constant and
uniform combination not to raise the wages of labor above their actual
rates.”
Well, if that is the case, if masters have everywhere a sort of
tacit combination not to raise wages above their actual rates,
have workmen not also a right to regulate the supply and
demand for labor in the way that will be most for their ad-
vantage? Members of trades’ societies are quite aware that too
many laborers in the market will reduce wages; and they en-
deavour by every legitimate means to keep that labor out of the
market; they indeed strive to decrease it as much as possible in
order to increase the value of labor. (Applause.) In this
respect they find great advantage from the benefits paid to mdn
when out of employment. The effect of them is to prevent
that unlimited competition which, without such a safeguard,
would necessarily exist, and reduce the wages considerably
below their present rate. We know precisely the effect of a
great supply of labor in the market, and check it as much as
possible; by that means, and in perfect accordance with the
principles of political economy, trades’ societies prove of in-
estimable value to their members. (Loud applause.)


Mr. Black has also said—
“ That the liberty of both workmen and their employers is often en-
croached upon by rules imposed by the union. One of these, that masters
shall not be allowed to take above a certain number of apprentices, I
consider to be especially cruel. What right has any man, or society of
men, to prevent a boy from learning a trade by which he may earn an
honest livelihood?”
I shall with this include the reference Mr. Black made to the
preface of our rules, and the restrictions it imposes. I will
quote the paragraph from the preface.
“Ourobject is not to do anything either indiscreet or illegal; but if con-
strained to make restrictions against the admission into our trade of
those who have not earned a right by a probationary servitude, we do so
knowing that such encroachments are productive of evil, and, when
persevered in unchecked, result in reducing the condition of the artizan
to that of the unskilled laborer, and confer no permanent advantage on
those admitted. It is our duty, then, to exercise the same care and
watchfulness over that in which we have a vested interest, as the
physician does who holds a diploma, or the author who is protected by a
copyright.”
I contend for the right of this, as on these regulations must we
depend very much for the comfort which as a trade we ought to
enjoy. If an unlimited supply of laborers is thrown into any trade,
it has the effect of reducing the value of their labor, and the con-
sequence is that existence becomes a mere struggle. If Mr.
Black is honest in his conviction that working-men should not
protect their labor by joining societies and taking part in com-
binations—if lie is honest in his reprehensions of these societies
—why does he not throw his own trade open? why does he not
abolish the copyright law, and allow me to sell the books which
he claims the exclusive right to sell ? (Great applause). The
only reason I know is because it would not be profitable for
him to do so. (Laughter.) Trade societies do the same thing,
because it is profitable for them to do so ; and how can any man
object to it in the one case and practise it in the other? (Ap-
plause.) The man who has devoted the best years of his life
to the service of a trade, looks upon it as his capital, and
claims to protect it with as much rigour and as many restric-
tions as other men’s capital is protected. (Applause.) Now
upon this question, what says the greatest living author on
political economy, Mr. John Stuart Mill,—a writer whose works
every working man should study, as they are being studied by
every philosopher of the day. I do not know whether the
quotations I am about to make from Mr. Mill’s work were


written before the extract I have given you from the preface
to our rules, but in language and meaning they are so much
alike that the one almost appears a plagiarism of the other. At
all events all that is contained in the extract from the preface to
the rules of the Amalgamated Society is justified in the following
from Mr. Stuart Mill. He says :
“ High wages and short hours are generally good objects, or, at all
events, may be so; and a limitation of the number of persons in employ-
ment may be a necessary condition of these. Combinations, therefore,
not to work for less wages, or for more than a certain number of hours,
or even not to work for a master who employs more than a certain num-
ber of apprentices, are, when voluntary on the part of all who engage in
them, not only unexceptionable, but would be desirable, were it not that
they almost always fail of their effect.”
Now, that extract is taken from a great authority on the science of
political economy ; but that is not all he says. The following
extract relates also to the same subject:—
“ In so far as they (combinations) succeed in keeping up the wages of
any trade by limiting its numbers, I look upon them as simply intrenching
round a particular spot against the inroads of our population, and making
their wages depend upon their own rate of increase, instead of depending
on that of a more reckless and improvident class than themselves; and I
should rejoice if by trade regulations, or oven by trades’ unions, the em-
ployments thus specially protected should be multiplied to a much
greater extent than experience has shown to be practicable. What at
first sight seems the injustice of excluding the more numerous class
from sharing the gains of a comparatively few, disappears when we con-
sider that, by being admitted, they would not be made better off for more
than a short time —the only permanent effect which their admission
would produce would be to lower the other to their level.”
That reasoning is by one of the greatest philosophers of the
present day; and you will see that what Mr. Black has stigma-
tised as coercion and tyranny, and what that gentleman has
quoted from the rules of the Amalgamated Engineers’ Society,
and held it up to public odium for, is justified in every particular
by Mr. John Stuart Mill: and Ido not think it is at all necessary
for one moment to institute a comparison between the two men as
to the degree of authority on this subject. (Laughterand applause).
But I have not done with authorities just yet, for what does the
well-known Mr. Malthus say on the same subject? Surely he
will be an authority after Mr. Black’s own heart. He says,—
“If we be really serious in what appears to be the object of such
general research, the mode of essentially and permanently bettering the
condition of the poor, we must explain to them the nature of their situa-
tion, and show them that the withholding of the supplies of labor is the


only possible way of raising its price; and they themselves, being the
possessors of this commodity, have alone the power to do this.”
Now, what will Mr. Black say to that ? Mr. Malthas teaches
that, although supply and demand regulate the value of labor,
the laborer has the power, and is justified in using it, to with-
hold the supply so as to increase the demand for, and raise the
price of, labor. I will just read one other extract from Adam
(Smith’s “ Wealth of Nations,” and then I shall be done. It is
as follows :
“No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the greater
part of the members are poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides,
that they who feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body of the people, should
have such a share of the produce of their own labor as to be themselves
tolerably well fed, clothed, and lodged.”
And again,—
“The liberal reward of labor, as it encourages the propagation, so it
increases the industry of the common people. The wages of labor are
the encouragement, which, like every other human quality (mark this,
not a commodity like corn or sand, but like every other human quality),
improves in proportion to the encouragement it receives.”
(Great applause).
I have now said all I wish to say in reply to the lecture lately
delivered by Mr. Black. That gentleman may be a very great
man—he at least is honoured with the suffrages of this great
city—but if he is great in himself, I have not had the honour of
hearing his greatness spoken of. I never heard of him having
done anything very brilliant, either in or out of the House of Com-
mons. (Laughter). 1 believe he has achieved greater notoriety
through delivering the lecture now under consideration than ever
he did before as a public man. (Renewed laughter). But it is
not sufficient that a man should be a public man, that he should be
able to write M.P. after his name, to entitle him to lecture at
the working classes of this country; to set himself up for an
oracle, whose sayings shall be as as a law unto the people. We
want more than this; we desire truth, and argument, and jus-
tice ; and when those are dealt out to working men they will
listen, and they will learn, and become improved by the occa-
sion. (Applause).
My object to-night is accomplished. I came here to show
that the Amalgamated Society of Engineers has been abused ;
that there is no secresy in its conduct, no injustice in its pro-
ceedings, no despotism in its constitution or practices; to explain


how that the whole of the members are bound by the same
rules—from the Council in London to the youngest member in
Scotland —and that those rules are the result of the universal
voice of the members. I have endeavoured to show you how
those rules have been misrepresented in this city, and that the
whole of Mr. Black’s lecture was one of great partiality. If I
have succeeded in that, I have performed my duty, satisfied
my mission, and done all that I desired to do. (Great applause).
I have now only to say, that it will be a sorry day for Britain
when her sons shall neglect or refuse to unite together for
their common good; when the working men of our country
shall be so careless of their interests as to leave others to do
for them what they ought to do for themselves; when they
shall exist only as individuals, and reduce themselves to the
weakness of a unit, when by combination they can be strong;
it will, I say, be a sorry day for this nation, that makes freedom
its great national boast, and the independence of its people its
great national characteristic, if its workers do not continue to
unite for self-protection. (Great applause). By combination
the workman is not only more powerful, but more useful. Ido
not say our combinations may not be more useful, and conducted
with greater discretion and wisdom than they are. Ido not claim
for them infallibility; no human institution is infallible; but
working men’s combinations are always improving in character
and usefulness. I say again, when workmen refuse to combine,
when they forget this duty to themselves, they will sink to
the very lowest condition of the serf; they will be the merest
slaves of capital, will cease to occupy the position in society
they do at this moment, and will no longer be the subject
of a nation’s pride and gratitude. (Loud cheers, which lasted
for several minutes).
