

Speeches by
Lord Baden- Powell
His Visit to New South Wales
MARCH, 1931




Lord Baden-Powell
The World Chief Scout.
His Visit to New South Wales
a,T ORD BADEN'POWELL, the founder of the Boy Scout Move'
TJLi ment, and the World'Chief Scout, arrived in Sydney on 1 7th
ML March, 1931, accompanied by Lady BademPowell, the Chief
l(a» vJ Guide. In a broadcasted message the same evening, the Chief
Scout said;—“ Since my arrival I have heard the same old
report I heard years ago, that the Boy Scouts is a military organisation.
I don’t know how it is that such a story persists. It may be because
I was a soldier once, but a soldier after he leaves the Army, makes
as good a citizen as anyone else. People who have never seen war,
hate it, and never want it again; but what about those men who saw
the brutality of it ? They want war least of all, and they try to see
that there is no more war.
“Then our critics ask why we dress our Boy Scouts and Girl
Guides in uniform. Certainly soldiers wore uniform, but then so do
football players and many other people. The uniform was to make
them all look alike—younger and older brothers played together in the
one uniform. The uniform eliminated any class distinction. People
ask us whether we drill the boys. No, we do, not drill them, for
that turns them into a machine. We try to teach them to act and
think and work for themselves, to be individuals, to make them good
citizens.
“I believe that our system is right. We now see that boys who
were trained as scouts have become men, and they have proved to be
good citizens. Boy Scouts and Girl Guides are a power for goodwill
and peace.”
A Civic Welcome
Next day, the Lord Mayor of Sydney (Alderman Jackson) and
many leading citizens welcomed Lord BademPowell at the Town Hall.
The Chief Secretary, Mr. Gosling, who represented the Premier and
the Government, said:—
“Any man who can win domination over the hearts of millions
of boys must be a man of far greater power and importance than a
mere citizen.”
1


“The aims of the Scout Movement,” he added, “were for peace.”
In an interesting address the Chief Scout said: —
“I feel myself at home amongst you, and indeed I am at home,
for we are all one nation.”
Sydney University Honors
Lord Baden-Powell.
After an inspiring parade of more than 7,000 Scouts, Cubs, and
Rovers through the city on the Friday afternoon, the Chief Scout
took the salute in Macquarie Street amid a large assemblage of citizens
who gave him a most enthusiastic welcome. Immediately thereafter,
Lord Baden-Powell proceeded to the University, where in the presence
of the Governor and Lady Game and a brilliant gathering of Senators,
Professors, and other citizens, the Chancellor, Sir William Cullen,
conferred upon him the degree of Doctor of Laws.
In presenting the distinguished visitor to the Chancellor, Sir John
Peden, Dean of the Faculty of Law, said:—
“From time to time the University has welcomed the opportunity
of paying its tribute to those who have rendered distinguished service
to the British Empire. It has also been eager to do honour to those
who by their eminent talents and virtues, and by the inspiration of
their precepts and example, have made a signal contribution to the
cause of education, and to the advancement of the standards and ideals
of life throughout the peoples of the world. To-day the University
desires to enrol among its members one of whom all these things are
true, and whose life and work have gained the admiration, the rever-
ence, and the affection of young and old in the Commonwealth of
Australia, as well as in other dominions, countries, and territories
under the sovereignty or protection of the British Crown, and in many
other lands.” (Applause.)
The Chief Scout Acknowledges the Honor.
“I feel very deeply sensible of the great honour that has been
bestowed on me,” said Lord Baden-Powell. “It is one I have never
looked for in my wildest dreams, because for one thing I have never
studied law, and it seems to be almost ridiculing that high office to
give me the degree. I do not think it is entirely for me that this honor
has been given. I look upon myself as only one of the vast army of
men and women, trying to bring the next generation to the idea of a
better manhood and womanhood. So, on behalf of these men and
women, to whom I look as my brothers and sisters, I thank you. This
will be a great encouragement to them to go on with the work they
are doing in spite of many discouragements.
2


Service and Sacrifice.
“After all, service is very little good without sacrifice, sacrifice
being the soul of service.
“I do not think I have any pretension to a knowledge of law,
but perhaps it may be because we have organised a code of laws of
our own that I have been honoured. The scout law runs into ten
principles, and they are laws of ‘do,’ and there is no law of ‘don’t,'
although we have an eleventh law which may be taken as ‘don’t’; it
is not written. That law is that the Scout must not be a fool, and
it covers a; great many real troubles in this world. The law of ‘do’
means rendering service, and all our law leads up to rendering service
to the community and to the country.” (Applause.)
“I would like to feel myself still more closely associated with
the University, and I appeal to some of the undergraduates to join
me in rendering this service among their younger brothers and sisters.”
(Applause.) “At Oxford and Cambridge and at other universities the
undergraduates have strong associations of Scouts. In these depressed
times we should look to the character of the men and women of the
future.
“This is a great opportunity to come to the rescue of the
Empire, not to prepare for war, but to prepare for peace and pros'
perity and happiness in the land. The girls and boys want to join
up, but we have not the older people to take them in hand. I shall
look forward to seeing a Scout Association started here.
“I thank you. I shall never forget this wonderful day.”
(Applause.)
Final Demonstrations.
Scout Week was brought to a triumphal termination by magni-
ficent demonstrations at Randwick Racecourse on Saturday, the 21 st
March, 1931, and at the Sydney Cricket Ground on Sunday, the
22nd March, 1931.
The Rally.
Before addressing a wonderful gathering of Brownies, Guides,
Cubs, Scouts, and Rovers, the Chief Scout took the opportunity to
decorate Cubmaster Thomas for his bravery in outwitting two bank
robbers. He related how Thomas, though badly hurt, feigned death,
released himself, and gave the alarm to the police, who arrested the
men. “The men got penal servitude for their pains, and the Cub-
master now gets our badge for his pains,” said the Chief Scout.
3


Message from the Prince of Wales.
The Chief Scout then conveyed greetings from the Scouts in
England, and read a message from the Prince of Wales. It said :
“My dear Chief Scout,
“I have had the good fortune to visit all the British oversea
Dominions in my time, and in each of them I have been glad to
see the Boy Scouts and Girl Guides on a promising foundation, and
on very much the same standard of efficiency and spirit as their
brothers and sisters in the Old Country. ... I desire you will give
the Scouts and Guides my cordial wishes for good camping.
“Yours sincerely, Edward.”
"Scouts' Own."
Few, if any, more brilliant or impressive spectacles have been
witnessed at the Sydney Cricket Ground than that presented by
Sunday’s Thanksgiving Service. The organisation was perfect, and
the service was attended by an enormous number of people, who
watched with sustained interest the marshalling of 10,000 Guides
and Scouts into their allotted positions.
At the commencement of the service, Rovers, carrying national
flags of countries affiliated with the International Bureau, advanced to
the salute.
Chief Commissioner J. M. Maughan read the Scout and Guide
Law, and speeches by the Chief Guide and the World Chief Scout
followed.
The Chief Scout's Final Words
“Scouts, Guides, and Cubs :
“This is a wonderful day for all of us, for it is one day that you
will carry in your memory for many years to come, because, in a
word, I do not think you will ever see a day quite like it again.
I do not want to keep you long, but just to get you to carry away
with you a reminder of the promise that you made as Scouts and
Guides, and also a reminder of your motto, ‘Be prepared.’
“I came, last week, from New Zealand, where your brother
Scouts and sister Guides, all looking exactly like you, are playing
the game in the same way as you are playing it here. They had
had a terrible disaster there. That earthquake at Napier came upon
them with terrible suddenness. It was an awful catastrophe. They
were entirely unprepared. It was just an ordinary day, when
everybody was going about his business in the ordinary way. Sud'
denly every house began to fall about them, and everything was
4


wrecked in a few moments. Many people were crushed and killed,
and very many were injured. One troop of Scouts lost three and one
Scoutmaster.
“That might have taken place anywhere, and to other troops;
a sudden disaster like that, with three killed without any opportunity
of making their peace with God, and suddenly dashed into the next
world. I hope those Scouts were prepared. I hope they had carried out
their motto, because that motto means to be prepared for life and
for death. I want you Scouts to think of it. At any moment death
may come; an accident, sudden disease. Be prepared for it, and then
I think any Boy Scout or Girl Guide, when the time comes for them
to die, may say to themselves, ‘Have I made the best of my life?
Have I tried to do good turns to other people? Have I tried to do
my duty?' If you can say, 'Well, I have done my best,’ that is all
that is necessary. You will feel comforted, for no one can do more
than his best. To be prepared for death is carrying out your Scout
Law to the best of your ability.
Scouts m the New Zealand Earthquake.
“There was one pleasing feature about the disaster in New
Zealand. We had it from a sailor who had landed immediately after
the disaster. He said that he saw Boy Scouts in all directions get-
ting into their uniforms and doing what they 1 could to help. They
did not wait for the Scoutmaster to form them up. They tackled
the work of extricating injured people, giving First Aid, and rigging
up shelters. The Girl Guides were active, too, working in pairs,
getting hold of little children, helping with cooking, giving First Aid.
And this at a time when grown-up people were still confused and
apparently helpless. I don't think I was ever more proud in my life
than when I got this information, because it showed that the Scouts
and Guides were carrying out their promise.
“In order to be prepared for any emergency you must learn
life saving, and keep up your practice. As Scouts and Guides you
must be prepared for any accident, any trouble, any disaster that may
turn up. Listen to your promise and think it over as never before.
‘On my 1 honour—(on your honour, mind) —I promise that I will do
my best to do my duty to God and the King; to help other people
at all times; to obey the Scout and Guide Law.’ 1 I ask those who
will do their best to carry that out to rise and raise their hands.
Now, will you do your best? Answer me.’’ (Loud chorus of “Yes,”
and prolonged cheering and applause.)
Lord Baden-Powell : “God bless you, and help you to carry
it out.” (Renewed applause.)
5


In the Bush "8.P." sees Scouts at Work
Informal Visit.
Camp fires, totem poles, carved logs, weird shouts—all the
youthful mysteries of a boys’ camp were unfolded to the Chief Scout
and the Chief Guide (Lord and Lady Baden-Powell) when, prior
to departing for Brisbane, they inspected the Scout training camp at
Pennant Hills. With them was the President of the Girl Guides in
New South Wales (Lady Game). They were shown over the camp
by the Camp Chief, Mr. H. Mac Allister.
With an agility that would put to shame many men of half
his age, Lord Baden-Powell descended steep tracks, clambered up
rocks, walked along paths above which rain-wet scrub hung heavily.
With the eye of the pioneer he looked appraisingly at camp and fire-
places. He saw packs and spare clothes folded neatly underneath
tents. He saw bridges of sturdy workmanship, steps cut in rocks,
swing gates made of rope and small tree stems. He saw a water
system that would have done credit to a Board of Works engineer.
He saw camp sites levelled out in the face of a steep hill, and pro-
tected from the winds of winter and the heat of summer by a thick
mantle of trees and scrub.
The sun was setting when he arrived. As he went from one
to the other of the forty-eight different camp sites, here and there
fires glinted through the gathering gloom, blue smoke curled into the
still air. And the smell of frying sausages was wafted through the
bush. Billies of boiling water bubbled merrily. Thick slices of bread
were toasted at thei end of sticks held by brown little hands. Smiling
boyish faces shone in the flickering light of fires.
It was all delightfully informal. Many of the Scouts seemed
unaware that the Big Chief was among them. “Hey, Jack, I dodged
you!” yelled one youngster from the top of a rock to a mate who
chased him. They did not see the keen-eyed Big Chief watching
them from a path above them. “Hey, Jacky, you can’t cat ”
Suddenly he saw Lord Baden-Powell—stopped in the middle of a
word, and came as nearly to attention as he could on his precarious
perch.
But when the Scouts did realise that their idol was there they
were all eagerness to be near him—some touching him with sticks,
and told their mates that they would keep those sticks as souvenirs
To all, the Big Chief had a kindly word of praise or encouragement.
6


In the centre of a large cleared space stood a heap of dried
firewood. He was asked to light it—around it, later in the evening,
was to be a “wood badge” investiture. Now the Scout rules say
that no Scout must use more than two matches in lighting a fire.
“8.P.” took several, and in the end had to invoke the aid of a
Herald representative’s copy-paper. At that moment the Chief Guide
appeared.
“I took more than two matches,” said “8.P.,” shamefacedly.
“Awful ! ” replied the Chief Guide, and “8.P.,” true Scout that
he is, did not excuse himself by saying, as he could have said, that the
laying of the fire was not his doing, nor did he blame the dampness
of the wood.
Young Vivian Smith, of Ist Parramatta Troop, presented to
him a home-made boomerang, inscribed with the words : “Bon
voyage.”
“Thank you,” said the Chief Scout. “I will throw it at my
son if he does not behave himself.”
Among the show places inspected was the special camp used
only by the winners of the Fairfax Challenge Flag, this year the First
Hurlstone Troop, who were there.
After the inspection the guests were entertained at dinner by
Mr. Robert Dixson (Chairman of the Camp Committee) and Mrs.
Dixson. Lord Baden-Powell presented the Medal of Merit to Scout-
master Milton Boyce, of the Baden-Powell Rovers, and the Scout
“Thanks Badge” to Miss Mac Allister, sister of the Commissioner of
Training.
In a very happy speech, Lord Baden-Powell said that when he
had seen the Scouts marching on Friday and Saturday, he had had
just a doubt whether they were not too much “parlour Scouts”—but
the visit to the camp had impressed him with their knowledge of
woodcraft and the true scouting attributes.
“You are giving up a lot to train the younger generation in a
good cause. God bless you all ”
Before catching the Brisbane train at Hornsby, Lord Baden-
Powell, in an interview, said he was delighted with what he had
seen of the Scouts in Sydney. “I hope many more men, worthy of
the name, will come forward and help the movement, which is doing
so much to build the characters of the youth of to-day and the men
of to-morrow,” he said.
“I am very pleased indeed with all I have seen of the Guides,”
said Lady Baden-Powell. “The work is splendid, and it bodes well
for the future of Australia. I look forward to hearing of many
women joining the Girl Guide Movement.”
By courtesy of The Sydney Morning Herald.
7


THE PROMISE.
On enrolment a Scout makes the following promise : —“On my
honour I promise that I will do my best—
To do my duty to God and the King,
To help other people at all times,
To obey the Scout Law.”
THE LAW.
1. A Scout’s honour is to be trusted.
2. A Scout is loyal to the King, his country, his officers, his
parents, his employers, and to those under him.
3. A Scout’s duty is to be useful and to help others.
4. A Scout is a friend to all, and a brother to every other Scout,
no matter to what social class the other belongs.
5. A Scout is courteous.
6. A Scout is a friend to animals.
7. A Scout obeys orders of his parents, patrol leader or Scout-
master, without question.
8. A Scout smiles and whistles under all difficulties
9. A Scout is thrifty.
10, A Scout is clean in thought, word, and deed
Scout Motto
“BE PREPARED.”
8




THE SHELLING PRINTING
WORKS,
52-54 Bay Street, Sydney.
