

SPEECH OF MR. THOMAS WALKER, M.P.,
ON
FEDERATION.
Given on the Address in reply to the Cr over nor's Speech fon the '2oth of
May, 1891.
Mr. Want, Q.C., M.P., of this speech, said :—“ Although I intend to say but a few
words on this question, I do so, I confess, with a feeling of hesitation and delicacy
after listening to the very able, eloquent and clever address we have just heard from,
the hon. member for Northumberland (Mr. T. Walker). Following him, I can
only say that I agree with, and would wish to echo almost every word he has
uttered. 1 believe there is no man throughout thej.engfch and breadth of this great
colony, no member of this House who has heard that* address, or who, not having
heard it, will happen to read it, but will agree, if he be a true patriot, with almost
every word of it.”
THE SPEECH.
Mb. T. Walkeb, M.P.: I was not prepared to speak just now, but I could
abt allow a division to take place without saying a fewwoffis as to the
extraordinary programme and the extraordinary attitude of the Gov-
ernment. We are on the eve of a day in the history of this colony,
when [
Sir Henky Pakkes : We admit our sins as candid men; let us divide l
Mr. T. Walkeb : lam glad of the admission. It is well for people
to confess their sins. But there is something further than the admis-
sion of the chief sinner.
Sir Henby Pashes : I will admit more. We are all sinners here,
and hon. members on that side are all saints !
Mr. T. Walkeb : The word of the chief sinner is so doubted in the
public mind that I am bound to advance some proof beyond his ad-
mission. I was stating when interrupted that we were approaching a
period in the history of this colony when more momentous questions
would be open for the consideration of the public than at any previous
time in its history. We are on the threshold of great events, and the
Government ask us to take the work of, I was going to say, a self-
appointed convention —it was self-appointed solar as its authority was
concerned —the people of no colony have ever asked for or endorsed
it —to take its work blindly, submissively, cringingly, and to
allow it a place in the birth of a nation. I am pleased to think that
the opposition to that proposal does not proceed only from this side of
the House. I cannot agree with the attack made upon the hon. and
learned member for East Sydney last night by the hon. member for
Eden, Mr. Garvan. It may be thought by some to be the duty of the
Opposition to attack the Government under any circumstances. lam
therefore pleased that in the ranks of the Government supporters




there are some men who have perceived the hollowness, the rottenness,
and danger of the scheme admittedly plotted in secret, which is to take
away the liberties of the people, not only of New South Wales, but
of all Australians. I am glad to find that some hon. members oppo-
site are now inclined to cry “ halt ” to the Government in the down-
ward course in which they are leading the country.- It is true there
may be hidden motives underlying the action of the hon. and learned
member for East Sydney, he may have purposes of his own to serve, he
may be merely gratifying an ambition, or avenging himself in obedience
to a private pique ; but above and beyond the motives of the speech the
hon. and learned member made last night, the charges he made
against the Government, and the grounds he has given for the
position he has taken up, have not yet been answered. They are
unanswerable. It is all very well to tell us, as we were told by the
Secretary for Public Works last night, that we shall have an oppor-
tunity to frame our own Federation Bill. That means nothing more
nor less than that the House will have an opportunity to play at
legislation. After it has enjoyed the inestimable privilege of dis-
cussing every line of the bill the result of its labours will be sent in the
form of a schedule to another irresponsible Convention. If this second
Government-elected body be fashioned as the first Convention was
fashioned, if it be composed of men destitute of sympathy for the
popular liberties which have been fought for and won in tbe past, if
it be constituted of men of the ultra anti-democratic order, it will
make very short work indeed of any amendments we may include in* a
schedule to the bill. I ask hon. members to consider the actions of
the delegates after they formed themselves into a separate body,
after they had, so to speak, got out of the hands of Parliament, and
had obtained possession of this Chamber. They constituted them-
selves into a body far superior to any parliament which had delegated
them. They took it upon themselves to dictate to the various
parliaments what they should do. They took the reins of authority
into their own hands, and considered themselves masters of the
situation. They went as far as they could in the direction of allowing
neither Parliament nor people to have anything to do with their
work. Their plans was to get their draft bill passed immediately—as
quickly, and with as little debate as possible —and sent home to the
Imperial authorities, to be made the law of the land. What more
did they do ? Without the authority of any parliament in Australia,
they passed a resolution enabling any three parliaments to send home
the draft bill which they shad fashioned, andto thus form the Common-
wealth of Australia. They had no authority to do anything of the
kind. They had no instructions in their commissions to found a
commonwealth with three colonies or with any number of colonies.
They not only went outside their instructions; but they assumed a
prerogative inimical to the prero|*miwjJbf every parliament in Aus-
tralia. Starting their labours with a sumptuous banquet, they
comported themselves like little monarchs, and at once assumed a
position infinitely superior to that of any legislative body in
the Southern Hemisphere. From the commencement to the close
of their debates their utter contempt for any representative


legislative bodies was made only too apparent. Their whole plan,
for which they worked deliberately from start to finish, was,
as far as possible, to humilitate, to belittle, the privileges of
every legislative body on this Continent. They assumed the
right to dictate, not only what the bill should be, but in every
respect how it should be treated after it left their hands. We have
no nerve, no manhood, left in us if we can submit to that species of
dictation. Among the delegates of- this colony _were the Colonial
Secretary and the hon. member for East Sydney (Mr. McMillan).
Were they monarchs possessing a divine right, and hedged in by a
divine circle so that they could do no wrong ? No ; they were not
little potentates. They were simply our creatures, sent with specific
instructions to do a certain thing, and that thing only. This House
is now what the Premier said it would be when he was speaking at
Hobart. It is absolutely powerless to do anything in the direction of
shaping the bill to its own wishes. It can reject the bill, and I hope
it will, and it ought to do so on the first opportunity, or it can accept
this bill as it is ; that is all. We have been told that the ground has
been taken from under the feet of the hon. and learned member for
East Sydney. We have been told that he has been anticipated by
the motion of the Premier; that all that the hon. and learned member
for East Sydney wants, all that he has advocated, is really provided
for by the Government. It is nothing of the kind. The members of
the Convention were to sharp, too clever, and too selfish; they were
altogether too arrogant to leave this House, or any other legislative
body in Australia the power to undo their work. Once they got out
of the hands of those who elected them, given strictly limited func-
tions to perform— that is, to consult alone, and to put the
result of their con&ultations in a draft proposal they assumed
to be absolutely free to foist upon Australia a draft bill
of their own, and they have done it; and they have done it
in yuch a way that the motion of the hon. and learned member for
East Sydney is extremely opportune. They have done it in such a
way that this House ought, at the very outset, to say what it thinks
of such conduct on the part of this irresponsible body of men. It
ought at once to be aware of the gravity of its present situationit
ought to be aware of the trap that hag been distinctly laid, into which
many hon. members are likely to fall’ if they are not guarded. The
trap is simply this: that the Convention has simply left us Hobson’s
choice. If we do not agree to the bill, what does it matter ? The
Convention framed a draft bill that will suit certain parts of Australia.
It will distinctly suit certain legislatures Which have not a great
democracy to consideyjjSSand these legislatures may hasten the draft
bill through. then send it to England. Three of the
colonies can send the bill to England, and then, whether New
South Wales likes it or notifibse three colonies can become the Com-
monwealth of Australia. Where, then, is New South Wales? The
Convention have done their work in such a way that we are almost
bound hand and foot. If the colonies to -\yhom the bill may prove a,
material benefit like to hasten the matter on, we are bound to come in
■upon their terms, or remain out in


members of a government who deliberately sell the liberties of the
land, over which they are .placed to govern, in this slipshod, careless,
and arrogant fashion ? Where are their instructions to do
anything of this kind ? All that these people were sent to the
Convention to do was, to the best of their ability, to draw up some
suggestion for confederation. All that they were authorised to do
was to put into shape the best bill they could, to express no opinion
upon it, but simply to put the result of their conference, of their
conflict of ideas, and of their general conclusions in the form of a
bill, and then to bring it back, as delegates, to the various Houses.
Then it should have been for the parliaments of Australia to decide
how many States should be required to enter into partnership before
the Crown of England should be asked to legislate upon the matter, and
make it the law of the country. We ought to have had the right to
a decision upon that matter; but our creatures—those whom we have
appointed; those to whom we have entrusted merely to draw up a
draft bill—say, “No; your parliaments shall be entirely ignored;
we will put them at defiance; we will ride rough-shod over them, and
behind their backs we will make it so that, when the bill is put to
them, they can do nothing, and they will be bound to accept or reject
it.” Now, in spite of the resolution to which the House is shortly to
be treated as a sort of safety-valve, to allow us to say what we have te
say, we are really to be treated to what has actually been the absolute
stand taken by the Premier throughout upon the matter. He has
told us, again and again, that the bill will be the bill of any future
commonwealth of Australia. He has told us that any one of our
parliaments cannot alter it, and he has said, ‘‘ If any alterations are
made, even by a Convention convened for the purpose, the bulk of
the bill will be maintained.” Yes, because it has been surrounded by
such circumstances, our delegates have so played into the hands of
delegates from other States that we can altogether be ignored. The
commonwealth can be formed, and New South Wales treated as
though it did not exist. As to our liberties in the matter, liberties
which should have been zealously guarded by the members we sent to
the Convention, they have been absolutely surrendered under
the comprehensive term of “compromise.” How beautiful is that
compromise which gives all to others and leaves us wreck and ruin L
What a beautiful compromise is that which takes away the liberties
of the Australian public! What a grand compromise is that which
renders New South Wales the helpless victim of the other colonies
and of England’s billet-hunting aristocracy! I would ask hon.
members to be careful how they vote ppon this question. There are
some hon. members who say, “Do not Vote with the hon. and learned
member for East Sydney, because he is hvfree-trader; and no pro-
tectionist ought to be led away by him.” *Tf it were a question of
freetrade and protection, we should knSvr very well what to do; but
it is not a question of freetrade and protection. It is now a question
as to whether New South Wales is to have her proper part in the
formation of the new commonwealth, or whether it is to have no part
at all. It is now a question as to whether the hon. and learned
member for East Sydney was right in his statement that our liberties


have been surrendered to the neighbouring colonies, and that we are
going to be placed under a despotism from which we can never release
ourselves excepting through the turmoils and dangers of a revolution.
That is what we are asked to do now. We are asked to consider whether
the hon. and learned member for East Sydney was right in liis charges
against the Convention, whether he was right in his expositions of
the weaknesses and the treachery that is contained in this bill. We
are asked to consider whether the hon. and learned member has pro-
perty exposed the designs of the neighbouring colonies upon our own ter-
ritory, and the designs of office-seekers in the aristocracy of the
British Empire. If he is right in that exposition, be he freetrader
or protectionist, I will follow him. Ido not care where the truth
comes from, I acknowledge it, and I will stand by it. Were the hon.
and learned member a freetrader of the deepest die, were he my bit-
terest enemy, let him speak the truth, and the truth more particularly
on behalf of the people of this country, in exposing the terrible
wrong that is sought to be foisted upon us, and I will follow him to
the utmost. I claim that the hon. and learned member has done that.
It is not enough for the Government to sneer at the past of the hon. and
learned gentleman, and to say that he is actuated by ambition. M hat
matters it to me by what he is actuated, if he speaks the truth ?
What matters it whether he is actuated b} T greed of office, or by
patriotic love ? I know that he has not been answered, and that his
statements require refutation before I will sit quietly in my seat and
be satisfied. What did the for Public Works say last night
in reply to his speech ? Pie simply taunted the hon. and learned
member because he had not always been in his seat. But does it
come with good grace from this Government to taunt the hon. and
learned member with his absence ? When was he not in his place
when the Government was in danger and required a voice to plead
for them, and to glue them to their seats ? The hon. and learned
member has done more good service in keeping the Government in
office than any member of the Ministry, and then they turn round on
him because he dares to tell the truth on a great national question,
and to differ upon it with the leader of the Government. It is true
this matter must yet come before us, but hon. members have evaded the
whole difficulty in connection with it. I know some hon. members on
the Government side of the House who were prepared to censure the
Government on this Federation Bill, and to go with the hon. and
learned member for East Sydney, or with any one else who would
expose the weaknesses of that bill, but now they are content to say,
“ There is no need to fight with the hon. and learned member for East
Sydney, because the Premier has given us an opportunity to amend
the bill.” Poor deluded creatures who believe it! The Premier has
given no opportunity for amending that bill. He has given you an
opportunity of approving or rejecting the bill, and, if you like, after
your approval you can play at making amendments. Amendments !
What will be the good of these scheduled amendments ? Supposing,
even they are submitted, to the people, and the people of New South
Wales adopt them ? "Will that secure their ultimate adoption in the
Commonwealth ? No, they have yet to be riddled by another Conven


tion —a Convention, mark, appointed by another Parliament. These
delegates from another Parliament to another Convention, may, and
probably would say, “ As to these amendments they are the vapour-
fugs of a defunct Parliament; they have not the authority of the Parlia-
ment that elects us ; they are therefore useless, we ignore them, and wilt
consider only the bill of the former Convention. Let it be evei
borne in mind that our late delegates have sold us so that if this Par-
liament does amend by affixing a schedule to the bill, and if the peop e
put their seal to that schedule*, a future Convention, with a majority
from the other colonies—and probably the very men will be there who
who shaped the present bill—will be able to treat the schedule of
amendments with absolute contempt. What a degradation to the
people of this country that our creatures, those whom we sent to draw-
up a bill on our behalf, should say, “ This is our bill, and you must
accept it, or if you will not accept it please tell us so on a separate
page. Do not soil our pages. Do not cross out a single bne of ours.
Do not blot out a sentence; but you can glue or pin to the back
of the bill your ideas upon it. We will graciously permit that.
Then we shall come again, tear off or unpin what you have
throw it into the waste-paper basket, and send the bill home to Her
Majesty the Queen, and put our fingers to our noses at you _ Isiiail
be able to show when we come to deal with the bill that the House
has only the right to “approve” of its provisions. We
cannot amend it. It is so rotten in principle, it
starts upon such false grounds and brings in so many anti-
democratic influences and so safe-guards all species of despotism
and privilege that to commence to amend the bill would only be by
tearing out clause after clause and writing a new bill from beginning
to end That is the only way in which it can be amended. JN ow let us
take our stand at once. ' Let us say when we have the opportunity
that we do not believe that the bill ought to be entertained for a
moment by this House. It ought not to be seriously discussed; it
ought to have no quarter given to it, but it should be resented m
spirit in which men of honour resent anything that is thrown before
them, as this is thrown before us. It has been given to us as a pri-
soner’s diet is given to him—“ Eat it, or leave it ’ -with an insult m
the very offer. There are some people who cannot see beinnei me
scenes in this matter. The bill was not born of The late convention.
Hon. members will make a mistake if they believe that it sprang new-
born from the brow of the convention. There are wires behind tha
convention ; there are plots and counter-plots that are hidden m secret,
and some of which might have been revealed in that secret committee
which so materially altered the opinions of some of the delegates who
came here apparently with the spirit of liberal democracy burning m
their breast, and with a love for a free constitution; but
who came out of that dark and sinister committee with the faces of
aristocrats and despots and with hearts of iron. Go back aHewjears
and rememberthe time when in this House the hon. member for Carcoai,
the hon. member for South Sydney, Mr. Toohey, and a few others,
with myself, stood here the whole night denouncing a proposed grant
towards the imperial warships that, now they are made, will not sail,


and about which the Premier dare not answer the questions that were
asked to-night. I now ask hon. members to view that as a scheme to
insert the thin edge of the wedge that meant something to follow. Some-
thing has come from it —something we ought to take as a warning
to the people of this country. I can imagine how the home authori-
ties laughed in their sleeves, after the scheme yras passed, at the way in
which they had duped the parliaments of Australia. We had our
manly spirit tested, and we succumbed to the flattery of the proposal,
and those who fought valiantly against it were laughed at and sneered
at. The thoughtless majority carried the proposal, and then, behold
the vast activity that there wat in London. There were meetings of
imperialistic leagues, essays in the Imperial Institute, leading articles
in the Times, cablegrams in the morning newspapers—all to work up
the feelings of Australia towards imperialistic federation. The scheme
long ago was discussed in England, and an imperialistic league was
formed", with its duly appointed officers to carry out its efforts into
effect. Our Governors, by some strange concurrence of events, me
together from time to time j and what was the object of their re-
unions ? It was always this imperialistic scheme of federation.
Mr Tooiiey : Imperialistic telegrams !
Mr. T Walker : Undoubtedly. A governor against whom I wish
to say nothing as a man, or even as a governor, in respect to his re-
lations with this colony, developed a most remarkable ardour in
exposing his heart’s wish at every public gathering. There was no
tea-meeting which he attended, no agricultural show that he opened,
at which he did not express his opinion in the direction of federation,
and when he left our shores and went back to the mother-country,
there was still the same enthusiasm. New meetings were called to
allow Lord Carrington to voice the extraordinary loyalty and devotion
of the Australian people to the Crown of Great Britain, all of which
makes us seemingly to live in the very atmosphere of glittering aris-
tocracy. We hear the shaking of the spurs of their royal guards, as
it were, passing us by; martial music is amongst us ; federation is
“i n the air,” but in its most imperialistic aspect. And then, when we
are asked to appoint delegates to the convention, how are we asked to
send them ? With the full liberty of drawing up a bill—with the
full liberty of exercising their discretion as to how that bill shall be
shaped—with the liberty Englishmen should prize dearly, to give
vent to their natural opinions and to their highest hopes and aspira-
tions ? No ; they are sent there with a distinct line to guide them —
with a distinct warning that federation, if it comes about, must be
“under the Crown.” Now, what is all this anxiety about? Why
that anxiety to arm our delegates with this instruction, because it
must be evident to anyone who looks at all into the matter that their
instructions from England were, that federation must be carefully
guarded, so as to be “ under the Crown.” There must be no mistake
about that. That must be in the constitution, and the constitution
must be so made that it cannot be easily altered. _ Get a constitution,
and then we have got the people. I tell you that in modern times we
have had more wars about constitutions than from almost any other
cause. We have written within the four corners of a piece of paper


instructions for the guidance of an executive and of a legislature.
They are bound to keep within those four corners, cannot go beyond
thera, must keep to their limitations. To go beyond them means
revolution; “ theretore, let it be distinctly understood,” came out the
instructions to our governors —no mistake about it—to Carrington, to
Jersey, to every one of our governors, “it must be carefully guarded
that federation is under the Crown —let that be in the constitution.”
I would not be surprised todiscov'er some day that the secret service mon-
ey of England has in some way been expended in the development of this
scheme. I will certainly say this : that there is a possibility that hope of
rewards under the new constitution may have hastened some of the
members of the convention to their decision. Not for the people’s
good, not for the national good, has all this work been done. What
a magnificent scene this House could have witnessed if there had been
real, genuine, downright earnestness in the hearts of everyone there;
what a glorious spectacle we might have beheld within these walls if
each delegate had come here with a single-hearted purpose and a
deep aspiration for his country’s welfare ! But no ; they came here like
a lot of stockbrokers—like a lot of card-players. “ You have trumps,
play them, I cannot follow suit, and will give in.” That was the
spirit in which the whole convention was conducted.
Mr. 0. 0. Dangar : Bough on Dibbs!
Mr. T. Walker : Bough on Dibbs ? There is a Dangar-ous man
there. But let it be rough on whom it may, lam telling the sober
truth, and I will tell the hon. member who interrupted me that we
have at least one man who dared to stand up for the colony that sent
him there, and that was the hon. member for the Murrumbidgee —
Mr. Dibbs.
Mr. 0. 0. Dangar :
Mr. T. Watxer : I ask the hon. member who interrupts me, and
who is in the habit of interrupting everybody whom he cannot under-
stand, did that great body rise to the magnificent height that he
expected it would reach ? We have seen the births of great nations.
Almost within the time of men now living —certainly not long ago —
the States of America had their birth, and their Constitution was
formed, the worst parts of which are copied in this bill, whilst the
best parts of it are left out. We witnessed then a grand development
—a development grand for that time, though events have proved it
to be very imperfect, instead of absolutely perfect. But did that start
with a lot of bickering, with no heart’s sentiment about it—no deep
sense of patriotism in the hearts of those who voiced their truest
aspirations then ? No; the whole time thrilled with the most magni-
ficent oratory to which America has ever listened. Men who before
had never betrayed the art of speech or showed signs of magnificence
of mind sprang forward as if touched by some magic agency. The
lightning of heaven seemed to take an abode in their souls and to pour
out its magnificent shafts of brightness. They rose, the events developed
all the grandeur of their souls. Had we that here ? Why, I sat some-
times in those back seats to which we were relegated —crushed out,
not fit to sit anywhere near one of those divine delegates—l sat there
listening to one man with grey hair who stood alone in that assembly.


He had a feeble voice—the voice of age—but that voice floated on the
holy breath of popular feeling and popular hope. He stood there
telling the members of that Convention that they had exceeded the
powers given to them, and had neglected to use the ordinary poweis
which they possessed to confer the truest liberties upon, the people of
these colonies. He spoke there with a whole-soul feeling , he spoke
alone, with the voice of one man, but it seemed as if, in that one
voice, the unspoken whispers, the unexpressed aspirations of the
vast multitude of this young nation had taken residence, and that the
spirit of progress poured out from his tongue. How was he listened
to ? He said he had thought that that great assemblage would rise
to some magnificence ; he said he had hoped to see that; but how was
he treated —this one venerable man ? Well, be was treated much m
the same way as a costermonger would be treated in the ball-room at
Government House. He was unwelcome ; he was irritating. Munro
turned the southern part of his anatomy to the speaker, and talked
over the back bench on the bank rate of interest to those sitting
behind. The hon. member for St, Leonards, Sir Henry Parkes, talked
wearily to some of his friends close by. The hon. member for East
Sydney, Mr. McMillan, was absorbed in the attack made upon him by
Sir Thomas Mcllwraith, who accused him of having suppressed some
curious documents. Other members had their whiskey in the mean-
time, and the Convention was in that state of commotion that you may
witness at a funeral after the ceremony is over—half gloomy, half
anxious to get away. That was the assembly which was to give us a
glorious democracy and a new nation !
Mr. Melville : God help the country !
Mr. T- Walker : An assembly of land-grabbers, an assembly of
monopolists, an assembly of self-seekers, an assembly of lawyers that
want to wear the wigs of Judges —this body treated us to this treason
in the way of a bill. M 7 e could not but ooserve that there was .no
real earnestness about federation, that it was a matter of bargaining
as to how the favoured few of these colonies might get such powers
as could never be touched in future, how they could safeguard theii
own positions, liow thoy could fortify th.emsel.vGS in defiance of the
people in days to come, and how they could clothe themselves with the
sacred hem of privilege and of authority.. That was their concern.
They scarcely made a secret of it. Even in their open sittings even
when they were in this House, and not in secret committee, they
scarcely made a secret of it. They did not at all disdain to ignoie
what they called democracies. Oh, no. What were democracies to
this august assembly of patricians, this wonderful body of self-consti-
tuted egotists and self-seekers ? Then, of course, we are told by Mr.
Barton, over in the distant and foreign village of Manly, that they
had not the power at all to delegate to the people a right wnich, as
Sir George Grey told us, is inherent in every breast—the right of
every individual citizen of every State to use the same power in the
making of the laws to govern him. No ! they were not authorised to
do that: their instructions did not contain anything of that kind.
But they had the power, it seems, to make sure that the Ministers
under the Federal Constitution, should not be paid less than £2OOO a


year. It seems that they had the power to see that the new Governor-
General should mean taxation to the public at the least of £io>,ooo a
year. And they had the power to make it so that even the Federal Parlia-
ment itself could not alter, to diminish, these salaries for a certain time
They had the power to arrange that this new bodyof people s ou
have each and every one of them £SOO a year Oh! anything that
touched themselves; anything that touched their own chance o
keeping in power once they got there; anything that would enable
them to snap their fingers at the people—that, of _ course, they found
they had authority to do. They had the authority to create judge-
ships. They could make judgeships and fix the very salaries of the
judges. There were some men in that body who would not mind
wearing a judge’s gown for the sake of £4OOO a year and the chance
of being called Sir So-and-so, or His Honor Mr Justice So-and-so,
if not actually as Lord Carrington has suggested Lord Justice Soand-
So. All these details they could go into, and they could fix, too, the
method of election for the members of Parliament and the number oi
voters which should be required to give a seat. > All these details
they could consider and decide. But when it came down to
giving one single plank of liberty, when it came to taking away from
them august powers, and unjust privileges, then they sheltered them-
selves behind the plea that they were not instructed to do anythingoi t
kind. No! and yet they assumed those powers they did exercise, l ac-
cuse the Convention, therefore, of having neglected to use the powers
which naturally were given to them, and which were expected of them,
to justly place the new-born nation upon the footing of um\ ersa
equality. I expected that; but that has been altogether ignored.
But, as has been pointed out, they have gone further : they have made
it so that all our reformers, be they right or wrong, can have no
chance without revolution in future of carrying out their reforms,
hope the hon member for Carcoar, Mr. Garland will forgive me t
alluding to him; but Ido so because I know, although he sits on th e
other side of the House to me, and that often we have most bitter
conflicts in the politicc.l arena, that in certain reforms he desires to
see brought about he is actuated by the most sincere earnestness; and
though I cannot go with him in all, I can go with him m many. ue
of his reforms is that championed by Henry George : the absolute
refusal to alienate any more of our lands, and to nationalise the ian_ s
we have already alienated. But how is this going to be the case in
future under the constitution! The Upper House oh . i
beg pardon of human nature for ever calling that an upper ouse,
without speaking disrespectfully of it—of whom is it to consis . s
the reformer, the earnest, anxious reformer, moving about m social
life to have his chance in forming such a house ? No, that is too zea-
, lously guarded against. The senate is to be comprised of men elected
by the parliaments. Where is the popular right there ? Where
does the liberty of the people, to choose their own law-makers, come
in? It is absolutely ignored! But if the parliaments choose the
senators, whom are they likely to choose ? Suppose the election were
the choice of this Parliament, should Ibe chosen ? Would I have a
chance to go amongst these people ?


Mr. Hutchinson (Glen Innes) : A poor chance! •
Mr. T. Walker : It is true ; I should have a poor chance, and an
exceedingly poor one !
Mr. Hutchinson ( Glen Innes) : Mr. Tonkin would •
Mr. T. Walker : The hon. member for East Macquarie would not
have that distinguished honour : his pockets are not big enough fox it.
No; the men who would be placed in that upper house would be the rich
landlords, landed proprietors, men with big estates. Remember what
these men with big estates, this landlord house, in reality, will be
able to do. Why, since the time of Cromwell, they have talked m
England about the uselessness of the House of Lords about its dan-
gerousness. Even Mr. Gladstone, quite recently, had to use the very
language of Cromwell, and to declare the Upper House or House o±
Lords, to be useless and dangerous, and that it ought to be abolished.
But the House of Lords in England is the veriest baby by the
side of the monstrous giant to be created here. It would be useless
and helpless in comparison with that power. Good-bye to all true
free legislation if it were ever created. Even the lower house would
resolve itself into a house of registration for the upper house if such
a constitution ever were adopted. Now, can my hon. friend, the hon.
member for Carcoar, support a bill directly in the interest of the kmd-
lor'ds of the country, the landed proprietors of the country'. Ihe
doctrine of Henry George may or may not be right; but no man who
goes in for land reform can support this bill. Land reform is an
impossibility with a senate with the powers it is proposed to give to
the Federal Senate. If our land laws are bad now, goodness knows
what they may be when we give over the lands of the whole o± the
colonies to the management of this senate.
Mr. Reid : They prevent tax on land in that very bill!
Mr. T. Walker : Undoubtedly they do. As I have pointed out,
every interest they possess is safe-guarded; but the people’s interests
are in every instance ignored. Cannot hon. members see that
we are made puppets to play at nation - making, while Down-
ing Street is shaping the destinies of this country ? I do not
mean to say that what I am going to picture is absolutely correct;
but let me suppose that I am an Englishman, with a pride of the race
of Englishmen, and with that desire for rule and majestic sway that
most Englishmen have. Englishmen are wonderfully gifted with t e
land fever and the ruling fever. They are wonderfully possessed of a
mania for governing nations that they even do not want so long as
they can have the honour of ruling them. Supposing lam an Eng-
lishman, I say, and have the power as a Statesman to inaugurate some
means of extending England’s power. Well, I reason thus: Australia
is becoming a little ticklish ; in Queensland they have been talking ot
electing their own Governor. Now that is outrageous, and we cannot
have it. The people in Sydney have shown sympathy with Queens-
land, and there have been little troubles with Sir Graham Berry, the
present Agent-General for Victoria, and others in Melbourne. It is
difficult to manage Australia as it is now situated, for we have Sydney,
with her Governor and Sir Henry Parkes, and Melbourne with her
Premier and Governor, and, in addition, those colonies of Western


Australia, South Australia, New Zealand, Queensland and Tasmania
and they can’t he kept in order. It would he a good thing if we could
manage to have them controlled from one point or centre. Let us see.
The way, then, to do it is to move the “ Grand Old Man,” Sir Henry
Parkes; get him to take an interest in the movement, make him the
first Premier, and it is easily managed. We will then run our own
Governor-General with increased powers —and the increased powers
are specially provided for in this bill, and, in addition, there are
increased English powers specially provided for.
Hon. Members : Hear, hear.
Mr. T. Walker : Now we are able to dictate what we want; and
what we dictate will have the force of law, and if they say anything
we can reply, “Well, you made all this for yourselves.” If they
complain, we will show them their own bill. By these means we
will get rid of local jealousies and disturbances; we will have them
under our thumb ; we will pull them with one string ; we will have one
Governor-General and one Premier, and then all Australia is helpless
to adopt any other but our policy. The Colonial Treasurer looks with
a smile upon me, but I question very much whether he understands
the bill that he has agreed to ; I question whether he has seen the
tendencies of this bill and recognises that the powers we are forging
will bind us in the future. I regard it as a deep-laid scheme to make
us more governable by the Home outhorities who wish to get us under
the thumb of the office in England. Then we shall not be governed as
we are at the present time; we shall be governed much in the same
way as Ireland is governed. We shall be managed as India is
managed. In these countries management is easy. A few police and
soldiers, and the popular voice is of no value. But the whole thing,
as it applies to us, is most monstrous, seeing that they want us to get
our own soldiers and ships, to keep ourselves in subjection.. They ask
us complacently to forge the chains that are to bind us.. Is it not a dis-
grace to the name of patriot that our own men are willing to shape
for us the very rack upon which we shall be stretched in the future .
The delegates at the Convention imagine that they have .been doing, a
great deal, but when posterity comes to look back at their deeds it will
fook back on a race of pigmies and contemptible self-seekers, un-
worthy of the name of patriots. Is it not evident to those who have
watched the course of events that we are in the hands of an enemy in
this matter. lam no provincialist; I have said that over and over
again. lam decidedly in favour of a federation, and of seeing these
colonies bound together for a common purpose ; but. that federation
must have the basis of liberty, equality and justice; it must recognise
the people and not a Senate. I want to see federation, but not one
that will give up all the wealth of our own colony, for the. advantage
and accession of the neighbouring colonies. Fair play is a jewel.
Let us have justice in the new partnership
Hon. Members : Hear, hear ! . <
Mr. T. Walker : Let us have the rights of this colony fairly res-
pected. But what was this colony in the estimation of our delegates
at the Convention? They did not even think it worthy of being
selected as the site for the capital of the federation.


Mr. Hutchison :
Mr. T. Walker : The whole scheme has been cunningly worked;
first of all by English schemers, and then carried out by Sir Samuel
Griffith. Sir Henry Parkes and Mr. McMillan were like two dummies
that a ventriloquist uses at his performance, and which he works at
his will by means of a string ; they have absolutely been at the mercy
of astute politicians. Sir Samuel Griffith will gain for his colony, which
in the future will have a good deal to do in shaping the policy of the
Australian commonwealth. Queensland will be entitled to eight
representatives, and their sympathies are almost sure to be identical
with those of South Australia. That gives sixteen votes, but with
Western Australia they get a total of twenty-four. But in addition to
that, a scheme is in existence now to divide Queensland into two, and
possibly into three colonies. Yery well, now just look at the power that
may be given to that colony. One can easily understand the attitude of
Sir Samuel Griffith. He is gaining everything for his colony—for
the landowners, the speculators, the rich squatters, and the pastoralists,
in fact, he has made a splendid bargain. It has been said that we
have all made a good bargain ; but the hon. and learned member for
East Sydney, Mr. Peid, pointed out the advantages that Melbourne
would gain, and thereby what Sydney would lose. Undoubtedly,
Melbourne will gain by it. We will just gain this advantage, that
we say to Melbourne, “You have an established business ; you have
your manufactories in full swing ; you have everything you want now.
We will tell you what we will do —we will enable you to extend your
markets through New South Wales, we will protect you against the
outside world.
Hon Members : Hear, Hear !
Mr. Peid : That is a new kind of free-trade !
Mr. T. Walker: Undoubtedly it is afree-trade that places everything
in the hands of protectionist Victoria and robs us of our just rights.
(Here some one applauded in the gallery).
Mr. Speaker : I intimated last night that if there were any further
interruptions from the gallery I would have it cleared, and I now
direct it to be cleared.
' An Hon. Member :
Mr. Speaker : If the Sergeant-at-Arms can ascertain who it was
that made the interruption, he had better be brought here. I with-
draw the order to have the gallery cleared.
Mr. T. Walker : As I said, it was directly in the interests of Vic-
toria, and I can very well understand with what satisfied feelings my
friend Mr. Deakin went home, and with what a spirit of contentment
Mr. Munro wrapped up his portmanteau. At one time it seemed
as if the Victorian delegates were going to cause a little trouble in the
ranks of the Convention, an(J were about to pack up and go away
without further notice; but they stayed until they went into the
secret committee. In the dark recess of that star chamber, what was
done ? Perhaps the Colonial Treasurer can tell us. He knows that
he was charged with suppressing certain evidence in connection with
the publication of the proceedings of that committee. What was that
evidence ? Evidence clearly showing that Victoria had everything to


gain, and, as Mr. Munro said, gave her the mastery of the situation.
After the Colonial Treasurer had destroyed the evidence of his own
complicity, Mr. Munro said at Melbourne, “We are the masters,
gentlemen.” We shall have what we want. New South Wales is to
be a territory of Victoria, and our borders shall extend to the Pacific
Ocean on the east.” That is exactly what was done. lam not going
to taunt hon. gentlemen opposite with having sold their principles.
Of course it does come with a good grace from the hon. and
learned member from East Sydney. lam thankful to see men coming
over to our side, and becoming protectionists : but what I am not
thankful for—and what I accuse them of doing, is that they have
become protectionists not for the people of this country, not to start
manufactures to help our labourers, but deliberately to help the estab-
lished industries of Victoria. New South A Vales went into this Conven-
tion as a beautiful goose with golden feathers. Now she has come
out like a goose plucked for the table. We are stripped of all; our
honour even has gone —is beslimed by the action of this Convention.
Then we are told that this is merely a matter now for our careful
deliberations. We are asked now simply to look with wondrous eyes
upon this bill, drawn up, the Governor tells us, by the foremost men in
the public life of Australia. Oh! libel upon the public life of this country
—libel upon the demoncratic spirit of this land —libel upon Australia,
that these crawlers to servitude, these office-hunters, these title-seekers,
these privilege-gainers and upholders, should be called the foremost
men of Australia! Foremost, it is true, to sell their country; fore-
most to give up our rights; foremost to reduce this Parliament to the
level of a municipal council; foremost to rob New South Wales of her
possessions; foremost to give to those about us all that their greedy
eyes are fixed upon; foremost to place the bonds of political slavery
upon the people fyet to be born in this country ; foremost, we hope, m
the future to look back with some degree of shame to their past
action. I hope that they are capable of feeling a sense of shame that
such golden opportunities should have beengivento them, and that they
should have lost them ! They have not only lost opportunities, but
they have taken away opportunities from others who might have given
us something worth calling a bill, which would have given. some-
thing like justice to New South Wales. Others might have given us
a federation in which the loyal hearts of the people could join, by
which every citizen of the'State would feel himself and dig-
nified. But, no. They have destroyed that opportunity. They have
passed a bill where almost every sentence is a link to a terrible chain
that is to keep posterity, humanity, the people of this great land,
down to the level of absolute servitude. No rights for the people in
future if this bill becomes law. No rights for humanity then. And
this bill must become law. They have made it so.
Mu. Toohey : Why must it become law ?
Mu. T. Walker : I regret to say that they have framed the
measure so that if three colonies like to adopt this bill they can make
it law. There is where the terrible danger lies. They have sold us.
They were sent there to protect us, but they have betrayed us. I ask
hon. members if this Government, who stand by the bill, who are par-


ticipators in the treachery practiced, who have conspired to ignore this
House and to set it at defiance, are deserving of confidence a moment
longer ? Do they deserve to have the support of this Assembly one
day longer ? Do not think that you can escape from it. _ You cannot
alter this bill one iota. You must send this bill as it is to another
Convention with your amendments pinned to it, and they will be
treated by another body of land grabbers A the same way as the bill
itself has been treated. They can snap their fingers at you then more
safely than ever. They will know that they will then be a decisive
court and that they can settle the question. What will they then
care for the people or for this Parliament ? I ask you to condemn
this Government which stands by the treachery practised on New
South Wales. Some of you say, “We will not do that because the
amendment has been moved by the hon. and learned membei foi East
Sydney, and because he is in a false position. He did not. talk to us
on the freetrade side last night; he talked to you protectionists. . Is it
not absurd that you protectionists should vote for a man like him or
that we should vote for him when he is only asking for your support ?”
Are you blind then to your own interests ? Are you willing then to
be treated as slaves ?
Mr. Speaker : I do not like to interrupt the hon. member, but I
wish to deal with a person who has beetu removed from the gallery,
and who is in the custody of the Sergeant-at-Arms. We have a stand-
ing order 97, and I am obliged to act according to it. I presume I have
some discretion in the matter. The man who has been pointed out as
creating a disturbance is named Michael Tierney. Several people say
he created a disturbance, but he denies it. Ido not think it is
necessary to pursue the matter further. I hope it will be a warning
to those persons admitted to the House not to create a disturbance of
any kind whatever. Hon. members themselves are not allowed to
create any disturbance during the debates, much less must the public
do so. The standing order is to this effect:
97 Any person not being a member who wilfully or vexatiously shall interrupt
the orderly conduct of the business of the House, or obstruct the approaches to the
House, or occasion a disturbance within the precincts of the House, shall be, by
the warrant of the Speaker, committed to the custody of the Serjeant-at Arms, and
shall, by the Serjeant-at-Arms be detained in custody until discnarged by au order
of the House. ,
That order confers upon Mr. Speaker very great power; it is a
power I shall certainly not use on this occasion. I therefore direct
the Seri eant-at-Arms to release Michael Tierney from custody. I hope
that he was not the offender; but if he was, I hope that his arrest
will be a warning to others not to interrupt the orderly conduct of the
proceedings of this House. The Serj eant-at-Arms will now set
Michael Tierney at liberty. .
Mr T. Walker : I was asking hon. members whether it was tneir
duty to consider who pointed out the treachery that has been displayed.
If the hon and learned member for East Sydney were merely a
phonograph automatically pouring out certain words hon. members
would have to consider the truths stated, the facts revealed. We
know that the hon. and learned member is fighting for free-trade
against those who have been false to its principles.


Mr. Reid : Hear, hear!
Mr. T. Walker : The hon. and learned member is ckposmg their
treachery to the cause of free-trade as well as to the nation, and he is
perfectly consistent. He does not come forward under any specious
pretext endeavouring to cajole protectionists into coriling over to his
side of the House. While pointing out the treachery of the Con-
vention in the matter of’this bill, he tells us openly that he is as
staunch a free-trader as ever he was, and that he is as bitterly hostile
to protection. "We know what the hon. member is, and we shall not
follow him as a free-trader, but as one of a few men in this country
who have the courage to stand up for their fellow-men and deriounce
the treachery contained in this bill. I shall vote with the hon. and
learned member, and I hope that every member with the interests of
New South Wales and of a future federation at heart will do likewise;
I am one of those who look forward to a grand future for this country.
I hope that all those who are not upon the dead level of political
apathy, that all who have one spark of interest capable of being
kindled into the flame of enthusiasm, will vote with the hon. and
learned member. My whole nature rises in revolt against this scheme,
because it stand in the way of a nobler, truer, and a grander federation.
It is on these grounds that I display such bitter hostility to it. It stands
in the way of the erection of a magnificent temple. This miserable,
wretched hut encumbers the ground I want to see the dome and spire
of a temple—a worthy edifice, glittering in the bright sunshine of
freedom—not the wretched hovel the Convention have given us.
I tell hon. members that it leaks, that it lets in the winds of adversity,
of wretchedness, and of slavery. The Premier tells us, “If you do
not take the house offered to you, you will have no house at all.’
The hon. and learned member for East Sydney says, “Give us a proper
house, so that we can live in it.” I also say, “Give us a proper build--
ino\” Do not monopolise the ground upon which the people’s temple
mmht stand. Do not occupy it with this wretched subterfuge. Burn
it down; rase it to its foundations. Then, come you patriotic sons,
with brighter hopes than the sordid self-seeking wretches who give
us this bill —you men of noble ambitions and bright dreams of grand
achievements, founded upon sacred memories, haste to erect a worthy
edifice to the glorious freedom and liberty of this land. Members of
thfe late Convention cannot give us this. Their minds are too narrow;
their hearts are too cold; their hands are too full to build a structure,
such as young Australia needs. That will come in time. First of all,
however, we must sweep away this wretched obstruction. We shall
then be free, in the future, with our hearts patriotically warm, our
souls aflame with hope, to build a true temple that will shelter
under its dome the eternal freedom of a great and happy people.
Read, and kindly pass to comrade patriots.
