

SPEECH
D. BUCHANAN, ESQ., M.P.
DELIVERED IN THE PARLIAMENT
OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
ON THE
SBCOHB EBAHJNG
OF THE
GOLD FIELDS’ ACT,
February 13th, 1873.
LEE & ROSS, PRINTERS, 231 CASTLEREAGH STREET,
EIGHT DOCKS SOUTH OF MARKET STREET.


This Speech, delivered by Mr. Buchanan, the honourable
member for the Western Gold Fields, on the Second Beading
of the Mining Bill, was heard by a number of Miners who
happened to he in the Gallery of the House on the night of
the Debate, and printed and published at their cost, as a most
able exposition of the multifarious wrongs and absurdities
of the measure.


WZSbk/ f
SPEECH.
Mr. Speaker —Sir, in rising to address myself to the measure now-
under discussion, I think I may safely assert that, in anything I
have to say on this important question, I will speak the sentiments
of my constituents. They may not agree with me in every detail,
hut in the strong condemnation that I will deliver of all the main
features of the Bill, I believe I will express the exact sentiments
and opinions of the intelligent miners of the West. I appear here
as the representative of the largest constituency in the country.
By a return laid upon this table some time ago the electors of the
Western Gold Fields were numbered at 20,000, nearly double that
of East Sydney, and greater than East and West Sydney combined,
which constituencies are represented in this House by no less than
eight members. There are as many as twelve representatives of
the people in this House who do not represent as many electors as
the Western Gold Fields electorates contains. I, therefore, having
the honour to represent a constituency so large and so important,
am entitled to the respectful attention of the members of this
House—above all I am entitled to their respectful attention when
I speak on an occasion like the present, when the subject matter
under discussion comes so completely home to the business and
bosoms of my constituents. There is one thing that I have been
struck with during this debate—that is, the want of interest shown
by hon. members in this great and deeply interesting, as well as
important, subject. During the entire speech of the hon. member
for the Southern Gold Fields, it seemed almost impossible to keep a
quorum together, and I am positive that the attendance, during his
whole speech, would not average twenty members. Well, I ask,
is not this scandalous 1 and yet, notwithstanding this, and in spite
of the fact that scarcely a member has read the Bill, we will find
them voting for it simply because it is introduced under the wings
of a Government, whereas, had it been introduced by a private
member, these very gentlemen who did not vote for it (to please
those in power) would have trampled it under foot as an outrage
upon every principle of justice and right. This is not very flatter-
ing to the honor and character of this House, but it is true never-
theless. I ask these gentlemen who have not read the Bill to read
it before they vote, and if they wont, or cant read it for them-
selves, let them in God’s name, have the common sense and decency
to come in and listen to those who have read it and studied it also.
It grieves me to see a number of hon. members—young men too—
continually nestling behind the Colonial Secretary, surrendering
their right of thought into his hands, and following him in every
direction, and wherever he goes, without reference to conviction or


sanctity of individual opinion. Surely those youths would act a
more spirited part if they confronted authority rather than slink
behind it. If they appreciated and understood their positions as
representatives of the people, they would see, at a glance, the
degradation they are steeped in by allowing any Government to
count upon them at all times, and to look upon them as little better
than voting machines who dare not exercise the right of thought or
of independent action. Would that I could inspire them with the
independence and nobility of purpose which would prompt them to
act, rather as a curb and restraint upon authority than as one of
the main sources of its strength. All power, instead of being
supported by independent members, should be jealously watched,
and no opportunity lost to restrain it and keep it within bounds.
But what hope is there for a country where the young men dis-
tinguish their advent to public life by an inglorious, ignoble,
surrender of all spirit and all independence, and become wretched
tools and flunkeys serving and waiting upon authority. lam fully
alive to the fact that no reading of this Bill will do such members
any good. When the division comes it will not be the injustice or
justice of what they are voting for that will agitate them, but their
whole anxieties will be absorbed in their desire to know where
the members of the Government are sitting, in their eagerness to
place themselves behind them; can we therefore hope for anything
like justice from a House like this ? Can we expect that the claims
of the gold miners will be regarded when the whole business of a
representative of the people seems to be the support of a Govern-
ment 1 But hopeless as the task is, it is my duty, and I will reso-
lutely perform it, of shewing this Mining Bill in all its naked
deformity; I will point out atrocities in this measure that will
shock the sense of justice of all who listen to me, and before I
have done, I will make it appear so ill-digested, ill-considered,
arbitrary, and oppressive a piece of legislation that, if intelligence
and independence were characteristics of this Assembly, it would
be unhesitatingly and resolutely trampled in the dust, as an insult
to the entire body of the miners, and an infamous outrage upon all
that we have hitherto regarded as the equal right of all men, and
the just and equitable principles of human government. This may
be thought the language of extravagance and exaggeration, but it
can only be so thought by those who have not read the Bill. Apart
altogether from the fearful wrongs that are scattered throughout
the Bill from begining to end, it is drawn by a mere legal pedant.
From first to last it is burdened and choked up with floods of that
barbarous legal jargon that seems to have been invented for no other
purpose than rendering confusion worse confounded. There are
whole series of clauses that no miner could possibly act upon with-
out having a skilful lawyer constantly at his elbow. Its wordy
complicated and involved character is perplexing in the extreme,


and if the country is visited with so dire a calamity as the passage of
this Act, I say, Mr. Speaker, that the toiling, hard-working, patient
gold-miners would be justified in rising up in open war against it,
rather than suffer its infamous enactments to sink them in bottomless
perdition and despair. Let hon. members, instead of deserting their
duty, only take the Bill and read it for themselves. If they are
honest they are bound to do so before they vote; and if they vote
for the Bill, as I doubt not many will do without doing so, then
the country may well view- with alarm the danger to which it is
exposed by the presence of such men in its Parliament. If hon.
members wont listen to gentlemen who have studied this measure,
and who will make good all they have said against it; I ask them
will they listen to the miners themselves on the subject 1 Need I
say that I believe they will not. The miners have spoken out in
several petitions ; and, in the name of justice, I ask the members
of this Assembly to listen to them. There is a petition from
Gulgong signed by over 3000 men. It condemns the Bill as a
whole, for many and divers reasons. Hon. members meet me with
the assertion that they wish to pass it. They conclude with a prayer
that their views may be embodied in the Act ; but if their views
were carried into effect, this Act would be so mutilated and des-
troyed that nothing would remain of it. To carry out the views
of the petitioners a new Act would be required. Let any one
follow me through this petition, and then say whether the petition
is not against the Act in toto, and whether it would not be utterly
impossible to embody the views of the petitioners in the Act
without, by the very process, creating a new Act altogether. The
petition asks that the miners should have the right of framing
their own regulations. Grant this, which I assert you should do,
and you cut out a large slice of the Bill. They then object to a
number of the clauses—to the construction of the Warden’s Court.
They pray that the duties of Warden be excised from the Bill,
thereby demolishing at one fell swoop dozens of the clauses. They
object to the Mining Appeal Court as “productive of ruinous delay
and excessive cost.” That all the clauses relating to the conditions
of occupation, the registration, or the forfeiture of any claim be
omitted. They condemn all the clauses relating to leases, and all
the clauses as to mining on private property. After this who will
say that these petitioners wish the Bill passed. Llere is a whole
army of the most formidable and fatal objections to every principle
of the Bill, and yet, because the petitioners in their courtesy merely
ask that their views be adopted, their petition is actually quoted
as being favourable to the Bill. Where would the Bill be, I ask,
if the views of those petitioners were adopted '? It would be out
of existence ; a blessed relief to all concerned. This petition from
Gulgong is a most able document; with every sentiment and
principle there laid down I most cordially agree. Those petitioners


are entitled to the most respectful consideration of this House, and
it would have been well for the unhappy author of this measure,
the honourable and learned Solicitor-General, if some of those
petitioners had been by his side when he drew this unique and
marvellous literary curiosity—the Mining Bill of 1873. Let us,
therefore, hear no more about those intelligent petitioners being in
favour of the second reading of the Bill. We all know that the
right and proper Parliamentary action is, when we are opposed to
the principle of a Bill, to vote against the second reading, and
undoubtedly this would have been the recommendation of the
Gnlgong petitioners, had they not thought that it was perhaps the
more courteous proceeding merely to ask that their views be
embodied in the Bill. I assert, Sir, that it would be difficult to
imagine a more sweeping condemnation of any measure than that
which breathes from every line of the Gnlgong petition. Let the
Solicitor-General and the Government only have faith in what they
see. The Solicitor-General seems to have a strong objection to
place the power of drawing regulations in the hands of the miners,
but only let the House grant them this one advantage, and a very
short time will suffice to prove the efficacy of the reform. I trust
the House will listen to the voice of the miners, so clear and
intelligent in its expression; and Ido trust lion, gentlemen will
read carefully the different petitions from the various gold-fields,
and show at least some deference to the wishes of those who are
so seriously concerned. I will now, Sir, proceed to justify all the
strong language I have applied to this Bill. I will go over it
seriatim, and deal with important and unimportant objections as
they occur, although I believe I will encounter few of the latter
description. I have used very emphatic strong language in con-
demnation of this Bill, but as I go on, hon. members will see the
necessity for such language. I have said that it is an outrage
against justice—a piece of rank treason against every known
principle of right—a black and damnable insult thrown in the face
of liberty, and a most atrocious and studied wrong inflicted upon
a most laborious and worthy class of the community. I ask the
House to judge between me and the proofs of this which I will
now produce. I feel almost disheartened at the prodigious nature
of the task I have imposed on myself in exposing the innumerable
wrongs of this Bill of 17 3 clauses ; and I first call attention to
clause 4, which, under the pretence of providing for the preserva-
tion of existing interests, perpetrates the absurdity of having two
laws affecting mining interests —while it is perfectly right to
preserve existing interests, surely a statesman would have managed
matters so that one law would have ruled all. As it is, there is at
present in existence about 4000 leases, and the holders of those
leases are to hold them on different terms, and by a different law,
from the present. The consequences will be endless difficulties


and disputes. Leases will be issued under the proposed law, and
the miners, finding many people holding land on different terms,
and having different laws affecting them, will come in collision
with them, and disputes and litigation will be the order of the day.
Well then, I say that a statesman, in view of all this complication
and trouble, would have so arranged matters, that, while both laws
would be assimilated, all existing interests would be preserved.
Clause 7, providing for a Minister for Mines, I object to. Ido not
believe it would be of any advantage to the miner ; while,
politically, it is open to very serious objection. What is wanted
is the appointment of a shrewd, intelligent, practical man as
secretary to the Mining Department, with full charge, under the
Minister for Lands. His duties would be to take charge of all
mining matters, and to be ready at a moment’s notice with all
papers and information on all matters connected with the depart-
ment. Such an officer, with no other duty to perform, would soon
bring our mining affairs into order and regularity. I object to the
power of the Executive being strengthened in this House by the
appointment of another Minister. We have seven Ministers in
this House, and if the House of Commons had the same propor-
tion, they would have upwards of seventy Ministers of the Crown
there—an enormity which, of course, would never be tolerated.
The influence of those seven Ministers on the Members of this
House is already too great without increasing it. The Executive
power in this House should be cut down rather than increased.
The appointment of one or two more Ministers would enable a
Government to carry everything, and completely paralyse the
efforts of the independent and genuine members of the House.
On these high constitutional grounds I oppose the appointment of
another Minister. I would not grudge the expense if I thought
such an appointment would advance the interests of the miner;
that expense would be no trifle with an under-secretary and staff
of clerks, officers, servants, &c. The next clause, 8, provides for
schools, museums, and the appointment of a host of professors,
teachers, readers, &c., which is sheer absurdity if it is meant to
benefit the gold-miner by all this. I have no objection to your
having as much of it as you like in the Sydney University, the
proper place for it, but introducing such ideas in a Mining Bill, is,
in my view, in the highest degree Utopian. Hon. members will
observe that the Warden mentioned in this Bill, is a person en-
dowed with enormous powers—powers that it would be almost
dangerous to entrust in the hands of an Angel from Heaven—and
in clause 11, his power commences; he is there empowered to
proclaim an entire area within a radius of two miles a gold-field,
upon it being so reported by a person claiming to have made such
a discovery. This may be all very right, but I surely dont require
to tell hon. members that it is a large power to trust to a Warden,


and might he worked tremendously to further nefarious purposes.
Clause 13 provides for the appointment of Wardens, and heaps up
expenses by the appointment of a numerous staff of highly paid
officials—the proviso enacts that no Warden shall hold any interest
in any claim or mineral lease—very good, but why limit it to the
Warden 1 Why not place the Mining Minister, the Appeal Court
Judges under the same restrictions 1 Clause 17 provides for what
is called 4 Consolidated Miners’ Rights,’ which means, that one
man may take out Miners’ Rights for fifty or a hundred, or, for
the matter of that, five hundred men. This principle is intended
to strike a blow at the independence of the miner ; it destroys his
individuality, and makes him something like the serf of the mono-
polists who employ him. Let the gold-miner always maintain his
independence and his character as a gold-miner. This Bill, I say,
all through favours monopoly and the great capitalist, and deals
most harshly with the individual miner. In the next clause, 18,
sub-section one, there is a notable piece of injustice ; speaking of
taking up land, it says 1 “ And such quantities, dimensions, and
boundaries shall be determined at or after the time of taking such
possession, and be subject to alteration and adjustment from time
to time'' Hon. members will see that there is here no finality ;
what is your land to-day may be altered to-morrow; there is no
fixity of tenure. , It is liable to change at any time, and uncer-
tainty is the atmosphere that looms over the unhappy miner by
this sorry enactment. Clause 20 seems to me abstruse nonsense,
like so many others in this masterpiece of mining legislation.
Clause 22 enacts that no man shall do this, that, and the other,
unless he has a Miner’s Right. Why, he has no locus standi unless
he has a Miner’s Right, and therefore this clause is like so many
others, mere surplusage. Clause 24 heaps up expense upon the
miners and all the residents on the gold-fields, and this pervades
the whole Bill. Wherever there is a chance of taking money out
of the miner’s pocket, this Bill does it; a Business License, by
this clause is £5 • by the present Act, I believe, it is only £l.
Clause 29 confers a most dangerous power upon the Minister—
that of reserving any land he likes, on a newly-discovered gold-
field, for mining, residence, or business purposes. A corrupt
Minister might reserve the best portion of a gold-field, and divide
it among his friends, which the next clause (30) enables him to do.
That this power would be abused —who is there that listens to me
can for a moment doubt ; but, whether or not, no such power shall
ever, by my vote, be placed in the hands of any man. Then we
come to clauses 34 and 35, which deals in the most arbitrary
manner with the business people. A man puts up a store at great
expense on the gold-fields, and just as he is about to realize some-
thing like a fair return for all his labour and risk, the Government
propose to sell his land : the advantage this Act gives the owner


is, that he will get it if he is the highest bidder, with the value of
his improvements deducted : but suppose he is unable to raise
means to put himself in the position of the highest bidder—what
then 1 ? Why he is turned out, and a stranger steps in to enjoy the
business he has nade, the connection he has established, and the
entire advantages of the position. A more gratuitous or senseless
wrong was never imagined or inflicted. Clause 36 is important,
as embodying the very principle for which the diggers contend —
as to mining on private property; by this clause, the diggers may
go on private property to cut a race, on giving the owner compen-
sation for the damage done. What more do they want in asking
to mine on private property 1 If it is right to allow miners to go
on private property to cut a race, on giving compensation to the
owner, must it not be equally right to allow miners to go on private
property to sink a shaft on giving the owner compensation 1 The
Solicitor-General affects horror at the idea of invading private
property for mining purposes, but he has enacted it in this (36)
clause, although, perhaps, he is not aware of it, which is his posi-
tion in reference to many of the clauses of this Bill. -I have
spoken of the enormous power of the Warden under this Bill; by
clause 38, sub-section 6, he has the power to suspend this sub-
section for a period of two months. The hon. member for the
Southern Gold-Fields says it is so at present —that may be, but it
is, nevertheless, an enormous power, and a power liable to the very
gravest abuse. Sub-section 9, of this clause, lays an embargo
upon all the water in the country. It says no license shall be granted
for the use or diversion of any water which may be required for
public purposes. Why, I would like to see the Solicitor-General dip
his finger into that piece of water in New South Wales that may not
be required for public purposes. Therefore, hon. members will see
what desolation this power would create were it enforced. Clause 41
comes down on the pockets of the miners again at the rate of not less
than five shillings nor more than £1 per sluice head per annum.
The miners pay nothing, I understand, at present. In the follow-
ing clauses the author of the Act uses terms such as —“ Act of
Council now or hereafter to be in force,” which satisfies me that
he acted without thought or consideration in framing this Bill—or,
as the Gulgong petitioners say —“ Artlessly copied from other Acts
of other countries, which have no meaning or application here.”
What Act of Council can ever be in force hereafter in this country]
I can’t understand what the learned gentleman means by “ Act of
Council,” and I am certain the solution is as I have already stated.
Clause 50 admits of a monstrous state [of things under it; pros-
pecting leases may be issued of 640 acres, distant more than three
miles from the nearest gold-field; and if the ground so leased
turns out payable, then fifty acres are given to the prospector.
Had this clause been in operation when the Home Rule was dis-


covered, that gold-field might have been in the sole possession of a
dozen people; but our comprehensive Solicitor-General never
thought of this. All these clauses are against the miner, and in
favour of monopoly; and, indeed, so far does this Bill go in this
path, that I believe if it is enacted without amendment, it
will lead to serious disturbance all over the gold-fields. If hon.
gentlemen will turn to clause 60, they will see that the Warden is
endowed with a jurisdiction denied to the Courts of Petty Sessions,
or to the District Courts. In fact, he has unlimited jurisdiction,
and can decide on matters involving from pounds to millions. He
is a marvellous person, this Warden, as I shall show as I proceed.
By the clause I am considering, namely, clause 60, in any dispute
all gold that has been taken from the claim must be lodged in the
hands of the Warden until the dispute is settled. Under this
clause, on some of the rich Hill End claims, if they happened to
be contested, it might be that the Warden might get £IOO,OOO
lodged with him. Was ever man so trusted ? Surely the miners
would require some quarantee for their money before they parted
with it in this way. But there is nothing for it ; this law compels
them to part with it in the manner described. All the clauses,
from 60 to 70, are so involved that it would be dangerous for any
miner to act upon them without the advice of a skilful lawyer.
Clause 71 purposes to grant leases even if the applicant shall not
have complied with the regulations. Will this not open the door
to litigation and all manner of disputes 1 What advantage has the
man who has complied with the regulations, if he could have
gained his object without such compliance 1 ? What an evident
want of thought and consideration this proves in the drawer of the
Bill. Clause 77 provides, in cases of ejectment, that the Attorney-
General appears in the Warden’s Court as one of the parties.
What a precious chance a poor miner would have with the
Attorney-General as his opponent and the Warden the judge I ?—the
Warden who is the mere creature of the Government, and who
would tremble for his office if he dared to decide against the
Attorney-General. I now come to the consideration of the Bill
under that section headed—“ The Administration of Justice,” which
literally bristles with wrongs of the grossest character. Clause 88
enacts that there shall be no appeal from the Warden unless the
sum exceeds .£3O. How I ask why is the miner to be deprived of
rights enjoyed by the rest of the community 1 ? All the people have
the right of appeal from Courts of Petty Sessions from £lO, and I
cannot understand why the gold-miner is to be subjected to an
injustice from which all the rest of the community are exempt.
Clause 92 confers more power on the Warden, and clause 96 heaps
expense on the miner by giving the Warden the power of sending
for scientific witnesses in the shape of mining engineers, surveyors,
accountants, experts and other scientific persons, all of which


tremendous expense is thrown upon the miner who loses. Clause
97 is a clause remarkable for its injustice ; it enacts that a person,
if unwilling to take an oath, may make an affirmation, but it
puts this great power in the hands of the Warden at the same
time—“ It shall be lawful for the Warden, upon being satisfied of
the sincerity of such objection.” Well, here the whole thing rests
with the whim or caprice of the Warden, who may be an insolent,
ignorant puppy for aught we know, and who has the power here of
saying to any man—“ lam not satisfied of your sincerity, and,
therefore, if you decline to take an oath, I will send you to prison
for contempt.” I characterise this, and denounce it, as a piece of
detestable tyranny, and a scandalous insult to the whole mining
community. A little lower down, another piece of flaring injus-
tice is to be met with. The clause provides for trial by Warden
and three Assessors, and if two of the Assessors are of one
opinion, and the Warden and one Assessor are of another, the
Warden carries the point. What is this but the grossest injustice 1 ?
It may be that the two Assessors are men of supreme intelligence,
and have arrived at the correct conclusion; and it may be that the
other Assessor and Warden are a couple of blockheads, and so
stupidity and wrong would triumph over intelligence and right.
Under the provisions of the Act, intituled —“ Special Powers and
Duties of Warden,” it is enacted that, on the decision by a Warden’s
Court, it shall be lawful for the Warden to “ order that any gold
or auriferous earth in the possession, and being the property of the
party by whom payment of any sum in respect of any such debt,
damages, or costs, as last aforesaid shall be ordered, &c.” I should
like to know how the Warden is to ascertain the value of auriferous
earth. I point out this merely as shewing the slipshod way in
which the Bill is drawn. Clause 110 gives a tremendous power
to the Warden—namely, of granting an Injunction, without notice,
to the other side. How this power will be abused, and great
injustice wrought, I require not to point out. Clause 111 provides
that the Warden may order gold, in dispute, to be placed in the
hands of any person. This gold may be of any value, and the
Warden may order it to be placed in the hands of any one. One
would think that this clause was actually drawn for the express
purpose of enabling a dishonest Warden to plunder the gold-
miners. How beautiful is the idea of not ordering the gold to be
placed in his own hands ; if he disappeared, suspicion would be
raised; but the gold being in the hands of another person, that
person may have decamped, while the Warden is preparing
leisurely to follow him. Then again, clause 113 gives the Warden
power to imprison for disobedience of an order, and this without
previous notice or summons to the person disobeying. What
fantastic tricks would those Wardens not play with powers of this
description placed in their hands. Clause 115 is a detestable piece


of grinding tyranny. It enacts that any order of commitment
may be made ex parte, that is, on hearing one side only, so that a
digger may be working quite innocently, conscious of having com-
mitted no wrong, while some one is making a charge against him
behind his back. The first intimation the poor digger has of it is
arrest on Warden’s warrant, and in gaol he will be left to wonder
what on earth he could have been guilty of. This is a treat pro-
vided for the respectable miners of New South Wales by our
sapient Solicitor-General. The next part of this wretched measure
I would draw hon. member’s attention to is, the Appeal Court,
namely, the District Courts. I protest against this, as involving
ruinous delay and excessive cost. The judges of the District
Courts are overworked as it is, and the time between the sittings
of such Courts is too long. The unfortunate miner would find all
his works suspended for three or four months in the event of an
appeal ; he and all his witnesses would have to travel to the town
where the Court met, and the expense there would be serious
indeed, and then they might find that the District Court judge
could not overtake their case, and so it would be put off till next
sittings. What is wanted is a Mining judge to visit the gold-
fields once a fortnight, or once a month, for the purpose of hearing
appeals, and so transact the business promptly and expeditiously.
I find in this clause there is a provision for an appeal to the
Supreme Court only when the sum exceeds £SOO. Why should
this be 1 All the rest of the people have the right of appeal from
the District Court to the Supreme Court on sums under £2OO ;
but the gold-miner is here again treated differently, and deprived
of rights enjoyed by all the rest of the community. There is also
another wrong inflicted on the miner in this clause—he is deprived
of the right of appeal to the Privy Council. How valuable this
right is, let hon. members ask the many parlies who are now
enjoying property which they would never have had but for this
great right of appeal to the Privy Council; and if there is one
section of the community more than another who should have this
right, it is the gold-miner. Questions involving large sums will
often arise on the gold-fields, and I, for one, will never be a party
to the removal of the safeguards by which right and justice
are secured. Above all, I will never be a party to the removal of
so formidable a barrier against wrong as the right of appeal to Her
Majesty in Council. Under the division of the Bill headed
“ Mining Assessors,” there are some startling enactments. In
Clause 1, hon. members will see that, although the Warden sits as
a judge and also a juryman, he has the sole power of making up
the jury list, and may strike off any one who “in the opinion of
the Warden is not a person of good repute.” So that the Warden,
if he has any little game to play, may knock off whoever he
chooses from the jury list by omnipotently saying, I, the Warden,


■am of opinion that so and so is not a person of good repute. Was
there ever such infernal folly enacted in this world before 1 Does
this childish Solicitor-General, or this more childish and foolish
Assembly, think that the gold-miners will stand anything 1 True
it is they are an orderly, patient, respectable body of men ; but
beware how you goad them to despair. Have a care that your
tyranny and insult may not become unbearable. This Bill seems
to have been conceived in every imaginable folly and absurdity.
Clause 140 provides that if an Assessor is once sworn he should
never be sworn again. This puts me in mind of the celebrated Dr.
Franklin’s remark to his father, when he was assisting him to take
in a twelve-months’ provisions,—“ Had you not, father, as well say
grace now for the whole twelve-months’ supply, and save trouble
saying it at each meal.” Why, again, are the miners to be treated
differently from the rest of the community h If it is thought a
guarantee that truth will be spoken through the administration of
an oath, why take away the guarantee from the miners 1 In clause
146 the Warden may be expected to commit grave blunders
through the extravagant powers committed to his hands. If he is
of opinion that a witness is prevaricating, he may send him to gaol
for two months ; or if any one shall, in the opinion of the Warden,
in any way misbehave in Court, or be guilty of any contempt
whatever, receive two months’ imprisoment. It is easily to be
seen that, by this clause, a silly Warden—-and the probabilities
are ten to one that the Wardens will be silly people—might send
an honest, truthful digger to prison for two months through mis-
taking his rough honesty for impertinence. Then we come to
penalties and forfeitures; and in clause 151 a£l 0 fine is inflicted for
selling a box of matches without a business license. By clause
152, employing any unauthorised person—that is, a man without
a miners’ right — to take a letter to the Post Office mulcts you in a
£lO fine. A carrier who has no miners’ right, merely camping on
a gold-field, is liable, by this clause, to a fine of £lO. Clause 153
revives the old intolerable nuisance of hunting diggers for their
miners’ rights, and can only lead to vexation and annoyance with-
out serving any good purpose. Clause 158 inflicts a penalty of six
months’ imprisonment on any man who, having lost his case before
a Warden’s Court, shall assault, or threaten to assault, the success-
ful party. No allowance is here made for the distress of a man
who finds himself the victim of an adverse decision; and if, in his
anger, he should let slip the words to his opponent, “ I’ll punch
your head,” six months in prison is his fate. So hon. gentlemen
will see that this measure goes on piling wrong on wrong, and
injustice on injustice, without remorse or dread, on the head of the
unfortunate miner. Clause 161 gives a power to the Warden
which, if hon. members could only comprehend it, would make
their blood curdle. The Warden may forfeit the claim. Now, I


do not go into tlie grounds on which this forfeiture may be executed
.—I utterly repudiate and deny the right of any man to such a
power. I would not give it to the Supreme Court constituted by
all the judges—to take a man’s claim from him, which might turn
out to be worth thousands, because he had not complied with the
terms and conditions of any lien or mortgage, is an unexampled
and unheard piece of I'eckless ignorant cruelty and tyranny. But,
nevertheless, it will be enacted by this House because it is com-
posed of members who dont represent the people, but come here to
support a Government, through thick and thin, for reasons best
known to themselves. The next and last section of the Bill I
have to consider is the mining on private property, which I look
upon as a mere insult to the miners. Why did not the Solicitor-
General take the manly course, and tell us why he was afraid to
deal with this subject; but whether he does so or not, it will not
be this wretched abortion that he has drawn that will satisfy any
one. The views of the miner are the right to mine on private
land on giving fair compensation, and the right of no man to
hinder him, unless this is conceded him, those clauses might as
well be struck out. I have now gone over this entire Bill, and I
ask hon. members to say whether or not they approve of it. I
have shewn defects in it of such a character, that those who have
listened to me cannot plead ignorance if they vote for it. I cannot
expect that the bulk of hon. members of this I T ous ■ will read the
Bill, and I have no hope that they would unders and it if they did
read it. I therefore ask them to listen to those vho have read it,
and be guided by them in this one instance. This is a serious
question, and if hon. members will not listen to me, in the name
of honour, I ask them to listen to the army of miners who have
petitioned against the Bill. If you are dead and insensible to this
paramount duty of the office you hold, go on and perpetrate
injustice upon injustice until a day of reckoning comes, when the
eyes of many members of this House will be opened to the fact
that there are other duties for a true and honest representative of
the people, than a systematic, crawling, servile support of a
government. I oppose this measure as in every way bad. I oppose
it as having been conceived in ignorance and shallowness, the uni-
form accompaniments of presumption. It is a measure that will
fall like a millstone upon the energies of the gold-miner, paraly-
sing his efforts and retarding his progress. Above all, it is a
measure so hateful in its injustice and so foul in its wrong, that it
strikes at the very foundation of all the miners’ hopes and peace
for the future. I therfore oppose it with intense and inveterate
determination of purpose. If an ignorant and misguided As-
sembly turning a deaf ear to the prayers of these petitioners, persist
in the support of a measure which they have, confessedly, never
read, let the memory of this fearful wrong stamp itself indelibly


upon the character of this Parliament. Let it he known far and
wide, that I have been told, in the course of this address that only
three members have read the Bill—and let it be further known
that scarcely twenty members could be kept together during the
course of the discussion, and that, in all probability, barely a
quorum will divide on the measure; and then, let the country
judge of this Parliament and fitness of its members to perform their
important functions. Whatever derangement or injury is visited
upon this great interest, by the passage of this infamous Act, I, at
least, stand clear of all responsibility, and to make assurance of this
doubly sure, I beg to move —“ That the order of the day be dis-
charged with a view to the introduction of a measure more concise
and intelligible, less complicated and involved, and better calcu-
lated to promote the prosperity and advancement of the great
mining interests of this country.” (The amendment was lost by
22 to 2, and the second reading of the Bill carried by 20 to 2. The
Parliament is composed of 72 members.)
15


