

SPEECH
By
The Right Honorable SIR JOHN FORREST
P.C., G.C.M.G., LL.D., M.P.,
Gold Medallist of the Royal Geographical Society, of London,
Urging the people of Western Australia
to support Compulsory Military Service
during the War by voting “YES” on the
Referendum, 28th October, 1916.
KATANNING, WESTERN AUSTRALIA,
26th October, 1916.




SPEECH by
Sir JOHN FORREST, P.C.,G.C.M.G., LL.D., M.P.
at Katanning, Western Australia,
26th October, 1916.
Sir John Forrest, who was loudly cheered on rising to
speak, said:—The question that is agitating the public
mind at this great crisis in the history of the Empire is
whether compulsory military service should be introduced.
A great responsibility rests upon us, and we should try and
remove from our minds everything that is of a partisan
nature, and should not be influenced by any but the stern
necessities of the situation and our duty to the Empire, of
which Australia is a part. When it is realised that the
Liberal Party of Australia is in complete accord with and
is supporting the Labour Executive Government, it is
clear that this pressing and vital question is non-party, and
is being dealt with on national grounds of patriotism and
the safety of Australia and the Empire.
In this great emergency the people of Australia must
stand shoulder to shoulder with their kinsmen throughout
the world, in unity, so as to achieve victory for ourselves and
for civilisation.
Australia is indeed in a position of unsafety and jeopardy,
and is the one great isolated prize upon which Germany has
set her eyes and is so anxious to convert into a German State,
Australia is Heart and Soul with the Empire.
We have shown that we are heart and soul with the Mother-
land in this war. We have shown by our spontaneous acts,
and have declared by our unanimous voice, that it is Australia’s
war as well as the war of the Motherland and the rest of the
British Empire.
We have already sent 250,000 men to the war, and 50,000
more are in the act of going, and we have expended
£100,000,000 of our money, thus showing unmistakably that
we are fighting with all our strength for our very national
existence and for our freedom and liberty.


The question you will be asked to vote upon and to say
“Yes” or "No” to on the 28th October is :
“Are you in favour of the Government having in
“this grave emergency the same compulsory powers
“over citizens in regard to requiring their military
“services for the time of the war, outside the Common-
“wealth, as it now has in regard to military service
“within the Commonwealth ?”
The men who have already gone to fight the battles of their
country have not only covered themselves with glory at
Gallipoli and in Flanders, but by their valour have also shed a
lustre on Australia, the land of their birth or of their adoption.
“They have raised a monument
More enduring than one of brass and loftier than the pyramids of
kings, a monument which shall not be destroyed by the con-
suming rain, nor by the mad rage of the north wind, nor by
the countless years and flight of ages.”
“Their triumph will be sung
By some yet unmoulded tongue
Far on in summers that we shall not see.”
(Loud cheers.)
I wish to again reiterate that thus far everything that
Australia has done has been done with the unanimous voice
of the people. (Cheers.)
The Necessity for More Reinforcements.
I now come to the future, and we have it on absolute
authority
(1) That more men are required.
(2) That the voluntary system is not supplying sufficient
men.
As to the fact that more men are required, I will now read
to you the following statements and cable messages :
Message from General Sir Douglas Haig, G.C.8.,
Commander-in-Ghief of the British Forces in France.
• Melbourne, 20th October.
The following cable message was received by the Prime
Minister (Mr. Hughes) to-day from General Sir Douglas Haig,
Commander-in-Chief of the British forces in France :
“The Australian Divisions in France are far below strength,
and drafts are not arriving in sufficient numbers. The divisions
have fought splendidly, and their heroic efforts will live in
history, but they cannot continue to achieve results unless their
strength is kept up. The successes of the past few months
justify absolute confidence in our power to win final victory,
but it is not yet won. To complete our work and ensure a
future enduring peace the utmost efforts of the Empire and of
the Allies are required for a long time yet. I hope strong drafts
for your divisions will be despatched, and their strength
maintained.”


In referring to the message, Mr. Hughes said : —“The cable
spoke for itself, and it needs neither interpretation nor com-
ment. It is at once the most complete endorsement of the
Government’s policy and a crushing refutation of the state-
ments that men are not needed, that the war is won, that
Russians or Indians or other men should be hired to take the
places of Australians. Here from the lips of the Commander-
in-Chief of the greatest armies that the British Empire has
put in the field is a plain and unsolicited statement of the
present position—that the Australian divisions are far below
strength ; that reinforcements are not arriving in sufficient
numbers ; and that their splendid heroism and valour will
live through history, but that they cannot continue to achieve
victories unless reinforcements arrive in sufficient numbers.
To all save the enemies of the Empire and of Britain in our
midst this message from this great soldier, General Haig, will
carry absolute conviction.’’
Message from Lieut.-General Sir William Birdwood,
K.G.5.1., etc., commanding the Australian and New
Zealand Army Corps in France.
A few days ago the Mayor of Kalgoorlie sent the following
cable to General Birdwood “Have the Anzacs any message
to Australia on the referendum question? A word from the
Miners’ Corps would be especially valued.’’
The following reply was received from General Birdwood on
Saturday, 21st October :
“The Anzacs feel sure that Australia will see that the sacrifices
already made were not in vain, which may be the case unless
we are assured that men will be forthcoming to keep effective
and up to their full strength the magnificent battalions and com-
panies which have made history and have established traditions.
The Miners’ Corps send the following message ; —‘We are strongly
in favour of conscription. All are wanted to finish the enemy
quickly, so that we may return sooner to those that we volun-
tarily came away to shield, clearly conscious of our duty to the
nation. Don’t delay.’ ”
Message to Mr. Hughes from the Premier of France.
Melbourne, 22nd October.
The Prime Minister (Mr. Hughes) to-day made available
for publication the following cable message received from
the Premier of France (M. Briand) :
“The whole French nation is watching with intense sympathy
your efforts to maintain the strength of the Australian forces
in the fighting on our front. We here not only feel deeply
grateful to those gallant comrades in arms who have come from
such distant parts to fight side by side with us in the defence
of our invaded territory, but we also feel the liveliest admiration
for such magnificent soldiers, who are fully equal to the greatest
soldiers of the present and of all time. I have seen them at


the front, and I shall never forget the impression they made on
me. The warm popular feeling towards them in France is
enough to show that my impression is shared by the whole
nation. Before we reach our common goal of final victory,
and in order to make it certain, we must be prepared to make
another great and supreme effort—the greatest, perhaps, we
have ever made—and the more unrestricted it is, it will sooner
and more conclusively end the war. We French people attri-
bute so much importance to the invaluable help of the Common-
wealth of Australia. We admire so much what she has done for
our great common cause, that we cannot do otherwise than
wish to see her fully prepared to go with us to the end.”
“It is obvious,” said Mr. Hughes, in commenting upon
M. Briand’s message, “that the timorous cry that Australia
does not count in the war proceeds only from the mouths of
Australia’s enemies. Our great French ally thinks otherwise,
and gladly welcomes the assistance of our army in achieving a
speedy and conclusive victory.”
Messages from Archbishops Riley and Clune, of
Western Australia, now at the Front in France.
In their capacity as Chaplains-General to the Common-
wealth Expeditionary Forces both Archbishop Riley (Anglican),
of Perth, Western Australia, and Archbishop Clune (Roman
Catholic), of Perth, Western Australia, who are both with the
troops on active service in France, have forwarded to Perth
cablegrams which indicate their strong advocacy of compulsory
service.
Under date 19th October Archbishop Riley cabled:—
‘T have just been seeing all our troops in France, who are in
good heart and determined to see this war through success-
fully to the honour of Australia. All realise how urgent the
question of reinforcements is, and, much as I regret the necessity,
I feel that compulsory military service is the only way to keep
the magnificent units we have in the field now up to their
strength. The men here rely on it that the sacrifices they have
already made will not be thrown away by want of reinforce-
ments, of which a steady flow from Australia is essential.”
Archbishop Clune cabled under the same date: —
“Whoever believes in the righteousness and justice of the
war we are engaged in ought not to hesitate to vote for compul-
sory military service in Australia.”
These statements from those in authority conclusively show
that more men are required.
What are we going to do ?
The question we must all ask ourselves is, What are
we going to do ? We not only know from those in authority
that more men are required to reinforce those whom we sent
forth “with banner and with music” to fight for us, but the
cry has come to us directly from the trenches, “Send more
men to help us.”


There cannot, I think, be two opinions as to the course we
should pursue. We are bound by all that is honourable and
all that we hold most dear to send a regular stream of
reinforcements to our brave men who are calling to us for help.
Unwise Sympathy.
I sometimes think undue sympathy is expressed for those
who under a system of compulsory service may be required to
serve their country. My sympathy is more for those who have
voluntarily gone, rather than for those who have stayed at
home and allowed their fellow Australians to go and fight for
them.
It is, however, but fair to say that those who have not as
yet volunteered are not all shirkers or cowards. They are in
many cases the victims of circumstances and of their environ-
ment, and I believe many of them will be glad to go when
compulsion is the law of the land.
Sacredness of Life.
We have heard a good deal about the sacredness of life,
but are not the lives of the volunteers who have already gone
to the war as sacred as those who may be compelled to go ?
Are not the lives of those now at the front as sacred as those
who are now compelled to enlist to defend Australia on Aus-
tralian soil? Arguments such as these are unworthy of serious
consideration, and must come from those who wish to shirk
their duty.
Equality of Sacrifice.
Another absurd argument used by those who are looking
about for an excuse to say “No” is that there should be
“equality of sacrifice” on the part of everyone, wishing to
make unthinking people believe that there is some inequality
between those who go to the war. Is there “equality of sacri-
fice” between the single men and married men who have not
gone with the single and married men who have gone? Surely
not. Every man who goes, whether single or married, rich or
poor, takes the same risk, and their “equality of sacrifice” is
equal. There is neither sense nor honesty in this cry.
Compulsory Service within Australia
already the Law.
We must remember that compulsory service in time of
war has been the law of Australia since 1903, but such com-
pulsory service is restricted to fighting on Australian soil.
What is now proposed is to extend that principle beyond the
limits of Australia in defence of Australia and the Empire.
This extension already applies to the Australian Navy, who


serve wherever they are required, and are at present in the
Northern Hemisphere.
This war has clearly shown that it is most inadvisable to
fight for our defence on Australian soil, and that it is most
desirable that our battles should be fought in other countries
as far away as possible from Australia. What does fighting on
Australian soil mean? Our homes destroyed, murder and
cruelty, devastation and ruin everywhere. Surely the ex-
periences of Belgium, France, Poland, and Serbia should prove
to us that those who are only willing to have compulsion for
home defence are as inconsistent as they are foolish and
insincere. It is the cry of the shirker who wishes to evade his
duty, and does not wish to serve his country either within or
beyond Australia.
The Motherland has been forced to adopt
Compulsory Service.
We must not forget that the Motherland has been forced to
adopt compulsory service during the war, and that all the
other nations now at war have compulsory service, not only
during the war, but compulsory service is part of their military
system in time of peace.
The Voluntary System.
I have hitherto always favoured the voluntary system,
but since this war I have changed my opinion, and must now
confess that it seems to me to be an unfair and unscientific
system. It is unfair because it allows the bold, the brave, the
self-reliant, the adventurous, and the enterprising to go and
fight while those who prefer to stay comfortably at home
may do so. It also allows married men with families to go,
while the shirkers and less enterprising single men remain at
home. It also prevents a proper system of classification as to
the order of going to the war, and is in very many other ways
unsatisfactory.
Cost of the War.
“Conscription of wealth must accompany compulsory
service” is a cry from those who are unwilling to go and are
not contributing anything to the cost of the war.
Australia is bearing her own share of the expenditure on
the war. Already the expenditure has reached the immense
sum of £100,000,000.
Those who are paying the necessary additional taxation
are willingly doing so, but it is surprising that the anxiety
as to the cost of the war comes from those who are not paying
anything directly, and a sort of desire is expressed by these


envious persons, to completely ruin by spoliation and confis-
cation those who are already paying the necessary taxation to
finance the war.
It is very creditable, too, that those who are paying the
extra taxation are all in favour of sending more men to the
war, thereby increasing the war expenditure. The only
reason I can think of for this spurious make-believe anxiety
is that of envy and uncharitableness, often found among the
irresponsible and least deserving of our fellow citizens, the
“pariahs and outcasts” referred to by Mr. Hughes.
Who is Paying for the War ?
Since the beginning of the war special war taxation has
been imposed, which, it is estimated, will realise this year
(1916-17) the following revenue :
1. Federal War Income Tax, sufficient to pay
interest at 4J per cent, and a sinking fund
of 3 per cent., which will repay the loan
in about 20 years £4,250,000
2. Special War Probate Duties .. .. 550,000
3. War Profits, 1915-16 and 1916-17 ~ 3,000,000
4. Repatriation Levy for returned soldiers,
first year being one-third part of a levy of
£10,000,000 3,333,000
£11,133,000
This taxation of £11,133,000 is altogether in addition to the
Federal land and other taxation (Federal and State) of all
kinds existing before the war, and is £6,514,000 more than the
special war taxation revenue received for 1915-16. This
£11,133,000 does not include any part of the revenue from
Customs and Excise, which it is estimated will produce £195,000
less for 1916-17 than was actually received for 1915-16.
I would ask everyone individually, including especially
those ungenerous and spiteful persons to whom I have referred,
who wish to confiscate all the savings of the people and ruin
everybody, without the least necessity for doing so, how much
are you paying this year towards this special taxation of
£11,133,000 for war purposes? How -much more are you
paying this year in taxation than you paid the year before the
war? By this means you will know what you are specially
paying for the war, and if it should happen that you are
paying very little or nothing at all, then I hope, as honest
people, you will think generously of those who are paying by
special taxation (for it is being paid) for the cost of the war
the £11,133,000 additional this year.


Returned Medical Officers’ Opinion.
The following telegram was received yesterday by the
Referendum committee conveying the opinions of Melbourne
medical officers returned from the front :
“One argument in the conscription campaign comes under
the special notice of medical officers who have had the privilege
of attending to our sick and wounded soldiers on active service.
It is being asked, Gan a woman vote to send another
woman’s son to his death ? As army medical officers who
have seen service abroad, we feel it our duty to impress upon all
members of the community that the actual deaths in our
army on active service occur not only from mortal wounds, but
also from severe forms of infectious and exhausting diseases,
such as dysentery, pneumonia, meningitis, and paratyphoid
fever. If men are not given periods of rest from trench life—
if companies are not relieved by the arrival of reinforcements to
take their place at the proper times —then the physical re-
sistance of the men is lowered by strain and exhaustion, and they
become more liable to disease, more liable to die from such
diseases, and more liable to die from serious wounds. One way
to save another woman’s son from being sent to his death is to
send someone to help to reinforce him, and then both may be saved.
The most splendid characteristic of our Australian soldiers at
Gallipoli—something finer, even, than their great courage in
battle —was the loyalty to their comrades. Our soldiers would
not desert their mates no matter how ill they were—no matter
how exhausted they felt. Many of our finest men would not
report sick, but held on literally unto the death in the trenches,
helping their mates and waiting for reinforcements which never
arrived, or arrived too late. It is within the personal knowledge
of some of us who were working at Lemnos, that men from time
to time insisted upon leaving the hospital and returning to the
trenches long before they were fit because they knew their
mates—their ‘cobbers’—wanted the help of every man, and no
help was going forward. It is within the truth to say that men and
women in this community who, from want of imagination, or
want of experience, refuse to send reinforcements forward, may
be condemning a number of our men, already at the front, to a
condition that leads on to death —a condition that could be,
and would be, relieved by the timely arrival of our own rein-
forcements. In connection with this matter, it is obvious that the
more reinforcements the less proportionately will be the mortal-
ity from wounds of the army in the field ; but we wish to
emphasise a point which is not so obvious, that the more rein-
forcements the less absolutely may be the number of deaths
from disease among our soldiers on active service. In one sense
deaths from wounds are inseparable from war, but deaths from
disease are preventable, and we can help to prevent these deaths
by sending fresh men forward, and bringing men back from the
fighting line before they are exhausted and worn out. If they
are not relieved, the spirit of our Australian soldiers will not let
them withdraw from positions they have won until their bodies
are worn out. In a fine army nothing lessens the war wastage
of life so surely as sufficiency of men.”
Signed by the following doctors: —H. W. Bryant, G. A. Syme,
R. R. Stawell, J. A. H. Sherwin, T. P. Dunhill, P. G. Dane,
Robert Fowler, Roy Watson.


LABOUR LEADERS’ OPINIONS.
It is desirable, I think, that I should quote the opinions of
a few of the most prominent Labour leaders who are support-
ing with all their influence and strength the referendum in
favour of compulsory service during the continuance of the war.
Brisbane, 3rd October, 1916.
Mr. Hughes, the Prime Minister, in a statement to the press,
said :
“The unionists of Australia are invited to attend a stop-
work meeting to-morrow. The ostensible purpose of this meet-
ing, as set out in the notice summoning it, is to protest against
the proclamation under the Defence Act issued by the Govern-
ment, but the real purpose, as is perfectly well known, is to
cause a general strike in order to prevent the taking of a re-
ferendum of the people. For some weeks past the extremists,
who, owing to the apathy of the great body of unionists, with
whom they have nothing in common, exercise an influence
quite disproportionate to their number, have been making des-
perate efforts to bring about a general strike, which they hoped
would bring trains, trams, ferries, and the shipping industry to
a standstill, paralyse industry, and create conditions under
cover of which they hoped something approaching civil war could
be engineered. I want to appeal to the great mass of unionists
in Australia —men who are loyal to the Empire, and who desire,
above all things in this world, that Germany should be de-
feated, men whose sons, brothers, and friends are fighting in
the trenches in the cause of liberty—not to play the treacherous
game of these men. I appeal to the great mass of unionists
not to allow themselves to be made tools of by reckless extrem-
ists, and by the secret enemies of Britain, who wish her to be
defeated. I ask the unionists of Australia, with whom I have
been associated all my public life, and to whose cause I have
devoted the best years of my life, not to be the dupes of these
reckless and disloyal men.”
Mr. Crawford Vaughan, Labour Premier, South Australia,
says :
“Australia has taken its place in that red line of living valour
which is crushing out for ever the world menace of German
frightfulness. We are fighting for a great heritage; for the
right of little nations to live ; for those principles of self-govern-
ment which have come down to us from the ages—the gift of
resolute men ; the fruit of sacrifice and devotion to those ideals
that have made our race live in history.”
Mr. Holman, Labour Premier of New South Wales, says :
“Our only hope is in victory. There is no way of winning
victory without effort. Whatever effort is necessary must be
made. If we do not win now, and win conclusively, our ‘White
Australia’ policy, our independence, and our freedom from
warlike exactions will all go. Everything will have to be
subordinated to the one interest of our national safety. Demo-
cracy will suffer most. We can make our national safety
secure by one resolute effort now, or we can leave it for ever in
jeopardy, and for ever depend upon a vigilant guard and an
armed watch. The great and final effort necessary to clear the
world of this menace is now being made by our Allies. We are
called upon to do our share and no more. Shall we make our
name contemptible in refusing?”


Mr. Will Crooks, M.P., has sent the following message to
Australia. From “West Australian,” 13 th October, 1916.
The Prime Minister (Mr. Hughes), during his address at
Hobart, last night quoted a message he had received from
Mr. Will Crooks, the Labour member for Greenwich in the
British House of Commons. Mr. Crooks says :
“The reasons which prompted me to support conscription
would certainly not allow of militarism. The danger of be-
coming a German colony ; the outrages on the women and
children in Belgium ; the demand of the wives and mothers of
soldiers who had gone ; the cry of thousands of men, ‘we would
go if everybody was compelled to go’—there was nothing left
for it but conscription for the duration of the war only ; not
industrially, but for fighting only. Any opponent of it would
have absolutely gone under, either in congress or election. The
cry of ‘Your King and country need you’ was not one whit
more effective than was the cry of ‘Your wives, your mothers,
and children demand you.’ I have travelled nearly sixty
thousand miles up and down the country since the war began,
and over the ground again and again, addressing absolutely
millions of working men and women, industrial toilers. Not
one word of dissent was urged throughout the land. Here and
there a section who have absolutely no mandate have managed
to get into the press as objecting. They have been challenged
again and again to test the feelings of their own constituents ;
they have not had the courage to face the music. Deep-rooted in
the hearts of the poorest of the toilers is that we will suffer any-
thing rather than suffer Prussian militarism to become our
masters. We are going to win, but we must have men. What-
ever troubles come upon the nation, or are likely to come, we
can deal with after the war. The war has first claim on the
manhood of the Empire.”
Mr. Ben Tillett, Secretary General Workers’ Union of Great
Britain and Ireland, etc., etc., says ;
“I have stood on the spot were a Canadian soldier has been
crucified by the Germans ; the unspeakable atrocities committed
by the Hun have been brought home to me by actual experience.
The worker who fails to give of his utmost in this war comes in
the same category as a murderer.”
Mr. W. G. Spence, M.P., Federal Parliament, Chief Organiser
of A.W.U., says :
"I feel ashamed of the action of the officers of trades unions
who have failed to realise the gravity of the situation, and the
fact that all the dearly bought liberties they now enjoy are
at stake in this world crisis. My brother officers of the Aus-
tralian Workers’ Union are on the opposite side to myself.
There are 27,000 members of that great union at the front ; and
I told my executive that I would be ashamed to look one of
them in the face on his return if I failed to help to send him rein-
forcements, when he is nobly fighting to maintain for us those
glorious privileges which he and his mates have stood for in
Australia,”


Mr. Heitmann, M.L.A. (W.A.), Perth, 12th October, 1916,
said :
“If the Germans get hold of this country God help the Labour
cause. (Hear, hear.) A victory by the Germans—the most
autocratic of all powers—would end all the industrial achieve-
ments that had been gained for the worker. Improved con-
ditions would go by the board. Adult suffrage, improved
factory laws would cease to exist. Conscription was not only
the fairest and most democratic system ; it was the only sys-
tem in which science could be applied. ‘The liberty of the
citizen’ was the cry of the shirker. Frequently a man said,
‘My body is my own,’ but the country had a right to say that if
a man was not using his body in the interests of his country he
should be directed to do so. (Applause.) Freedom was much
preached by the anti-conscriptionists ; and was being used as
a license by a number of able-bodied men to avoid or shirk
their duty. A shirker was prepared to accept all the privileges
afforded him, but he would not go and fight for them ; he let
someone else do that. Unionists call a man who in a time of
industrial trouble stood out against the majority a scab. He
had heard it said: ‘There is nothing for me to fight for.’ God
help Australia if that sentiment was the feeling of the majority
of the people. If Australia said ‘No’ it meant repudiation and
dishonour. If Australia said ‘Yes’ it would only be in keeping
with a promise to England, to the Anzacs, and to civilisation.’’
Concluding an address to the women of Australia, in Mel-
bourne, 3rd October, 1916, Mr. Hughes said :
“Now is the hour. Women of Australia. Mothers, wives,
and sisters of free men. What is your answer to Britain, to
whom we owe so much, to France, to Belgium? Are you going
to cover with shame and dishonour the country for which our
soldiers are fighting and dying? Now is the hour of your trial
and opportunity. Will you be the proud mothers of a nation
of heroes, or stand dishonoured as the mothers of a race of
degenerates? Prove that you are worthy to be the mothers and
wives of free men. Set the world a glorious example, and bid
your men go forth to do battle for their country.’’
Who are urging the People to say “No” ?
In a great crisis like the present, when our nation is engaged
in a terrible war, and when the Labour Executive Government
and the whole Liberal Party of Australia are in accord in
urging compulsory military service during the term of the
war, it is reasonable to ask, who are those who are opposing
the course considered by those in authority to be so obligatory.
Who are they? They consist of some members of the Labour
Party who have deserted their leader, Mr. Hughes, and, not
content with having deserted their own leader, now ask the
people of Western Australia to desert their fellow Australians
now fighting for us and for the Empire. These deserters for the
most part belong to the extreme tail of the Labour unionists,
with the main body of whom, Mr. Hughes informs us, “they
have nothing in common.” They include the 1.W.W., said
to be an industrial organisation, some of whose members have
been sentenced to death for a cowardly and brutal murder,


and some are under arrest for other abominable crimes. They
include anarchists, wreckers, destroyers, pullers-down, the
envious, and the enemies of everybody who has done some-
thing, and they also include the worthless generally.
Those who vote “No” on the 28th October (Saturday next)
should know those with whom they will be associated.
The Effect of Voting “No.”
Those who refuse to respond to the cry of our brave men
and vote “No” to their appeal to us to “come and help,”
what will they in effect say ? “They will say that they don’t
care if we are defeated in this war. They will say that they
don’t care if Australia, our home, becomes a German State,
and that in any case they are willing to risk losing their home
and their nationality, and to leave others to fight for them
while they will stay at home.” They will also in effect
say, when they vote “No,” “that they are willing to
forget the murders, the cruelties, and the wrongs inflicted on
Belgium, France, Poland, and Serbia—that they are willing to
forget the sinking of the ‘Lusitania’ and the murder of men,
women, and children sent without warning to their death—
that they are willing to forget all about the murder of Nurse
Cavell and Captain Fryatt—that they are willing to forget the
fiendish inoculation of British prisoners with foul diseases, and
that they are willing to forget the innumerable murders and
cruelties continually being practised, unparalleled in cruel
malignity in the history of the world.”
But, in addition to saying in effect that they forget all these
criminal, wanton and abominable acts, they will in addition
brand the people of Australia as an ungrateful and selfish
people, willing to take all the advantages that have come to us
—the free gift of our Australian home, won for us and given
to us unencumbered by the people of the Old Land to work
out our own destiny on this continent, and to build up another
home of freedom and liberty in the Southern Hemisphere for
ourselves and our countrymen—but that we are unwilling to
help to secure it for ourselves and our nation for ever.
Those who hold such opinions do not, in my opinion,
deserve to enjoy a home in this fair land. My views on this
point are in complete accord with those expressed by Mr.
Hughes when he said :
“It is the primary and sacred duty of every citizen to defend
his country. Those who will not defend their country should
have no voice in its Government. They should not be regarded
as citizens, but only as pariahs and outcasts.”
The so-called arguments of those who are urging us to follow
the downward path of national dishonour by^voting “No” on
28th October are, as far as I am able to judge, ungrateful,
dishonourable, cowardly, and altogether unworthy and selfish.


The British Navy.
What we owe to the British Navy is scarcely realised by
any of us. In Australia we scarcely realise that we are at war.
We are unmolested by our enemies—we live in peace and
safety—we go about our business and our ordinary avocations—
we go to theatres, races, shows, social gatherings, and other
pleasures, and we scarcely remember that our being able to do
so is solely due to the power and might of the British Navy,
which has swept the enemy from off the sea, thus permitting
our trade and commerce to proceed uninterruptedly across the
ocean, while the trade of our enemies is completely stopped
and their ships are unable to show themselves on the seas of
the world. We must also never cease to remember that to
the strong arm of the Motherland we absolutely owe the
possession of this great continent of Australia "compassed by
the inviolate sea,” as well as our safety in peace and security
for more than 100 years. For us, therefore, in this time of
danger, to do other than stand shoulder to shoulder with our
kinsmen in the Old Land should be unthinkable by anyone
who is imbued with even a spark of gratitude and national
affection. (Cheers.)
Concluding Remarks.
I urge the people of Western Australia to be bold and
determined in this the greatest crisis in the history of our-
selves and our country, and to go to the poll on the 28th
October and vote "YES ”
I urge them to do this on the grounds of—
(1) Affection for our Nation and for the "Old Land.”
(2) Our duty to our kinsmen of the Old Land and through-
out the world, and to our brave Allies who are fighting
with us the battle of civilisation and liberty.
(3) Our duty to those we have already sent to the war, who
are calling to us for help.
(4) Our love of Australia, our home, and our aspirations and
hopes for her future.
(5) Everything we hold most dear.
On all these grounds I urge and implore my fellow West
Australians to follow the path of • national and personal
honour and duty. I urge them to do all in their power to
support the proposals of Mr. Hughes, the Prime Minister, and
to go to the poll on the 28th October and vote
"YES.”
“Australia will be there.”
(Prolonged cheers.)


APPENDIX I.
SIR JOHN FORREST’S FINAL APPEAL.
People implored to vote “Yes.”
Perth,
28th Oct., 1916, Referendum Day.
Sir John Forrest returned to Perth yesterday, after having
addressed during the past fortnight twenty-five meetings
throughout the State, every one of such meetings being
unanimously in favour of voting “Yes” to the question to be
submitted to the electors to-day.
Sir John makes his final appeal to the electors of Western
Australia in the following words :—“We must not falter.
We cannot desert our brave men whom we have sent forth with
‘banner and with music’ to fight for the safety of Australia and
for the integrity of the Empire. Those who are asking us
to say ‘No’ are asking us to follow the downward path of
national dishonour. They have deserted their own leader, but,
not content with that, ask us to cover ourselves with shame by
deserting those who have by their valour shed a lustre on
themselves and upon Australia. They ask us also to desert
our kinsmen in the Old Land, and brand ourselves for ever as
an ungrateful and dishonourable people. Let us by our act
to-day repudiate all such ignoble, discreditable, and selfish
ideas. Let us all go to the poll and do our duty by voting
‘Yes.’ Let us show that we are a grateful people, willing to
stand by the Motherland, to which we owe everything, in the
time of danger and adversity, and not only in the day of peace
and prosperity. Let us in this the greatest crisis in our
history be true to ourselves and to our country.”
APPENDIX II.
The result of the Referendum in Western Australia was
very satisfactory.
About 93,700 voted "Yes”
„ 40,700 „ "No”
~ 53,000 majority for "Yes”
APPENDIX III.
The result of the Referendum in the whole of Australia
was, however, deplorable.
About 1,144,000 voted "No”
„ 1,085,000 „ "Yes”
„ 59,000 majority for "No”


APPENDIX IV
On hearing the result of the Referendum, 11th November,
1916, Sir John Forrest made the following statement to the
press:—
“I wonder what our generous kinsmen in the Old Land are
thinking of us ? Personally I could not have believed that
such a result was possible. Compulsory service in time of
war has been adopted by the Old Country, and has been since
1903 the law of the Commonwealth,' for defence within
Australia, and by our unanimous voice we have sent nearly
300,000 men, and have spent £100,000,000 of money in the
prosecution of a war that we have made our own. We have
realised, and have pledged ourselves that all our men and all
our resources shall be made available for bringing this war to a
speedy and victorious conclusion, and when we were appealed
to to send more men and were told that the voluntary system
had failed to supply them, what other course was there for us
to adopt but to extend the compulsory system in time of war,
now the law for our defence within Australia, to the defence
of Australia beyond her limits ? That my hopes have not been
fulfilled shows that we do not yet realise that any danger to
Australia or the Empire exists, and that all sorts of spurious
ulterior motives and sympathies, not associated with the ex-
treme gravity of our position, have obsessed the minds of
many, and have made them oblivious to their deaf and
manifest duty. The jubilation of the cruel Germans at the
defeat of the referendum, should be gall and bitterness to
those who voted against the appeal for help of our brave men
fighting for us in the trenches, and must prove stronger than
any words, that their vote was cast for our enemies and
against their own country and her devoted sons. Those who
did their duty and voted ‘Yes’ can only bow their heads in
sorrow. They must not, however, falter or relax their efforts
They must gird up their loins and be even more determined
than ever and continue to do their best to serve their country.”
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by D. W. Paterson Co. Pty. Ltd.,
495 Collins Street, Melbourne.
