

SPEECHES
ALEX. GORDON, Esq.
ALEX. STUART, Esq., M.L.A.
§hc |r L omnml Agnail of Jtp south Maks,
September 17th, 1879.
On Denominational Education.




SPEECHES,
&c., &c., &c.
S*2>yA 17 fb
Mr. Alexander Gordon rose and said, —Mr. President, —Ear
and brain being somewhat rested from the effect of the Demos-
thenic demotes of the speech which closed our last evening’s
sitting, I find myself able, without much difficulty, to resolve that
speech into its component parts. I shall do this fairly if I state
them to be somewhat as follows : The first part was a defence of
an act for which the reverend speaker (Canon Smith) expected
that he should undergo, and he seemed disappointed that he had
not undergone, certain dire penalties which he described in
language of varied metaphor, which I do not profess to quite
accurately comprehend. The second part was a violent attack,
into which the speaker allowed himself to be betrayed, upon the
sentiments and feelings of a large body of our fellow citizens and
upon persons whom they may be supposed to regard with esteem
and respect. The third portion of the speech was a sort of up
and down here and there disquisition upon the merits and demerits
of Denominational Schools and of Public Schools —a disquisition
which left me, as I think it must have left others, in doubt whe-
ther the reverend speaker might not return back to his old love
of twelve years ago, and be found at no distant time again fight-
ing by the side of old friends, in opposition to old foes with whom
he now appears to be allied.
I intend to dispose of the two first portions of the speech very
briefly. As to the first: if ever there was an exhibition of what
Lord Beaconsfield once happily designated as “ the rhetoric of an
uneasy conscience,” the reverend speaker made that exhibition.
Self-accusation was apparent in every sentence he uttered, and it
was both carious and painful to follow the array of inconsistent
and inadequate reasons and causes, by which he sought to explain
and justify what he had done. And he closed by asserting that


his conduct was influenced by something which he chose to sup-
pose had taken place at the last session of the Sydney Synod,
whereas, had he taken the slightest pains to enquire, he would
have found he was labouring under a complete mistake. As a
result, I suspect that if the speaker persuaded himself, it was
quite as much as he did, and if so that he was the sole convert
made by his own eloquence.
The second portion of the speech —the attack upon the opinions
and feelings of the members of a Church differing from his own,
and upon persons holding high positions in that Church, I heard
with extreme pain and regret. What would the reverend speaker
have said to attacks upon his own Diocesan, or upon the Metro-
politan, couched in such terms as he used towards the Roman
Catholic Archbishop ? I heard this part of the speech, I say again,
with extreme pain and regret. It is one thing ‘‘ to banish and drive
away erroneous and strange doctrine, ’ ’ and quite another to person-
ally stigmatize and denounce those who profess doctrine which we
hold to be such. Aware as lam of the influence of the reverend
speaker in the district in which he resides, and judging by his ut-
terances here how that influence must be used, I cannot but con-
trast his practice and conduct with the practice and conduct of the
great Apostle of the Gentiles. St. Paul resided long amidst a hea-
then population, and at the end of that residence was able to appeal
to those whom he had influenced by his teaching, that he had not
shunned to declare unto them the whole counsel of God. And
at the same time, when the effect of that teaching had excited to
violence and riot those with whose temporal gains it interfered,
the heathen Magistrate was able, as a means of appeasing the
tumult, to adduce as a well known fact, that the Apostle and his
converts had neither profaned the temple nor insulted the great ob-
ject of popular veneration—idol though that object was. This
was a line of conduct far different from that of the reverend
speaker, and I cannot help making the contrast. And then how
utterly irrelevant to the matter under discussion were these at-
tacks of the reverend Canon. The question is not one of the
truth or the reverse of articles of Roman Catholic faith, but
the competency of Roman Catholic Schools to do good service to
the State. And with reference to this, of what use is it to take a
pair of scissors and a bundle of newspapers and pamphlets, and to


cut out and paste together, extracts and quotations taken from
here and there and everywhere, and to try out of such materials,
separated from all context, to construct a case of attack and ac-
cusation. Suppose that I were to adopt a similar plan, and to
collect and array in opposition extracts of an equally violent kind
on the other side—what possible result would there be, hut an
increase of mutual discharity and enmity? I will, how-
ever, produce one testimony directly to the point on
this part of the question, and I think it will he allowed to out-
weigh the whole bundle of irrelevant extracts with which we
were favoured by the reverend Canon. At a recent meeting of
the National Education Union in England (I am quoting from
the report of it in the Guardian newspaper of 18th June last) at
which were present a large number of distinguished persons who
take an interest in Education, various matters were discussed,
and among them the subject of “ Penny or Eree Schools.” Upon
this a Paper was read by the Pev. W. J. Kennedy, a Clergyman
of the Church of England, and formerly one of Her Majesty’s
Inspectors of Schools. In the course of this paper the writer
makes the following remarks, and I commend them to the partic-
ular attention of the House :
“ I speak on my own personal knowledge, when I say further that
some of the zealous promoters ot tree schools aim especially at dealing a
death blow to Roman Catholic schools. How far this feeling extends
Ido not know. Now, nobody can be more thoroughly Protestant than
lam ; but I deprecate this result. Our Roman Catholic population is
a great fact. You can’t get rid of it. Facts are stubborn things.
Will you make better men and better citizens of them in Board Schools
and Secular Schools? Not so; quite the reverse. I have lived for
thirty years in the most Roman Catholic towns in England ; and I, as a
Protestant Clergyman, have for some years examined Roman Catholic
schools ; and I found that these schools spared no pains to turn a very
poor and dangerous population into enlightened, humanized, God-fearing
people. Liverpool, especially, owes a debt ot gratitude to the managers
and teachers of Roman Catholic schools ; and I should be very much
surprised if the able men, Mr. Bushell and Mr. Rathbone, who have
been chairmen of the Liverpool School Board, would not indorse what
I now say.”
This quotation shows how Eoman Catholic Schools do good
work for the State in England, and why not then in this colony.
If a Eoman Catholic School can do such work as is described in
Liverpool, why not in Sydney, or any other town or place in New
South Wales ? But I cannot let this part of the reverend Canon’s


speech pass without deprecating what I believe has been the
mischievous effect of the agitation upon the subject of the Pas-
torals, for which he is so greatly answerable. The Pastorals them-
selves, joint or several, would have done no harm to Church of
England Schools. It would have little affected the parents of
Church of England children that Wesleyans, Independents, Bap-
tists, and all non-Church Denominations agitated themselves in
mutual rivalry on a subject, which after all did not really concern
them. But when the reverend Canon and other clergymen of the
Church of England joined in the outcry, and actually demanded
the extinction of Church Schools, the case was altered; and I tell
the reverend Canon, and those who have acted in a similar man-
ner, that they, and not the Roman Catholic Pastorals, are answer-
able for what I fear may be very great damage done to the
Schools of their own Church.
And here, Sir, I desire to express, and in language not
entirely my own, the surprise and regret with which I have
viewed the conduct of these reverend gentlemen. I would fain
believe that they desire, as ardently as I do myself, to
perpetuate to their fellow citizens those blessings of a religious
education which we all profess to value: but, Sir, I say that
if I could conceive myself so wicked as to form a deliberate design
to deprive the people of this country of those blessings—l can also
imagine what instruments I would select for the carrying out
of my mischievous purpose : I would take men —ministers of re-
ligion-holding high positions in their own church—possessed of
considerable social influence—personally popular—gifted with
more than ordinary eloquence, and endowed with respectable
talents—and I say that such men, while going all lengths in an
inconsiderate hostility to one form of faith , from the dogmas of
which they conscientiously differed, would be the most powerful
though unconscious instruments in promoting the success of the
malevolent purpose of undermining all religious faith among our
people, and of handing over the rising generation to the guidance
of those, who desire that they should deny the existence of a God,
and pour contempt on the Bible as the revelation of His will to
men. I feel, Sir, very strongly on this subject, and do not regret
that I have had, as a layman, this opportunity of thus expressing
myself in a representative Assembly of my fellow Churchmen :


and I should have deemed myself unworthy of the position which
I hold as one of the representatives of my Diocese, had I not taken
advantage of the opportunity afforded to me. I now gladly pass
to a more general consideration of the question before the House.
Before however doing so, I must notice two or three topics
brought forward, more or less incidentally, in the speech of the
reverend Canon. At one time he stated that he endorsed every-
thing said in favour of Denominational Schools; at another he
declared that the Denominational system was fraught with loss
to the Church of England ; and then again that Denominational
Schools were unsuited to the wants of the community. These
inconsistent utterances seem to refute-each other, and require no
further notice from me. Then the reverend Canon put a case of
this kind—what would happen if the State gave up Public
Schools ?—and what would happen if the Church of England
gave up her own Schools ? Now this is raising a completely
false issue. No one desires the State to give up Public Schools,
and therefore what might happen in such an event is utterly be-
side the question. What is desired is, that the Church of England
may not be driven to abandon her schools; and it is only the
consequences which might follow from her being compelled so to
do that we are at all concerned to consider. The reverend speaker
also taunted the members of the Church of England with not
having opened any new Denominational Schools, applying his
remarks principally to Churchmen in the Diocese of Sydney, and
intimating that if we had set an example, he and his friends
would have done wonderful things in the Diocese within which
he is placed. But surely he must have forgotten that the ques-
tion is not one of willingness to open new schools, but one of the
possibility of so doing in the face of the provisions of the Act.
Let us look at the matter for a moment. If you want to obtain
a certificate for a new Denominational School, it is first of all
absolutely necessary to start it into existence. You have then to
take care that there is a Public School within five miles, and that
that school has an attendance of seventy children : the Denom-
inational school must have an attendance of thirty. Thus the
very success of the latter, should it draw away children from the
Public School so as to reduce its numbers below seventy, would
be fatal to the Denominational School obtaining a certificate.


But this is not all. If the Public School which must be within five
miles should happen to be within two, the Denominational School
cannot obtain a certificate unless there is an attendance of one
hundred and twenty children in it, and the Public School
together. Surely then it is idle to taunt Members of the Church
of England with not opening new schools, when the restrictions
placed by the Act on their so doing are such as I have mentioned.
Then again, the Reverend speaker alleged that Denominational
Schools became secular schools after the first hour of religious
instruction. How any one, with the slightest knowledge of
practical school working, could assert this, I am at a loss to con-
ceive. There is all the difference in the world between religious
instruction being given by the Teacher, who afterwards conducts
the secular instruction, and religious instruction given by one
who, after that instruction is given, has nothing further to do with
the conduct of the school. In the former case, the tone of the
school is influenced by the work of the first hour ; in the latter, it is
comparatively unaffected by it. Again, w;e had the old story that
the inevitable must be faced—that we must succumb to the
inevitable, and all that sort of thing. As I think that by this time
the Reverend originator of the phrase must have heard enough
of it, I will say no more about it, except that I know of nothing
being inevitable but the ultimate triumph of the truth, and of a
good cause. The last of these incidental points that I shall
notice is a reference made to some quotations read in the
French Chambers on the occasion of an Educational Debate
which recently took place. It appears that a Bill has been
brought in by M. Ferry to stop the teaching which is given
in Schools in France, by certain teaching Orders, and this
on a ground, not dissimilar to that taken up by the
reverend Canon, that they treat historic facts in a manner not con-
sonant with the political ideas of them now prevalent in France.
The scheme of M. Ferry has led to much remark in the English
papers ; and in spite of such quotations as those referred to by the
reverend Canon, it is pointed out that to insist on History being
made to deal with characters and events in a manner to suit
existing political ideas must involve the necessity of the Govern -
ment putting forth a History of its own, which History would of
course be abolished in the event, so common in France, of


another revolution. It is also suggested that, instead of inter-
fering in the manner proposed, it is better to trust to social influ-
ences in after life, to correct erroneous ideas imparted on such a
subject as historical characters and events. I would commend to
the reverend Canon remarks addressed by the Saturday Review
to M. Ferry, and I say that the reverend Canon “is as com-
pletely the slave of an ecclesiastical black spectre as any French
conservative under the second Empire was of a revolutionary,
red spectre : that he has yielded himself to panic, unless indeed
he is merely finding arguments for others more frightened than
himself, and that his policy is characterised by all the short-sight-
edness which panic commonly brings with it.” I now turn to
the more general aspect of the question before us.
There are two plans of primary education which are in this day
contending for adoption. The one instructs the child in the prin-
ciples of morality and right conduct, because they are commanded
by the God to Whom he owes his being, and are laid down in
the Bible which contains the revelation of God’s will to men. The
other system professes to instruct the child in the same principles
of morality, without regard to the considerations I have mentioned,
and simply because they are desirable with reference to this
present life. The first of these systems is religious : the other is
secular. All Christians of whatever denomination must support
the first. Secularists, a name specially affected by those who
concern themselves only with this life, may and do support the
other ; and these include the Atheist who says there is no God,
the Deist who simply believes in His existence, and Rationalists
and Sceptics of every type. The practical difference of the two
systems is obvious. Under the religious system you tell the child
not to steal, and not to lie, because God in His own Word has
commanded him to be honest and truthful. Under the secular
system you likewise tell the child not to steal and not to lie,
but the reason for obedience is simply that honesty and truth
answer better than dishonesty and lying. Such being the state of
the case, is it too much to urge, as the Archbishop of Canterbury
did some time back, that it is a sacred duty binding on all
Christians to see that religious instruction does not perish out of
the land in which they live ? Now with this idea of our duty, we
may apply ourselves to the Resolution under consideration. And


I assert than an efficient Denominational School, I care not of
what Denomination, is one of the best safeguards against the
danger of children being educated without a knowledge of God,
and of the revelation of His will. J also assert than an efficient
Church of England School is one of the best means of training
the youthful members of our own Church. The tone of Denomi-
national Schools must be religious, and I therefore hail with
satisfaction the President’s no uncertain declaration in favour of
maintaining Church of England Schools. And now I turn to con-
sider what sort of Schools those are to which children must be
handed over, if Denominational Schools are abolished ; I refer of
course to the Public Schools. With regard to these, lam not goingto
say a word against their usefulness ; but what I do say is, that the
system of a Public School is essentially secular. Imean thatwhatis
called the tone of the school is, and must be, secular. All recog-
nition of God is avoided by the absence of prayer. All recognition
of His Will, as being revealed to men, is avoided by banishing
the Bible. As a test I would say that a child of heathen parents
might be educated in a Public School just as well as a child of
Christian parents. The use even of what are called the Scripture
Lessons might be accepted by the former ; they would no more
necessarily affect the heathen child religiously, than extracts from
Confucius, or any heathen philosopher would affect the religion
of a Christian child. They are no more the Bible than those
stories from Horace, from Virgil, and from Dante, with which we
are familiar, are the works of those great Greek, Latin, and Italian
poets. And this is the view which those who desire to banish the
Bible from the education of children take of their use. They call
these lessons a mutilated Bible, and are quite willing that they
shall be used, looking upon them as a sure means of undermining
a regard and reverence for the Bible as God’s Word. Knowing
as I do what Secularists write and say on this subject, I am
not inclined to play into their hands, by allowing myself to be
deluded into supposing that the Scripture Lessons in any way
supply the place of the Bible, or do away with the secular tone
and character of the Public School. There is however a redeeming'
feature in the Public School system, I allude to the permission
of one hour for religious instruction by a Minister of religion. No
one however can imagine that this is at all the same thing as


tlie religious teaching in Denominational Schools : the Reverend
member Mr. Wilson has shewn this conclusively, and I will not
repeat his argument. The privilege however should be used to
the utmost possible, and I accordingly am glad of what the Pre-
sident has said on this subject. Our duty then as members of
the Church of England is clear. We must maintain our own
schools. We must use all advantages which the present state of
the law offers to us to impart religious instruction in Public
Schools; and we must oppose any change which would deprive
us of any means of religious education which we now enjoy. And
as we are living in a mixed community, we must resolve not to
cut ourselves off from our present advantages, merely because
other religious bodies, from whom we disagree, share them with
us.
I will now turn to the position in which Denominational Schools
stand to the State. All citizens are taxed to support the Education
of the country. The State holds itself entirely aloof from all care
for the religious element in the education it thus compels. Be it so:
it ought therefore simply to pay for what it wants, and ought to pay
no more because it obtains it through other sources than those itself
originates. Then as to what the State wants, —this is well laid down
in the English Act of 1876, which declares that ‘‘ it shall be the duty
of the parent of every child to cause such child to receive efficient
elementary instruction in reading, writing, and arithmetic.” Mr.
Bright has stated that all that the people have a claim to receive
from the State, is such instruction as this; he adds, I think music or
some such refining subject; he terms these subjects not education,
butthe means or tools of education, the having which enables a man
to educate himself. When once this principle is determined, the
question of payment by results to those who give the required
instruction arises, and the President has alluded to it.
Upon this matter of payment by results, I would wish to point
out that under it the State would pay for what it wants, and the
religious bodies would pay for that with which the State has de-
termined to have no concern. Thus if you group a Public School, a
Church of England School, a Wesleyan School, and a Congrega-
tional School all together in any neighbourhood, you might pro-
duce a healthy rivalry among them, but the State would not pay
more than if all the pupils were collected under the same roof. I


could work out this in detail from the paper which I hold in my
hand, which contains the actual payment hy results in a large
London Board School, but I must not now trespass on the House
for this purpose. Another advantage which would arise from
the proposed alteration of payment is, that it will enable
the introduction of some sort of compulsion, an addition
which seems to be necessary to our present system, and in
favour of which the President has expressed his change
of opinion. If the State intends, in any way, to compel
attendance at school, the greatest freedom of choice with regard
to the school must be allowed, otherwise a case of oppression, pos-
sibly more plausible than real, is established.
I urge, therefore, upon the House the necessity of insisting, first,
that Denominational Schools shall not be interfered with; secondly,
that nothing shall he done to prevent the present use of Public
Schools for religious teaching; and thirdly, that before any change
whatever is made in the present Act, a full enquiry shall be in-
stituted into the working of the system. Sir Henry Parkes has
over and over again promised this, and the statements made on
all sides in this Debate point to its being necessary. The great
object must be to unite the whole people in one common system
of education; and such an advantage I see in the system of pay-
ment by results. I believe that the objections made to it are
unfounded as applicable to this Colony; and that the very matters
which have been urged against it in England, are those which
will not arise when it is applied here. I would once again refer
to my friend Canon Smith. He has threatened us with going
through the length and breadth of his district in the character
of a sort of electioneering agent. But I believe he will do no
such thing; he is made for work far better and holier, and that
work, I am persuaded, he will carry out, and that he will not
be found helping to do anything to undermine the religious
teaching of the children of this country.
One word as to the Amendment of the Honorable member Mr.
Cox. I shall oppose it, among other reasons, because it casts an
unfair reflection on the Clergy. That it is unfair, Mr. Cox
may not know, but I and others here know it perfectly well from
recent work, in which we have been engaged, in connexion with
a Resolution passed in the last Session of the Sydney Synod.


In conclusion, I heartily support the Resolution before the
House, and shall also be ready to concur in some such addition
to it as that which has been suggested, in order that we may unite
in giving practical effect to the Resolution.
Mr. Alexander Stuart :—My views on the important subject
which is now engaging the attention of the Synod—that of
Education in Primary Schools —are tolerably well known both
to members of the Synod, and to the public outside, so that it
can scarcely be expected that I will do other than vote against
the amendment and for the resolution, or some enlargement
thereof concerning which I will speak by and bye.
As for the amendment proposed by Mr. Cox I consider it to
be most mischievous and to be destructive of the principles of
the Church of England in the matter of Education, for if I have
understood anything of the mind of the Church of England—or
at all events of the great body of that Church—upon this weighty
matter it is that she holds to the great principle that religious
teaching must go hand in hand with secular instruction in our
Primary schools in order to form Education in the true sense of
that term. Now the amendment involves the separation of
these two things which the Church holds should never be separ-
ated. Ido not mean to say that there is no religion attempted
to be taught in the Public schools—thank Hod we have not yet
had forced upon us the system carried out in some of the
neighbouring Colonies where all reference to Hod or
religion is strictly forbidden and expunged from the class
books ; nor do I mean to undervalue the opportunities
afforded under the Public Schools Act for the giving of religious
instruction by separate teachers or instructors in separate class
rooms. lam thankful for all these, and, in the absence of what I
deem to be far better, I desire to see the most made of them that
can be, but I say that at the best they are very indifferent
substitutes, and that the separation of religion from the ordi-
nary school life and school course of teaching is extremely mis-
chievous in its effect on the minds of children, for if a master
be not entrusted to give the religious as well as the secular in-


struction the youthful mind is quick enough to discern that they
are differently appreciated by those who control the school,
and that the religious teaching is superadded by a power outside
of the controlling authority, and thus it is deemed of inferior
importance, and as a thing which could be done without ;
thus the good effect which religious education would otherwise
have is, to a great extent, nullified. Religious instruction
should be so blended with secular instruction as to enter into the
very nature of the child; they should be like the warp and the woof
of a textile fabric, interwoven with each other, so that that which
is presented to the observer is neither the one nor the other sepa-
rately, but that combination of the two which constitutes
true education : and it is just because these two thus form toge-
ther real—and the only real—education, that I cannot consent to
see them dissociated ; and the reason why I have striven to do
what I can to conserve our Denominational schools is simply that
I believe that they can thus co-exist under the system known as
Denominational, while, composed as the Colony is of masses
holding very widely differing views upon religion and the character
of the religious teaching which shouldbe imparted to their children,
they cannot co-exist under the system known as that of the Public
schools.
We have heard much of the assertion that the “ death knell of
Denominational schools has been rung,” and that despite our
preference we “ must face the inevitable.” My opinion is that
if Denominational schools are swept away the blame will lie at
the door of those clergy and laity who, while believing that they
are the best schools for the education of our children are
either frightened by the movement outside of the Church or
shrink from appearing to go along with another Church with
whose principles they cannot agree, and therefore do not stand
boldly in the defence of our Church schools. If Churchmen
would uphold the principles of the Church in this matter, the
Church schools would not be ruined nor in any way interfered
with. It was only this day that on meeting a clergyman whose
school is maintained in a manner that is a credit to the Church
and a valued benefit to the inhabitants of that portion of the city
in which it stands, I was greeted with the reiteration of the stock
phrase about “the inevitable” and “the death knell,” and I


could not help feeling pained that such sentiments, rejoiced in by
our enemies, should be re-echoed from within the Church, for I
feel persuaded that such timidity is only playing into the hands
of those who, for various reasons, desire to put an end to our
Church schools altogether.
With reference to the case of Rev. Canon Smith’s school at
Bathurst, to which reference has been made, I may say that I
extremely deplore the step which that Reverend gentleman has
thought fit to take, because I consider that his action in abandon-
ing one of her first class schools, has inflicted a grievous
wrong upon the Church of England. The Reverend gentleman
has referred to a part alleged to have been taken by me, in fur-
nishing materials for circulating printed statements about his action
in this matter, which if not absolutely slanders, were detrimental to
his usefulness, but has done mo the j ustice to say that he did not
believe X had been the author or abettor of the objectionable
action taken against him. lam glad that he thus acquits me, for
I assure him X knew nothing of any such movement, and would
not take any ungenerous action towards him, but certainly, when
I saw the announcement in the public newspapers, of the contem-
plated closing of his school, and when I was asked what I thought
of it, I did not hesitate to give my opinion, just as I give it now,
that it was an act to be deplored by Churchmen, as detrimental to
the interests of our Church, and one which I could only account
for by the strong impulsive character of the Rev. Canon, causing
him to feel a revulsion against appearing to be rowing in the
same boat with the Church of Rome. The giving up that school
I consider to have been unjustifiable by the circumstances at-
tending it, notwithstanding the explanations given by the Rev.
Canon, for on referring to Reports of the Council of Education
for the year 1877, I find that the Church of England School at
Bathurst was no mean school with poverty of attendance
and indifferent teaching, and consequently followed by miser-
able results; but, on the contrary, that it was a flourishing school
with an average attendance of over 170 children; that in
premises, in appointments, in teaching, in moral tone, in
diligence, in punctuality, and in attendance it commanded as
good an inspectoral report as is given to any Denominational
School; and that in comparison with the Public School of


Bathurst it stood on an equal, if not on a higher platform ; and
yet this is the school which is abandoned. Can it be wondered
at that after my Eev. friend had fought side by side with me for
the last twelve years, and done right good service by his eloquence
and his energy, exerted as they were in favour of our Denomina-
tional Schools, I was amazed and grieved at his departure from
among us ? But, says the Eev. Canon, the report I have read is
two years old, and the circumstances have changed —the Public
School is no longer held in its former building, but is in a new
and handsome building close to his own door —a building that
has cost £12,000, and he can no longer compete against it. This,
no doubt, is one of the difficulties against which we have
to contend. The undue, and, as I venture to say it will be held
to be when it comes to press more directly by having to be raised
by taxation instead of being taken from an adventitious fund
the unjustifiable, expenditure upon Public schools, is
sapping the foundation of our schools; but are we, or was the
Eev. Canon justified, in thus bowing down before the advancing
tide of mere wealth and outward display ? would it not have
been a prouder position for the Church and for her clergy to be
found defending to the last that which is the embodiment of the
principles for which she has always contended ? It is to my mind
grievous to see the Eev. Canon with all his energy and eloquence
succumb, ere its doors were well opened, before the magnificence
of this new public school as if he were suddenly charmed with
its grand exterior. lam reminded by the Eev. gentleman that
one half of the Denominational schools have been closed without
exciting one tithe of the talk which has followed the closing of
the Bathurst school; the cases are widely different, for these were
closed by the Council of Education withdrawing the certificate
owing to inability to keep up the number required by law. We
regret such action of the law, but look upon it in a totally differ-
ent light from this case. I consider that the voluntary abandon-
ment of any of our schools is one of the greatest wrongs that can
be inflicted upon the Church of England—it is striking her in the
most vital part.
To return to the amendment, Mr. Cox has said, and said truly,
that if the Church of England would only stand forth unitedly,
she would be strong enough to defy all the assaults made by


Secularists and all other opponents. But what does the Hon.
gentleman ask the Church to do ? To stand forth unitedly to
destroy itself! What he said may be paraphrased thus—“ We
have good schools well taught, well appointed —schools that have
done good work—-but because of this bugbear of inevitability we
must abandon them.” I do hope that this House will stand
forth, and, if not with one voice, yet nearly unanimously, reject
the amendment, and show that we are united in one thing, viz.,
that we are not prepared to abandon one of the chief
glories of the Church—her schools. Is there any body of
Christians or of Secularists, or of any other creed that
has done one tithe of what the Church of England has done for
the cause of Education in England ? The great bulk of Educa-
tion has been carried on in England for many years by the Church
of England. lam interrupted by a voice saying that she is there
the State Church. What has that to do with it ? It is idle to say
that she did this great work because she is connected with the
State, when it is well known that the greater part of her Educa-
tion work has been done by an enormous voluntary effort. Let
us show that we are in reality the same Church in the colony—
save in the State connection—and let us show that the same
spirit animates us and that we are prepared to make a personal
sacrifice for the maintenance of her principles. One of the
greatest principles in the Church’s action is the keeping in view
the necessity of carrying on her work of Education—it is one of
her chiefest means of efficiency —one of her greatest glories, and
I would entreat this House to pause before it casts it away for the
sake of a theoretical but unattainable uniformity. If the inevi-
table is to come—and I don’t believe it will come unless we are
neglectful of our duty—let it, when it comes, find us defending
to the last, those principles which we believe to be sound; let
this Synod be the last place where a voice is to be found in favour
of the destruction of our Church Schools ; as long as
we possibly can secure them let us hold them, and
never voluntarily abandon them. Let us bear in mind
that Scripture extracts nay Bible teaching, essential
and highly to be prized as it is, are not all that we as Church-
men seek to secure for our children under the term “religious
teaching.” We hold it necessary, or at all events, very highly


desirable, that in addition to these they should have distinctive
Church teaching; others may be content with the teaching of
Holy Scripture alone, and so far we can go hand in hand, for no
one values the Scriptures more highly than does the Church of
England ; but in addition thereto, she deems it her duty to in-
struct her children in her own distinctive principles whi6h she
holds to be deduced therefrom, and to rest upon Holy Scripture.
One word as to the Pastorals of the Archbishop and Bishops
of the Church of Rome. Had the question been treated outside
on its proper footing, the discussion would have assumed a very
different aspect; but instead of the merits or demerits of Denomi-
national Schools being discussed, the question has become
rather a battle between Romanism and Protestantism, and the
strongest feelings of religious antagonism have been aroused be-
tween large bodies in the community, and this has diverted the
thoughts of people from the true point at issue. I was
grieved that my Rev. friend (Canon Smith) was carried
away by his strong feelings in his impassioned address
from the question of the schools to the question of the
difference in Churches as to dogmas and teaching and practice.
I am as a loyal member of the Church of England perhaps as
much opposed as the Rev. Canon to some of the doctrines of the
Church of Rome, but the question before the Synod is not one of
the preference of one Church to another, or of the truth or error in-
volved in special dogmas or doctrines but simply as to the best way
of training up our children.
If the question had been the exclusion of the Church of Rome
altogether from the colony, the Rev. Canon could not have couched
his speech of the previous evening in more appropriate language
from his stand-point, but it was altogether beside the question
of the schools. Does my Rev. friend flatter himself with the
idea that if he could shut up every Roman Catholic school
from getting State support he would lessen Roman Cath-
olic influence in teaching ? Even if we could accomplish such an
end, I for one would protest against such an injustice. Instead
however of destroying that influence, the committing of such
injustice would only intensify Roman teaching. Experience
ought to teach us that we cannot force the Church of
Rome to accept with cordiality any Public school system —if


we do attempt to drive her to it the result will be that she will
at her own cost establish separate schools entirely free from
state supervision and control, which in my opinion would be a
most undesirable condition for our public instruction to get into
and Roman Catholics would deem themselves martyrs for con-
science sake just as Nonconformists in England did in regard to
tithes for the support of a National Church when they could not
according to their consciences accept its services and were thus for-
ced to maintain their own in addition thereto ; England havingbe-
come enlightened freed the Nonconformists from this galling yoke
and shall we be less enlightened or less liberal here ? surely it is far
the wiser policy to let that Church have her Denominational
schools, and even payment by results —although I see difficulties
in the way of that, which even my learned friend Mr. Q-ordon
remarks have not dissipated; and let the Church of England
have her schools also.
I am not ashamed to be at one with the Church of Rome in
this matter; we have the same civil rights, and we cannot help
being side by side with our Roman Catholic fellow citizens in de-
manding a continuance of these rights ; and this by trending upon
political grounds brings me to notice, as it has been referred to by
previous speakers, the amendment of which my friend Mr. Shep-
herd Smith has placed upon the business paper. If Mr. Wilson’s
motion has been termed “milk and water,” my friend Mr.
Shepherd Smith has tendered us some “strong meat” in his
amendment. While I would deprecate this Synod being turned
into a political arena, yet I do sympathise much with his views,
for, disguise it as we like, it is a political question, and as a poli-
tical question it must be fought out—not here, but in another
place. If we admit, as I believe the great body of the Church of
England does admit, that the maintenance of her Church Schools
is her unalienable right, then the violent interference with these
schools is an interference with that right we immediately
open up the political aspect of the question for unless we are pre-
pared to tamely submit to have our civil rights trampled upon,
we must take a political view of the situation. My idea, however,
is that we should in this Synod content ourselves with taking a
Church view , and that view is that we should, wherever practi-
cable, maintain Church Schools, and I therefore will propose an


amendment—if Mr. Cox’s be negatived —which will press this
view upon every member of the Church, leaving it to the indi-
vidual conscience to decide as to the best way of giving practical
expression to it. I acknowledge that X see no other way than
that suggested by Mr. Shepherd Smith, but still I would relegate
the political action to each individual member of the Church,
rather than leave it with the Church in the concrete.
I believe that the question must take a political turn, and while
I have here advocated my views from the stand-point of a Church-
man, I promise that I will be found in the proper place, and at
the fitting time, arguing in favour of our position from a political
point of view, just as strongly and just as fearlessly as I have
now done from the Church point of view.
The amendment which I take this opportunity of declaring my
intention to move, if Mr. Cox’s amendment be negatived, as I
hope and believe will be in some such words as these: —
“ That the Synod expresses its satisfaction with the utterances
of the President on the subject of primary education in Church
schools and rests in the conviction that the interests of
religion and the welfare of the Colony alike demand the main-
tenance wherever practicable, of Denominational schools as the
best means under present circumstances for meeting the religious
difficulty and commends to the members of the Church the duty
of supporting such schools by every legitimate means: and
appoints a committee to unite with members of the Church
of England outside of this Synod to conserve the rights of the
Church in relation thereto.”
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 370, George-street, Sydney.
