

SPIRITUAL COMMUNICATIONS
AND THE
COMFORT THEY BRING;
BY THE DISEMBODIED SPIRIT OF
CHARLES DICKENS,
THROUGH A MELBOURNE MEDIUM.
No. 1.
These pamphlets will be published the First day of each month , to
be had at all the Stationers and Booksellers in Melbourne.
Next month being Christmas-month, the next pamphlet will
be entitled “ Christmas Stories by the Spirit of Charles Dickens .”
Melbourne , 1st November , 1873.
Chas. Troedel, Melbourne.
Pamphlets to be continued.




PREFACE.
Dear ' Readers,
I feel called upon to write this little book upon
Spiritualism, as at this present time there are a great many
different standards. So called Spiritual communications,
Physical" Manifestations, and Christian communications: these
three I intend to explain to you.
Dear, dear Readers, since I have lived in Summer-land, I have
seen great wonders, and wished that I could convey them to
earth, feeling that it would be not only a benefit to the rising
generation, but a comfort to those that are travelling their
last road ; giving you the thorough peace and comfort that
can be found in dwelling an hour with the immortal souls of
God. The comfort it establishes upon the minds of young
and old—that every family and every Christian mother should
seek and investigate the so-called phenomena which in truth
is to your minds such, —I will endeavour to make my book
interesting and beneficial to your minds.
Manv of you have no doubt read the works I wrote in
my earthly life ; you will find them differ much in style from
what I now write ; but then I wrote as a man of the world,
inhabiting the flesh, to amuse the minds of the people, and
for the support of my own body ; now I write in the spirit,
for the comfort and enlightenment of many minds, upon the
future ; in simple language, that every child, educated or un-
educated may read, ponder, and understand. In some of my
future pamphlets I will use language of the world; hoping
you will bear in mind, that I was once in the flesh, moving in
the society of the learned of earth ; and now I am walking
with the pure spiritual companions of the Summer-land,
hoping that we all shall meet, and you will appreciate these,
for the sake of the once great writer
CHARLES DICKENS,


SPIRITUAL COMMUNICATIONS
AND THE COMFORT THEY BRING;
BY THE DISEMBODIED SPIRIT OF
CHARLES DICKENS.
Dear Readers, —
Spiritual life now raging throughout the United
Kingdom,—what comfort it brings to the minds of men, and
what happiness it gives unto our spirits.
A great many, old and young, at all times fear death, and
banish it from their thoughts as an unwelcome guest; when
we all know that the Divine God made all creatures, and He
established them upon the earth to labour, and reap the reward
of their labours; seeing that God has done all these things,
does it not occur unto your piinds that He has in His loving
kindness prepared a bright future for you ?
Death comes like a sleep,—you may be racked with pain,
helpless as an infant, with weeping friends around you.
Youth cries for a little more life, old men w T earied, yet
trembling with fear of the future ; while youth only has
faith and looks to the bright side of nature.
When around thy bed are the beloved ones that have gone
before, and waiting to receive thy spirit, God hath said unto
you that the soul does not quicken unless the body dies. The
awakening from the sleep (cold trance) is something beyond
the conception of men ; how you change in the quickening of
an eye throwing off the body that has served you well, and
performed all the duties you required of it, leaving it to the
mercy and love of your weeping friends, to perform upon it
the last service man can ever bestow upon you, they weeping,
and at last erect a stone above your body to let all know that
you lie there, and that it is sacred ground to your memory ;
they write not death but sleeping. Where can you find your
heart and mind so peeping into the future world as when
walking among the dead. There you see the raised earth,


you carry your minds into their coffins, then wondering where
their spirits dwell, trusting they are happy, but not
satisfied to that effect. Let your minds dwell no longer in the
earth, but lift them to the skies, and round about you they are
not sleeping, but awake in all the power of words. Happy yet
anxious to bestow upon you the joy they feel, to whisper that
they live and are still watching, and proving to you that they
cannot be asleep, although they appear in their last sleep of
the body as if impossible of ever holding life, you follow it on,
you lay it in the cold earth, you water it with your tears, and
leave your heart in heart-broken sighs. You give the last long
glance on the remains that had given you pleasure in life ;
you return again to your home, you seem to miss the form, the
voice, the smile, and the welcome they had oftime given you.
In lonely hours, you sit calling to your mind, all the good
acts they had done in life, of the laughter that rang through
the house, of the footsteps that you heard, which are silenced
forever, they are only gone to cheer others on to the unseen
world. They have wound themselves around your heart,
carrying with them your sympathy and your love, teaching
your heart and your better nature to dwell on the things
above, and to visit you again in spirit, to watch around you
and try to guard you on to heavenly shores. Behold the mother,
who even would leave the earth, and bid farewell to all its
cares, but her heart clings to her children, fearing that they
would pine away and perish without her care. Behold the
little children, the number that God has taken from earth,
laying those treasures in heaven, where moth nor rust can
enter, preserved for years upon number, and to be the first to
pronounce your new name; what a glorious comfort and
relief it will give to the fond parents’ hearts that their children
are safe on other lands, with the company of holy angels.
What a comfort and relief to the children that are left to
mourn the loss of their parents, that though separated from
the body, parted by death, they are united to you by the
spirit ever hovering around and striving to give you comfort,
and even watching with trembling fear for the sons that are
sleeping their souls in forgetfulness and sin, forgetting the
fond mother whose body was laid in the cold earth. If
indeed every soul, every son of man were to embrace spiritual-
ism, every house and home would be made happy and
comfortable while under the guardian care of angels, and what
comfort would be given to the hearts« f fond parents—likewise


the orphans, the widower, and the widow what benefit they
would reap holding sweet communion with the spirits of their
loved departed. What strength, what love would be thrown
into the mourning soul, what comfort would be given to the
poor and the rich only for embracing this great truth; sin
would speedily vanish from off the face of the earth ; poverty
likewise would disappear, the world would become to all as a
heaven below, guarded and watched by God’s ministering
spirits. Think to yourselves ye fond mothers, ponder
well ye fathers, in your hearts what would you give to know
that the dear departed ones were happy, when it is no trouble,
for they are striving by every means to manifest themselves
to you, and think also ye widowers and widows, and ye or-
phans, what unbounded joy it would give to you to hear their
loving voices again.
God has permitted this, he being a God of love and mercy,
and so anxious to establish happiness and peace on earth,
and likewise to make the future home of man one of serene
happiness and bliss, so careful that their happiness should
not be marred by one absent love, that he has given into our
hands the joy of watching and reclaiming those we love. It
is impossible for God to forget one of the children of earth
and it is impossible for parents to forget their children
as equally children their parents. The happiness we enjoy
makes us that we wish to bring them to the same enjoy-
ment, so take the advice of one who lived in the flesh, and
investigate this grand holy truth, to make every home a little
heaven below. Had I known this when in the flesh, I
should have been a far happier man on earth. My home
and family would have been happy and appreciated by
all.
There are a hundred reasons why every child ol earth,
should enter into investigating 'Spiritualism. A few
reasons I will give you. First, it brings you the grand feeling
of safety. Second, you have bestowed upon you the watchful
care of angels, and departed spirits, knowing and feeling this
you cannot sin in tire presence of holy and innocent spirits.
It binds you up in faith, establishes you in hope, and gives
you strength to battle with the temptations of the soul.
Thirdly, you gain knowledge, wisdom, and power ; your heart
though hard, is changed to love, benevolence, and in fact all
things needful, both spiritually and worldly. Fourthly,
it banishes strife, and establishes peace, gives wealth


to the home of poverty, cheers the heart of the lonely,
and Fifthly, it gives a foretaste of the grandeur of man’s
future, and the progressive state of his immortal soul, gives
comfort and hope to the vilest sinner on earth ; and coming
to the last, it smooths your path to the grave, it gives light
and reveals mysteries to those that are ignorant, it gives a
light and a helping hand, smooths the pillow of death, reviving
the spirit in hope of a heavenly future; banishes all fear
from the spirit and mind of him whom God is calling. The
souls that once trembled with fear, now spring forth in
delight, to be received by those that are waiting in
other lands for them. The spirit will no longer strive or fight
for life, but will come as a child falls asleep, to awake as from
a dream, in a bright summer-land, leaning upon the bosom of
some beloved spirit, welcomed amidst strains of music
and heavenly voices, rejoicing in thy return and reuniting
with them.
Never to part more, thy sorrows fled,
Thy tears no more to shed ;
The storm of life so swiftly passed,
And received into thy heavenly home at last.
No more labour for daily bread,
No more storms or sorrows to battle, no more weeping for the dead,
But bidding farewell to sorrows and care,
Kising with glorified beings their joys to share.
Beckoning on as on spirit wings you rise,
Smiling as on spheres you pass,
Pointing on to those heavenly lands at last.
So readers this opportunity embrace, and welcome angels to
thy heart, let loved ones speak to you in language of holiness
and contrite heart.


ON THE CHANGE OE OUR NATURE.
I will not dwell upon the things of earth, but indeed
man should hold a far higher opinion of his nature than he
does on the earth.
When you look at your forms, how beautiful! how perfect!
every particle is fixed, how every joint sits in its socket, how
it is protected by the oil to keep your joints in action, and
again, how every vein performs its work ; the flesh a covering
for its bones, and the skin over all.
What workmanship can equal the form of man ? You may
make statues unite, indeed make the very frame-work of man,
there you stop at a stand still; what will you do to give it
life and understanding, and make in each of those small veins
(leaders) to perform their work.
Then, indeed, ought not man to appreciate, to tender and
protect the precious frame wherein his spirit dwells. You
can take off a limb, but you cannot put it back.
You injure any part of the frame, it defies the power of man
to fix or make another grow in its place. Does this not set
man thinking of a supreme Almighty ruler, that he has been
so strict in his order and arrangement, not one mistake in the
form of man. We have now spoken of the frame-work, now
let us dwell upon the inward—the spirit of man.
The body may die, may perish, be severed inch by inch, yet
there stands the spirit of that body without a disfigurement;
perfect, beautiful and glorious to behold, it has the same pow-
ers, faculties of thought, and yet changed, the change being
free from sin ; the body perishing, but the spirit immortal.
The body is only a house wherein the spirit dwells. You
move the body as you are engaged in the affairs of life, you
imagine it is your body, but were the spirit to leave it you


would have no power ; therefore it is the spirit that moves, —
you think, you imagine, you dream, you walk, you talk, you
are active, but it is the spirit that is master of the body,—
therefore you are only a moving house, and when your spirit
leaves the body it is like an empty house bereft of all its
furniture. Then you can put it up “to let.”
But then where does the spirit dwell ? Man cannot with
all his reasoning powers or imagination bring near to him
the glorious, magnificent change that is with the immortal
spirit of man.
Having done with the body that served him so well, he
takes his way to glorious beautiful lands, and looks again
upon the earth. But how do we look, not as we often had
done in the flesh, uttering a curse oft times upon the world
for the sorrow it had caused mortal heart ; no, my friends,
we look to earth in love, and anxious care and sorrow for
those we have left behind, forgiving those that injured us,
willing to give them part of the happiness we enjoy. The
-world and the earth look to us as a beautiful garden, and the
flowers are the alphabet of angels;—the trees representing
man.
How he sprang forth into life and cut down, what mighty
lessons could be learnt from nature ; showing you how God
has prepared for the comfort of man, and for the life he had
placed upon it. Then carry in your thoughts for a moment
with me what has he prepared for you ; there is a home of
peace, of splendour, and how has lie decorated it for you 1
Your departed ones waiting to receive you. Is it not my
friends something comforting to know that after bitter years,
may be of sorrow, there are those that will rejoice at your
coming ?
Had God placed you upon a barren earth to die or perish as
soon as you almost had life (I mean a death from want) you
would not have expected a life in the future; but yourlife here
on earth, your trials, your sorrows, and care in the midst of
all these, your spirit is ever whispering to you hope and rest
in the future. Indeed, had it not been for hope, what would
man do? In youth we hope to prosper and flourish, we
build mansions of prosperity ahead, but often hope hides her
face, her castles fall to build them again, hope helps a being
through storm and through rain, causes the youth to perse-
vere in his object, lights her lamp, and leads us on to those
bright and glorious regions above.


Bright hope fills the heavens with love, that we should all
meet in that glorious land. Without hope a man cannot
work ; without faith in his hope he is lost, therefore faith and
hope are twin-sisters; so we cherish the fond hope that you,
and all your generation, shall dwell in one mighty mansion,
and I with fond hope that all my sons and daughters shall
meet, and none be missing.
What man can live and not know and feel within himself
that he has a double nature, mortal on earth and immortal in
the future world.
In fact every thing on earth speaks of two natures, —every
thing that has life. First it has the beginning,—rising and
progressing in either beautiful flowers or lofty forest. Man,
first a child, secondly rising into manhood, then comes the
change, every thing speaking of two natures —an earth and a
heaven, and it is the object of every soul to make their earth
a beautiful dwelling for the body ; while God Almighty is
preparing for their souls an eternal heaven.




