





SPIRITUALISM
UNMASKED :
BEING A CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN
*
. THE
KEY. JOHN ALEX. DOWIE
MR THOMAS WALKER
(Lecturer for the Victorian Association of Spiritualists)
WITH AX INTRODUCTION BY MR. DOWIE.
Pflbottrn£:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, PUBLISHER,
AND AT
SYDNEY, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE.
MDCCCLXXXII.




INTRODUCTION.
It is necessary to inform the reader of these pages of some facts
connected with the origin of the correspondence herein published;
of the reasons which led the writer and his friends to place it
before the public at this time, and in this manner; and of the
serious dangers which threaten the world through the spiritualistic
“ pestilence that walketh in darkness,” which is even already a
“ destruction that wasteth at noon-day.”
After several letters had been received by me from the gentle-
man who appears in the following pages as Mr. A. D. S •, lat
last consented to have a conversation with him on 3rd February,
at his house, “on the subject of Spiritualism.” In agreeing to do
so, I was somewhat reluctant at first, principally because of the
uncertainty of my stay in this city, and my conviction that, once
entered upon here, the subject would lead me on into a prolonged
controversy, as has proved to be the case. Ido not regret the
fact; but, for good reasons, I state these circumstances „to show
that, from the first, the Spiritualists of this city took the initiative,
and cannot fairly complain that their challenge was taken up and
dealt with in my own way.
It is of importance to note here the principal feature in my
method of dealing with the subject. I can best explain that by
quoting the following sentences from an unpublished letter of
mine to Mr. A. D. S , written on 30th January.
“ Although I have given much attention to the subject of
Spiritualism, it has largely been in one direction, and that the
philosophy of it, as expressed in the writings of its principal
exponents in England and the United States of America. With
the phenomena I have comparatively little personal experience or
concern; the question, as I view it, being not so much—Do spirits
communicate with, or manifest themselves to, mortals now on earth ?
—for I see no reason whatever to deny or doubt that they can and
do —but, Is the teaching, or whole cult an , so to speak, of Modern
Spiritualism good or evil ? Upon the decision of that question


in the affirmative or negative depends the whole issue as to the'
origin of spiritualistic manifestations and teachings, and whether
they are to be held Divine or diabolical. I may say, at once,
that my investigations and observations have led me to adopt,
very firmly, the view that Spiritualism is diabolical in its origin,
and is dangerous and hurtful in its effects upon the moral and
spiritual nature of man. At the same time, as my conclusion has
been reached without prejudice, and in a spirit of candour and
desire for to know the truth, it is also held without bigotry or
uncharitableness ; and I only state the position in which I stand,
so that there maybe no misundei’standing concerning it.”
After a long conversation with Mr. A. D. S , extending over
five hours, that gentleman, who has been a “ spiritualist” for
fifteen years, informed me frankly that he was unaware of many
of the indisputable facts which I produced to prove the diabolical
nature of Spiritualism, as shown in the immoral and wicked
teachings of its most prominent and accepted exponents. He
subsequently visited me on several occasions, and seemed to me
to be uneasy in mind, although still holding himself to be a
Spiritualist. I found he was resting entirely on the phenomena
which he had witnessed, the good origin of which he believed in ;
but when I, without discussing or admitting the genuineness of
all “ the signs and lying wonders,” pointed out that their reality
was not incompatible with a diabolical origin, he was much
confused, or, as Mr. Walker verbally described his mental
condition, “he was very much disturbed.” After one of these
conversations, he seems to have met Mr. Walker, who is the
publicly-acknowledged representative and lecturer of the Victorian
Association of Spiritualists ; and the result of that meeting was
the first letter in these pages, from which arose Mr. Walker’s
letter to me of the 6th February, and all that followed on either
his part or mine.
The reader of these letters will perceive that, after Mr. Walker’s
letter of 20th February, there is an interval of about three weeks,
during which I took no notice whatever of his extraordinary
effusion, which I deemed utterly unworthy of serious reply, so far
as he was personally concerned, since his letters had convinced
me of his logical incompetence, and, I regret to say, his moral
incompetence as a controversialist. I allowed the matter entirely
to drop, and did not take any action whatever as to publishing,
in any form, my views upon the subject, determining to wait
until a favourable opportunity for delivering a series of lectures
upon it should be given me by God, in His own good time.
But my silence was evidently misconstrued, by Mr. Walker and
his friends, into an evidence of fear ; and so he rushed forth with
his threatening letter of the 13th March, in which he stated his
intention of publishing the correspondence as it stood, unless I at


•once replied to his letter, which I found myself unable to describe
as other than “ a continent of infidel mud.” This threat, of
course, decided my course of action, and I at once informed him
of my intention, “ for the sake of others,” of answering his
letter, at the same time making certain fair stipulations as to the
publication of the correspondence—the chief of which was my
claim to read and approve the printers’ proofs ere they went
finally to press.
To that letter I received no answer; but I, nevertheless,
proceeded with my reply at once, and sent it to him in a few
days. Day after day passed, but there were no signs of the
publication of the letters, which he had been so ready to threaten
on the 13th March, when, as yet, I had not exercised my right of
reply—a right which he was compelled to recognize was mine.
Still there was silence- -all the oracles were dumb ; there was not
a whisper heard, where just before there had been such a display
of vain-glorious bluster. At last I determined to break the silence ;
and, after giving him nearly a clear day’s notice of my intention, I
called at his residence with my friend, Dr. Singleton. I asked when
and how he intended to print the correspondence, and offered, on
behalf of my friends, who desired its appearance, to bear one-half
•of the cost of printing it in a pamphlet form. To my surprise,
he coolly informed me that he was in no hurry to print it now;
and that he intended first to prepare “ a reply ” to my last letter,
which he purposed including with the rest in a pamphlet, to be
published just when it was convenient to him. I pointed out
that mine was “ the reply,” and that anything he might now write
would require “ a reply ” from me before publication, to which he
might demand a right of further rejoinder, and so the correspondence
might swell to an unreasonable bulk, too costly for publication.
He was impervious to reason ; was most offensive in manner and
speech ; repeatedly denounced me, with most excited gestures and
stamping of feet, itc., calling me “ a liar ” and other names; and
alleged that it was “ cowardly ” of me to wish the correspondence
to close at this point.
I asked him wherein it was so, and he said because I had
introduced totally new matter. Being pressed to specify, he
pointed to the passage on page 37, referring to Voltaire, Paine,
&c., which I at once showed him was only a reply to his assertions
concerning these persons on pp. 17 and 19. Admitting that, he
then alleged that my remarks at pp. 45-9, concerning Andrew
Jackson Davis, were entirely new matter ; but I pointed out that
these were only proofs in support of my previous assertions
concerning that writer, which he, at page 26, had asserted I had
“ acted dishonestly ” in making, and which it was, therefore,
imperatively necessary for me either to retract or to prove, and
I had done the latter. But reason was utterly thrown away


upon him, and only served to inflame his passion and increase his.
abusiveness.
I, therefore, intimated the fixed intention of my friends to.
publish the correspondence as it stood, and offered to send the
final proof-sheets for his inspection before they went to press, so
that he might see that every word he had written and received
was correctly printed.
He was kind enough to say that my offer was unnecessary, and
that he could trust my honour; but he strongly protested against
my friends’ intention, and made dreadful threats of exposure, &c.,
amidst a storm of which the interview closed.
I have been thus particular over these apparently trivial facts,
because of widespread misrepresentations of what occurred, which
have reached me from many sources, and for some of which Mr,
Walker is, I regret to say, directly responsible. All candid and
honest readers must judge as to this matter, and I cannot but hope
that all such will justify my action in publishing the correspondence
as it stands at this date.
After Mr. Walker’s letter of 13th March, I had no alternative
but to do so at at once, when he failed to fulfil his offensively-
expressed threat ; and, had I waited until he was ready to go to
press, no one can safely say how long that would have been. 1
have done, with the entire approval of experienced and valued
friends, what seemed right in my conscience, as in the sight of
God my Saviour, to promote whose cause and kingdom 1 alone
perform this duty, and with Him I can leave my justification
against all slanders.
And now, I desire to add to these pages some considerations
and facts as to the serious dangers which a spread of this “ Spiritual-
istic Pestilence” inevitably involves, and as to the serious grounds
which exist for supposing that such dangers are imminent, unless
prompt measures be taken to “ stamp it out,” as a kind of moral
and social small-pox which threatens the destruction of the bodies
and souls of tens of thousands around us.
There is a most erroneous impression abroad, in the minds of
many sincere Christians, that Spiritualism is not rapidly spreading,
and many point to the recent census in proof of that view; but
a closer acquaintance with facts would at once dispel that
illusion.
There are probably tens of thousands of Infidels and Spiritualists
in this country who allowed themselves, for various reasons, to
appear under religious denominations with which they have no
real connection whatever. There are also many persons, who
openly profess Christianity, but who are secretly Spiritualists ; and
—I say it with care, and caution, and with deep regret—several of
these traitors are to be found occupying Christian pulpits.
This is delicate, and even dangerous ground, I am aware ; but I


know that to be true whereof I affirm, and it is laid upon my con-
science to speak out the whole truth upon this matter, “ impugn it
whoso list.” Theirs’ be the blame with whom the shame lies. It is
absolutely necessary to use great plainness of speech ; for there
are dangerous rocks ahead, and it is important that honest men
should steer the ship, and not the blind tools of spiritual pirates.
In a singular manner, a few weeks ago, I discovered one of
these ministerial traitors in one of the principal pulpits of this
city. He was in the habit of meeting at seances with a certain
circle in Melbourne; and he agreed, on one occasion, to allow
“ the spirits” who patronized that circle to inspire his sermons on
a certain Sunday. He afterwards informed the circle that the
experiment was a most perfect success; and he declared that he
had seen the whole of what he had preached, written by “ the
spirits,” whom he permitted to control him, in beautiful letters, in
the open space before his eyes, whilst he was speaking ! 1
happened to hear one of those sermons, and at once detected
undoubtedly spiritualistic ideas, which led me to entertain strong
suspicions, which were speedily changed into certainty.
A member of the “ circle”—no other than the Mr, A. D. S
of this correspondence —boasted to me one day that they had a
popular minister amongst them, and stated the fact as to “ the
spirits” inspiring him to preach without previous trouble or study,
they providing everything from the text to the end. I was
offered his name in confidence, which I promptly declined to
receive ; but, I startled my informant, by at once naming the
minister, whom I had previously suspected. Mr. A. D. S
expressed the utmost surprise ; asked me how I knew ; said it
was a secret known only to a few; that, if it were known, “it
would ruin” the minister; and ended by begging me not to
mention my discovery. I reserved my rights, and made no
promise.
This is a significant fact. I do not think there are many such
instances to be found among ministers here. I know absolutely
of only another ; but that there should be even one is a disgrace,
and shows the reality of the danger. I record this case with
much grief; but it is high time the false security of many should
be dispelled, for the Enemy is in the very citadel of a slumbering
Church.
I have not seen it to be my duty to do more than warn the
minister in question, who still claims to be a Christian, whilst
accepting the aid of spirits who deny Christ’s divinity.
Deceit is the very atmosphere of Spiritualism, which has many
gradations—as I have elsewhere shown—but ends at last in the
awful doctrines and practices which my letters disclose. I never
knew of a single Spiritualist of long standing who did not “ fall away
from the faith,” if he was a Christian when he began: for the *'
| .


“ seducing spirits” are all agreed upon a denial of the divinity
and atonement of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amongst some of the
recent impersonations by these “ spirits of devils” are those of
the late Rev. John Graham, of Sydney, and Dr. Adam Cairns, of
this city, with both of whom I have had intercourse, when in the
flesh, concerning Spiritualism; and the utterly ignorant non-
sense which both these good and able men were represented as
talking, was enough to convince any person of sense, that these
were the utterances of “ lying spirits,” and not of those whom
they personated. In both cases, the “ lying spirit ” denied Christ’s
divinity and atonement.
But I submit that the horrible sea of vice into which I have,
in these letters, shown Spiritualism to be flowing, proves that the
phenomena must be of diabolical origin.
There is nothing whatever in common between the angelic
ministrations recorded in the Bible and the teachings and actions
of “ the spirits” who now curse this earth, and withstand all that is
true and good ; whilst they have everything in common with those
demons against whom the Lord Jesus and His apostles fought.
Spiritualists themselves are, sometimes, driven to admit, and to
find some way of accounting for, the indisputable abominations of
Spiritualism ; and, in attempting to perform their impossible task,
they often expose themselves to well-merited contempt by their
self-condemnatory admissions, and absurdly contradictory explana-
tions. For instance, Dr. J. M. Peebles writes as follows :
“ Low, undeveloped spirits, from force of habit, &c., may enjoy
the sight of lasciviousness, or for some scheming wicked purpose
may psychologically lead mediums into debauchery and the
unfruitful ivorks of darkness. Low, selfish, disorderly spirits are
at the bottom of the ‘ free lust movement ,’ known by the more
attractive term, * social freedom.’”
Again, the chief prophet of this dispensation of devils, Andrew
Jackson Davis, in a recent book, entitled “The Diakka and their
Earthly Victims, being an Explanation of much that is false and
repulsive in Spiritualism ,” says —“A Diakka (the name of an
order of spirits) is an unbalanced, not an evil person; he wanders
in his own congenial forest, never resting, never satisfied with
life; often amusing himself with jugglery and tricky witticisms ;
invariably victimizing others; secretly tormenting mediums,
causing them to exaggerate in speech, and to falsify by acts ;
unlocking and unbolting the street doors of your bosom and
memory ; pointing your feet into wrong paths, and far more.”
And can any reasonable being believe that the new gospel is of
God, which has lying and vicious spirits for its evangelists 1 It
is blasphemy of the vilest and most awful nature to impute
such wickedness to God. But it is a blasphemy from which
Spiritualists do not shrink.


It will be observed that A. J. Davis says the Diakka spirit is
“ not AN evil person,” though he is a spiritual vagabond who
delights in inflicting pain, in teaching mediums to lie in word and
deed, and in leading human beings into “ wrong paths, and far
more.” It may, therefore, be reasonably asked—What is it, then,
to be an “ evil person,” if such spirits as these are not, spirits
which are leading men “into wrong paths,” and “into debauchery
and the unfruitful works of darkness 1 ”
The spiritualistic answ T er to this question is given in these
letters, and it is to that point I venture to direct the attention of
every honest, truth-loving, and virtuous man and woman whom
my words can reach, and, especially, the attention of every faithful
friend and follower of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. That
answer is in four words, and those are of their own choosing,
“Evil does not exist.” I refer for proof to page 9, where these
words are quoted, with many of a like nature, from the work of
an authoritative exponent of Spiritualism, Dr. A. B. Child, of
Boston, U.S.A. Hence, it is also an article of spiritualistic faith
that “ there are no evil spirits ” — see page 47, where this
doctrine is laid bare in their own words, as follows: —“Broadly
and unreservedly I do declare that I know nothing of the
existence of evil spirits anywhere in God’s creation. All spirits
are good, because immortal.” Consequently, A. J. Davis, and J.
M. Peebles, and all advanced Spiritualists, may very well say that
those spiritual burglars and leaders in debauchery called the
“ Diakka ” are not evil. They are their very good friends, who
go about “ unlocking and unbolting the street doors of the bosom
and memory ” of their deluded victims, stealing from them every
virtue and truly good desire, and Ailing them with every vice,
and lie, and evil passion. The proof of this is to be found, with
considerable detail and illustration, in my letters of 13th Februaiy
and 18th March, to which I refer the reader.
The bearing of these teachings upon the phenomena of
Spiritualism is, I again repeat, surely self-evident proof of
the diabolical origin of these appearances and messages, so
far as these are genuine and not the result of contemptible
trickery upon the part of the mediums, or of the delusions,
resulting from their own wickedness, to which both they and
their victims are exposed without the intervention of evil spirits.
The exposures by Baldwin, Maskeleyne, Cook, and many
others j the records of criminal courts in Europe and America j
and facts regarding the knavery of certain mediums in Australia,
which are within my own knowledge, are convincing proofs of the
fact that portions of the phenomena are pitiful jugglery on the
part of the mediums. An instance of that kind occurred in
Sydney about two years ago, where a person named C , who
was the partner of a notorious medium there named R , came


to me, and informed me of the details of a certain trick played by
K, , with complete success, upon a number of literary, political,
and scientific persons in that city. A public intimation by me
that the facts were known, and might be used, caused the imme-
diate departure of the medium, and the cessation of impudent
nonsense and threats which came from the “spirits” attending
that circle. At the same time C frankly informed me that he
was still a Spiritualist, though he would no longer associate
with professional mediums, whom he described in strong lan-
guage ; but he was beginning to question the good origin of
certain phenomena, which he knew to be genuine beyond ques-
tion. Only two days ago, I had a long conversation with a most
intelligent gentleman, holding a good position in the Civil Service
of this colony, who informed me that he was for several years
a firm believer in Spiritualism as a divine revelation beneficial to
man ; but that he had for some time past become convinced of its
diabolical and immoral character, whilst he was still firmly con-
vinced of the reality of much of the phenomena, in the form of
appearances, messages, and other “ lying wonders,” such as “ mate-
rialization of spirits,” all of which he believes to be the work of
“seducing spirits.” I may add that this gentleman is not a
Christian, nor is he an Infidel—he is a sincere, honest, and
upright man, of large brain power and some literary fame, who
is feeling his way back again into a life of faith, and is at present
a close and careful student of the Bible, which he places far above
all human productions. I may also add, “on account of whom it
may concern,” that he has given me very much information con-
cerning the practical working of Spiritualism in this city, and its
effects upon its leaders and their followers, especially as regards
its influence upon their moral conduct, all of which I have care-
fully noted, and will, after proper inquiry, use, should their future
behaviour render it necessary. 1 have been much urged to make
use, in this introduction, of certain other indisputable facts which
have recently occurred in this city, proving the horrible conse-
quences of Spiritualism ; but I reserve them, and trust I may not
require to employ such weapons against “the generation of vipers”
who are now working such woe.
But here let me publicly ask a question, addressed also to
“ whom it may concern.” When is Mr. Walker prepared to
discuss publicly with me—and it should be in an audience of
men only—the proposal which I made in my first letter (nee
page 1), viz.—“ Do the phenomena and teachings of ‘ Modern
Spiritualism ’ warrant the conclusion that they will promote the
intellectual, moral, social, and spiritual welfare of mankind 1 ”
He declared verbally, on Ist April, in the presence of Dr.
Singleton, and in a most tragic voice and manner, that he there
and then “ challenged ” me to discuss “ Spiritualism pure and


simple.” I requested him to put it in writing, which he said he
would, after we left, and forward it to me. More than a week has
passed ; but it has not yet appeared. Account for it I cannot. It
may be that “ the spirits ” keep the day on which he made it a kind
of “ All Fools’ Day,” and that some “ Diakka ” had control of him
just at that moment —he claims to speak under inspiration, it must
be remembered —and had, as A. J. Davis would say, been “amusing
himself with jugglery and tricky witticisms,” or “victimizing”
him, or “ secretly tormenting ” him, or “ causing him to exaggerate
in speech,” &c., &c. Who can tell 1 I gravely suspect it was a
“ Diakka,” who had been “ unlocking and unbolting the street
doors of his bosom and memory ”on that particular morning. I
thought so at the time, and I think so now. Perhaps he will
explain, though, that his proper guide and familiar spirit was
most unfortunately absent in some distant part of “ the Summer-
land,” as Spiritualists call their heaven, on that one day. But
then he must be a poor kind of protector, seeing he knew the
previous day that I was coming. Perhaps, also, Mr. Walker
and his friends did cry, as did some of old, “ O Baal, hear us ! ”
(1 Kings xviii. 26—27). Anyhow, as in their case, “There was
no voice, nor any that answered.” Ah, but who can tell whether
he cried loud enough; for Mr. Walker has often declared, when
lecturing, that “he is a spirit,” of very high degree indeed, who
controls and directs him. Ah, but, as Elijah said of Baal,
that “spirit” was either “talking” (or “meditating” as the
margin reads), or he was “ pursuing ” (perhaps there was a law case
on amongst the demons, or a hunt after some other soul to destroy
it), or he was “ on a journey ” (possibly to a gathering of lunatics
in the moon, or elsewhere), or “ peradventure he sleepeth, and
must be awaked.” Well, it is high time for him to rub his
sleepy eyes ; for I am greatly afraid the “ Diakka ” are spoiling
his pupil.
But, meanwhile, some “ spirit ” must have seen the mess into
which their protege had fallen, and, for the present at all events,
has managed to keep him quiet. Indeed, I hear, even whilst
writing these pages, that some of “ the spirits ” have at certain
seances in this city been saying very uncomplimentary things
concerning him for venturing upon a correspondence with me;
and, although he has been their faithful slave for years, scarcely
daring to call his soul his own, permitting them to control him
for many years and speak through him, just as a boy blows through
a tin whistle, any tune they pleased ; and, although he is even now
“ Lecturer ” for the “Association ” of their earthly victims—yet,
I am credibly informed that many of “ the spirits ” mean to
turn him adrift, if they can possibly manage it. This is
apparently cruel. But what else could be expected, if it takes
place. These “ spirits ” are wise in their own way. But they


will find new tools, they will make new fools—some are eager,
already, for his place —and they will again abandon them to their
fate when trouble comes.
That is the well-ascertained method of the Devil, and all his
“ seducing spirits ” in every age, from the time of Cain, “who was
of that wicked one, and slew his brother '’ (1 John hi. 12), to the
days of Judas Iscariot, “when Satan entered into” him (Luke
xxii. 3) and made him a thief, a liar, a money-worshipper, and a
murderer —both of whom the demons abandoned to shame,
infamy, self-condemnation, and despair. Since their days, until
the present, many have followed in their footsteps, and in other
paths, giving heed to evil spirits ; —“ These speak evil of things
which they know not ] but what they know naturally, as brute
beasts, in those things they corrupt themselves. Woe unto
them ! for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily
after the error of Balaam for _ reward, and perished in the gain-
saying of Core” (Jude 11-12).
And this awful and truthful description of “ these filthy
dreamers,” who “defile the flesh, despise dominion, and speak
evil of dignities” (Jude 8) brings me to a brief consideration,
intended especially for Christians, of the teachings of the Holy
Scriptures upon this subject of Spiritualism.
It is of especial consequence that we consider the teachings of
the Spirit of God, in the “ more sure word of prophecy; where-
unto we do well that we take heed, as unto a light that shineth in
a dark place, until the day dawn and the day-star arise in our
hearts” (2 Peter i. 19). I will, for the present, examine prin-
cipally the New Testament prophecy bearing upon this subject.
Let me observe (1) that the Lord Jesus has foretold, and
prepared His followers for, this conflict with the Powers of Hell
and Darkness.
His own entrance upon His earthly ministry began with
that conflict, and although we have not any record of the
details of that great struggle for the empire of the human
race, yet we have the closing scenes, in which we see that by His
use of “the sword of the Spirit”— “it is written”— He gives
the Great Tempter himself, after a forty days’ battle, the final
blows which put him to flight (Matthew iv. 1-11). His whole
coui'se of ministry is beautifully summed up by Peter (Acts x. 38) :
“ God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost, and
with power; who went about doing good, and healing all that
were oppressed of the Devil : for God was with Him.” He
traced physical, as well as spiritual, diseases to this cause ; and,
when healing a woman who could “in nowise lift up herself,”
.and was “ bowed together,” He recognized in her “ A spirit of
infirmity ;” and when blamed for casting out this devil on the
Sabbath day, He justified Himself by saying, “ Ought not this


woman, whom Satan hath bound, lo ! these eighteen years,
be loosed from her infirmity on the Sabbath day” (Luke xiii.
10-17). He constantly “cast out devils,” and He was accom-
panied in His journeyings throughout Palestine (see Luke viii.
1-3) by “ the Twelve, and certain women which had been
healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary that was called
Magdalene, from whom seven devils had gone out, and Joanna
the wife of Chuza, Herod’s steward, and Susanna, and many
others who ministered unto Him of their substance.” It is also
recorded that “He called the Twelve together, and gave them
power over all devils (Luke ix. 1) ; that “ the Seventy
returned with joy, saying, Lord, even the devils are subject
unto us in Thy name,” that He said, “ I give unto you power
to tread on serpents and SCORPIONS (symbolical words for
devils), and over all the power of the Enemy” (Luke x. 17-22);
that His last earthly conflict, like His first, was with the Devil,
when, just before His crucifixion and death He said, “the
Prince of this At;O RLI) cometh, and hath nothing in Me” (John
xiv. 30); and the Apostle John, long after, sums up the whole
object of Christ’s manifestation to be “ that He might destroy
the WORKS of the Devil” (1 John hi, 8) ; thus showing Him to
be the fulfiller of all Old Testament prophecies, the first of which
was given when God said to that old serpent, the Devil, in
Paradise, “ I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed (between devils and sons of God):
it shall bruise thy iiead, and thou shalt bruise His heel.”
Now, this work has been begun by Christ; is going on by His
Spirit; and will be finished when, in due time, “ He hath put all
things under His feet.” So that the Church of Christ may
assuredly rest upon the prophecy of God’s word :—“ And the
God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly ”
(Romans xvi. 20).
I observe (2) that Christ gave “ power over all devils ” to His
people by the gift of the Holy Spirit; that this power was
exercised throughout the Apostolic age ; and that the conflict with
the spirits of hell and darkness was set forth as the Great Warfare
of the Church of Christ.
The promise of Christ was that they were to “receive
power when the Holy Ghost is come upon you” (Acts i. 8) ;
and this “power,” which came at Pentecost, remains now,
according to the promise of our Lord, who said, “He shall be
with you for ever” (John xiv. 16). The manifestations of this
power were shown in the gifts of convincing speech conferred
upon believers (Acts ii.), which resulted in the immediate conver-
sion of three thousand souls (verse 41). In gifts of heading added
thereto, one remarkable case, that of the man lame from birth
who sat at the “ Beautiful ” gate of the Temple, resulting in the


immediate conversion of five thousand men (Acts iv. 4). In yift&
of prevailing prayer (Acts iv. 24—31) for “when they had
prayed, the place was shaken wherein they were gathered, and
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they spake the woid
of God with boldness.” In gifts of discerning evil spirits, as
in the cases of Ananias and Sapphira, when Peter said, “ Ananias,
why hath Satan filled thy heart to lie to the Holy Ghost ”
(Acts v. 3). And lastly, in gifts of power to cast out and to
control devils, as when Peter healed “ everyone who was
VEXED WITH unclean spirits” (Acts v. 16) ; or as when, through
the preaching of Philip, in the city of Samaria, many were cast out,
“ for from many of those which had unclean spirits, they came
out, crying with a loud voice ’ (Acts viii. 4—B) j or as when Paul
conquered that “child of the devil,” Elymas, the sorcerer, at
Cyprus, who was struck with blindness, and silenced (Acts xiii.
6-12) ; s or as when, at Philippi, the same Apostle, being “sore
troubled” with “a spirit of divination” which possessed a
■certain maid there, “turned and said to the spirit, I charge
thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her, and it
■CAME OUT THAT very hour ” (Acts xvi. 16-18) ; or as at Ephesus,
where “the evil spirits went out” (Acts xix. 12), at which
place, also, when “certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took
upon’ them to call over them which had evil spirits the name of
the Lord Jesus, saying, we adjure you by Jesus whom Paul
preacheth,” the “ spirits ” would not own these hypocrites, and
so one “ evil spirit answered, and said, Jesus I know, and Paul
I know, but who are ye 1 And the man in whom the evil spirit
was, leaped on them, and overcame them, and prevailed against
them, so that they fled out of that house, naked and wounded ”
(Acts xix. 15-16). A warning to all sham Christians !
And these illustrations of the fact that this “power over all
devils ” was directly exercised throughout the Apostolic age by
believers in the Lord Jesus, “ in the power of the Spirit,” are also
supported by the inspired exhortations to its continued exei cise,
and by reminders that it is with these “ devils that the Chris-
tian’s warfare lies—in every condition, and in every age.
Paul warns the Church at Corinth against those who would
“ corrupt their minds from the simplicity and purity that is
toward Christ,” and who act as “the Serpent” who beguiled
Eve in his craftiness ” (2 Corinthians xi. 3). And, in the same
chapter (verses 13-15), he declares that “such men are false
apostles, deceitful workers, transforming themselves into the
Apostles of Christ.” This transformation, he says, is a proof
■of their being under diabolical control, for he argues that they
are the “ministers ” of Satan, who “ himself is transformed into
:an angel of light.” This warning is similar to that of our Lord
(Matthew xxiv. 24), where He says, “ Eor there shall arise false


Christs and false prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders ,
insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall deceive the very
elect.” And, in addition to these Satan-inspired deceivers, Paul
reminds the Corinthian Christians that they must not look upon
idols as if they represented nothing, but that the idolaters around
them were really “sacrificing to devils,” were holding “fellow-
ship with devils,” and were drinking, in their heathen feasts,
“ the cup of devils,” and sitting at “ the table of devils ”
(1 Corinthians x. 19-22).
Here let me, in passing, note that it is within my own know-
ledge that the principle of diabolical communion and sacrifice is
at the present moment fully established amongst Modern
Spiritualists, at what are known as “ materialization seances ” in
this city, and elsewhere, to which silly men and women bring
bouquets of flowers, and other things of more importance, for “ the
spirits of devils ” with whom they meet. On another occasion, I
shall have more to say on that subject. But I continue.
Paul warns “ younger women,” in his epistle to Timothy
(1 Timothy v. jr4-15), of their danger in giving “occasion
to the Adversary to speak reproachfully; for some are
already turned aside after Satan.” Peter likewise warns
“ all of you ”to “be sober, be vigilant; because your
Adversary the Devil, as a roaring lion, walketh about,
seeking whom he may devour : whom resist stedfast in
the faith” (1 Peter v. 8-9). James speaks of “the devils,
also, who believe and tremble ” (James ii. 19) ; and declares
that “ an evil tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity,” which is “ set
on fire of hell ” — thus tracing all speech that defiles and
hurts the good, to its origin in the “ spirits of devils.” John writes
to “ young men ” who are “ strong,” and in whom “the word of
God abideth,” rejoicing that they “ have overcome the Wicked
One” (1 John ii. 14). He also says, “He that is begotten of
God keepeth himself, and that Wicked One toucheth him not ”
(1 John v. 18). He speaks of those who are “children op the
devil” (1 John iii. 10); and warns the “children of God ’
against lying “ spirits,” and “ false prophets,” who deny that
“ Jesus Christ is come in the flesh ; ” telling them that “ this is
that Spirit op Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should
come, and even now already is it in the world (1 John iv. 1-3).
Again I observe, in passing, this is the sin which makes
Unitarianism an open door, and broad highway, into Spi-
ritualism : for the denial of Jesus as the Christ, God’s anointed
and eternal Son, is a common article of faith with
As James puts it, in a passage already alluded to, the
Unitarians, who say they believe in one God, are in agreement
with the Spiritualists, who believe in many devils —“Thou
belie vest there is one God; thou doest well : the devils also


believe and tremble.” Fatal and false is the acknowledgment of
God which rejects faith in the divinity of His Son ! But I
continue.
That the warfare of the Christian is to be against the powers of
hell, is most surely made clear by these teachings of the Spirit of
God.
Paul said, when addressing Agrippa, that it was for that purpose
Jesus had sent him forth, giving his commission in these words :
“ I send thee to open their eyes, and to turn them from dark-
ness TO LIGHT, and FROM THE POWER OF SATAN UNTO GOD, that
they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them
which are sanctified by faith that is in Me” (Acts xxvi. 14-18).
And truly he could say, “ I was not disobedient for he went
forth, and from Jerusalem to Athens, and from Athens to Rome,
he fought in many cities and lands, for thirty years, amidst
countless devils, with “ the Prince of the power of the air, the
Spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience” (Ephesians
ii. 2). His courage never failed ; and although, at the time he
wrote these words, he was an “ ambassador in bonds,” awaiting a
martyr’s death and crown, in prison at Rome, yet he demanded
prayer for “ utterance,” that he might “ speak boldly, as I ought
to speak” (Ephesians vi. 19-20). And, although he said “no
man stood by me” when he stood before the heathen tyrant who
“sacrificed to devils,” yet he could say “ the Lord stood with me
and strengthened me, .... and I was delivered out of
the mouth or the lion” —the Devil—who would have fain made
his heart to fear by his demoniac roaring. And it is with the
divinely-inspired words of that glorious hero, who shortly after
“ finished his course,” and received his “ crown of righteousness,”
that I will close this section of my argument. They are the words
of the Spirit of God to the Church in this, as in that, day:—
“Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the Devil. For our wrestling is not
against flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against
the powers, against the world-rulers of this darkness, against
the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly [the upper
air] places” (Ephesians vi. 11-12).
These solemn words must close the proofs in support of the
third portion of my second observation j and I submit that its
truth is fully proved from these inspired Scriptures, to whose
authority every true Christian owes allegiance.
I now observe (3) that the Scriptures declare that this conflict
with evil spirits is to increase in intensity until the latter times,
when these “ spirits ” will put forth mightier and subtler powers,
and make a determined effort to possess themselves of the whole
world, and of every soul therein.
The prophecies in the New Testament afford, clearly and


definitely, conclusive proof of this observation. I quote but three
of these, as being sufficient
The first is in 1 Timothy iv. 1-2 :—“ But the Spirit saith
expressly, that in later times some shall fall away from the faith,
GIVING HEED TO SEDUCING SPIRITS AND DOCTRINES OF DEVILS,
through the hypocrisy of men that speak lies, branded in their
own conscience as with a hot iron ; forbidding to marry, and
commanding to abstain from meats, which God created to be
received with thanksgiving by them that believe and know the
truth.” This prophecy is fulfilled in Spiritualism in its main
features; and I point to pp. 47-49, in confirmation especially of
that clause “ forbidding to marry,” and to my letters generally, as
exposing “ doctrines” which are so foul and fiendishly wicked, that
they must be those of “devils.” Instance p. 8, where “virtue”
and “vice,” a “lie” and the “truth,” are taught by the “spirits”
to be of equal value—to be, in fact, not words conveying opposite
ideas, but words conveying identical ideas, as in the following
expressions : — “ Wijat is called evil is good ; a lie is a truth
INTRINSICALLY ; VICE AND VIRTUE, TOO, ARE BEAUTIFUL IN THE
EYES OP THE SOUL ; VIRTUE IS GOOD, AND SIN IS GOOD.”
The next passage to which I refer is in 2 Thessalonians ii. 3-12,
where, after saying that ere “ the day of the Lord ” comes there
must be a falling away first, and the Man of Sin be revealed, the
Son of Perdition, he that opposeth and exalteth himself against
all that is called God, or that is worshipped ; so that he sitteth in
the temple of God, setting himself forth as God.” This has surely
been fulfilled in the triumph of the “ seducing spirits ” who have
long ruled the apostate Church of Rome, and who, on 18th July,
1870, promulgated the diabolical doctrine of the Pope’s infal-
libility. By that doctrine, as defined in the Constitution “Pastor
JEternus ,” chapters 3 and 4, that infallibility is defined as making
the Pope the “ one supreme pastor ” with “ the entire and
SUPREME POWER OP JURISDICTION,” and “ THE ABSOLUTE FULNESS
of this supreme power ; ” and that, therefore, the “definitions
of the roman pontiff are unalterable.”
Here is the “ Man of Sin ” revealed ! He has approved of
Mgr. Berteand saying, “ The Father and the Pope may have,
and probably have, secrets between them in which Christ does
not participate, and thus it is practically safer to go to the Pope
than to Christ , for, when the pope speaks, it is more than Christ
speaking, it is God the Father himself,” He has allowed
Cardinal Manning to say that he, the Pope, may rightly say “ I
CLAIM TO BE THE SUPREME JUDGE AND DIRECTOR OF THE CON-
SCIENCES of men ; 7 am the sole, last supreme judge of what is
right and wrong.” He has allowed a newspaper, published
under his own direction, in Rome —the Civilta Cattolica —to
say:—“When the Pope reflects, it is God who thinks in
b


him.” Hence he is seen to be, as prophesied, “sitting in the
temple of God, setting himself forth as God.”
But, associated with him, in these latter days (see verses 8 and
9) there is to be revealed “ The Lawless One, whom the Lord
Jesus shall slay with the breath of His mouth, and bring to
nought by the manifestation of His coming; even he whose
COMING IS ACCORDING TO THE WORKING OF SATAN, with all power,
and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceit of unrighteous-
ness for them that are perishing.” I suggest that this describes
Spiritualism accurately.
I would further draw attention to another prophecy, which
seems to bear out this interpretation.
I allude to the passage in the Book of Revelation xvi. 13-16,
to which I have also referred at page 13 of this pamphlet, but
again quote here as necessary to this argument. It is part of
that which happens after the “ sixth vial ” is poured out upon the
river Euphrates, which dries up; and which symbol is generally
held to apply to our days, and the rapid drying up of the
Turkish Empire in the East, which is going on daily. Then the
inspired vision of “things to come” continues: —“And I saw
coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of
the Beast, and out of the mouth of the False Prophet, three
unclean spirits, as it were frogs: for they are spirits of
devils, working signs; which go forth unto the kings of the
whole world, to gather them together unto the War of the great
day of God, the Almighty.”
As the Dragon represents the direct power of Satan, it is
probably here that, amongst other forms of Satanic delusion in
these days, Spiritualism is foretold, with all its “spirits of devils.”
The Beast is generally supposed to represent the Romish Church,
and other forms of ecclesiastical corruption; and I have already
shown, that at this very time there is a revival of diabolical pride
and imposture. The False Prophet, who comes last, doubtless
refers to Mohammedanism; and the prospects of a revival of
Moslem fanaticism throughout the East are said to be many—
some of them, as in Egypt, are already apparent. Hence, it
seems to me that Spiritualism, as one powerful form of this
prophesied going-forth of “ the spirits of devils,” was to be ex-
pected about this time—and here it certainly is, a most dan-
gerous ally to ’all the other existing delusions imposed upon men
by “ seducing spirits.”
But, even if my application of these prophesies be incorrect in
some particulars, I submit humbly that my third observation is
none the less proved, and that a most desperate conflict is lying
before the Church with “ the spirits of devils.” The utmost
courage, vigilance, wisdom, faith, and power are needed at this
crisis; and to her Lord the Church must turn her eyes and prayers:


for only by the “ breath of His mouth, and the manifestation of
His coming,” can these demon hosts be overcome, and brought
“ to nought.”
And now I close this introduction.
I am very sensible of its many defects ; but it is all I could
accomplish in the brief time at my disposal for its composition.
Yet, I trust that it will promote the glory of God, and the welfare
of man, awakening many to a sense of their danger, and arousing
a spirit of determination upon the part of the Church of Christ in
Australia, to resist the advancing tide of Spiritualism in all its
seducing forms.
Spiritualism lies, I submit, unmasked in these pages, imperfect
though they are. And, when the monster is stripped, what is
seen 1 I can only reply in the inspired words— “ Seducing
SPIRITS AND DOCTRINES OF DEVILS.”
What, then, shall be done 1 “ When The Enemy shall come in
like a Hood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard
against him!” (Isaiah lix. 19). In whose hands shall this
standard be placed 1 “ Who is she that looketh forth as the
morning, fair as the moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an
army with banners!” (Song of Solomon vi. 10). Tis the Church
of Christ; and she alone can lift up the Royal Standard, and carry
it on to victory. May every soldier of her army in this fair
Australian land “ put on the whole armour of God, and with-
stand “ the spiritual hosts of wickedness,” who are now Hooding
our cities with every vice, and destroying every virtue.
Lord Jesus, come !
Again this earth by sin oppressed,
By demons from beneath possessed —•
Some dark and foul, as hell and night,
And some transformed, like sons of light—
Usurp Thy throne within the heart,
And bid men choose the evil part.
Lord Jesus, come !
Lord Jesus, come !
Thine answer sweet our spirits hear,
It soothes our grief, we cannot fear ;
It came to him on Patmos’ isle,
Who loved and lived on earth awhile ;
It comes to us, —“ I quickly comb.”
Yea, “ Even so, Lord Jesus, come ! ”
Lord Jesus, come !
It is with very much reluctance that I obtrude upon the public
attention, as an appendix to this introduction, some words of
explanation concerning matters of personal concern, which Mr.


Walker lias seen fit to bring forward in las letter of 20th
February, The passage to which I refer will be found on page 17.
Mr. Walker endeavours to justify his reference to my affairs,
by complaining of my having described him as “ a most audacious
infidel mercenary.” But readers will see, on page 6, that 1
applied that term justly to him, in a moral sense generally, and
not specially in a pecuniary sense, as he implies that I did. But,
like a naughty boy, he thought he had got some hard “ stones ’ to
throw at my reputation. He will find though, that I do not live
in “a glass house;” and that his “stones” have done me no
damage: for they are only the mud of falsehood, which will not
stick.
It will be observed that Mr. Walker makes two statements.
The first is, that he has been told that I have collected <£20,000
for to build a church, in which I am to preach, and the second,
that I have received very considerable sums of money for
preaching.
Both of these statements, which he has taken the responsibility
of repeating from hearsay, are absolutely false.
I might content myself with that reply, and say no more ; but,
since I have heard of wide-spread calumnies concerning these
matters having obtained currency, by means of “ lying spirits,’
not only here, but in South Australia and New South Wales, 1
take this opportunity of placing both my friends and enemies
throughout these colonies in possession of some facts.
First, as to my having collected £20,000 to build a church. This
“ peculiarly spiritualistic ” fiction owes its origin, doubtless, to
the fact which was publicly announced on 12th August, 1880, in
Sydney, that I had been promised a sum of £21,000 to build a
Free Christian Tabernacle, in which to continue and establish the
Free Christian Mission, which I conducted for nearly three years
in theatres and public halls, and in other ways, in that city. But
it remains until this day an unfulfilled promise ; and is likely to
continue so : for the person who made it has proved to be a
swindler and an impostor. He came to me with most respectable
credentials, which he had secured by a successful course of
imposture elsewhere. He deceived some of the shrewdest men of
business in London, Adelaide, and Sydney, by means of forged
legal documents, letters written by confederates in the United
States and in England, and in many other ways. Amongst my
companions in affliction, through him, are bankers, land agents,
lawyers, manufacturers, and tradesmen—and, in one instance, he
lived for seven months, after his return to England, with persons
of wealth and station, amongst wliom he passed for a gentleman
of large prospective property. He “ died ” in Paris last year,
according to memorial mourning cards which he caused to be
issued ; but he has, it is said, come to life again, within the last


few weeks, in Queensland, where he made some attempts to practice
his vile profession. He reminds me much of the “ Diakka ”to
whom I have referred in the foregoing pages ; and I suppose A. J.
Davis and Mr, Walker would agree to define him as “an
unbalanced, not an evil person.” The Police, however, by whom
he is “ wanted,” differ seriously from the Spiritualists on such
matters, as I am afraid William Henry Quintun Holding, or
whatever he now calls himself, will find some day. The Lord
have mercy upon him. He has in some ways greatly impeded me
in the work to which I have consecrated my life, and caused me
not a little sorrow; but the Lord has sustained me, amidst a time
of severe trial consequent upon his robberies from myself, and,
what I have felt still more keenly, his robberies from dear friends
in Sydney, and elsewhere. “ But £he Lord knoweth how to
deliver the godly out of temptation, and to reserve the unjust, unto
the day of judgment to be punished.” And with the Lord I leave
this matter. “ Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right ?
As to the second statement, a very few words will suffice. It
has not even a shadow of fact to rest its untruth upon. My kind
and devoted friend, the Treasurer of my late Mission in Sydney,
with whose name and address I can furnish doubters, could
inform Mr. Walker that, although I preached for years to large
audiences in that city, the income barely sufficed to cover the
Mission expenses, leaving me usually nothing, and sometimes
a little less.
I trust that an indulgent public will not grudge me this
liberty of explaining these most painful personal matters j and
will remember, that this necessity was thrust upon me by Mr.
Walker’s insinuations.
It is the first explanation I have made of a matter in which
many throughout Australia are interested, and it is likely to be
the last. I have no reason to feel ashamed of my part in these
matters, however much I have had reason to feel grief and
disappointment at the interruptions to work amongst those whom,
for more than seven years, I loved and lived for, in Sydney. I
cannot, at present, see all God’s “ reasons why for those but
I am glad that I can say from my heart, “ Thy will be done.”
It only remains for me to add, that this pamphlet has been
printed at the request, and at the entire cost, of friends in this
city. On their behalf, I desire to inform the public, that the net
proceeds of its sale will be devoted to the funds of Dr. Singleton’s


“Temporary Home for Friendless and Fallen Women” in
Collingwood, an institution which has done, and is doing, to my
certain knowledge, a work of the noblest kind, with, in many
cases, the most gratifying temporal and eternal results.
JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.
Melbourne, 11 th April, 1882.


SPIRITUALISM UNMASKED.
Hawthorn, 6th February, 1882.
Dear Sir, — In connection with our conversation, would you
have any objections to enter into a public discussion on the
following:—You to affirm “ that Orthodoxy is conducive to
morality and progress,” and Mr. Thomas Walker, who is now in
Melbourne, to affirm “ that Infidelity is conducive to morality
and progress?”—Yours very truly,
A. D. S.
Rev. J. A. Dowie, Coffee Palace,
Collins-street, Melbourne.
Victoria Coffee Palace, Collins-street, '
Melbourne, 6th February, 1882.
Dear Sir, — Your note received. Permit me to ask, does this
challenge to meet Mr. Thomas Walker proceed from him, or
those who think with him in any degree, or is it simply a personal
inquiry on your own part ?
I have hitherto declined to enter upon public discussions of
this kind ; and, whilst I have not altered in my disinclination for
such tournaments as they have been generally conducted, I am
deeply sensible of the absolute necessity of dealing with this
subject in some public way as early as I can find convenient.
If, however, there ever should be a public debate on “ Spirit-
ualism,” in which I should take a part, I should wish the question
differently stated to the proposal you have made. Instead of
discussing “ Is orthodox Christianity, or Infidelity, conducive to
morality and progress ? ” it would be better to confine the dis-
cussion to one question, and to define the nature of that question,
and the limits within which it should be discussed, as clearly and
carefully as possible.
If the question wei’e —“ Do the phenomena and teachings of
‘Modern Spiritualism’ warrant the conclusion that they will


promote the intellectual, moral, social, and spiritual welfare of
mankind 1 ?” I should, under certain circumstances, be prepared to
take the negative. But I bind myself to no course of action by
this note. 1 simply await an answer to my first question.
With sincere desires for your highest welfare —I am, faithfully
yours,
JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.
Mr. A. D. S., Hawthorn.
Hawthorn, 7th February, 1882.
Dear Sir, —I have received yours of the 6th inst. In answer,
I have to state that, after leaving you at the Coffee Palace, I met
Mr. Walker, and mentioned to him our conversation. He said,
“ I would like to meet Mr. Dowie in public debate on the question
of morality, freethought, &c.” I have sent your letter to me to
Mr. Walker, and he will answer the latter part of it.—Yours
very truly,
A. D. S.
P.S.—I trust you and he will be able to arrange matters satis-
factorily, so that truth may prevail.—A.D.S.
6 Carolina-terrace, Drummond-street,
Carlton, Bth February, 1882.
Bev. Sir, — Mr. S has forwarded me a copy of his letter to
you, and your answer thereto, with the request that I will reply
to your question and remarks.
In the first place, I believe I am responsible for the challenge
to you. Mr. S and I were talking over various matters,
based upon a conversation he had had with you, and whilst doing
so, I asked him if you were ready to defend your cause in public.
As he did not know, I requested him to ask you the question;
and, for the purpose of giving him something to go upon, I
worded the two propositions which he sent to you in his letter.
I am glad to see that there is a prospect of your coming
forward in defence of your position. It is one of the strongest
arguments for Infidelity that its opponents either cannot, or dare
not, meet its advocates in the fair field of battle.
You suggest a change in the propositions. Why? I think
<£ Infidelity” includes all you state, and gives you a wider field to
work in. Infidelity not only covers Spiritualism, but Rational-
ism, Materialism, Atheism, Deism, &c., &c. Surely, as a clergy-
man, you must be convinced that none of these are conducive to
morality and progress. In the same manner, “ Orthodox Christ-
ianity” covers every sect, and gives me the same room to work in
my field.


The question, to my mind, thus resolves itself : —Are you
willing to have the merits of Christianity and Infidelity publicly
defended by their respective advocates, under such circumstances
that the hearers may compare and judge according to the evidence
then adduced.—l remain, yours truly,
THOS. WALKER.
Rev. J. A. Dowie.
Victoria Coffee Palace, Collins-street,
Melbourne, 10th February, 1882.
Dear Sir, —Yours of Bth did not reach me until late yesterday.
I now clearly understand you to be the author of the proposals
•contained in Mr. S ’s letter to me of Bth fnst.
As the challenge to me arose out of my conversations with Mr.
S on “ Modern Spiritualism,” I do not see why I should be
asked to enter upon a discussion on “ Orthodox Christianity,” or
“ Infidelity,” with the numerous aliases which you have appended
thereto.
In my conversations with Mr. S I kept strictly to the
point at issue, viz. —“ Is Spiritualism good and true, or the
■opposite I ” It is not, therefore, I who change the basis of
discussion, but you ; and I utterly fail to see that to widen that
basis would be conducive to an intelligent controversy, or lead to
any clear results.
Allow me to show you how useless such a discussion would be,
as that upon which you desire me to enter, upon the basis of
your proposals.
Take the first of these, which you propose that I should affirm
—“ That orthodox Christianity is conducive to morality and
progress.” Observe—(l) what is “orthodox” would require to
be defined, and you might not accept my definition, and as 1
would not argue upon any other basis, the discussion could not
proceed; (2) suppose I failed to prove my beliefs to be that
which this proposal affirms them to be, that would not prove
Spiritualism, or anything else, to be right; (3) suppose I
proved my affirmation, I would not thereby necessarily prove
Spiritualism, or anything else, to be wrong; and (4) instead of
leading to practical results, it might leave our hearers in a greater
confusion than before, if we are merely to stand upon two
opposite platforms, as your proposals would place us, to say,
unchecked, whatever we pleased upon two distinct systems of
thought and life.
Then, take the second proposal, that you should affirm “ That
Infidelity is conducive to morality and progress.”
Observe (1) that the four objections which I have already
urged would apply, probably, in your case as in mine; (2) that your


definition of “ Infidelity,” as covering Spiritualism, Rationalism,
Materialism, Atheism, Deism, &c., &c., would present not so much
a field for discussion as a number of utterly irreconcilable
elements, self-contradictory and absurd, which might justly be
labelled chaos and anarchy; (3) the “ field to work in ” would be
so wide, if an attempt were made to contend in it, that we
might each work in it for a thousand years and never come
within sight or grasp of each other; and (4) the triumph of
truth on any one point would be thus rendered almost im-
possible.
I submit, therefore, that my proposal is definite, and gives
ample scope. Spiritualism must stand or fall upon its own
merits or demerits, as must everything else in religious phil-
osophy. If it needs Rationalism, Materialism, and Atheism to
support it, and keep it in countenance, then its origin, nature,
designs, and destiny are self-evident. If you again declare that
to be the case, public discussion of its claims would be labour
lost; for every mind capable of reasoning must then see that it
has no claims, except the right to be at once rejected.
Although I still reserve my right to decline to enter upon a
public discussion of the claims of “ Spiritualism ” per se , yet I am
inclined to do so on the basis I have suggested, or on any modi-
fication of it which might be more acceptable to you and equally
advantageous to the cause of truth and righteousness. —I am,
faithfully yours,
JOHN ALEX. DOWIE.
Mr. Thomas Walker, 6 Carolina-terrace, Drummond-street,.
Carlton.
6 Carolina-terrace, Drummond-street,
Carlton, 11th February, 1882.
Rev, Sir, —Your letter to hand. Though the challenge arose
out of a conversation you had with Mr, S , when it reached
you it was of a definite nature, and accui’ately expressed the issue
there is between us as public men. You are advocating Christ-
ianity ; I am spreading Infidelity : are you ready to have the
merits of the two compared 1 I fail to see that your objections to
the subjects I proposed are valid.
I.—l promise you that I will agree to your definition of ortho-
doxy, providing it includes these dogmas:—(l.) That Jesus Christ
was miraculously conceived ; (2.) That he was divine in a sense
that no other men are ; (3.) That he came on earth to die to save
sinners.
11. —lf you fail to prove your position, you would fail to prove
that Christianity is conducive to morality and progress.
111. —lf you did prove your position, you -would prove that


-Christianity is conducive to morality and progress, which is all
that you would require to do by such an affirmation.
IY. —lt would lead to very practical results if you proved your
position. I and many others would turn Christians. If you did
not prove your affirmation, the results would still be practical,
inasmuch as it would show that Christianity always gets the
worst in a fair encounter.
The same may be said of the objections to the second proposal.
I. —The definition of Infidelity that I should make lam pretty
sure you would agree with. It would include, for instance, these
statements :—(1.) That the Bible is not the Word of God; (2.) That
it is not inspired in a sense that Shakespeare is not; (3.) That the
Bible is chiefly the product of an ignorant and barbarous people ;
(4.) That Jesus (if his character be historical) was simply and
only a man ; (5.) That the “plan of salvation ” was a mistake.
11. —I think “ Spiritualism, nationalism, Materialism, Atheism,
Deism, etc., &c.,” though incongruous with each other, are all
opposed to Christianity, and 1 am prepared to show that they are,
all of them, more conducive to morality and progress than
Christianity is.
Hl.—You are mistaken about the field being so wide that we
should never come within sight of each othei’, I promise you i
will not lose sight of you if once the discussion be brought about.
IY. —You say “ the triumph of truth on any one point would
be thus rendered impossible.” Surely if you proved that Christ-
ianity was conducive to morality and progress, and I failed to
prove that Infidelity was, the victory for truth (if it be on your
side) would be complete on every point.
“ If Spiritualism needs Rationalism, Materialism, and Atheism
to support it,” etc., “ public discussion of its claims would be labour
lost, for every mind capable of reasoning must then see that it
has no claims, except the right to be at once rejected. ’
Surely this is a strange piece of reasoning. Without asserting
that Spiritualism does require these supports, I venture to think
that even Atheism has the right to be heard before being rejected,
and that whether it be tenable or not is a matter of evidence.
I may tell you that I am, or believe myself to be, a Rationalist;
as far as Materialism goes, lam a Materialist; and, so far as your
God is concerned, lam an Atheist.—l x-emain, yours truly,
THOS. WALKER.
Rev. J. A. Dowie.
Victoria Coffee Palace, Collins-street east,
Melbourne, 13th February, 1882.
Dear Sir, —Yours dated 11th reached me to-day. It is with
no desire to be pei’sonally offensive that I am compelled to


characterize it as a jumble of illogical nonsense, subtle cunning,,
and daring misrepresentation —a mixture which scarcely deserves,
and is hardly capable of, being seriously answered.
You evidently wish to make it appear that I am evading a fair
inquiry into, and am afraid to attempt the defence of, my beliefs;
whereas it is you who are shirking from the position of defender
of the “ spiritualistic” faith, which you were very naturally
called upon by Mr. S to assume, and which you are paid by
the Victorian Association of Spiritualists publicly to undertake
in this city. My beliefs are not in question. If I were to enter
upon a defence of my faith, it would not be with such a
controversialist as you, who have evidently either no regard for,
or no capacity to perceive, what is true and righteous, since you
avow yourself to be ready to advocate utterly irreconcilable and
even antagonistic systems of belief. You act as does a mercenary
soldier who is prepared to fight under any flag, and betray any
cause, so long as he can sell his sword to the best advantage, and
indulge in his passion to ravage and destroy. This is clearly
your true character as a disputant. You are asked by one who
trusts in you as an honest and competent champion of
Spiritualism to help him in a contest with me on that subject,
and thereupon you rush into the arena and loudly demand that I
shall discuss with you on the one hand “ orthodox Christianity,
and on the other Infidelity, Spiritualism, Materialism, Rationalism,
Atheism, Deism, and a host of anonymous foes of God and man
whom you vaguely hint at as “ &c., &c.” You ask me to fight
upon two distinct platforms at the same moment, I to affirm one
thing, and you to affirm a dozen other things, which is equivalent
to asking us to travel upon two parallel lines which can never
meet. Then, when I say this is manifestly unfair, and would be
most undoubtedly useless, and invite you to keep to the point at
issue, “Is Spiritualism good and true, or the opposite 1 ?” you
rush again into the arena, shouting, in effect, “ Oh! you are
afraid. You won’t meet me!” Could any spectacle be more
pitiful and absurd 1 Surely the most foolish of men could
penetrate the flimsy bravado which covers your cowardice, and
see that your attempt to fix upon me a charge of evasion has
miserably failed.
You are driven to admit my charge that the Infidelity which
you were prepai'ed to defend covers systems of belief and morals
which are “ incongruous with each other; ” but still you declare,
“ I am prepared to show that they are all of them more conducive
to morality and progress than Christianity.” Could any assertion
more clearly prove your controversial dishonesty, your logical
imbecility, or your moral incompetence to discuss any question of
morality than these words do ? You are certainly a most audacious
infidel mercenary.


You are willing to prove Spiritualism and Rationalism on the
one side, which profess to trace all things to a spiritual and
reasonable origin; and yet, on the other, are willing to prove
Materialism, which traces the origin of all things to soulless
natural forces and unintelligent matter, to be systems of thought
equally conducive to morality and progress. Do your followers
really swallow such absolute and impudent nonsense, as that it is
equally good for a man to believe that he is a clod of earth, as
it is for him to believe that he is a rational and immortal being 1
Then you are willing to prove that Atheism, which says there
is no God, and Deism, which says there is a God, are equally
conducive to morality and progress. Do you and your followers
really believe it is equally good for a man to believe that he is the
creation and offspring of an eternal God, upon whom he is
dependent and to whom he is responsible, as it is for him to
believe the opposite—that he came fromji nowhere, belongs to
nobody, and need care for nothing %
Do you imagine that all men are liars and fools, that you
should even dare to insult the common sense of mankind by
presenting yourself before the world as a friend of morality and
progress, and yet call upon men to follow you in such false and
immoral teachings 1
What would men think, if a politician were to claim their
suffrages on the ground that he was wholly a free trader, and yet
wholly a protectionist, wholly in favour of public economy, and
yet wholly in favour of public plunder, wholly in favour of
making good laws, and yet wholly in favour of abolishing all
laws, &c. ?
They would, of course, say the man was a rogue or a fool; and,
if he persisted in his craze, that the only fit place for him was a
prison or a lunatic asylum.
But how much more serious is it when a man stands deliberately
before his fellow men, as you do, openly avowing himself to be an
Apostle of Falsehood, prepared to defend any system, no matter
how false, if by that means he can injure or impede the progress
of Christian truth, in its beneficent efforts to set all men free from
the fearful miseries produced by diabolical errors in thought and
practice.
I have, as you probably know, for several years done what I
could, on many public occasions, to expose and denounce “Modern
Spiritualism ”as a foe to God and man; and this correspondence
only confirms my conviction that it is destructive of all morality
and true progress.
Your confession that you are a Spiritualist, Rationalist,
Materialist, Atheist, Deist, &c., all rolled into one under the
name of “ Infidel,” is only an additional proof of what I have
long seen, that in “ Modern Spiritualism ” the world has a system


embracing all error, uncleanness, and malice—a system which
could only be the production of “ the spirits of devils.”
Well might one of your own prophetesses, Emily Kislingbury,
Secretary to the British National Association of Spiritualists, say
of Australian and universal Spiritualism what she did of American,
after her return from a visit to the United States—“ Most persons
of good sense and of high moral character, and who value the
peace and purity of their homes, refuse to associate themselves
with Spiritualists as a body, or to identify themselves with the
movement ” —(see the report of her address in the London
Spirihmlisf of 14th December, 1877).
How can it be otherwise? Your own letters conclusively prove
that you teach mental, moral, social, and spiritual chaos and
anarchy, and in that respect you are quite consistent with the
designs of its author.
You evidently agree with another of your prophets, Dr. A. B.
Child, of Boston, U.S. A., who, in his filthy book, “ Whatever is, is
Bight,” teaches (page 6) —“ Vice and virtue, too, are beautiful to
the eyes of the soul. Both are right and in place.” Again, at
page 18, he says ;—“ A lie is a truth intrinsically ;it holds a lawful
place in creation; it is a necessity.” Again, on the same page,
“ Every opinion is right,” is proclaimed to be true, whilst, at page
103, the absolute uncertainty of every opinion is taught, where he
says “ Spiritualism has no creed ; nor can it have. The truly
progressive soul has new convictions every day, so that the creed
of yesterday would not answer for to-day.” Again, at page 19,
defending positive immorality, he writes words which lam
ashamed to repeat:—“The degradation of prostitution is a phantom
of materialism that belongs to self-righteousness; that is produced
by the fictitious distinctions of self-excellence; prostitution, so-
called, is in reality an undisguised condition of life—an open
expression of the elements of existence that are spontaneous and
natural, and that are antagonistic to material glory.” Again, at
page 24, in answer to the question, “ Does impurity exist in the
soul?” he replies, “No; impurity exists only in matter, and is
only palpable to material perception.” Yet, with inconceivable
effrontery, he even denies that exception, and says, in the same
paragraph, “ Soul perception discovers no impurity anywhere in
the creation of God,” thereby denying its existence even in
matter, which is certainly a part of creation. Again, at page 27,
this priest and prophet of evil, of your own order, says ; —“What
is called evil is good. Nothing is evil in reality. Good is every-
thing, for everything is good. Virtue is good, and sin is good ;
every human being is good, and every human action is good.
Then in answer, on page 35, to the question, “ Which is the way
that leads to heaven ? ” this incarnate Beelzebub replies, “ There is
no way in which the soul goes forth in life that does not lead


•directly to lieaven. Not a single path on earth is trod that does
not lead the soul to God. The clean and the unclean, the rebel
and the saint, each one goes in the way the soul directs, and
every way points to heaven.” Hence this procurer for hell has
no shame in writing, at page 45 : —“ Lucy, the courtezan, is led in
an avenue of happiness where her inclinations immediately direct,
with the deeper longings of her soul held for a time in check; and
her sister Frances, the faithful wife and mother, in another avenue
of happiness, where her inclinations lead.” It is no surprise,
therefore, to find, at page 67, a chapter headed “ Evil does not
exist,” in which he teaches that “evil is only the natural operation
of things for the production of good.”
An application of this doctrine is made to the crime of murder,
at page 71, which is quite in keeping with the teaching of his and
your common master, the devil, of whom the! Lord Jesus truly
said—“ He was a murderer from the beginning, and abode not in
the truth, because there is no truth in him.” Your fellow-worker
sa y S Murder has no influence upon the soul; it is a thing of
the material world in its influences. Every murder that ever was
•committed has been inevitable ; in the bosom of nature [which he
elsewhere declares is God] has existed the lawful cause of which
murder has been the effect. The causes of nature, and the effects
of nature, are always right.” It follows, therefore, that since
•every murder is a lawful effect of a lawful cause, murder is always
light, in the opinion of this spiritualistic Thug, whose doctrines
would fain destroy both soul and body.
The majestic beauty of every vice and crime is thus an article
of spiritualistic faith. Hence it is taught that to do wickedly
hastens the development of the soul and its true progress, as is
seen at p. 103, where he writes:—“ The greatest wickednesses are
but the damps of life, that are produced by soul growth, and
thereby soften and prepare the soul sooner for the development of
new truth.”
To go further with this guide would be impossible, for he has
now conclusively proved, to all who are under the guidance of the
spirits of devils, that earth will only be pure when it is ruled from
hell, and that it is the right and duty of every man so disposed,
to lie, to murder, to steal, and to commit every wickedness which
the powers and principalities of evil can suggest; nor has God or
man, in his judgment, any right to stay or impede in any way the
onward march of this system, which you declare is “ conducive
to morality and progress.”
Now, lest you, or anyone who may read these lines, should
suppose that Dr. A. B. Child’s book, from which I have quoted so
largely, is only the expression of an isolated spiritualist’s views,
permit me to add that he appends to his volume ninety-six pages
•of remarks upon it by leading spiritualists and spiritualistic papers,


generally approving his doctrines, and rejoicing that they have
found expression.
Amongst these, E. Annie Kingsbury declares—“ Its philosophy
is to me very beautiful; it is substantial, satisfying, and divine ;
and it will assuredly benefit everyone who studies and appro-
priates it.”
Mrs. Emma Hardinge Britten writes also a letter,- by Dr.
Child’s request, “expressly for a place in the pages of this book,”
and, in a wearisome rhapsody of grandiloquent verbiage, she tells
us what her “ guardian angel ” told her about this book, when she
“ read it in the dim twilight ” —a very bad time, indeed, for reading.
Her attendant demon, as was to be expected, very much approved
of this diabolical production, and told her that he saw “ the gold
of God within the human soul,” even in those “ whose very vices
were levers to move the whole;” so “that jails and scaffolds,
crimes and virtues, became machinery to coin, at last, the image
of God, and stamp it on the saintly soul of man.”
Imagine a gang of murderers and robbers standing before a
judge in Melbourne, pleading that they were lawfully engaged,
when they committed the crimes with which they stand charged,
in coining the image of God out of the gold of their vices, and
stamping it on the souls of their victims !
Mrs. J. S. Adams, another portress at this gate of hell called
Spiritualism, writes in glowing terms of approval, and says ;
“ Life without evil, so-called, would be anything but desirable—
a passive condition, wherein virtue would have no reward, faith
no merit, and progress no obstacles to aid the spirit’s growth. I
sincerely hope that you may be encouraged and strengthened in
your noble efforts by the inhabitants of earth, as you have been
and now are by the angels of heaven.”
Charlotte H. Bowen is prepared to hail Dr. Child as a true
Messiah; and, after gushingly declaring that his doctrine “ was
born within me, with many other beautiful ideas, when I began
to unfold interiorly,” she continues :—“There are a few wise men
who have seen the star just risen in the east, and will assemble to
worship it—or rather the principle— ‘ the young Child ’ over which
it stands. So say on, my brother.”
Another writer, C. E., says : —“ ‘ Whatever is, is right,’ is a com-
forting doctrine. Of course it destroys the idea that w r e are free
agents. It is fatalism in another form; but fatalism is the only
logical doctrine.”
Andrew Jackson Davis, the greatest of spiritualistic seers until
the advent of this Satanic Messiah, worships the new star also,
and writes :—“ Yes, in the highest, widest, truest statement, every-
thing is good, is right, is beautiful.”
And similar approval is given by many others, of less note
individually, to these horrible doctrines.


Then the spiritualistic press approve of it generally. The
Shekinah welcomes it as being “ one of the great steps onward in
the new era of unfolded truth.” The Herald of Progress says :
“ Our brother’s gospel is comforting to the last degree of heavenly
peace.” The Banner of Ligld says : —“ It is a good symptom
that this our day brings forth a book of this character.” The
National Standard says ; —“ We can commend this book.” And,
in a French infidel sheet, La Revue de Honest, the climax of
praise is given to Dr. Child’s doctrine in these words : —“ He has
beautifully said, that vice is as legitimate as virtue, and that
falsehood is as true as truth.”
So, then, here we have your position as a “spiritualist” defined
correctly by friendly writers in the front rank of the army of
evil, representing fully all its ranks, and its unseen diabolical
leaders. And this fact was the reason for my saying that, if you
clung to your position, “ public discussion of the claims of
Spiritualism would be labour lost, for every mind capable of
reasoning must then see that it has no claims, except the right to
be at once rejected.”
Allow me to my sincere regret that I find your soul in
the bondage of such demoniacal fetters, and that you hug your
chains and boast of your freedom when you are all the while “ led
captive by the devil at his will.”
I do earnestly pray that you may see your sin and flee to the
Rock of Salvation—the eternal Son of God. You are building
on the quicksands of sin and death, and you are leading others to
build there too. The waters are rising on every side of you ; the
last dark night of tempest may be very near at hand. The last
fierce storm will beat ere long upon your soul, and your house will
fall with an awful crash, amidst the mockery of the fiends who
are destroying you, as they did your late companion in sin, John
Tyerman, in Sydney, not long ago. I do most earnestly and
affectionately entreat you to flee from this worse than Sodom and
Gomorrah, miscalled Spiritualism (Nihilism better describes it),
ere it be too late, and that may be very soon. I warn you and
your deluded friends, in the inspired words of the Son of God—•
“Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish.” Your teachings
are at present doing fearful harm. “ Your vine is as the vine of
Sodom and of the fields of Gomorrah ; your grapes are grapes of
gall, their clusters are bitter ; your wine is the poison of dragons
and the cruel venom of asps ” 32-33). For years
I have studied your wicked system, and everywhere I have found
its fruits evil and deadly, destroying the fairest homes, the noblest
faculties, and sowing the dragon’s teeth of every sin and crime—a
blight to the individual, a desolation to the family, a hindrance to
every virtue, a handmaid to every vice, and a curse to every city
and land where it comes.


You closed your last letter by a short declaration of your
faith, wherein you say : “I may tell you that I am, or
believe myself to be, a Rationalist; as far as Materialism goes,
I am a Materialist; and, so far as your God is concerned, I am
an Atheist.”
Permit me to say what I am, and why, I am a Christian,
resting my hopes for time and eternity upon the eternal Son
of God, my Saviour and my King, whose love binds me to His
sex-vice.
And when I consider how gloriously Ho has vindicated His
claims to be the Lord and Redeemer, by the sacrifice of Himself
for a guilty and fallen race, by the purity of His teaching, the
sinless beauty of His example, the attraction of His love, and the
glorious results which have ever followed obedience to His com-
mands, I find abundant reason to justify my choice.
‘Tis Jesus, the Christ of God, who has established the principles
of a pure morality, which preserves the home and all its priceless
blessings; ’tis Jesus who teaches the sublimity of self-denying
love, and bids His followers care for the weak, the orphaned, the
poor, the ignorant, the sin-laden, and the sorrow-stricken every-
where ; ’tis Jesus who inspires the sublimest heroism and the
noblest philanthropy, and the grandest pages of history are those
which record the triumphs of His faith —a faith which has led true
Christians in every age gladly to toil, to suffer, and to die for
their fellow-men; ’tis Jesus who has raised nations from the
depths of heathen degradation and ignorance to a high standard
of intelligence, and virtue, and true religion—and these triumphs
are going on in our day, as witness Fiji and Madagascar, and
many other lands ; ’tis Jesus who is ever in the van of all true
progress—and though His teachings are travestied and dishonoured
by the Romish and Greek and other corrupt churches, and though
He is opposed by Infidelity and all the hosts of hell, still He goes
ever onward, “ conquering and to conquer,” until every foe of
God and man is vanquished, and not an aching sin-oppressed
heart or tear-dimmed eye is found. For “ all that is beautiful shall
abide, and all that is base shall die.”
“ Behold the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of
the world !”
And what has this unclean Spiritualism of yours, and all hex-
attendants, to say in His divine presence —this
‘ ‘ Snaky sorceress that sits
Fast by hell gate, and holds a fatal key ? ”
Where are her triumphs, where are the blessings she has
bestowed, and the deliverances she has wrought for man 1
There are none. No, not a single attempt has ever been made
by Spiritualism to lessen the sorrows, to cure the spix-itual diseases,


to restore the fallen, or to deliver the sin-oppressed amongst
men.
Where is the hospital she has founded, and what savage tribe
has she civilized and raised from its degradation and superstition?
“ By their fruits ye shall know them ; ” and the only fruits from
that tree are corrupt and deadly. She has come robed in false
attire, sometimes appearing attractive as an angel of light;
but when revealed as she is, she stands, in all her detestable
vileness, so loathsome and hateful, that, when she is seen, she is
hated and rejected.
Spiritualism, then, can be no other than an emanation from
hell. Its advent was foretold by the Spirit of God long ages
since, in the First Epistle to Timothy, fourth chapter, and first two'
verses, in these words : —“ Now the Spirit saith expressly, that in
later times some shall fall away from the faith, giving heed to
seducing spirits and doctrines oj devils , through the hypocrisy of
men that speak lies, branded in their own conscience as with a
hot iron.” That awful brand is on you who teach “ doctrines of
devils,” which cannot be other than the work of “ seducing
spirits.”
Another prophecy in God’s inspired word seems to me to apply
also to your system, and the revival of other forms of Satanic
error. “The dragon ”in it probably represents the direct power
of Satan himself; “the beast,” the corrupt Church of Rome and
kindred corruptions ; and “the false prophet,” Mohammedanism,
I identify Spiritualism as emanating directly from “ the
dragon,” in the passage which I now quote from the Book of
Revelation, seventeenth chapter, thirteenth and fourteenth verses :
“ And I saw, coming out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of
the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophet,
three unclean spirits, as it were frogs: for they are spirits of
devils, working signs ; which go forth unto the kings of the
whole world to gather them together unto the great day of God
the Almighty.”
Will you not be warned in time, and turn to God from serving
these “ unclean spirits,” into whose fearful bondage you are also
enticing by your lies many precious souls ? I speak plainly, but,
as God knoweth, I do not speak unkindly.
I wish, if it be possible, to open your eyes so that you may
see your danger ; and, if you persist, I warn you of your doom.
May God in His mercy stop you and your deluded associates
in your career of devilry; and may many Christians who are
now being tempted by the. seductions of Spiritualism to fall away
from the faith, remember the solemn warning of their Lord, which
is appended to the prophecy from which I last quoted ; “ Behold,
I come as a thief. Blessed is he that watcheth and keepeth his
garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame.”


Trusting that these words may be made useful in awakening
you and others to a sense of your perilous condition —I am, faith-
fully yours,
JOHN ALEX. HOWIE.
Mr. Thomas Walker, 6 Carolina-terrace, Drummond-street,
Carlton.
6 Carolina-terrace, Drummond-street,
Carlton, 20th February, 1882.
Rev. Sir, —My last letter evidently ruffled you a little, and
stepped upon some one or other of your corns, if I may judge
by the number of clerical expletives with which your letter
abounds. I had no idea you were so good a Christian before,
and that you were so apt at cursing and swearing at those who
do not believe with you. It is reported of Jesus that his temper
was none of the smoothest when he addressed his enemies, and
to them he applied such epithets as “Ye fools and blind,” “Ye
serpents,” “Ye hypocrites,” “Ye generation of vipers,” “Ye
blind guides,” “Ye are like unto whited sepulchres,” &c., &c.
In this respect you have imitated your Master well, if you have
not even surpassed him. Were these the days of competition by
Christian clergy in the use of foul language and vapid abuse, I
would deferentially advise you to be a competitor, for you could
not fail to win, at least, a bronze medal.
If my last letter to you be “ a jumble of illogical nonsense,
subtle cunning, and daring misrepresentation,” how would you
characterize yours 1
Allow me, again, to point out that my challenge to you was of
a definite nature, and that I called your beliefs in question. How,
then, can you with clerical justice say, “My beliefs are not in
question 1 ” They are in question ; and I ask you again if you
dare to defend them ? If you will undertake a defence of your
orthodoxy, I will undertake a defence of Spiritualism pare et
simple , since you appear to be so much afraid to meet Infidelity
in any other form.
There are three recognized Christian virtues—“ Faith, hope,
and charity, and the greatest of these is charity.” Will you
kindly inform me under which one of these, if any, the following
sentences of yours will come 1 —
“You act as does a mercenary soldier who is prepared to fight
under any flag, and betray any cause, so long as he can sell his
sword to the best advantage, and indulge in his passion to ravage
and destroy.”
“Surely the most foolish of men could penetrate the flimsy
bravado which covers your cowardice.”


“Your controversial dishonesty, your logical imbecility, or
your moral incompetence to discuss any question of morality.”
“ You are certainly a most audacious infidel mercenary.”
“ Absolute and impudent nonsense.”
“ They would, of course, say the man (to whom I am compared)
was a rogue or a fool, and, if he persisted in his craze, that the
only fit place for him was a prison or a lunatic asylum.”
“ Openly avowing himself (myself) to be an Apostle of False-
hood, prepared to defend any system, no matter how false, if by
that means he can injure or impede the progress of Christian
truth.”
“ You teach mental, moral, social, and spiritual chaos and
anarchy.”
“ You evidently agree with another of your prophets, Dr. A. B.
Child, of Boston, U.S.A., who, in his filthy book,” &c.
“ Quite in keeping with his and vour common master, the
devil.”
“You are all the while ‘ led captive by the devil at his will.’ ”
“ Your late companion in sin, John Tyerman.”
“ I warn you of your doom,” &c.
These are all applied to me personally. There are quite as
many more applied to others, and to systems of philosophy which,
it appears to me, it is evident you do not understand. Think
you, sir, that this is of the nature of argument, and that I am to
be turned to a religion which, in you, has given rise to such
vituperations, by abuse of such a description 1 To mistake such
wholesale libelling for intended argument appears to prove that it
is you, and not I, who should be charged with “ controversial
dishonesty” and “ logical imbecility.”
Now, let me see for a moment who is guilty of “ daring misre-
presentation.”
1. “ You ask me to fight upon two distinct platforms at the
same MOMENT.” Where 1 Point out the passage where I have
asked you to do this, from my last letter, or you, sir, stand con-
victed of “ dax’ing misrepresentation.” Permit me to say that I
did nothing of the kind. I asked you to stand and tight upon
your platform in defence of your views, and then on my platform
to attack mine. lam ready to defend my views—are you to
defend yours ? Such was and is my position, and I confess I can see
nothing illogical in it. But to think you could do the two at the
same moment —that you could be taking the affirmative and I the
affirmative at the same time—is not a thing that I should be
guilty of.
2/You say that I loudly demand that you shall discuss with
me on “ Infidelity, Materialism, Rationalism, Atheism, Deism, and
a host of anonymous foes of God and man whom you vaguely hint
at as ‘ &c., &c.’ ” Again, I ask you —where ? Point out the place,


sir, and quote the very passage, or I shall be obliged to accuse
you of “ daring misrepresentation.” In my challenge to you
there were two definite proposals, one of which it was intended
you should affirm—viz. : “ Resolved that (your) Orthodoxy is con-
ducive to morality and progress ; ” and the other I should affirm—
viz. : “ Infidelity is conducive to morality and progress.” Such
was my challenge to you ; in reply to which you stated that you
could not accept it, for several reasons, one of which was —I might
not agree to your definition of Orthodoxy, nor you to my definition
of Infidelity.
I pointed out to you that none of your objections were
valid; that I would agree to your definition of Orthodoxy, and
that you could scarcely fail to agree to the definition of Infi-
delity that I made in my last letter. My only reason for mention-
ing so many “ isms ” was to show you that the term “ Infidelity”
was wider than that of “ Spiritualism,” and gave both of us more
room to state our views more fully. Spiritualism, in its present
form, is of modern oi'igin ; it, therefore, will not so effectually
serve xxxe as will the term “Infidelity,” in proving that our progress
is not due to the influence of Christianity. I was willing to
defend Infidelity; which term “Infidelity” covered the “isms”
enumerated, in the saxxxe manner that the term “ ox’thodox” covers
“the Baptists,” “the Wesleyans,” “the Ranters,” “the Angli-
cans,” “ the High Church,” “ the Low Church,” “the Adventists,”
“ the Lutherans,” “ the Calvinists,” “ the Roman Catholics,”
“the Presbyterians”—including all the divisions of this sect
—and “ others ” whom I shall “ vaguely hint at as ‘ &c., &c.’ ”
not, of course, forgettixxg the “Salvation Army.” Now, it is not
impossible that you may be willing to show that any or all of
these sects, covered by the word “ orthodox,” are better than my
belief, and superior to the “ Infidelity ” which I advocate, without
identifying yourself with any one of them. You might — might
you not?—undertake, consistently and honestly, to show “that
the Baptists are better than infidels,” “that the Wesleyans are
better than infidels,” “that the Anglicans are better than infidels,”
“ that the Presbyterians are better than infidels,” without being
specially either a Baptist, Wesleyan, Anglican, or Presbyterian.
You might be a Lutheran, and still show that the orthodoxy of a
Wesleyan, Baptist, Anglican, or Presbyterian was more conducive
to px’ogress than the heresy of the infidels; and this, too, without
involving yourself in the slightest inconsistency or absux’dity. In
fact, had a debate to be brought about, and you had to defend
orthodoxy, you would be obliged to take this course. Whatever
your orthodoxy xnay be, in defending it you would be obliged to
defend those points it has ixx commoxx with the rest of the sects
called “ orthodox.” Should Ibe justified, because of this fact, in
saying of you —“ You act as does a nxercenary soldier, who is pre-


pared to fight under any flag, and betray any cause, so long as
be can sell his sword to the best advantage 1 ?” It appears to
me I should not. Why, then—when I have only admitted my
willingness to take a similar course—should I be so charitably
slandered 1
3. “ You are driven to admit my charge that the Infidelity
which you were prepared to defend covers systems of belief and
morals ‘incongruous with each other;’ but still you declare, I am
prepared to show that they are all of them more conducive to
morality and progress than Christianity.”
First of all, I was not driven to admit this; and nextly, I did
not mention the word “ morals ”in my statement; and lastly, I
was only prepared to show that they were more conducive to
morality and progress in the same manner as you might under-
take to prove that both Calvin and Wesley did more good for the
world than either Voltaire or Chai'les Bradlaugh have done.
Both the Infralapsarians and the Supralapsarians are orthodox.
Yet these systems are incongruous with each other. You, to a
certain extent, in defending orthodoxy, would have to defend
both the Infra and Supra Lapsarians. The Sprinklers and the
Dippers are both orthodox, yet their systems of baptism are
incongruous with each other. Yet, in defending orthodoxy at all,
you would have to defend at least some of their orthodoxy. The
Lutherans believe in the “ real presence ” as do the Roman
Catholics. The Anglicans and others do not. On this point there
is incongruity. Yet in defending orthodoxy you must defend
both that of the Lutheran and that of the Anglican. Should I,
on this account, be justified in accusing you of “ controversial
dishonesty,” “ logical imbecility,” and “ moral incompetence to
discuss any question of morality ? ” If not, why do you apply
these abusive epithets to me for doing what you do every time
you defend your cause ?
4. “ You are certainly a most audacious infidel mercenary.”
Why, pray ? From what portion of my letter have you drawn
this charitable and Christian conclusion 1 Am I necessarily “an
audacious infidel mercenary ” because I am willing to prove that
your cause rests on insufficient evidence, and has not been con-
ducive to morality and progress, whilst Infidelity has ? Are you
an “ audacious Christian mercenary ” because you attack ray
cause and defend your own 1 It is reported to me that you have
collected £20,000 to build a church for you to preach in, at a
certain regularly paid salary. This may not be true, but at all
events you cannot complain of not having got money for preaching
vour views, in no despicable sums. I do not complain of this, but
when it is probable that you get more money for preaching your
views than I do for preaching mine, it can be nothing short of a
“ daring misrepresentation ” to accuse me of being “ an audacious
3


mercenary infidel.” Those who live in glass houses, methinks,
“ should not throw stones.”
But even supposing, for the sake of argument, that I am a
“ mercenary infidel,” does that prove your position and disprove
mine ? It has nothing to do with the question, sir, and is utterly
beneath a man who would fain pass for a “Christian” and a
“gentleman.” I might be the most “audacious” man and the
greatest “mercenary” living, without this enabling you in one
whit to prove that “ orthodoxy is conducive to morality and
progress,” or to disprove that Infidelity is. Oh ! when will the
clergy learn that abuse is no part of an argument ?
5. (1) “You are willing to prove Spiritualism on the one side
, . . . and yet, on the other, are willing to prove
Materialism.”
(2) “ Then you are willing to prove that Atheism . . . .
and Deism are equally conducive to morality and
progress.”
I know not, sir, how to characterize such misrepresentation as
this. Point me out the very sentence in my letter where I said
I was ready to prove both Spiritualism and Materialism as
equally true and conducive to morality. I insist, sir ; point me
out the very paragraph—the very words—or forever know that
you have told a lie, either wilfully or in consequence of your
“ logical imbecility.” I shall not apologize for this strong lan-
guage ; for to cover over the truth with the gloss of politeness,
and to hide the injustice of your conduct beneath soft words of a
double meaning, is in itself to misrepresent the facts. You must
either, therefore, produce the paragraph from my letter in which
I say, without doubt, that Atheism and Deism are “ equally ”
conducive to morality and progress, and that I am ready to
undertake the proof of this ; or else, as you are a gentleman, you
are morally bound to apologize to me for your “ daring misrepre-
sentation.”
You ask me—“ Do you imagine that all men are liars and
fools?” As an infidel, I do not; for I may say that the chief
characteristic of Infidelity is respect for truth. If I were a
Christian, in the orthodox sense, I should be disposed to answer
in the affirmative; for should I not therein have the authority of
Paul, who himself was one (vide Rom. iii. 7) of the former. In
this respect, and in a friendly spirit, I would advise you not to
follow Paul too closely.
6. “Your confession that you are a Spiritualist, Rationalist,
Materialist, Atheist, Deist, &c., all rolled into one,” &c. Will
you be kind enough to quote me this “ confession ” from my
letter? No shuffling, sir; quote me the very “ confession.” Let


me have no constructions of your own, but my words to
express such a confession ! This, sir, like the others, is one of
your “ daring misrepresentations.” The nearest statement ap-
proaching to a confession that I made in my letter was at the
conclusion, where I said, “ I am, or believe myself to be, a
Rationalist; as far as Materialism goes , lam a Materialist; and,
so far as your Gof is concerned, I am an Atheist.” I simply
stated that I was an Atheist to your God, and a Materialist
so far as Materialism went; but I did not say that I was
both a Deist and an Atheist at one and the same time, and
that I held that both Materialism and Spiritualism were equally
true.
My position throughout has been this : Atheism may or may
not be truer than Deism, but certain it is that both Atheism and
Deism have done more good for humanity than has your ortho-
doxy. I want to defend neither Atheism nor Deism, but I am
anxious both to point out and to defend what good they have done,
and still are doing, as opposed to the system you advocate. The
fact of the matter is, the freedom of thought permitted and
encouraged by both Deists (represented by such men as Y oltaire and
Paine) and Atheists (represented by such men as Lewis, Buchner,
Haeckel, and even Bradlaugh) lias liberated humanity from the
slavery of faith, and opened to them the thousand doors of truth,
whilst your orthodoxy has not only, in the past, been the advo-
cate of literal slavery, but has made a serf of every mind, and
closed the portals of discovery to the sons of men. It was this
field that I was eager to enter upon in a public discussion, but
into which field you appear to have no inclination to travel. I
was prepared to show the good that all forms of Infidelity have
done, and are still calculated to do; for, encouraging (as they do)
the freedom of thought, they enwiden the horizon of human
knowledge, and open a myriad avenues to aspiration, discovery,
and progression. If you are firmly convinced that Infidelity
has not done this, but that Christianity has, how comes that
you are so unwilling to even attempt to prove your position,
and so willing to abuse me for claiming to be ready to prove
mine 1
7. “Your own letters conclusively prove that you teach mental,
moral, social, and spiritual chaos and anarchy. here in my
letters have I taught such 1 Again I ask you to point out the
paragraph.
As to the work of Dr. A. B. Child, it appears to me that you
have not the ability or the honesty to understand it aright.
There are statements and conclusions in the work with which 1
cannot agree ; but I venture to affirm that there is more truth in
it than there would be in a work of equal size written by your-
self to express your own views. And there is more —not one of


the passages you have quoted from his work are peculiarly-
spiritualistic. Pope, who was not a spiritualist, hut is claimed by
Christians as belonging to them, in his celebrated “ Essay on.
Man,” says:—
“ All nature is but art unknown to thee.
All chance, direction, which thou canst not see
All discord, harmony not understood ;
All partial evil, universal good.
And, spite of pride, in erring reason’s spite,
One truth is clear— whatever is, is right.”
This Dr. Child has elaborated in a moderately large work—in
a less poetic manner, it is true, than Pope; still the conclusions
of the tw r o are precisely the same. Why, then, should you specially
single out Dr. Child for your abuse, whilst you say not a word
about Pope ? But, further, is it not a fact that the Calvinists,
who are Christians, believe that God has foreordained everything
that happens, and that he lias predestined some for heaven and
some for hell 1 Reasoning from this stand-point, surely what God
has foreordained and predestined is right. Does not even the
New Testament teach us that everything happens by the will of
God, and that out of the same lump of clay he makes one vessel
to honour and another to dishonour ? Surely what God does
must be right, and since you believe that God does everything,
what is it that prevents you from saying, with Paul, Pope, and
Child, “Whatever is, is right?” Remember, I have not ranked
myself on the side of the optimists. I have only pointed out to
you that you are inconsistent in so maliciously abusing Dr. Child,
whilst you allow- Pope and Paul, who had the same views in this
respect, to escape scot free.
The following quotation which you make, I thoroughly agree
with; —“The truly progressive soul has new' convictions every
day, so that the creeds of yesterday would not answer for to-day.”
By this we are simply told that the man of progress is constantly-
acquiring fresh knowledge and adjusting his convictions thereto.
There is nothing debasing in such a confession, and I do not wish
you ill, but well, when I say that I wish you were possessed of a
truly progressive soul, such as Dr. Child has described in the
above quotation.
The following is a paragraph which you say you are
ashamed to repeat :—“ The degradation of prostitution is a
phantom of Materialism that belongs to self-righteousness; that
is produced by fictitious distinctions of self-excellence ; prostitu-
tion so-called is in reality an undisguised condition of life—an
open expression of the elements of existence that are spontaneous
and natural, and that are antagonistic to material glory.” lam
not going to defend the opinions in the above paragraph, and I


any o£ these wretches?
Numbers xxxi. 17-18:—“Now therefore kill every male
among the little ones, and kill every woman that hath known
man by lying with him. But all the women-children that have
not known a man by lying with him, keep alive for yourselves.
Thirty-two thousand virgins were given to the soldiers, of which
the tribute of the Lord was thirty-two. Is there anything more
horrible in Dr. Child’s work than this ? If there be, I should be
thankful if you would point it out. Is the coarseness of Ezekiel
anywhere surpassed by Dr. Child? Find me a passage in the
work you have cited more abominably filthy than the following
passage, and I will give in. Jer. iii. 0 : —“And it came to
pass, through the lightness of her .... that she defiled
the land, and committed .... with stones and with
will only so far speak in their defence as to say they are more
charitable to the “fallen” than any I have heard from the
Christian clergy. But, sir, it ill-becomes you to talk about
shame at the repetition of the obscene and the unchaste. You
preach from a book, and you get your living by a book that
contains passages to which, for obscenity and vulgarity, the
passage you have quoted can bear no comparison at all. lam
forced by your letter, in self-defence, iso quote a few passages from
the very book you base your faith upon, and which is the main-
stay of your position. Gen. xxxviii. 8-10:—“And Judah
said unto Onan, Go in unto thy brother’s wife, and marry her,
and raise up seed to thy brother. And Onan knew that the seed
should not be his ; and it came to pass when he went in unto his
brother’s wife that .... lest he should give seed to his
brother. And the thing which he did displeased the Lord :
wherefore he slew him also.” Read the whole of the chapter, and
then ask yourself if Dr. Child has advocated anything more
horrible than the actual conduct of the villain Judah !
The case of the daughters of Lot you know ; you know of the
wives and concubines of Solomon, and of the adultery of David,
the man after God’s own heart. Was Dr. Child any worse than
stocks.” Every crime, sir, which has disgraced humanity I can
point out to you as commanded and sanctioned by the God of the
Old Testament —murder, rape, incest, theft, and lying are all
stamped with Divine authority in the book on which your
orthodoxy rests. Why, then, do you “strain at a gnat and
swallow a camel,” and rave at the “ mote ” that is in the
eye of your brother whilst you are unconscious of the beam in
your own?
If you will consult H. T. Buckle’s “ History of Civilization,”
you will find that the main opinions of Dr. Child are substan-
tiated by evidence, for, in his chapter on “ Resources for Inves-
tigating History,” Mr. Buckle supports these positions :


“ Murder is committed with as much regularity, and bears as uniform a
relation to certain known circumstances as do the movements of the tides
and the rotation of the seasons.
“Every year, there not only take place nearly the same number of
murders, but even the instruments by which they are committed are
employed in the same proportion.
“ Suicide is merely the product of the general condition of society, and
that the individual felon only carries into effect what is a necessary con-
sequence of preceding circumstances.
“In a given state of society, a certain number of persons must put an
end to their own life. This is the general law ; and the special question as
to who shall commit the crime depends, of course, upon special laws,
which, however, in their total action must obey the large social law to
which they are all subordinate.”
Eead the whole of the chapter, for I am of opinion that the
evidence he gives is pretty nigh irresistible. AV hy don’t you
abuse Buckle, then, who maintains that in a given state of
society there must be a certain proportion of crime 1 This is
precisely the position of Dr. Child. Dr. Child says everything
takes place by Law —that it follows by necessity from the existence
of causes sufficient to produce it. He, therefore, on that account,
and no other, calls it “ right,” But, mark you, it is only right
—id esf, lawful —for the time being,
the same. Let me, then, compare
Child’s -with Henry Thomas Buckle’s
Dr. Child.
“ For every deed of human life
there has been a cause sufficient to
produce the deed, whether the deed
has been called good or evil.”—
Page 2.
“ Life’sperturbations, its conflicts,
and its sufferings, that come to us
of what we call evil, are lawful
necessities.”—Page 137.
t Buckle is quite as strong in the
law as is Dr. Child. And not only
so long as conditions remain
a statement or two of Dr.
Buckle.
“ When we perform an action,
we perform it in consequence of some
motive or motives . . . those
motives are the remits of some ante-
cedents ; and that, therefore, if we
were acquainted with the whole of
the antecedents, and with all the
laws of their movements, we could
with unerring certainty predict the
whole of their immediate results.”
—Page 18.
‘ ‘ The actions of men, being
determined solely by their ante-
cedents, must have a character of
uniformity —that is to say, must,
under precisely the same circum-
stances, always issue in precisely the
same results. ’’—Page 20. .
You will thus perceive that
assertion of the supremacy of 1
does he maintain that “ law” is supreme, but that its actions or
results—or, more properly speaking, the “facts” that it expresses—
are in “order,” and never inconsistent. We will carry the com-
parison a little further.


Dr. Child.
Buckle.
“It sees the manifestation of
every human soul, whether good or
bad, as being the necessary result of
a certain condition, in which con-
dition is to be found a natural cause
that produced the good or bad
action.” —Page 134.
“To those who have a steady
conception of the regularity of
events, and have firmly seized the
great truth —that the actions of
men, being guided by their antece-
dents, are in reality never incon-
sistent, but, however capricious
they may appear, only form part
of one vast scheme of universal
order.”—Page 33.
“ Nature will always balance
extremes by extremes.” —Page 121.
‘ ‘ The activity of one motive is
corrected by the activity of another,
for to every vice there is a corres-
ponding virtue. ” —Page 225.
I have put in italics the
chief
points which I wish you to
notice.
If Dr. Child is to be as
much
abused for reducing all pheno-
mena to law, what are you going to do with Buckle!
Have you read the work of J. S. Mill on “ Logic! ’ Does not
the work reduce both physical and mental phenomena, equally ,
to the operation of law! In this respect, though infinitely more
exact and philosophic than Dr. Child, he stands upon the same
platform with him. Mill, however, was not a Spiritualist, but an
Atheist. How are you going to abuse him!
Max Muller, a warm friend of the late Dean Stanley, and
avowedly a Christian, though a little heterodox, speaking in
praise of the primitive Aryans, said, in his Hibbert Lectures :
(t Their impulsive force would not rest till it had beaten into the
minds of the fathers of our race the deep and indelible impression
that ‘ all is right,’ and filled them with a hope, and more than a
hope, that ‘ all will he right.’ ” (Again I have put the point in
italics.) Is not this the position of Dr. Child! What store of
abuse, then, have you for Max Muller!
Stuart Glennie, in his work entitled “Pilgrim Memories,’
states, as an accepted fact of psychology, “that all mental action
whatever is but an aspect of a certain mechanical action.” He
reduces everything to law. So far, he agrees with Dr. Child,
though he was a denouncer of Spiritualism. What favourite
“ epithet ” would you apply to him !
1 could go on for hours, quoting from recognized works of
genius and learning, to show that the opinions of Dr. Child—
that the universe is governed by law, and that everything, for the
time being, is right, because inevitable had been held by all
classes of minds, from Zeno to Mill, from Paul to Humboldt, but
I will content myself with making one more quotation from the
“ Social Statics ” of that great philosopher, Herbert Spencer :
“As with the physical, so with the ethical. A belief, as jet fitful
and partial, is beginning to spread amongst men, that here also


there is an indissoluble bond between cause and consequence , an
inexorable destiny, ‘ a law which altereth not.’ .... Yet
in the moral, as in the material world, accumulated evidence
is gradually generating the conviction that events are not, at
bottom, fortuitous; but that they are wrought out in a certain
inevitable way by unchanging forces."— Page 54. (Italics are
mine.)
Herbert Spencer, you are aware, was not a spiritualist, but
has Dr. Child anywhere in his book expressed the doctrine of
“ Necessity ” more strongly 1 Is Herbert Spencer also a “ Satanic
Messiah ? ”
I have thus quoted from various authors, Christian and Infidel,
of every shade, from the author of New Testament Epistles to the
author of the essay on “Nature,” to show you that the ideas of
Dr. Child are by no means peculiar to him, and that you are not
only unjust, but inconsistent in the extreme, to pour out your
venom on him for having stated, in a very clumsy, often
unphilosophic and short-sighted manner, what so many others
have undertaken to prove.
I desire to return to one of your quotations from this “ filthy
book ” of Dr. Child’s, in order to correct the impression it made
upon you, and, what is more important as showing your character
as a controversialist, to point out the fact that you did not quote
with perfect accuracy. You hold up the passage to opprobrium.
It reads thus in the book : —“ Lucy, the courtezan, is led in an
avenue of happiness where her inclinations immediately direct,
with the deeper longings of her soul held for a time in check; and
her sister Frances, the faithful wife and mother, in another
avenue of happiness, where her inclinations lead.” The words
“ immediately ” and “ deeper,” which are the key to the meaning
of the passage, the author puts in italics. In your quotations the
italics do not appear. For what reason, sir 1 Is it not evident
that the whole meaning of the passage depends upon the impor-
tance which we attach to these two words ? If that be not so, is it
not at least a fact that Dr. Child showed the importance he
attached to them by italicizing them 1 Have you not, therefore,
misrepresented and weakened the meaning of the author to this
extent, by omitting to draw special attention to these words by
placing them in italics 1 What kind of honesty do you call this ?
But cannot you see that in the passage you have quoted
to condemn, Dr. Child has only stated what must be, to all
Christians even, a self-evident truth 1 “ Lucy follows where her
inclinations immediately direct, with the deeper longings of her
soul held for a time in check ; ” therefore she is a courtezan !Be
kind enough to point out to me where this is wrong. Does Lucy
not follow where her inclinations lead 1 Or are the deeper longings
of her soul not held in check 1 Or is she not a courtezan because


she follows her immediate inclinations, and holds the deeper feel-
ings of her soul in check 1 Pray, come, sir, let us know precisely
what it is with which you find fault in this passage ?
Now let me point out a few passages which you have not
deigned to quote, because, I doubt not, you felt they would not
altogether furnish you with enough “ filth ” to wantonly splutter-
over all who disagree with you.
“Vice is an enemy to this world’s beauty.—Page 5.
The crime mentioned in the passage you said you were
ashamed to quote, is thus described :
“It is a condition of earthly degradation ; ” and
“An enemy to the good, the true, the beautiful —that are the
crowning excellencies of the material world.”—Page 19.
“ To do good is a part of the work of life—and to our earthly
and spiritual consciousness it is the most beautiful part.”—
Page 25.
“ The recognition of evil, its resistance and condemnation ”
(italics mine) among other things, Dr. Child informs us, “ are the
legitimate offspring of nature.”—Page 41.
“ Now, reader, do not go away and say that this book recom-
mends murder.”
This is what you have to all intents and purposes done, con-
trary to the express warning of the author.
“ Both crime <ind punishment ax-e links in the chain of cause
and effect in the courses of nature.”—Page 166.
I have again put the words in italics which I wish you to notice.
All your nonsense, therefore, about the murderers pleading “ not
guilty,” on the score of being “lawfully engaged,” is answered by
Dr. Child’s book, when it declax-es “ punishment” for crime to be
“ legitimate,” and therefore right. The foregoing is from one of
the notices, as are the following :
“ A vicious man is one who surrenders to temptation for the
moment, without regard to the pain that comes in the end.”—
Page 196,
“ The nearer we come to God, the purer grows the soul.”—Page
197. (What say you of this 1 ?)
“If our inxxer life be true and pure, we have little to fear fx-om
the errors of the head. The soul must first desire to do good, and
the effort to satiate that desire will be forthcoming.”-—Page 207.
These are only a few passages selected at random, and I venture
to assert that they express the real aims of the book far more
accurately than the passages you have quoted, especially as you
have quoted them. lam not referring liere at all to your inter-
pretation of them, for that is just about as unjust and one-sided,
as uncharitable and misleading, as your ingenuity could make it.
No, I am not speaking of this, but I am alluding to the fact
which I have already touched upon, viz., that you have not quoted


fairly. In other words, in my humble opinion at least, you have
acted dishonestly, either knowingly or otherwise. Lest you may
assert that my opinion is groundless, and abuse me for it, here is
the proof : You have quoted A. J. Davis as saying, “ Yes, in
the highest, widest, truest statement, everything is good, is
right, is beautiful.” You make it appear, therefore, that A. J.
Davis gives his unqualified approval to the book, and that he
actually endorses all that you have condemned. Now, let me
quote A. J. Davis, as you should have done, without doing him an
injustice :—“ Yes, in the highest, widest, truest statement, every-
thing is good, is right, is heautifid. But this generous statement is
for the far-off future, refers to ultimates, anticipates results; and it
is not, therefore, practically adapted to the conditions and inter-
mediates of the past and present. Because the finger of wisdom
and goodness is visible in everything, and because there is a world
of intelligences environing ours, with which our life and destiny
are interlinked and inseparable, it does not follow that everything
is as perfect, as good, as pure, as beautiful, as it can become and
will be in the far-off future time, when every germ will have
ultimated its properties, and the buds of earth will have bloomed
in heaven.”
I, therefore, charge you with haring quoted A. J. Davis
unfairly, and with haring made him say what he felt it necessary
to define and modify as though he had given no modification
and no definition. How far short of “ controversial dishonesty ”
does this conduct come 1
Would it not have been fair, also, to have mentioned that the
French infidel sheet, the Western Review, is not entirely
satisfied with Dr. Child’s “ Paradox 1 ” Why did you not quote this
statement: —“ Mr. Child recognizes himself, then, that there is
much to change (italics mine) in these opposing men, institutions,
and things ? ” And does not the same review— La Revue de
L’ouest —conclude by suggesting an improvement to Dr. Child’s
title and conviction for his book in these words : —“ I propose to
him to amend his apothegm, and say, ‘ All that which is, is good,
but in condition of becoming better. ’ ” It would appear to me that
you have been so in the habit of disjoining passages, and of taking
a little here and a little there, leaving out these words and putting
in those, twisting and turning, and construing as it suited your
purpose, from what you call God’s inspired Word, that when you
descend down to the level of such uninspired books as Dr. Child’s,-
for the time being, the force of habit is so strong that you run
away with the idea that the same method of treatment may
lawfully be employed, and that you may twist and turn, suppress
and add, just as the genius of the hour may direct. Now,
although such a method is very convenient for the clergy, applied
to the “Word of God,” it won’t do for literature that is unin-


spired. With uninspired literature a naan requires to be honest.
When he professes to give the real meaning of the author, he
must quote those portions fairly that support that meaning, and
not suppress those passages which the author specially relied upon
to define his position exactly. The texts in the Bible are like a
set of chessmen —you move them about according to the game
you are playing. Not so profane literature, which was never
intended to furnish toys for the priests ; it plays only one game—
the game of the author—and whosoever interferes with this is
an interloper and an obstructionist, deserving truly to be put
under the restraint of a moral cloture.
On the 4th page of your letter you thus moralize on your own
interpretation of my conduct: —“ But how much more serious is
it when a man stands deliberately before his fellow-men, as you
do, openly avowing himself to be an Apostle of Falsehood?” How
must I moralize on your conduct when I have such abundant
proofs of your perversions, misrepresentations, and what cannot
be otherwise than characterized as untruths ? If falsehood requires
an apostle, permit me, rev. sir, to assure you that I never met
anyone more qualified to do honour to the position than yourself.
I am very much obliged for. your solicitations for my eternal
welfare, but unless you are able to adduce something like argu-
ment in support of your views, you cannot expect to win me
over.
Your sermon at the end of your letter might have been spared,
for you beg the entire question at issue—“’Tis Jesus who has
raised nations from the depths of heathen ignorance and degrada-
tion ” is just the very thing I have asked you to prove, and
which you appear so afraid to attempt. “ ’Tis Jesus who is ever
in the van of all true progress ” is what I wanted you to affirm
in debate, but which you prefer to assert in the midst of a torrent
of commonplace rhapsody. Such a long string of religious (?)
phrases are impervious to the influence of common sense, and I
shall not waste more of my time by noticing them. Should you
feel inclined to give me some proof for what you say, I shall then
be at your service. In the meantime, let me ask you again, “Are
you willing to discuss the relative merits of Orthodoxy and
Infidelity ? ”
The following expressions I desire to thank you for: —
Ist. —“Allow me to express my sincere regret that I find your
soul in the bondage of such demoniacal fetters.”
2nd.—“l do earnestly pray that you may see your sin.”
3rd. —“ Ido most earnestly and affectionately entreat you to
flee from this worse than Sodom and Gomorrah.”
4th.—“ Will you not be warned in time ? ”
sth.—“ I speak plainly, but, as God knoweth, Ido not speak
unkindly.” (Very necessary information.)


6th.—“ I wish, if it be possible, to open your eyes, so that you
may see your danger; and, if you persist, I warn you of your doom.”
These expressions comport but ill with the rest of your letter,
and especially with those paragraphs I quoted at the beginning
of this letter. Nevertheless, I will give you the credit of being
sincere. I only wish to assure you that silly, emotional platitudes
do not affect me, and it is folly for you to Avaste your time in
trying to influence me by that means. lam open to reason and
to facts, and, when you have these to offer in support of your
cause, you will find me an earnest listener. In the meantime, be
less abusive and more argumentative.
When you are ready to defend your cause in public, I am
ready to meet you.—l remain, yours truly,
THOS. WALKER.
Rev. J, A. DoAvie.
6 Carolina-terrace, Drummond-street,
Carlton, 13th March, 1882.
Rev. Sir, —I am aAvaiting a reply to my last letter to you.
Should none be received before the termination of this Aveek, it is
my intention to have our correspondence published, just as it has
been forwarded and received.—l remain, yours truly,
THOS. WALKER.
Roan J. A, Dowie.
Victoria Coffee Palace, Collins-street,
Melbourne, 16th March, 1882.
Dear Sir, —Yours dated 13th received, saying that you are
aAvaiting reply to yours dated 20th February, and that it is your
intention to have our correspondence published.
As to my reply, I must plainly say that I did not, and do not,
think that your letter was worth the trouble of a reply, so far as
you personally are concerned: for its contents prove that you are
not an honest seeker after truth in any degree.
But as you declare your intention of publishing the corres-
pondence (although you haA T e no right to do so without my
consent), I Avill, for the sake of others, reply to your letter as soon
as convenient —which Avill not be until Monday or Tuesday next,
at soonest.
There are three stipulations, however, Avhich I will make before
■consenting to the publication of these letters —(1) that Mr. S ’s
letters to me of 6th and 7th Februaiy shall be included; (2) that
Mr. S ’s name shall not be used Avithout his consent; and (3)
that I shall see and approve the proof-sheets, ere they go finally to
press.


I trust you will see that these conditions are only fair and
reasonable. Ido not wish to alter anything I have written, but
I want to see that what I wrote asid received is correctly printed.
—I am, faithfully yours,
JOHN ALEX. HOWIE.
Mr. Thomas Walker, 6 Carolina-terrace,
Drummond-street, Carlton.
Victoria Coffee Palace, Collins-street,
Melbourne, 18th March, 1882.
Dear Sir, —Amongst the ancient Greeks there was a saying
that “ against stupidity even the gods are powerless.” lam filled
with a sense of its truth, as regards men at all events, when I
look at your letter of fifty-six pages, dated 20th February, now
lying before. It is a continent of infidel mud, in which even an
intellectual giant might be overwhelmed, unless very cautious. It
is not only stupid, in its utter failure to recognize the principles
of truth and reason, but it is full of a certain kind of clever and
cunning sophistry, in its attempts to cover its slimy depths with
a carpet of false reasoning, based upon false assertions as to facts.
I confess, therefore, that I would approach the unpleasant task
of examining and replying to it with great reluctance, except for
the opportunity it gives me of stripping your philosophy of its
false garments, and exposing it in its real character, as being
“ earthly, sensual, and devilish.” May the Eternal Spirit of God
open your eyes to see, and your ears to hear, and your heart to
i-eceive, light and truth.
I will first address a few observations to you concerning some
of your personal charges against me, which I shall subsequently
show to be as unjust as they are numerous. Ido not complain of
such charges from men in your condition of soul—indeed, I fully
expect them : for you are only thereby proving yourselves to be
faithful servants of a vile master. Some years ago, in Sydney,
numerous threats of personal violence, and even death, reached
me from spiritualists, and from “ spirits ” even, who attended
certain seances in that city.
One of these latter “ spirits ” was wrought up into a fearful
state of wrath with me, because of certain lectures I was at the
time delivering against the doctrines of these “ devils,” and in a
poem which he inspired, and which was officially communicated
to me, this “ spirit,” calling himself “ Philosopheme,” addressed
me thus in the closing verse :
“ One word—then for battle we hold in our breath
To fight you ! By God ! we shall fight to the death;
Through earth, heaven, hell, and the range of endeavour,
We fight you ; by God ! we will fight you forever !”


The letter accompanying this effusion was addressed “To that
infamous antichrist, the most reverend John Alex. Dowie;” and I
was informed therein that “ elevated ” spiritualists well knew that
I was a m.ost infamous being—no other than “ a seducing embodied
spirit, and under the inspiration of a lying disembodied spirit of
the worst kind, which is likely to continue with you in this life,
until you arrive at that purgatory below the earth sphere, which
will surely attend you in the next life,” &c.
I was further charged with being “ assiduous in the dissemina-
tion of falsehood, in the mendacity of speech, and in superlative
paralogism and malversation against the truth,” &c,, &c. But it
was a woeful mistake upon the part of the “ spirits,” and their
mortal circle, to choose such a scribe : for, happening to show the
letter to a commercial friend in Sydney, he immediately recognized
the writing as that of a great rogue, who had only been a few
months out of Darlinghurst Gaol, where he had spent a number
of years for forgery and embezzlement. This fact, told publicly
the next Sunday by me, without mentioning the poor creature’s
name, and an indication that I might be compelled also to disclose
some of the doings of the professional medium concerned in the
production of this poem and letter, caused the immediate collapse
of “ the circle,” and the speedy disappearance of the scribe and
medium, who troubled me with no more communications from the
“spirits.” Another of your friends wrote to me—“ You will
burn in hell—your soul, I mean —for you are the biggest and most
wicked liar in Sydney, and the lowest depth of hell is your
portion ; and you will be damned in hell.”
This letter was “ dedicated to A J. Dowie, Sydney, who has
•sold himself to the devil for gain.” In addition, I received many
letters at various times threatening my life, one of which declared
that if I wrote again on the subject, “ a piece of lead will be put
through your b y heart;” and the others were of a similar
nature —some even threatening my wife and children’s lives. Of
course, I need scarcely say that none of these things moved me :
for I have not so learned of Christ as to fear any or all of these
hellish foes, whether in or out of the flesh, since my life is in His
keeping. I tell you, therefore, these facts only that you may
know, for the future, that I am perfectly indifferent to all your vile
language, and all the concoctions of the filthy spirits who attend
your seances in this city: for 1 know whose you all are, and whom
you all serve, and, so long as you are in that service, I expect just
such treatment as you have given me in your letter.
I am grateful to you for linking me with my Lord and Saviour
Jesus Christ in the opening sentences of your letter. Your
blasphemy against Him for denouncing the hypocrisy and
uncleanness of His day is only to be expected, when it is
a’emembered that He “ cast out devils,” and put your master


himself and all his hellish host to flight. The hypocritical
Pharisees, and the venomous materialistic Sadducees, of that day,
as of this, got on very well with the demons who were working
such woe in those times, as in this. You and yours would
doubtless have helped these fiends to crucify Him, as you help
them now to crucify Him afresh and put Him to an open shame,
so far as words can do it. But you honour me too highly when
you say, “ In this respect you have imitated your Master well, if
you have not even surpassed Him.” No mortal tongue can ever
express the love for sinners, and the hatred for their sins, which
fell in words of eternal power from Jesus’ lips. Would that I
could —alas ! that I am still so far off—reach nearer to Him in
both aspects of His character. Still I will follow Him: for I
ever seem to hear Him say—
Wherever wrong shall right deny,
Or suffering spirits urge their plea,
Be thou a voice to smite the lie,
A hand to set the captive free.”
Hence I do what I can to smite this awful lie called
Spiritualism, or rather multitude of lies: for, when I ask you
“What is thy name 1 ” as Jesus did of that “man with an
unclean spirit” long ago (see Mark v, 1-20), your reply is, like
his, “My name is Legion: for we are many.” May it also be
that you, like him, may be soon dispossessed, and “ clothed, and
in your right mind ;” may you tell your friends “ how great
things the Lord hath done for thee, and how He had mercy on
thee.” Yes, your name is Legion : for you are many, and your
devices are many. You are all things to all men, if by any
means you can destroy some with your master’s many wiles,
ancient and modern.
You take exception to my assertion that “my beliefs are not
in question;” and you say, “ I called your beliefs in question.”
But my statement is the exact truth. The question upon which
alone you were called in by Mr. S to help him concerning was
“ Spiritualism ; ” for that was the only question discussed between
him and I. That question you have cunningly and persistently
evaded. Your calling of my beliefs in question does not matter a
jot. I met a drunken man who called them in question the other
day, and whilst he was doing so he stammered, staggered, and fell
into the gutter. Ho you think that I discussed questions of
religion and morality with him 1 No, indeed.
I would gladly do so, when he was sober enough to listen to
reason and truth—when the accursed spirit, “ Alcohol,” had gone
out of him. And so I will with you. But, whilst you hug this
vile concoction of all forms of falsehood, called “ Spiritualism,” to
your breast, as a drunkard does a rum-flask, and whilst you drink


of its maddening, spiritually intoxicating cup, I will not discuss
with you, or anyone else in your position, the sublime beauty of
the Lord Jesus and His teaching. “Spiritualism,” and that
alone, is the question which originated this correspondence ; but
for reasons of your own, which you dare not avow, you shun it.
As to whether I “dare” to defend my views, when a proper
occasion arises, there can be no question whatever, seeing that I
have been doing that for more than fourteen years, and my
bitterest foes have never charged me with cowardice.
As to your question under which heading (Faith, Hope, or
Charity) a number of severe, but needful, comments upon your
character as a controversialist are to be classed, I reply, under
that of Charity ; for God, who knows all hearts, knows that I
wrote only what I believed to be true, in a spirit of love towards
your soul; and, no matter what you or others may say or think,
I know that I am writing in that same spirit in this letter—and
He who alone is my judge knows that also.
You say that I am guilty of misrepresenting you by saying,
“You ask me to fight upon two distinct platforms at the same
moment.” But I think your challenge in Mr. S ’s letter of 6th
Februaiy, and in yours of Bth and 11th, can leave no other
impression upon candid minds than that you wanted one discussion,
in which the issues would be confused, and not two distinct
discussions —you never use the plural number—-as would be
required, if Christianity and Infidelity were to be separately
discussed upon their respective merits. That is my impression
still, and the whole tenor of your last letter, in which you confuse
everything, confirms me in still asserting that to have been your
true object in your proposals. Indeed, your closing question in
that letter proves it : for you therein say : —“ Are you willing to
discuss the relative mex-its of Orthodoxy and Infidelity?” You
nowhere speak of two distinct discussions. I stated my willingness,
under certain conditions, to enter upon one discussion—namely,
that on Spiritualism ; but you have always been determined to
mix up Christianity with it, to which I wholly demur.
You ask me to point out the place where you demand that I
shall discuss with you on “ Infidelity, Materialism, Rationalism,
Atheism, Deism, and a host of anonymous foes of God and man,
whom you vaguely hint at as £ &c., &c.’ ”
This is certainly a most audacious question, in the face of your
' words in your letter of Bth February, where you say that you
cling to your proposal to discuss “ Infidelity ” with me, adding,
“ Infidelity not only covers Spiritualism, but Rationalism,
Materialism, Atheism, Deism, &c., &c.; surely you, as a clergy-
man, must be convinced that none of these are conducive to
morality and progress.” How dare you, in the face of these
words, say to me, “ Point me out, sir, the very place, and quote


the very passage, or I shall be obliged to accuse you of daring
misrepresentation 1 ” Well, now you have the very passage, and
what do you think of yourself ! I leave all honest men to judge.
Your quibbling about not identifying yourself with all these
systems, which you undertook to affirm “ are conducive to morality
and progress,” is too transparent a trick to succeed with people of
good sense. You were completely confounded with, and could not
answer, my arguments as to your utterly reckless and inconsistent
conduct, which I likened to that of a “mercenary soldier,” &c.,
and I now repeat the charge, which I have again fairly proved.
More, I add to it this: Your Spiritualism is like a cruel
Pirate, who really sails under the Black Flag of death and hell
upon the sea of human life, but who keeps a stock of false colours,
which he cunningly flies when necessary, to delude the foolish and
get near enough to destroy, if possible, the feeble and unwary
among men ; and then, when sure of his prey, he orders servants
like you to haul down the deceptive flag and display his true
colours—the grinning death’s head and bare white bones of
Infidelity upon its black ground of Despair. Yes, Spiritualism
sometimes sails the summer seas, and appears to spread snowy
wings like an angel from heaven, whilst it unfurls to the breeze
the white flag of the Cross of Christ, and pretends to be a vessel
bound for the Christian’s Home above. Many have been deceived
thereby, and have gone on board this Pirate ship of Hell, not
knowing its true character until too late \ and many, alas ! have
been further deceived into joining its demoniac crew—many who
have at last made awful “shipwreck of faith and of a good
conscience,” amidst the mocking laughter of the ‘ seducing
spirits ” who had ensnared them into Satan’s service.
Yes, Spiritualism has its Rationalistic flag for the proud, self-
sufficient* intellectual egotist, whose god is his shallow brains,
whose religion is what he is pleased to call “ Science, and who
reckons upon building somehow a tower to reach to heaven, so as
to get there without any help, and be able to tell Clod he can do
without Him. And so the Rationalist gets on boaxd, and
Spiritualism lands him, very appropriately, at some modern
Tower of Babel, where he spends his wretched days in striving to
interpret the irreconcilable jargon of the fiends, who mock him
with all kinds of confused language and thought, until he
perishes there.
And so with the Materialist, the Atheist, and the Deist. You
were quite right in saying that the Spiritualism which you teach
“ covers them 3 all : ” for it carries the flags of all. My reading of
its literature, now extending over four years, justifies me in saying
that every form of Paganism as well as Infidelity every form of
evil in short—is covered by Spiritualism. It is the Jesuitism of
Atheism especially, and one of the most dangerous forms of
4


that old Serpent, the Devil, with which this earth has been
cursed.
You have utterly failed in your pitiful endeavour to wriggle out
of my having proved you to be most inconsistent, in having to
admit “that the Infidelity you were prepared to defend covers
systems of belief and morals incongruous with each other,” and yet
that you still declared, “I am prepared to show that they are all of
them more conducive to morality and progress than Christianity.”
It is a laughable farce to see how you labour to disentangle
yourself, by endeavouring to show how I would have been
entangled, according to your account, had I ventured to discuss the
merits of orthodox Christianity with you. Your imagination, or
the misguided inspiration of some mischievous spirit which was
befooling you, led you to say that the Orthodoxy which I would
have defended, would have included the most absurd and irrecon-
cilable systems of pseudo-Christianity. Why, if I did so, I would
be as great a mercenary, as a Christian, as you are as an Infidel
or Spiritualist You say :—“ The Lutherans believe in the ‘real
presence,’ as do the Roman Catholics. The Anglicans and others
do not. On this point there is incongruity. Yet, in defending
Orthodoxy, you must defend both that of the Lutheran and that
of the Anglican.” Now, apart from the question of fact as to
what are the Lutheran and Anglican doctrines concerning the
“ real presence,” I just ask—Did any rational being ever make a
more irrational statement than that which I have just quoted?
Why, of course, I would only defend what I believed the Scriptures
to teach on that or any question of Christian belief ; and it would
be as easy to get me to defend the dogma of papal infallibility, or
any other screaming absurdity, as the doctrine of transubstantia-
tion in any form. If I could defend all these opposed doctrines, I
could sign all kinds of contradictory creeds, make all kinds of
contradictory vows, and preach—if they were insane enough to
allow me —in a Roman Catholic church in the morning, a Presby-
terian church in the afternoon, and in a Lutheran, Wesleyan, or
any other, church at night. Do you really think all men are fools
in every sense, as to suppose such conduct would be tolerated by
any number of men who were not idiots, or, perhaps, spiritualists?
If I acted in such a manner I should stand in immediate need of
quarters at Yarra Bend Lunatic Asylum. But, permit me to
assist you in your “inspired” argument. You have only to add to
your list of orthodox persons, whom I would have to defend,
those who call themselves Christian Spiritualists, and then you
would have me completely—for, in defending their doctrine of
Spiritualism, do you not see that I would walk straight into my
enemy’s castle, and have to surrender at discretion ! The
argument is utterly illogical, and beneath contempt, and is
scarcely worth the application of this reductio ad ahsurdum.


You refer to my statement that you were willing to prove
Spiritualism, Materialism, Atheism, Rationalism, Deism, &c., to
be “equally conducive to morality and progress;” and, getting
into another theatrical rage, you say—“ I insist, sir, point me out
the very paragraph, the very words, or forever know that you
have told a lie,” etc. This, again, is only another cuttle-fish kind
of trick, an attempt to escape from your own words in the
passage which I have already quoted, where you say, that the
Infidelity which you are prepared to prove is conducive to morality
and progress “ covers them all ; ” and, therefore, that they are all
equally good is to be fairly inferred, and equally conducive to
morality and progress.
If I were to say Christianity covers truth, faith, hope, wisdom,
and love, and is conducive to morality and progress, it would be
fair for you to say that I held all these graces to be equally con-
ducive to morality and progress, although I hold the greatest of
these to be love; and it was just in that sense that I employed
the word “ equally .” Perhaps, however, you may wish to dis-
tinguish Atheism as the greatest amongst your moral and
progressive agencies; and, if you do wish to make it pre-eminent
in your teaching, you may, and still remain a Spiritualist,
according to some “ spirit” authorities.
You will therein agree, for instance, with a “ French-Normandy
spirit,” claiming to have been in “the higher existence” no less
than “ three hundred years,” which, by permission of what spirit-
ualists consider a distinguished circle, advocated the following
theoretical dogmas: —“(l.) There is no God; nothing in the
universe of being but matter, and the negative forces in matter.
(2.) Annihilation is true; or a conscious future existence, in
the sense of endlessness, is a farce. Spiritual beings, by becoming
more pure and etherealized, are finally absorbed in the great ocean
of refined matter, snuffed out, losing their consciousness and their
identity. (3.) Fatalism is a truth. Man is not responsible
for an act of his life. All things, including men and their actions,
are fated, or necessitated to be precisely as they are. Man is a
thing”
This Satan-inspired utterance of “a seducing spirit” is to be found
in the work of Dr. J. M. Peebles, entitled, “Around the World,”
at page 204. Do you wish to elevate the teaching of this “ spirit ”
to the chief place in your system ? If you will say *so, I will so
far modify my statement as to say, that, whilst you certainly hold
all these incongruous systems to be equally conducive to morality
and progress, yet in the advance guard of these “ doctrines of
devils ” you place Atheism, Annihilation, and Fatalism. Will
that suit you \ It is, at least, all I can do.
Your sixth complaint is that I have done you a wrong by
saying that you have “ confessed that you are a Spiritualist,


Rationalist, Materialist, Atheist, Deist, &c., all rolled into one
under the the name of Infidel.” And then you again proceed,
with absurd bravado, to dare me to quote your “ words to express
such a confession.”
I am almost weary of doing such things ; but I will once more
respond to your appeal for information concerning yourself.
In the first sentence of your letter of 11th February, you say :
“ I am spreading Infidelity.” Surely, then, you admit there that
you are an Infidel. In your letter of Bth February, you say ;
“ Infidelity not only covers Spiritualism, but Rationalism,
Materialism, Atheism, Deism, &c., &c.” Surely, then, you admit
there that you embody all these systems in your own person, as
you are spreading them all, according to your own confession of
11th February; and you are, therefore, what I say you are, “ all
rolled into one, under the name of Infidel.” Can anything be
clearer? All your attempts to wriggle out of the fetters of your
own confession are unavailing. It suits your purpose novj to say
something different, when you see how your own voluntary,
written words condemn you. But it is too late. You have
shared, in this matter, the usual fate of the wicked —“ Behold, he
travaileth with iniquity, and hath conceived mischief, and brought-
forth falsehood; he made a pit, and digged it, and is fallen into
the ditch which he made ” (Psalm vii. 15).
And there I leave you. If you will confess and forsake your sin.
God will be merciful, and bring you out of that “ horrible pit and
miry clay” into which you have dragged so many. But remember
that, till then, no man can help you ; and concerning you the word
of God is : —“ His mischief shall return upon his own head, and his
violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate.” You have
reviled and blasphemed the Son of God, whose mercy alone spares
your wicked life, which is spent in such sinful antagonism to His
purposes and will; you have deliberately charged the greatest of
the Apostles, Paul, with being a liar; and you are constantly
striving to destroy and discredit, by false charges, the authority
of the Most High God in every way you can. Of course, all your
puny endeavours are as vain and ineffectual to affect or injure
Him, as if they were never put forth ; but, remember, that, if His
judgments tarry, yet they are sure, and terrible to the impenitent.
Your slander against Paul, based upon Romans iii. 7, is a most
iniquitous perversion of the passage ; for, if the Bth verse is read
with it, seeing it is part of the same sentence, it is at once seen that
he is speaking concerning false charges made against him, things
“ slanderously reported, and as some affirm that we say.” He no
more imagines that if he told a lie it would abound to the glory
of God, than he believes it would be right to say, “ Let us do
evil that good may come.” He says, concerning those who practise
such iniquity, “ whose condemnation is just,” and that condem-


nation rests upon you : for here you are caught in the very act
of slanderously reporting what you must know to be false. But
I do not wonder at your hatred of that unselfish, noble-hearted
preacher and teacher, Paul, whose life was one of the grandest
and most fruitful for good of any lived on earth. He saw, and
routed, the demon hosts who now inspire your hatred, and uttered
that divinely-inspired word to the soldiers of Christ in every age
—“ Put on the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to stand
against the wiles of the devil.” He never mistook the real
enemy with whom he had to tight. “For,” said he, “our wrestling
is not with flesh and blood, but against the principalities, against
the powers, against the world-rulers of this darkness, against the
spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places” (Ephesians vi.
11-12). And you hate him for that reason.
But I honour him, and only wish I were more like him.
Contrary to your presumptuous warning not to follow Paul too
closely, I would that I could follow him as closely as he followed
Christ; then I should be more powerful in wrestling with these
“ spiritual hosts of wickedness,” to whom it is your desire to hand
over every soul on earth.
Your approval of Voltaire, Paine, Bradlaugh, &c., as liberators
of mankind, and openers of “ the thousand doors of truth,” will,
I hope, open the eyes of any amongst your followers who have
respect for private virtue, or public law. The scenes of the
Reign of Terror in France not a century ago, when Infidelity
established its worship of the Goddess of Reason, in the form of
a shameless woman of the streets, and ruled by the guillotine,
until the land was deluged in blood, by fiends like Robespierre
and Marat—these are triumphs of Paine, Voltaire, Rousseau,
Diderot, and all that horrid infidel crew who then manned the
Slave Ship of Hell, when it bore the name of “ The Age of
Reason.”
The utterly sensual and soulless creed of Bradlaugh would, if
supreme, restore those days for which your soul seems to pine.
Let your companions and victims note the fact.
Your seventh complaint is, that I chax’ge you with teaching
“ mental, moral, social, and spiritual chaos and anarchy. Well,
if your letters do not prove the charge, what do they prove 1 I
will leave the answer to those who may read this correspondence,
in full confidence as to what the answer will be, if they are
honest and unprejudiced. There is not even a semblance of
order in your thoughts. They seem to me like a dense Indian
jungle abounding with poison plants, venomous vipei’S, ravenous
beasts, and slimy x’eptiles of every kind; whilst a horrible
miasma rises from its foetid marshes, laden with fevers, pestilence,
and death.
And now I come to that pox'tion of the jungle where you


profess to review and reply to my criticism of Dr. A. B. Child’s
book, “ Whatever is, is Right,” It is an almost inaccessible
labyrinth of pestiferous writing, neither honest nor clever, as I
shall show; bnt simply productive of a mass of briars and
thorns, and noxious weeds. It is scarcely worth the task of
cutting down, except for the opportunity it gives to me of killing
some of the adders and asps which find shelter there.
You try, chameleon-like, to change Dr. Child’s colour, and
disarm what I have written, by saying at the outset, “Not one of
the passages which you have quoted from his work are peculiarly
spiritualistic.” • Now, how dare you affirm that, when the whole
work is “ spiritualistic ” from beginning to end ? It was originally
published in the Banner of Light , the principal spiritualistic
organ in the United States, and it bears the endorsement of the
spiritualistic press generally, and of leading spiritualists. The
author himself tells us, in his preface, that the thoughts expressed
in it were gathered from many sources, amongst which are “ from
talking with devils and talking with angels.” Besides which, two
of the most damaging extracts which I quoted from his book are
found at pages 102-3, which form part of a distinct chapter headed
“ Spiritualism.” And before I go further, I will add to my
quotations from that chapter two more, just to show you how
“peculiarly spiritualistic” the book is. At page 102, Dr. Child
says :—“ The clean outside and the virtuous life are to Spiritualism
just the same as the habiliments of crime, pollution, and degrada-
tion.” Again, at page 103 : —“ Distinctions among men, to
Spiritualism, are phantoms.”
In a chapter on “Human Distinctions,” at page 118, he makes
the doctrine yet clearer, and says :—“ This great distinction
between good and bad men is a moral and religions fiction, found
nowhere except in the vapour of man’s belief, in his materialism,
in man’s judgment.”
Or, to refer again to the preface, he says : —“ It (this book) has
approbation for everything, and condemnation for nothing. It
recognizes no merit, no demerit, in human souls.” Oh, yes, it is
Spiritualism which is “ peculiarly ” responsible for these “ doctrines
of devils,” which teach, as he does, in the preface : —“ The soul
produces deeds called good and bad .... and by these
products of the soul it can in no way be influenced, retarded, or
advanced in its eternal progression.” So, then, do good or do
evil, it matters not a jot to the advanced spiritualist; he asserts
that nothing he may do can in any way retard his soul’s
progress, and, therefore, no law, human or divine, can restrain,
guide, or affect him !
Permit me, then, to fling aside your preliminary quibble, and
to present you with the interesting fact that the whole book is
“ peculiarly spiritualistic,” beyond a doubt.


Now, what have I to do in this argument with all the rubbish
which you have strung together about Pope, whom Christians do
not “claim as belonging to them;” about Calvin, whom you do
not quote, and entirely misrepresent; about Buckie, whose
peculiar doctrines I am not responsible for, nor have undertaken
to discuss; about J ohn Stuart Mill, who was not a Christian in
any sense, and from whom you quote nothing ; or about Max
Muller, Stuart Glennie, Herbert Spencer, or any other of the
writers from whom you so irrelevantly quote at such length 1
Simply nothing.
None of these, even if they all wrongly approved Dr. Child's
doctrine, which they do not, could make it right, if it were wrong.
But your trick is too transparent. You simply want to put
me off the scent, and get me, if possible, to hunt some other game
than your poor, exhausted, spiritualistic Child.
You know well that none of these writers have ever dared to
pen such atrocious sentiments as his, and that, even if they did,
it would in no way affect my argument. No; this doctrine is
“ peculiarly spiritualistic,” and rationalistic, atheistic, materialistic,
or deistic allies cannot help you in defending it, as you wish them
to do. lam dealing with Spiritualism in your person, and
with that alone ; and, therefore, the gate of the arena is closed,
meanwhile, to all other combatants, until this business is finished.
“No admittance,” therefore, is my answer to your crowd of
discordant allies.
But you have dared to say that I must not attack your
“ spiritualistic ” Child, because the Apostle Paul taught the
doctrine of “whatever is, is right.” You know that assertion to
be wholly false ; for there is not a single passage in all his writings
which will bear such an interpretation.
You refer to—though you, very cunningly, did not exactly quote
—his words in Romans ix. 21 ;—“ Or hath not the potter a right
over the clay, from the same lump to make one part a vessel unto
honour, and another unto dishonour 1 ”
But continue the quotation to the next verse, and note how
applicable it is to you —“ What if God, willing to show His wrath,
and to make His power known, endured with much longsuffering
vessels of wrath fitted unto destruction!” You, like the wicked
Jews to whom the words were first applied, have rejected the
Saviour and the counsel of God, and have become “ a vessel of
wrath,” which Satan fills, at your own desire, “ full of abomina-
tions;” and you, thereby, make “drunken with the wine of
(spiritual) fornication ” the misguided persons who drink, at your
hands, from that “ cup of devils ” called Spiritualism. I say to
you, as Paul said to the Corinthians, “Ye cannot drink the cup
of the Lord, and the cup of devils.” You have chosen the latter
of your own deliberate free will, and are daily insulting the Most


High. You are “ fitted unto destruction,” yet the Lord displays
His anger, power, and longsufiering in permitting you to live.
Were He a man, like yourself, He would crush you at once. But,
because He is God, He spares you, partly as a righteous punishment
upon this people for their great national sins ; partly to show, by
contrast with your vile, mean, and weak blasphemies, the glory
and power of His Eternal Son and His Gospel; and, partly, to give
you time for repentance, so showing His mercy and love to the
most wretched sinners. But, beware, lest your day of grace be
gone, and His open judgments overtake you.
You have also tried to shield Dr. Child by striving to defile the
Word of God, and have dared to say—“ Every crime, sir, which
disgraces humanity I can point out to you as commanded and
sanctioned by the God of the Old Testament,” &c. This is but
repeating, parrot-like, the infamous slanders and blasphemies of
Voltaire, Paine, Ingersoll, and others, which have been refuted
again and again. It is a profitless task to answer such as yon,
who, as I have now so often proved, cannot really honestly believe
in your own assertions. But, for the sake of others, I will briefly
show how absolutely false your statements are concerning what
the Bible teaches.
Your first quotation is from the 38th chapter of Genesis, and it
shows that so far from God having “commanded and sanctioned
the horrible sins therein recorded, that He visited them with
immediate and condign punishment, and left the record for the
warning of every age—a warning needed by such as you, who
approve of Bradlaugh, whose horrid teaching commends similar
abominations, and for doing which certain of his obscene works
have been suppressed by law. This charge, therefore, is found
false, and returns upon your own head.
Your next, “the daughters of Lot,” is also a wicked libel ; for
you know that their detestable sin was never sanctioned by God,
but the contrary, and was the result, also, of that demoniac sin ol
intemperance which Spiritualism does so much to foster in every
sense—for, like Lot’s daughters, “ your vine is the vine of Sodom,
and of the fields of Gomorrah.” God’s curse rested upon the
offspring of that sin, the Moabites and Ammonites, who clung to
their mothers’ vices ; and many of the terrible judgments of God
upon these wicked nations, who were ever the foes of God’s people
in after ages, can only be understood by the light of that awful
story in Genesis. For some such purpose it was recorded. This
charge, also, “ comes down upon your own pate.”
Your next is the sins of Solomon. Well, how dare you charge
God with these 1 Bead the 11th chapter of I. Kings, and you will
see that all these wicked deeds were evil in the sight of the Lord ;
and again, in the 9th verse, “ The Lord was angry with Solomon,
because his heart was turned from the Lord God of Israel; ” and,


in the 11th and two following verses, God’s judgment against
him is decreed : —“ Forasmuch as this is done of thee ... I
will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and give it to thy
servantand, finally, because of these sins, the prophet Ahijah is
sent to Jeroboam to tell him of God’s purpose to make him king
over the ten tribes of Israel, and Solomon’s reign and life close in
a night of terror, rebellion, and impending doom—a fearful end
to what, but for these sins, woidd have been a glorious career.
Again your charge against God is proved false.
Your next libel is concerning “ the adultery of David.” How
dare you say God “ sanctioned, commanded,” or in any degree
tolerated, or approved that horrid crime, with its accompaniment
of murder? The story of these sins, as recorded in 11. Samuel,
11th chapter, ends with these words:—“But the thing which
David had done displeased the Lord.” The following chapter, in
which the prophet Nathan’s message from God is recorded, shows
with what detestation He viewed, and with what severity He
punished David for these very sins; on account of which He said
(10th verse) ;—“ The sword shall never depart from thine house,
because thou hast despised Me, and hast taken the wife of Uriah,
the Hittite, to be thy wife.” Alas for David ! his sin could not
rest with himself; it was the ruin of his family, the disintegrator
of his kingdom, a curse to the Jewish race, and, as Nathan said,
“ By this deed thou hast given great occasion to the enemies of
the Lord to blaspheme.” As one of the Lord’s enemies, although
the deed happened nearly three thousand years ago, you rake it
up for the purpose of blaspheming—thus confirming Nathan’s
prophecy. But your charge again recoils upon yourself, and God
is shown to be righteous and holy, hating sin, and punishing those
who commit it; yet mercifully forgiving, as in David’s case, the
truly penitent.
Your next charge is based upon Numbers xxxi., 17th and
18th verses. But those words were not spoken by the Lord.
They form part of what Moses said, beginning with the 15th
verse. It is only a portion of a dark and mysterious page of
human history, the destruction of the horribly wicked Midianites
and Canaanites, who filled the Promised Land with the foulest
idolatries and vices which had ever cursed the earth. Ido not
pretend to solve all mysteries, as spiritualists do. These events
occurred more than thirty-three centuries ago, in a condition of
human life, and under a dispensation of Divine government,
entirely different to that under which we live. Such deeds
would be wicked and wrong in our days, and we have far
mightier weapons against our foes than weapons of human
warfare. Possibly, this was one of the instances where Moses
did not rightly interpret the commands of God. The Lord Jesus,
with whom alone I have to do, said (Mathew xix. 8, and Mark


x. 5), regarding the Mosaic law of divorce, for instance, these
words : —“ Moses, for your hardness of heart, suffered you to put
away your wives, but from the beginning it hath not been so; ”
and then He goes on to lay down the true law of divorce—a law
which you spiritualists hate and denounce. In the same way
then, perhaps, “ for the hardness of their hearts,” Moses was
permitted to give such commands as in the passage you quote
from N umbers; but it does not follow God approved such
deeds.
For instance, God permits such vile systems as Spiritualism,
Mormonism, and Mohammedanism to exist; but He most
certainly does not approve them.
He commands His Church to destroy them; and, as in the case
of the Mohammedan power in Turkey, He permitted the horrible
late Russo-Turkish war to work for the destruction of the power
of the false prophet; but He never “ commanded ” nor “ sanc-
tioned ” the barbarities of that war, nor of any war. For as Paul
says, in 2 Corinthians x. 4, 5 : —“ The weapons of our warfare
are not of the flesh, but mighty before God to the casting down of
strongholds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that
is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bringing every
thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.” So again your
charge against God fails.
Your last blasphemy against God, as sanctioning and com-
manding sin, is based upon Jeremiah iii. 9, where, so far from
doing that, any candid reader will see that God, by the mouth of
His prophet, is reproving the people of Israel for their sins, under
the appropriate figure of an adulterous wife, and especially for
idolatry. “ Hast thou seen what backsliding Israel hath done ? ”
is the question of the Lord, to which the passage you quote is a
part of the answer, in which “her treacherous sister, Judah,” is
also condemned.
And yet you dare to quote this as an instance of God’s having
“ sanctioned and commanded every crime which has disgraced
humanity.” Again you have fallen into the ditch which you
made for me; and this, the last of your blasphemous misrepre-
sentations of the Bible, falls upon your own miserable head, as
did the rest.
And what shall I say to you, in the name of the Lord, ere I
turn from the exposure of this portion of your reckless malignity ?
I will address you in the words which Paul employed (Acts
xiii. 10) to a man of your stamp, named “ Elymas, the sorcerer,”
at the island of Cyprus long ago : “ O, full of all subtlety and all
mischief, thou child of the devil, thou enemy of ail righteousness,
wilt thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord 1 ” It
is not my province to go further, and say, as Paul did, Thou
shalt be blind, not seeing the sun for a season; ” but I can say


SPIRITUALISM UNMASKED.
confidently, “ And now, behold, the hand of the Lord is upon
thee,” and I warn you to turn from your evil ways : for “ he that,
being often reproved, hardeneth his neck, shall suddenly be
destroyed, and that without remedy.” I have seen this
warning terribly fulfilled within the last few years, in several
striking instances, in these colonies, in the persons of daring
blasphemers like yourself.
And now, I pursue my examination of your letter, at that point
of “ the jungle” where you resume your defence of Dr. Child’s
“specially spiritualistic” work, “Whatever is, is Light. Lou
expend a great deal of strength, and no less than three pages of your
letter, in bringing forth a most serious charge of misquotation
against me, founded upon—what 1 Why, a mere omission to
underline two words which Dr. Child had placed in italics. The
very mention of this charge is its condemnation ; because all will
admit, that the accidental omission of the italics is of no material
consequence, since the sentiment is quite as detestable with them.
You evidently approve the principle of “ prostitution, as Dr.
Child unquestionably does. You say “ Lucy follows where her
inclinations immediately direct, with the deeper longings of hei
soul held for a time in check ; therefore she is a courtezan ! Be
kind enough to point out to me where this is wrong. Leally,
your blindness is startling. Well, I will try to show you.
Lut 1 must first require you to omit the word “ follows after
the word “ Lucy,” in your quotation, and to add there the
important words which you have left out —namely, “the courtezan,
is led in an avenue of happiness”—a much more important
omission than my italics. You see, the point lies there, since,
according to Dr. Child, Lucy is as much “led” [Do the spirits
lead her ’ll in an “ avenue of happiness,” as is her sister Frances,
“ the faithful wife and mother and they are both to be regarded
as in “avenues” which lead straight to heaven—for he says, on
pao-e 35, that “ there is no way in which the soul goes forth in
life that does not lead directly to heaven.” And yet, you ask me
to point out where this is wrong 1 ? Well, just put your question
in this form :—“James, the murderer ; George, the burglar ; and
Alfred, the adulterer, are led in avenues of happiness where their
inclinations immediately direct, with the deeper longings o t ieii
souls held for a time in check ; therefore, one is a murderer, the
other a thief, and the third an adulterer ! Be kind enough to
point out to me where this is wrong.” Well, if you were to put
the question that way, I would refer you to the police, just as, m
answering the question in the other form, I would refer you it
you are a married man, to your wife for an answer. But, whilst
I am on this phase of the question, permit me to refer to another
proof of Dr. Child’s approval of this vice. At page 135, he says
“The woman of shame and suffering that met Christ at Jacobs


well was just as near God before she preached Christ as after.'’
Comment is needless.
You point me out a number of passages, some of them only
parts of sentences, which you reproach me for not having “ deigned
to quote.” But, if any reader of this correspondence has access
to this book, and will test your quotations, he will find them
garbled and incorrect in every instance.
Take, for example, that from page 19, where you say that Dr.
Child writes concerning prostitution : —“ It is a condition of
earthly degradation ; ” and there you stop, without completing the
sentence, which continues, “ produced by the distinctions of the
material world, not by soul comparisons.” This is a daring piece
of imposition; for further on, as I quoted, he declares these
“ distinctions” to be ‘ ‘ the fictitious distinctions of self-excellence.”
Again, your quotation from page 41 does not even begin with
a sentence, nor end one, but is a mere distorted clip from the
middle of one, which is written regarding things which are said to
be “the legitimate offspring of Nature.” It begins with “groans
and sighs,” and then takes in your clip, going on to include, among
other legitimate things, “ ten thousand beliefs and anti-beliefs
that agitate the religious and moral world,” &c. This is another
case of garbling.
Again, you quote from page 71 : —“ Now, reader, do not go
away and say that this book recommends murder; ” and you say
this is what I have, “ to all intents and purposes, done.” You
are right—l did so, and Ido it again : for not only do the
passages which I quoted prove the charge, but it is substantiated
by many other portions of the book, notably at pages 63 to 65,
in a chapter headed “The cause of what we call Evil.”
Referring to this very crime of murder, he says, at page 64 :
“ And the man we call a free moral agent, kills another man that we
call a free moral agent. This deed we call evil. What is the cause ?
Nature. What is Nature? God, And is Nature wrong? Is
God, the great main-spring of Nature, wicked 1 ... . The
desires of men, and the inclinations of men—from whence come
they ? From God, direct and immediate.” Now, what is this
but a direct approval of murder, and justification of the murderer?
It is the identical defence which that cowardly and fiendish
assasin of President Garfield —Guiteau—made, when tried recently
at Washington for that crime. He claimed that the desire to
murder the noble President, whose death all good men mourned,
was an inspiration “ from God, direct and immediate,” and,
therefore, that he ought not to be considered a murderer. He
was a true follower of Dr. Child’s philosophy, and a striking
illustration of how this “ doctrine of devils ” works in practice.
I repeat the charge, therefore, that Spiritualism directly
promotes every crime, and most clearly murder, as being a


characteristic of its author, 44 who was a murderer from the
beginning ” of the history of our race.
Again, your quotation from page 166 is only a part of a
sentence, which closes with these words—“ They (meaning crime
and punishment) are directly legitimate to that condition of life
which produces them.” And, on the same page, he declares
“ there is no distinction of merit and demerit to be instituted
between the good man and the had man ” —thus completely
nullifying your garbled quotation.
The quotation from page 196 is not from Dr. Child at all, but
is from Lysander Spooner’s letter to him ; and any value which
might be attached to it is at once destroyed, when he says, further
on— 44 I think that God caused everything that we call good and
evil.”
Again, at page 197, the quotation—“ The nearer we come to
God, the purer grows the soul,” is from a letter of Miss Lizzie
Doten ; and in it she also writes—“ Evil is only evil by comparison.
She adds this illustration—“ The roots may be compared to evil,
the trunk and top to good. The ramifications of each are similar;
both are good, both are necessary.” She also says ; —“ Evil is the
friction of life; it is the conservative power that prevents men
from flying off in a tangent to perfection; it is a necessity; it is
the regulator of the soul’s growth; it times the progress of the
soul.” She is an out-and : out supporter of this “child of the
devil.” That is my reply to your question —“ What say you of
this 1” when making the quotation.
Again, the words you quote from page 207 are not those of
Dr. Child, but an extract from an article, by L. C. Howe, in the
Golden Age. He distinctly says he does not approve of Dr.
Child’s doctrine, and cannot “ synonyraize the words 4 right ’ and
4 wrong,’ so as to see everything alike lovely and meritorious.”
So, whatever value may attach to your quotation— 44 If our inner
life be pure and true,” «fcc., it must not be credited to Dr.
Child.
Now I have finished the examination of all your quotations,
and what comes of all the nonsense you have written concerning
them, and especially of your statement — 44 I venture to assert
that they express the real aims of Dr. Child’s book?
Why, only this, that you ventured to sea in a leaky, rotten
ship, which has gone down with all its cargo of lies.
And now I come to one of your last reckless charges against
me —that of unfairly quoting Andrew Jackson Davis as endorsing
Dr. Child’s book.
Now, I quoted with the most perfect accuracy, the only
sentence I gave from his hazy and cautious letter to Dr. Child ;
and, notwithstanding his misty, qualifying sentences, which you
quote as my condemnation, I am prepared to re-attirm that he does


most fully endorse the whole aim of Dr. Child’s book. I will prove
that these qualifications are valueless, in the light of his own
writings. This Andrew Jackson Davis’ works are well known to
me, and as he is one of the greatest exponents of the “ doctrines
of devils,” called Spiritualistic Philosophy, I will devote a little
attention to him before closing this reply.
I assert that A. J. Davis teaches the same doctrine as to the
nature of Good and Evil, which is the root of the whole question.
In his book entitled “ The History and Philosophy of Evil,” he asks
the question, at page 72—“ But what is this evill ” and answers
it as follows : —“ It is the temporal subversion or misdirection
of the absolute and omnipresent good.” That is his first stage.
His next is at page 75, where he says:—“ I hesitate not to affirm,
once for all, that Ignorance is a negative or passive fulcrum upon
which the intellectual lever of spiritual progress acts with an
almighty and universal sweep.” His position, therefore, is, that
Ignorance is the basis of progress—a doctrine which is most cer-
tainly true of Spiritualism, since its course is downward into utter
chaos and darkness. On the same page, he tells us that “earthly
evil, when not abused, is the dungeon-door we pass through, or
perhaps the wild highway over which we travel, to reach, the goal
of the absolute Good.”
Delightful doctrine —for devils! The broad road of evil is,
therefore, with him, as with Dr. Child, the spiritualistic highway
to heaven. But, lest there should be any doubt as to his real
meaning, I quote some confirmatory passages from his chapter
on “The Harmonial Cure of Evil”—an absurd title, from his
point of view.
At page 109 he says : —“ At length Evil has been thoroughly
analysed, by the most competent and authoritative Chemists
known in the shoreless universe—viz., the immutable principles
of Father God and the fixed laws of Mother Nature; and, strange
as it may seem, it (Evil) is found to contain neither ‘ a devil ’
nor any elements of positive ‘ enmity ’ to human growth and
happiness.” There can be no mistake now, surely, as to his
meaning : Evil is not an enemy to man, and, therefore, it must
be a friend. Indeed, we have only to go a little further to find
it so defined ; for, on the same page, he writes;—“ Evil is not a
principle, is not a devil, is not a fluid, is not a solid, is not a
sentiment, or a thing to be blasphemed against and fought down
like a wild beast; but quite otherwise. These authoritative
teachers have demonstrated positively that what men term ‘evil’ is
but the temporary subversion of individual rights, the incidental
misdirection of local forces, and the inversion of private faculties,
innately good.” Oh, this is a very ideal of philosophy for every
fiend in hell and on earth. Evil is not to be “fought against”—
for it is innately good ! What a farce, then, it is to talk


about “ the cure of evil ” —it ought to be embraced and loved!
But, since some people will insist upon a prescription for something
they fancy to be “evil,” this doctor, whose diploma is granted from
perdition, gives this, at page 111—“ The true cure of Evil is the
true use of Evil.” This is certainly a new application of the
saying—“ Set a thief to catch a thiefit is setting Satan to cast
out Satan—a very likely business.
The application of it in daily life would soon produce utter
chaos, and make earth worse than hell itself. But, let me give yet
further proof of how “ peculiarly spiritualistic” this doctrine is,
as expounded by this arch-deceiver, whose pestilential writings
have been widely circulated in America and Europe.
In his book entitled “ The Penetralia,” at page 390, we are
favoured with a report of a spiritualistic “Utilitarian Convention,”
which passed fourteen resolutions, the twelfth of which I'eads
thus:—“ Resolved—That l evil,’ so-called, is not a transgression
of any law, either physical or moral,” &c. Can it be necessary to
go further in quotation? Here is the very key-note of Dr. Child’s
“ Whatever is, is Right,” since “evil” is held to be a transgression
of no law, either physical or moral. Hence, everything we have been
accustomed to consider physically or morally wrong, is “ authori-
tatively” declared to be lawful and right. Dr. Child only goes a
little further, and writes yet more plainly. He declares, as I
pointed out in my previous letter, that “ Evil does not exist ” (at
page 67); and “ That which seems to be evil, is not evil intrinsically ;
it is only the natural operation of things for the production of
good.” He also says (at page 129)“ There are no evil spirits.
Broadly and unreservedly I do declare that I know nothing of the
existence of evil spirits anywhere in God’s creation. All spirits
are good, because immortal.”
This is just the doctrine which devils would like to see
triumph ; and it is the root-doctrine of Spiritualism beyond all
question.
I leave this portion of my examination of your letter, feeling
sure that, to candid minds, I have demonstrated the substantial
unity between Dr. Child and Mr. A. J. Davis ; and I have already
shown, beyond your power even to challenge the assertion, that
these writers authoritatively represent Spiritualism as a whole.
But I must add to this demonstration a few illustrations from
the works of A. J. Davis, to show the practical immorality of
Spiritualism.
A. J. Davis has distinguished himself by his “ specially
spiritualistic” attacks upon the sacred institution of marriage,
which lies at the foundation of all national virtue, happiness, and
progress.
In his “ Genesis and Ethics of Conjugal Love,” at page 46, he
says : “ The true plan of correcting the evils in social life is,


first, to provide by law for the legitimacy of all children , and for
their support and education from public or private funds ; second,
to restrict marriage and parentage, as far as possible, to competent
persons ; and third, to let those who make mistakes, in spite of
caution and the law, get out as easily and voluntarily as they got
into the trouble.” Here, then, is distinctly taught a diabolical
doctrine, which would destroy the foundations of all morality.
If divorce is to be thus easy, the land will be full of vice, family
life will be impossible, parental and political obligations will be
set at naught, and the utmost confusion and danger must follow.
The evil results would defy description and exaggeration.
In proof of the real nature of this attack, I now refer to another
work of A. J. Davis, entitled “The Great Harmonia”—Yol. IY. :
“ The Reformer ” —where, from pages 397 to 425, he is pleased to-
treat of what he calls “ The Rights and Wrongs of Divorce.”
A more grossly wicked and immoral chapter was never penned.
He begins with an attack upon the Lord Jesus, and a laudation of
the Pharisees; and he declares that “the history of divorce is coeval
with the history of marriage;” and suggests that “ the, first idea of
divorce occurred in Paradise.” He quotes with approval from
many enemies of marriage. For instance, at page 409, he says :
“ In regard to marriage and divorce, he (Mr. Andrews) speaks
out like a lover of truth—not intuitionally, but intellectually. He
opposes the perpetual or exclusive marriage. He objects to civil
marriages, because they make personal property of woman,
restricting her self-sovereignty, and ultimating in compound
selfishness and imperfect offspring. He says :—“ The man and
woman who do love, can live together in purity without any
mummery at all.” Now, what this means is clear enough—
namely, the abolition of marriage in any form, and all the
consequent horrors of such a state. On page 410, he quotes
approvingly from another, who writes : —“ A love may be genuine
and true for the time, and not for all time. The woman who
filled my ideal twenty years ago, may have no attraction for me
now. There is no evident reason why tlte law of variety, which
extends to the studies, pursuits, pleasures, tastes, and passions,
should fail when it comes to the question of variety in love.”
What does this “peculiarly spiritualistic” teaching mean, if it
does not mean approval of general immorality, base desertion of
wives—especially when advanced in years—polygamy, or worse ?
Again, he quotes, at page 413, approvingly from Dr. Nichols, who
says :—“ If by marriage is meant an indissoluble monogamy (or
union with one), a legal exclusive bond of a civilized institution,
I deny that it ever is, or ever can be, right. I assert that the
promise of a man to love any woman as long as he lives is wrong.
I denounce, therefore, the civilized marriage as a violation of the
laws of Nature, and the commands of God.” Where the “seducing


spirits” are now leading men, in “forbidding to marry,” as God’s
word prophesied they would (1 Timothy, iv. 1-3), is now, I hope,
become clear ; and, if more proof is needed that it is to an abyss
of unbridled lust and social chaos, I can find it in abundance
in the writings and practices of many leading spiritualists. Such
proof may be found at pages 418, 422, and 433 of the volume
from which I have just quoted, and at pages 65, 66, 100, and 101
of A. J. Davis’s book on “ Conjugal Love,” and in many other
“ spiritualistic” works.
But one of the crowning proofs is to be found in the history
and person of Andrew Jackson Davis himself, as recorded in the
“ Magic Staff ; or, Autobiography of A. J. Davis.” He gives, with-
out shame, the story of his two marriages, which shows that he
induced both women to get divorces from their husbands in order
to marry him; and that, both in law and in fact, he was living
in a state of adultery in 1876, when the edition of the book in
my possession was published. The proof of this may be seen at
page 550, where adecree of the Supreme Court, Erie County, New
York, is quoted. That decree grants a divorce to Mr. S. C.
Love, on the ground “ that the defendant (his wife) is now, and
has been for some time living in open adultery with the said A.
J. Davis, and that the said ' defendant, Mary F. Love, now calls
herself Mary F. Davis; and it shall be lawful for the said
plaintiff to marry again, as if the defendant was actually dead ;
but it shall not he lawful for the said defendant, Mary F. Love, to
marry again until the said plaintiff is actually dead.” This
decree was obtained in 1856. Hence, in 1876, A. J. Davis had
been living, f rom 1855, in a state of adultery for more than twenty
years : for Mr. S. G. Love was then living, and may be still. In
1854, Mary F. Love had, upon her own application got, in a
scandalous way, after an understanding with Davis, a divorce in
the State of Indiana ; but it was of no avail, either to herself, or
Mr. S. G. Love, who, about two years after, sued for, and obtained
the Supreme ComT decree I have quoted. The whole story, even
upon A. J. Davis’s own version of it, is a scandalously bad and
immoral transaction, and the story of his first marriage is not a
.whit better or cleaner —in some respects it is worse.
I give these facts as “ specially spiritualistic ” illustrations of
the effects, upon leading spiritualists, of the immoral doctrines of
Spiritualism; and I have been most careful to assert nothing
except that which spiritualistic works, of easy reference in this
city, can verify. If I were to state facts within my personal
knowledge, I could add most heartrending illustrations of the
misery and ruin which these horrible and detestable doctrines
have wrought, in breaking up once happy homes, and destroying
the precious lives of many persons, after ruining them body and
soul.


But I forbear. To those who are wise, I have said enough to
show the Dead Sea of Vice and Crime towards which the polluted
streams of Spiritualism are rapidly flowing.
And now, I leave candid readers of these letters to judge
between us as to your final charge against me of “ twisting and
turning ” the language of authors from whom I quote, and, also,
as to whom “ the restraint of a moral cloture ” should be applied.
I have, and you know it, quoted fairly throughout, and have
reasoned upon well-established facts, which it is impossible for
you to escape from; and the irresistible logic of truth and fact
crushes your wretched system into the dust, so far as its moral and
progressive pretensions are concerned.
And, at last, I close this most unsavoury task, not without a
sense of relief, but with a still greater sense of gratitude to God
for His goodness in enabling me to perform it. May it promote
His glory, and your good; and, especially, be blessed to many who
have been seduced to sail with you in the Pirate Ship of Demons,
called Spiritualism, which is bound for the port of Hell, from
whence it sailed.
You scoff at the warnings in my last; but that will not deter
me from adding one more, to the many which these letter s contain;
and I pray you to heed it, ere the “ Woe,” in all its divine force,
comes down upon your soul.
“ Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil; that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness ; that put bitter for
sweet, and sweet for bitter!” (Isaiah v. 20).— I am, faithfully
Walker, May and Co., Printers, 9 Macldllop Street, Melbourne,


3 1508 02236039 5


