

AUTOBIOGRAPHY
OF
JAMES DAVIS SENR


v {2*>aserts9


Spiritual Soul Travelling
in the Wilderness
BY
JAMES DAVIS,
Late of Bristol , England; now of Par an Lodge,
Lower Malvern Load, Glen Ins,
Melbourne, Victoria.


London:
F. XIRBY, Printer, 17, Bouverie Street,
Fleet Street, E.C.


PREFACE.
The following is some short account of my travelling through
the wilderness. Being a cripple, and often ready to halt, I have
had to walk much alone, as I could not keep pace with the crowd,
which seem to have no burdens to carry, no soul trouble, no doubts
or fears about the matter, a path not tried, a sort of gold-faith
mixed with the day of the creature. Never tried in the furnace,
and seem to be always on the mount top while I was travelling
in the valley below, amongst the briars and thorns in the dark,
quite alone, unless I happened to meet another poor cripple
travelling, and then we could hobble along together and under-
stand each other. And I have found it good to look at the chart
and compare notes together with some of the old travellers, such
as Jeremiah, Job, and my poor brother Jonah, if I may claim
him my brother. For I believe they travelled this way through
the wilderness much alone. And when I have met one of these
cripples my very soul has leaped for joy, for with these there is
union ; yes, the wrestling Jacobs have something to talk about
when they meet together. The General Baptists I have left more
than sixty years ago, though I was baptized by that body, being
then very zealous amongst them for a time. The Particular
Baptists I cannot walk with in union, as none are admitted to the
table in breaking of bread with them however clear they can give
an account of their call by Divine grace ; they are not allowed to
sit at the table unless they have been immersed. But this I know
the (inward) kingdom of God is not meat and drink but in
righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. In the 14th
chap, of Romans, verse 19, Paul said, “let us therefore follow
after the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one
may edify another.” Paul’s motto was not to judge one another
or to put a stumbling-block in his brother’s way (why dost thou
set at nought thy brother from the table of the Lord). Paul, in
Writing to the church of the Corinthians, told them Christ sent
him not to baptize but to preach the gospel. Indeed, he thanked
God he baptized none of them but Orispus and Gaius. In my
travelling through the wilderness I have been often grieved about
these things, and I have heard men arguing with some warmth
and zeal in the flesh, more than in the spirit of the peace of the


gospel, in the unity of brotherly love. Some of the most highly
favoured saints of God, whose hymns are often sung at the
ordinance, were not what are called Particular Baptists with whom
I feel a great love. I could meet at the table of the Lord with
such as Bunyan, Huntington, Kent, Herbert, Toplady, Fowler,
Berridge, and dear Hart. All these, not being Particular Baptists,
would break bread to the branches of the Living Vine in harmony
and love, immersed or not. There is no bar there. The dear
Lord gave me two gracious wives, and we lived together both the
first and the second, over thirty years, as fellow-heirs of the grace
of life; and I believe they are both in heaven ; but neither of
them was baptized, so they could not sit at the table with the
Particular Baptists; these things ought not to be. There are
many of the Particular Baptists that I love and highly esteem in
the truth, and can walk in hand together, hut when we come to
the table we differ, and shall as long as we are below. But not
in the inward kingdom of baptism, and I hope ever to love such
in the spirit of the gospel, though we differ about the water. I
knew one dear soul in this country (Australia) having no home
where she could break bread, go to the creek, sit down, break
the bread, dip her cup, and drink it as wine in commemoration
of His death and sufferings for her poor soul. I loved her and
she loved me, and we had some blessed times together. She is
now safe landed at home ; and I have often thought many on the
back seats have had the spirit of the ordinance to their souls
though not allowed at the table. I have stated some of my
reasons why lam not a Particular Baptist. This division at the
table has often been a grief to me as it follows so close to the
custom of the Hindoos when they meet together for worship, as
brethren in harmony, but when they eat bread they differ so as
not to eat together, having different castes amongst themselves
at their table. Surely these things ought not to be amongst the
living branches of the Living Tine. I have stated some of my
reasons why lam not a Particular Baptist; I have written more
than I intended to in my preface, but they flowed into my mind.
I should be glad to see that blessed spirit in the churches of
truth, walking in love, that Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and
Judah shall not vex Ephraim, Isaiah ii. chap., 13th verse.
JAMES DAVIS.
November 16 th, 1894.


AUTOBIOGRAPHY
OF
MR. JAMES DAVIS, Senior,
WRITTEN AT
PARAN LODGE, LOWER MALVERN ROAD, GLEN IRIS,
IN THE YEAR 1892, AT THE AGE OF 83 YEARS.
INTRODUCTION.
I have often been desired to write some account of my life,
especially concerning the ground of my bope, that religion of
which I have professed to be the subject for more than sixty years,
and it is my desire that the Lord may guide me in this matter
and that it may be for the glory of God, to speak good of His
dear name. Many years ago I wrote some account of it, but as I
am a bad writer and cannot spell very well, I have often felt
inclined to burn it, for it is somewhat of a task to me to write.
My path through this dreary wilderness has been a very trying
one, both temporal and spiritual (for I have had to walk much
alone). I have often been much tried in the world, and in the
visible professing church, but especially amongst the church
within the church ; these trials have at times almost broken my
heart. This is the path where David had to walk, as we read in
the tifty-fifth Psalm and I believe that these deep waters which
he passed through are left as waymarks, and only found in the
narrow path leading to the City. In John, 18th chapter, 2nd verse,
we have an account of the dear Redeemer being betrayed by one of
the twelve in the very place where they had often met together.
And Job especially travelled along this very narrow path (Job.
7th chapter, 3rd and 4th verses). Well, as I said before, I
believe these things are written and left as waymarks in the
valley, they have encouraged me many times. David said “ Come


all ye that fear God and I will declare what he hath done for my
soul (Psalm Ixyi. 16). Shall I hide and keep silent what I
humbly hope He hath done for my poor soul ? Peeling lam one
of the most unworthy of all who profess to be the subject of these
glorious mysteries, if I only crawl along this narrow path, no one
will ever have more cause to praise Sovereign Grace than my poor
soul, and the Lord knows I feel it. But sometimes the thought
comes over me, What if I should be for ever separated from some
who have gone safe home ? Some with whom I feel a union and,
at times, when somewhat delivered from the noise of archers,
have felt it sweet to meet with them. As we read in Judges v.
11, “ They that are delivered from the noise of archers in the
place of drawing water, there shall they rehearse the righteous
acts of the Lord.” This is when they meet, not in chit-chat or
what is called social tea-meetings, but in soul-union, to speak of
pardon while there is weeping in soul-love together, as children
who are taught of God ; there is a bond of love in those who are
taught of God to love one another, as branches who have received
their life sap from the Living Yine; and sure I am that this soul-
union never can be broken either in life or death, though we often
feel that through the flesh, communion is broken off for a time, the
union is never broken.
N 1) now I will try to write down some account of my path-
•;/7v way, and the way which I humbly trust the Lord has
led me. Here, then, I pause, for I know that if the
beginning was wrong, the middle is wrong, and the end will be
also. Many started and appeared to leave Egypt when I did,
and I seem to have lost sight of them in the journey through the
wilderness. This has been a mystery to me; and some have
tried me much, but I must leave them, for I believe many climb
up and get into the visible church, and this often tries the poor
sheep who enter by the door into the church within the church,
I believe thousands love the doctrines and contend for them, and
many churches are built up on the foundation of that dry breast
and can look down on the poor soul who would give ten thousand
worlds to be able to say, “Abba, Father,” from a feeling of the
spirit’s witness within, of pardon, love, and mercy; these things
will make the king on his throne and the gutter sweeper weep
together, should they meet together in the wilderness. The dear
Lord has picked up some of the vilest and most unlikely of poor
sinners from the Adam fall, and put them amongst the children,.


or I should have no hope ; this Paul felt and acknowledged after
he had obtained mercy, so did Peter, and Mary, out of whom
were cast seven devils, and look at Manasseh, how the Lord
picked him up and set him amongst the children (n. Chronicles
xsxiii. 13). He had to prove that salvation was of the Lord,
like Jonah when)the Lord brought him up from the very belly of
hell, for it was such to him when he said, “I am cast out of
Thy sight.” 0, the trembling of the poor soul, when the weeds
are wrapped about the head in total darkness at the very bottom
of the mountains, with scarce a gleam of hope, as we read in the
second chapter of Jonah. When the poor soul is brought up, he
will ever praise the hand that snatched him, a brand, from the
very mouth of hell. I know the Lord has various ways of calling
forth the stones from nature’s quarry for the spiritual building
of Zion. Until Almighty Grace hewed us out we all lay in the
bed rock (Isaiah li. 1), “Look unto the rock whence ye are
hewn, and to the hole of the pit whence ye are digged;” and
sure I am that none but an Almighty power can do this —and
this is called a new birth—this rather puzzled Nicodemus, “Ye
must be born again.” (John iii. 7.) And this is all the Spirit’s
work, “The wind bloweth where it listeth, so is every one that is
born of the Spirit,” neither is any false conception in Sarah’s
womb, she must bring forth her heirs. The travail may be long
or it may be short, here hangs eternal matters, and as Hunting-
ton says, “ Spiritual labour is life in disguise ; ” though the poor
soul in labour does not know where the scene will end with him,
whether he shall ever find mercy, or sink for ever into that pit
over which he seems to hang, as it were with a single thread.
No mortal can know these labour pains but thej’- who have
travailed here. And the bringing forth ! oh ! that blessed time,
that sacred spot where the poor soul is brought into the bond of
the covenant, and put amongst the children of the kingdom and
the sheep of His pasture; they know the Shepherd’s voice who
gives unto them eternal life. Here the poor soul is delivered
from the gates of death and hell to the very gate of heaven, and
thinks he will soon be there, and oftens begs tor home, to see the
King in His beauty. He wants to leave his mortal garments all
below. Oh! how he pants and longs to get home when on the
mount, wrapped up as it were in the cloud with the dear
Eedeemer. But he has to come down and prove that he has to
pass through a wilderness of great tribulation ; thus proving the
truth of the dear Eedeemer, “ In the world ye shall have tribula-
tion.” “Therefore ye are my witnesses, saith the Lord, that I
am God.” (Isaiah xliii. 12.) In the dark night when there is
neither sun, moon, or stars to be seen while travelling through


the boggy ground, and the world, the flesh, and the devil all let
loose ; how many times the poor soul trembles in this dark path;
and, if left to himself, he would surely sink and die in the dense,
thorny scrub of the wilderness. Oh ! how many times I have
thought I never should get through, and if ever I get safe home,
no one will ever have more cause to praise redeeming grace than
I shall. From a child the fear of death more or less, has been
the cup I have had to drink. I never could get up and live on
the mountains and hold an unshaken faith. No : mine has been
a tried one, and I have often begged the Lord to give me that
faith, gold, tried in the fire (Revelation hi. 18). We read in Ist
Peter, Ist chapter, 7th verse, that the trial of faith is more precious
than gold, though it be tried with fire. Fire is very painful, and
the furnace will try every man’s work, what sort it is; and yet
the poor soul is afraid to come out without it being sanctified.
Job said, “ When he hath tried me I shall come forth as gold.”
(Job xxiii. 10.) We have footmarks of some of the highly
favoured saints left recorded in the blessed book. These have at
times encouraged me for they too passed this way home. Job
said that his stroke was heavier than his groaning. His cry was
•‘Oh that I knew where I might find Him.” And how clear
was the prophet Jeremiah’s call by grace. Then hear him in
the dungeon, in the stocks (Jeremiah ii. 27). How my poor soul
at times has sucked honey, as it were, out of some of their
troubles. The trials they passed through about soul-troubles
while under the cloud have often encouraged me, and especially
that horror of great darkness which fell upon Abram. Then in the
7th chapter of Job we have an account of his path. Also in ooth
Psalm, David said, “ My heart is sore pained within me ; and the
terrors of death are fallen upon me. Fearfulness and trembling
are come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed me.” These
are deep soul troubles. Poor Job said he was a companion to
owls (Psalms cii. 6, also Job xxx. 29). There is the language
and the path; and I think many of the dear children walk in
loneliness along this path; in bitterness of soul, like Hannah
with inward prayer to the Lord and inward keeping. This is the
path which makes eternal things weighty indeed; and I like to
be alone, away from the multitude. The dear Redeemer said to
the little flock “ Come aside and rest awhile ” ; these secret places
are never forgotten, though when alone the poor soul is often
much tried about it, but this I know, what He gives we gather,
and want nothing, but what He will own in the solemn hour of
death, and we are often brought to examine ourselves according
to the Divine Word (2 Cor. 13., 5). David said, “examine me 0
Lord, prove me, try my reins, and my heart,” and this is the cry


of the poor soul, more or less, all his j ourney through the wilder-
ness, and these poor cripples often crawl along together and talk
of the way ; and if we can compare notes together, we shall weep
together and sing together, and I trust it will be all to the glory
of God. For we have often wept and rejoiced in the valley when
we have heard them relate what God had done for their souls.
As you have desired me to tell you something about my journey,
especially for the last 66 years of my life, since 1 professed to
have left Egypt, where I was somewhat at home, and of my life,
while I lived there, and how I came to leave it first. As regards
my natural life, my father’s name was James Davis —he was
pressed on board a man of war ship in Coleraine, Ireland. He
served in several ships, the “ Despatch ” being the last. While
visiting Frome, I believe on furlough, he married my mother ;
he was known in the town as Sergeant Davis. After the war
was over, he returned home on a pension of 14 shillings a week,
I think it was; but in a year or so he died leaving my mother
with three children. I was then about eight years old, being
born on the 30th of January, 1809. I perfectly remember follow-
ing my mother to the feast after peace was proclaimed. After
some time my mother married again, and in about two years she
died, leaving mo and my brother orphans. My step-father
promised my mother that ho would keep one of us, and the other
must be put into the workhouse, I was present when this conver-
sation took place and I felt it very much, and something I said to
my mother about it has grieved me many times since I have been
a parent myself. My mother wished him to keep my brother, as
he was two years younger than me. From what I remember of
my dear mother’s life and death, I believe she was one who
loved and feared God ; and as she at times spoke to me about
these things, there were solemn thoughts of death, heaven and
hell, working in my youthful mind. Those thoughts often marred
my childish pleasures, Oh ! I thought how happy I should be if
it were not for death. I remember when quite a child, how I
would go into some secret place and beg the Jjord to make me a
good boy. These were some of the youthful feelings of the mind
which kept me back so that I could not speak and do as some of
the boys did, although I did not like to be thought a coward.
After my father’s death, it was a hard struggle for my mother,
she had to receive help from the parish, for, being a weak woman,
she was not able to work hard, and every penny had to tell. I
went to work very young, being about six or seven years of age,
and I earned sixpence a week, so I had very little schooling.
After my dear mother died, my step-father employed a person to
keep the house, and he kept me as well as my brother, that was


more than he promised, to do. But after a time he married again ;
this made a great change in the home, and I was put into the Poor
House. His wife was a woman of no feeling, she kept us very
short of food, and yet I did not dare to say a word to my step-
father, for he was very kind to us after our mother’s death. She
fed her cat better than us. I have secretly cut a hit off the meat
boiled for the cat, unknown to her, cut it carefully and eaten it
so as not to be found out, and have even licked the dishes after
the meals. Hunger is sharp to those to have felt it. I remained
in the workhouse until I was apprenticed to a butcher. He had
no children and his wife and I often had the marks of his brutality
on our bodies for weeks together ; poor thing she was often
beaten until she was black and blue, and then turned out of doors,
for he was one of the cruelest men I ever knew. I had to run away
sometimes and hide all night in a cart or in the hayloft. And
then when he came to get hay from the loft for the horse, I have
been afraid to breathe lest he should hear me and kill me. I
have got into the copper boiler, and curled myself up, and when
I have felt him near me I have trembled like a leaf. At one time
he planned his wife’s death but did not succeed in doing it. He
said if it were not for the law, ho would take her life. We had
to wait up for him until a late hour, fearing his coming home,
he being at the public-house. I have at times thought that the
dear Lord did watch over me then, or I should not be here to
write some account of my life. I have often thought about two
remarkable circumstances which took place. One day I was in
the hayloft pulling at a rope, my master was skinning a sheep
j ust underneath me, on a paved stone floor; the rope suddenly
gave way and I fell backwards and came down head foremost, I
cried out “ Lord have uiexw on me.” My master looked up and
caught me just before my head touched the stones, where I must
havo broken my neck or split my skull. The other was this ;
My master had a donkey which he let out on hire. He said that
when the donkey came home I was to take it to the field. It
was rather late when it came, I took it or tried to do so, but on
the way a heavy thunderstorm came on, and lightning ; I tried
with all my might to get him along the lanes but could not, the
animal was frightened with the weather, and so was I. I then
went back home and put him in the stable again, as usual, and
went to bed. The wife waited up for her husband, and when he
came homo he said to her “ Where is Jim ? ” she answered, “ He
has gone to bod,” “Where is the donkey ? ” she replied “In the
stable,” then he said “ How is it he did not put him in the
field?” She said “The lightning frightened the donkey so
much that he could not get along the lanes.” When my master


heard this he ran up the stairs, and dragged mo out of bed, and
down the stairs and put me on the donkey’s back; he was a big
tall man, and I was a mere nothing in his hands ; he drove us
with the stick until we came to the lane that led to the field,
some distance out of the town, and then left me to go the rest of
the way by myself. As it was the middle of the night and very
dark he thought I should be afraid to go to the field, and would
leave the donkey in the lane, and say in the morning that he
had broken out. The donkey went quiet enough for he was so
frightened with the beating he had received. I put him in the
field and returned home. When my master went home he said
to his wife, 1 ‘ I will walk him back again and if the donkey is
not there, I will knock his brains out, and tear out his entrails
and hang him up to the tree.” (This she told me the next day
but dared not tell me when I returned from the field, because
she feared the result, for, when in a rage, he was dreadful).
However, when I got back he said, “ I think there is some sheep
stealing going on, we will go up and see.” He put on bis great
coat, took his stick and away we went ; it was the middle of the
night and very dark, and we went in at the top of the field (I can
seem to see it now), and then to the hovel where I was sent some-
times on the Sabbath to kill a sheep or two when we happened
to sell out on Saturday. As we went around the fields not a word
was spoken, we saw no sign of the donkey. Then lie stopped at
the place where he used to make the mow. I trembled ; with
the stick in his hand he roared out, “ Now I have found you out.”
Just at that moment and before he struck the blow the donkey
brayed, and I think it was one of the loudest brays I have ever
heard. Strange to sat', he was within a few feet of us although
we had walked the field and could not find him. Being the dead
of night it sounded terrible, it frightened my master for he seemed
paralyzed, and soon left the field. I following him home ; and,
as far as I can remember, not a word was spoken all the way
home. I have sometimes thought that the same God who opened
the mouth of Baalam’s ass, when he was on the way to do mischief,
opened that donkey’s mouth to bray just at the time to save my
life, for when my master was in such a rage, nothing could stop
his cruelty. Indeed he so beat his wife overnight that she was
found dead in the morning ; he stood his trial for it, but he got
off somehow. I think I was with him nearly two years and
it was a mercy that I escaped with my limbs and my life.
1 was thankful to the people who took my case in hand. My
deliverance was this way: My mistress told me to kill so
many sheep, I did so and sent the rest to the field. When
my master came home ho asked me how many Iha 1 killed. I


said I thought it was three ; but his wife made a mistake, she
should have told me to kill four sheep. Without asking me why
I only killed the three, he as usual roared out at me, ‘ ‘ Get the
stick.” I knew what was coming and dropping the knife I had
in my hand, ran for my life; he ran after me. I ran into a
house, shut the door and locked it, and running into the garden
jumped over the wall into the next house, and then out into the
street again, he still after me. The people said “run Jim,” and
when he found I was gaining ground on him, he cried out,
“ Stop thief.” I, being baulked by one and the other, he caught
me, and knocked me down with the stick ; then the people came
around and protected me a little. I was then taken to a doctor
by someone, and examined. Some kind people took out a
summons for me; and he hud to appear in court and produce
the stick. It was measured, and proved to be an unlawful weapon,
he was fined £2. 7s. 6d and admonished. I was to go back to
him, but the look he gave me struck terror into me and I burst
into tears. The court said, “ The boy is afraid to go back : w r e
will cancel his indentures and take him away.” This was done,
and Oh! what I felt then no tongue can describe ; knowing I
was free and that he had no more power over me. But I was
without a homo, and had no money and no clothes but the rags
I stood up in; scarcely any shoes, nowhere to sleep but a cart or
sired. The only money I could earn now was by canwing meat
from the butchers to their customers on Wednesdays and Satur-
days, I received one penny per basket. In this way I went on
for a while, often feeling the pangs of hunger. After a time I
got work as a mortar boy, thus earning 4s. 6d. per week, but in
tire wet and frosty weather I could only work a day or two at a
time. This was against me, and I used to allow myself so much
bread per day, and sometimes I have eaten it all while going to
work and then have had to go without any all day long. I
remember one time my employers were building a house close to
another, in which an old lady lived She observing that I worked
very hard and was badly clothed, I suppose she thought I had
little to eat, for one day she called me to her and questioned me
respecting myself. She said, “We have a goose for dinner, and
if you like the servant shall cook the giblets for you.” I thanked
her, and at the dinner time went into the kitchen for the giblets
and ate them. But when I went to work again I was in such
jiaiu that I could scarcely stoop to get the mortar board on my
head; I did not know what to do, for they were crying oat
“ Mortar,” but I could not stoop to get it up, it was like the old
saying, “roll me, roll me,” after awhile I got better, but this
■circumstance I never forgot. However the old lady sent for me


again and asked me if I -would like to go into the country and
live with her son-in-law, to look after the pony and buggy, and
work in the garden. I assented to it and went to live with the
gentleman, where I had plenty to eat, and a bed to lie on, and,
as I was a growing boy, this was a great benefit to me, and I
should have appreciated it more than I did, after what I had
passed through. He was a doctor and had a son about my own
age, named Charlie, and we soon became mates. There was a
servant in the house and she was as bad as Charlie and me.
There was no fear of God in either of us, my master made some
profession and had prayer in the evening, and we had to attend,
but it was a burden to us. All that child-like feeling which I
had gathered while under a mother’s care and the Sunday School
was all gone. The Sabbath was spent in wickedness, and I
escaped by the skin of my teeth from many grievous snares, no
thanks to me, but I humbly trust the Lord watched over me even
then, although I knew it not, neither do I remember calling or
even thinking once on His dear name all the time I was there
(about twelve months). The doctor found that he could do
nothing with Charlie and me, so he determined to part us.
Charlie was to be sent on board ship, as midshipman, and I was
to be sent about my business. This he did, but we boys intended
to meet on board ship, but I could not, though Charlie did. No,
that was not my path. I returned to Frome again to mourn over
my folly, for I had no friend, no home—without a shelter, but not
quite dead in my feelings. Here I picked up with some of the
roughs of the town and I soon got into some of their ways, but
I could never swear an oath at the end of my words as they did.
Instead of calling upon the name of God I used to say, “ So help
me Bob.” When there are no restraining influences sin has
such a hardening effect on the mind. I was brought very low
and depraved for a long time, often having nothing to eat, and
my sleeping places were the carts, haylofts, &c. Sometimes we
would go out into the country (I am ashamed to write it), to steal
fowls, which we sold to buy bread. The other boys had homes,
such as they were, dreadfully depraved. I remember once going
about three miles to steal a goose. I was too much afraid to do
it myself so used to watch while the others did it and then they
would give me part of the spoil. Sometimes I have given false
alarms to deter them. However they caught the goose, wrapped
it up and brought it home, then we all set to work and plucked
it; after boiling it, we ate it all up just as it was, without sauce
or bread, so that if the farmer came after us he could not find it.
Sometimes we would go into the potato field and get some pota-
toes and boil them with mushrooms, all went down sweet. And


sometimes I went to country fairs, and would earn a little money,
holding the farmers horses, &c., and then at night time when I
have crept under a settle, thinking that they would not see me
being small. But at the time for turning out they have found
me and I have been on the common or down where the fairs were
held all night shivering with the cold, having just enough rags
to cover my body. There was a man at one of these booths who
offered me a billet. I had noticed him, for he used to have a
good dinner day after day, and my mouth often watered, but he
never offered me any, and I never could beg. This man with two
others, were beggars ; they had a kind of cart, in which one was
drawn by dogs, he being, I suppose, a cripple, and another lame
man walking with a crutch hat in hand begging. They asked
me if I would go with them, they woidd give me my board and
eighteenpence per week, and I would have to travel with them
and beg too ; and when we put up for the night, look after the
dogs, see they were fed, &c. I did not give an answer at once,
but hung about for a day or two while I thought it all over,
f'npposing in their travels they went intoFrome, my native place,
I thought how could I beg for them there when I could not beg
for myself. So I told them no, I could not accept their offer.
When there were no fairs being held I used to pick up bones and
sell them, but the most I could make at this was about threepence
per day. Ido not think I had slept in a bed for some weeks at
this time. One day I made threepence extra, so I spent it in
paying for a threepenny' bed, and when I got my rags off and
into bed, it seemed something like heaven. I was now about
fifteen or sixteen years old. My stepfather allowed me to sleep
in the garret, and his wife would give me a dinner on the Sunday
for fourpence half-penny, so that as a general thing I had one
dinner a week. But passing over many things I will tell y r ou
how I came to leave my native place. I had sunk deep in the
mud of Sodom (oh, my poor soul). Here I pause and weep, and
I humbly' trust the Lord watched over me and kept me from being
smothered and falling into the pit of hell, for I had been walking
on the edge for years. There were two brothers and another boy
living in the dirty den where we cooked the goose. They had
planned to rob a woman of her fowls (she kept them for a living),
and as she lived alone in a wood there seemed no difficulty in the
matter. All this was much against my mind, but not liking to
be thought a coward or chicken hearted, I joined them. We
arranged it thus : —One boy was, to go to the house and ask for
water, and another was to take the key from the door and lock
her in, and then catch her fowls and carry' them away. We went
to the house but our plans were frustrated, and I was very glad.


On the way home another plan was made which was to come off
in a lew weeks. When I got hack to my home and went to the
garret loft, I sat on the side of the bed, for I dared not get into
the bed. I thought the eye of God was upon me, and if I were
to die in the night I should surely drop into hell. I felt that He
was there, and if I escaped the laws of the country, the eye of
God was upon me. I could not lay down for I felt His presence,
and knew that he could do everything, so I knelt down and
told him how I had tried to be better and to get away from
these, my companions, but could not. Then I said, “If Thou
wilt move me away from Frome to some place where I know
no one, then I will be better and serve Thee,” for I felt God
was there and I was speaking to Him; after this I got into
bed. This was my vow, and sure I am that none but God
heard me. In a day or so, a person called to see me, they
had received a letter from someone in Bristol asking’ if they
knew a boy who would go to Bristol and work in a bake-
house. I said yes I would go, but I had no coat or shoes scarcely
that I could walk with, or any money, and it was 24 miles away.
I found out that I could go by the night wagon for eighteeupence.
So I went to the parish officer and told him all about it as far as
I can remember. I got some slices and four shillings and six-
pence. I paid the waggon fare, then I had three shillings left.
I arrived in Bristol in the morning, went to a shop and bought
an old coat and cap, then I bought a cup of tea on Bristol bridge
and this took all my money. Then I went to look after the place.
It was a confectioner, the corner shop in Cart-lane and Temple-
street, a Mr. Hazell, who wanted a boy, and I was to receive
eighteenpence per week and my board and lodging. Thus I was
removed for ever from my native place, and those with whom I
was led as the capitive linked in the chains to destruction. Here
I pause again and weep; snatched as a. brand from the very
brink. Oh ! can it be ? Why me, and the others left. Years
afterwards I heard for a fact that one had been transported, and
the other blew his brains out. I told the Lord how I would
serve Him (Oh what a mass of corruption is the human heart).
My master was a Wesleyan, and on the Sabbath I was sent to a
place of worship. Instead of going we boys were aways break-
ing the Sabbath, and as we had to carry home a text, we found
one; this passed for a while but Oh! what a mercy the Lord
calls all His children out of Egypt. As we read in Hosea 11th
chap. Ist verse, ‘ ‘ When Israel was a child then I loved him and
called My Son out of Egypt,” and also in Matthew, 2nd chap.
Ist verse, “ Out of Egypt have I called My Son.” It seems to
me that all these things are types and shadows of something, if


only we have spiritual discernment, even the mixed multitude
has a figurative meaning, tor it is evident that they followed
Israel out, but were not called out. (Exodus, 12th chap. 38th
verse), my thought is this : Egypt is a type of this world and the
wilderness to Jordan, and Jordan a type of death, and Canaan a
type of heaven. As I have given an account of my life in Egypt,
I will try by the help of God to give some account of the way I
left it, and of my lonely path since. Jeremiah gives us a picture
of this journey in the second chapter and sixth verse, “ Where is
the Lord that brought us up out of the land of Egypt, that led
us through the wilderness, through a land of deserts and of pits,
through a land of drought, and of the shadow of death, through
a land that no man passed through and where no man dwelt'? ”
Thus I felt the first, and the second birth, was all fixed by the
Lord. The time and the place, the labour and the bringing
forth. In the journey through the wilderness, the poor soul is
often tried as to whether he shall get safe home at last. This
has been my path and if a poor soul who is oast down should see
this, remember that the Lord tries all the children of the kingdom.
Mark this : “Eorwhom the Lord loveth He chasteneth,” Heh.
12 chap, verse G. The greatest chastening that ever I have is the
hiding of His face. The apparent frown of a father to a child
is dreadful, especially if he has been “ indulged as it were and
dandled on the father’s knee. “ Come and hear all ye that fear
God and I will declare what He hath done for my soul,” this
was David’s language in the 66th Psalm. It was to them who
feared God he called, and I know that none but they can under-
stand this mystery, especially the new birth as we find it recorded
in the 3rd chapter of St. John, when the dear Redeemer spoke
to Nicodemus, who was a ruler of the Jews and a master in Israel,
and one who knew nothing of these things. (Here I pause and
weep a moment). The other boy and I had gone to the water to
have a swim, this was on the Sabbath day, and there were many
people there. I had undressed and swam partly across the
river when the thought struck me, suppose I took the cramp
and were drowned, I should surely go to hell. I got safely
across the river, but my clothes were on the other side. Inwardty
I begged the Lord to preserve me in crossing the stream and I
would never do so again. I got back safe, put on my clothes
and got away, leaving the others there. As I was goirg home,
the tide was coming in, and a number of people were standing
on a bridge, watching and admiring the boys swimming in the
tide. I wanted to be admired too, and so plunged in again, and
it was a mercy that I was not drowned. That Sabbath I went
home with a lie to my master, and that night I was awakened


from sleep by a heavy thunderstorm (it was the middle of the
night), and more terrible than I had ever seen or heard, and I
really thought that the day of judgment had come, and I had to
appear before the judgment seat. My sins came up before me
as a great mountain. I cried aloud for mercy, and the family
heard me and came to my room, and tried to soothe me, but it
was of no avail. The thunder seemed to say “Come to judg-
ment.” Oh !my sins, Oh! my sins, what shall Ido ? Mercy 0
Lord, have_ mercy on my poor soul! Here I was in my night-
shirt expecting every moment to be cast into hell, where “ the
worm dieth not and the fire is never quenched.” That night I
left Egypt and all my companions with whom I had been going
down to hell. I could never mix up with them again, but was
one alone in the midst of them. Yes, quite alone, and it was
some time before I knew anyone to whom I could speak on these
matters. Oh, the cries for pardoning mercy, mercy, night and
day, for a long time this continued. Afraid to be by myself,
not knowing a day but what death would be my doom. I was
afraid to walk on the pavement for fear the houses would fall
and crash me to death. My master wanted to send me home to
the parish as I could not work, but his wife pitied me and
sympathised with me. At that time I did not know any pro-
fessing Christian people but the Bryanites or Banters, now
known as Bible Christians. They tried all they could to bring
me out of the pit, but I was sunk too deep for that, although
they held prayer-meetings after the service for me ; but as I sank
deeper and deeper I could not work. Oh ! to stand a condemned
criminal at the bar of God! Ob, the tears, the cries, the groans
for mercy ! This is the place that never can ho forgotten. Some
of the family wore afraid that I would kill myself. I was scarcely
able to work, neither could I stay in the house, and I did not
know what to do nor where to go. At last I thought I would go
away into the fields, get into some quiet place and groan and cry
for mercy until I died, resolving never to return home. In agony
of mind I went, and kneeling down, cried for pardon through
the dear Eedeemer for some time, but I did not experience
deliverance. I felt that I could not stop there all night
so got up and went home again with all my burden. When
I arrived home they tried to heal the wound, but to
no purpose, neither could I stop in the house. As the Bryanites
were holding a prayer meeting that night I went to it, for what
to do I did not know. I was just distracted. They told me to
lay hold on the promises, and have faith, for the dear Eedeemer
with open arms was waiting to save me. This I could not do,
death and the coffin seemed to follow me as it were in the street.
B


Oh! the cries, and the tears that I shed then, I used to wash my
eyes to hide the traces of my weeping. Weak in body I was
taken with the ague, and they gave me quinine ; but my mind
was worse than my body. One of the sons was a doctor, and he
told them I would not live. This was adding salt to the wound.
But, here I pause a moment—Were these labour pains ? Because
here is the weighty point : Was I called out of that Egypt by
the Lord, or did I come out like the mixed multitude ? Is the
faith that I have professed, and written about, a living faith ?
Or is it a dead faith ? We find the two sorts in the Word of God.
And a living faith and a dead faith can never walk along’ together.
The Lord knows my trial on this weighty point; it has made me
walk much alone, and every step has been tried. Several times
I have thought to burn this and some other matter that I have
written, yes, even last evening, while under the cloud, I told my
dear wife if in death lam deceived, she was to burn it all; for I
should not like to be deceived, or yet be a stumbling block to the
Church of Christ. But, how were my bands broken ? Oh, tne
cries for mercy as I sunk lower and lower. I was in the bakehouse
at my work, baking bread nuts : with all the weight of my
burden upon me. I looked around at the window : the sun was
shining in like a stream or ray and, in a moment, I lost my
burden, it was all gone. No word was applied to my soul. It
was my work to take the horse out for an airing in the mornings
when it was not used much ; and, feeling I could not stay in the
room, I left the table where I was working, and, taking the horse,
went out of the city. I seemed in a new world, everything
seemed different, and my cup was full. I could have told nil the
world what the Lord had done for my soul. But, when I arrived
home again, I begun to question :Is it real ?is it real'? are my
sins really pardoned, or am I deceived ? Being asked the ques-
tion I was afraid to say yes, fearing that I might be deceived,
as there was no word applied from Scripture—but my burden was
gone—and I felt free ; my poor soul was brighter and brighter
under that blest deliverance. What my poor soul enjoyed for
many months no mortal knows ? I was on the mount, with the
City in view—the glorious City. The bakehouse, stable, hsyloft,
water-closet, the places where I had trembled on the very brink
of hell had now become my Bethels. Oh ! the tears of joy that
watered my face both night and day ; in the morning my pillow
was wet with the tears shed in the night season. How I begged
the dear Lord to take me home then. I envied the aged, because
I thought they were near home, while I was only young. At
that time I was about 18 years of age. I have gone into the
street sometimes from the bake-house, while in a perspiration,


hoping to catch cold that I might he taken ill and die, and see
the King in His beauty; and I would often look and watch for
His coming in the clouds of heaven. Oh how sweet to me that
beautiful hymn,
‘ ‘ Lo He comes with clouds descending,
Once for favoured sinners slain.”
If anything took place in the bake-house to hurt my mind, I
went to Him (like a child to a father) and told Him all about it.
A word from Him put all to rights. Oh ! when I think of those
former days when, as Job says, “ The candle of the Lord shone
round about Him, when by His light I walketh through dark-
ness ; ” When I have, as it were, challenged the devil to fight,
having the bounty money, sword in hand, flying colours—l
thought I could fight the world, the flesh, and the devil at that
time, when I was on the Mount: where I remained about six
months without a cloud or doubt on my mind. At that time I
used to travel, with my master, in a covered cart, to country fairs
with our wares. We travelled on Saturday, and my master, being
a Wesleyan, took lodgings for the Sabbath, and I slept in the
cart. I was quite alone, and the cart being a covered one, no
one could see me. Oh! what my soul enjoyed on the Sabbath,
shut up like that, away from the Sodom fair outside. I have
never forgotten Mills, a township near I'roume, England, and
other places, especially Trowbridge ; while there I was in the cart
reading a little book that I carried with me; the servant at the
house where my master was staying saw me reading, and thought
it was a song book I had, she cautioned the boys against me, and
I overheard her. Being full of zeal, I lost no time in undeceiving
her, arid went to the kitchen to tell her she was mistaken. She
took me into the parlour, as they were professors ; she was one of
John Warburton’s members : a mother in Israel, while I was
then but a child. I have never forgotten the love I felt to that
dear child of God. nor ever shall, although she is now safely
landed, no doubt, as this happened over sixty years ago. But
the remembrance of it makes me weep, even now, while writing
this. At that time I was full of zeal and could have told all the
world what the Lord had done for my poor soul. In my way I
would write letters and slip them under doors, exhorting- the
inmates to flee from the wrath to come. That dear saint told me
that I should see differently by-and-bye, and would leave these
Wesleyans—and so I did when I was led farther on. I wrote
to her and told her all about it and it gladdened her heart; but
travelling to fairs was very trying to me, the filthy language used
at these places grieved me, and led me to beg the Lord to open
another door, and I felt that He would. I knew there was a good


man working in a certain sugar house, and I thought I should
like to go there. When I spoke to him about it he said I was
too small, the work would be too hard for me, he was afraid the
master would not take me as a workman. I said to him the Lord
hath said that “ whatever two of you shall agree together to ask
it shall be done unto you” ; let us both ask Him and I shall get
the place. I went like a child to the Lord and asked Him, then
I went to the master and applied for the place. He made many
remarks about my being strong enough for the work, but he took
me into his factory and I was there seven years Luring that
period I experienced many changes, both in mind and body ;
there are some blessed places in that factory which are more to
me than all the world besides. The man referred to above was
the only one that I could converse with on spiritual things,
amongst twenty or thirty men. As we were in the same part of
the factory we often exchanged a word about the kingdom. It
was very hard work and although I was weak in body compared
to others, I had to take my part, and I often groaned under tire
burden. My soul was favoured sometimes and at the close of
the day would often feel it was one less ; I found it sweet to read
the Word at meal times, for I had my Bible in a secret place.
My dinner and my tears were often mixed together. I remember
one time my friend had a visit from the Lord and was much
broken in spirit while he was at his dinner. I had not been
blessed with a visit for some time and this caused a sort of
jealously—for I thought the Lord had passed me by and blessed
him. Soon after this I was alone and that word came, “Re-
deemed,” and it wont from the crown of my head to the sole of
my feet. Again it sounded, “ Redeemed,” and it sounded yet
again, “Redeemed,” from the (.Town of my head to the sole of
nij* feet. This was three times and I felt that if it came again I
could not hear it. I was standing with a sugar rake in my hands
at the time and the foreman came to speak to me ; I was then as
it were at Calvary, in the vision of my mind, arid it is a sacred
spot to me. There is another place; I had been unwell for some
time and was under the doctor’s care ; my lungs were very weak
and there was a great discharge from them. I asked the doctor
to tell me what my complaint was, as I thought of taking a wife,
and if there was no likelihood of my recovery I would break it
off. He told mo I was in a consumption and I knew this was
what my mother and father had suffered from. But this I knew,
there was nothing too hard for the Lord. Being in the factory
alone one day I went to a certain spot, and, on my knees, told the
Lord my'case. I said there was nothing too hard for Him to do.
and I told Him about Hezekiah: how He had added fifteen


years to his life, and that He could restore and heal me. I felt
that He had heard me : I rose from my knees and wrote down
the date with a piece of chalk on the pillar of the building, in the
room where I worked, so that I could see it every day ; it was
never rubbed out because I had climbed up the post and written
it; no one but myself knew what it meant. I'rom that time I
recovered, this was over sixty-five years ago—these were my
golden days. Another circumstance I will mention : I liked to
be alone at meal times and would get away by myself. On this
occasion the “ganger” came in and cruelly abused me for being
there ; I thought it very hard but felt no enemity against him ;
when he had left me I took the Bible from under the window,
where I kept it, and looked up to the Lord to give mo a word. I
opened the book on these words, “His roots shall be dried up
from beneath, and above shall his branch be cut off ” (Job. xviii,
16), and I felt such would be his cup. Soon after this he did
wrong and was removed from his position as “ganger,” his
family went wrong and his wife died, his goods were sold off for
rent, lie took ill with some bad disease and was taken to the
hospital, and there he passed into eternity. If it had been in
my power I would have done anything to have helped him. In
the same room where my friend and I worked, there was another
man, a great one for the church, who could quote chapter and
verse and almost any text, but he seemed spiritually dead to me ;
sometimes he would hold with me or my friend, or with others
in the factory, just as it suited him, or circumstances required.
We often spoke to him of the day that would make manifest
the solemn realities of religion, for I believed he was spiritually
dead. About this time the cholera visited our city aud carried
many into a solemn eternity ; I was speaking to him in the
morning, he was taken ill and was dead in the evening. At
this time I left the sugar factory, thinking to better myself, hut
here I made a mistake; although I believe that the path is
marked out I left it without asking counsel of the Lord, depend-
ing on my own ability to move in the path marked out in my
mind. All failed, everything went against me, so that I was
brought ver/ low indeed; the hand of the Lord went out against
me. I tried my old trade, butcher, then confectioner, I carried
my goods to c mntry fairs on my back, and walked back home
again, and only earned a few shillings. I fretted very much
about my hard fate, for my poor wife was often loft without a
shilling, for all I earned I spent in buying the flour and other
things to make the confectionery I wanted to sell at the fairs.
All these trials worked death in my poor soul; I could not do as
the world; I must give weight and measure; neither could I


misrepresent. After a time the Lord opened a door, for me—
this was another great step in my life. The door that was
opened now was a tobacco manufactory. The masters were
professors and were considered liberal, and supporters of the
cause, many of the work people were members of some form of
religion. I thought, “ I shall be amongst my own people.” At
that time I had a wife and two children. The master gave me
fourteen shillings per week, and the work was not so heavy as
in the sugar factory. While I was out of work I had con-
tracted some debts which I was anxious to pay off. I was
now enabled to do this. One circumstance I will relate here:
I wanted to buy some pigs for killing, and I wanted to buy
at the first market, instead of buying from others, but to do this
I must have ten pounds : this I could get if I could succeed in
getting two bondsmen. One who seemed to be my friend and
who professed to know the truth became one of my bondsmen
and an old master of mine became the other. The former was
doing a good business as grocer and baker, and I owed him two
or three pounds. As soon as I received the ten pounds my friend
held out his hand for what I owed him ; this was cruel to me
and crippled me at once, for, when I paid him, I could not do as
I intended, nor could I pay back all the £lO I had borrowed, so
they came on my bondsmen and they had to pay it. When I
started to work at the tobacco factory one of them very cruelly
pushed me, and misrepresented me, saying I was dishonest.
This was a great grief to me, for I should have been very glad
to pay them all. After a time, with hard struggling, I was
enabled to do this out of my small wages. When 1 carried the
last of tire debt to my oppressor I intended to speak out my mind
to him about the way they had spoken about me. Just as I was
going into the shop with it that word came to my mind, —
“Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the Lord,” this prevented
me from saying a word so I just paid the money and left him
and his wife. At that time they had more pounds than I had
pence for they were doing a good business and had no family.
But from that time everything went against them, they were sold
out and were bankrupt. Many years afterwards I was enabled
to give them credit and I was pleased to do so. I felt that the
fault was on the husband’s side, as I think there was life in her
poor soul —she wept as she talked about the old days. May the
dear Lord ever keep me from oppressing the poor, even of this
world, but especially those whom we trust are the Lord’s children.
In this factory there were some twenty or thirty men and women
at work. Most of them professed religion but there were only
two or three that I could converse with about the things of the


Kingdom. After some time I was removed from that factory
by my master to his mill in the country, where the snuff was
ground and made. This was a responsible position and a place
of trust, for there were many hundred pounds of goods under
my care ; the man there before me was dishonest. My being
sent there caused a sort of jealousy amongst the workpeople that
I should be the one chosen, especially as there was a house to
live in and a garden, also coal and caudles found. I was pleased
with the appointment as it appeared to my advantage, but I soon
found that I had got into a hornet’s nest. There was one man in
the mill who had been there a long time with the man who was
discharged for dishonesty; he was a worldly man, and people
about the village were linked together with him. All work done
in the shape of repairs came under my notice as it was my place
to endorse all the bills before they were paid, I could not wink
at what I felt to be wrong; this and many other things brought
down their enmity against me. Although I was there nearly
seven years I feel that the path is marked out, the time, place,
all is appointed for our good, even though outward circumstances
seem to be so very crooked to us—like the children of Israel
going through the sea. I was now seven miles from the few
who met together, and where I used to go when in Bristol; the
late Mr. Symons preached there, Mr. Silver, Mr. Emery, Mr.
Small, and Nathaniel Marmer, also supplied there at times, and
when there was no supply Mr. Tyler read. When I did not go
to Bristol I used to go into the fields on the Sabbath and breathe
out my soul to Him alone, for there was no one to whom I could
speak about the Kingdom and the trials and pathway. My
master liked me, but not my religion, but I will speak more about
this further on. Being much alone I was often tried in my mind
about many things. The people I knew seemed happy while I
wis so often bowed down, many could seem to feed upon the
letter of the Word, but I wanted the Word applied and brought
into my poor soul iu the life and power of it. It is here we
have to be much alone, and we find some in the Bible have been
here too. We read in Psalm cii., “I am like a pelican in the
wilderness, and an owl of the desert, as a sparrow alone upon
the house top ” ; this was his path, alone, he said he had eaten
ashes like bread and mingled his drink with weeping (ninth
verse). I remember that one Sabbath I felt very low in my mind,
much cast down, and felt very lonely; I was walking along the
road and weeping, when that word came to me, “ He that goeth
forth weeping, bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again
with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him ” (Psalm cxxvi., 6).
My feelings at the time were such that I ran up and off the road


to give vent to them ; I cried aloud, for I could not help it.
About this time I had a remarkable dream, which made a deep
impression on my mind : I dreamt that I was in a road about
a chain wide, crying out, “Oh where is the narrow path ? ” As
I looked behind me I saw the background of the heavens looking
like fire, and it seemed as if horses and men where on them;
and there seemed to be a great multitude of people running
before them on the road towards me ; I stood still, crying out,
Oh where is the narrow path ? ” I felt that where I stood was
the iroad road, and here the crowd divided, some went over the
common, where the grass was very short, these I thought would
die of hunger under the scorching rays of the sun ; the other
part of the crowd went down the road, which was on the decline,
it was like a turnpike road, and it led to a precipice, over which
it was total darkness; it was like a cavern between two wide
cliffs, although it was some way off; I could see a dark bottom-
less abyss. I stood still crying out, “Where is the narrow
path? ” Then I saw a narrow path just before me, and there
was just room enough for one or two to walk. I seemed like a
blind man, and felt as if someone or something was leading me,
for I seemed to have hold of something, like a chain ; the road
was very rough, narrow, and somewhat crooked, and I saw no
one. After a time I came to a large gate, and I heard a voice
distinctly say, “This is death.” The gate then opened of its
own accord, and I was inside ; I hud a feeling as if my clothes
were being cut at the top, for my mortal garments then dropped
(it was like cutting a sack on the top), and then I seemed to
mount up very high until I came where the clouds seem to open,
and I felt sure that I was going to heaven. The cloud was
illuminated with the rays of light which came through, and I
seemed to hear the heavenly host singing; I was just about to
join them when I woke and found to my sorrow it was but a
dream. For a long time I felt some sweetness in my mind, this
was my dream and I have told it: “The prophet that hatha
dream let him tell a dream ” (Jeremiah xxiii, 28). Job tells us,
“ God speaketh in a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep
sleep falleth upon men and sealeth their instruction,” (Job xxxiii,
15), so that I have the Word of God to bear me out in telling it.
As I said before, I was much alone, having no one to whom I
could talk who would understand my language. The church
minister of the village had been told by his tract distributor that
I was an infidel, and he called to see me to ascertain if it were
true; we had some conversation together, but he went away dis-
appointed. Whenever he met me alterwards, he always acknow-
ledged me, but I could not agree with him on some matters.


As the snuff mills were under the Excise, they came every day
to examine, to see if all were right and the supervisor came once
a weak, when sometimes a few words would pass between us on
eternal things as matters of faith; at that time my son was ten
years of age and attended a school about a mile or so away from
where we then lived. A fever broke out amongst the scholars in
this school and some of the children died, and this made my son
timid about going to the school, and he would weep to his mother
about it. Now came the trial: Should I take him away, fearing
he would take the fever, or let him continue to go there ? The
people about me who knew me, knew also that i confessed that
the Lord who made heaven and earth watched over me and mine ;
if I take him away what about my faith ? The exciseman said
that I did wrong to send him when the child was afraid to go, as
his mother told me that; these things, with my own mind, tried
me very much, and I was much exercised about it, as I wanted
a word from the Lord to guide me in the matter, for at that time
I desired not to listen to mortals. The boy came home one
evening and said another child had died, so between the mother
and the child’s tears, and what the people said, I did not know
what to do, for I had told them that the Lord would preserve
and watch over his people, and that not a sparrow could fall to
the ground without His notice. My thought was this : If I take
him away what will the people say about my trust in the Lord ?
And then again : Am I not presumptions in sending him to the
school ? I could bear it no longer, and one evening I went into
my bedroom and fell upon my knees and told the Lord that I
wanted a word from Him to guide me in the matter, and this
word came, “They that trust in the Lord shall never be con-
founded.” I rose from my knees and was going downstairs
feeling some relief in my mind, when this came to me : How do
you know where that portion of scrip ure came from ? It only
crossed the mind perhaps, and did not come from the Lord ?
I went back again to my room and begged the Lord not to let
me be deceived ; then I thought like this: If the Lord would
take away all fear from the child, then I should know that it
was from him! So I asked Him not to be angry with me but
to grant me this my petition. Now none but the Lord and my
own soul know this. The next day the child was in a field play-
ing with some other boys, before going to school, when something
came over him that took away ail fear from him, and he went
home and toll his mother about it, and from that day he never
felt the least fear (and that is nearly fifty years ago now, and
he tells me that if he were in England he could point out the
place iu the field where he stood when it happened). I was


satisfied in my mind that the Lord would preserve him ; the fever
raged in the school and village for some time and I was censured
for allowing him to attend the school, and mix up with the
children in the village. When I went into Bristol on the Sab-
bath to hear the Word, sometimes I would stay all night and
return on the Monday morning, and my son would come and
meet me sometimes. This Monday morning when he met me,
the first words ho said were that his brother had the fever, and
the little girl who lived next door, with whom he used to play,
had taken it too. Then something seemed to say to me :Itis in
the house, and he will be sure to have it now, and then what will
become of what you have told the people, that your son would be
preserved and not have the fever ? Here I was tried for some
time, neither could I forbid my son to go in next door, fearing
what the people would say. And thus I watched, looking to
the Lord alone for guidance and help. There was a person
staying with my wife to look after her in her confinement,
and she had her little girl with her; she came to me and
said that her child had the fever too. What to do I did not
know, and fearing the consequence in case of death, I thought'
I would get medical advice, and then this was the working
of my mind : If you do, what will they think then of your faith
in the Lord that He will preserve you, if you look to the arm of
flesh ? So I had to look to the Lord alone as my Physician, but
I sent a letter to my friend about his little girl, and I told him
how I was led in the matter, but if he wished it, I would get
medical advice for his child, but as one who professed the same
as myself the answer was, “ No, lot her be as yours.” By this
time the children were apparently worse, and I did not know
what to do, for then this thought came to me. “If the children
should die, what will the people say about my faith ? May
they not say How presumptous not to use the means ? Then a
word came to me : Asa was diseased in his feet, lie sought not to
the Lord, but to physicians, whereof he died (2 Chronicles xvi.
13). This stopped me. I desired to leave them in the hands of
the great Physician, but I was tossed about aud tried for some
time. Was it presumption not to use the means ? The children of
God do use the means and have a doctor and why not you ? But
the scripture quoted above was as a mountain, that I could not
get over, as I nad made the Lord my trust and my only Physician.
The children seemed to get worse and I was much perplexed aud
brought very low, both in mind and bodv. In this state 1
went into the garden, and into an empty pigstye, which had a
thatched roof. I could be quite alone there, and none could hear
me. There I knelt down and poured out my soul’s trouble,


about my trials and fears, when this word came to me (and it
seemed to come down through the thatch) : “I have seen his
affliction and will heal him” (Isaiah Ivii. 17). I looked up and
said, “When Lord?” Then this word came, “ To-morrow shall
this sign he ” (Exodus viii, 23). Then I went hack to my work
the day following was a Saturday and I was in the mill by
myself, as the other man had gone to town, I was indeed very
low in body and mind respecting my children, for I had none to
whom I could look, but the Lord. The fever being in the house,
the children appearing to get worse, I did not know where the
scene would end; tremblingly I went to the cradle where they
both lay and took hold of one of their hands for I feared death
would be the end, when something seemed to seize me and I
really thought that I had taken the fever. My wife was near
her confinement so I said nothing, but went out of the house
again. I went to the mill and fastened the door, then I knelt
down and groaned out my soul’s complaint before Him, I told
Him how I had been looking to Him and the cry of my poor
soul was that he would honour that faith that was looking to
Him to heal the children : “I am afraid dear Lord that I am
deceived altogether ; Oh I what shall Ido if the children die. I
cannot live like this, and I have got it! ” I was so weak in body
under this cloud that I nearly fainted, I could not kneel any
longer, so lay flat in agony, groaning and feeling that I had been
deceived. I felt very bad and was afraid I should faint or die
while fastened in the mill. I got up and unfas'tened the door
and going into my house, which was close at hand, told my wife
and the nurse that I had taken the fever. My' dear wife said to
me, “ This is a great affliction! ” and I said, “Yes, and we do
not know where it will end.” Then I went to bed and took
something warm to drink and had a hot brick to my feet. I felt
a little better in the afternoon and dressing myself, thought I
would go to a chemist or doctor and describe our case. Yes,
something said, “ Now you are taken yourself you will go to a
doctor for advice, but the children may be left to die and you
will not get it for them! ” Up to this time I had tried to hang
on the promise, “ They' that trust in the Lord shall never be
confounded.” 1 had been enabled as it were to sail against
wind and tide, but now I sank in deep waters, where there was
no standing. These questions came, and Oh ! the agony of the
mind : “ Where now is your faith ? What will the people think
of your faith ? And the children of God too ! After all you
have said, how ymu were trusting Him and looking to him alone
for protection. Where are you now ? ” Asking my'dear wife for
some money and a bottle I started to go to the chemist, this


came : “ Leave it, and to refuge fly,” I said, “ Lord, I have
tried refuge and that has failed me; ” then the passage in 2nd
Cfaron. came to my mind : “ Yet in his disease he sought not to
the Lord, but to physicians, whereof he died.” I went up the
lane staggering and breathing out my poor soul, sometimes
under one hedge, sometimes under another, I was quite
bewildered and did not know what to do. Oh! to be deceived !
Oh I to be deceived and left to sink : the heavens iron, and the
earth brass, and sure I am if anyone had seen me they would
have thought I was out of my mind. But I never saw anyone
for about half a mile. Then I came to four cross ways. One
led to Bristol, one to the village where the fever was raging,
another to the doctor’s, and the other to my own house. Looking
around and not seeing anyone, I got gate into a field
where I saw a mow of hav. There I went for tne last time
breathed out all my troubles; telling Him again about the
children and how my poor soul had been looking to Him, and to
H'm alone, in all this affliction, and how He had stopped me
from getting advice by that of Asa going to mortal man for help.
My child! my poor body ready to sink! Oh! what shall I do?
After all go to mortal man for help ? Others can get advice
from doctors, and help. But I could not, but have been looking
to Thee alom\ Then holding up the bottle in one hand and the
money in the other, I said, “ What shall I do ? oh, what shall I
do?” Then came this word, “Oast thy burden upon the Lord
and He will sustain thee, He will never suffer the righteous to be
moved” (Psalm Iv. 22). That very time my burden was all
gone. I got up as light as a feather and I said “ I can trust
Thee now, ” sink or swim, for time or eternity. I said, “ I love
the Lord because He has heard the voice of my supplications ”
(Psalm cxvi). “ I will praise Thy name, I will extol Thee before
the people ’’ (Psalm cviii. 3). That is how it come to me, and it
broke me all to pieces, and I wept for joy. I was weeping so
that I went home the back way, far I did not want to meet
anvone.
When my poor wife saw me come back weeping so. she said,
“ What is the matter 1 ” “Oh ! ” I said, “ the Lord has come and
settled the matter.” “ I hope He has done it to the purpose,”
She replied. “Yes,” I said “ He has ; the children will recover
ami so shall I.” Indeed I felt quite well, ray burden was gone,
Bless the Lord oh my soul.” That day, as far as I can remem-
ber, the children sat up and could take some food, and in a day
or so they were up and out of doors. They are now man and
wife and have children and grandchildren. The next Sunday I
went to Bristol to meet the little flock and I told them all about


it. “It is better to trust the Lord than to put confidence in
princes.” The son about whom I was so much tried never had
the fever, although he slept with them. This was my trial,
because ! had it in my mind that he would not have the fever
and I felt that I had received it from the Lord by faith. As I
said before, my master liked me very well, but in eternal matters
we could not agree, and he objected to my leaving the mill on the
Sabbath, although my wife and family and the other man were
there all the time ; for the house we lived in abutted the mill
and it was therefore perfectly safe. But he was amongst the
itinerant preachers who went out to preach in the village on the
Sabbath and ho wished me to go there (the village where they
preached was about two miles from the mill). I put it oif for a
while but, as he so urgently entreated, at last I wont. I thought
it to he the letter, will-worship, creature-religion, only. I knew
he would ask me for my opinion, and I knew that I must speak
the truth, if I lost my place through it. As mentioned before, I
went to Bristol once a fortnight to meet him in the office. When
I saw him he asked me if I had hoard Air. C preach. 1 said “ Yes
Sir.” “ How did you like him”? “ ATot at all; ] don’t think
he understands the footsteps of the flock,” was my reply. Then
he, and his brother who was with him, said, “ In speaking against
him yon speak against us. If you go with them yon may bo a
help to them.” Then I said, “The Lord has had mercy on me
and given mo to know the blessedness of pardon and I do not feed
at homo with a religion of mere profession (or words to that effect :.
There are a few in Bristol whom I love and I feel at homo with
them.” “ Well,” they said, “You will have to meet with the
people or else lose your place.” I answered, “I am your servant
and will serve you morning, noon, or night, according to my
abilities, during the week, but the Sabbath, and in all eternal
matters, I have no master but the Lord Jesus.” Then they said,
“ The Word says : ‘ Servants obey your master’s.’ We will give
you a week to consider the matter.” I said, “My time is in the
Lord’s hands and the bounds of my habitation are fixed, and if
my time is up at Littleton I can say “ The Lord’s will be done,
and this I know, that your hearts are in the Lord’s hands and you
cannot discharge me before the time appointed, and I will never
sell my conscience for a morsel of bread.” This was said weep-
ingly, for I felt it, and I believe I should have said the same if
there had been a sword at my breast , for all fear of man was taken
away. Although at that time I did not possess a pound in the
world and had a young family to support (how different rvhen all
fear of man is taken away ; for at other times his step has gone


through me as it were. A fortnight afterwards when I went to
the office, knowing the matter was to be decided, whether I would
comply with their request or not. My mind was fully at a point
about it, but, as I had a seven miles’ walk, I had time to think
things over; just outside the office there was an ante-room with
a table, on which a Bible was always kept. I went into this room
and paused a moment, and looked up to the Lord to give me a
word. I opened the Book on these words, “ I will put my hook
in thy nose and my bridle in thy lips and I will turn thee back ”
(2 Xings xix, 28). Then I went into the office and saw them
both, but they never said a word to me about the matter, they
only spoke about the business.
About this time I had a dream. I dreamt that a strong wind
came and blow my house over and over, and as I stood astonished,
looking at my wife, another wind came and blew it back again
as before. The following circumstance seemed to me to explain
the dream: My enemies had laid certain plans to move me,
indeed I lived in a perfect Sodom, a perfect Sodom I said to my
soul. The man who assisted me in the mill led the van and find-
ing they could not get rid of me, they wrote anonymous letters to
my master respecting me, there being no names to the letters it
could not be sifted, but the bound of our habitation is fixed and
our removal certainly was. My master was ready to credit
reports although he could not prove them. There was a man in
his church and the minister wanted to get him into a situation,
and the place I held would just do for him. Sometimes the
minister and his wdfe would come over to the mill with my master
for a drive, and often they would bring one or more children with
them and they would have tea. We baked our own bread and
my dear wife had to prepare tea and provide for them all for the
sum of one shilling and sixpence, and I never remember that he
ever gave any more. Sometimes I had to take a net to the pond
to catch trout, but it was all the same, we never were paid any
more, although he was worth more thousands than I shillings,
but, poor as I was, I would not have exchanged -with him at that
time for all the world. Although I could but just make two ends
meet. After some few months I left the mill with my wife and
family and a young baby. I did not know what I should do, for
he might not allow me to work in his town factory. But the
Lord would not suffer him to discharge me, but he treated me
cruelly. The Lord caused the foreman to be very kind to me,
and here I was back again after seven years amongst my old
companions, who seemed to glory over me, for they had always
envied me that situation. They dug the pit for me but they get
into it themselves ; the two who helped to dig the pit took my


place in the country mill, one was of my master’s church, and he,
with the man left in the mill, robbed them and both were dis-
charged, and only just escaped being sent to gaol —Yes, within
twelve months. When the cart took away my family and goods
I said to them, “ You have got me out, and the pit you have dug
forme you will be in it yourselves within twelve months” (or
words to that effect), and I said it without any previous thought;
and the other man in the town factory, who connived with them
in the matter, got into the pit too, while I escaped. I firmly be-
lieved that the Lord permitted it, although the trial was very
sharp it was for my good, as the end proved. I was now enabled
to meet on the Sabbath with those whom I could walk with
spiritually; instead of being often alone in the fields or in the
woods on the Sabbath (for I could not always go to Bristol,
though my heart was there). When I went to the factory in
town, the master put me to work in the cellar where the tobacco
was cured and manufactured for snuff, and kept to a certain heat
to allow it to ferment. This had a terrible effect on the body; it
was very weakening, and until a person could bear the fumes
they would he sick again, and again, and tremble and faint. It
was in this place I was now placed by the master’s orders, and
here they gloried over me : “ How about the mill and garden,
and your country seat,” they would say, when I was inwardly
groaning to the Lord to deliver me ; but I am sure that I could
not have borne it long for it was as bad, or worse, than sea-sick -
ness. The Lord had given me ability for many things; sometimes
one of the men working upstairs would be taken sick and have
to leave his work, then the foreman would take me to fill his
place. When the master saw me he wanted to know why I was
not below, and the foreman would explain matters, but when the
man recovered I was put below again. Then perhaps another
would be sick and I would be called up again, this went on
several times, but nry cry was to Him who made the heavens.
The master’s treatment worked so in my mind that his step
seemed to afflict me under a sort of fear, that kept me in bondage.
After a time I was up for good, and my work now was to grind
the knives used in cutting the tobacco ; this was in a little room
partly screened from the men and women around me. As I had
been much tried I was much broken in spirit, and while sitting
on the horse, grinding the knives on the stone in front of me,
which was driven by the engine, I have often wept amidst all
the confusion around me. Oh ! how sweet these dropping tears
are that come out of the cup of gall of the soul’s affliction. Some-
times a word would come and then I put it down in chalk, my
poor soul was so melted down at times that I could hardly bear


to speak ; I would get away by myself at meal times, for there
being only one or two in the factory to whom I could speak about
soul troubles, I seemed one alone, and this often tried me, for I
did sink very low in my mind at times, and while under the
cloud it seemed as if I should lose my senses; and then again
I have been broken to pieces so that I have gone home through
the city with my fingers in mj’ ears to keep out the noise of
the passers-by. Oh! how sweet is a drop to a thirsty soul till the
tongue again fail for thirst. Indeed, the master and those in the
profession seemed spiritually dead. I believe the master robbed
the government of thousands a year. It was done secretly, and
unknown to the Excise, and all this under a profession of religion,
and he was looked upon as a very good and liberal man, his
name was always high in the charity list in the papers. But what
could the workmen think, for they knew- this was going on, they
would look through their lingers. On one occasion he had a private
room fitted up to do these things in the dark. When it was all
ready he gave us a supper ; before the supper he had his minister
there and held a prayer-meeting over the very room. Of course
the minister did not know- what was under his feet. I suspected
he would get me into the prayer-meeting, so I got away, making
the excuse that I would look after the cooking, but he found me,
and got me up, much against my will; but I was glad to go away
when the meeting was over. After a time the government found
that there -was a great falling off in the revenue, as the duty on
tobacco was os. 2d. per lb. Some firms were found out and
heavily fined, but he escaped, having had timely warning. AIL
hands were set to work to remove from the premises all the
things which were used for adulteration, but now I leave them.
As the bounds of our habitation are fixed, the cloud must move
before we can take a step. I suffered much, both in body and
mind, for years in that place. Before I relate how I came to leave-
that place I will mention a circumstance which has crossed my
mind. These words of the poet kept coming into my mind, again,
and again :
“Happy is the man that bears the stroke
Of his chastising God;
Nor stubbornly rejects his yoke,
Nor faints beneath His rod.”
I said to a friend of mine “ I think something is coming upon
me,” and in a day or so, while I w-as at work, my hand was caught,
and the back of it torn away. I was laid up for some weeks, and
suffered much in body and mind, fearing a lock-jaw. The doctor
thought of taking one of my fingers off, and this led me to look
to the Great Physician to preserve my finger. I had to go on a


certain day, thinking to have it done ; I went, but the doctor was
not there to do it, for he had gone to see the “ Great Britain ”
launched. I watched this. The next time the doctor came to
see me my hand was much better, so that I have all my fingers
still. Although my hand was somewhat crippled I did not find
it interfere much with my work.
At this time I lost a child by death. These things brought
me very low ; indeed, I have found it so all the way. But now,
I will state how I came to leave that master, and the place. The
foreman had some thought of going into the tobacco trade himself
with one of the clerks, and he asked me if I would go with them,
offering me some advantage. They would also take my eldest
son, and I saw that that -would be a help to me. I suffered much
bondage and fear under my master, and firmly believe the Lord
opened that door for me. I felt that the Lord would not permit
my master to discharge me, although he had oppressed me, and
now an open door appeared to me. I thought if I left my present
employment and the thing went against me, what should I do ?
For men were kept in that firm until they were old, and then
allowed some trifle per week, when not able to work. Here I
was in a fix, lest I should take a wrong step ; I partly broke my
mind to one or two, but could get no real help in the matter. I
had to give a decided answer on the Friday, which was pay night.
Oh, my mind ! What cries to the Lord about it! What shall I
do ? When the men went to their tea I took the Bible and went
away to a place where no one could see or hear me. There I
knelt down, and laid my case before Him, and begged Him to
direct me, for I must give a week’s notice. I asked that I might
open on a word that would be His voice to me. When I opened
the Book it was, as far as I can remember, Ezekiel xii. 3,
“Therefore, thou son of man, prepare thy stuff for removing,
and remove by day in their sight, and thou shalt remove from that
place to another place in their sight.” My path was now made
quite clear to mo. Then I went down to the office, and gave a
week’s notice. This caused quite a stir, that the most conspicuous
amongst them should have been engaged for the position of fore-
man, in the business which the foreman and clerk intending
starting, for the manufacture of tobacco. This was another great
step in my life, and I have never regretted it. My new masters
were very good to me, but not having sufficient capital could not
carry it on for many years, and I was very sorry, but even that
turned out for my good in the end. It had been a place for the
manufacture of tobacco for a number of years. The Excise
officials visited our place almost daily and, as it was not carried on
according to the strict letter of the law, they got into trouble, and
c


included me also. The government went to law with them (this
was two or three years after they started business). They seized
some of their goods; this crippled them in business although
they got the day against the Excise. This was a great trouble to
me, for I told them if I were called to give evidence in court,
being on my oath, I must speak the truth. I could not take a
false oath, and I feared by speaking the truth I should ruin them".
I wished them to discharge me until after the trial, but this
they would not do as 1 was there when the seizure took place.
Every inducement was held out to me, and as they were both
professors I quoted Hebrews x. 26, “ For if we sin wilfully after
that we have received the knowledge of the Truth, there remain-
eth no more sacrifice for sin,” and look at verse 27, I said, “But
a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation,
which shall devour the adversaries.” I told them I could not,
although it grieved me. However, the case came on, and lasted
some days ; all were examined on oath ; I was afraid they would
call me into the court to give evidence, and what to do I did not
know. Before I was called, in the night I was awakened with
these words, “ 0 Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul.” (Psalm
cxvi. 4.) In the morning I was standing outside the court, full
of thought, and dreading to be called in, I being the last and
principal witnesss; most of the trade were there and the Excise-
men, and some I think from London, employed by the Crown,
and who examined the seized goods ; these were there when 1
was called to give evidence, and the following took place;
“ What is your name ? ” “ James Davis.” “ Take that book.”
I said, “ I cannot swear.” “ Why, are you a Jew ? ” “NoSir.”
“Are you a Quaker?” “No Sir.” “Why then not
swear?” “The Word of God says, ‘Swear not at all.’”
“ That means profane swearing.” I replied, “ The Word of
God says, ‘ Swear not by heaven for it is God’s throne, nor
by the earth for it is His footstool.’ ” Here I was stopped by
one of the lawyers, “ You can leave the court, we do not want
preaching here.” This was the way in which I was delivered,
without incriminating my masters. Ido not remember pre-
meditating about the oath. They were blinded to the real cause
for my not swearing. Then some thought they would take my
word of affirmation. But others objected, as they thought of
taking the case to a higher court. Thus it fell through, and the
case ended in my masters’ favour; and I escaped, like David
(1 Samuel xxi. 13). I don’t find that David ever felt condemned,
nor have I, but I have been by some who were never in that fix
themselves. Thus I have been enabled at times to look to the
Lord alone in some of my troubles, and it is always best when I


can do so. I told my masters, as a servant in their employ, I
did lor them what I could not do were 1 a master.
About four or five years after they started business they gave
it up. Then the landlord engaged me to carry it on in my name
until he could dispose of it. I did so, but it was rather a respon-
sible situation. As it was under the Excise, all duty to the
Orown must he straight and clear. After a time the landlord
sold it to another firm in the same line, and they agreed to keep
me on, especially as I knew the out-door customers, and gener-
ally called on them once a week- I told my new master that I
wanted to leave work once a week at seven o’clock, as I was in
the habit of attending our prayer-meetings, and wished to con-
tinue it. To this he objected, and I was again in a fix. I must
either give up my place or that evening service; generally I was
expected to lead it. After much exercise of mind I decided to
leave my place, and looked to the Lord to guide me. I told the
proprietor that I could not comply with his rules, so we parted.
Then I thought to buy tobacco wholesale and sell it retail, and
some of the old customers in the town promised to deal with me.
This was another great step in my life, and I feel that it was the
path marked out for me. I learnt afterwards, from the traveller
of my late employer, that he only intended to keep me until he
knew the business connection, then I was to leave. Now the
Lord knew this, and I felt that the door was opened for me to
leave in His way.
At that time I lived in a three roomed cottage in a garden,
and there I begun my business, buying and selling tobacco. I
had a wife and five children then, and it was the period when the
cholera broke out and carried thousands to their graves, some-
times after an hour’s illness only. This was a very solemn time:
some said one thing and some another, to ward off the arrow of
death; and some rather surprised me for they looked so much
to the arm of flesh when I expected they would have looked
higher. I know that life and death were in the Lord’s
hands and He held the keys of both, though I solemnly felt it,
for many deaths took place round about us, and I was a poor,
trembling, doubting worm of earth. I wanted a word from the
dear Lord to rest upon. In this state of mind I went into my
bedroom and kneeling down begged the dear Lord to give me a
word, so that I might have something to rest upon, more than
this or that, like many around me. I was kneeling before the
Lord with the closed Bible in front of me. My petition was that
with my eyes closed I might open on some word that would be
His voice to me on this solemn matter. I opened the Bible and
when I opened my eyes they were fized on Psalm xci, 7; “A


thousand shall fall at thy side and ten thousand at thy right
hand but it shall not come nigh thee.” Ido not remember now
whether I read further or not, but this I do remember, it led me
to lean on the Lord alone and not on outward means ; although
I would not condemn any means used in a lawful way if I were
so led, looking to Him at the same time to sanctify it. It was a
very solemn time. In going round from week to week to get
orders some whom I called on one week were dead and buried
on my next visit. Many loads of coffins, merely blacked over,
with the name written in chalk, passed by my door, for the
bodies of those who died in the Union. Although I was some-
what enabled to rest on the promise, yet, at times, I had some
thoughts which tried me. During this time my wife was taken
in labour and I went for the doctor, he thought it was a case of
cholera, and objected to come until he understood that it was as
I said, for I had previously engaged him. My wife was safely
delivered and preserved, neither did that plague come nigh my
dwelling. JBut I had many things to try my poor soul both in
the world and those members of the church whom I trust were
called out of the world, and about whom I was perplexed, for as
they had professed great love and attachment to me I expected
love and sympathy ; but it was not so and I felt it keenly, as
Paul said, “ The more I love, the less I be loved,” for I truly
loved some of them as my own soul. Here I was often very low
and could not come up on high ground where some of them
seemed to be.
I will relate another dream. In my dream I was busy trying
to cleanse some sheep pens from the dirt, but I could not cleanse
them, so at last I gave it up and left them alone ; I then found
myself between two high walls of stone but I could not see the
top, yet I felt that this was the way to the Kingdom. The space
was so small that two could not pass each other and I had to
walk sideways, and even then with great difficulty ; my breath
was almost gone, as my back and breast were squeezed so. At
last I could neither go forward or backward. All of a sudden
there -was a little opening so that I was able to breathe again,
but I was not through, and I only saw one person who was
behind me. At last I made another attempt and squeezed
through sideways and got through to the road, and shouted for
joy for I felt that I was in the glorious liberty of the gospel.
Then I awoke. We poor mortals are too apt to lean on an arm
of flesh rather than the arm of the mighty God of Jacob. I will
now relate what cured me for ever from leaning on mortals :
There was a friend of mine, one whom I thought could not be
deceived by a wrong impression; this person had a word or


impression which she believed was from the Lord. I feared that
she was deceived and so it turned out that the word, or impression,
was not from the Lord, as I feared. As I had leaned on that
mortal arm and found it only an arm of flesh, I feared that I
was deceived altogether and that poor soul also. Here I sank
almost into black despair ; calling in question all my religion,
fearing I had been deceived. My hope was gone and I could
not live in this state. I took Hart’s hymn-book and wrote in it
my name and address; I looked at my dear wife, feeling it was
for the last time ; I thought I would get away into some wood
and there groan out my soul to the Lord until I died, my head
was full of confusion with the agony of the mind. How could
I live without a hope ? I went outside the city to a quarry
where the chasm of the rocks opened. I intended to squeeze in
there out of sight, so that no one could find me. When I got
there a man was at work, although it was the Sabbath day ; then
I thought of the sea walls, where I could fall over into the tide
and be carried out to sea, here I could not go although death
would be preferable to the horrors of the mind. Then I thought;
What will the people say about my religion ? One who has pro-
fessed before the -world and the church to be the subject of
Divine Grace, and of that high and heavenly calling that differs
from the profession of the day. Yes, they -will say, “He is now
made manifest after all he has said about others !’’ In this state
I walked the down, or common, until I was almost distracted—
No hope! No hope! I am deceived? What shall Ido ! It
came into my mind to go home and go into a little room off the
house, where the water-butt stood. I thought to stand on a
stool as though I were reaching after something, and fall in head
foremost. It would then be thought it was an accident and that
I did not take my life. I left the down for this purpose and
came to a fence, and stood for a moment under the dark cloud,
“ 0 what shall Ido in this midnight pit,” was my cry. In a
moment hope sprung up in my breast; I can never describe the
feeling. It was midnight darkness, and in a moment—noonday
brightness to my soul; I ran and wept for joy, and went the back
way home so that I could not meet anyone, for I was weeping so,
and I was anxious to get home to my wife while the spring was
running. Just before I got home it was gone in a moment, and
there I stood, and something said, “It is a delusion!” I stood
arguing the point; the devil pulled at that blessed hope, and I
pulled. I said, “No Satan, you did not make that blessed change
in my poor soul and I will never give it up!” It all came back
again and I went home and told my dear wife all about it. Here
we wept together and praised the Lord. This completely cured


me for ever leaning on the word of mortals, from that day to
this, for the most upright may be deceived ; but if the Lord speak
to a poor soul, “ This is the way,” we shall sure to be led right.
We read in the Bible of the prophet giving up the word that the
Lord told him and leaning on the word of another, which costlhim
his life, as recorded in Ist Kings, chap. 13.
I will now say a little about howl got on in my three-roomed
house in the tobacco trade. I had but little money and had to
buy from my old master. The house was small and we could
hardly find room, but I could not see any way out of it, though
I begged the Lord to lead me in the matter. In weighing up
the tobacco one morning I stepped on one of the children’s feet
and made it cry, the place was so small. I felt this and when
my wife had taken them away to school I breathed out my soul
to the dear Lord to give me a shop so that I could do my business
away from the house. In this state I went out to look for one.
Passing down a street I saw a dressmaker’s shop, and I felt that
was for me. I went in and asked if the shop was to let, they
said, “No, we are doing very well, and not going to leave, there
is no paper up.” However, I felt that shop was for me. Going
down the street again I met a man I knew and told him that the
Lord was going to give me a shop. It then came to my mind
what a fool I was to say so, and to go into the shop and ask
about it in the way I did. I thought it over and over, again
and again, and would go and see if it were to let. Once I went
in and gave them my name and address, and told them that if
they should leave it, I would take it; a few days after this I was
at home in my garden, and my wife said that some person wished
to see me, when I went in I found it was one of the women whom,
I had seen in the shop I had been enquiring about. She said,
“We are going to leave the shop : our brother has come home
from sea and wishes us to keep house for him, so you can have
it, fixtures too, at a price.” It was all settled, they moved out
and I moved in. My wife asked me how I was going to stock
it, for “ you have no money!” she said ; this caused inward cries
to the Lord and this came, “ The Lord will provide ; ” I had not
a pound in the world that I could spare towards stocking the
shop. By some means my kind master had heard about my
taking a shop (this was the master who could not carry on
business because of the trouble with the Excise) ; he called on me
and said, “ There are the scales and weights, tobacco and snuff
jars and many other things you can have.” I thanked him but
said I had no money, he replied, “ Never mind, pay me when
you can.” Thus my little shop was partly stocked. I was going
down the old market when a Mr. Headford called me and said


“I have £o, payment for 'some goods, ;for which. I have no
immediate use, yon can have it for the present.” This was a
great help and in a week or so my little shop was stocked and
opened, without asking any one for a penny, and I soon got a
connection. This was a mystery to those who had no respect for
me, both the master at the factory and the workmen wondered
where I got the money from to do the trade I did. Yes, there
were vile, wicked reports raised against me, hut what a mercy to
be clear of it all. As I bought most of my goods from my old
master —he who had so cruelly oppressed me —they knew pretty
well what trade I was doing, as I bought wholesale from them.
But after a time I found I was being supplied with an inferior
article, and this compelled me to try and manufacture my own
tobacco, but how this was to be done I could not tell. There
must be a cutting machine, steam engine, &0., and I could not
get the tobacco out of bond without paying from £SO to £IOO
duty after purchasing the tobacco at an average price of 7|-d. per
lb. in the raw material, the duty being 3s. 1-Jd. per lb. 80 how
this was to be done I could not tell; I called on a person for
orders on my round, as usual, one who had the fear of God in
his heart and asked him if he would sell on commission. I did
this thinking it would he a help to him and would perhaps help
me ; he declined, but said he would take a part of the business
and put so much capital into it. In this unexpected way I was
supplied with the means required to manufacture my own tobacco.
My partner travelled round the country with horse and buggy
for orders, thus meeting my oppressor on the trade platform.
These things were a mystery to the master and men, and a great
mystery to me, for when I was so cruelly discharged from Little-
ton snuff mills, with a wife and three children to provide for,
and the youngest a baby at the breast, I had not £1 in the world
and I was afterwards much tried by the master and others,
though they could prove nothing against me. If I could have
given up my religion to please the master, and accepted his theory
and do as they did at the mill (which I could not) speaking after
the manner of men, I might have remained there. Now I can
see it was all wisely arranged by Him who is too wise to err and
too good to be unkind, both temporal and spiritual.
I could now go where I liked on the Sabbath. A few used
to meet in a friend’s house on Bedminster Down for reading the
“Penny Pulpit” sermons and, when we could, we got supplies,
for there was no place in the city where we could hear those
blessed truths, the late Mr. Godwin and Mr. Tiptaft preached
for us. It was only with great difficulty that we could get the
use of a pulpit in the city for any of these ministers of truth,


that they might speak to us as they passed through the city.
Even Mr. Mueller would not lend us his schoolroom pulpit for
such as Warburton to speak in. Once we had the use of the
Moravian Chapel, where Mr. McKenzie spoke to us, and once
we obtained the use of the Welsh Chapel. All this led to the
building of Providence Baptist Chapel, Wilder Street, as we
called it. As we got no help we subscribed amongst ourselves ;
this was a great undertaking, and I was very poor at the time ;
I lay awake one night wondering however it could be done. I
struck a light and took up a book of Huntington’s which was on
the chair, and opened it at these words, “ My very soul trembled
at the thought of such a great undertaking.” This rather
encouraged me for the words I read referred to the chapel
which he built. Here I will not enter into detail, but, when it
was built, the late Stephen Dark opened it, and, from reports
heard, I humbly trust the Lord blessed it. There was a debt on
the chapel which would not have been the case if I could have
had my way. I felt this: let us build according to our means,
and not involve ourselves, or bring a burden upon the people by
begging for money to pay it off. A place half the size would
have answered every purpose and been better. A little place
well filled is better than having the same people scattered about
in a large chapel with many empty seats. As regards myself,
I feel more at home with a few living cripples, bruised reeds,
the smoking flax souls, the hungry and thirsty souls, who are
often tried, and are in and out of “ Doubting Castle,” than with
ten thousand high doctrine notionalists, who have a doctrinal
faith that is never tried. Being a cripple myself I feel more
at home with cripples. As I said, the Chapel was built chiefly
to get supplies, and this not being entirely carried out, with
some other matters, brought a little unpleasantness and a
division, which I must view as the permitted will of God. This
ended in another place being opened in Bristol and I think there
are now three places of truth in that city. Before Providence
Chapel was built, I sometimes went to Trowbridge to hear the
late John Warburton (nearly 50 years ago.) Friend K
and I would go to Bath by train, then by boat to Bradford,
walking from thence to Trowbridge. After the service on the
Sabbath evening we would walk back to Bath and meet the
train from London to Bristol, arriving home about one o’clock
in the morning; at that time there was no railway line to
Trowbridge. As I said, sometimes divisions may be permitted
by God and things which appear crooked to us at times, are
made straight in the end. We find in the Acts of the Apostles,
15th chapter, 37th verse, that Paul and Barnabas did not agree


about John and Mark travelling with them, and a sharp con-
tention followed, but this was for the furtherance of the Gospel.
The path of Barnabas and Mark was to be in Cyprus, Paul and
Silas were to labour in another field, each one had their appointed
work to do. We read in the book of Isaiah, 11th chapter, 13th
verse, “Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall not vex
Ephraim. In all these things we want wisdom to move in the
fear of God, and to be kept from our own spirit, in love and in
the fear of God, to bear in a gospel spirit each other’s infirmities ;
but here I will not enlarge, although it was one of the greatest
trials my soul ever experienced in church matters, being wounded
in the house of my friends. I believe we may make idols of one
another —if so, something will come to break those idols. As
the business increased I had to take a house close to the little
shop the Lord gave me ; there was a large room over the shop
and we fitted it up for worship. When we could we got supplies,
and when we could not, we read and prayed together; here the
cripples and some poor hungry souls met together from Sabbath
to Sabbath as long as we kept that place. Then they took the
place in Castle Street, there I left them when I left England.
But to return, about opening the room over the shop. This
was a great trouble to me although I was desired to do so by
some who loved the Truth and feared God, and, who could not
get along very well at the place I had left. I did not want to do
anything that would look like opposition, for I felt ttiat there
were some in the Wilder St. Chapel whom I loved, although I
could not agree with them in some things, and I could not see
with them, now after more than forty years have passed away,
nor have I ever felt that I took a wrong step, but I will not
enlarge; the Lord knows ail about it. The night before the
room w T as opened I shall never forget the state of my mind as to
whether I had taken the right step ; I know it is a very solemn
act for any mortal man to put forth his hand to touch the Ark.
(Ist Chronicles xiii. 10.) We read of more than fifty thousand
being smitten for looking into the Ark. In the Ist book of
Samuel, sth chapter, we read about Dagon, the god of the
Philistines, falling down on his face before the Ark. Under the
law none but the Levites were allowed to carry the Ark.
(Ist Chronicles xv. 2.) 1 say then it is tender ground to walk
on. David speaks beautifully of the) Ark of God’s strength in the
132nd Psalm. We read about Noah (Genesis vii. 16); the Lord
shut him in, neither did he leave the Ark until the Lord said,
“Go forth.” (Gen. viii. 15). But to return. That night I could
hardly sleep, some feeling came over me that made me tremble,
and I could not tell whether I was dead or alive —such a horror


of great darkness; I jumped up in the bed, and struck a light,
then I took the Bible and opened on some Word in Job, which
was as the balm of Gilead to my soul. I never felt such before,
or since, and I could never find the words afterwards as I then
read and felt it. We opened the room and I gave out the hymns
and read, but did not expound, and called on someone to speak
in prayer, when we had no one to take the desk. We heard ot
a Mr. Pryor, a farmer, whom the Lord had sent into the vine-
yard ; I sent to him and desired him to come. We expected him
on the Sabbath morning, and he had to come some distance.
The people were waiting in the room and I went out to see if he
were in sight, and I saw a man coming along who looked some-
thing like a ploughman. He wore great hob-nailed boots, and
was apparently looking for some place. I said to him, “Is your
name Pryor?” “Yes, that is my name” he said. “ Come in,
this is the place,” I answered. After he had taken a cup of
coffee I asked him to come upstairs. The people were waiting
so I gave out a hymn. He being a stranger, I watched him
closely in his prayer and reading of the Word of God, whether
he read and prayed like a living soul. His text was in the Song
of Solomon, Ist song, 7th verse, “ Tell me, 0 thou whom my soul
loveth, where thou feedest, where thou makest thy flock to rest
at noon : for why should I be as one that turneth aside by fhe
flocks of thy companions ? ” After he had read it, he paused, and
looking around the room, said, “ You are strangers to me and I
am a stranger to you, but if we can meet together in the
language before us we shall not be strangers to each other.”
He began something like that and at once it caused the few poor
sheep to lift up their heads. After he had spoken for some time
he said, “I suppose I must come to a close,” but I said, “ No,
as long as the stream runs, don’t you stop,” and I feel that that
sermon was blessed to many, and one of my own family dates
life from that time, and I hope it may prove to be so. I took
him home with me and we had a blessed time together about the
way from the beginning of our pilgrimage journey. I was very
fond of him and he was much against my leaving England, but
it was my path. The late Stephen Dark preached for us many
times, he would lodge with us for two or three weeks sometimes.
He would be pleading with the Lord before daylight on the
Sabbath morning for bread for the children. Dear man ! I
loved him; he was for trying to help along the poor cripples.
He came on board the ship when we left for Australia, and we
parted, to meet no more in the flesh. A Mr. Higgins came and
spoke for us sometimes, (I think he used to write in the
“ Standard ” under the title of “ The Smoking Flax ”).


I will say a few words about how I came to leave England.
There is always something to bring about the purpose of God in
leading us in the pathway through this wilderness. It is not
always in the day when we can see the way that we move, but
sometimes in the night, like Israel of old ; they did not always
move in the day, but sometimes in the night, when the cloud
gave the sign. I had been in business for some time as a
manufacturer of tobacco, with my partner; as trade increased we
wanted more capital; we had to give credit, and at the same
time pay cash for the raw material, and pay duty also. This
often brought a deal of trouble on the mind, as we had to be in
the field with men of capital. I tried every lawful means to get
along —subject to the powers that he—-paying duty according to
law, I could not smuggle or adulterate. I told my partner we
could not manage without more capital, hut if he would put
more money in the business we might succeed. I could not for
I had none. If not, I suggested he had better buy me out and
I would go with my wife and family to Australia. He agreed to
do this and when all was settled I had just enough to pay the
passage of myself, wife and six children. I brought a cask of
tobacco with me. Our outstanding debts, which wore many,
were taken as cash, and which I promised to return if they were
not paid; I had some money also which a kind friend lent me.
In the year 1852 we went on board the “ Clara Symes ” at Bristol,
arriving at the Cape of Good Hope at Christmas time, where we
stayed some time. While there, anchored in the bay, we had a
very narrow escape from being sunk in a boat. My wife and
eldest son were with me, and several others were in the boat too.
The rest of my family were on board the ship and were crying
all night, thinking we were drowned, for they did not know
until the morning that we were not. We had left the land in a
boat to go to the ship, which was anchored some way out, when
one of those squalls from the Table mountain came on, which
often do great damage to shipping in Simon’s Bay. We managed
to get to the ship’s side but the waves were mountains high and
the mate would not allow a rope to be thrown to us seeing it was
not safe, so we had to make for the land again. There we were
in the dark night, the water to the edge of the boat, the waves
beating over us, the boatmen begging us to sit still, for at the
least move of the boat, we must all sink. The two boatmen
were the picture of death. 0 ! What a thought, another tack of
the boat and we might have been combating with the billows,
wind and sprays. Such a night we passed through, I never
shall forget it. At last we got to the jetty, and even the boat-
men said, “ Thank God we are here.” We were wet through to


the skin, but we obtained an empty room and laid down until the
morning, just as we were. In the morning I sent word to my
family that we were alright, and as soon as we could we went on
board, and how glad the poor children were to see their mother
and father and brother again. We weighed anchor again, and,
through many mercies, we landed safe on the shores of Australia,
after a voyage of one hundred and thirteen days. There was a
great deal of excitement when we landed, and we could not get
a house, and I paid live shilling for a room for my wife and the
two girls, and they sat up all night (the room merely being a
shelter for them) while I lay on the wharf with my sons. The
next day I pitched my tent on Batman’s Hill, where the Spencer
St. railway station now stands. In the night the wind blew my
tent down and there we had to stay until the morning, and as it
rained it was not very comfortable, for between the wind and the
rain, we did not know what to do. We then went into the bush
and cut some poles and put up a kind of four square tent-house.
Is was all excitement and confusion and I began to think whether
I had taken the wrong step in coming to Australia ; everything
was very dear, excepting meat, and I had but a few shillings.
The tobacco I put in bond and borrowed some money from one
of the passengers to pay the duty, this kept us going for some
time. One morning while I was walking up Bourke Street offer-
ing my tobacco for sale, and calling out, “ Three sticks of Bristol
tobacco for a shilling,” a man met me and said, “ That is not
Bristol tobacco,” I replied “ Yes, it is Bristol tobacco,” then he
asked me if I knew a certain firm in Bristol —Ricketts and Wells.
I answered yes, and also told him I had been in their employ for
some years. Then he ask me if I knew James Lowe there, I said,
“Yes, he was the engineer,” then, said he, “Do you remember
a step-son of his who left England for Australia”—l answered
“ yes, I remember when he lelt, it was some years ago.” Here
came a pause, while we looked at each other, he recognised me
and I had a faint recollection of him, although he was young
when he left England. This at once settled the point concerning
us, and he asked me where I was living, and I told him that I
had just taken a place at £2 10s per week, he said that would
not do : I ought to have a bit of land and build a house. I told
him that I had no money. “Never mind” was the answer, “I
have got a bit of land and you can have it without the money
and pay me when you can ; ” here the thing was settled. If I
had smuggled the tobacco in as was often done I should have
been afraid to offer it for sale, but having put it in bond and
paid duty for it in the proper manner, I could sell it freely and
conscientiously. I feel that if I had not acted thus I should not


have met the friend, and being helped by him in the manner I
have described. With the help of my eldest son, I put up a
house with such materials as we could get at that time. As bricks
were £lB per thousand, we made some ourselves, Babylonian
bricks, made with clay and straw and then dried in the sun, we
used stoues, poles, tin-case, tin tiles, wattle and dab, indeed any-
thing we could get; we soon had it finished and removed into it,
and saved the rent. After a month or two we added two small
rooms and let them for £l per week. I named the house
Providence Cottage, and I was soon able to pay for the land.
But there is always something of adversity as the Word says,
“ Prosperity and adversity are not far apart. (Ecclesiastes vii. 14.)
God hath set the one over against the other. I went to work on
board the ship we came out in. I took down the fittings, for I
was glad to get anything to do, food was very dear ; butter, 2s.
per lb. ; bread, Is. per loaf; potatoes, 4d. per lb.; cabbages,
Is.; eggs, 6d each; wood, from £2 to £2 10s. per load, and
water 12s. per barrel, I did not go home at night, but slept on
board. One evening, after my day’s work, while going from the
forecastle to another part of the ship, I stepped over the hatch-
way and fell 25 feet on to the stone ballast at the bottom. I
was drawn up in a basket and laid on my back and a doctor from
another ship was sent for. When he came and saw me, he said
some of my ribs were broken and he thought my head was
fractured ;he bound up my ribs and left me on my back. There
I lay i n agony of mind and body and what I felt I never can
describe; my family on shore and I lying like that in the bay,
and, for aught I knew, to die. No hope! Oh, my poor soul, the
pain of the body was great, but the pain of the mind greater.
When the sailors heard me groaning they would talk about me
like this, “ He will kick the bucket,” and I could hear them,
and oh what I felt, for I knew that I had been oil' my watch
tower and had spoken triflingly, for on that ship some others and
myself had often held service, and my language ought to have
been more solemn and weighty ; it was a mercy that I was not
landed into eternity, but mercy was coupled with judgment. I
had taken what they call a “ tot ” of rum that evening after my
work, and I should have been better without it. After a day or
two my family heard of my accident and came to take me home.
It was a very calm day and I was lowered down into the boat in
a kind of basket or chair, on the fittings that were being taken
ashore, there being no accommodating jetty at that time, the ship
lay some distance out, but the bay was smooth, not a ripple on
the water; just as we got to the jetty the wind rose as it does at
times, when boats are often capsized and all on board are lost.


If the wind liacl risen a few minutes before I must have been
upset as I could not help myself ; we landed, and with great
difficulty I arrived home safe, where I lay for some time very ill,
and, as it were, between life and death, a dark cloud over my
mind, no hope, and feeling deceived altogether. I felt as if I
were dying, and I told my son to sell the house and return with
the family to England. My son said “You are-not deceived
altogether, for I know what took place at Littleton, I know what
I felt, and, if there, I could find the spot of ground where I stood
playing with Johnny Martin, when something came over me
that took all fear away.’’* He then said, “ You are not deceived,
shall I read to you a little?” He took up the “Gospel
Standard ” and read, unknowingly, what I had written in that
magazine some years before. Here my captivity was turned,
both in body and mind. I have thought that perhaps the ribs
knit together then, as that death-like appearance passed away
and from that time I got better.
My dear friend Dark, who used to preach for us in my room
in West Street (over the shopl had a son living on the Hunter
river, towards Queensland. He was a man of means, and grew
tobacco, but did not understand much about the manufacture of
t. Having heard of me he wrote and asked me to come, and
bring my with me, and he would take me as a partner in
the business, just as I was. I thought it would be better for
me to go first and see what sort of a man he was, so I went, but
now and then I heard language from his mouth that was not
respectable, and I felt that we could not plough together ; yet
he was very kind to me. I thanked him for all his kindness and
returned home. Then I thought, What shall Ido ? I will turn
carpenter, was my resolve. My son and I had built our house,
although we had not learnt the art. We obtained tools and
answered an advertisement, and went to work at the Cremorne
Gardens; our earnings on an average were £9 per week each,
bringing home £lB weekly'. After this we built houses, indeed
-almost everything in that line of business and I was soon enabled
to send home enough money to pay all my' debts, and also the
passage money of my dear brother in the Lord, Thomas Hooper.
When I was in England he lived in a room over my factory in
Bedminster. He was one of those whom I dearly loved in the
Lord and a hearer with me under the late Mr. Symons, Nathaniel
Mariner, Mr. Small, Mr. Simeon Emery, Mr. Silver and many
others who held forth the Truth, and some sweet and blessed
times we have had together. He was old and feeble and very
* See page 25.


poor, and was allowed eigliteenpence per week from the Union
and that was all he had for his maintenance. I was loth to leave
him behind when I left England and was glad when I had the
means to send for him. Here he lived and died, and his death
is recorded in the “ Gospel Standard.”
I will now go back a little and explain that I sold the house
we built and named Providence Cottage, and built another in
the country, where we lived ; my dear wife’s health was failing.
O how I begged the Lord to spare her to me, but in this I
could not prevail; it was a trial when the Lord removed her by
death but, I trust, to that land of Immortal Glory. Here I was
left with the family ; a great change had taken place in regard
to labour and I thought that I would go to the diggings like
others and get a lump of gold (what a fool I was). I went, and
took the boys with me, leaving the younger children at home.
Oh what a life it was on the goldfields, I was glad to get back
for we did not get enough to pay our way, but we were pre-
served amongst them from any harm, when there was death and
danger all around us, indeed many were smothered by the
ground falling in on them and they were never heard of after-
wards. I have, as it were, ventured with my pick to get a bit,
the ground above being propped up with stones, when one blow
might have brought the whole roof down upon us. What a
mercy to be preserved in many of these forbidden paths. Is it
possible that one who professed the love and fear of God, to be
mixed up with the world so much as to grasp after the gold that
perisheth ? When I tnink of it now I am ashamed to speak
about it. What a mercy to be preserved! On one occasion
there were five of us, all professors of religion, at least in the
letter of Truth, and we agreed to get a horse and dray and fit it
out with provisions and go away to the mountains, some fifty
miles from where we then were, and look for gold. We went;
at the second camping place I was to be cook. They all went
away with their guns to shoot game, and left me to look after
the fire. The “ billy ” saucepan was on the fire with some
parrots which I was cooking for them, the “ billy ” fell over and
scalded my foot, and I felt at once I was a Jonah and had no
business there. I was laid aside for some time and could not
walk, and they had to carry me from one camping place to
another, and leave me in the tent while they were away in the
wild bush, and this went on till my foot got better. It was a
country where, I suppose, no white man had ever trod. Before
we attempted to lie down for the night we had to make a fire to
clear away the snakes, scorpions etc. We put branches at our
heads to break the wind and with the fire at our feet we laid in


a row until the break of day.-L When away in our tent, we
were supposed to sing a hymn, and read the Word, and speak
in prayer before we laid down to rest, but sure I am, this was
more a form than spiritual worship; I could not attempt it
sometimes, but would inwardly try to breathe out my poor soul
to the Lord, to watch over us. One of our party was lost in the
bush one night, and another time two were lost. It was a
mercy we were not bitten with any of those deadly snakes, for
we were so far away in the hush, and a bite might have proved
fatal in an hour or so. During this time (seven weeks) I had
never undressed, except to wash in the water in the creek. As
we could get no gold we returned to Melbourne and we travel-
led day and night until we reached the town, and glad was I to
get back safe to my family; what a fool I was. When I
returned home, I began to think how I was to maintain my
family. A friend of mine, who had a business in the tobacco
trade, was going to give it up, having done pretty well, and he
offered it to me. This looked like an opening, as I understood
the business; I had to give him an answer by a certain time ;
but I wanted a word from the Lord about it. I took the Bible
and begged the Lord to give me a word, and I asked Him that
I might open the book on a word to guide me in the matter.
The first word my eye saw was this, “ And in his estate shall
stand up a vile person.” (Daniel 2. 21.) I read it again, it was
so pointed to my case ; and here I was brought to a point. No,
not for all the world would I take over his estate. So I told
him I could not take it, and the reason ; indeed if I had, I could
not have carried it on, as I found out afterwards, for I could not
smuggle tobacco to avoid paying the duty, and this had been
done. Here I watched to see whether the person who took the
business was a vile person. I knew him, and from my know-
ledge of him there could not be a worse man. My mind seemed
led to buy and sell and repair furniture. In this branch I
could work and my three sons also, and as a furniture dealer I
kept on until I was seventy years of age, aud with the blessing
of the Lord did pretty well.
Now I will go back again. I had been a widower for nearly
three years and my eldest daughter was about fourteen years of
age, and had kept the house ever since her mother died. I went
to see a friend one day, and while at this friend’s house, I saw
a maiden lady who had just arrived from Bach. I began to
think thus about her, “ If she knows salvation and is not engaged
to be married to anyone, she will suit me.” She came out in
the same ship with two persons who would have been glad to
marry her, and one of these professed the Truth. I told my


friend in whose house I met her that I believed she was for me.
We then met at the cave, where the late Mr. Chari wood used to
read the “ Penny Pulpit Sermons ” (this person went there with
her friend), that morning he called on me to speak in prayer,
and I learnt afterwards that this person told her friend that she
felt I was a good man, from my prayer. We all came home
together and I got into conversation with her about the best
things, and I felt that she knew something about it. When she
left England it was her intention to return home again in about
two years’ time, as she had an aged father and mother living there,
and as to getting married and settling down here in Australia, it
was furthest from her thoughts, and especially to a widower who
had sons grown to manhood. But this I felt in my mind, the
Lord had appointed her for me and every obstacle that was in
the way He could remove, yes, and turn her mind, however
adverse to it. One night I was awakened with these words, “ I
will overturn, overturn, overturn, until he comes whose right it
is.” (Ekekiel 21. 27.) This was how it came to me when I was
sound asleep, and from that night I felt sure about it, and told a
friend so, and the Lord did remove every obstacle out of the way
and brought us together and He gave us one son whom I named
Benjamin Joseph, for he was the son of my old age. He is
married now and has four children living. I feel this was of the
Lord, and I could not have had a better wife or a better step-
mother for my children, and in this my family bear me witness.
But I have never gone along very far without some troubles in
this wilderness, and the greatest to me have been soul troubles
and church troubles; indeed they have been woven together as
it were, they have brought me so low in a nervous fever that my
family have been gathered to my bed-side, expecting to see me
pass away ; no mortal knows what my soul has passed through
in these things, only the Lord knows, and I would not go through
it again for all the gold in Victoria. I will just say a word
about my nervous fever and what brought me into that furnace
of soul affliction. When Mr. Chariwood was taken ill, he wished
me to carry the service on at the cave, some others thought they
could do it better, and I think so too, as far as reading the
“ Penny Pulpit Sermons ” was concerned, fori never was a good
reader, besides, trouble had brought me very low. I had been
with poor Chariwood through all his affliction, both night and
day, and, I held his hand in mine when he died, and I witnessed
the great soul-trouble he passed through. One man, Mr. G., mis-
represented things concerning Mr. Chariwood, and also Mr.
Huntley, which I proved to be awful lies afterwards. I was as
David said, greatly afflicted, I said in my haste, “ All men are
D


liars.” (Psalm cxvi. 11.) Indeed I was shaken to pieces both in
body and mind, and called in question everything that I had
passed through in soul matters, which was more to me than all
the world ; here the sun went down and my hope was removed
like a tree, and sure I am the poor soul wants more thftrtfletter
religion here, yes, he wants to see the Lord’s hand in his affliction.
Elihu told Job’s three friends that God had thrust him down, not
man. (Job xxxii. 13.) But if the poor soul can see the Lord’s
hand in it, he is somewhat reconciled, and if he can see a Father’s
hand in it, he can lie passive, and, as the Church says, in
Micah vii. 9, “I will bear the indignation of the Lord.” And
a little faith comes up sometimes, a sort of glimmering spark,
that some day the Lord will say to these billows, “ Peace be still, ”
and then again the poor soul seems overboard, like Jonah, and
in the very belly of despair, yes, cut off, and here the poor soul
seems alone. This was my path and no Word came to me, but,
“ 0 Lord rebuke the company of spearmen ” (Psalm Ixviii. 30),
for I felt speared to death, both within and without. As I said
before, this was all brought about through church and soul
matters, and it laid me on a bed of affliction. This is where
eternal matters are examined in regard to soul-experience; in
this sieve, the poor soul is sifted again and again, and the wind
of affliction blows away much of the chaff, so that we walk much
alone and are a mystery to some who stand on high ground,
whose faith is never tried. Here I was nearly twelve months ;
what a mercy that I did not lose my senses and have to be put
into a mad-house. I could write a volume here, but I forbear,
the Lord knows all about it, and the Lord passed this way, as we
read, “ They all forsook Him and fled.” (Matthew xxvi. 56), but
He never did and never will forsake His people (1 Samuel xii.
22). When I got better I was advised to take a voyage to
England, which I did. Before I speak about this I will go back
38 years, when I first arrived in the colony, respecting those who
professed to hold the truth. I was anxious to find some of the
family who loved and feared God; I was directed to a Particular
Baptist Church in Lonsdale Street where a Mr. Turner preached,
but between error in the Trinity and living upon a doctrinal,
untried faith, I could find no union with the minister or the
people. Then I was directed to the Protestant Hall, where a
Mr. D. Allen was preaching, I felt there was the letter of Truth,
but to me, although the speaker seemed to have great energy
and feeling, it was dry breast. A Mr. White and Mr. Gathons
attended there; these two became infidels : one has since died, I
believe in the same state. There the late Mr. Charlwood went,
he was a good man, and one with whom I felt at home, but I


wondered how he could hear Mr. D. Allen, and he wondered how
I could. One Sabbath Mr. D. Allen was not there, and there
was a prayer-meeting, and I was called on to pray, which I did,
and in my prayer I begged the Lord to make it clear to my soul
whether he sent Mr. D. Allen to preach or whether he came from
time to time without being sent, as my soul was in trouble about
it; Mr. Chari wood was exercised in the same way about it. This
caused a great stir amongst them. Then Mr. Oharlwood built a
large room and some of us met there from Sabbath to Sabbath;
he read the Penny Pulpit Sermons, and this was carried on until
his death—the room was called the cave. While we worshipped
there we heard of Henry Huntley, who was at that time preach-
ing the Gospel at Portland ; we sent for him, he was a good man
and preached the Truth, and my soul loved him more than any
preacher I have heard since I left England ; he was straight-
forward, and the gospel he preached was what he had tasted,
handled, and felt in a sweet soul-experience, but these things
did not please some who did not like dose heart-work; the last
time he preached there he told them that the Lord would make
manifest some who were there, and so He has in a solemn way.
Soon after this the place was all burnt down, the few poor
scattered sheep desired me to take a room, this was done and
dear Huntley preached to the few. As I said before, church
troubles and Mr. Charlwood’s death brought me on the very
brink of the grave, and what my soul passed through in that
thorny path, and under that cloud, none but the Lord knows. It
was at this time I went to England, leaving dear Huntley to carry
on the service until I returned. I will say a little now about our
trip to England. We, that is my dear wife, two children and
myself, left Melbourne in 1862, sailing in the “Great Britain.”
I shall never forget the circumstance, I was in the galley and the
man at the wheel made some mistake, and got the vessel in the
trough of the sea, she nearly went over, the yard-arms went
three feet into the water, and I just escaped from going over'the
side, almost everything below was upset. The captain came
running up, pale as death, all was confusion for a time until the
vessel was righted.
While in England I visited some of my dear friends. I went
to Studely and saw my dear brother, George Wiltshire, with
whom I had walked in communion, and his dear wife, for many
years. I went to Caine anniversary, where I had often gone for
many years before I left England, and where I have heard Mr.
J ohn War burton, the elder, Mr. Godwin, Mr. Mortimer, Mr. Beerd
and others, who have long gone home. Here I saw Mr. Philpot,
Mr. Gadsby, and others who were at the Caine anniversary. The


next day I went to Allington to Mr. Parry’s house, where I saw
Mr. Philpot, Mr. Stephen Tuckwell, and others, with whom I
dined; it was a blessed interview, and we had some sweet con-
versation on the best things. I felt almost afraid to meet that
great man Mr. Philpot, and I thought he was rather cool towards
me, he had never seen me before, but had heard of me—Mr.
Stephen Dark and others having spoken about me to him; he
had also published letters that I had written to the “Gospel
Standard,” both in England and in the Colonies, and I esteemed
him highly as a servant of God and also as Editor of that
periodical. As soon as he knew who I was, and we had entered
into conversation, all coolness passed away, and I felt very differ-
ent—quite at home with him and he with me —and that conver-
sation I shall never forget. He corresponded with me as long as
he lived, and I hear from his widow up to the present time. I
had a good time with Mr. Parry and Mr. Tuckwell also, they
came partly over the down with me and we had some sweet and
blessed conversation together. When they parted with me, to
meet no more on this earth, they said, we shall meet in heaven,
this was nearly thirty years ago and they long since have gone
home. It is ever my desire to acknowledge the Lord’s hand in
my pathway through this wilderness although at times it seems
so very crooked and we think His hand is all against us until we
see the end of the dark cloud. Such was my path as soon as I
landed in England. As we landed at Liverpool, we stayed there
the night, and in the morning we took the train for Birmingham,
when we arrived at Crewe, where it was usual to change trains
for Birmingham, some shunting was being done, and a man was
going up and down the platform calling out “ Change here for
Birmingham.” My dear wife said to the porter, “We must get
out and change here,” but he said, “No, stay where you are,”
giving us to understand our luggage was going to Birmingham;
my wife not being satisfied then spoke to another porter who took
the tickets, and he said, “ No, stay where you are, it is alright,'’
and I was too ill and nervous to do anything. After the shunt-
ing was over the train moved on and we had gone about tw 7 enty
miles, when my wife said, “ I do not know this road, it must be
altered,” some one in the carriage asked where we were going,
and she said “to Birmingham,” then they said, “ you are on the
way to London.” Oh, what I felt, for it seemed that the Lord’s
hand had gone out against me. What to do I did not know, for
all my luggage was in the Birmingham train, merely tied up,
nothing locked. In one of the boxes was a draft for four
hundred pounds, some of which a kind friend had lent me, as I
thought 1 might make a little purchase for my business, which


would help to pay our expenses. I thought that all was gone
and I did not know what to do ; when the train stopped, we ex-
plained to the station-master and he sent us back to Crewe.
When we arrived there, my dear wife complained bitterly to the
porter who had misled us, and he said, “ And a good job too, for
had you gone on alright, you might have lost your life, there
has been a collision at Wolverhampton and there are thirty per-
sons injured, and seven doctors in attendance on them, and you
would have been in that carriage.” That stopped all my mur-
murings, and instead of feeling that the hand of God had gone
out against me, I saw His hand in the matter, that I should not
be in that train. When we reached Birmingham the following
day, we found the luggage was alright. Surely the Lord’s hand
was visible in this mysterious way, and to him be all the glory.
What so often appears to be against us, in the end we feel is all
for the best, and I desire to bou to the will of heaven, but I am
such a poor, fretful worm at times in these crooked paths, I can
see nothing right. I visited some places that were dear to me,
while in England, viz., the corner of Cart Lane and Temple
Street in Bristol, where, I humbly trust, was my second birth-
place, as on page 15. Here I pause a moment, and think over
my title deeds, and how many times has this been the ease. I
asked the occupants of the place if they would allow me to look
over it, as I had lived there some thirty years ago, when Mr.
Hazel had a confectioner’s shop there, but now he and others
who were connected with it were dead. They kindly allowed
me to go over the place, and in so doing, it brought many things
to my mind ; there was the spot where I trembled on the very
brink of hell, afraid to move a step, the stable, loft, and bake-
house, where I stood when that great change took place, there
was the old oven, where I used to work in tears. When I left I
told the people my motive for visiting the place, but there was
no response, so I thanked them and left. After this I went seven
miles further, to Littleton, and visited the old mill, the house,
garden and pig-sty where I used to go in secret and pour out my
soul in trouble, as recorded on page 26. Then I went down to the
four cross roads, where I got over the gate and crept under the
mow, when my soul was in trouble respecting my children.
(Many years before I left England I cut a stick from the hedge—
but I could not feel as I did at that time, Oh, that I could —I
brought the stick out with me and have it now in my box). I
also visited the sugar house in the old market, where I worked
hard for seven years, and at times have had some sweet seasons
under the staircase, yes, sweet times, Oh, that I could feel the
same now! I often thought then that every day passed was one


the less, for I was like Israel of old, groaning under the bondage
of hard labour, for I had to do the same hard labour as the men
who were nearly double my weight. There was not a vestige of
it left, it had all been burnt down, and I suppose, few if any, are
living of those who once laboured there, as it is more than sixty-
four years since I went there to work. But what a mercy the Lord
has spared my worthless life to the present time, and at times
there is a sweetness in re-visiting these places in my mind. Oh,
England ! I love the sound of that isle of the west, and I have
thought there are more of the living family there than in any
nation in the world, and some whom my soul loves are there now,
although many have gone home since I left; my mind is often
there although my body is here.
We were away from home about nine months, having left my
business in my son’s hands . Coming out again in the “ Kent,”
we had dreadful weather; after leaving Plymouth the captain
never left the deck for three days and nights, he said he had
never witnessed such, weather and he told my wife that he never
expected to see daylight. We heard of some vessels that were
wrecked and some of the people on board of them were drowned.
After three days we got back again inside the breakwater, until
the weather would admit us to again put to sea. What a mercy
we were preserved ! After this I was taken bad with bronohiris
and it was thought I should never reach Melbourne, but through
mercy I recovered, and reached home safely, and found the
family all well; “Bless the Lord, oh my soul, and all that is
within me bless His Holy Name.” When I returned to
Melbourne I resumed the service again at the little chapel, and
Mr. Huntley returned home to Portland to his wife and daughter,
speaking chiefly to a few in bis own house, from which he was
called to his house above. His dear wife lived some time after
his death, then she too was called home; their obituaries are
published in the “Gospel Standard,” also a letter entitled:
“ Annointing for the Burial.” § Before he died I went to Port-
land to see him, for I loved him and his dear wife; while there
I had a very narrow escape : I was walking through the bush,
and not noticing it, I stepped on one of those deadly carpet
snakes, their bite is generally death in a very short time, it
seemed to have got around my leg; I jumped and cried aloud
and as I moved my foot slipped as if I had stepped on a piece
of liver. I wondered if it had bitten me ; I pulled up my stock-
ing and saw the blood running down my leg; this alarmed me
for I was a long way from the town, I ran as fast as I could to the
nearest house and the people followed me as I went to see the
* See Gospel Standard, March 186 H, and May 1877. § May 1869


doctor. I felt rather faint and very nervous, so took a little
brandy; the doctor examined the wound, but could find no
puncture. I felt a little sick, but after I had taken the evening
meal, I felt better.
There were a few living souls in Portland to whom dear
Huntley used to speak—l had to speak that night to them, and
I trust, not in vain. The words were in Matthew xiii. 47, 48,
49, and I believe there were some good and bad gathered in
that net, as at Hamilton and Horsham, where I found one or
two, and also in Launceston ; but what a mercy the Lord knows
them that are His, and that their path is all marked out, although
it seems so crooked at times, and they seem to walk, or rather
crawl, along in the dark. Sometimes I have seemed to have a
sort of foreboding of some trouble or affliction coming upon me
sometimes by a dream, and I had a remarkable one, but before
I narrate it, I must say a word about my speaking in the name
of the Lord. When Mr. Charlwood was laid aside he wished
me to carry on the service at the cave (that was to read the Penny
Pulpit Sermons that were published by men of Truth). This
was a great trial to me, as I could not read like him, he was a
good reader, one of the best I have known indeed, a person
coming in would not know whether he were preaching or reading.
While reading the sermons I have, unknown to the people, said
a few words that have flowed into my mind, and as the word
from the testimony of some was blessed to them, I spoke to them
for many years, and I would speak humbly on this ground, being
tried about it in this way ; Were they, or are they deceived who
have spoken to me, and told me how the words were blessed to
them, and who date spiritual life to their souls ; and who have
stood firm to the Truth for more than twenty years ? This is a
solemn matter with me, for sure I am, there never lived a more
ignorant mortal, afraid to speak, and afraid not to speak. Here
I have been tried, lest I should put my poor puny hand to the
Ark like Uzzah (2 Samuel vi. 6); but this I can say, I have
never looked to any commentator in my life for the meaning of
any portion of the Word of God, and as I have had no gift of
speech, what shall I say but this : I spoke in my own language
rough as it was —only what I had tasted, and felt of the Word
of Life. Ido not mean to say that I have not at times repeated
what some good men have said when it has come to my mind,
this is what I mean —I have never made up a subject from theirs
for my own. I have never received a penny in my life for thus
speaking, or for travelling expenses, and I have felt it good
to find now and then a poor crippled sheep in the wilderness;
being a cripple myself, I always feel more at home amongst them.


I am now in my eighty-fourth year; that is, of my natural birth,
and I humbly trust about sixty-four of my spiritual birth, I
have found it to be a long, dreary wilderness, and have often
been sore-footed, tired and weary, and I have found but a very
few with whom I could travel. The crowd of general professors
I have long left behind ; then there are some who hold the
doctrine of Truth in the letter and contend for it, with these I
cannot walk ; then there are others who hold it and who seem
to have a strong faith, and speak of many things as if they had
been the subject of them and of the Truth, and who always seem
to be on the mount, and can and do often use the words,
Abba, Father, or in other words, seem to have a faith that is
never tried about the matter, they seem to walk in the untried
broadway to the no briars or thorns to prick their feet, but
a faith that is not tried will do them no good in the hour of death.
They do not want iron or brass shoes, as in Deuteronomy xxxiii.
25, they can get along without a daily or hourly strength. The
path described in Psalm Ixix. they know nothing about; not
the path Job speaks of in Job iii. Hear what David said in the
thirtieth Psalm, seventh verse (there is the mount and the valley)
listen : —“ Lord, by Thy favour Thou hast made my mountain
to stand strong, Thou didst hide Thy face, I was troubled.”
This is the path where the poor soul has to walk; hear his cry
in verses 8,9, 10 and 11, and hear him again in the 31st Psalm,
verses 7,8, 9 and 10. There we have the Christian’s path
marked out. Yes! this is the narrow path where the poor
cripple walks much alone. Look again at Psalm xxxii. 4, and
in the 55th Psalm he speaks of the heart-pain, and the terror of
being overwhelmed, yes, and the tremblings, these are deep
waters to wade through, my soul knows it. In the 30th Psalm
he tells us why he was so troubled, he said it was because the
Lord had hid His face from him, and sure I am there is no greater
trouble can ever overtake a poor soul than that. Hear what
Job says (Job vii. 3,4, 5). Yes, for months, Oh, the tossings on
the bed in the night, wearisome, dark, dark, and the cry, when
will He come and say “Peace be still” to my poor soul ? I know
the powers of darkness are compared to a roaring lion, and in
the dark they creep forth on the poor soul, and sometimes in tue
night when he is sound asleep. When the Lord put Job into
the furnace, the roaring lion knew all about it, he knew the Lord
had made a hedge about him, and about his house and all that
he possessed, and he could not break through the hedge before
the Lord gave him leave. I will speak now about my dream :
Something came to me one night when I was sound asleep, the
form I cannot describe, it seemed as if two paws crushed me flat


from the feet to the head, and I heard a voice say distinctly
“ three months!” This happened just before I went to Portland,
not being very well my wife and I went there for a change, and
to see dear brother Huntley; the little place where the service
was held being closed until we returned home again as there
was no one that I could see to carry it on spiritually and in the
the love and fear of God. There was one who would have liked
to do it, but I felt there was no spiritual life there, and I knew
the few would not go to hear big words of a ready talker ; this
soured him, and he tried all he could to prejudice the few while
I was at Portland; 1 was taken ill and had to return home, but
as there were a few sheep at Camperdown we returned home that
way, stopping there one night, but I was not able to speak to
them on the (Sabbath. When I reached home I found the few
poor sheep were scattered about, and I was taken very ill with
rheumatic fever, and was laid aside with it just twelve weeks, the
time mentioned in my dream. I could not move without help,
the pain I suffered I cannot describe ; my life was despaired
of, at times I was very dark in my mind, and then again
brought to lie passive in His hands, whether life or death.
When I recovered, the few poor sheep met in my house
for worship, and I trust not in vain, I did indeed feel com-
pletely crushed ; and the person just referred to scattered
the flock, and hurt my mind very much, and his wife,
through his influence, was drawn away irony our little company,
even until her death. Poor thing, on her death-bed she sent for
me, and desired me to pass all by, and pray for her, which I did,
and I buried her, I knew her in England, and she came out with
us. She idolized me, to his grief, and so did I idolize her, that
is, in the best things (spiritually). We may carry these things
too far I think, and such has been my case more than once, and
I have had to prove that the most upright is as a briar or thorn
hedge, indeed we are told to put no trust in a friend or confidence
in a guide (Micah vii. 4,6) but to look to the Lord and wait for
Him. Oh that I could always carry out that precept. As a gen-
eral thing, when trouble or affliction has come upon me, I have
had some impression beforehand. Job speaks about being scared
with dreams and terrified through visions (Job 7. 14) and some-
times the dear Lord has condescended to make known to His
children in a dream, His mind and will to them, as He did to
Jacob when he left his father’s house, and was in the desert,
tired and weary, and laid himself down to sleep (Genesis xxviii
12); and again, the angel of the Lord spoke to him in a dream
when he had to retrace his steps after twenty years (Genesis xxxi.
II.) He spoke to Laban in a dream and told him not to touch


Jacob. Joseph dreamed a dream which neither his father or
mother could understand, indeed his father rebuked him, and it
was some years before it was made clear (Genesis xxxvii.) The
butler and the baker dreamt and so did Pharoah, and the Lord
gave Joseph the spirit of understanding to interpret their dreams
and it came to pass as he had interpreted. The Lord keeps
men back sometimes from their purpose by a dream, as He did
Abimelech concerning Abraham’s wife. Gideon was strengthened
by hearing a man’s dream related about the barley bread.
(Judges vii. 17.) The Lord appeared to Solomon in a dream
(1 Kings iii. 5). Daniel had a dream and he wrote it down
(Daniel vii. 1), the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a
dream about the dear Redeemer and Mary when they were to go
down into Egypt, for he must be called out of Egypt. (Hosea si. 1;
Matthew ii. 15), and he never returned there again. God’s sons
are called out of Egypt, and by a mighty hand ; this is a solemn
and weighty matter with me at times. Was I called out? Or
am I one of the mixed multitude that went up with them
(Exodus xii. 38) ? Peter, in his 2nd Epistle, exhorts the family
to give diligence to make their calling and election sure. (2 Pet.
1. 10.) Paul told the church to work out their own salvation
with fear and trembling. (Philippians ii. 12.) I believe all real
faith is tried in the fire, indeed, we are exhorted to buy none
beside, and sooner or later the fire will try every man’s work, of
what sort it is (Ist Peter i. 7). In writing to the Corinthian
Church Paul desired that their faith should not be found to stand
in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God (1 Corinthians
ii. 5). I have met with some on the road who appeared to have
great faith, and could use language that I could not, and who
seemed to run very fast for a time, and had no changes; some
have stumbled on the dark mountains and their supposed light
has proved to them the shadow of death and made it gross dark-
ness (Jeremiah xiii. 16). John Bunyan speaks of some he knew,
one in the slough of despond, and he got out again near his own
house, also of talkative und vain hope, but in death they could
not find any certificate. Such as these often have no bands in
life or death, as Asaph said (Psalm Ixxiii. 4-5) . In the twentieth
verse he tells us, “ God will despise their image.” These
travellers often try the poor soul, indeed they have tried me many
times ; and I believe Paul felt it, for twice he had sent the salute
of greeting from Demas, and yet when he was in trouble and in
bonds at Pome he forsook him, having loved this present world.
David speaks of one with whom he had taken sweet counsel, yes,
and walked to the house of God in company, and who reproached
him and became a bitter enemy ; read the fifty-fifth Psalm, also


2 Samuel xvii. 23. And Judas had the letter of Truth only, and
after preaching for years, went the same way ; he had a gift, but
no grace, he was but a devil, and the Lord was not deceived in
him, although the little flock were. When such lights set in
darkness, it shakes little faith, lest he may be deceived in his
religion, and like the poor cripple at the pool of Bethesda, he
wants the Lord to speak to him and pick him up, and none
besides can satisfy his soul. Oh, to get safe home at last. Job
said that he was a brother to dragons and a companion to owls
(Job xxx. 29); when he looked for good, then evil came, and
when he waited for light there came darkness. And the days of
affliction went before him ; here we find but few travelling.
The Lord knows some of the poor sheep wander about here
amongst the briars and thorns, and they are often ready to halt
and under the cloud, when their hope seems removed, like a
tree down in the valley, crippled and faint, while the crowd
around them sing as they go along in their professing, untried
faith ; but sure I am the poor cripple sheep dare not sing unless
he can find the witness within, but he has often to sit mute,
with an inward breathing to heaven until the dear Lord loose
his stammering tongue. Here is the path of many who have to
walk alone, yes, alone, when neither sun, moon or stars have
been seen for many days, the Bible a sealed book, and no access
at the Throne of Grace, the heavens iron above, and all is dark
beneath; the world, the flesh, and the devil working, and
unbelief too, hard thoughts of God, rebellion, peevishness, fret-
fulness, and then sullenness at work within, and, to me, the
very gates of death seemed opening until my poor soul and
body has trembled like a leaf so that I have envied the dog in
the street and should have been glad to drop into non-existence ;
no one to speak to, for none knew my path; the professing
world and the world who appear in their true characters were
happy, while I was often miserable, so that I could not mix up
with either. Thus I have had to walk much alone through the
long dreary wilderness, and ic a word has come, my poor soul
has caught it, as a poor drowning man sinking. David passed
this way, for he said the waters were come into his soul, “I
sink in deep mire where there is no standing,” he said —the
waters overflowed him, and he was weary of crying, his throat
was dry, and his eyes failed, waiting for his God. (Psalm 69.)
None but the poor soul who travels here knows the horrors of
the mind, sometimes he is afraid that he will lose his senses,
and sink into despair, and end his days in a mad-house. Oh,
what shall Ido ? Oh, where am I f Oh that I had never been
born! And that I had never made a profession, and that I


had kept all to myself; such are his cries. Oh, the gloomy
path of the valley of the shadow of death, desponding and
despairing of ever getting out of the dungeon ; sinking, sinking ;
this was something like what Jeremiah passed through, “ I said
I am cut off.” (Lamentations iii. 54.) Yes, his lamentations
have been some of my path ; look at his language here, “ when
I cry and shout, he shutteth out my prayer.” And what will not
a poor soul say while under a cloud in the dark. Just hear what
Jonah said, “ Therefore now, 0 Lord, take, I beseech thee, my
life from me ” (Jonah iv. 3); he wished in himself to die and
told God he did, and God said, “ Doest thou well to be angry ? ”
And he said he did, unto death. What a mercy he knows our
frame, and does not afflict willingly, to crush under his feet, the
prisoners, oh, what would become of me were it not so; this I
know, troubles wean from this world. Yes, trouble cuts off, and
weans the mind from many things, and being tired and weary, the
poor soul longs for home, where the world, nor the family, or the
church, shall vex his weary soul any more. What my poor soul
has passed through under the cloud none but the dear Lord
knows, the dear Redeemer was persecuted more, from the pro-
fessing church, for they could not make Him out, and a great
many of His disciples went back and walked no more with Him,
Jesus,told them, “it is the Spirit that quickeneth, the flesh
profiteth nothing.” This seemed to offend them, and Jesus said
unto the twelve, “ Will ye also go away ? ” Look at (John vi. 66.)
what He endured from those who walked for a time, and cried,
Hosanna, in smooth waters, but in the garden forsook Him and
fled. This is a wonderful Word ; and. being in agony He prayed
more earnestly. This cup we must taste, trouble will make the
poor soul cry to heaven for help but there is something more in
this agony than night and morning prayer with the family or in
private, if so led it is good, and not to be despised, but agony
prayer is weighty, the ice breaking, the soul sinking, none but
the Lord can hold the poor soul from sinking here —these trials
make eternal matters weighty, and sure I am the tried soul
cannot feel at home with a mere doctrinal creed, however sound
it may be in the letter, whether in a church or a private person;
but if he meets with a poor, sore-footed traveller on the road, he
soon feels at home ; and they can walk and talk by the way, and
compare notes of their journey and often weep together. Oh,
how sweet is soul-brotherhood in a Gospel, cemented, as the
branches in the living Vine, from whence the sap flows; as in
Jesus the living Yine to the branches, being taught of God to
love one another. Indeed the communion is sweet in speaking
with some of the path of tribulation through which they have


travelled. I have sometimes thought that no one was ever tried
like me, hut when I have found one in this path, it has en-
couraged me to find lam not alone. The Lord Jesus said, “In
the world ye shall have tribulation.” (John xvi. 83.) It is called
great tribulation, from which the Church is brought out.
(Eev. vii. 14.) Paul said, “We glory in tribulation, knowing
that it worketh patience (Romans v. 5,6) and he said that we
must “ through much tribulation enter the kingdom.” (Acts xiv.
22.) I have thought at times, that there never was one more
lonely than I, for in this path in the dark I can neither go for-
ward or backwards, I seem like a man who has fallen overboard
in the dark, amongst the breakers, and have been under this
cloud for days, weeks, months. Asaph said, “ All the day long
have I been tried, plagued, and chastened every morning.”
(Psalm Ixxiii. 14.) David said his bones waxed old through his
roaring all the day long, both night and day, and his moisture
turned into the drought of summer, (Psalm xxxii). Oh, what a
mercy if I get home safe at last, lam often tried about this. Oh,
what must it be to meet all the family, and those whom I
esteemed as bound up in the bundle of life, back to Adam and
Eve, and all that I have known in my short time; oh, to meet
them there in that kingdom, and see the King in his beauty. Oh,
my poor soul, can 1, can I even hope it will be so, seeing that no
mortal ever can conceive what He hath prepared for His bride;
1 believe the greatest manifestation of that gloiious kingdom,
that the Lord ever revealed to mortals on earth, while in the
body, has been as looking through a glass darkly. The vision
Paul saw, when he was caught up to the third heavens, I believe
it was ever on the mind, and he could see it at a distance
through the clouds that did at times darken his mind,
although he could not tell it to mortals. When the Lord
Jesus was on the high mountain, with Peter, James, and
John, His face did shine as the sun and His raiment white as
the light, this and the voice made them sore afraid, for they
fell on their faces, they were in the cloud, and saw and heard
more than they cauld bear (Matthew xvii); and I believe they
never forgot it. It must have been a glorious vision when Elisha
saw the chariot and horses and the whirlwind taking Elijah
away to Heaven. Oh, when shall my soul meet them on yonder
mount? John also had a glorious sight of the Lord Jesus at
Patmos, as recorded in the Revelation. And one clay He will
come and take His bride home; Oh, whac a meeting that will be
when the bride and the Bridegroom meet at the marriage supper
of the Lamb, when the Lord Jesus will gather her home from
all the kingdoms of the earth, as He said to her, “ I appoint


unto j’ou a Kingdom, as my Father hath appointed unto me ”
(Luke xxii. 9). Listen, my poor soul, “Father I -will that they
also, whom Thou hast given me, be with Me where I am, that
they may behold My glory which Thou hast given Me, for Thou
lovedst Me before the foundation of the world ” (John xvii. 24).
What can break the union? “I am the Yine, ye are the
branches ; ” Oh, the Union ! The head and the members can
never be severed, the marriage union never can be dissolved in
life or death; “There shall also be a crown of glory in the
hand of the Lord, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God,
thou shalt no more be termed forsaken, neither shall thy land
any more be termed desolate, but thou shalt be called Hephzibah,
for the Lord delighteth in thee and thy land shall be married
(what language to dying mortals!), and as the Bridegroom
rejoiceth over the bride, so shall thy God rejoice over thee.”
Yes, poor soul, the wedding robe will make thee acceptable to
thy Husband, the ring and the marriage seal binds the union ;
“ She shall be brought unto the King in raiment of needle-
work, the virgins, her companions that follow her, shall be
brought unto thee, yes, with gladness and rejoicing shall they
be brought, they shall enter into the King’s palace ” (Psalm xlv.
14, io). What a blessed word that is in Eevelations xix. 7,8, 9,
about the marriage of the Lamb and His wife, and her fine linen
clean and white. Look ! “ Blessed are they winch are called unto
the marriage supper of the Lamb look at the word called , and
again, these are the true sayings of God, look at verse 16, “ King
ot kings, and Lord of lords, this is the Bridegroom of the bride,
and He will gather her out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and nation” (Eev. v. 9). Just look at chapter xxii.
verse 4: “And they shall see His face, yes, the Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the end, the first and the last, yes, the root
and the offspring of David, the bright and morning star and the
Spirit and the Bride say come, and let him that heareth say
come, and let him that is athirst say come, and whosever will let
him take the water of life freely.” These are some of the precious
jewels that belong to the Church of Christ, and which are often
broadcast amongst the world, and the dead, dry, doctrine pro-
fessor of the present day; but sure I am, man by nature is
spiritually dead, and blind, and deaf, and can neither see, hear,
or hunger, or thirst, so that the spirit and the bride are speaking
to those who have had their eyes opened, their ears to hear, and
their heart to feel spiritual hunger, and their soul to feel
spiritual thirst for the water of life, agreeable to the word of
God. In the Ephesians Paul tells them they were dead in
trespasses and sins; yes, when we were dead in sins, He hath


quietened us with Christ (Ephesians ii. 1), then he tells them
again, “By grace are ye saved, and that not of yourselves, but
the gift of God,” and sure I am there never was, nor ever will
be one poor soul, but will agree with Paul on this ground, as poor
Jonah said, that salvation is of the Lord, yes, or I should have
no hope: wonder, 0 heavens, and be astonished, 0 earth, the Lord
hath done it. Solemn thought, take thy shoes off thy feet while
treading this holy ground, and again, examine thyself. Is for
heaven thy. credentials clear ? Pause my soul! What if
deceived at last, Yes, this is the weighty point, after sixty-six
years. Oh, what a mystery, how narrow is the pathway to the
kingdom ; it is indeed through much tribulation, but there is a
rejoicing in hope, patience in tribulation, continuing instant in
prayer, and sure I am, nothing can separate us from the love of
Christ. As Paul asked the Romans, “Who shall separate us
from the love of Christ ? tribulation, or distress, or persecution,
or famine, or nakedness, or peril or sword ? ” No, he said he
was persuaded that nothing could, “neither death, nor life nor
angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor
things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in
Christ Jesus.” (Romans viii.) And sure I am the Church was
one in Him before the foundation of the world, and she is in Him
in time and will be to all Eternity, and although she fell in
Adam, she never fell out of the Covenant. Adam was not
deceived when his wife fell into sin, as Paul told Timothy in his
first letter (Ist Timothy ii. 14) he did not run away and leave her;
yes, he loved her then. And the second Adam loved His bride
before and after, and laid His glory by, and came into this lower
world to redeem her; how sweet is this mystery, Oh, wonderful
mystery. Yes, He paid all the law demanded, in the garden and
on Calvary’s mount, how He did love her ! hear His prayer to
His Father, “Father, I will that they also,-whom thou hast
given me, be ■with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory,” and sure I am, that prayer will be answered when He
■will gather home all His poor sheep who have been, and are now
scattered about in this cloudy and dark day, for He knows
them all, yes, He has said He will cause them to pass
under the rod, and will bring them into the bond of the
Covenant, and who can break that Covenant ? (Ezekiel xx
37.) And He hath also said that the sheep hear His voice
and it is the Shepherd’s voice that openeth the way into the
sheep-fold, and all who climb up to get in will be but thieves
and robbers. These are solemn, weighty things, and when the
poor sheep contend for these things, they have often to walk


much alone, for Zion speaks a different language, it is called in
Zephaniah, a pure language, (Zeph. hi. 9). But when the poor
weary travellers meet together, whether it he a king or a poor
soul who cannot read; when they meet Oh, how sweet to speak
and compare notes, and rehearse the righteous acts of the Lord,
even the righteous acts, “ Awake, Awake Deborah, awake,
awake, utter a song.” (Judges v. 11). This is the company I
like to meet with and here I feel at home, as a rule I may be
counted a strange one, but let me find a poor crippled sheep
amongst the crowd, who can speak Zion’s language, there is no
reserve then, where union is felt—and cupboard, pocket, heart,
and all his open as far as he can give help and where he feels
there is need. I know the Lord can and does often feed His
people in a wonderful way; He can cause the barrel of meal,
though but a handful, not to waste nor diminish, nor the pot of
oil —but it must supply the household until He opens another
door, as we read in Ist Kings 17. Or the Lord can command a
raven to bring a breakfast and supper to feed His children, or
He can feed a multitude with bread from heaven, as the children
of Israel in the wilderness, and He can feed thousands of men,
women and children with seven loaves and a few little fishes,
He can command a fish to bring money to pay the custom or
tribute. Yes, I know He can do everything, as Job told the
Lord, and no thought can be witholden from Him, (Job xlii.), and
I believe it also. I remember one Sabbath, as I was going to
hear the Word, I was thinking of one whom I knew and loved,
and who was in want, and I had not much, if anything, to help
him; while walking along, I thought how glad I should be if
I could pick up some money, I had not got many yards
when I saw a shilling on the ground, and then some coppers.
How pleased I was to pick it up for my dear brother, 1 know
the Lord could have given gold instead of silver and copper, if
He saw fit, but He has only promised to supply our needs (Phil,
iv. 19). He has not said all that we want. What my poor soul
wants to see in my pathway is a Lather’s hand, holding mine,
and leading me along through the wilderness, however rough the
path may be, then I know it will be well at last. It is only those
who are led by the Spirit in the path of regeneration that will
arrive safely at the City and enter in through the gate. Some
whom I have known have walked a long way apparently, and
have then swerved off into some bye-path, which has ended in
infidelity, yes, and died in it, to my great grief. lam speaking
of one, with whom I have met, and prayed with, and have gone
to the house of God in company, and he has written and contended
for the Truth in the doctrine, but the end seemed to be like the


house that was built on the sand, and le±t as a heap of ruins.
When the Lord makes such manifest it often tries the poor, weak
trembling, broken reeds, lest they too should be deceived. Oh,
the cries to God about the matter; we are told to examine
ourselves (2 Corinthians xiii. 12); and Peter tells us to give
diligence to make our calling and election sure (2 Peter i. 10);
and I have never gone beyond that precept, indeed, every halting
place (of which I have had many) during sixty-six years,
I have had to examine again and again, yes, with trembling.
Referring to my young days, I had a great deal of zeal that
was not according to right knowledge. I could have gone to the
ends ot the earth to try and bring people to the Redeemer to
find mercy. At that time I was travelling with my master to
country fairs with our merchandise, I used to write letters, point-
ing out the love of Christ to save poor sinners if they would come
to Him, and these letters I used to put under the doors of houses
and down the gratings leading to kitchens so that the servants
might read them. I had a brother and a cousin, Oh, how I tried
to bring them to the dear Redeemer that they might be saved.
I do not wonder that Paul spoke as he did in the 9th of Romans,
2nd and 3rd verses —but I found all my writing to them was in
vain, and I had to leave them, “ Shall not the Judge of all the
earth do right.” (Jer. xviii. 25.) Yes, and here I bow with fear
and trembling to His will. I could not see then, as I saw after-
wards, that man by nature is spiritually dead, and it takes the
same Almighty power to quicken us to life, that called Lazarus
from the grave of death. “Por the wind bloweth where it
listeth.” And sure lam if all the so-called divines stood by the
side of the tomb, not one could awake the dead, but He who is
the Resurrection and the Life alone has that power, yes, and He
shall have the glory, “ Bless the Lord oh my soul, and all that is
within me bless His holy name.” What a contused mortal I
was at that time, trying to help the Lord forward in His work.
It was at this time that I was mixed up with the “Ranters,”
now called Bible Christians, for I was at that time a member of
that persuasion, and such was my zeal that they thought I
would become a minister of that body. I would not say but that
there are some of the Lord’s children mixed up with them for a
time, and carried away with some of their sparks, especially if
they were as ignorant as I was; indeed, I was carried away with
some of their wild fire, which I thought to be the finger of God,
I now believe it was a delusion "of the devil-spark of nature.
However, after a time, as my eyes began to open, I spoke to one
of their ministers respecting the doctrine of sovereign grace in
God, election, and His chosen people; he told me that he liked
E


John Wesley’s views on that doctrine, but he did not tell me
what they were. Soon after this I left that people. At
that time there was a Baptist minister preaching in the
neighbourhood, a Mr. Winter—a man of great ability in
the letter. Watts’ hymns and Rippan’s Selections were used
at the services, so I went there and I seemed to like him
and the people, and I soon became acquainted with some
of them, for I was full of zeal, and, after a time, knowing
some of the people, I thought that I should like to become a
member with them. Mr. Winter seemed to be such a nice man
that I almost worshipped him, and have gone out of my way to
pass by his house. After a time I spoke to him and told him
that I should like to become a member with them, and I was
visited by the deacons, one of whom was his brother-in-law.
He was a man I did not like, for I could not see in him that
meek and loving spirit that becometh the Gospel of Christ. I
told Mr. Winter this, and it gave offence, and so I was not
received. After a time, while thinking over all this, these
words came to my mind, ‘ ‘ When my father and my mother
forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.” (Ps. xxvii. 10).
Soon after this I met Mr. Winter and told him all about it. He
said, “We were not going to forsake you altogether.” He had
told me before that if 1 found fault with the deacons before I
was a member what would it be after I became a member. I
told him I could not feel any union to his brother-in-law. Some
time passed and I was again to come forward to be proposed as
a member of the church. There were, I think, twelve others
proposed at the same time ; we all had to relate our experience
before the church (which was a very large one) and I was told
to say no more before the church but what he would ask me, I
was not to enlarge, he said he would ask me enough to satisfy
the church, which he did, and it was not much. Here the door
is too wide open, and so they wrap it up and in this way the
visible churches have members in the present day, members in
the mere letter and not in the spirit of Gospel union, for with
both minister and people, it began in the flesh, and there can be
no real union with a living soul amongst such. But when the
poor soul is standing before the members of the visible church,
and is enabled to give an account of where he was when the Lord
in mercy stopped him and called him by His Divine Grace, and
put him amongst the children of His blessed family, as David
said in the 66th psalm, 16th verse, “Come hear, all ye that fear
God, and I will declare what He hath done for my soul; ” this
is the bond of union in the visible church which binds and unites
them together as the Vine and the branches. Yes, it is here they


understand one another, and it is often a very blessed and refresh-
ing time to the church, and no one should be admitted into the
visible church but through that door. However, I was received
and with, I believe, eleven others, after which we were all
baptized and received into the bosom of the church. I felt a
great deal of emotion at that time and could have told the vast
crowd who came to witness the ordinance what the Lord had done
for my poor soul. Most of us were given some work to do, especi-
ally the male members, I was appointed with an older one to carry
tracts and distribute them. This man was a great one in the
church, he could speak well in prayer, and he was often called
upon to pray in the meetings. He held and led a prayer meeting
every week in the outskirts of the city. But what is a gift
without grace, it withers in the day of trial; it was so with him,
for his awful end proved it, but here I leave him. The tracts
I carried out did not contain sound gospel truth according to my
judgment and I return them to the deacon, the brother-in-law
before referred to. He told me I must walk in a middle path,
not too high (I suppose he meant something between doctrine and
Arminianism, the sovereignty of God and the will of the creature.)
However, after a time I gave it up altogether. After the awful
death and disgrace of the above, we young members carried on
the prayer meeting, each one leading it in his turn. One young
man, who joined the church with me, had a great natural gift in
religious matters, he took the desk, and I felt sick at the awful
pride he seemed to manifest; he called on me to speak in prayer, I
did so and as far as I can remember breathed out in my poor
feeble way against what I saw and felt, and I never went there
afterwards. He was sent out on the sabbath to the country vil-
lages to preach, returning on the Monday morning, that was his
next step. On one occasion I had gone about ten miles with my
wares, trying to sell them to get bread for my family, for I was
very poor, I was badly clothed, tired and weary, and carrying my
pack on my back, when a cab passed me and he was in it. He
had on his parson’s suit, and on seeing me he put his head
out of the window and gave me a nod. I felt it a little,
but I would not have exchanged with him if he had been
clothed in gold. Some time afterwards I met him in the city,
and he said, “Do you know where I am now?” I said “No,
Edward,” he said “lam up in the Croft,” and I said, “What are
you there for?” but he gave an evasive answer. I told him the
Lord took His ministers from the plough-tail, and the ewes and
the lambs, and sent them to feed His people, as he did David
when he was minding the sheep (1 Sam. xvi. 11); Elisha was
ploughing in the field when the Lord took him (1 Kings xix. 19).


He was not sent to the academy to he stamped like a copper coin
for circulation. When I had said this, with a wave of his hand,
he went on. Some time after this, when he was a little more
polished, he got a living at Chetter, near Bristol, so I was
informed. Ido not know that any of them honoured their
profession. One of them, whom I believe became a deacon, was
pretty well off, hut for some cause he made an awful end. What
a mercy to he kept. As I could not feel at home with them I
went to hear Mr. Simmons and other ministers of truth, this
gave offence and I was suspended for three months. During
that time I was visited both by the minister and deacons. The
charge against me was non-attendance and holding erroneous
doctrines. Mr. Winter had visited me and had seen a sermon
lying on the table, ‘ 1 The law established by faith,” written by that
dear man of God William Huntington, and he was greatly aston-
ished and said that that book had opened the very gates of lasciv-
iousness and I had gone in, and he was quite in a rage with me.
I said, “There is my wife and she goes by my rule as her husband,
but if I were dead and she married again, she would go by the
rule of her second husband, not by mine, who had died.” So I
explained that I was dead to the law —my first husband, and was
married to Christ, this I said with many tears. I have thought
of this interview many times since for I seemed to have such
liberty. After a little more conversation he said that I was a
babe, a suckling, and he was a minister of the Gospel, and that
I had become wiser than my teachers ; then he added, “ I will
state to the church the result of my visit to you.” So I told him
to repeat all our conversation, not to keep anything back. Then
he said he had had a great deal of trouble with me before I
joined the church and also since I had become a member, then he
left me. After this some of the deacons and members visited me,
but they could do nothing with me. A Mr. Hupton came to see
me, he used to speak in the afternoons, and I rather liked him,
but he could not heal the breach. He told me that he had some
of Mr. Huntington’s writings, but had not told the parson about
it. However, I was such a strange being they could not make
me out. One day I took up the Bible and opened it on these
words (1 Pet. in. 1-1) “But, and if ye suffer for righteousness
sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of their terror, neither be
troubled.” Although I had many visits from them, I never felt
the least fear, that is to say, the fear of man or any of their
arguments, for I did not make nor pick up my religion, what I
had was my own, though I have called it in question thousands
of times since, yet I would not part with it in the trial of my
faith for all the joy sparks by which they seemed to warm them


selves, for my soul was very jealous on that ground. However,
after a time, my case was brought before the church, I wrote to
Mr. Winter and asked him to allow me to be present, that I might
answer to the charge brought against me, viz. : —non-attendance
and for holding erroneous doctrines. My request was not granted.
To the first charge I should have pleaded guilty and given my
reason for it, and on the second I should have stood my ground,
as Paul said to the Romans, in the 7th chapter, when speaking
to his brethren, he was become dead to the law by the body of
Christ. Yes, the second marriage is legal, for Moses is dead and
buried. The law never did and it never will bring, nor help to
bring, one poor soul into Canaan. Joshua must do that, and
Moses must be dead and buried first, and I will defy all the so-
called divines in the world to prove differently. A wife cannot
have two husbands according to law and live in peace, that is
Moses’ rod and Christ’s yoke. Moses’ rod is heavy, and Christ’s
yoke is light. I know the child of God would not sin in word,
nor deed, nor thought, if he could help it, not because of the
rod of Moses, that fell on Christ in the garden, and on Calvary’s
mount. 0, what he endured under every stroke, when his sweat
was great drops of blood, and on the Cross when he cried out,
“My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me ?” All this for
His lawful wife. Yes, He loved her before she fell; Adam was
not deceived when she fell, he loved her before and after; 0,
glorious mystery, who can fathom it, this makes me weep. 0,
this is a boundless ocean of broad rivers and streams, no galley
with oars is wanted there and the lame take the prey, the people who
will dwell therein are forgiven their iniquities (Isaiah xxxiii. 19-
24). Yes, the lame and the cripples, the sore-footed and tired,
the ready to halt, the fearing, and the trembling ones, the little-
faith ones who cannot mix up with the crowd, who are a mystery
to the professing high doctrine Calvinist; they seem to live in
the clouds and steal the children’s bread, and aiming to speak the
language of Zion which is only learnt in the school of experience.
These have caused me to stumble many times in my journey.
But what a mercy the Shepherd knows His own sheep.
But to return, they had the meeting and I was brought on
the carpet, and they excluded me from being a member amongst
them. What a mercy they could bring nothing against me,
only concerning the law, because I did not hold it as my rule of
life. So the poor Antinomian was cast out, while some, if not all,
who joined the church when I did, seemed to have withered in
their profession. This is more than 60 years ago. Some 20
years afterwards I went to see him, and asked him if he would
give me a little money towards building a little chapel, but he


declined, giving me to understand he could not give out of their
circuit. I believe he was at that time the head of the General
Baptists in that city. We had a long talk about old times ; we
agreed to differ hut parted in a friendly way. Just before I left
England I met him again: then our conversation was mostly
about death ; he has been gone many years, also several others
who ministered there, and all the members.
The following is a copy of a letter which I received from the
present deacon, it was of the same linsey-woolsey cloth. I had
written to the church asking them to give me the date of my
membership. This was copied from the church books; “On
7th June, 1829, Mr. Winter baptized 12 persons (then came the
names, mine being amongst them). At a church meeting
December 1831, it was proposed and carried unanimously that
James Davis be suspended from church membership for 3
months for holding erroneous doctrines, and at the end of 4
months removed for continuance in the same.” I wrote him a
letter afterwards to enlighten him as to what my erroneous
doctrine was and my view of doctrinal truth, such as Mr.
Warburton preached. This was his reply to my letter : —“I knew
the late John Warburton of Trowbridge from my infancy, being
born there, but always taught to believe the doctrine which he
held and preached was undesirable—dangerous and dishonouring
to God—and so I do now believe, and I hope to do so as long as
I live.” I received this letter in 1881, so we seem to be as far
apart as the north and south poles; these things have often
puzzled me, they seem to live happy and die the same. I know
that there are sparks by which they warm themselves, and there
is a fire which they seem to kindle (Isaiah 1.11) and such are to
lie down in sorrow and they often have no bands in their death,
yea, their strength is firm (Ps. Ixxiii. 4). We meet with many
who seem to speak something like the language of Zion and yet
they do not seem to belong to the household of faith. We read
about them in the 13th chapter of Matthew, the wheat and the
tares are to grow together until the harvest, and at that time a
living faith and a dead faith will be made manifest. In the Bth
chapter of the Acts of the Apostles we read of a certain man wlm
did wonders and the people received his word and believed he
had the power of God. Phillip preached in that city and many
believed, and this man believed and was baptized and continued
with Phillip, and wondered at the things that were done, but he
was in the gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity, his faith
was not the faith of God’s elect, about which Paul speaks to
Tifus, in his Ist Epistle to the Corinthians, and in which there is
a good deal about letter-faith. In the 13th chapter, 1,2, 3 verses.


we read that all natural faith is but as a sounding brass and a
tinkling cymbal. All real faith is tried in the fire, in the furnace
of affliction, it is compared to gold tried in the fire. I believe
that there is a great deal of dead, dry doctrinal, and many get
into the visible church through that door. These people know
nothing of the path which Job speaks about, we read it in the
28th chapter of Job. Surely there is a vein for the silver (margin
reads mine). This is the path which no fowl knoweth and not
even the keen eye of the vulture has seen it. But the church
inside the visible church holds communion with each other some-
times, that is, the members of the church. Saving faith is the
gift of God, and when the Lord speaks to the poor soul it warms
the heart, and he knows His voice. There is no dew nor savour
in letter-faith, devils have faith but there is no love in them, for
they cannot love. The poet says,
Faith in the bleeding Lamb,
0, what a gift is this ;
Hope of salvation in His name,
How comfortable it is.
Letter faith is not saving faith. Balaam had a faith but it was
not a saving faith when he said, “ I shall see him ; but not now;
I shall behold Him but not nigh.” (Numbers xxiv. 17.) I say
thousands have a faith that is never tried in life or death, and
they can seem to pick it up and use it at any time and it seems
to bring in many things.
Some fifty years ago there were two Germans who visited the
city of Bristol, Messrs. Craig and Mueller, they were men of
great faith and they seemed to arouse the city, they spoke a
great deal of letter-truth, and generally the places in which they
spoke were crowded with people, but it seemed all to be in the
reach of the creature; their faith seemed like this :—Suppose
you were to throw down a basket of apples, well, anyone can
pick them up. They built an orphan asylum and their faith
seemed to bring in all they wanted for its support. These things
were a mystery to me, and some of the children were supposed
to be converted and baptized and brought into their church. The
zeal amongst them was wonderful, the faith they held was all in
the power of the creature, so it was very easy to become a
Christian. These were his own words, “If I believed that Christ
died on the cross of Calvary, then I am a Christian.” This he
told a friend of mine who went to see him. I have never known
one of them to whom I felt a soul-union. On one occasion we
asked Mr. Mueller if he would lend us his pulpit for a night or
so, for such men as John Warburton to preach there (this was
before we built Wilder Street Providence Chapel) but he declined,


not even lending us the school desk, he knew John Warburton
well, as they had a cause in that town. These things often
puzzled me, because they seemed to have many answers to prayer,
and their faith seemed never tried. On one occasion Mr. Craig
complained to Mr. Mueller, saying that he had not so many seals
to his ministry as Mr. Mueller had, “Well,” he said, “ You must
pray more.” He did so and then he had more than Mr. Mueller.
O, how all this puzzled me, because I know that the Lord
quickeneth whom He will, and it does not depend on the zeal of the
creature, and I know too, that the Lord has a set time to call in
His children, for the wind of the Spirit is from above, and man
has nothing to do with it, neither to hasten it nor to delay the
set time. Spiritual Itachael has a set time to bring forth her
sons, and there is no false conception in Zion’s womb, neither
can it be hastened by mortal energy (may the Lord give grace to
bow to His divine will in all things). I remember on one
occasion being much exercised about these things. It was one
Sabbath evening, I cannot now remember whether I had been to
Bristol that day or not; my wife had gone to bed and I was
alone. I thought like this “Am I right in not receiving these
men and speaking against them ? ” Then I said, “ I will not go
to bed any more until the Lord removes the burden from my
mind,” this was my inward breathing. How long I remained in
that state I cannot say, I do not know whether I went to sleep or
dropped into unconsciousness, but I was in Bristol and going
into Gideon Chapel where Mr. Mueller preached. As I went
inside the door I saw one of the finest figures that ever eyes
beheld, she was dressed gorgeously in various colours, rather
above the usual height; I saw Mr. Mueller, as plainly as I ever
saw him in my life, standing by her side, with his arm over her
head. There were one or two milk cans by his side. This figure
made a most gracious bow to every one who came in. I looked
with astonishment and walked up to see her, and looking at her
I said, “ Behold she is dead.” I saw that the whole figure was
worked mechanically. Then I awoke, or came to myself, and
my burden was gone, and it has never returned. I make no
comment, but hear what Paul says in Hebrews v. 13, “ For every
one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness, for
he is a babe ; ” or, as the margin reads, “ hath no experience.”
However I leave these things and many others, but we are
exhorted to examine ourselves. John tells us in his first epistle
and the 4th chapter, we are not to believe every spirit but to try
them whether they be of God, for because many false prophets
are gone out into the world. I have found many of those in my
path who have astonished me and who seemed to prosper for a


time, and who have even parted with almost everything in their
zeal, like Jehu (2 Kings x. 16), “ Come, see my zeal for the
Lord ; ” but we are told that he took no heed to walk in the way
of the Lord with all his heart; for he still held on to the golden
calves in Bethel and in Dan, and thousands hold on to golden
self in their zeal-work to the present day. No doubt they were
both raised up for the work of the orphanage, but in regard to
the glorious gospel in the ministry of life I must leave that, for,
to me, it was only in the letter and not in the spirit, and all
within the power of the creature. Some time ago Mr. Mueller
visited our city (Melbourne), I sent him a letter saying that I should
like to see him, but I received no answer from him. While I was
in England, there were many wandering stars, especially in Bristol,
these drewmany after them, especially in what is called the profess-
ing world. Some came very near the letter of truth, and these
are more likely to deceive and ensnare some for a time, indeed
in my young days they have deceived me, but I always found it
best to get at heart-work in soul experience, when they left this
world (Egypt) and how and what took place then; how they
lost their burden of sin, or whether they ever had one, how they
got into the fold of Christ, whether they came in by the door,
or whether they climbed up some other way and got in, or
whether they stole their religion. What about the door, for
Christ says, “ I am the Door.” The members of the invisible
church get their password at their entrance, and no mortal
knows what that password is but they to whom it is given and
who receive it. We read in Revelation ii. 17, and Zephaniah
iii. 9, “For then will I turn to the people a pure language ; ”
and the sheep can converse in that language. I say no mortal
can read that personal name but he who receives it. There is a
great familiarity in the language, and they understand. one
another, whether they be a babe in grace, or a man in years ot
experience. I know a person may pick up a little of it, but
there is no dew or savour in their speaking about it. No, there
is no heart-burning of soul in their talk, as the two disciples
experienced when they were going to Bmmaus (Luke xxiv. 13).
I have sometimes been deceived, and it has made me very
cautious. About fifty years ago, two great wandering stars
visited that city; indeed, they seemed to shake it. They came
from America, their names being Gunner and Winter. They
preached and said that the end of all things would take place
that year, they went into the prophecies of Daniel. Yes, they
went on to the starry heavens. They had pamphlets printed
and programmes, and paintings illustrating the book of Daniel,
and they spoke of almost everything relating to the end. While


they were preaching you could almost hear a pin drop, the
place was crowded, and death, pale death, seemed stamped on
the people. Many believed it, and they parted with nearly
everything they possessed. Yes, they got up and began to trim
their lamps. Indeed, I began to think solemnly about it myself,
and yet I thought, how is it that the church of God has not
received any communication about it ? Paul tells the Thessalon-
ians, in his second Epistle and the second chapter, that they are not
to be troubled or shaken in mind about it. He says, “ Let no man
deceive you.” I believe when that day is come, there will be a
general pouring out of the Spirit of God upon the watchmen on the
walls of Zion. There will be the cry, “ Behold! the Bridegroom
cometh,” and there will be souls going out to meet Him, and there
will be a general uprising (amongst the professors also) to trim their
lamps. But for want of the oil of grace in the professor’s lamp
the wick will not burn long. Oh no, nothing but the oil of the
blessed annointing will do then. But I thought, what does all
this mean, they seem so happy in their minds, and seem all on
fire ? They sang Wesley’s hymns and seemed so happy with their
lamps. My dear friend H was much taken up with them
for a time and he was so elated with it that he could hardly work.
During this time he wrote to John Warburton and said, “ Watch-
man, what of the night ? ” At that time we used to go to Trow-
bridge from Bristol on the Saturday afternoon to hear him preach
on the Sabbath, returning to Bristol Monday morning. We have
often walked a good part of the way and have felt it good to be
there to meet with friends; most of them are now safe landed, it
being over fifty years ago I think. I know it will be a glorious
day when it will be sounded from the walls of Zion, “ Behold the
Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet him. When Zion will be,
as it were, awakened from her midnight slumber, when the Bride-
groom will come and call her home. 0 blessed home. Then the
church will crown him Lord of all. Pause my soul. Shall I
among them stand and join in the song, Alleluia, salvation and
glory and honour and power unto the Lord God ? Will he wipe
away my tears'? (Eevelations vii. 17) (Eev. xxi. 5.) What, no
more weeping, nor sorrow ? Hark my poor soul, the Bridegroom
is coming, go out in thy soul-feelings to meet Him. When shall
I wake and find me there ? In my own mind I think that the
professing church, the virgins in name, will see what is going on,
and make a going out in their letter, will-worship, and profes-
sional lamp religion; I often see them carrying their book-lamp
in their hands on Sabbath mornings, and it you were to ask them
if they had the oil of grace to understand the mysteries of that
lamp they were carrying in their hand, they would look at you


with astonishment. Although they were masters of the professing
Israel and of the pulpit in which they stand and speak to the
people, I believe that many of them would he as blind as
Nicodemus, the ruler of the Jews, although he was a master
in the Jewish church, he did not like to be seen going to
Jesus by day, so he came by night. He looked astonished
when the dear Redeemer spoke to him about the new birth,
especially when He told him it was from above, and that the
wind bloweth where it listeth, and so is every one that is born
of the Spirit (John iii. 8). This was a mystery to this master of
Israel. Yes, he was as ignorant as a beast of the field, for how
can a man see when he is spiritually blind and dead; what
power has he over the wind ? And sure lam that if all the so-
called divines on the earth stood beside the spiritually dead
Lazaruses, they would have no power to awake them ; only the
Lord Jesus can do this, for He is the Resurrection and the Life.
For it is the Spirit that quickeneth, t ;e flesh profiteth nothing.
However, I thought that I would go and see these wonderful
evangelists who were doing such wonders in our city, and also
in some other places in England, for they were men who were
rather clever at lecturing and preaching, so they caused a great
stir, especially one of them—Mr. Winter. I heard that he was
living in certain lodgings, so I went and knocked at the door.
A lady opened it, and I asked if Mr. Winter lived there. She
said, “Yes,” and when I asked if I could see him, she replied,
“Yes, he is in the parlor.” I was given to understand that she
viewed them as angels, and that when they enquired of her if
she had lodgings, she rather demurred, but that came to her
mind: “ Forget not to entertain strangers for thereby some have
entertained angels unawares.” Her door was then opened to
them. I do not know whether that Scripture was from heaven
or not, but I must leave that, that is what she said, but to me
they did not appear to be messengers from heaven, they seemed
more like wandering stars that seem to shine cloudily and then
set in darkness. I have seen many of these, and I have run
after them for a time. Oh, these wandering stars, hovr many
poor souls have they led into a bog, especially in their young
days, but we are told in 1 Timothy, o-22, “ Lay hands suddenly
on no man, neither be partakers of other men’s sins : keep
thyself pure.” However, I went into the parlor and found him
alone, sitting by the fire, and as far as I can remember he was
smoking, and appeared unconcerned. I said to him, “These
are solemn things about which you are lecturing, the end
of all things at the door; I should like to know where
you got it, and also what you know about soul matters


in your experience. If you will tell me I will try and tell
you what the Lord has done for ray poor soul.” He
then began to tell me how he became a Christian in
America, about the society of Christians, and the prophecies
respecting the end of the world, speaking chiefly of Daniel,
mentioning other scriptures that referred to the end of the world.
Then he said that the Gospel had been preached all over the
world, or it would be that year, by the society with which he and
his friend were connected. He said further, “ This year, the
heavenly bodies, viz. the stars, the moon, planets, &c., are in just
the same position as they were when Christ was crucified, and
they have never been like it before or since that time.” With
regard to soul matters he seemed to me to be only in the letter,
neither could I trace any mark of the Spirit’s work in the work
of regeneration on his poor soul; it was only letter-knowledge,
full of confusion and stumbling upon the dark mountains. He
thought he had a light that was going to enlighten the world, he
seemed quite happy in his delusions. How true is this scripture :
“ If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is
that darkness” 1 (Matt. vi. 23) so was his light. However, as I
promised to speak a little of how the Lord had led me in soul
matters I did so. I began to tell him how the Lord had called
me out of this world and about the new birth, but I felt such a
dark cloud come over me, I can hardly describe it, I was as a man
dumb, and although I tried again and again to relate somewhat
of the way the Lord called me, it was just like speaking to a
granite rock, so that I was.glad to get up and go out of the house.
No, it was not my company, the Son of Peace was not there, but
I felt bones and death. But how different it is when we find we
are at home with our own company.
Well, after a time these wandering stars set, with the fire sparks
that they kindled, and so will all that are not from God, whether
in doctrine or Arminianism, however clear they may be in their
creed according to man’s judgment, for I believe that thousands
are rocked to sleep in this cradle and do not want to be awakened.
The living family of God are compared to the gleaning of the
vineyard. (Isaiah xvii. 6.) She is also compared to a cottage in
the midst of a vineyard, (Isaiah i. 8), and in Jeremiah xii. 10,
we read about certain pastors destroying it and treading it down.
We read of the church of Christ, His own vineyard, that it is not
to be sown with divers seeds, no, an ox and an ass are not to
plough together. (Deut. xxii. 9—10.) The Lord’s ministers are
compared to the ox that treadeth out the corn. And there is a
vast difference between the lowing of an ox and the braying of
an ass, and if these get into the same vineyard, they cannot


plough together, there will not be a clear sound. The ox loves
clean provender winnowed with the shovel and the fan (Isaiah xxx.
24.) An ass will feed on almost anything, it generally feeds
upon the briars and thorns along the hedges; we read in Job
about the ox ploughing and the ass feeding beside it, but there
is a path where they can neither plough, sow, nor feed, and my
dear .brother Job (if I may claim that brotherhood) knew that
path, and he gives us a blessed account of it in the 28th chapter,
and he tells all that his three friends had said to him. He said,
“ Surely there is a vein for the silver and a place for gold, where
they find it,” and he calls it a path which no fowl knoweth and
which the vulture’s eye hath not seen, the lion’s whelps have not
trodden it, nor the fierce lion passed by it; and I believe that
most of the Lord’s children walk there much alone, more or less,
and they have to prove that it is through much tribulation they
have to walk alone to the kingdom; and they are often tired and
ready to halt. Yes, tired and weary of everything. Oh, could
I climb to the top of Pisgah’s mount, and have a glorious view
of that blessed land, the glorious city, and then to drop this poor
body of death that has been such a plague to my poor soul for
so many years. Oh, that blessed city, wuere we will meet those
who have gone before and the dear Eedeemer in the heaven of
heavens: —
“And will He own my worthless name,
before His Lather’s face;
And in the new Jerusalem
Appoint my soul a place! ”
Oh the thought and the hope of it is worth a million worlds,
if it were not for this blessed hope at times I could not live. I
do not wonder that Paul told the Philippian Church that he had
a desire to depart and be with Christ which is far better. (Phil i.
23); he tells the Corinthians the same. (2 Cor. v. 8.) Just before
he went he seems to have had a sight of that Crown which the
Lord, the righteous Judge, would give him, and to all those who
love His appearing. (2 Timothy iv. 6 —B). But he wanted to see
his dear son Timothy before he went home. Oh, blessed home,
home sweet home, what must it be to be there'? The wilderness
is called a path, a tribulation, and great tribulation, the world,
the flesh, and the devil are three mighty nations which block up
the path in the journey from Egypt to Canaan, and the poor soul
would never get through alone ; if it were not for Almighty grace
holding him and leading him there, the poor soul would surely
be caught in some snare, for there are so many pits and snares,
so many, lo here, or lo there, that some poor souls have been
sorely wounded in some of the dirty bog holes, and the dirt like


pitch has got in some of their professional garments, to their
great grief. Yes, if it were not for Almighty grace the poor
soul could never travel along these paths. There is an account
of the travels of some of these left on record, so that others may
be warned not to do the same. In the 38th Psalm, we have the
experience of one who groaned out in agony; It is called “A
psalm to bring to remembrance.” He said his wounds stunk
(verse 5) and he was for halting (verse 17. margin) and make
haste to help me, 0 Lord my salvation (verse 22.) I believe that
what makes the poor soul groan the most in the consciousness of
the dirty wounds within and the inward groaning of the poor
soul over these, no mortal knows anything about it; this is the
body of death that Paul speaks about in the 7th chapter of
Homans (verse 24). But he delighted in the law of God after
the inward man, and so do all the Lord’s children, after being
quickened into divine life.
lam writing this on June 22nd, 1893 ; This morning I was
reading those golden words of the dear Redeemer (John xx. 17),
“But go to my brethen and say unto them, I ascend unto
My Father and your Father, and to My God and your God,” and
what He said to my brother Thomas, and Thomas’ reply to Him.
When such words as Ily God and your God are felt within, under
that blessed sealing of the Spirit’s witness, I could sweetly step
into the Jordan of death and loose all these mortal garments.
Oh, what must it be to be there ? Well, He has said, “ Fear not
little flock, it is your Father’s good pleasure to give you the King-
dom,” —Home, Home, Sweet Home, for which I pant.
As I mentioned on page 55 1 met some of the scattered flock
in Launceston, Tasmania, and I will speak of one whom I will
call the “ Old Pilgrim.” When I saw him the first time, he was
in his 99th year ; he had heard Huntington and Jenkins at Lewes,
near Brighton, England. Having heard that he was one of the
living family I called with my wife one morning to see him, when
the following conversation took place with his wife, who answered
the door to us ; I said, “ Does Mr. Cleaver live here ?” “ Yes ”
was the reply, “but he is not up yet.” “I hear he is an old
pilgrim and knows his call by Divine Grace ” I said. “0, yes,”
she said, “he does,” then 1 said “And as I am one, I trust,
from Melbourne, I thought I should like to see him,” she
answered, “ Come in, he is not downstairs yet.” “ Oh, I can see
him in bed,” I said, but, she said he would soon be downstairs,
so we waited, and he came into the room where we were sitting.
I said to him, “ I am from Melbourne, and as I have heard that
you are one who knows your call, and the time and place where
it took place, and as I trust I know something about these things,


1 thought I should like to see you,” he, being rather deaf, I spoke
into his ear. He then said, ‘‘ My conversion was rather remark-
able ; 1 was apprenticed to a tailor in Lewes.” He then related
tome what he passed through when brought to feel himself a
sinner before God, he had no one to whom he could speak on
eternal things, most of his fellow workmen were almost infidels.
“ Oh, what my poor soul felt at that time,” he said, “ as I stood
on the brink of eternity, under the condemning power of the law,
as a guilty sinner before God. During this time a book entitled
‘ Baxter’s Call to the Unconverted,’ fell into my hands, and if ever
a man felt the horrors of the damned, I did while reading that
book.” Passing over many months of deep anguish of soul both
night and day, I will just speak of his deliverance. In the
midst of his sorrow, at times he had some little buddings of hope.
Speaking of his deliverance, in his own words: —“ My deliverance
was at Lewes, in a shop ; I had a bed in a back room upstairs,
oh, the agony and horror I have felt there. One night when
sinking, the dear Redeemer appeared before me, at that time I
felt the greatest monster in the world and could have, as it were,
justified God in my being sent to hell. While in that state of
mind, He appeared most loving and most pure, with such heavenly
love, pity and compassion, which struck me with surprise ; He
assured me that I was pardoned, and that He had paid the claims
of justice for me, though He spoke not a word, but His looks
spoke louder than words, the love He manifested to me was so
much that I felt willing to go to hell. I turned away, I told
Him that He could not pardon such a wretch, but He still mani-
fested His love ; I said I could not endure it and turned away
from such an overwhelming sight, but He turned to me, and I
then threw myself at His feet, to do with me what He would,
and whether my eyes were open or shut He was still before me
in vision for a time, until He vanished awaj r . Then the
glorious promises seemed to run like a river through my soul.
I had not been able to sleep before for anguish of mind, and
now I could not sleep for joy, my dungeon was a Bethel. This
took place about 80 years ago.”
When he told me all this, how we wept together, and read
and prayed together, and I kissed him too, as fellow-heir of the
grace of Life. We corresponded with him for two or three
years after this, the following letter he wrote me in his own
handwriting, at the close of his 102nd year :
York Street, Launceston,
June 2nd, 1882.
My Dear Friend and Brother, —I am sat down to attempt to
answer, acknowledge, and thank you for your kind letter and


present which I received per last mail. I rejoice that the Lord
enables you and dear wife to travel so widely about to visit, and
console and comfort the Lord’s solitary sheep so widely spread
about in the wilderness. The gracious Lord, in His infinite
wisdom, employs His people in various ways to accomplish His
purposes. You He has given the means and the heart to
serve by travelling, and me He confines in obscurity,
and sends many to visit me, I hope to obtain a blessing. A
friend the other day brought a young lady from Prabran,
Melbourne, of the name of H , a stranger to me, the
Lord opened my mouth and I preached a little to her and told
her a little of my experience and the Lord’s gracious dealings
with me ; she hung upon my lips with such evident anxiety,
anxious to catch every word, I saw her earnestness and pointed
her to the cross, to believe in Jesus ; she earnestly asked, “ What
is it to believe ? ” I pointed her to the eunuch’s reply to Phillip :
“I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God,” that He is
Almighty, able to forgive sins, and willing to forgive every
penitent that is led to Him. She was obliged to leave me
abruptly as her husband was waiting for her at the inn for tea,
but she said she must come back to see me. After I was in bed
they came back, when I pointed out to her God’s plan of salvation,
in which she seemed much interested. She then left me, with a
warm pressure of the hand. She left with regret as she feared
she would not see me again; the good Lord -was with us, and I
hope good will follow. A week after, I received a parcel from
her containing two suits of clothes, one for the winter, the other
for the summer, and a comfortable warm dressing gown. May
the Lord bless her, for she seemed hungering after the bread of
life. Though thus shut up, I trust lam not altogether useless.
I correspond and write to my numerous grand and great-grand-
children, they are constantly on my heart in prayer before our
Father, and I trust that many of our dear ones the Lord has and
may yet quicken to newness of life, as in nature, so in grace, all
children are quickened before they come into the world, so many
have life before they are made manifest to the church ; as in
Elijah’s day, I have reserved seven thousand who have not bowed
the knee unto Baal, when he thought there was only himself and
they sought his life. May all our dear ones be of that number
is our prayer —with love and wishing every blessing.
I remain,
Yours in Jesus,
W. CLEAVER.
Remember me to Mr. Morris and family when you see him.


Another letter I will copy, written when 103 years old : —
York Street, Launceston,
January 7th, 1883.
My dear, kind Friend and Brother in the ever blessed Lord
Jesus, —I received your much valued letter and present yesterday
and was much refreshed ty it. What a wonderful thought and
expression was that of our precious Lord to Mary : “But go to
My brethren ! ” What brethren ? and I, the mighty God, unto
whom is given all power in heaven and earth, 'tell the pour weak
sinful disciples, and tell Peter who cursed and swore, that he
never knew me, tell him that I ascend unto My Father, and to
your Father, to My God and to your God ! Oh, infinite conde-
scension to talk to and take such sinful mortals into union with
His infinitely holy and pure nature; “that they all may be one
as Thou Father art in Me, and I in Thee, that they may be one
in us.” One with the Deity: none could be degraded lower than
Christ was when on earth, and none can be exalted higher, after
He left it than He was, and is now ; and for us who have degraded
ourselves so low, to be raised and honoured with such dignity,
would be beyond credence had not God Himself asserted it, in
His word. I am lost in wonder, love and praise. You have
prayed that He would bless my poor soul; blessed be His name,
He has blessed it, is blessing it, and, glory to- His name, ever
will bless it, for infinite perfection can never falter. No, my dear
brother, for you are entitled to the same blessings, all the called
must share in the same love. Adam loved Eve, and could not
part with her, he must share all her misery, Oh, our dear second
Adam did share, and not only share, but took the whole weight
of sufferings on Himself, leaving very little for His spouse to
bear. Oh, what love! how shall we adore our Beloved enough ?
it will take Eternity, it can never end. His sufferings make us
weep now, but He will not suffer us to weep by-and-bye, He
will allow nothing but joy in His presence above, at the marriage
supper of the Lamb, every countenance will be lighted up with
joy and gladness. You say you have been unwell. I hope your
earthly tabernacle will be preserved from much pain while here
below, but here below we shall get all that we have to suffer, and
that’s but very little compared with our Lord’s. My tabernacle
is very shaky, but free from pain; my Lord is very kind to me,
in enabling me to use my pen, and retaining my intellect, the
Lord has enabled me to write to some of my grand-children, I hope
not without effect. If I leave anything behind me when I am
taken away, may it be blessed to others, is my prayer. With
blessings on you and your dear family, who I hope are all well,
is the prayer of your earnest friend,
W. CLEAVER.
