

SPIRITS
And Their Friends,
BEING
AN APPEAL TO REASON AND JUSTICE,
E. Oyril
IN ANSWER TO
11 MEDIUMS AND THEIR DUPES,”
PRICE SIXPENCE.
<SgtmeiJ
TURNER cSC HENDERSON,
16 AND 18 HUNTER STREET.
[\n\




Frost?
SPIRITS
And Their Friemfs,
BEING
AN APPEAL TO REASON AND JUSTICE,
lE. Oyril
IN ANSWER TO
11 MEDIUMS AND THEIR DUPES,”
PRICE SIXPENCE.
cSj^tteg:
TXJRisnEFR, cSs HEisriDEi^soisr,
16 AND 18 HUNTER STREET.




PREFACE.
This Pamphlet cannot be published for any pecuniary profit, as it is
sold at cost price. But what I wish to say here is this, if I have
awakened in any editor or proprietor of a secular paper a sense to do
justice impartially to both sides of this important question, I shall be
glad to know it, for the purpose of publishing any further phenomena or
promulgating Spiritualism, in this country. Up to the present I have
been obliged personally to pay for as advertisements, what should be
published as letters, and no man should be expected to do this, in a free
land, where there ought to be an organ, not of a class, but of the
people.
My purpose, however, has been gained, if I remove the doubt,
existing, in the minds of those who only hear of Dr. Slade and have
not seen him , as to his integrity, honesty and gentlemanly character, and
I am better fitted to do this, as I know more of him than anyone else in
the Colony,
Sydney, April, 1879
ss6s/p foxgg
U S rr




SPIRITS AND THEIR FRIENDS,
Under the title of “ Mediums and their Dupes,” a pamphlet has lately
been published in Sydney, written by four men, two of whom know
nothing personally about the matter, except by reading a chance work
here and there, and then not understanding it, and the remaining two,
though they have seen Dr. Slade once or twice, through their own ignor-
ance and crass stupidity, actually are bold enough to start forward with
their weak pens to put down a truth and to deny a fact.
Now I propose in the following pages, with the aid of the Spirits,
that I have only too good and too many reasons to believe and trust in,
with their aid I now purpose to utterly refute the falsehood, calumny,
and error that these four “ blind ” men have published ; and to do so, I
shall take their book step by step and page by page, and thus, I hope,
leave not a stone unturned. All I ask is a fair and impartial hearing,
judge me as I speak, the facts I set forth are true, and there are but two
courses open, either believe them or call me a liar. If you believe them,
search into them and say, “Is this from the Spirits or not?” Test these
facts, prove them, and seek whence come they. They are not emanations
from the brain of either the Medium or his Dupe. But, let me deal with
this “poisoned arrow,” let me heal the wounds it may have made and
suck out the poison it has planted in the souls of some men. Those
whose reasoning powers are good, even though they be now averse to
Spiritualism, see the absurdity of the pamphlet referred to, but there are
some who calmly sit and wait—“ What does it matter?” say they.
“ Does it do any good ?” It matters this to them, —every act detri-
mental to good, every thought against right, every hour they waste in
frivolity and nonsense, every time they coolly throw aside the chances
given them of improvement and advance in this life, is a stumbling block,
a stone and an obstacle to be surmounted and worked out in Spirit-land.
There is no hell, there is no devil, except the hell and the evil influence
that bad men carry always with them ; there is no lake of burning, fiery,
brimstone, that Gustave Dore so vividly pictures.


Christ was crucified, simply because people did not understand
Him; they thought they were doing God a good service, even as people
of to-day in their blindness, think that they do God a good service by
their vain attempts to trample down Spiritualism.
Spiritualism is as a young oak tree, it has taken root in good soil
and it will flourish and grow, its branches will spread over the earth, in
spite of the petty breaths, or the heavier tempests and storms that
assail it.
In this work that I have now under notice, one of these men refers
in a slighting manner to the trial of Dr. Slade in London. I firmly
believe this was ordered of God. Dr. Slade by that trial was made
world-famed, thousands flocked to see him, and to see his tricks, that
otherwise would not have come ; hundreds through that same trial have
been shown and are convinced of the truth, and I assert that his enemies,
instead of flouting him with it, are but honouring and helping him ; for
people say “this trial lasted three weeks, there must be something in
it,” and that trial has been the cause of a thousand times more good
than harm ; say let Dr. Slade be proud of it, let him thank
God for it, for he was the honoured instrument of God’s good work,
and through his worldly troubles and trials good only has come.
In the Preface to “ Medium and their Dupes ” it is stated that
the pamphlet is not published for “ profit or gain, but from a higher
motive.” What is the meaning of this and where are the profits going ?
I know personally something of publishing, and this brochure costs
about sd. each, certainly not more ; it is sold at a shilling, leaving 7d.
a copy profit on 3,000 copies, and besides that there is £l4 worth of
advertisements. As high motives are in question perhaps the “ several
authors ” will hand over all the profits to some charity, the Children’s
Home at Ashfield,® for instance. Again, “as honest recorders,” this
remains to be proved, I say positively, and will prove that the work has
falsehoods in it. Let all the Australian dupes be comforted for they
are in good society ; men in Europe, Asia and America, with more
brains than all four of these “ authors ” put together, have calmly and
impartially examined Spiritualism generally, and Dr. Slade particularly,
and have pronounced in favour of both. Further, “ the authors claim
the support and sympathy of all Christian and soberminded citizens in
their endeavours,” &c. All I would remark here is, that I should like
these authors to prove their own personal claims to either of the above
attributes. And again, by their remark at the end of the Preface, one is
led to believe that they refer to Spiritualism as having sapped the
foundations of Religion, Morality, and Social Order. This statement is


so absurd, that of itself it proves they do not know what they are
talking about. Do they mean to convince anyone that a religion, pure,
holy and good, a religion that appeals to man’s very soul, that places
God as an all-wise and all-powerful Creator on a pinnacle of omnipotence
and omniscience ; do these men earnestly state that such a religion as
this, —and this is Spiritualism as taught by the Spirits through Dr.
Slade and other true mediums, —saps the foundations of religion ?
Morality and social order have fared so well under what I shall call the
Christian religion, that I am afraid any other form would have improved
it; but true Spiritualists, and indeed true men of any denomination,
lead good and true lives; but were every man a Spiritualist he would
have, as I before stated, the stubborn fact held before him that, as
much as he breaks through morality and social order on this earth, so
much is he behind in Spirit land. It is like several men running a race,
they start even and there is a fixed goal; this man turns aside for one
thing, that for another and so on ; they must reach the goal, and those
who are late and have lagged must make up. Religions make no differ-
ence in Spirit land as regards the ultimate happiness of each Spirit, but
each Spirit must work off its own errors and superstitions either here or
there ; and the mud and slime that these four and other such men have
cast at truth and goodness in this lower world, they will find to their
own sorrow and trouble they will have to scrape off hereafter.
The first paper in this collection is “The World of Dupes,” a singu-
larly taking title, but of old I know “ The Vagabond’s ” aptitude in
choosing titles, this one, however, might well head an answer to his
contribution, for who are the Dupes ? I give “ The Vagabond ” credit
for above an average quantity and quality of sense and knowledge of the
world, and I but return the compliment when I say “ The Vagabond,
I am sure, believes every word he has written,” and, further, I have little
doubt, that in a year or two, when he is in some other country, he will
write a paper —“ How I drove Slade out of Sydney;” or, more truthfully
still, as I saw him do this gentlemanly action, “ How I went on board the
Australia, and took every opportunity of shaking my pamphlet,
‘ Mediums and their Dupes,’ in Slade’s face, who was on his way to
Frisco.” However, there are plenty of us knew that Dr. Slade was
going by that mail before the pamphlet was published, and some of us
already know he will be back here in the course of a year, when, I hope,
he will get a better reception.
“ The Vagabond” refers to “medicine men,” some of them even
among the benighted savages, effected wonderful cures, how did they do
it? But my say is not with them, I only wish to deal definitely with


what 1 know. He mentions “one extraordinary fact that shows how the
world is and has ever been duped—the gods or spirits never work for
nothing.” Now this is nought else but a barefaced lie : I put aside all
the cases where, night after night and day after day, spirits advise, work,
and manifest themselves for nothing but love, and he does not mean that
by his context, I put all these evidences aside, and they are many, and
pick out but one, and that is Dr. Slade, the medium that this infamous
paper is directed against, and I, as the particular dupe in question, state
that I have had sitting after sitting, I was cured of deafness in my left
ear, I was cured of heart disease, and I never paid him a penny for it.
Perhaps “ The Vagabond” will object to my picking myself out, and so
I can pick out others; there is an old and poor man, who lay at the point
of death, near Waterloo, that Dr. Slade ivalked out to see and try to do
him good, and I know personally, hut must refrain from using names, of
dozens of cases, both here and in Melbourne, where not only poor people
had advice and messages free, but rich people and people who could afford
it well never thought of paying him a cent.
But another view of the case, if we did not pay our Clergymen or
our teachers, would they work for nothing ? Will the Vagabond him-
self take rooms, say in Wynyard Square, and teach morals, truth , and good-
ness for nothing ? if so, let him do it. Some of his articles, known as the
“ Vagabond Papers,” have done much good, I freely acknowledge, but
why does he not sell them at a price that will leave no profit to himself?
He has boasted of their enormous circulation, therefore let him practise
what he preaches, and give to charities all his profits. He has only
spoken of what he has seen, heard, and known; his mortal part has been
the medium to express his thoughts. Dr. Slade has only been the
medium to spirits who use him ; the spirits do not take any fees to Spirit-
land, they kindly leave them with the medium, in order that he may sup-
port himself. This also in part answers the paragraph on page 7, ending
with “ No cash, no show.”
The “ spirit-rapping” mania, as he says, “ sprung up about a quarter
of a century ago,” but he says nothing of the wonderful strides it has
taken since then, of the scientific men, the high and influential men and
women that have become convinced of its truth. He then goes on to state
that he has been at domestic seances, and saw things he cannot account
for, &c., &c. He is very careful in his words here, he was fully aware
that I knew for a fact that he never saw Dr. Slade at a seance, for the
simple reason that he (the Vagabond) told me so, and accused me of fear to
take him up to the medium. If the idea had entered my mind to invite
him (for I don’t suppose he would have gone himself, as, at the time, he


was under the impression that everyone paid), I should certainly not have
taken him, for, being at that time a quasi friend, I knew him too well. I
am, however, glad that he admits to seeing some things he could not
account for, some of his original self, of his inner soul, sprung forth in that
remark, and made him feel better for the time. But enough of this ban-
tering, a statement is made ‘ £ that the spirits take delight in the silliest of
puerile means to demonstrate their presence to mortals, and they generally
require a darkened room in which to perform third-rate conjurors’ tricks.”
He then refers to the Davenports. I know nothing about them, and
therefore am incapable of speaking in their favour, but, from the tone and
manner of The Vagabond’s allusions to them, and the statement that he
exposed them, I should mostly feel inclined to believe in them. To return
however to the alleged frivolity of the spirits, this is a thing that is often
brought up. In the first place, what are “ spirits ?” A human being, a
man for instance is composed of spirit and body, the spirit is separate and
distinct from the body, the body is merely an outer casing imbued with
aura or influence given from the spirit to sustain life; when we say “we
die,” we do not really end existence, the outer casing (the body) becomes
empty of soul, because the soul or spirit has left it, the body is buried, or
burned, and becomes mixed up in the earth’s material, and there is an end
of it, it ceases to be a separate organization ; the body is finite, the spirit
is infinite.
While on earth, this spirit does many things through the agency of
the body or casing it lives in, it is frivolous, plays tricks on men, it be-
comes angry, and it does many things that, in Spirit land, it is
afterwards ashamed of, and has to work off; but when the Spirit reaches
Spirit land, it wishes, we will say, to communicate, it draws attention to
this fact by rapping, and there is a curious illustration of this in “ The
Life of John Wesley,” where raps were continually being heard about
them, and in whatever house they moved to ; they finally christened this
Spirit “Geoffrey.” Again, the Spirits require means to communicate,
and they have also to form mediums, some men and women are more or
less gifted in this way, they are more susceptible and sensitive to influen-
ces, and it does not require a Dr. Slade only, to produce raps. I have
got them myself, and alone, other families have them continually ; but
perhaps the allusion is made with reference to pulling chairs and tables,
lifting weights, &c. It much depends on how you look at it; for my own
part I see nothing puerile or silly in it. The wonder is to me “ How can a
Spirit, intangible and invisible, a thing without substance, atmosphere, so
to speak, how can it possibly lift a Solid, a material substance, when the
laws of gravitation are against it ?” The thing is done, and done con-


tinually ; I have seen chairs move across the room eight or ten feet away
from anyone; I have seen a fallen chair pick itself up, and I have at-
tempted to lift an ordinary chair, thrown down by a Spirit, and no other
mortal touching it but myself, and with all my strength I could not do
it. I have had my collar drawer emptied, it being locked at the time, and
the contents scattered over me, and I have examined the drawer, found it
empty, and the collars and handkerchiefs in my bed the next morning.
Scoff at it, if it please you, disbelieve if you will, say I was mesmerised, I
dreamt it, say anything, but admit it as a fact; laugb at it as a silly
puerile, foolish, stupid thing, for any spirit to do, but, for my own part,
I say I cannot explain, these actions are too wonderful for man to under-
stand why they are done.
One evening I asked a Spirit, during the control of a medium (not
Dr. Slade), why these things were done ; the answer then given was to
this effect—“ Men do not understand yet the phenomena and phases of
Spirit-life, some of the lower Spirits do these things to testify their
presence and to show their power that they can do them, and as men
come more to acknowledge this fact, so there will be less of these signs,
and more of a higher nature.” This sounds reasonable when you think
over it, —you cannot pour out from a vessel more than it contains.
Now “ The Vagabond” begins his abuse of my friend, Dr. Slade.
In the first place, as I before stated, he never saw him professionally, and
I do not think knew him by sight until he met him on the Australia,
the day that the Doctor sailed, when he showed his good breeding and
delicacy by pulling the book out of his pocket and almost thrusting it
under his nose. I do not wish to descend to personalities in the same
low and vulgar style in which “ The Vagabond ” does, but from my per-
sonal knowledge of the two men, I must say that Dr. Henry Slade is a
gentleman far beyond the capabilities of his traducer. “The Vagabond”
knows nothing of him personally, and yet he makes this rash statement,
which is false and libellous, and as for any “ recent proceedings ” of his,
I know Dr, Slade thoroughly, having lived with him in Melbourne and
Sydney, and I assert, positively, that there are no “ proceedings ” of his
that would in any way reflect aught but honour and credit on him ; and if
anybody “ deserves lashing naked through the world,” it is “ The
Vagabond ” himself, for the slanderous lie he has so wilfully uttered.
Perhaps a word here is necessary for the benefit of those who don’t
know who the “ one Simmons ” referred to as “ Slade’s accomplice ” is.
Mr. Simmons was Doctor Slade’s agent and friend. He is a gentleman and
travelled with him to Russia and elsewhere, acting as his agent. I have
often heard Dr. Slade speak of him in tones that showed his respect and
gratitude for the friend who travelled with him.


Now “ The Vagabond ” goes on about certain sceptics in London,
&c., showing this thing up ; if so, why did these four men waste their
money trying to do it here and failing so piteously.
I have spoken of the trial before, but a few more remarks may be
useful. Mrs. Ross Church (one of the chief witnesses mentioned by
“ The Vagabond”) was, and is a great friend and staunch supporter of Dr.
Slade’s, and Dr. Carpenter was not a tvitness at the trial as stated. If
the evidence then given proves that the “ Slate Trick ” was done in the
same way here, that is with a thimble, &c., as Maskelyne says, what
becomes of Dr. Knaggs and his toe theory, yet these four men are
“ pulling in the same boat,” and are divided in their opinions. If a
“ house be divided against itself,” we are told, “it cannot stand,” and
I think the disconnected divided house of so many opinions that these
“ exposers ” live in, will soon fall.
It becomes an easy matter for clever conjurors to perform tricks
and even to copy apparently what Dr. Slade does with the slate, &c.,
but they do not do it in the same way. Dr. Slade never yet at any
sitting wrote either with his toes or with a little thimble attached
to a pencil, or with his fingers without the thimble, and so therefore
conjurors in exposing him should use neither of these means. I will
have more to say further on as to his mode of procedure, but as to the
evidence given at his trial, it was given by men ignorant of the subject
they were talking about, and from various motives best known to them-
selves. There was no fairness in the trial, and from the judge to the
witnesses (or rather most of them), there was a natural prejudice against
Dr. Slade, which they as good Christians considered it their duty
to have.
Why, if this grand trial had been decided in his favour, all England
and all the world would have been astounded, and the wonder is that
when his appeal was made to the Middlesex Sessions, where he was
acquitted, that he was even released on bail until that time. Ido not
wish to make any comparison that may hurt the feelings of any Christian,
but when Christ came on earth to perform His good work, how was He
received and how were His disciples treated ? Why did those stupid,
ignorant people crucify Him ? Why did they revile Him ? They in
their ignorance thought that they were doing God a good service, and
even so thought those in the English Court, when they with a natural
prejudice, blindly tried a man, whose actions and good work they could
not understand.
“The Vagabond” quotes again from Mr. Maskelyne’s statemen
that the writing is in curved lines, &c., and really Mr. Maskelyne


statement is very ingenious. I don’t know which of the two to admire
more, Dr. Knagg’s toe theory, or Maskelyne’s thimble. One or the other
must be in error, which shall we choose ? The writing is not curved at
all, it is written as straight as people ordinarily write, and I have plenty
of slates now in my possession to prove it. Further, Mr. Maskelyne is
wrong as to both sides being written on, so as to turn the slate. Dr.
Slade never yet did such a thing, nor would he have the need, seeing that
he writes nothing of himself.
There is a small book called “ Psychography,” by M. A. Oxon, and I
will here take the liberty of making an extract bearing on this subject.
“ The Vagabond” either knew nothing of this book, or purposely ignored
it.
M. A. says “ That the so-called exposure of the modus operandi of a
professional Psychic by a professional conjurer is of so little importance
as to be practically nihil ad rem. Mr. Maskelyne, on his own stage, sur-
rounded by his own confederates, and using his own prepared apparatus,
does something which burlesques the results obtained by Slade. What
then ? If the imitation were moderately good, it would be a creditable
counterfeit, such as the skilful illusionist should have no difficulty in pro-
ducing on his own terms. The stage thunder, the stage dinner, the false
sovereign, the mask and wig of the actor, may all be made, more or less,
like the reality which they counterfeit. Mr. Maskelyne’s is a sorry piece
of illusion, unworthy one who passes as so great an artist, and only ex-
cusable because he finds it good enough for his method of misguiding a
credulous public. But were it never so good, what would it prove ?
Simply that a thing can be imitated, when unlimited means for doing so
are provided. That is hardly a point that we need to have demonstrated ;
and if those who lay stress upon it find any comfort in that demonstra-
tion, they are welcome to it. If, however, they flatter themselves that it
extends any further, then must they be advised to commence the study
of logic.”
This extract applies to all others, as well as Maskelyne ; Chevalier
Thorn and Baldwin are welcome to it. “The Vagabond” says: “Mr.
Maskelyne’s exposure was most complete.” It only bears one point of
resemblance to Dr. Knaggs’ expose , and that is, its stupidity. I doubt
not conjurers can do these things in their own way, but they do not
obtain writing and messages from departed friends and relatives as Dr.
Slade, and under the same conditions. It is well known that in Spirit
land there are lying spirits, and this will always be the case until earth
ceases to send them there ; one gentleman is quoted as having received
messages from a deceased friend who never existed, he having given the


medium a fictitious name. He was only answered by a Spirit that lied
as be did himself in giving a false name as that of his friend, or it may
be that some friend actually answered him and used the name he gave,
as I sometimes now sign myself to friends as “Hamlet,” “Sairey Gamp,”
or the like.
“ The Vagabond” refers to English files for verbatim reports of the
trial. I only ask all fair and reasonable men to read and judge both
sides of the question impartially. But why go to English papers; those
who have seen Dr. Slade here, and have watched him carefully and well
while these phenomena occur, if they speak the truth afterwards, must
feel the falseness of the English trial.
According to “The Vagabond,” “ Slade next turned up in Russia.”
Certainly, having been invited there by the Court, and the whole time he
was there he was treated, as he should always be, in a gentlemanly man-
ner ; but now “The Vagabond” makes a statement that I can so easily deny
that it seems almost unnecessary to do so, and that is “ In foreign countries,
as the medium is unacquainted with any language but his own, the
Spirits could not send written messages,” &c., &c. ; and then a few lines
down he says that the answers were “ always in English,” &c. This I
shall also show to be untrue further on, and as a glaring proof of the fact
that “ The Vagabond ” does not know what he is writing about, he
quotes Professor Zollner of the Berlin University. I have by me an
extract from the Boston Transcript of April 18th, 1878, which I leave
on its own merits to the fairness of my readers, and they will soon form
an opinion as to “ The Vagabond’s ” knowledge of the subject he pro-
poses to expose.
To the Editor of the Transcript
In my communication to the Transcript of April 13th, I did not
explain Prof. Zbllner’s experiment quite so clearly as to prevent miscon-
ception. It was simply this: The two ends of a cord were tied together
and sealed, and under these conditions four knots were made in the end-
less cord. The experiment is one quite analogous to many that have
been made heretofore by investigators.
Zollner, who, in company with other citizens of Leipzig, made the
present experiment, is the professor of astronomy at the University of
Leipzig, and one of the highest authorities of the day in stellar physics.
His reputation, not only as a physicist, but as a metaphysician, gives
great weight to his testimony, and his boldness in testifying to phen-
omena tabooed by Tyndall, Lankester, and Carpenter, excites consterna-
tion among the conservatives of science. He says :
“ The experiment was conclusively made, with the concurrence of
the American medium Mr. Henry Slade, at Leipzig, Dec. 17th, 1877, at
eleven o’clock in the forenoon, and occupied only a lew minutes of time.


The drawing,* showing the one millimetre of thick string, with the four
knots, as well as the position of my hands, with which Mr. Slade’s left
and that of another gentleman were linked upon the table, is taken from
nature. Whilst the seal was the whole time on the table before our eyes,
and that part of the string, as shown in the cut, was pressed firmly by
my two thumbs against the top of the table, the remainder of the string
hung loose upon my lap. Whereas I had only wished for the production
of one knot in a few minutes there were no less than four knots in the
string, exactly as shown in the illustration.
The four-knotted string, with the seal intact is lying before me ; I
can produce it as a proof to other men ; I could send it in succession to all
the learned bodies in the world, that they|might convince themselves
it is no question of subjective phantasma, but of an objective permanent
result produced in the real physical world, and which no human understand-
ing is in a position to explain from our present standpoint regarding space
and force.”
Zollner, in the result of his experiments, finds support for the idea
preached by Kant, and more lately by Gauss and other followers on the
anti-Euclid geometry, that space has another dimension beyond the
length, breadth, and thickness recognized in geometry. This theory
cannot be easily explained whithout the use of diagrams and resort to
highly abstract conceptions. The telephone is instanced as lending
support, also, to Kant’s theory.
Zollner says that he made “ other surprisingly successful ex-
periments ” through Slade, and he adds, “As Dr. Slade made on myself
and my friends the impression of his being a gentleman, his conviction
for deception in London awakened our liveliest moral sympathy ; for, after
witnessing those physical facts which took place in his presence with
such great variety, there could be no reasonable ground for supposing
that Slade had in any single case resorted to conscious deception. Mr.
Slade was , therefore, in our eyes, innocently condemned, a sacrifice to the
uninform ed judgment of his accuser and his judge.”
This hit at Professor Lankester and Mr. Justice Flowers is a hard
one, coming from so eminent an authority as the Leipzig professor.
Zollner, having convinced himself of the genuineness of the phenomena,
unreservedly declares his convictions, like a true man, though at great
risk to his scientific popularity. He boldly defies his “ colleagues,
Helmholtz and Pfaundler,” the former of whom was either so pusillani-
mous, or so averse to practicing what might seem discourtesy to Professors
Carpenter and Lankester, that he refused to investigate the Slade
phenomena.
* The following will explain the drawing referred to; it is written by Mr,
Aksakof: —“At a seance with Slade on the 17th of December, experience con-
firmed the reality of the fact [the powers of beings existent in the fourth dimen-
sion of space], the possibility of which had been admitted a priori. On a string,
the two ends of which were sealed and held Toy Mr. Zollner, while the remaining
portion rested on 7m hnees, four knots appeared in the space of a few minutes.
This phenomenon belongs, as you will see, to the category of what we know as
the passage of matter through matter.”


Referring to Prof. Tyndall, who thinks he is exempted from any
further research in the matter because he once gave a quarter of an hour
to the subject, and satisfied himself that a credulous old gentleman, who
believed in the phenomena, was cheated, Zollner says, “ I, on the con-
trary, considered my power to explain these remarkable phenomena so
insufficient that, at the beginning of my experiments with Slade, I felt
little hope that, after a week’s continuous and painstaking experimental
research, I should be so fortunate as to arrive at the demonstrated
proof.”
But it is not only by the celebrated Zollner that Slade has been
vindicated. In Russia, the Grand Duke Constantine, Prof. Butlerof, of
the University of St. Petersburg, Hon. M. Aksakof, and many other
distinguished persons have all fully satisfied themselves of the wonderful
fact of psychography, or independent writing, without human agency,
through Slade—a phenomenon quite common in Spiritualism. Further-
more, Samuel Bellachini, “court conjurer and prestidigitator,” having
been employed by certain eminent investigators in Berlin to look into
the subject, made an affidavit, in which he says, Dec. 6th, 1877, before
Gustav Haagen, counsellor and notary ;
“ After I have, at the wish of several highly esteemed gentlemen of
rank and position, and also for my own satisfaction, tested the physical
mediumship of Mr. Slade in a series of sittings by full daylight, as well
as in the evening in his bedroom, I must, for the sake of truth, hereby
certify that the phenomenal occurrences with Mr. Slade have been
thoroughly examined by me with the minutest observation and investi-
gation of his surroundings, including the table, and that I have not in
the smallest instance, found anything to be produced by means of
prestidigitative manifestations, or by mechanical apparatus ; and I pro-
nounce that any explanation of the experiments which took place under
the circumstances and conditions then obtaining, by any reference to
prestidigitation, is absolutely impossible.”
The London Telegraph of April 2nd, 1878, the most widely circu-
ated daily paper in England, and which formerly used to decry Slade,
has had the grace to publish Zollner’s emphatic vindication of the
American medium.
Ever since the Lankester affair most of our leading American
newspapers have referred to Slade in terms of contumely, speaking of
of him as an “impostor” or a “mountebank,” and sometimes more
mildly as “ the fellow Slade.” Will these journals now show their regard
for fair play by honestly telling their readers that there are two sides to
the question, and that it is not quite so certain as they had supposed
that Slade is a trickster.
I feel somewhat interested in the matter ; for, knowing that some
at least of the phenomena through Slade was genuine, I gave him a letter
of introduction to one of the most eminent investigators in England,
who, having fully satisfied himself in regard to the phenomena, and
compared notes with German and Russian investigators, has recently
put forth a volume entitled “ Psychography,” in which the proofs are


summed up with irresistible cogency. “ Strike, but hear, gentlemen I”
The new book will be soon for sale in Boston, f E. S.
After this very likely “ The Vagabond” will argue that Professor
Zollner is also a dupe or a fool.
Now “ The Vagabond” mentions the fact of broken messages, bad
punctuation, and bad grammar; this is so, and the cause is not far off,
and was given to me by a Spirit itself, in answer to my question on the
point. “In consequence of the continual laughter, the small talk, and
the breaks and jars occurring during the receipt of a message on the
slate, the disturbances in the circle sitting for such messages are so great
as to make it difficult to avoid these errors.” I know the truth of this
now, by practice, for, after that, I kept silence, and the consequence was
all my messages were good, both in grammar, dictation, and spelling ;
besides, why should a Spirit use a better grammar, &c., than the person it
represents ?
Now I come to where “ The Vagabond” imposes on himself a very
painful duty, by drawing attention to my advertisement in the Argus of
the 18th February, 1879. I have reproduced it further on, for the bene-
fit of those who have not read it already.
“ The Vagabond” says “ He is a friend of mine, that he esteems me
highly, and he respects the memory of the lady whose name has so un-
fortunately been thrust before the public,” &c,, &c. In the first place, I
deny that “ The Vagabond” is a friend of mine, or, if so, why does he
deem it a painful duty to expose me ; perhaps this is his idea of friend-
ship, then God save me from my friends. lam thankful to him and his
confreres in this book that they have given me this opportunity of coming
before the world and declaring myself. lam a Spiritualist, and whether
I have worked well or ill on this earth must remain to be shown me in
Spirit land. Three months ago I was a sceptic, but not in the general
meaning of the word ; I did not know sufficient of the subject to be
capable of judging ; I had heard lectures, but, though they may appeal
ever so strongly to the reasoning mental faculties of man, still lectures
will convince very few. The more reason you bring to bear on Spiritu-
alism and its teachings, the more convinced you become of its truth. It
was actual physical facts shown me through Dr. Slade’s mediumship that
convinced me, and since then I have made rapid strides. I have thrown
down no gauntlet to unbelievers in my advertisement, it is only a plain
and simple statement of facts detailed as they occurred, and the truth of
f This book is now for sale, under the title of “ Psychography by M. A.
Oxon,” and may be purchased in Sydney for the sum of 6s.


which I have vouched for, and, in the concluding paragraph to that
article, I deny part of Dr. Knaggs’ statement. “ The Vagabond” puts
forth a piteous wail as to my wife’s name being thrust before the public.
I have such a respect for my wife’s name that I would ask “ The Vaga-
bond” not to dishonour it again by passing it through his lips ; I, for one,
have had sufficient of his friendship.
My wife’s name I have a right to use, and no man should be so
insolent as to question my right ; I shall take care that whenever I use
it, it shall be with honour, and in the cause of truth, and not as he has
referred to it, in a paper that bristles with falsehood and calumny. He
is quite right in saying that nothing in their pamphlet will change my
views, I flatter myself that it would take some reasoning and some facts
to do that.
He now commences to analyse the conditions under which I have
framed that advertisement, and mixes up truth and supposition into such
a heterogeneous mass as to be quite confusing. Certainly I had known
Slade a fortnight, but I deny being under his moral sway, in any case, if
so, it was much better “moral sway’ than “ The Vagabond’s ” could
have been.
He makes a gratuitous statement, “ that I went to Melbourne hav-
ing no earthly business there for two months previously I had been
ordered there by a medical man for change of air, and private affairs being
propitious at that time, I was glad of going in company with a gentleman
I so much respected and liked ; further than this, it gave me opportuni-
ties of seeing him in private, and it was these very private views that
have to a great extent helped to convince me. “ The Vagabond” now
says “he believes that Slade says this and did that at their first inter-
view.” Why does he not accuse me openly of perjury, have I not sworn
to my statement ? Everything occurred as I have stated, and there is
no imagination in the facts narrated, nor in the order in which they
occurred ; but my sometime friend says “ he is not going to analyse or
attempt, seriatim, to account for the manifestations described in this
advertisement.” Then have I failed, for that is why I published it; I
want it logically and truthfully explained ; is not this very pamphlet of
theirs called “ a complete exposure, &c., &c., and an explanation of so-
called spirit phenomena.” And yet one of the writers lays down his pen
with the remark quoted, he refers to Dr. Knaggs and Mr. Wilton’s papers,
but they let my facts alone also : it strikes me forcibly just here that
they have used Dr. Slade’s name to make money, “The Vagabond”
especially knowing the value of a seasonable article either for or against
a famed man. “Ifhe is detected in one trick, I believe all his manifes-
tations are of the same kind,” so says m y friend. Quite so, and the


fact still remains that never yet has he been detected of trickery, for the
very simple reason, that there are no tricks to detect. These men do not
know what they are writing about, they go on blindly fighting against
the wind, and with stubborn minds; what they don’t see, they imagine ;
and of their own hearts they judge all men to be, more or less, as they
are themselves. “ The Vagabond” goes on about Chevalier Thorn, &c.,
as to his going through tricks privately, and his publication of a challenge
to Dr. Slade. Why should Dr. Slade accept challenges, his friends
stand to him, Spiritualism spreads and truth progresses without his
demeaning himself to accept any or every challenge thrown'out to him by
these itinerant conjurors. Neither Chevalier Thorn nor Professor Bald-
win can do as Slade does under the same conditions, and prove it is not
Spirits at work. They may kick a chair over, or write on a slate, or
bungle through some other performance, but those who have seen Dr.
Slade detect the difference at once.
Many people go away perfectly contented from a public performance
satisfied of Dr. Slade’s complete exposure ; these people have not seen
him, and the first question I put to these men when they say they have
seen Thorn or Baldwin expose him, is this—“ Have you seen Dr. Slade?”
“ No, but that doesn’t matter, we were told it was exactly the same.” I
leave this to impartial readers to express their own opinion of such logic.
I have referred once before to a falsehood written by “ The Vaga-
bond,” in stating that “ the answers were always in English,” and now
he more deeply involves himself in untruth. He says that “ I state,”
and I do so again, “ that Slade, whether in Eussia, China, Fiji, or any
other foreign country, would receive messages from spirits in the
language of that country,” and I now say that I am positive on this
point, and it is a point that is of itself so good a test, that I wonder it
has been so long unnoticed. “ The Vagabond ” has stated that answers
were always in English, and implies that I have sworn falsely in stating
otherwise; now let the falsehood rest on him who uttered it. I will first
quote from the work “ Psychography ” in support of this statement.
“ When we find Ancient and Modern Greek, Spanish, Portuguese,
Russian, Swedish, Dutch, German, Arabic, and Chinese forming the
language of some of these Psychographs obtained in the presence of
Slade and Watkins, we shall not have much difficulty in concluding that
their linguistic attainments are not of this polyglot character.”
“ Slade knows no language but his own mother tongue. I am in a
position to affirm this with confidence on the authority of Dr. Carter
Blake.” *******


“ I adduce, therefore, this fact, that languages unknown to the Psychic
are frequently used, as an additional proof of [the absence of frauds.
When such precautions are taken to prevent previous fraudulent prepar-
ations of the slate as I have noted in each quoted case (see “ Psycho-
graphy,” page 71), the presumption is in favour of the reality of the
phenomenon. When the evidence of the senses tells of the progress of
the writing, that presumption is increased. If, when the slate is
inspected, the language used is unknown to the Psychic, I submit that
the presumption is still further increased, and that another link has been
added to the chain of evidence.”
The following instances of Dr. Slade having obtained foreign langua-
ges may be referred to in that work, and there are fac similies of some
of them: —
Hon. R. Dale Owen, received Matthew v. 43-45, in Greek.
Mr. Charles Blackburn states that, in hroad daylight , a crumb of
pencil was placed on top of the table, and a clean slate turned face down-
wards over the pencil, and he received another verse in Greek.
Mr. Gledstane “ had Greek, Arabic, and English on the same slate.”
“ Since Slade has been on the Continent, at the Hague and Berlin,
we find that messages in Dutch and German are written.”
“ In London, one gentleman obtained writing in both Spanish and
Portuguese.”
There are also many proofs of Mr. Watkins’ mediumship in the
same way, but I consider that Dr, Slade is more in question in this
pamphlet.
One more quotation from page 150 of this book. It speaks of the
time Dr. Slade was in St. Petersburg, and mentions that he “ has had a
series of successful sittings, in the course of which writing has been
obtained in the Russian language. At one recent sitting, writing in six
different languages was obtained on a single slate.”
Personally, I have now in my possession a German message on a
slate, as follows :
3d) fycffe, idj bedange nid&t ju bid bon 3brer ©efdlligfeit, inbem id)
6ie §u ©unften meiheS greunbeS in Slnfprudj neijme, unb in bicfcr
£)ofrnunq berbleibe id)
ber Sfyrige anfridjtig
P. S.
I had a French one also, but it has been accidently destroyed. It
ran —“ Montrez moi ton rneme, montrerai vous ton occur.” I think I have
now said enough to prove the truth (in the words of The Vagabond) “ of
the statement which Mr. Haviland is called upon to swear to.”


In conclusion of “ The Vagabond’s ” article, he says “if in this
paper I use strong words it is because I feel strongly, a friend of mine
having been duped and the holiest feelings of his nature preyed upon by
a scoundrel, who I trust will yet meet his just reward.” A friend of
mine need not fear, I’ll be duped no longer by his friendship, neither need
he trust that Dr. Slade will meet his just reward, for he is sure of that.
The two first lines of his quotation I will aptly quote to him again,
and let him lay them well to heart—
‘ ‘ And I can teach thee, coz, to shame the devil
By telling truth. ”
I now come to the article of Dr. Knaggs, reprinted from the
Herald, after revision. In answering “ The Vagabond ” I have in a
general manner answered all the pamphlet, but there are still a few
points to be particularly dealt with, which I shall do in as few words as
possible.
I know nothing personally of Dr. Knaggs, but I am told by some
of his intimate friends that he is very shortsighted, and this may in a
great measure account for the fact that his imagination has led him
astray, causing him to state things positively, which never occurred.
He says, “ I went ivith an unbiassed and impartial mind." He could not
have done so, as just before that he remarks, “My object in going in
the morning was to have a general survey of the method of procedure ;
this w r ould enable me to plan for the afternoon any feasible means for the
detection of jugglery or fraud, should I have reason to suspect such.” Mark
this, he went to detect jugglery and fraud, and therefore it is no question of
“ should he have reason to suspecthe had reason to suspect, or he
would not have gone beforehand to make ready— ergo, his mind was not
unbiassed and impartial.
I, for the first two or three times that I went to Dr. Slade, was not
an impartial judge ; I was prepossessed with the horror of throwing over
the English Church, and it was against my will that I have become a
thorough and firm believer in a faith that I have only too many facts to
substantiate.
Dr. Knaggs goes on with a description of his sitting, and with it I
have no fault to find, in fact, all the descriptions of what occurred, are
about the truest part of this book, it is only their imagination and con-
cocted explanations that are wrong. For instance, when he gives as a
fact, his idea of how the table was raised—but I shall come to this
presently.
Dr. Slade made a rule not to admit more than three at each sitting,
more than this number sitting at once retarded the phenomena, and,


therefore, Dr. Knaggs need not imagine that it was through any fear of
him that Dr. Slade “ appeared disinclined to admit him ” with his three
other friends. Dr. Slade evidently recognised him as having already
received a sitting, and most likely imagined that, in all probability, as
the others had not, Dr. Knaggs would give way. He could not possibly
have had an idea that these men were laying a trap in their, or rather
Dr. Knaggs’, unprejudiced mind to catch him.
Dr. Knaggs now begins to imagine, and the utter absurdity of his
imaginations is so palpable, that it is sufficient to leave it to any man’s
good reason. Instead of harming Spiritualism, or Dr. Slade, he has only
increased the yearning for knowledge in the one, and added to the fame
of the other, so that when Dr. Slade returns to Sydney about the end of
this year, he will find many enquiring minds who want to see for
themselves.
Dr. Knaggs says that the means he adopted was to “ obtain a plain
mirror of silvered glass,” in other words, a piece of looking-glass, and he
put this between his legs, or rather he leads people to believe he did, for
my own part, and for his sake, I should be sorry to believe this statement.
It comes to one of two things, either Dr. Knaggs never used a mirror at
all, or, if he did, then his short-sightedness helped him to see things that
never occurred. The very size mentioned is an absurdity, “ two and a
half inches wide and five inches long just let some one get a mirror of
that description, and sit down at one side of a square table, having all
four sides occupied, and try to Avatch the movements of his friend’s hands
and legs under the table, he will find it next door to impossible ; and Dr.
Knaggs hardly, I should think, clever conjurer as he may be, attained
sufficient proficiency in the use of his mirror to see all he states he saw
in the interim between the morning and afternoon seances. Besides this,
I have very good reason to assert that he never used a mirror at all.
The next statement, and one that is equally untrue, is that Dr.
Slade uses his foot to make taps under the table, or that, with the same
member, he grasps the sitters’chairs for the purpose of pulling or pushing
them. Why Dr. Knaggs makes such a statement Ido not know, it is
certainly possible for a conjurer to do these things of himself, but Dr.
Slade never by any mechanical action of his body, helped in any way to
the success or otherwise of his seances.
I have seen him kneeling on a cane-bottomed chair fully two feet
away from the table, and at such a distance that it was only by leaning
as far as he possibly could forward that he might reach the table Avith
his hands, and in this position, I have obtained writing, raps, had my
chair tAvisted round, and felt hands on my knees, and friends have been


present at the time, and I can conscientiously state that he has never in
any way received messages or produced manifestations other than by
spirit power and with spirit help.
As for the pencil being grasped by the toes or fixed in the slipper,
it is the most arrant nonsense I have heard, and in reference to this I
will relate some phenomena that occurred at one of my sittings with Dr.
Slade.
A well-known Sydney gentleman went with me, and knowing his
practical turn for carpentry, &c., I was anxious that he should see the
wonderful table that is supposed to carry springs, clockwork, electricity,
and all other kinds of automatic apparatus. He was quite satisfied with
the make, and pronounced it to be a good, strong, common, pine table.
(I have got it here now, and am using it to write upon.) It measures
exactly 3 feet 6 inches square, and feet high, weighs 45 lbs., is solid
work, and has four legs. The general appearance is that of a common
table, whose top has been extended so as to project over the two sides
for about one foot. My friend being quite satisfied as to the absence of
anything extraneous to the table, we sat down, he being next Dr. Slade.
After several phenomena, the Doctor kneeled up on the chair as I have
said before, and holding two common slates together, with a bit of pencil
between them (these slates we had examined on both sides), he placed
them on edge on my friend’s head, and we proceeded to talk on general
topics; presently the scratching sound was audible, and then the taps,
signifying conclusion, and on opening the slates the message was—
“ How i§ this for toes ?” And I reiterate the query, and in doing so,
scatter Dr. Knaggs’ toe theory to the winds.
As for his allusion to “business ” and “ patter,” he could, if he had
liked, have had silence the whole time, as I did when I found why words
were misspelt, &c.
Dr. Knaggs’ explanation of the log-slate writing, that iswriting on the
inside of a folding-slate, while locked or fastened, is also most ridiculous.
Why, if he went so fully prepared for all these things, did he not see
that there was no writing on it on either side. I took good care with
my log-slate that I saw all and that it did not leave my sight, and still
when it was opened there was a message from my wife, and signed
by her.
Dr. Knaggs would imply that the writing was done with another
piece of pencil. This is not so. It is done by Spirit hands with the
identical grain of pencil lying on the slate, and anyone who has watched
closely will have noticed that in every instance the pencil is left at the
end of the last word, be the message one or a hundred words long.


Another supposition on the part of Dr. Knaggs is, that Dr Slade lifted
the table described above, by “grasping one leg of the table between his
legs and knees and bringing the edge of the table top into his abdomen.”
He never once did anything of the sort, and the foolishness of this
explanation speaks for itself. My readers will see this when they
understand, that Dr, Slade’s two feet being under the table, he requests
one of the sitters to place his foot over them so as to be perfectly sure
that he (Dr. Slade) in no way moves his legs, knees, or feet. He then
sits off from the table at the full length of his arms, and each of the
sitters having their hands joined with his in the centre of the table top, he
requests the Spirits to lift it “ plumb up from the floor,” and as each
sitter raises his hand so the table follows until it is suspended in mid-
air some eight inches or a foot from the floor, the top being perfectly
level. Directly the connection of hands is broken the table falls with a
crash. That is a fair and true statement, and I defy Dr. Knaggs to
prove anything he has said. It was stated in the papers that he had
given a successful exposure of Dr. Slade’s performance at Newcastle. A
great many are waiting for him in Sydney, where some people have seen
Dr. Slade. In Newcastle, very few, if any, have seen the Medium he
professes to expose, let him therefore come to Sydney and prove his
words. Until he does this he must allow this statement of mine to
stand before the world, that he has accused a gentleman wrongfully.
Mr. Wilton’s “ Another Seance with Dr. Slade,” has hardly any-
thing in it worth a special notice ; he has been mostly answered in the
previous pages, but, for the information of those who care to know, I am
the Mr. X referred to in his paper, and I am “ a firm believer in the
genuineness of Dr. Slade’s mediumistic powers,” having much more
reason for my belief than these four in their ignorance and obstinacy have
to disbelieve. Mr. Wilton goes a little step further than the others, in
implying in one part of his article that I was a confederate, and he only
proves his own denseness by his words.
Again, Mr. Wilton refers to the compass, and offers his feeble ex-
planation of the phenomena, as to what moves the needle. I simply copy
a paragraph from the Banner of Light, of the 11th May, 1878, which I
think will be sufficient for Mr. Wilton’s theory :
“ At a seance given by Slade, at the house of A. Aksakof, Russian
Imperial Councillor at St. Petersburg, two pocket compasses were placed
upon the table, side by side. The spirit force was requested to turn the
needle of one while the other remained stationary, which was done, thus
destroying the theory that it was turned by a concealed magnet,”
His explanations, or rather attempted explanations, as to the touches
he felt, and that I (Mr. X) felt also, are simply childish in the extreme,


and lie is careful in not stating manfully he saw Dr. Slade do it, but no,
he only implies, lago-like, that it was Dr. Slade.
There is one thing has struck me forcibly, how all these writers toil
to make mountains out of molehills. I pity the next medium who is ex-
posed by them; why, Dr. Slade could not scratch his toes without Mr.
Wilton fancying that “ he commenced to rub and move the joints like
one who suffered from twinges of cramp. He had plenty of time to use
his fingers ; but had he been writing with his toes ? Or had the pre-
hensile movement necessary to produce “ Spirit” touches given him the
cramp ?” Let me ask Mr. Wilton a more sensible question in the same
style—Had the undulatory motion of some fugitive flea caused an irrita-
tion in his pedal appendages ? And where was the pencil, surely Mr.
Wilton must have seen it when the toes were on the chair, being
“rubbed ?”
He then goes on to state, with reference to a question asked by him
on the back of a slate, that “he felt quite certain that he (Dr. Slade)
turned the slate in his fingers and so read what I had written.” I not
only feel quite certain, but, being present and seeing all that occurred, I
assert most positively Dr. Slade did nothing of the kind.
Mr. Wilton falls into a common error of those who do not under-
stand anything about Spirit life. His sneering remarks as to their
failure to give him a definite answer prove this. Spirits do not know
and see all things, they cannot tell you everything you may wish to know,
sometimes they must investigate a subject before they can answer. In
fact, Spirits lose none of their earthly individuality, but as on earth they
saw “in a glass darkly,” as Spirits they now see “ face to face.” Mr.
Wilton asked “how some one met his death?” it was just possible an
answer could be given, but the chances were against it, because that some
one may have been in another sphere or phase, or, more properly speak-
ing, state of progression, and the Spirits then present in the room with
us may never have met or known the party in question. It is the ignor-
ance of this condition that disappoints many inquirers.
I have already stated facts that answer Mr. Wilton in any point
worth a reply in his paper, but towards the end of his article he says—
“ Let Dr. Slade submit his manifestations to a committee of practical
men under conditions that will ensure a crucial test.” Has he not
already done it over and over again ; one would think Dr. Slade had
never been out of Sydney, and had never held seances before men who
occupy higher positions in the scientific world than any in Sydney—for
instance, Professor Zollner and his brother professors of the Berlin
University ; Dr. C. Carter Blake, and dozens of others whose names I


have not by me. So that having already done this, I think both “he and
his disciples” have cause for complaint when such men as these exposers
write such malicious and unfounded statements as are given to the public
in their pamphlet.
The most amusing paper in this “complete exposure” is “Maori’s.”
It is amusing in two senses, it “exposes” nothing, and explains nothing,
and it serves as a special advertisement to “ Maori’s ” “ lately published
book,” “ Sport and Work on the Nepaul Frontier,” published by Mac-
millan and Co. towards the close of last year. I must certainly say this,
the book is well worth reading, the descriptions of the Hindoo tribes are
splendid, the adventures narrated are exciting, and altogether the book
should be obtained by those who want reliable information put in a most
enticing manner. My personal experience of his book is, that if I pick
it up to glance at it, lam almost compelled to go on reading it. But I
am not criticising “ Maori’s ” book, I only meant to notice the shrewd
way he has advertised it ; but I know “ Maori ” is a Scotchman, and that
is quite sufficient.
I fail to see where “ Maori’s ” paper in this pamphlet is at all apposite
to the “ Exposure of the Chicaneries of Professional Mediums,” or “ an
Explanation of so-called Spirit Phenomena.” It is only a relation of
some conjurer’s tricks, with a sprinkling here and there of quotations
from the Bible or holy sentiments of his own.
“ Maori,” like “ The Vagabond,” never saw Dr. Slade at a seance.
As to his allusion to the fact of messages being received from Shy-
lock, Falstaff, Mrs. ’Arris, and the like, I have already dealt with it, and
besides that explanation, allowing for the sake of argument that the
Medium wrote these answers of his own volition, would it not stand to
reason that he would never be such a fool as to sign as genuine signatures
names of mythical personages ? Were I such an imposter, knowing it,
I should answer to these and such questions, “ you are a blockhead to
expect answers from people who never lived.” But answers being given
and being signed by Shylock for instance, only prove to me that the
Medium never knows the question, and knows nothing of the answer.
“ Maori’s ” four last words are (in capitals), “ BUT FEAR
THOU GOD.” No true Spiritualist does this, for God is not to be
feared, hut loved.
To Dr. Knaggs’ second paper, “ Spiritualism Considered as an In-
fectious Disease,” one simple answer may be given—
All the arguments of prejudiced men cannot overthrow a fact: what
is a fact is true, and, if Spiritualism be a disease, then I think the sooner
we are infected, the better for us, both here and hereafter. There are only


too many witnesses to prove it is no disease, any more than Christianity
(so called) is, or any other religious faith, and what I claim for Spiritual-
ism is this —it takes away all horror or fear of Death ; there is really
no Death ; it is but the passing from one sphere to another, and, though
the mortal part of man may be absent from his loved ones, still he is not
parted from them ; his spirit is ever with them, can communicate and advise
them, and guard them from harm, if they will listen to his warning.
Spirits do not like to be treated contemptuously, and when this feeling is
got over, then good results will follow.
God (the same God as others believe in) is exalted to a wise, just,
loving Father ; we (Spiritualists) do not believe that God could ever
have been the unjust, cruel, tyrannical Being he is made out to be in the
Old Testament; every day is God’s day, and every day of the week we
have cause to know and be thankful for His love and goodness. We
fear Him not, for there can be no fear where true love exists.
Time alone will prove how much truth there is in this second contri-
bution of Dr. Knaggs, and I, for one, am quite content to wait. If Dr.
Knaggs is a true believer in his own religion, and really wishes to do
good, why does he not come to Sydney and allow some of the Spiritualists
who have been present at Dr. Slade’s seances to test him, whether Dr,
Knaggs himself is not that, that he tries vainly to prove others.
I now come to “ The Spirits at Albury,” reported to the ALhury
Banner of January 11, 1879. On reading this, one would imagine that
it was from here Dr. Knaggs got his theory, and also from here Mr.
Wilton’s statement as to Dr. Slade slipping “ his toes out of his boots”
arose. Like other prejudiced reports of seances, there is some truth,
some falsehood, and some (not manfully out-spoken assertions) but dark
hints, which are not worth while noticing. Concerning the writing and
spelling of the word “ investigate” as “ investigate,” I am inclined to
think that a prejudiced man, not only on the watch, but anxious to prove
his ideas, would greatly, by his imagination, be led to take a roughly
written “ i ” for an “ e ,” or vice versa, more especially when written on a
slate. But let my readers put against this had spelling of a psychic’s
mother tongue, the fact that he has received on a slate foreign languages,
of which he knows nothing, correctly spelt, and good in grammar, as
quoted previously. Then this “ mountain” raised by “ exposers” will
dwindle again to the “ molehill” from which it sprung.
As a sort of counterbalance, I close my work with a statement of
actual facts ; I give no explanations, but leave them to the reasoning
powers of my readers ; such as I have narrated actually occurred, and I
can produce plenty of witnesses to prove them. If any man doubt my


statement, I will willingly make oath to the whole or any part of it, as I
have already to that published in the Melbourne Argus, February 18, 1879,
and which I place first, as follows :
Spiritualistic Facts, or Scepticism Bewildered.
In the first place I must preface what I have to say with the
remark, that had you gone through Sydney you would hardly have found
a greater sceptic than myself, but at the same time I must also state
that I did not sit calmly down and laugh at Spiritualism as “ jugglery,
humbug, and imposture.” No ! I, like many others, wanted to see and
hear the arguments of the other side, and took every opportunity of so
doing. I heard Mrs. Britten, and admired her lecture immensely. I
listened with wonder and awe, not unmixed with reverence, to the words
she spoke, but still that did not convince me. I wanted a manifestation,
something real, something tangible, and I got it.
Of all the phenomena connected with Spiritualism I think that of
“ slate writing ” is the most wonderful, and though people are apt to slur
it over, and do not attach much importance to it, still what can be more
wonderful or more convincing, to what is fast becoming an acknowledged
fact, than written messages from those we’ve “ loved and lost,” making
one feel that they are “ not dead but only gone before.”
Now, before I proceed with the details of my experience, I must
state that wherever I have used names in full I have permission to do so,
and the parties concerned are well known in Sydney, and with this ex-
planation further proof of my words may be obtained if necessary ; and
I hope that your readers will pardon the rather frequent use of the letter
“ I,” but being a personal narrative, it is difficult to cut it out.
Last Saturday fortnight I was proceeding along York Street, Sydney,
and in passing Dr. Slade’s house, I was suddenly taken with the idea to
go up and see him. There was no previous intention of my doing so, as,
five minutes before, he had not been in my mind. I had never met him,
and was in fact, a perfect stranger to him. I reached his room and found
him alone, with the window open and the blind drawn up. I did not
introduce myself, but only asked for an appointment for the following
week, which was granted for Wednesday afternoon. I was turning to go
away, when I thought I might have one “ all to myself,” and this he
readily acceded to, saying, “ Possibly you might get more personal mes-
sages alone,” We closed the door, and I examined the table. It was
very plain deal, with a wide ledge, had four legs, was steady and strong,
and had no apparatus concealed in any part of it. It was not hollow, as I
have heard suggested, for I tapped it and sounded it thoroughly. We then
joined hands on top of it, the window being still open (it was a calm clear
day) ; immediately raps were heard, as if in the wood, dull, heavy thuds.
Then the doctor said, “Tap like this,” producing a sharp sound with his
nail, and it was imitated at once. He then asked, “ Will you write?”
and was answered by three raps, decisive and loud. “Are you ready ?”
three raps again ; this meant “Yes.”


All this time Dr. Slade was sitting sideways to the table, with his
feet and legs well away from it, and in full view. After the answer last
given, he turned round and picked a slate off a side table, cleaned it with
a sponge, and placed a chip of pencil on it, and held it under the ledge,
clamped it there, in fact, by placing his thumb on the top of the table.
He then put his left hand on my two, and at once we heard writing on the
slate. Now, I just wish here to reiterate the fact that the doctor and I were
perfect strangers, and that he knew nothing about me and my affairs I
am most positive. Three taps announced the completion of the message,
and with some difficulty he slid the slate from the table (it seemed to be
almost glued there) and handed it to me.
The slate contained a message from my wife (now dead eight
months) congratulating me on having come to the medium, and using
terms and words —“ passwords ” I should more properly call them—
familiar to us both during her life. The writing on the first message was
not like hers at all, with the exception of the signature, and that instead
of being her Christian name Jessie, was signed as we more often called
her “ Sissie,” and in a similar way to that on her letters addressed to
me. I received a second message from her referring to her two children,
the existence of whom Dr. Slade knew not.
Dr, Slade then asked if any other spirits were present, and this
time held the slate downwards on top of the table, with the pencil con-
fined in the intervening space. Immediately there was written a large
“W. H.” I disowned any knowledge of the initials, and though I
tried to think of some one answering to them, still I could not.
“ Never mind,” said the doctor, “ we will ask who it is ?” and putting
the slate down again he said, “ Will the Spirit please give full name ?”
Then we heard the writing again, and then the taps signifying the con-
clusion. He turned the slate over, and there, written in quite a different
hand to the first message, were the words, “ I am your uncle, William
Haviland.” Had I a doubt this must have removed it, there was no
mind-reading, clairvoyance, or will force here. In the first place, my
wife did not give the surname, and in the next the doctor did not know
it, and still this was a truth. William Haviland, my father’s brother,
was shot in the gold escort in New South Wales, how many years ago I
almost forget, I should think about 18 or 20, and when I was a child,
therefore I looked on that message as a marvellous test.
Now, I went home and told Mrs. Robson (my mother-in-law) all
this, and she, who was, like I had been, a disbeliever, wondered at it
greatly, and finally said, “ I’m going into town on Monday, will you
come with me and see him ?” Of course I would, and I told her that
sometimes Spirits tied knots in ladies’ handkerchiefs, as I had been
informed, and so she had better take an extra one.
On Monday morning we went at 11 o'clock, Mrs. Robson taking
with her a handkerchief. We entered the room and I made no intro-
duction, simply saying, “ That this lady wanted to sit with me.” This
time we shut the door, and, as before, left the window up, Mrs. Robson
sitting down with the loose handkerchief on her lap on one side, Dr.
Slade sitting sideways, as before, and myself opposite him. We joined


hands on the top of the table, and at once strong raps announced the
presence of the Spirits. I was touched on the knee and on the side,
Mrs. Eobson’s chair was twisted round, she in it, and her bonnet strings
and ribbons were visibly pulled and untied, and all this in hroad daylight,
and not, as many suppose, in darkness. Dr. Slade then took a slate,
and after holding it a minute he said, “ Oh, it’s gone,” and immediately
it appeared on edge at the opposite side of the table, out of reach of any
one but myself. “ Bring it back to me,” said he, and the slate disap-
peared again, and reached his hand, never once touching the floor. “ I
think,” said the doctor to Mrs. Eobson, “that the Spirits want you to
hold the slate yourself.” She took it from him. He put his two hands
on the top of the table with ours, and Mrs. Eobson held the slate alone
just under the table in front of her. Writing was distinctly heard, and
soon it stopped, and we took the slate from her to read the message. It
proved to be from her daughter (my wife), and was addressed, “ My
darling mother and husband it then went on to speak about private
affairs, of her father who was present with her, of her children and how
happy she was, &c. I kept on watching Mrs. Eobson’s handkerchief,
which lay still untouched in her lap, and we both had several touches, as
if a hand had been laid on our knees. At one time there was written
on the slate, “ My dear husband, it was I touched you, —Jessie.” For
one instant I had my eyes off the handkerchief, and when I looked
again it was rolled up tight and knotted in two curious and small knots,
one in each end. Dr. Slade seemed as much astonished as we were, and
holding the slate face downwards on the table he asked, “ Who tied the
handkerchief?” and the answer came, “ Father.” This was splendidly
written, and was so like my wife’s handwriting that we could not doubt
the truth, but what followed was the most singular part of this apparently
trifling knot. “ Why,” said Mrs. Eobson in an almost bewildered state
of ‘(that is most strange. Do you know,” said she,
“my husband, Captain Eobson, when he was alive, used to tie knots
identical with these in every way , he used to snatch my handkerchief out
of my pocket and tie them just like this.” Now, what can sceptics say
to this ? I give it up. I have that handkerchief at home, and have
shown it to dozens of people.
The next fact I come to, taking them seriatim, occurred on the
following Wednesday the (appointed day) when I visited the doctor in
company with two gentlemen, one a well-known Sydney engineer (Mr.
T. S. Parrott). We took the folding-book slate with us, and obtained
messages inside it, the slate being held on top of the table. We had
also other manifestations of the presence and power of the Spirits, but
in this article I only wish to mention in as few words as possible what
struck me as most wonderful and most convincing proof of Dr. Slade’s
truthfulness, and further to impress on your readers the fact that they
may all go and see these things themselves, and it is for this purpose
that I seek publication of my statement in a paper where it will be read
by thousands and tens of thousands, for this will not only be published
in Melbourne, but every journal throughout England and America that
is essentially an organ of the people will place before its readers my


experiences, which, as far as in me lies, I have put past doubt, by taking
my oath before God and the world, are true.
But to pass on to the next interesting experiment. A gentleman
in Sydney called on Dr. Slade, and took with him a compass. Placing
it on the table, he requested the doctor to put his hand on it, but,
contrary to his expectations, the needle moved not. They then joined
hands, and the doctor putting one hand to the needle, covering his
visitor’s hands with his other one, was astonished himself to see the
needle deflected more than 60 degrees. The day following I was up
again to see him, and he told me of this, bearing out exactly what my
friend the scientist had said, and turning round to his side table he took
a small compass from it, and placing it between us, joined hands with me
and said, “ This is the way we did it,” but to his surprise the needle did
not move, “ Why,” said he, “ that is curious, it moved yesterday, but
perhaps the Spirits want you to do it.” I disengaged one hand from his,
and held it towards the needle, and it immediately followed my finger
whichever side I put it. He then pushed the compass far from us, to the
extreme edge of the table, and we sat away, but in full view of it.
“ Now,” said Dr. Slade, “will the Spirits please revolve the needle, if we
wish it ?” Three raps answered him, and the needle, with no one near
it, turned round several times. Perhaps scientific men will explain this,
but before they attempt it, let them take their own compasses, and the
doctor will, I doubt not, he only too happy to convince them. There is
only one thing for them to bear in mind, and that is, act in a courteous
and gentlemanly manner when you go, and not, as some have done, and
by so doing disgraced themselves, treated him as a swindling rascal, and
a rogue of the deepest dye.
Outsiders (those who have not seen Dr. Slade, and look on Spiritua-
lism as thorough trash and nonsense) are apt to judge rashly, and many
speak in a mysterious “stage-aside” voice of wires, electrior batteries,
will power, ethic, psychic, and goodness knows how many other forces,
and further still, if one mentions Dr. Slade in their hearing, they im-
mediately answer significantly, Professor Baldwin, Maskylene, Cooke, and
I forget how many other conjurors. But all I ask in simple fairness is
that before they speak of what they have not seen and do not know—in
fact, before they make fools of themselves—let them see Dr. Slade, and
I will guarantee that neither Baldwin nor any of the others can produce
writing on a locked-up book-slate under the same conditions that Dr.
Slade has done, and prove, as they profess to do, that it is not spirit
agency and power that is at work.
Dr. Slade has been to my private house, and on my own table, with
a common school slate, and in the presence of my friends, received written
messages of love and happiness from relatives that he could not possibly
have known of in any way, and I make this statement partly in justice to
him, but more so that others may share in some of the blessings awaiting
them. But perchance they may not get personal messages, and will then
be disappointed. Let them take heart and try by themselves in their
own family circle —try with planchette, or same other means, that I,


among many, have too long looked upon as toys and trifling objects, and
then their eyes will be opened, as, I thank God, mine have been.
In closing this article, I wish to state that it is by no means a com-
plete list of all I have witnessed, but only a selection of what I considered
the most remarkable and wonderful tests in my experience. Others, no
doubt, have seen better, and they should in justice give them to the
world. I shall write further details of this great blessing for the Banner
of Light, who, having the cause at heart, I know are only too happy to
publish such experiences, if people would only send them.
There is another thing that is very curious with regard to Dr. Slade’s
mediumship, and that is, that it does not signify whether he be in
Russia, China, Fiji, or any other foreign country, the messages written
on the slate are, with few exceptions, in the language of the people so
addressed.
Since writing the above, I have read Dr, Knaggs’ paper in the
Sydney Herald of the 14th instant, and he certainly proves that he is
“ wise in his own conceit.” As for his explanations, any sensible man
will at once see their stupidity, and I can only wonder at his putting his
name to such nonsense. Just let him try to raise a table like Dr. Slade’s
by “ grasping one leg between his legs and knees, and burying the edge
in his abdomen.” Let him practice it for the next ten years, and he
won’t do it. Dr, Slade, I positively assert, does not touch the table at
all except with his hands ; but perhaps Dr. Knaggs can easily explain
“ how he (Slade) raised a lady of 9 st,, chair and all, from the floor,
simply by placing his hand on her chair back.”
E. C. HAVILAND.
I, EDWIN CYRIL HAVILAND, of Sydney, New South
Wales, do solemnly and sincerely declare, that the PHENOMENA and
occurrences as stated in my paper, “ Spiritualistic Facts, or Scepticism
Bewildered,” are TRUE, and took place in every particular as I have
therein set forth, and that Dr. Slade used no apparatus to produce them,
and that I carefully examined the table and slates used. And I make
this solemn declaration conscientiously believing the same to be true, and
by virtue of the provisions of an act of the Parliament of Victoria ren-
dering persons making a false declaration punishable for wilful and
corrupt perjury.
E. C. HAVILAND.
Declared at Melbourne, in the colony of Victoria, this seventeenth
day of February, one thousand eight hundred and seventy-nine, before
me, Henry Penheth Fergie, notary public, also a commissioner for taking
affidavits, &c., in the Supreme Court of the colony of New South Wales,
in Melbourne, in the colony of Victoria.
Now I shall proceed with the narration of the following facts, telling
them simply as they occurred, and I leave my readers to form their own
conclusions.
I do not wish to convert anybody, and the reasons I have thus come
forward and exposed these exposers are easily seen throughout my work.


While I was in Melbourne I was staying at the same hotel as Dr.
Slade (another proof I suppose of “ his moral sway ”), and one afternoon
the Doctor, who had been at his own rooms all the rest of the day, came
in, and taking one of the two easy chairs, began to smoke a cigar. I
rose from the chair where I was writing at the table and seated myself
in the other easy one. Immediately the chair I had left, which was
about six feet from either of us, began to rock backwards and forwards,
and finally on my asking if it was my wife moving it, gave three taps
and then drew over towards me.
Again, I had been deaf in my left ear for over three months. I had
tried all sorts of remedies and had resigned myself to fate, when it
seemed to me that I had better ask the advice of the Spirits. The next
time Dr. Slade was controlled I mentioned it, and the Spirit then con-
trolling him told me when I went to bed that night to lie on the right
side and I would be well in the morning. I did so, and in the morning
woke up perfectly cured. This fact I think goes a little beyond
imagination. I was also cured of heart disease, but of this I can
show no visible proof to any man, I know it is a truth and that is all.
It is not only on tables that raps come in Dr. Slade’s presence or
with other Mediums ; but with him 1 have had them on my own hat, he
not touching me in any way ; on his walking stick and umbrella, in the
railway carriages, on steamboats, or standing on a jetty at my private
house. I have received messages on slates held on my head, or on my
shoulder. I have also, as others have done, held a perfectly clean slate
myself in my right hand, he holding my left in his two hands on the top
of the table, and then I have received messages from friends written on
the slate, thus entirely removing the possibility of his writing them
himself.
Now I come to three cases that I wish to record particularly.
First, I will relate one in which I only came in at the latter part, and it
is this:—A gentleman in Sydney, well known, honoured, and respected,
went to Dr. Slade for a seance: the message he received was as follows:
“ Dear Sir, —I am not able to say but a word. lam the father-in-
law of Mr. W. (or M.) Snowdon ; I lived at the corner of Buckland and
Cooper-streets, Waterloo ; I want my friends to know this is a truth ; I
am not able to say more now.” And then he said “he had a reason for
not writing his name.”
I went out to Waterloo by request of my friend to make inquiries
about this, and though I tried all four corners, nobody was known of the
name of Snowdon, Just as I was turning away disappointed, an elderly
lady stepped out to me and said she “had heard me asking for Snowdon,


because, he never lived there, but his father-in-law, a Mr. Mitchell, died
in the corner house about ten days before, and she did not know where
Mrs. Mitchell lived now.” I said, “ I had got a written message from
him for his friends.” But she answered, u He could not write at all.”
Perhaps that is the reason he would not sign his name, and he got some
friendly spirit to write for him. I have not found any of his relatives,
but if any of my readers know them, will they oblige me by showing this
to them?
The other two anecdotes are personally ray own. One night, at my
house, Dr. Slade proposed a seance between ourselves, and we sat down
to a common dining table. After receiving messages on the slate both
below and above the table-top, an impression came upon me to apply the
following test: —l had a small folding photographic album, holding four
portraits, in my pocket ; I took it out of my pocket and threw it open
on the floor at the extreme end of the table, and entirely out of reach of
any one of us. I then took Mrs. Robson’s hand in mine (Dr. Slade’s two
hands and one of ours being on top of the table all the time), and holding
her right hand just under the ledge, I said, “ Jessie (that is my late wife)
will take a photo out of that album and give it to us.” Hardly half-a-
minute elapsed when we felt it put between our joined fingers, and I picked
tbe case up, minus the one we held. Again, I replaced it, and this time
fastening the book up, threw it back, and said, “ Now she will take the
same one and leave the book as I fastened it.” Immediately it was
done, we held the photo, and the book was less that one, and was fastened
as I had left it.
One more, and I have nearly done. Dr. Slade was staying with me,
that is, passing his evenings out at Five Dock, and about a week or ten
days before his departure we were all sitting round chatting, when he was
suddenly entranced or controlled by a Spirit, who proceeded to speak as
follows, addressing me —
“ You, we know, will take warning when it is given to you, and that
is one reason why we have come, if others would heed us, and not treat
us with such contempt, we would warn them in the same way, but what
we have come to tell you is this. Some men, there are several of them,
are planning to break into this house, because they see jewellery about
you all when you get out of the train at Ashfield. The description of
the two men who are going to try to do it, is this—'One is shorter than the
other. The short man has a grey beard and hair, slightly curly, and
wears moleskin trowsers and a dark coat, and the taller one has black
hair and beard and has lost part of one of his little fingers. We do not
know their names, or where they live, but they often go over past the


honse where your wife left earth, because she has pointed that place out
to us. Now you make ready for them, they perhaps will try to poison
your dogs.”
The next morning I, at once, went to Mr. Fosberry, the Inspector of
Police, and informed him. He asked me several questions, and I told him
I had received my information from the Spirits. Then said he, “ I should
treat it with utter contempt, I can do nothing for you.” I had expected
as much, and only told him as a sort of evidence of the truth. I then
went to several Sydney friends, and on their promise to keep it quiet,
repeated all I knew.
Some five nights afterwards, we went to a friend’s at Enfield, not
reaching home until 12.45 a.m. ; coming in my gate, I fired a revolver,
to let my man know I was home, &c. When he came out, he said all
had been quiet, except the barking of the dogs once or twice, and we
went inside ; I looked round the house, and found all just as I had left
it, but, on returning to the dining-room, Dr. Slade was again controlled
by the same Spirit, who told me to “ go and look at the door leading into
my room off the verandah; the grey-haired man has been there with a
sharp chisel-like instrument, but he was awfully nervous, because he has
not done these things before. He had with him a brown slut, to keep
your dogs quiet, and he had only just commenced when you fired your
revolver at the gate, that frightened him so that he has run away as hard
as he can into the bush.”
We all went to look, and there, on the door to this day, are the
marks of the chisel, where he was forcing it by the lock. The next
morning I picked up a square of black net, evidently intended as a face-
covering by him. Further than this, the slut was seen round the place
with a string round her throat, and we, fearing to frighten the maids
unnecessarily, forebore from asking them questions. However, a few
days back, one of them casually mentioned “ burglars” to Mrs. Robson,
and then proceeded to tell her—“ You know, mam, the night you were at
Enfield, well, the laundress was sleeping here that night, and, about half-
past twelve, she woke us, saying someone was trying to get into Mr.
Haviland’s room, and we laid still to listen, when we heard a pistol shot,
and then heavy footsteps running along the verandah and away, as hard
as they could go,”
I, myself, have seen these two men together on the Five Dock Road,
and am only heartily sorry that I have not visible proof to offer my
readers, in the shape of their persons as prisoners. Rut, I have stated
simple facts, and I do so gladly, in the hope that it will prevent people
from rashly jeering at a subject of which they know next to nothing.


Just a few words in conclusion. In order to prove the truth of
Spiritualism, I append a copy of instructions to anyone who chooses to
investigate the subject at his or her own home, and, by doing this, medi-
ums will be developed all over the country whom their own personal
friends can thoroughly trust in. This will in a great measure remove
doubt from hundreds and thousands. Do not let anyone say it is not
worth investigating, for let them look at such men as Professor Crookes,
Zdllner, &c., and take them as examples.
Evidence that Spiritualism deserves Investigation.
{From “The Spiritualist.'")
Spiritualism deserves investigation because within the last twenty
years it has found its way into all the civilised countries on the globe ;
it has also a literature of thousands of volumes and not a few periodicals.
The London Dialectical Society Adam-street, Adelphi, under the
presidency of Sir John Lubbock, Bart., M.P., appointed a Committee to
investigate spiritual phenomena. The Committee was appointed on the
26th January, 1869, as follows:
“H. G. Atkinson, Esq., F.G.S. ; G. Wheatley Bennett, Esq.; J. S.
Bergheim, Esq., C.E. ; H. R, Fox Bourne, Esq. ; Charles Bradlaugh
Esq. ; G. Fenton Cameron, Esq., M.D. ; John Chapman, Esq., M.D. ;
Rev. C. Maurice Davies, D.D. ; Charles R. Drysdale Esq., M.D.; D.
H. Dyte, Esq., M.R.C.S. ; Mrs D. H. Dyte ; James Edmunds, Esq.,
M.D. ; Mrs Edmunds ; James Gannon, Esq. ; Gratton Geary, Esq. ;
Robert Hannah, Esq., F.G,S, ; Jenner Gale Hillier, Esq. ; Mrs J. G.
Hillier ; Henry Jeffery, Esq.; Albert Kisch, Esq., M.R.C.S. ; Joseph
Maurice, Esq, ; Isaac L. Meyers, Esq. ; B. M. Moss, Esq. ; Robert
Quelch, Esq., C.E. ; Thomas Reed, Esq. ; C. Russell Roberts, Esq.,
Ph. D. ; William Yolckman, Esq. ; Horace S. Yeomans, Esq.
“ Professor Huxley and Mr. George Henry Lewes, to be invited to
co-operate. Drs. Chapman and Drysdale and Mr. Fox Bourne, declim'il
to sit, and the following names were subsequently added to the
Committee:—
“George Cary, Esq., 8.A.; Edward W, Cox, Esq., Serjeant at-law;
William B. Gower, Esq. ; H. D. Jencken, Esq., Barrister-at-law , J. H.
Levy, Esq. ; W. H. Swepston, Esq., Solicitor ; Alfred R. Wallace, Esq..
F. R.G.S. ; Josiah Webber, Esq.”


In the course of its inquiries the committee of the Dialectical Society
engaged no professional medium, but the members pursued their investi-
gation among themselves and in their own families.
After inquiring into the subject for two years, the Committee
issued its report, which, with the evidence, forms a bulky volume, pub-
lished by Messrs. Longmans. Among other things this Committee
reported.
“ 1. That sounds of a very varied character, apparently proceeding
from articles of furniture, the floor and walls of the room—the vibrations
accompanying which sounds are often distinctly perceptible to the touch—
occur, without being produced by muscular action or mechanical con-
trivance.
“ 2, That movements of heavy bodies take place without mechanical
contrivance of any kind, or adequate exertion of muscular force by those
present, and frequently without contact or connection with any person.
“ 3. That these sounds and movements often occur at the time and
in the manner asked for by persons present, and by means of a simple
code of signals, answer questions and spell out coherent communications.”
How to Form Spirit Circles.
(From '■'The Spiritualist" Newspaper.)
Inquirers into Spiritualism should begin by forming spirit circles in
their own homes, with no Spiritualist or professional medium present.
Should no results be obtained on the first occasion, try again with other
sitters. One or more persons possessing medial powers without knowing
jt are to be found in nearly every household.
1. Let the room be of a comfortable temperature, but cool rather
than warm—let arrangements be made that nobody shall enter it, and
that there shall be no interruption for one hour during the sitting of the
circle.
2. Let the circle consist of four, five, or six individuals, about the
same number of each sex. Sit round an uncovered wooden table, with
all the palms of the hands in contact with its top surface. Whether the
hands touch each other or not is usually of no importance. Any table
will do, just large enough to conveniently accommodate the sitters. The


removal of a hand from the table for a few seconds does no harm,
but when one of the sitters breaks the circle by leaving the table it some-
times, but not always, very considerably delays the manifestations.
3. Before the sitting begins, place some pointed lead-pencils and
some sheets of clean writing paper on the table, to write down any
communications that may be obtained.
4. People who do not like each other should not sit in the same
circle, for such a want of harmony tends to prevent manifestations,
except with well-developed physical mediums ; it is not yet known why.
Belief or unbelief has no influence on the manifestations, but an acrid
feeling against them is a weakening influence.
5. Before the manifestations begin, it is well to engage in general
conversation or in singing and it is best that neither should be of a
frivolous nature. A prayerful, earnest feeling among the members of
the circle gives the higher spirits more power to come to the circle, and
makes it more difficult for the lower spirits to get near.
6. The first symptom of the invisible power at work is often a
feeling like a cool wind sweeping over the hands. The first manifestation
will probably be table tiltings or raps.
7. When motions of the table or sounds are produced freely, to
avoid confusion, let one person only speak, and talk to the table as to an
intelligent being. Let him tell the table that three tilts or raps mean
“ Yes” one means “No ” and two mean “ Doubtful,” and ask whether
the arrangement is understood. If three signals be given in answer,
then say, “If I speak the letters of the alphabet slowly, will you signal
every time I come to the letter you want, and spell us out a message ?”
Should three signals be given, set to work on the plan proposed, and from
this time an intelligent system of communication is established.
8. Afterwards the question should be put, “Are we sitting in the
right order to get the best manifestations?” Probably some members of
the circle will then be told to change seats with each other, and the
signals will be afterwards strengthened. Next ask, “Who is the
medium ?” When spirits come asserting themselves to be related or
known to anyone present, well-chosen questions should be put to test the
accuracy of the statements, as spirits out of the body have all the virtues
and all the failings of spirits in the body.
9. A powerful physical medium is usually a person of an impulsive,
affectionate, and genial nature, and very sensitive to mesmeric influences.
The majority of media are ladies.
The best manifestations are obtained when the medium and all the
members of the circle are strongly bound together by the affections and
are thoroughly comfortable and happy ; the manifestations are born of
the spirit, and shrink somewhat from the lower mental influences of
earth. Family circles, with no strangers present, are usually the best.
Possibly at the first sitting of a circle symptoms of other forms of
mediumship than tilts or raps may make their appearance.


1 may perhaps be pardoned for finishing my work (and it has been
very pleasant to me) with a piece of poetry, dictated by a Spirit through
me under control. The piece was named by the Spirit author, and I take
no credit for it in any shape.
Spirits in the Air.
Think not, mortal, none are watching,—
Think not, there is no one by ;
For the Spirit friends, who love thee
Guard thee, with a loving eye.
Knowest thou, thy friends are watching
At the gate of Spirit land ;
Waiting there with hands to welcome
Th ee, unto a loving band.
In thy lonely hours at even,
When thou thinkest none are near ;
Then thy loved ones round thee standing,
Bring to thy sad heart good cheer.
Could’st thou see the happy faces,
Clust’ring round thee on thy chair ;
Thou would’st smile, with joyous welcome,
To know that thy loved ones are there.
Mortal, cease thy weary longing,
Calm thy doubts and graver fears ;
Know that we are round thee, thronging,
Spirits from the Spirit spheres.
Knowing this then, why not greet us,
We, who wait around thee there?
Let thy soul come forth and meet us,
Spirits from the realms of air.
E. CYRIL HAYILAND.
A. W. -LibAUU, Printer, rill George St., Sydney.




ITT THE PRESS.
Vagabonds^Dupes.
A Complete
Exposure of errors and mis-statements made by
“The Vagabond” and others .
HAROLD W. H. STEPHEN
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Hampson & Gibson, Queen’s Place,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.
