

SPIRITUALISM
DELUSION.
The Rev. canon brownrigg.
[BByiSBB BY THE AtTTHOE.]
MELBOU RNE.
1884.
1


SPIRITUALISM A DELUSION.
Substance of a Sermon delivered in St. John’s Church,
Launceston , Sunday evening , Nov. 18, 1883.
By the Rev. Canon Beownbioo.
(revised by the author.)
Levit. XIX 31 —“ Regard not them that have familiar spirits.”
I make no apology, and ask no indulgence, for bringing
prominently under your notice the topic proposed for con-
sideration this evening. The course of Sunday Evening
Lectures on “Modern Scepticism”—(not designed solely or
chiefly for sceptics, but also, and particularly,, to evidence
to Christian people the incomparable excellence of Christ-
ianity)—has been undertaken with the full conviction that
it is the duty of the pulpit to deal with the varied forms in
which unbelief of Revelation manifests itself.
In pursuing this design, I have already dealt with the
question of the “Bible and Inspiration,” then with that of
“ Miracles,” and as miracles have been appealed to in proof
of the divine origin of the message from God to man, so the
next subject for consideration is naturally that system whose
boast (according to one of its accredited advocates—the au-
thoress of a Manual for Investigators-( 1 ) is, that “ it is re-
moved for ever from the fanciful realms of miracle, and the
supernatural,” and that “the intelligence of our own times
refuses to accept the idea of miracle, and ranges all occur-
rences, however rare or unprecedented, under the domain of
natural law.”
Now, in addressing you upon this subject, I will abstain
from making even one unverifiable assertion, —what I state
from the pulpit I shall be prepared to defend elsewhere. I
have gathered and will present the representations of Spirit-
ualism from the testimony of accredited teachers among
Spiritualists, so that these may be thus permitted to speak
(1) “ On the Road,” by Emma Hardinge Britten.


Fe4t\ cr nw
for themselves. Whatever I may say about the system, I
will cast no reflection upon the sincerity of Spiritualists,
nor will I judge it by any of the impostors by whom it may
have been propagated, and whose advocacy has been deplored
by many Spiritualists. I would let the system stand or fall
upon its own merits ; and nothing, I conceive, could be fairer
than this.
I set out with the question—What is Spiritualism 1 It
is an idea with many that Spiritualism is a matter of mere
physical phenomena—such as rappings, table-turning, chair-
lifting, etc., and, accordingly, by these it is regarded as a
very harmless and innocent affair. Were it only this it
might well be so regarded, but I will presently adduce proof
that, far from its being “ harmless and innocent,” one of its
principal designs is expressed in the empty boast (at which
we can afford to smile) of one of its acknowledged advocates,
delivered in the presence of “an appreciative and sympa-
thetic audience,” —“We are indeed thankful that we have
succeeded without the aid of priest or Bible, that this ‘more
than faith’ has come into our very homes and made itself
manifest through our dear little ones, and our noble-minded
women. We have needed no missionaries, but we have
sapped the vitality from Christianity, and made the dry
bones of theology quiver and shake with the electric shocks
of Spiritualism.” ( 2 ). Now, however really impotent against
Christianity Spiritualism has been, and is, and ever will be,
can that be a “harmless” thing, in the intention of its ad-
vocates, which boasts of having “ sapped the vitality from
Christianity” 1
In reply to the question—What is Spiritualism ? one
authority on the subject tells us that “ Spiritualism is the
Science op the Soul, and teaches of all that belongs to the
occult or spiritual portion of the Universe.” ( 3 ) Another
authority, while he gives us Webster’s definition, tells us
that “ a better, because a more accurate, definition is : ‘ Spi-
ritualism is a belief in the communication of intelligence
(3) Mrs. E. L. Watson, as reported in the “ Banner of Light,”
Ist April, 1883.
( 3 ) “On the Eoad,” by E. 11. Britten.


from the spirits of the departed, commonly obtained through
a person of susceptibility called a medium.” ( 4 )
These definitions clearly show that Spiritualism is not a
matter of mere physical phenomena—that, in fact, these
phenomena occupy a very secondary position in the system
—that its essence is practically the dealing with “ familiar'
spirits,” otherwise called “ mediums,” through whom, it is,
alleged, “ intelligence from the spirits of the departed” is
obtained. The system is, moreover, by its advocates ex-
alted into a religion, having its “ten spiritual command-
ments” audits “ten laws of right”—alleged to have been
communicated by spirits, and these commandments and
laws are summed up in these words : “In Morals, justice;
in Science, harmony; in Religion, the fatherhood of God,
the brotherhood of man, the immortality of the human soul,
and compensation or retribution for the good or evil done on
Earth.” (5)
I abstain, at present, from any expression of opinion as
to the propriety, or as to the nature, of the “ communica-
tions,” alleged to be from “the spirits of the departed,”
but merely observe, in passing; in reference to Spiritualistic
Religion, that it utterly ignores the Atonement of Christ,
and hence there is no difference (in this particular, between
it and that religion, of man's Heart , as represented by Cain,
to whom, and to whose offering, the Lord “had 1 not respect”
—a religion which (as I evidenced this morning) was widely
different from that of God’s Word, as represented' by “ right-
eous Abel,” “who by faith offered, unto,God', a more excel-
lent sacrifice than Cain” (Heb. xi, 4j, and to whom,, and to
whose offering, “the Lord had respect.”
To do the system full justice, however, I am prepared to
acknowledge as good whatever there may be in it of good,
but mark this !■— you will find nothing good in it which is
not to he found in Christianity ■, and that long ages ago !
For example, its advocates contend that—-1. Spiritualism
is a witness against Atheism. It acknowledges and declares
the existence of God the Supreme Ruler and Father of man-
kind. But, I reply, does not Christianity also bear its wit-
O “Is Spiritualism True?” Wm. Denton.
( 5 ) “On the Road.” B. H. Britten,


ness against Atheism 1 Did not the revealed Word'make
known the existence of God ages and ages before Spiritual-
ism was ever dreamt of 1 Will Spiritualists, with any show
of reason, profess that their spiritualism has any special
claim to respect on merely theistic grounds 1 Let it be re-
membered (and the statement about to be made is,, of course,
as applicable to the anti-Spiritualist as to the Spiritualist)
that the mere acknowledgment of the Divine existence does
not necessarily argue either rectitude of life nor general or-
thodoxy of view on the part of him who avows that belief,
for, says St. James, “Thou believest that there is one God :
thou doest well; the devils also believe and tremble.”
James ii, 19.
But, further, Spiritualists affirm that —2. Spiritualism
is a witness against Materialism. It proclaims the existence
of spirit, and recognises spirit, in respect of its nature or
essence, not as merely a higher and more refined develop-
ment of matter, but as something distinct from and superior
to all matter. Very well. But such also, I reply, is the
witness of Christianity; and in no measure is the teaching
of Spiritualism more definite and positive in this particular
than is the Christian’s guide Book—-the Word of God itself.
But, again, Spiritualists maintain that—3. Spiritualism
is a witness against Sadduceeism. It believes in the exist-
ence of angels and spirits. It teaches that the 1 soul survives
death—that after its separation from the body it goes not
out of being but passes into a state of conscious existence,
and that there is intelligent intercourse between spirit and
spirit in the unseen world. But surely this is no new doc-
trine—no discovery of the nineteenth century. We are not
indebted to Spiritualism for our light on these subjects.
Christianity has made all this known long ago, and on really
unquestionable authority, which is more than can be truly
said on behalf of the Spiritualist’s alleged foundation for
his teaching in this respect.
Here, then, are three important matters, in which it is
most evident that Spiritualism cannot claim any superiority
to or advantage over Christianity : wherein, therefore, I de-
mand, is its superiority to be maintained 1 It is herein, say
its advocates, inasmuch, as Christianity is only speculative


with regard to spirit-life after death, whereas Spiritualism
is positive. To this I answer, there is nothing “speculative”
in the teaching of Christianity on this subject. It is dog-
matic. It leaves no room for doubt as to the fact of spirit-
life, and, in its teaching on this subject, it is happily inno-
cent of and free from the often extravagant and contradic-
tory “communications” alleged to be made by “the spirits,
of the departed.” The Spiritualist, however, asks and ex-
pects us to believe this testimony concerning the reality of
his spiritual “ communications,” as furnishing the positive
testimony which he asserts to be wanting in Christi-
anity : we, on our part, may therefore ask and expect
him to accept the testimony of creditable historians as to
the positive evidence of spiritual disembodied existence—of
intelligent intercourse among spirits in the after-death
state, and of the reunion of soul and body as furnished in
the narratives of Moses and Elias on Tabor—of Dives and
Lazarus, in the other worlds of being—of the rising up of
the bodies of many saints at Christ’s crucifixion, and of
the Resurrection of Christ’s Himself. If, however, it shall
be attempted to throw discredit upon this testimony by
urging the lapse of time since it was delivered (as though
that would necessarily prove it to have been false) let the
Spiritualist bear in mind that his own testimony, which he
now affirms to be true, would be open to the like objection
in some future age. As, however, “ lapse of time ” cannot
make truth falsehood, nor falsehood truth, so the positive
testimony of Christianity cannot be overthrown by the
mere fact of its having been delivered eighteen hundred
years ago. We are, moreover, quite independent of the
questionable and so-called positive help that it is contended
Spiritualism affords in matters which relate to the unseen
world. Multitudes have believed the doctrines which re-
late to the future state who have never troubled themselves
about Spiritualism, for in the Word of Revelation there is
ample sober-minded testimony upon this matter—testimony
of an elevating and manly nature, and unblemished by mere
maudlin sentimentality.
Upon a review of the above particulars the conclusion
is inevitable and noteworthy, that Spiritualism cannot he


advocated or pressed upon the world as supplying a want
which has not been already anticipated and supplied by
Christianity. So far, then, as Spiritualism agrees with
Christianity it is good, but, as will he presently seen, where-
insoever it is in antagonism to Christianity, it is mischievous
and delusive.
But after all, what proof is to be had of the genuineness
of the “ communication ” ? What proof positive is there
that the “ communications ” are, as it is alleged they are,
from “ the spirits of the departed ” I Is not delusion here
possible ? May not evil (angelic) spirits impersonate de-
parted spirits % Is it beyond either the power or the ma-
lignity of evil (angelic) spirits thus to deceive 1 ? Verily
he has yet much to learn respecting the malignity and power
of evil (angelic) spirits (of which only the word of God can
rightly teach him) who denies the possibility of such delu-
sion, or of such power of impersonation. Ido not, indeed,
question the reality of some alleged Spiritualistic manifesta-
tions any more than I should question the reality of the
lying words (that is, the wonders performed for deceiving-
purposes) wrought by Pharaoh’s magicians in opposition to
the genuine miracles which Moses wrought by Divine com-
mand, but the reality of such manifestations does not neces-
sarily involve th e proof that such “ manifestations” or “ com-
munications” are of, or from, “the spirits of the departed.”
It is, however, contended, as against the view of a
demoniacal authorship in respect of “ communications,”
that they are of a moral nature. This, indeed, is not
always the case, as Spiritualists very well know. Assuming,
however, that, as a rule, the “ communications ” are of a
moral nature, this alone would not necessarily disprove a
demoniacal authorship, for we are assured upon an authority
which, at all events, Christians respect and believe, that
“ Satan is transformed into an angel of light, therefore it is
no great thing if his ministers also be transformed as the
ministers of righteousness—(2 Cor., xi, 14, 15); and it
must surely be obvious that were the “ communications,”
as a rule, to be of an immoral nature, Spiritualism would
never have brought within its influence any decent-minded
person. It could not, therefore, have been otherwise than


that the “communications” should he of such a nature,
(as a rule), as not to defeat the whole system they are in-
tended to support.
But now let the system be judged of by its teaching in
ceriain particulars, and it will be at once perceived how
submissive it is, in its aims, of doctrines which are the very
foundations of Christianity. Without here entering upon
the question whether Bible-teaching is true or false, it will
be sufficient for my purpose to ascertain whether there is
any difference between it and the teaching of Spiritualism.
Take, for example, the Atonement of Christ. Friend and
foe alike admit that Bible-teaching represents the vicarious
nature of the Atonement of Christ, and requires belief in
the same as a condition of eternal life; but what is the
teaching of Spiritualism on this subject 1 Does it reverently
acknowledge it ? Does it manifest the benign authorship
of its moral “ communication ” by its teaching on this point
being in harmony with the Word of God ? Far otherwise.
It betrays itself in its boasted opposition to the Atonement.
Thus writes an authority among Spiritualists—“lt (Spirit-
ualism) takes away for ever the doctrine of a vicarious
Atonement, by throwing man upon his own personal re-
sponsibility.” ( 6 ). Now, looking to the mere fact that the
opposite teachings of the Bible and of Spiritualism in re-
ference to the Atonement cannot both be right, the con-
clusion is unavoidable that Spiritualism is an Anti-Christian
System.
For another example, take the homage which is due to
Christ. The Bible teaches that “ all men should honor the
Son, even as they honor the Father.” Does Spiritualism
profess to do this 1 Far otherwise, it dishonors and degrades
Christ. I adduce the proof—One of its recognised teachers
sa y S —“ The great secret of Christ’s power over the multi-
tude lay in the beneficent and wonderful works he per-
formed. He himself challenged belief in his divine
mission for the Work’s sake, and he commanded his fol-
lowers to perform similar works in evidence of their faith.
It is remarkable that both Christ and his Apostles com-
municated their own spiritualistic powers by the laying on
of hands ; a fact well understood both by mesmerisers and
(6) “ On the Road,” p. 15.


'spiritualists of our time, and one in perfect harmony with
those modes of development to which we have alluded, as
inaugurating the modern Spiritual movement. For ex-
ample : by the laying on of hands, or the magnetic touch,
the mesmeriser controls his subject, who thenceforward may
become the subject of Spirits and the medium of Spiritual
gifts. The only question is one of terms. Change the
term, “ Receive ye the Holy Ghost ” to “ Receive ye the
Power of the Spirit,” and call the “ laying on of hands ”
“ mesmerism,” and the philosophy of miracles becomes the
modus opernndi of mediumistic development.” ( 7 ). Is this, I
ask, to “ honor the Son,” even as men should “ honor the
Father ” 1 Is it not, rather, to grossly insult the Son of
God ? Is it not verily to degrade Him by bringing Him
down to the level of a Spiritualistic Medium 1 Look, too,
at the “ deceitful handling ” of the Word of God covered
over by an appearance of charming innocence, when it is
attempted to show that the difference between the Bible
testimony to Christ’s miraculous powers and the doings of
modern Spiritualists is only “ one of terms.” How deroga-
tory to the honor of the Holy Spirit of God to even sug-
gest, as Spiritualists do, that His holy influence is mere
magnetism ! I decide not which is greater, the ignorance of
the presumption which would bolster up the delusion that
any mere “ change of terms, ” —a little profane manipula-
ting, could be allowed the Spiritualist by any sensible
person to make the Bible self-contradictory, and to turn it
into an authority for the anti-Christian teachings of
Modern Spiritualism. The artifice is, happily, a little too
apparent to constitute it a real danger, but it serves to show
how unscrupulous are the methods which can be employed
to impose upon the weak and unwary.
How, without troubling about further examples, it will
be seen by those adduced that Spiritualism stands convicted,
upon its own representations, of being in antagonism to
the Word of God. On which side, then, does the truth rest 1
On which side, I reply, could it be reasonably expected to
rest but upon the side of the Word of God 1 The fact is,
that a denial of the Divine origin of the Bible comes rather
(l) “On the Road, p. 11,


too late in the day to be now of help to' siny anti-C/hristiall-
H ism.” Where this is now attempted, it implies ignorance,
Or presumption, or inacquaintance with the results of true
scholarly criticism, or perverted intellect, or want of
candour, or pride, or prejudice, or a mind incapable of, or
unfitted, through want of proper training, for logical
reasoning, or a purpose to be gained. To one or more of
these causes, at least, a denial of the Divine origin of the
Bible can in any case be very readily traced, up. Spirit-
ualism being thus, in respect of its professed religion, in
opposition to the Word of God, and its premature boast
being that it has “ sapped the vitality from Christianity,”
it were easy to appraise at their true value the “moral”
character of Spiritualistic communications- which constitu-
tutes one feature of the delusiveness of Spiritualism,
But Spiritualism is forbidden of God, as may be plainly
gathered from the following passages of Holy Scripture —-
“ Regard not them that have familiar spirits ” —(Levit.
xix, dl) ; “The Lord said, (and the soul that turneth
after such as have familiar spirits # * * I will even set my
face against that soul, and will cut him otf from among his
people.” (Levit. xx, 6); “ When thou art come into the
land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, thou shait not
learn to do after the abominations of those nations. There
shall not be found among you * * * a consulter with
familiar spirits * * * for all that do those things are
an abomination unto the Lord: and because of these abomina-
tions, the Lord thy God doth drive them out from before
thee.” (Deut. xviii, 9, 12); and again—“ And when they
shall say unto you, seek unto them that have familiar'
spirits * * should not a people seek their God 1 for the
living to the dead 1 ?” (Is. viii, 19). Now the common-
sense teaching of all these passages is plainly and strongly
condemnatory of Spiritualism, but how do you suppose
Spiritualists treat such denunciations 1 By denying them %
No? This they cannot do, but they vainly try to explain
them away. “ There are such denunciations’” say they,
in many parts of the Bible ” (a fatal admission, I venture
to think). “ But,” they add, “in the first place they were
■written by Priests and Prophets, who might well be supposed


to iiave interested motives in keeping Spiritual gifts reserved
to their own order. Next, they were enunciated by those
who constantly exercised such powers in their own persons ;■
hence the inference is legitimate that they resented any
interference with what they deemed the exercise of then'
special profession. And, finally, Christians should remember
that the laws and edicts applicable to the Jews two or three
thousand years ago would involve the world in crimes and
horrors of the blackest dye should they be enforced to-day.”
(s). And does the authoress from whom I quote really
imagine that such utterances will stand the test of common
sense 1 Here it is advanced, and of course unsupported
(because unsupportable) by any proof, that “ the Priests
and Prophets ” of olden times were like the Spiritualist of
modern times—that Spiritualism was “ their special pro-'
fession,” and that they might therefore “well be supposed,
to have interested motives in keeping Spiritual gifts reserved
to their own order.” But how is such a view as this con-
sistent with the representations made to this effect, that all-
such seeking, unto “ familiar Spirits ” is “ abomination ” in
the sight of God ? You will observe that the “forbidding”
is not limited to the dealing with mediums or “ familiar
Spirits-,” of other peoples or nations, but is applicable in the
widest sense to dealing with “ familiar Spirits ” anywhere
and at any time. It is the practice itself which is “ abo-
mination” before God. Had the “ Priests and Prophets”
of God been what are called Spiritualists, they would surely
not have condemned themselves by denouncing the con-
sulting with “ familiar Spirits,” hut would rather have
encouraged and commended it as do Spiritualists of modern
times. It is, however, worth while noticing an important
fact which one authoress has not perceived, or else conceals,
but which must not be kept out of view—viz., that it is not
“ the Priests nor the Prophets ’ ’ who are represented in the
passages referred to as denouncing and forbidding the
Spiritualism of that age, but it is God himself who does this
by human instrumentality, and surely had the consulting,
with “ familiar Spirits ” been lawful and right, the practice
would never have been condemned of the Lord as an “ abo-
(8) “On the Road,” p. 7.-


ii F 75^3
mmatian” in His sight. The “explanation” of our
spiritualistic authoress is, therefore, but a weak and airy
fiction which carries with it its own refutation.
But the Divine condemnation of Spiritualism is not a
mere arbitrary proceeding on the part of God. The
numerous evils of a moral and physical nature inseparable
from Spiritualism manifest the wisdom and goodness of
God v earning mankind against it. Tn the following
terms lie evils connected with the system are forcibly
pointed out by Professor Barrett, of the Royal College of
Science of Dublin. (Ist). A morbid unhealthy curiosity
is excited, (2nd), The mind is distracted from the pursuit
and present duties of life. (3rd). In tellectual confusion is
created by uncertain and contradictory teachings. (4th).
Moral and Spiritual confusion is created by anarchic mani-
festations, (sth). The will is subject to the slavery of an
unknown power, and the Spiritual nature of man may be
preyed upon by unseen parasites. 6th. It offers a demon-
stration which is the negation of facts, much so-called
Spiritualism being merely a kind of inebriated Materialism.
All these facts, “ says the Professor,” I can verify by actual
cases, and as a rule I have observed the steady downward
course of mediums who sit regularly : moral obliquity is the
first symptom ; then they become wrecks. This applies to
mediums for physical manifestations chiefly. Indeed is it
PPt impossible to have a purely phenomenal presentation of
any high spiritual laws,” ( 9 ),
Upon each of these particulars very much might be said,
but enlargement would be needless. Enough has been
advanced throughout to manifest the inutility of Spiritualism,
as not supplying any reasonable want which has riot been
anticipated and supplied by Christianity—to demonstrate
the anti-Christianity of the System, forcing us to the
conclusion, from its own repi esentations, that it cannot be
traceable to a Divine Source, but to the “ Spirit of Error,”
and on this ground is a delusion.
(9) From address of Canon Wdberforce in the discussion upon
f< Spiritualism,” at the Church Congress at Newcastle-on-Tyne, 1881,
BBINTED BY J. WING, 33 WELLINGTON STREET, COLLIKqWQQD,
