

p P
o *> Cl
S** IC# s Cj> w *-9 f*/\MS
ftox <£}




iTTH
SPIRITUALISM.
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE
MELBOURNE FREE DISCUSSION SOCIETY,
SUNDAY EVENING, JULY 9 th , 1871.
BV E. W. C.
The fundamental idea of Spiritualism is that the 'inhabitants of the
Spirit-world can aud do, under some circumstances, communicate with
persons still in the flesh. Whoever believes this is a spiritualist; no
matter what else he believes or disbelieves. This idea has been a vitali-
zing principle in all the Eeligions of which we have any record. Its
'-bfogfc-■dh;d. ’i>bT.i*K dig- '
until it is lost in the dim twilig’ht of ancient tradition. It has assumed
various outward forms ; but its essence has ever been the same; whether
in the form of oracles, visions, or the inspired utterances of prophets and
seers. The ancient literature of India, Egypt, China, Persia, Judea,
G-reece and Eome, is permeated and enriched with this thought. The
Christian Church teems with it, from the day of pentecost downwards
until the days of Luther, by which time it had become so degraded by
superstition, imposture, and priestly avarice, that a violent reaction set in;
and both true and false were condemned by the reformers. Erom this
time the belief, in what is erroneously called the Supernatural was
gradually submerged under a flood of disbelief, which was intensified by
the increasing tendency towards scientific modes of thought. This went
on until about 1818, when the belief emerged, and being purified from its
former superstition, it has since progressed with a rapidity unparalleled in
the _ world’s history until to-day we find it numbering its adherents by
millions, and that too in this scientific age, and principally among hard
practical matter-of-fact English and Americans. And when we remember
that _ spiritualists were not born such, but have been compelled by the
irresistible logic of facts to believe in it, in spite of their educational
prejudices, the movement assumes an importance that challenges serious
attention.
The time has arrived when it can no longer be ignored; if it is true, it
must be placed upon the scientific basis which its adherents claim for it,
but. if it is false it must be proved so, and then relegated to the super-
stitious past, from whence it sprang. In whichever way regarded, it
is fraught with vital interest to man kind ; hence it becomes the duty of
all who claim to be truth-seekers to thoroughly investigate the subject.
And the object of this paper is to show, that it is well ivorthy of the most
searching investigation that can be bestowed upon it.


William Howitt, towards the end of his “ History of the Supernatural
after showing that the belief in it has prevailed in all places, and through
all recorded time, says, “We have now traversed all ages and all
countries, and everywhere we have found the faith and the facts of super-
naturalism existing in all classes of men —in the highest philosophers as
in the simplest individuals; nay, they are the highest philosophers, and
the most illustrious ' apostles of religion, who have been the boldest and
firmest assertors of them. Wherever literature extends it stamps the
page in the face of all opposition, wherever man lives with instructed or
uninstructed nature, it lives with him. With the Platos, the Socrateses,
the Aristotles, the Senecas, Tacituses, and Ciceros of antiquity —with
those men worshipped for their mighty intellects by the learned of all
succeeding ages —it was itself a worshipped guest and power.”
He goes on to say that—“ the evidence on this subject is so voluminous,
that no one work, no, nor a dozen large volumes, could contain it. Men
of all nations, and all religions, of all grades of education, and every rank
of intellect, pressed on to put in their claims as witnesses. In the heart
and soul of mankind the great truth is found to be rooted inextricably
with the roots of life, and of all consciousness. It is no longer what some
would fain call it, the belief of a few weak or visionary individuals ; we
may boldly pronounce it the faith of all the race, the contrary being only
the exceptions. The greatest names in the history of intellect and of
human achievement are the prominent names in this cardinal faith. The
list of these names, and the proofs of this fact 1 in extenso,’ would make a
large volume ot itself. TV e must go on numbering the princes and
chieftains of mind through all time. Like Scott’s clans, they come
thronging over the hills —
‘ Stiii gatnering7as they pour along,
A voice more loud, a tide more strong.’ ’
The accounts of apparitions alone, are so numerous and so well attested,
and that too in this sceptical age, that it is very difficult to account for
them on any supposition, except that there is some truth in them, however
little. Apparitions appearing to friends at the moment of death, are the
cases most commonly recorded. (Several of this kind have been published
lately in the Melbourne ! Daily Telegraph.’ Notably one recorded by
Lord Brougham, as having appeared to himself).
“ The Cambridge Association for spiritual enquiry, familiarly called the
Ghost Club, consisting of eminent members of the university, have stated
that their carefully conducted researches on the subject of apparitions
have led them to regard such appearances as a settled fact. A member
of this association informed Mr. Dale Owen that he had collected 2,000
cases of them.” # In fact apparitions, and a variety of phenomena, that
can be explained by no known laws of nature, rest on evidence which in
its cumulative character is almost irresistible.
Now I put it to the good sense of this meeting, and let each one decide
in his own mind, whether the probe l h Hitics are not in favour of the sup-
position, that there is some some truth underlying all this belief in what
is erroneously called the supernatural, some IciWj as yet unrecognized by
science? And whether we are justified in rejecting such a vast amount
of human testimony ? But the objection may here be raised, that by admit-
tino- these probabilities we open the door for all the superstitions of the
past to come trooping back again. This, however is not so, we only open
the way to their thorough investigation, and by recognising the true and
rejecting the false, we make superstition thenceforth impossible by
showing all to be the result of laws hitherto unknown.
* Howitt,


It is not recognized so clearly as it sliould be, that the prevailing dis-
belief in “ supernaturalism,” is a re-action from the credulity of the past;
this being so, it is highly probable, from the well-known tendency of
re-actions to go to extremes, that the truth lies between the present
scientific scepticism and the old belief in spiritual manifestations, and
this is where modern spiritualism is seeking it, with what success I will
now endeavour to show. Before doing so, however, let me state that the
spiritualism of the past bears the same relation to modern spiritualism,
that Alchemy bears to Chemistry, or Astrology to Astronomy. In each
case the one has naturally led to the other.
Modern Spiritualism is essentially a scientific, rational, and progressive
religion, “ based upon present tangible facts and past historic records;”
demonstrating the reality of a future state of existence. It is stated that
“ Spiritualism considered from its philosophic side is nationalism, from its
scientific side Naturalism, and from its religious side the embodiment of
love to Bod and man. It spans ail human interests and seeks to recon-
struct society upon the principles of a universal brotherhood —and the
strict equality of the sexes.”
“ Desirous of greater knowledge touching the relations of - spirit with
matter, and of men with God and the intelligences of the surrounding
world of spirits, Spiritualists study and reverently interrogate the laws
and principles that govern the phenomena and occult forces of the uni-
verse;. the histories of the past, and the experiences of the present,
anxious to rightly solve those psychologic and spiritual problems of the
ages —man’s origin, capacity, duty and final destiny.” Spiritualism is
eminently adapted to the spirit of the age, and the human constitution.
It addresses the intellect, the affections, and aspirations of all. Broad,
unsectarian and democratic, it is in unison with all the advanced move-
ments of the day. It exercises a “divine eclecticism” uniting in one
harmonious whole, the truths contained in all preceding religions: and
thuk appealing to the'universal eonsGiousness of mafrldiiAt Tbit its dis-
tinguishing feature is its claim to the power of scientifically demonstrating
the reality of a future state of existence. In this it meets the last
requirements of the age.
Of all the great questions that have engaged the human mind, none are
fraught with more momentous interest; and none are more difficult of
solution, than the question of human immortality; bound up as it is so
indissolubly with our hopes and aspirations. The belief in it has been
almost universal; but (apart from modern spiritualism) we have, unfor-
tunately, no proof of it. In this age of transition when creeds, which
have passed current for centuries, are being so sternly questioned and
found wanting ; -when theological systems are crumbling away so surely
before the onward march of exact knowledge, it is absolutely necessary
that the cheering belief in a future state of existence should be rescued
from the decaying theologies and placed upon a sure foundation. This is
the mission of Spiritualism. The most beautiful of the speculative systems,
such as that taught by Theodore Parker, appealing as it does to the reason
and intuitions of mankind, is powmrless to convince the materialist.
Wearied of belief and speculation he demands something more tangible,
and this neither theology nor physical science can give.
Science says —we have no knowledge of the existence of life apart from
organization: and as it is seen that life and organization are so closely
connected and so mutually dependent; it is argued that life and intelli-
gence are only the resvdt of material organization, and cease on the dis-
solution of it.
It is manifestly useless to meet this argument by a confession of faith ;
it can only be met by tangible facts proving the existence of life and


intelligence outside of any known organisms. This brings us to a con-
sideration of the spiritual phenomena, as it is claimed that they effectually
meet the case.
Time will not permit me to describe even a tithe of these phenomena ;
but I may state generally,'that if they do occur as stated, they prove con-
clusively, that individualized intelligences exist apart from human or
visible organisms, that these intelligences can, under certain conditions,
exercise a force capable of moving heavy bodies and producing audible
sounds, and that these intelligences when questioned invariably assert
themselves to be the spirits of departed human beings. That this force is
exercised under certain conditions, and that intelligence is displayed, is
testified to by thousands of witnesses, whose testimony on any other sub-
ject would be considered conclusive.
This, which is the starting point and foundation for all the other
phenomena, has lately been thoroughly investigated by one of the most
learned and philosophical societies in London ; and has been pronounced
by its investigating sub-committee to be an absolute fact. I will read a
few extracts from the report of this learned body, the London Dialectical
Society, as lately published in some of the Melbourne papers.
“Your Committee have confined their report to facts witnessed by them in I’m
collective capacity ; which facts were palpable to the senses, and their reality capable ,
of demonstrative proof.
Of the members of your sub-committee, about foitr-fifths entered upon the investi-
gation wholly sceptical as to the reality of the alleged phenomena, firmly believing
them to be the result either of imposture , or of delusion, or of involuntary muscular
action. It was only by irresistible evidence, under conditions that precluded the
possibility of either of these solutions, and after trial and test many times repeated,
that the most sceptical of your sub-committee were slowly and reluctantly convinced
that the phenomena exhibited in the course of their protracted inquiry were veritable
facts.
“ The result of their long-continued and carefully conducted experiments,' after trial
by every detective test they could devise, has been to establish conclusively—
Tlrat, mdQoWCoFoain bodily srmienta;! conditions of one onniorc of ■’the
persons present, a force is exhibited sufficient to put heavy substances in motion with-
out the employment of any muscular force, without contact or material connection of
any kind between such substances and the body of any person present.
“ Second —That this force can make distinctly audible sounds to proceed from solid
substances not in contact with, nor having any visible or material connection with, the
body of any person present; aud which sounds are proved to proceed from such sub-
stances by the vibrations which are distinctly felt when they are touched.
“ Third—That this force is frequently directed by intelligence.
“At thirty-four out of the forty meetings of your committee, some of these
phenomena occurred.”
This however is only the lowest and least interesting phase of the
phenomena, the higher branches are testified to by witnesses almost as
numerous and quite as reliable as those testifying to the physical mani-
festations, and as these have been proved true, it is but rational to suppose
that the higher will be proved true also ; but if only one-third of them
are true, it is impossible, at present, to account for them by any theory
except the spiritual one, These phenomena are so varied that I can only
enumerate a few of them.
From a periodical called “ Human Nature ” I extract the following.
In reply to the question “ How are the existence and power of spirits
shown?” it replies :
Ist, —By moving tangible articles when asked to do so.
2nd.—By producing sounds-of various kinds, on tables, chairs, walls, etc., when
asked so to do.
3rd. —By consecutive sentences of advice, reproof, etc., produced by sounds, when a
pencil is passed over an alphabet.
4th.—Premonitions.
sth. —By using the voice of a person, and uttering words the person acted upon has
not, in his mind.
6th.-—By using the arms and hands of susceptible persons to write prescriptions—


give information—-give warning of a personal and relative character—and inculcate
purity of life, and prayerfulness of inclination; the person acted upon simply con-
senting to let the hand be used, but totally unconscious of what is to be produced.
7th. —Audible voices heard, and conversation so carried on by mediums.
Bth.—Apparitions of the whole body, or part of the body.
9th.—Spirits touching the human body, sometimes gently, sometimes roughly.
10th.—Musical instruments used, and exquisite melodies produced on pianos,
accordions, etc., no seen hand touching the instruments.
11th.—Curing the sick, by the hand of the medium being floated to the patient by a
power felt but not seen ; and placed on the diseased part of the body ; the medium
till then not knowing where the diseased part was.
12th.—By taking up persons, and heavy substances off the ground into the air, and
that in the presence of many witnesses.
Many other and more wonderful manifestations could be added if time
would permit. Trance speaking and clairvoyance are among the more
important: by these, and similar means, thousands have been convinced
of the identity of their spirit friends. It is stated that “ Answers have
been given to questions which could not possibly have been previously
known to the medium. Husbands have had questions answered which
only their deceased wives could possibly reply to. Fathers have received
messages from sons, and sons from fathers, giving information that has
been afterwards verified.” Many remarkable cures are recorded as having
been effected by media, who had no medical knowledge except what they
received from these unseen intelligences. “Unlearned men and women
are enabled to speak in languages of which they are entirely ignorant;
they are enabled to pour forth torrents of fervid eloquence and profound
philosophy, on the most scientific and metaphysical subjects. Others are
made to write involuntarily upon topics far beyond their natural compre-
hension or their acquirements, while others can execute beautiful paint-
ings, without previous study of the art. All these, when asked, positively
assert that they are not the only agents in the work ; but that there is a
( higher power and intelligence directing and originating the whole. And
when these intelligences are appealed to, they invariably affirm that tiley ~
are spirits of departed friends.”
The testimony in support of these extraordinary statements is almost
irresistible. The published testimony, which is by far the smallest part
of it, fills volumes, It comes from all classes of society, and from nearly
every part of the world. The following extract must suffice, as a specimen
of thousands that could be brought.
, W. Crookes, F.R.S., editor of the Chemical News, discoverer of the new metal Thal-
lium, and one of the most accurate observers connected with the Royal Society,
frankly acknowledges the physical phenomena of Spiritualism to be true. C. F.
Yarley, F.R;S., eminent in natural philosophy, science, electricity, &0., says:
“My authority for asserting that the spirits of kindred beings do visit us, is—l. I
have on several occasions distinctly seen them. 2. On several occasions, things known
.only to myself and to the deceased person purporting to communicate.with me have
been correctly stated, while the medium was unaware of any of the circumstances. 3.
On several occasions, things known only to our two selves, and which I had entirely
forgotten, have been recalled to my mind by the communicating spirits ; therefore,
this could not be a case of mere thought-reading. 4. On some occasions, when these
communications have been made to me, I have put my questions mentally, while the
medium, a private lady in independent circumstances, has written out : the answers,
she being quite unconscious of the meaning of the communications. 5. . The time and
nature of coming events, unanticipated, have on more than one occasion been
accurately made known to me several days in advance. As my invisible informants
r t°ld the truth regarding the coming events, and also stated that they were spirits, and
as no mortals in the room had any knowledge of some of the facts they communicated,
I see no reason to disbelieve them. Mrs. Yarley very frequently sees and recognises
spirits ; especially is this the case when entranced. She is a good trance-medium.”—
Spiritual Magazine.
Professor Mapes thus sums up the uses he has evolved from Spirit-
ualism :
“ The manifestations which are pertinent to the ends required are so conclusive in


.cta-
their character as to establish in my mind certain cardinal points. These are;
Ist, That there is a future state of existence, which is but a continuation of our present
state of being, devoid of such portions of our organism as are now denominated
material.
2nd, That the great aim of nature, as shown through a great variety of spiritual
existences, is progression, extending beyond this mundane sphere.
3rd, That Spirits can and do communicate with mortals, and in all cases evince a
desire to elevate and advance those they commune with.
4th, That spirits have, in a vast number of well-attested instances, proved their will
and ability to ward off dangers, cure sickness, prevent crimes, reform criminals, and
communicate many useful, scientific, and some highly-occult and novel ideas to mankind.”
Testimony of this sort, from men of high standing, could be multiplied
ad-infinitum, showing that the phenomena are capable of but one explana-
tion in the present state of our knowledge—that is the one given by the
Spiritualists. If any other can be given, that will rationally account for
the phenomena, the majority of Spiritualists will be most happy to receive
it. Because most of them are Spiritualists, simply because they cannot
help it. They have been compelled to believe by the cogency of facts and
testimony; and that too, often in spite of the most violent prejudice
against it. From the present aspect of the question, however, it seems
very improbable that any other explanation will be forthcoming; as every
fresh phenomenon points more clearly to the one conclusion.
If, after a thorough investigation of the subject in all its bearings, it
should be ultimately proved that these manifestations are not produced
by disembodied spirits, it will be still more wonderful than if they are.
The investigation will be profitable either way, because if it is not the
work of spirits, and we have to retreat from that position, we shall still be
in possession of the most advanced form of religion and philosophy that
the world has yet seen, we shall have proved the existence of forces in
nature hitherto undreamt of, and we shall have proved the human mind
to possess faculties far more glorious than our ordinary senses, therefore
-I say again, that if fit is not the work tn spirits, it is something a great
deal more wonderful. The position taken up by Spiritualists is often
quarrelled with by persons imperfectly acquainted with the subject: but
I maintain that our position is analagous to that held by scientific men.
They state the results of their investigations and calculations, which are
generally accepted, because, anyone who doubts their correctness, can,
by going through the same amount of patient labour, verify them to his
own satisfaction. We are in the same position. That certain things do
occur that are capable of but one explanation, is a matter, not of belief,
but of actual knowledge to the majority of Spiritualists, and anyone who
doubts that this is so, has only to investigate as carefully as they have
done to come to the same conclusion. And there is not a single case on
record of anyone having so investigated and come to a different conclusion.
It is frequently asked—“ what good is it, even if it is true?” Others
urge that they have no desire for an after life, therefore any arguments
based upon this desire has no weight with them. These and all similar
objections are scarcely worth serious consideration. For there are very
few, I imagine, in whom this desire for continued being does not exist;
and whose social feelings are so dead, as not to have some longings to re-
join those they have loved and lost on earth ; and very few whose thirst
for knowledge is so small that they are content with the mere fragment
of knoAvledge of this glorious universe, which can be gained from this
tiny world, and who would not gladly embrace an opportunity of explor-
ing the boundless realms of nature. The cold, chilling representations of
the after life, given by the orthodox, can have no attraction for the man
of culture : one whose intellectual cravings are but stimulated by the
knowledge gained in this life. An eternity of idleness, or harp playing and


hallelujahs, has no charms for him ; and although human intuitions have
far outrun this primitive conception of heaven, they have been mistrusted
as mere dreams, too beautiful to be true. But Spiritualism comes and
confirms them, tells us that the ideal is the prophetic and will be attained,
that the next world is but a vaster field for the exercise of the increased
and ever increasing powers of the human mind.
Whatever may be the merits and defects of Modern Spiritualism as a
religion, it will, I believe, inevitably become the dominant system of the
civilized world, for it is progressing calmly and irresistibly. Received at
first with shouts of derision, indignation, and ridicule, it urges onward
until ridicule is being replaced by curiosity. Men investigate that they
may the more effectually denounce it, but only to find they have been
laughing at their own ignorance , when they thought they were laughing at
spiritualism. Others have denounced spiritualists as fools and impostors,
until they have stumbled across the knowledge that some of their dearest
and most respected friends were firm adherents to the belief. The utmost
ingenuity has been exercised to vilify and misrepresent it; but nothing
can crush out its irrepressible vitality. It meets the demands of the
age, it satisfies the reason, the affections and aspirations of mankind. It
asks not faith, but investigation. It claims to have removed the uncer-
tainty about a future state, and presents death as promotion, the begin-
ning of another and more glorious life, the first step of the soul’s destiny,
which is infinite progression.
From this very imperfect sketch of this great subject, it will be seen
that it is at least worthy of investigation. This is all we ask; and the
only qualifications necessary for its investigation, are simply patience and
common sense.
Of course ive shall receive grcvWoppdsitk)irto ffioWdabßshment of our
principles ; this we expect, as every great movement that has benefited
mankind has been so opposed, and unfortunately our opponents have not
yet learned the lessons which history should teach them. So to Christians
I would say, be careful, lest you find yourselves holding the same position
with regard to Spiritualism, that the ancient Pharisees held towards the
higher and purer teachings of Jesus. To Protestants I would say, be
careful, lest you find yourselves in the same position as the Roman
Catholics were with regard to the reformation. And to all would-be
scientists, I would say, look well to it, lest you find yourselves in the
position of those learned men who proved the earth could not be round,
because the people on the other side would tumble off!
Prom what has been advanced we find—First, that a belief in what is
called the ‘ supernatural ’ has been almost universal through all ages of the
world’s history; that the present scientific scepticism, is a re-action from
this belief; consequently, it is extremely probable on these grounds
alone, that the truth lies between these two points. In this direction,
Modern Spiritualism is seeking it.
Secondly —That Modern Manifestations are so well attested that they
demand the most serious attention and thorough investigation by all
earnest trutb-seelcers.
Thirdly —These manifestations are of such a character as to admit of
but one explanation, and that is the spiritual theory. Therefore the
spiritualists are acting consistently with the true scientific method, in
holding this theory until another, capable of explaining the phenomena, is
discovered.
If these deductions are correct, then it follows that the abuse and con-
tempt that have been, and are still being thrown upon Spiritualism and
Spiritualists, are irrational and utterly unworthy of this comparatively
enlightened age.


What’s o’Clock...
1 0
Beyond the Grave. A lecture by G. C. Leech, Esq. ...
0 2
The Creed of the Spirits and the Influence of the Eeli-
gion of Spiritualism. By Emma Hardinge
0 3
The Spirit Circle and Laws of Mediumship. By Emma
Hardinge ... ... ... •••
0 3
CHEAP INTRODUCTORY
PAMPHLETS ON SPIRITUALISM
ON SALE AT
W. H. TERRY’S SPIRITUAL & PROGRESSIVE BOOK DEPOT,
96 RUSSELL STREET, MELBOURNE.
s. d.
The Ministry of Angels, realised by E. A iSTewton
1 0
0 6
0 $
What is Spiritualism ? By T. Gales Foster
Theodore Parker in Spirit Life
Pianchettes, irom 2s. each; posted to any part
of the Colony, 4d. extra.
JUST PUBLISHED, a Collection of 110 HYMNS and
ANTHEMS, appropriate to Spiritualists, and other Un-
sectarian Congregations, selected by the Committee of the
Melbourne Association. 16mo. Cloth, Is. 6d. Imn. Morrocco,
2s. 6d. By Post, 2d. extra.
THE
“HARBINGER OF LIGHT,”
A MONTHLY JOURNAL
Devoted to Zoistic Science, Free Thought, Spirit-
ualism, and the Harmonial Philosophy.
PRICE 6d.; SUBSCRIPTION, ss. per annum, payable in
advance. Country, 6s.
E. Pm:ton & Co., Steam Printers, 106 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.




