

SPIRITUALISM;
A PAPER READ BEFORE THE
ECLECTIC ASSOCIATION OF MELBOURNE,
ON SEPTEMBER 2ND, 1869.
BY
HENRY G. TURNER,
PRESIDENT OF THE ASSOCIATION.
PUBLISHED BY BEQUEST.
MELBOURNE:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, 69 ELIZABETH STREET.
MDCCCLXIX.




SPIRITUALISM.
Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen,
When I undertook to open this evening’s debate with an
essay on what is vaguely called u Spiritualism, I was hardly
aware of the extreme comprehensiveness of the theme, and the
difficulty which I should experience, in reducing my views into a
statement sufficiently concise, to admit of their examination and
possible refutation in the course of one evening’s discussion.
To do so, I think it would he as well at the outset, to define
what I mean by the word Spiritualism—the sense in which I shall
use it—and the conclusions to which I have come regarding it.
This will enable the succeeding speakers to concentrate their
observations on what is absolutely affirmed, and save us from
wandering into debate on the reality or otherwise of some of its
lower and more common manifestations.
The meaning, therefore, which I propose to attach to Spiritual-
ism is the power of living human beings to hold direct communion
with, and to receive direct revelation from incorporeal, spiritual
or supernatural intelligences : —and the position which I hope to
maintain is—
-Ist. That the belief in such a power is not warranted by the
results, even accepting them as literally true.
2nd. That the nature of the testimony on which it relies for
support is eminently unsatisfactory.
3rd. That its teachings are vague, contradictory, often mercenary,
and inextricably confounded with fraud and chicane.
4th. That its acceptance as an article of belief can only be
accomplished by an entire surrender of our reasoning and enquir-
ing faculties, and a practical denial of those fundamental Cosmic
laws on which alone true science can rest.
Let me then, first briefly glance at the commonest manifestations
of the phenomena, known as spirit rappings, in which I would
embrace all unexplained movements of ponderable bodies, and at
once admit their existence, as demonstrable to anyone possessing
the requisite interest and patience. That is to say, I will grant
that under given conditions, a table will rotate, or even move across
a room, will tilt and knock with its legs upon the floor, under the
hands of persons who are looking for such movements ; and Ido
not think it worth while to pause here to enquire whether b araday s
theory of involuntary muscular action, the operation of expectant
attention, or the less understood powers of animal magnetism and
electricity, be the immediate cause of such manifestation though
the result of my own investigations confirms me in the belief that
the two former are responsible, at least, for the so-called responses
to questions asked by this process.


But many of the spiritualist writers go beyond this simple
movement, and recount instances of tables moving rapidly about
rooms by themselves—standing on one leg without displacing
lamps and flower vases resting upon them, and even climbing to
the top of other pieces of furniture, and generally outraging the
laws of gravity without any apparent purpose, unless it be love of
eccentricity. All accounts of such phenomena must be received with
great caution, and we may entirely disbelieve the narration, without
accusing the narrator of bad faith. They are not manifested to
the sceptic, and the devout believer who has sat for a length of
time, with his attention concentrated upon the object of his wonder,
is in the same state of mind, or rather want of mind, as the sub-
ject through whom the marvels of “ electro-biology,” so called,
are exhibited on the public platform, and who unhesitatingly
believes that a stick on the floor, is a river he cannot cross ; or the
chair on which he sits, the car of a balloon. In addition to this
semi-stupefaction, produced by a phase of hypnotism, it has been
justly said, that the very disposition to look for something out of
the ordinary course of nature, makes one incapable, for the time,
of distinguishing what actually happens from what is expected
to happen. . r
Upon this hypothesis only, can we explain the statements ot
Mr. Robert Bell, in his paper in the Cornhill Magazine, entitled
t( Stranger than Fiction,” —wherein he recounts a series of marvels
remarkably similar in their general character, to those exhibited
by the Davenport Brothers, whose clever jugglery has been long
since exposed and, when we consider the discreditable denoue-
ment of Mr. Home’s career in England, we are fully justified in
charging him too with fraudulent deception, to which the darkened
room and prostrated mental condition of his audience alike invited.
That otherwise intelligent people should be prepared to stake
their veracity on the fact that Mr. Home floated about in the air
of the dark room, and that they not only heard his voice near the
ceiling, but even saw something like his figure passing across a
window dimly illuminated by a distant street lamp, is, after all
nothing so very extraordinary, though the modus operandi would
be likely to excite the suspicion of the sceptic.
Anyone wlio consults JButlev s Lives of the SamtSy will find, tnnt
St. Theresa, St. Catherine, St. Philip Neri, and many others, fre-
quently took these involuntary flights, not in dark rooms, but in
broad daylight, in the open air, or in the “ dim religious light” of
some cloistered cathedral, as has been attested by many learned
theologians, without however carrying conviction to the mind
of heretical Protestantism.
Now upon the minor matters of manifestations I wish here to
be very brief, desiring to treat the question upon the broadest
grounds. Without, however, intending to divert the discussion into
details, I think it desirable to repeat, that while I believe that the
conditions under which ponderable and inanimate bodies are
moved may be referred to natural laws, I hold, with Dr. Carpenter,


that the supposed communications made by spirits through their
agency, are due, like the actions of biologised subjects, to the
mental state of the performers themselves ; and that these and
many similar wonders are to be ranged under the same category,
namely, the possession of the mind by a dominant idea, from which
it makes no sufficient effort to free itself.
As a proof of the influence of the performer’s own views upon the
supposed communications, we have only to notice that the spirits
who revealed the future state to Owen described a heaven organised
on his own social theory. The Rev. A. S. Godfrey, who published
a volume entitled “ Table-turning examined and proved to be the
result of Satanic agency,” had the frankest admission from the
evil spirits of the truth of his theory; and cites his wile and
curate to bear witness to the fact that in its maddest career, his
table was instantly brought into repose by placing the Bible on it,
though other books were wildly thrown off. The Rev. E. Gillson,
who wrote to a similar purpose, found that his own peculiarly
strong Anti-papal views were quite a moving power in the spirit-
world—and this list might be extended indefinitely.
The next and higher phase of manifestation is that called spirit
writing, performed by the medium involuntarily,-either in the form
of replies to verbal or mental questions, or in the shape of a special
revelation ; and this I think may readily be explained upon the
grounds just stated. Cases are cited in which direct spirit
writing is said to have been obtained on paper, without any
human agency; but these are admitted, even by spiritualists, to
be extremely rare, and I think we may be justified in concluding
to disbelieve in their existence.
Trance-speaking and clairvoyance, spirit influx, and involuntary
utterances, may be classed together as the highest manifestations
of Spiritualism, and without adducing instances, or entering into
details, I may safely say that in the numerous books I have con-
sulted on the subject I have not found anything that needed the
intervention of supernatural power to explain it, or that was not
referable to the action upon the mind and body of the subject, of
Animal Magnetism, Mesmerism, Hypnotism, Odyllism, or what-
ever we call those mysterious phemomena, which have been
reduced almost to a science by the researches of Reichenbach, Dr.
Gregory, and others ; and which, though as old as creation, are
now claimed as the miraculous witnesses to the truth of modern
Spiritualism.
Before proceeding to adduce general arguments in support of
my objections, I think it worth while to call your attention to the
wide diversity of opinion which exists among spiritualists, as to
the antiquity or otherwise of its origin; and to notice the fact that
each side has its special supernatural confirmation of the views ad-
vanced by it. A considerable minority of their writers maintain that
the present movement is but an active development of a condition
that permeates the Biblical narratives, the ancient Hindoo sacred
writings, and is found vaguely hinted at by the Greek and


Roman philosophers ; while, on the other hand, the majority
claim it as a new and unworn revelation, an exclusive property of
the American intellect, and decline to carry back the movement
to an earlier date than the visions of Andrew Jackson Davis, the
Poughkeepsie seer, and what Hepworth Dixon calls the happy
audacities” of Kate and Caroline Fox.
At the first glance it does appear very strange that a movement
like this, s undoubtedly based on superstition, should have arisen
in such a country as New England, amidst a people who stand
very high in the matter of popular education —who are alike prac-
tical, and eminently intelligent, and undoubtedly addicted to taking
no new theological, social, or political canon on trust. Yet possibly,
the fact of the well-known pride they take in the free exercise of
their own judgment, the possession of unbounded liberty of con-
science, and the suppression of all ecclesiastical organization, has
led them into singular caprices of popular imagination, and.
betrayed them into many aberrations of- mystic fancy, and quasi
religious excitement.
In no country in the world do we find the counterpart of the
wild frenzies that accompany the Methodist camp meetings of the
central and western States: no other civilised people can show us
a prosperous community based upon the principles of the Shakers
of Mount Lebanon, or the Perfectionists of Oneida creek; and
surely the gigantic imposture of Joe Smith could never have
developed into -a mighty political and social power, in any other
country with which we are acquainted. Swedenborgianism trans-
planted to that appropriate soil has grown as rapidly as it has
declined in England; and the eager acceptance of the tenets of
our own half-crazed Edward Irving, in the States, is but another
proof of the avidity with which anything professing a supernatural
orio-in is received by that enquiring race. For observe, that all
these phases of religious belief profess to be based on special divine
or spiritual revelations —their founders have all received visions and
direct supra-mundane communications. Most have been intromitted
to the spirit world, and held converse with its inhabitants ; and as
a rule they claim to have the gift of tongues and prophesying, of
healing and exorcism.
When Mr. Andrew Jackson Davis came forward among such
a people, and announced his revelations as those of a spirit, freed
hv a certain physical process from the obstructing influence of the
material organisation, and exalted to a position which gave him
free access to a knowledge of the structure and laws of the whole
material and spiritual universe, his pretensions were not suffi-
ciently novel to startle his countrymen from their propriety, and
he revealed away for a few years without evoking any enthusiasm,
until the celebrated “ Rochester knockings” succeeded in arresting
the popular attention, and turned it into so profitable a channel,
that now, twenty years after, there are said to be 3,000,000 pro-
fessed believers in Spiritualism in the United States, and upwards


of 5,000 public advocates of it, as lecturers, prophets, mediums
and clairvoyants, earning their daily bread by its practice, and
open to be consulted for a fee, upon any of its profoundest
mysteries.
It was a tedious business at first, to be sure, and it must have
been more than wearisome to spell out the intolerable platitudes of
the ghostly communicants by a series of raps on the wall, or the
equally absurd kicks of a table ; while the strong temptation to
imposture, which the very facility for it offered, and the innumerable
detections of fraud, came near shipwrecking the cause, but for the
timely discovery of simpler modes of communication, such as have
now almost superseded the original cumbrous, not to say ridiculous,
table turning.
Still it would be interesting to ascertain exactly how that same
11 table turning” began. For when we come to look closely into
the matter, we find that this is the only shred of originality that
belongs to the modern manifestations of Spiritualism. Knock-
ings we have had in our own Cock Lane Ghost, and elsewhere :
spirit-writings, trance-speakings, spiritual impersonation and inter-
course we have, the common property of the Shakers, the Mormons,
and the Swedenborgians; clairvoyance and luminous pheno-
mena have been matters of public exhibition alike by the
followers of Mesmer, the professors of animal magnetism, and the
strolling conjuror ; —spirit influx, gifts of tongues, and involuntary
utterances, have formed a characteristic of the Quakers and the
Irvingites from their beginning ; while apparitions and visionary
dreams are confined to no race or country.
Unfortunately in dealing with the professed spiritualist, the un-
believer is placed at a great disadvantage, inasmuch as the former
will take up the position that he is dealing with a matter of fact
which must be decided upon the balance of evidence, and that the
test of recognised laws which the latter may seek to apply to the
demolition of his deductions, has no weight with him if opposed
to the evidence of his senses. It therefore falls to the sceptic to
analyse minutely the strength of his opponents’ powers of discrimi-
nation ; to eliminate from his so-called facts, the weight of
inferences by which they are overborne, and then to find that the
logical deductions of arguments based on soundly established data,
are held to be mere fallible human deductions, which can have no
weight against the visible manifestations of a power superior alike
to conventional notions of science, philosophy, syntax, ortho-
graphy, and common sense.
Such a position is undoubtedly a difficult and delicate one. No
man likes to fight with shadows, nor to argue with an opponent,
who, declining to meet him on the known grounds of controversy,
calls to his aid a cloud of shadowy intelligences, the knowledge of
whose very existence is denied to the sceptic as a consequence of
his unbelief.
The great difficulty in thus securing a common platform has
undoubtedly been the cause of so little having been written in oppo


sition to the growth of this popular delusion. At the time of its incep-
tion a few scientific men denounced its pretensions, and destroyed
its supernatural by demonstrating its physical basis, leaving it as
they assumed to die . out after its proverbial nine days notoriety.
As it grew in magnitude occasional writers attacked it with tren-
chant satire, or dismissed it with withering scorn, but these were
only in ephemeral magazine or newspaper articles, and generally
followed upon the exposure of some outrageous imposture. The
great bulk of the men who were capable of expressing an
opinion on the subject held aloof from it, however, as unworthy
of serious controversy; the more especially as they could not fail
to see from the character of its assumptions, it was not amenable
and did not profess to be amenable, to human reason.
On the other hand, I find that in the present year of grace
Spiritualism counts some 30 magazines and serials devoted to the
dissemination of its theories, and has a literature of its own, num-
bering several hundreds of bulky volumes, and thousands of
pamphlets and tracts.
Having said thus much to place the matter fairly before you,
I now proceed to take up the position indicated at the outset, and
express my conviction —
Ist. That a belief in Spiritualism is not warranted by the re-
sults adduced, even acccepting them as literally true.
In connection with this I will quote the motto adopted by the
editor of the Spiritual Magazine, an accepted organ of the body,
and which may therefore be taken as an epitomised exposition of
their views.
u Spiritualism is based on the cardinal fact of spirit communion
and influx : it is the effort to discover all truth relating to man’s
spiritual nature, capacities, relations, duties, welfare, and destiny,
and its application to a regenerate life. It recognises a continu-
ous divine inspiration in man; it aims, through a careful, reverent
study of facts, at a knowledge of the laws which govern the
occult forces of the universe; of the relation of spirit to matter,
and of man to God and the spiritual world.”
Now, in what sense have these aspirations been satisfied?
Where are the results of this careful , reverent study of facts ? —a
form of expression, by the way, widely at variance with the pre-
tensions made by many of its professors, who with their ability
to draw knowledge from the sublimed intellects of a higher
order of being surely need no such study.
Have spiritual revelations added one iota of knowledge to our
common stock ? Does science, does art, owe them anything ?
No—unhesitatingly no ! And yet lam confronted with Andrew
Jackson Davis’s Nature and her Divine Revelations, and am
bidden to look on a volume written, under spiritual inspiration, by
an illiterate youth of two or three and twenty; which contains within
its covers an epitome of the knowledge of all times, past, present
and future, and has been called by some enthusiasts the Bible of


Spiritualism ! I look; and what do I see ? A ponderous volume
of over 800 large Bvo. pages “full of sound and fury signifying
nothing.”
Everything is touched off with the master hand of a writer
conscious of the superiority of his asserted claims to attention.
Astronomy is followed into the minutest details of the manners
and customs of the denizens of the other planets, and we learn
with becoming reverence the important fact that an innate sense
of modesty compels the inhabitants of Jupiter to go on all-fours !
Geology is made interesting by the most fantastical accounts of
animal and vegetable life in the pre-historic era.
The development theory is propounded and explained with an
elaboration that must make Darwin think very poorly of the re-
sult of his forty years labor in that direction ; while Huxley
may take comfort in learning that we came originally from some-
thing much more repxdsively ugly than the Gorilla, and were
thousands of years working our way up from the lowest Quadru-
mana to the perfect Troglodyte !
Human physiology is discoursed upon in a manner that would
make our greatest anatomists stand abashed, until they remember
that the seer of the book annihilates all medical and surgical
formulge, and cures all diseases by imposition of hands.
Dr. Latham and Humboldt are confounded and put to shame
by the deliverances on the origin of language and the Cosmic
theories.
Biblical criticism is illustrated by some of the most astounding
statements ever encountered by student, while the knotty ques-
tion of free-will or necessity is settled for ever by a distinct
denial of the possibility of the former condition.
I take this book as a type, because I find that the circum-
stances under which it is said to have been produced, are cited as
sufficient grounds for its unquestioned reception, and its general
laudation would imply that it is regarded as a masterpiece.
For myself I do not hesitate to pronounce it a farrago of pre-
tentious humbug. With an affectation of scientific nomenclature,
and a pretence of metaphysical precision, it contains glaring errors
in physical science, abounds in illogical deductions, in wild and
baseless assertions, and in hypotheses that are quite beyond the
sphere of reason. And this is the great work of that system
which has for one of its fundamental principles the acquisition of
a knowledge of the laws which govern the occult forces of the
universe, &c.
The result is unsatisfactory; I ask for others. Spiritualism I
am told has saved thousands from infidelity and atheism, by con-
vincing them of the truth of the Biblical miracles, and assuring
them of a future life.
Ido not believe it: for I maintain that the very persons who
would reject the miracles of the New Testament, after candid
inquiry, would certainly decline to accept those of modern
Spiritualism.


The honest objector to the Biblical miracles founds his dissent
solely upon the ground of their incompatibility with the known
and accepted order of nature; not upon any supposition of their
having been disproved, or being immoral in their tendency, or
emanations of jugglery and fraud: he simply discredits the nar-
rator. Is it not then monstrous to suppose that such a man
could be turned from his unbelief by a series of thaumaturgic
wonders, whose very existence is based upon a postulate which
he denies ? which have not even the object for their performance
commonly ascribed to the older ones, and of which probably nine
tenths have been exposed as fraudulent and unreliable. While,
as to the triumphant claim made for the manifestations as the
sure and certain revelations of a future life, I confess to a sense
of chill dismay at the bare idea of resting my hopes of a pro-
gressive hereafter upon such testimony.
Such a hope is co-existent with mankind; it animates hundreds
of millions, who can give no reason for the faith that is in them.
I never feel a doubt or hesitancy about it myself until, as Rath-
bone Greg says, I hear others attempting to assign ostensible and
logical reasons for it, or to prove it by arguments which could
satisfy no one by whom arguments were needed.
But of all attempted proofs, this modern theory of Spiritualism
is the saddest and cruellest. That the wise and good of past
ages, from Moses and Jesus Christ, to the philosophers of the
last century, should be at the beck and call of every advertising
medium whom the love of gain has called into existence, and be
prepared with suitable advice and admonition for any and every
occasion, in exchange for dollars duly paid, is too painful to con-
template.
That the gigantic intellect of a Bacon should be dwarfed by his
spiritual existence to the smug platitudes and copy-book-slip
morality of his utterances to Judge Edmonds; and that Sweden-
borg should himself vouch tor the fact that he spent the first sixty
or eighty years of his spirit life in untiring and strenuous efforts
to brfng about a means of communication with mortals, and only
hit upon the expedient of the raps through the practical philosophy
of the shade of Benjamin Franklin, is melancholy indeed. But
that our chief hope of immortality should rest on such assertions
as that of the spirit of the Rev. John Pierpoint, who passing into
the body of Mrs. Conant, the Boston medium, ten days after his
death, proclaimed in a loud voice and before accredited witnesses,
“ Brothers and sisters, the problem now is solved with me, and
because I live you shall live also,” is not encouraging outside the
members of that gentleman’s congregation.
How does this kind of revelation comfort the dying ? Better,
far better, annihilation in the grave, than that I, if as a sentient
spirit I retain a shred of the self-respect that pertains to my
human nature, should be liable to be summoned back to earth,
to play fantastic tricks with chairs and tables, to float fat mediums
in mid air, to play accordions and banjos, and ring mysterious


bells, and generally to conduct myself like a clown in the panto-
mime, at a time when I hoped to be progressing towards a moral
and intellectual perfection.
No! if the power of communication existed at all between the
earthly wayfarer and those who have gone before, it would per-
meate the tenderest and holiest relations of life. How many
thousands of human beings since the world began—husbands
and wives—dear friends—loving youths and maidens—have
thought and talked over their hope of a home beyond the skies,
and covenanted with one another that the first to depart should
surely, if permitted, “ revisit the glimpses of the moon,” and
tell the fearful mystery to the survivor ! Was it ever done?
Alas, no! the world has no record of it. But that which was
whilome impossible to love in its highest and purest form is now
a daily matter of business, and a thousand mediums stand ready
at your word, with rival tariffs, to call before you those whose
affections were powerless to seek you out alone.
I pass on to my second position.
That the nature of the testimony on which it relies for support
is eminently unsatisfactory.
That this is so is more the fault of the spiritualists themselves
than any one else, for when the determined investigator comes
amongst them, there is such a fluttering of objections, such a shy
reticence of the spirits, and such a demur to any of the conditions
essential to a thorough examination of the subject, that science
comes not unnaturally to the conclusion, that imposture must be
lurking about.. Professor Faraday has shown us that many of the
lower manifestations are the results of natural causes, and Professor
Tyndall, in a most interesting account of a seance that he attended,
has exposed the utter fallacy of the pretensions of a medium ex-
tensively believed in in private circles of repute in London.
Speaking for myself, I may here say that I have sat at tables
which obstinately refused to respond to any amount of patience,
but which appeared lively enough on my retiring, and have even
gone so far as to rap out an intimation that no further revelations
would be vouchsafed until I left the room. Now, upon what
principle are these convincing manifestations denied to me that
they may be made patent to those who believed before they saw ?
A writer in the Cornhill Magazine on a cognate subject, some
years ago, says :
“ In the case of mere marvels reported on good authority, the
“ presumption is always in favor of not believing. It would be a
u real calamity to believe that a chair walked and talked unless it
“ really did, and it could do but little harm not to believe it if it
u did, for it is impossible to say what such an occurrence would
“ prove supposing it to be true.”
Since, therefore, we can evidently prove nothing by demonstra-
ting the purposeless aberrations of tables and chairs, let us look at
the testimony which is supposed to be borne by the revelation as
translated by accredited spirit interpreters.


Of these probably the one most relied on is the deliverance, by
writing or speech, of matter far beyond the knowledge of the
medium in his normal state, and this frequently takes the form of
prophesying, or describing supernatural localities, such as cannot
be readily verified.
Another form is the supposed possession of the medium by the
spirit of some deceased celebrity, in which condition the peculiar
characteristics of the individual represented are developed. Liter-
ary men, and especially poets, are the favorites in this form of
manifestation, Edgar Allen Poe being always ready to declare
himself through any imaginative female medium; while the
enormous quantity of spirit poetry which he perpetrates in weak
imitation of his earthly excellences in that line, show that his fato
at least is deterioration in place of progress !
A volume recently lent to me called “ Poems of the Inner Life,”
contains a collection of verses delivered by a celebrated lady-
medium in the trance state, as we learn from the business-like
attestations of witnesses.
But what do these certificates amount to ? Simply that a young
lady with her eyes closed, and the appearance of unconsciousness,
delivered certain poetical effusions, after anouncing the name of
the spirit that possessed her.
As imitations they are inferior to the “ Rejected Addresses” of the
brothers Smith, while their publication in this form is an insult to
the memory of the authors named, because it presupposes in them
a poverty of languageand ideas that necessitates their falling
back upon the very phrases and sentiments of their mundane work.
This is carried to a ridiculous length in the Shakesperian utterances,
which are garnished throughout with whole lines taken at random
from his various plays, not always in harmony with the context;
while the general versification of the book is such as might be
squeezed out of anyone, who, fairly read in poetry, had a musical
ear and moderately retentive memory.
Now I cannot admit that these deliverances help the matter to
any satisfactory testimony.
Some of the writing under influence appears to present occa-
sional difficulties of explanation, as to how the penman acquired
his information, but nine-tenths of all these communications are
of such vague general import, that they may be read in any sense,
and most of the remainder is made up of statements which it
would be as impossible to disprove as to prove.
The power of mediums to hold conversations and make written
communications in foreign languages of which they are ignorant,
is confidently advanced as convincing testimony. But un-
fortunately this is a class of evidence that requires to be
testified to itself; and that, too, by the very class of men who are
denounced as unreasonable sceptics, and refused admission to the
sanctuary. Judge Edmonds says his daughter has spoken, and
been understood by the persons addressed, in Greek, Latin, Italian,
Portuguese, Polish, Hungarian, and several dialects of the abo


riginal Indian; but then the Judge does not pretend to say that
he understands the languages himself, so we may easily estimate
the value of his testimony. We cannot forget that some hundreds
of thousands of people believe to this day in the reality of the
golden plates and the Egyptian characters, in which the Book of
Mormon was revealed to Joe Smith; and it is well known that
Professor Anthon, the celebrated Orientalist, was quoted for years
as an authority for the philological genuineness of the characters
of the record, though entirely without his knowledge, and
in opposition to his views, so difficult is it to overtake error
if it get but a good start. It is recorded by Judge Edmonds
and Dr. Dexter that communications have been written by
mediums in Hebrew and Arabic, without their own compre-
hension ; and that upon submission to competent scholars, the
writing has been found wonderfully correct. Now, considering
that Confucius and the Apostle Paul have both delivered their
sentiments in excellent English, it seems a little like straining
after effect, for these lesser lights to require such deference to
their philological peculiarities.
In any case where the evidence fails to satisfy the enquirer, the
spiritualist has a safe ground to fall back upoh in denouncing the
motive of the enquiry as unbecoming, too worldly, or irreverent;
or if not amenable to that impeachment, the blame may be thrown
upon the spirits as undeveloped, false or mischievous, and refusing
to yield place to better ones.
Great stress is laid upon the statement of Judge Edmonds,
whose adhesion to the movement undoubtedly gave it great im-
pulse in America, that he was a determined sceptic during four
months of preliminary investigation, and tried the patience of
believers sorely by his obduracy. But though he says so in his
“ Appeal to the Public,” lie certainly contradicts himself in the
introduction of his great book, and shows plainly that he was a
ready-made believer from the beginning.
“My first interview,” he says, “ was with the rappings, and
“three things struck me as remarkable. One was that, under
(( the circumstances it was beyond all cavil that the sounds
“ were not produced by any person present. Another was,
«that my mental questions were answered, when I knew that
i( no person present could know what they were; j
“ third was, that I was directed to correct a mistake I had
“made in my memorandum, when I knew that no onepre-
“ sent was aware that I had made a mistake, or what it was.
Add to this his own statement that at the time of commencing
these inquiries, he, a man of delicate organisation and singularly
nervous temperament, was withdrawn altogether from society
in a condition of hvpochondriacal monomania. “ I was labouring,
he says, “ under great depression of spirits; I was occupying all
“ my leisure in reading on the subject of death, and man s exls "
“ tence afterwards. I had in the course of my life read, and


“ heard from the pulpit, so many contradictory and conflicting
“ views of the subject that I hardly knew what to believe,” &c.
(Introd. p. 71.)
Let me ask any candid person if this was the man to investigate
calmly a movement in which pschychological as well as physiologi-
cal phenomena were undoubtedly manifested : an investigation
requiring a clear cool head, —an unimpressionable imagination,
considerable scientific knowledge and some logical acumen.
Surely, after writing as Judge Edmonds has done in the enthu-
siastic support of spiritualistic views, his followers must feel a chill
at the glimpse they get of the legal mind, which provides a loop-
hole of escape by saying (Introd. p. 72), “ If I have been deluded
“ and have not seen and heard what I think I have, my delusion
“ has been shared by many as shrewd, as intelligent, as honest, and
“ as enlightened people as are to be found anywhere among us.”
And if the testimony of this champion fails, I can produce no
other like him in Spiritualistic literature.
3rd. That its teachings are vague, contradictory, often mer-
cenary, and inextricably confounded with fraud and chicane.
Thomas Brevior, the author of a book entitled, “ The Two
“ Worlds, Natural and Spiritual, their intimate connection and
“ relation illustrated,” says, u We must be careful to distinguish
“ between the teachings of Spiritualism and the teachings of
“ Spiritualists—the latter is only another name for a creed.
u Beyond the common acknowledgement that spirits have always
“ held, and do still hold intercourse with mankind, there is but
“ little necessary agreement ; for concerning other important
“ truths, as all have not before them the same range and variety
“ of facts, as they differ in their powers of comparison and reason-
u ing, their education, religion, philosophy, and modes of thought;
“ there will be corresponding divergences in their conclusions
u even from the same facts; and with the conviction of Spiritual-
u ism, there may, in some minds, co-exist notions inconsistent and
“ even logically incompatible with it!”
Now, here we have the most modern revelation, with all the
experience of past failures to guide it, giving forth its utterances
in such uncertain tones, paltering with us in a double sense, that
even its eager disciples come to diametrically opposite conclusions
on many points of moment, and may even hold opinions logically
inconsistent with their belief in its existence. This certainly
does not seem to point to any great improvement upon those
sectarian differences which many hold that the new Ilevelation
comes to supersede and abolish; but worse yet remains behind.
The same writer also cautions us that we must not confound the
teachings of the spirits with the teachings of Spiritualism. The
spirits, he tells us, are not a kind of minor gods, but men like
ourselves, differing from us only in not having the same visible
body; that they are fallible, and no more to be implicitly trusted


than our brother man, and in this view he is supported by Judge
Edmonds, though apparently opposed by A. J. Davis and many
others.
“ In supposing,” says Mr. Brevior, “ that spirits are permitted
to communicate only what is true and of the gravest moment, you
are under a delusion. If you surrender yourself to the ipse dixit
of any spirit, or give up the reins of your own judgment into other
hands it is at your peril. * * * I speak now of those facts only in
which the falsehood and frivolity of verbal spirit communications
are intentional, and unmistakeably originate with the communica-
ting spirit. * * * For some physico-spiritual manifestations have
been connected with a very palpable dishonesty on the part of the
spirits. The true spiritual theory is not necessarily that which
spirits teach, but that which commends itself to the deepest intui-
tions of the spiritual man, and the fullest and freest exercise of
his reasoning powers.”
Now, what is the meaning of all this in plain language ? The
teachings of spiritualists are unreliable, because every man’s views
of the great tenets are warped and twisted by his own mental
peculiarities. The revelations of the spirits are unreliable, unless
confirmed by your own knowledge or intuition; because the
spirits, besides being ignorant like ourselves, are strongly ad-
dicted to fraud and lying. True Spiritualism, therefore, it would
appear cannot be taught, but commends itself to our intuitions j
which means, I suppose, that it is the result of some fortuitous
condition of mind that impresses one with a belief in a shadowy
something, compounded of the poetical idea of guardian angels
and ministering spirits, and a restless craving to know something
of that “ bourne from whence no traveller returns.” But what a
sad farrago of rubbish become all these volumes of revealed
wisdom under this light. Why not employ the time preferably in
the cultivation of our common humanity, and gaining real substantial
knowledge, as we all may do, from earthly sources, without
fear of deception or delusion ? Hear once more how low the
spirits are fallen, and note the adroitness with which even their very
lies are made to serve the truth as held by the faithful. I quote
from The Spiritual Telegraph and Fireside Pastor : —
“ Suppose that raps spell out the sentence, —There is no God,
u no distinction between good and evil, and no moral responsi-
bility. Now, taking this in its merely superficial import,
“it must of course be pronounced totally false. But supposing it
t( to be established beyond doubt that this communication actually
“ comes from a human spirit, is there not something else that is
“ said to us by its means ? Most certainly, and that after all is
“ the chief point of value. It is tacitly said "that human spirits
“ possess intelligence and ignorance similar to those which charac-
“ terised them while dwellers in the mortal body : and that there
‘ c are those actually so low in intelligence, in morals and in per-
a ception, as to deny the existence of a God, the distinction
“ between good and evil, and the moral responsibility of man.”


I must hurry on to glance at a few of the contradictory teach-
ings involved in spiritualistic literature: and first as to mediums.
Unanimity prevails as to the absolute necessity for a medium for
any communications with the unseen world ; but as to the qualifi-
cations for mediumship the widest diversity obtains. The
Rev. Mr. Harris, an eloquent expounder of the doctrines, says any
man, good or bad, can become a medium for spirits, and he has
seen revelations made through the vilest and most degraded of
mankind.
Judge Edmonds, on the other hand, says that the fact of
mediumship is the result of physical organisation ; the kind of
communication is affected by moral causes (observe here the admis-
sion of a most important element in the power of the medium over
the revelation); the power is possessed in different degrees, and it is
capable of improvement by cultivation and study. Thomas Brevior
asserts that mediums must be peculiarly constituted, but is
unable to say whether the peculiarity is chemical, electrical, mag-
netic, odyllic, or some combination of all these—or something else !
Among the North American Indians, every tribe had its
mediums or medicine men, who exorcised evil spirits and cured
diseases by incantations and laying on of hands. They were held
in reverence by their fellows, and had the best of everything that
was going; but George Catlin says the only peculiarity he ever
noticed in them was the cunning which enabled them to disguise
the fact that they were too lazy for hunters, and had not pluck
enough for warriors. I think if we look at the announcements of
some of the American mediums, we shall admit the possession of
fully as much-cunning in lighting upon an easy and well-paid
walk in life.
I quote from an unbeliever, but he in turn quotes from the
spiritualist organ, The Banner of Light. Mrs. Eliza Williams, a
sister of A. J. Davis, announces that she will examine and pre-
scribe for diseases and cure the sick by her healing powers, which
have been fully tested. Mrs. Spencer undertakes to cure chills and
fevers, by her positive and negative powders ; adding “ for the pre-
vention and cure of cholera this great spiritual medicine should
“ always be kept on hand.” Madame Gall advertises that she sees
spirits and describes absent friends. Dr. George Emerson is ad-
vertised as a medium “ developed to cure diseases by drawing
them into himself,” and announces that he is ready to perform this
miracle of spirit-art by letter, at any distance, for ten dollars.
Mrs. S. W. Gilbert, describing herself as a dermapathist, not only
offers to cure disease, but to teach the art in so many lessons, at
so much a lesson !
I know 1 shall be told that fraud and imposture cling about
every popular movement; but if we remember what has been said
about the false teachings of the writers on Spiritualism, and the
lying penchant of the I ask, in despair, if the
mediums are so generally discredited, where are we to apply for
the truth ?


Again, Judge Edmonds, Brevior, and, to some extent, A. J.Davis,
with some of the magazines, assert that the teachings of Spiri-
tualism are supplementary to, and, in the main, in support of the
generally received doctrines of Christianity. But this view is
scouted as derogatory by many of their writers, and it has been
held that man is his own judge and saviour; the existence of a
personal God, and the mediatory character of Christ being both
denied. In Hepworth Dixon’s account of the Rhode Island Spiri-
tual Conference, 1866, we find many of the speakers denouncing
churches, worship, human laws, the use of the word sacred in any
sense, and rejoicing that the old religion was dying out.
M. Allan Kardac, editor of The Revue Spirite, says, among
other teachings, “ Spiritualism confirms and proves the funda-
“mental bases of religion, namely:—
“ The existence of an only omnipotent God, Creator of all things,
“ supremely just and good.”
“ The existence of the soul; its immortality and individuality
“ after death.
“ Man’s free will and the utility of prayer.
“ It contributes to the happiness of man upon earth, in coun-
“ teracting hopelessness and despair; in teaching man to be con-
“ tent with what he has, and to regard wealth, honor, and
“ power as trials more to be dreaded than desired ; and in inspiring
“him with sentiments of charity and true fraternity for his
“ neighbour.”
Now how in the name of common sense can a belief in the ex-
istence of spirits, whose communications are no more reliable than
those of our next door neighbour, and whose revelations are so
palpably a reflex of the mind of their interlocutor, be any assis + ance
'in reaching the standard of social morality set up for us by M.
Kardac.
I feel that my time is quite inadequate to exhaust tne subject,
and dismissing all reference to the stupendous frauds and im-
pious juggleries which have and do still disgrace the movement, I
come to consider briefly my last position, viz;—
4th. That its acceptance as an article of belief can only be ac-
complished by an entire surrender of our reasoning and inquiring
faculties, and a practical denial of those fundamental Cosmic laws
on which alone true science can rest.
At the outset I am placed in this difficulty, that in dealing
with matters of spirit utterances, say with Davis’s Divine Revela-
tions of Nature, if I refuse to accept his description of the inhabi-
tants of Jupiter, I am silenced by being asked what I know to the
contrary ; but if I take exception to his theory of the seas of the
primeval earth being 400 miles in depth, as opposed to the teach-
ings of geology, physical geography, and common sense, I may
be told that the inspiration of this particular chapter was by a
lying spirit; or, in a general way, that the peculiar bent of Davis’
mind being towards big figures, his understanding was misled.


As such discussion is hopeless, I propose now only to look at
the unnatural perturbations of inanimate bodies, as said to be ex-
hibited at some spirit seances. In doing- this Ido not abandon
my own theory that these movements when beyond natural agency
are purely imaginary, but I wish to show how the spiritualist
meets the difficulty of their being in opposition to the laws of
gravitation.
Professor Faraday, and many able men before him, have laid it
down that the laws of nature, as we understand them, are the
foundations of our knowledge in natural things, and whatever is
inconsistent with these is false. Now, Judge Edmonds and some
others profess to abide by this doctrine, omitting the words, “as
“we understand them,” and maintain that none of these mani-
“ festations are miraculous, or flow from any suspension of nature’s
u laws ; but are on the other hand, in conformity with and in execu-
“ tion of those laws ; that like the steam-engine and telegraph they
“ are marvellous only to those who do not understand them, and that
“ those laws, and the means by which they produce such results,
“ are as capable of being found out by human research; and
“ this knowledge is open to all, wise or ignorant, who will
“ patiently search for it.”
This is a graceful concession to science as far as it goes, but is
there the faintest shadow of a ground for supposing that a law,
apparently so immutable as gravitation, is about to become vari-
able in its operation; or is liable to be negatived by influences of
which scientific research has no record in all its experiments.
Setting aside the recorded vagaries of possessed tables and chairs,
can we by any process of analogy or induction arrive at a conclu-
sion that a further development of nature’s laws will show us that
some of the more important are not constant, or are liable to be
counteracted by others of whose existence we are yet ignorant.
It is asking us to take too much upon trust and is scarcely pre-
ferable to the direct assertion of supernatural interference.
Thomas Brevoir plunges boldly into the attack, ard says, when
scientific men affirm that certain of the phenomena cannot possibly
take place because they are contrary to the law of gravitation,
they forget that the evidence of gravitation depends on the same
senses as testify to the reality of the levitation, and that if their
testimony is rejected as not trustworthy, the proof of gravitation
is itself invalidated : an argument, tlie fallacy of which is too
patent to need comment.
But Dr. Brownson speaks the sentiments of the bulk of the
writers on this subject when he says of M. Babinet’s article in the
Revue des Deux Mondes , u Poor man ! he reasons as if the pheno-
“ mena repugnant to the law of gravitation, are supposed to be
“ produced by it, or at least without a power that overcomes it.
“ Why, the very marvellousness is that it is contrary to the law of
“ gravitation, and because it is, we infer that it is supernatural.
“ When I see a man raised without visible means to the ceiling
“ and held there by the feet, head downwards for half-an-hour,


“ without visible support, I do not pretend that it is in accord
« w ith the law of gravitation, but the very essence of the fact
“ is precisely that it is not.”
This language is re-echoed in various books, and teems in the
letters and articles of spiritual magazines, and to admit this form
of argument I insist that we must entirely surrender our reasoning
and enquiring faculties, and replace them by a blind faith in what
we cannot understand.
It has been well said that supernatural incidents fall between
two stools; either they violate that course of nature and chain of
incident from the classified description of which all our knowledge
is derived, and in that case they cannot be described by any terms
which we can use, and are therefore incredible; or else they form
part of it, and then they are not supernatural.
For those who hold that the experience of science in the immu-
tability of nature’s laws affords us no evidence of their permanence
in the future : —that the expectation that any part of the course of
nature will be the next moment what it has been up to this
moment, rests upon no rational grounds, and can be traced to no
rational principle —and, holding such views, can maintain a natural
basis for floating mediums, bounding furniture, substantial spirit
hands, and the power of a medium under spiritual advice to
swallow harmlessly 100 grains of arsenic at a dose, as recorded by
Mary Howitt; —to all such I would say that their answer will be
found in Professor Tyndall’s paper on “ Miracles and Special Provi-
dences,” recently reprinted here by a Society for the diffusion of
knowledge. .
The conclusion of the whole matter is, that what is good in the
preaching of Spiritualism is common to all reformers, for to some
extent the movement in America comes under that head, as an
impatient protest against the abuses and indifferentism of some of
the more orthodox churches.
Dr. Holmes says, “ The spiritualists have some pretty strong
“ instincts to pry over, which no doubt have been roughly handled
Ct by theologians at different times. And the Nemesis of the pulpit
« comes in a shape that it little thought of, beginning with the
u snap of a toe-joint, and ending with such a crack of old beliefs
“ that the roar of it is heard in all the ministers studies in
“ Christendom.” .
But apart from what trifling good it may do in awakening the
professors of theology from the lethargy which their sleepy security
has induced, and from the association of certain philanthropic sen-
timents, of a politico-economic character with the professions of
its expounders, all else appears positively harmful.
It professes to have its own royal road to knowledge, without
the healthy discipline of earthly study; it teaches us to pry into
the secrets of futurity, which all reason and analogy tell us we
cannot know. .......
It tempts thousands to fraud and imposture as a means o> liveli-
hood, and pays them a hundredfold better than honest labor.


It engrosses men’s minds with dreamy speculations, and wastes
their time in fruitless investigations ; losing to humanity as much
energy as would reform many crying abuses, and time enough to
make a mark on the progress of nations.
It debases the intellect of its votaries, and degrades the idea of
a future state below the “ happy hunting grounds” of the red
Indian.
It professes to give us a newer andmore perfect revelation, and its
deliverances are more obscure and less reliable than that which has
split Christendom into a hundred sects.
It offers no solution of the social evils which oppress mankind ;
o-ives no formula for an improved organisation of society; extends
no helping hand to keep poverty from sinking deeper into misery,
and conveys to us no information worth having upon the para-
mount questions of health and happiness, disease and death.
Let us then wash our hands of it, and be up and doing for our-
selves. Relying upon no such shadowy aid, let us do with all our
might the work that lies before us in the world. If our efforts
are°unselfishly directed to the amelioration of our race on earth, it
needs no spiritual communication to tell us that our reflections in
that hereafter will make our own heaven • while, even in the flesh
we know that virtue is its own exceeding great reward.
E. Bell, Steam Printer, 97 Little Collins Street East, Melbourne.
