





pere’g Aqotljei l MeW {Sensation
Hunter’s
Half CUlKfa BOOTS,
Nothing Like them in xhe World
FOR
Style, Fit, Durability, and Comfort.
|3 ranches.
NEW SOUTH WALES,
Oxford Street.
Darlinghurst.
Paddington,
Glebe.
Pyrmont.
Balmain.
N ewtown.
Leichhardt.
Waverley.
Petersham.
Summer Hill.
St. Leonards.
Rozelle.
.^ranches.
Burwood.
10/6 Parramatta.
Wollongong.
0/> i Newcastle.
1 West Maitland.
| Goulburn,
Young!'
* Broken Hill.
Wagga.
John Hunter,
CITY BOOT PALACE,
GEORGE and MARKET STREETS,
And ski aaj &£ the aU&ve Brauehe®*
Orders by Post Promptly Attended to.
(POSTAGE EXTRA.)




Under Chemical Analysis ,
'ecorate with cheap and effective “dacier,” the same as used in
argest Assortment of Artists’ Materials always on hand and at lowest prices.
This should be the desire of every one. Your home is your kingdom and
should be just as comfortable and beautiful as your means will allow.
Little expense is necessary to decorate your rooms
Head quarters for Absolutely Pure White Lead.
James Sandy & Co.,
Plate and Sheet Glass Merchants,
Oil and Colomen and Artistic Decorators,
71 & 330 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
A? 33 SS'/ A /OJ


GEO. ROBERTSON & GO.
361 & 363 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL
Booksellers and Stationers
NEW BOOKS BY EVERY MAIL.
Plain, Fancy and Commercial Stationery
Fancy Leather Goods. Ladies’ Workbaskets.
SMOKER’S CABINETS.
SOLE AGENTS FOR
ELLIOTT & FRY’S
CELEBRATED CABINET
of £nglis|) and Colonial
- Cefeb titles. -
LONDON ; 17 Warwick Square, Paternoster Road, E.C.
MELBOURNE : 384 & 390 Little Collins Street.
ADELAIDE: Freeman Street.
BRISBANE ; 27 Queen Street.


“SPOOKUANDI"
Record of Research and Experiment in a much-talked-of realm of mystery ,
with a Review and Criticism of the so-called spiritualistic phenomena of
Sprint yHateWaTfsatfon*
And Hints and Illustrations as to the possibility of artificially
producing ffye §ame.
T. SHEKLETON HENRY, A R.1.8.A.
ILLUSTRATED FROM
ORIQIN/3L “SPIRIT” PHOTOQRfIFH/.
SYDNEY;
W. M. Maclardy and Co., Printers, 82 Pitt Street.




30 if
AUTHOR’S PREFACE.
In placing the following pages before the public, the author is
actuated by two motives : —Firstly, that recent occurrences in our
midst, relating to some of the so-called phenomena of Spiritualism, and
questioning the evidence on which these phenomena profess to stand,
and notably the occurrence of Friday, October 12th, have created a
widespread, sensational, and general interest throughout Australasia.
The newspapers have been full of controversial matter on the
subject, opinions have been expressed most freely; and without
confining themselves to the alleged exposure of the 12th October, and
the immediate and irrefutable evidence on which that one fact can
alone be judged, many correspondents have wandered off into side
issues, and brought forward statements and counter-statements not
material to the case in point, but involving the greater and wider
issue of the probability or even possibility of the occurrence of such
phenomena at all.
Certain so-called Tests are stated to have been applied by
individuals in Sydney, who put forward the evidence of these so-called
Tests, in support of the genuineness of the phenomena which they
uphold.
On the other hand, are the statements of other individuals, who
took part in the said so-called Tests, but who cannot accept them as
such, and can not consider the evidence adduced as sufficient ground
on which to base so bold a faith.
Therefore, the author, firstly, in the capacity of an impartial
recorder and witness, gives to the public an exact, truthful, and
impartial record of these so-called Tests carried out in Sydney, that
the thinking public may sift and judge the evidence for itself.
If such occurences as these are to be held up as evidence now or
at any future time, it is well that some truthful, and undistorted record
should be available. The author has been present at, and assisted in,
all these rnuch-talked-of experiments, and has kept complete written
notes and records, with the view to ultimate publication. This duty,
therefore, naturally and necessarily devolves upon him, and no time
could be more fitting than the present.
As an unbiassed critic, viewing the broad question of Spirit
Materialisation as a whole, the author endeavours to avoid all narrow
and personal issues and to consider everything material to the question
purely in the aspect of evidence.
On such a vexed question as this, it is impossible to avoid the
mention of certain names and occurrences, and the candid criticisms
■of the evidence of individuals.


The author, while regretting the necessity, wishes to assure those
persons that his action arises from no personal feeling in the matter,
and that no offence is intended.
No counsel, when criticising the evidence of witnesses and present-
ing his view bf a case to a jury, would be accused of personal feeling
in dealing with those witnesses; and the author asks the same
consideration in presenting this case to the public.
All the authentic testimony, documentary or otherwise, at the
author’s disposal and relating to the incipiency and growth of the
alleged phenomena of Materialisation, are reviewed by him.
The second reason for this publication is somewhat different.
In dealing with a field of research Avhich necessitates the
employment of a class of individuals at all times more or less
associated with trickery or imposture, it behoves the investigator to be
upon his guard, and while retaining an impartial judgment, to be fully
alive to every possibility of fraud and trickery. The man of business,
in the course of daily commercial transactions, works upon this
principal; and while casting no personal reflection upon his fellow-
citizen does not leave it in the power of that other to dupe him.
How much more necessary is it, therefore, in dealing with a realm
of so much mystery to take even stricter precautions ?
To the true scientific investigator, this warning is unnecessary ;
but humanity embraces a large class of people predisposed to dabble in
occult mysteries, and with a tendency to still believe in supernatural
interference with their personal welfare.
These can not be considered investigators in any sense of the
word, but emotional, credulous, and ready-made dupes.
A timely warning may save such as these from the toils of un-
scrupulous imposters who abound ; and enable them to ascribe to their
true source, the various tricks, by which, in many cases, the impostor
plays upon the most sacred feelings of the credulous, while he relieves
them of their cash.
Numbers of pex’sons will witness an exhibition of this sort, and
because they cannot themselves detect how it is done, ascribe the
performance at once to supernatural or abnormal agency.
Their emotions are played upon, their x’eligious sentiments abused,
and the x’esultant all-believing state, leaves no room for the reasoning
faculties.
In this condition they are ready to swallow everything and ask
for more.
And yet the same persons after witnessing a clever conjuring
entertainment, however far beyond their powers of explanation, would
never think of ascribing such to other than the true cause.
But the bona-fide conjui’er does not appeal to the emotions, neither
does he play upon the religious sentiments of his audience. Given
certain conditions, with surroundings of semi-darkness and music, it is
possible to produce this unreasoning, emotional state in the majority
of persons ; and it grows with px’actise.
It is merely a confidence trick.


The author illustrates how, from personal experiment, he is able
to produce the exact semblance of Materialised Spirit forms, under
Spiritualistic conditions, and explains how any individual may do
the same.
A number of bona-fide tricks are thus disclosed.
It is not with any wish to cast reflection upon Spiritualism or its
followers that this is done, but from a desire to open the eyes of the
unwary to all the possibilities of an artificial source for much that
passes as supernatural. Although the Phenomena of Spirit Materialisa-
tion may not stand upon sufficient evidence, yet the author believes
that, below all the fraud and imposture there exists, without doubt, a
substratum of little known and abnormal, though natural, phenomena,
which are worthy of scientific investigation.
He therefore claims the sympathy and co-operation of every right-
thinking person, whether spiritualist or otherwise, in his endeavour to
separate falsity from truth and to remove a fruitful source of imposture
and evil.
For the etymology of the title “ Spookland,” as expressing the
haunt or plane of the “ Spook,” readers are referred to current
Theosophical Treatises.
Lincoln’s Inn Chambers,
Elizabeth Street,
October, 1894.
Sydney.


-freo]'WEjWg.«-
BPiScBRT I.
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER I—Some Typical and Historic Materialisation Seances ; Mr.
Hackett, Mrs. Mellon, Mrs. Besant
CHAPTER ll.—The “Test” Seances and Criticisms. Test No. 1:■
The Materialisation of Spirits while the Medium is
sitting outside “ Cabinet ”
CHAPTER lll.—Test No. 2 : The First Photographic Sfeance. Geordie
Photographed ... .- ...
CHAPTER IV.—Test No. 3 ; The Second Photographic Seance, and the
Result ..
Test No. 4; The Third Photographic Seance, and Remark-
able Developments
CHAPTER V.—Test No. 5: The Stance for Weighing the “Spirits,” and
the Result
CHAPTER Vl.—Test No, 6 : The Alleged Exposure of Friday, 12th
October, 1894 and what led up to it. The Evidence of
the various Witnesses. Further Revelations by the
President of the Spiritualists’ Association. Public
Comment and Interesting Correspondence
CHAPTER Vll.—The so-called “ Tests” Criticised. The Opinions of
Local Exponents Discussed. Extracts from the Lives
of Some Remarkable Mediums _
CHAPTER VIII.—Mrs. Mellon, the foremost and most Remarkable
Materialising Medium of the World. Her Life
Reviewed. Her own Statements as to Early History
of her Materialising Spirits “ Geordie,” “ Cissie,” etc.
with extracts from accounts of Stances held by her
in England and elsewhere ...
CHAPTER IX.—The Broad Question of the so-called Spiritualistic
Phenomena of Spirit Materialisation considered. The
Evidence on which it stands
ap.a.Bß.’r ii.
CHAPTER X.—Some Possible Explanations for the so-called Phenomena of
Spirit Materialisation Illustrated, Art and Science
combined .. ...
CHAPTER Xl.—How to Produce “ Spooks ” by Artificial Means
CHAPTER XII.—A Warning to the Credulous
111.
CHAPTER Xlll.—Seances in England. Some full and authentic Records
of a Number of Mrs. Mellon’s Materialisation Stances;
extending over a Number of Years Past
CHAPTER XlV.—Seances in Australia, from written records kept by
witnesses ...


MRS. MELLON AND “ CISSIE.’’
From a photograph taken at Edinburgh by Mr, Stewart Smith on September S, 1890.




PART I
CHAPTER I.
Introduction: SOME TYPICAL AND HISTORIC
MATERIALIZATION SEANCES.
Mr. Hackett, Mrs. Mellon, Mrs. Besant.
jYOEFORE theorising upon the origin of any particular phase of
“ earthly matter,” or discussing the characteristics of any one
form of organised matei’ial, whether it be “ Spook,” “ Spirit” or one of
the every-day forms of life, it is necessary, firstly, for the propounder or
author to be personally well acquainted with the habits, manners,
customs and characteristics of that phase of material upon which he
writes ; and secondly, to convey to his readers some exact knowledge
also of the habits and characteristics of the race of beings about to be
discussed. My acquaintance with that realm of mystery and occultism,
which I have termed “ Spookland,” and more particularly with that
greatest of all the so-called Spiritualistic Phenomena, and most
astounding of all the professed mysteries—“ Spirit-Materialisation ”
is based principally upon my own careful research and personal ob-
servation, extending over a considerable period, and also upon docu-
mentary evidence at my disposal.
The exponents of this arch-mystery profess to bring back, to earthly
life, the denizens of the land of death ; to raise up to our mortal gaze,
in all the semblance of the bodies which they left behind, those friends
and relations long since dead ; to clothe the Spook again with a warm
material covering of flesh, and from the Ghost create for the time being,
a living, moving, speaking human entity.
Before discussing the truth or error of these professions, I will intro-
duce my readers to the habits of these ghostly beings, and for the
benefit of such as have not had a personal acquaintance with the Spook,
or themselves investigated this land of mystery, will proceed to recount
my observations of their habits. I will, therefore, take my reader to
some typical “Spirit-Materialisation” Seances, and for the sake of
authenticity they shall be recent, and some of them historic, occurrences.
That I may not be accused of adding or subtracting anything, I will
give the accounts written by others, where possible, in preference to my


own, and where my own account appears it shall be corroborated by
the testimony of others present.
In my early investigations of this subject I was introduced to a
medium named Hackett, and witnessed a remarkable exhibition of his
powers given at the Psychical Society’s Rooms in Pitt-street, Sydney.
As his particular phase of Materialisation is considered by Spiritualists
to be an elementary stage of the Phenomena, I can not do better than
introduce them to Mr. Hackett’s powers first.
The seance took place in a large upstairs room about 60ft. by 20ft.,
and when in company with three or four friends I entered this room,
there were about seventy or eighty persons assembled. The door was
at one end, and the three windows at the opposite end were blocked by
dark blinds. In one corner at the end next the window was erected a
small platform or stage about three feet high and six feet square, the
construction of this and the floor beneath being visible and unenclosed.
Upon this stage and in the angle of the room a curtained recess was
arranged by hanging on an iron rod two curtains of black material,
about seven feet high, fitting closely side by side and reaching to the
stage.
I was allowed to examine the curtained recess or “cabinet,” and in
fact examined the stage, floor, and adjacent window thoroughly without
finding anything concealed ; the only peculiarity that attracted my
attention being the fact that the curtains had three or four long slits
extending from the bottom up to four or five feet of their height. On
the corner of the stage, and about two feet in front of the cabinet, was
placed a large basin containing cut flowers. I and my friends were
alloted front seats, my position being within four feet of this basin of
flowers.
Mr. Hackett, the medium, a powerfully-built man, aged about
thirty-eight, of dark complexion, clear cut features, and by trade a
blacksmith, after being introduced to the visitors, ascended the stage
and took his seat on a chair behind the curtains. The lights at our
end of the room were turned out, and only a dim light at the far end
near the door left burning. The President of the Spiritualistic Society
requested that no person should leave a seat without permission, and
then took the lead in singing several hymns. After some minutes of
this sort of thing, peculiar mutterings and jabberings issued from
behind the curtains, and I was informed that the medium was in a
trance and under “control” of one of his “spirit” guides named
“ Parehaka,” a supposed Maori.
Not having a knowledge of the Maori language, however, this did
not impress me much ; but when the supposed “ Parehaka” broke off
into pigeon English and addressed several of his old acquaintances
present, informing them that certain spirit friends were there and were
going to show themselves, I became more interested. Suddenly in the
midst of renewed jabberings a long streak of what seemed luminous
drapery appeared between the curtains, and as the jabbering increased
the drapery seemed to rise and distend until it assumed the rough


outline of a female form. This figure moved out across the stage and
bowed to the spectators, and being asked by a gentleman present if it
were his deceased wife, nodded in the affirmative. Thereupon the
gentleman rose and reverently touched the hem of that drapery, and
the figure vanished in the way that it had come.
Many other forms came and went—some tall some short—but each
one draped and all possessing the graceful gliding motion of the
orthodox Ghost. Most of them were recognised by persons present
and many of them reverently touched, though how they were recog-
nised I do not know, seeing that all were equally without features, and
limbless.
Many of the persons at the back professed to see the features dis-
tinctly—these persons were “ clairvoyante ” —though I, sitting in the
very front only a few feet from the apparitions and with remarkably
good eye sight, could distinguish none. This is evidently a faculty ac-
quired after practice.
Some of the Ghosts approached the basin of flowers and appeared to
stoop towards it, and then flowers were thrown to the spectators. I
mildly asked if I might be allowed to touch the Spirit drapery, and
after promising that my touch should be very gentle I was allowed to
do so.
In a coquettish manner the ghost dodged close to the curtain and
in a half-distrustful sort of way submitted to my irreverent touch.
To my sceptic hand the drapery felt remarkably like the ordinary
coarse muslin of commerce, and I felt strongly tempted to hold on and
pull ; but, remembering my promise, and that the friends with whom
I had come were responsible for my good behaviour, I said nothing and
meekly took my seat.
Another interval of jabbering by some more “Spirit” guides, and
then we were infoz'med that the spirits would give us a dark seance.
The light at the back was then turned completely out, and forth
from the “ cabinet” into the black darkness of the room issued small,
glowing stars and specks of incandescent light. "Words cannot describe
the way these lights glowed and flitted till they lost themselves in the
darkness among the spectators. A faint imagining of phosphorous and
match heads crossed the workings of my brain, but was scouted, wit hout
finding expression in words, as an insult to the implicit trust placed by
those present in the bona-fides of the medium.
A little more singing brought this remarkable seance to a close,
and the lights were turned up; and after expressing my thanks to Mr.
Hackett for his exhibition, I departed with my friends.
I never met Mr. Hackett again, but the history of his later
achievements will be related in a later chapter. The above account is
corroborated by Mr. Wallis, who was also present. It must not be
presumed from this that I was ever a bigoted sceptic on these matters.
On the contrary my attitude was always that of an earnest impartial
investigator, anxious to prove or disprove to my own satisfaction the
genuineness of many alleged remarkable phenomena. While never


personally approving of the teachings or objects of Spiritualism, I was
investigating from a scientific standpoint much of its phenomena, and
while keeping my mind unbiassed by the credulous faith of the
Spiritualist on the one side, or the dogmatic teachings of Modern
Science on the other, was prepared to accept nothing that was not
proved to my own satisfaction. Ever sceptical and on the outlook for
fraud and imposture, until a fact was irrefutably proved, I have always
been ready to uphold publicly and in the face of popular prejudice any
phenomena, however abnormal and startling, that should rest on proper
evidence.
I will now describe a typical Materialisation Seance with Mrs.
Annie Mellon, a medium who has obtained world-wide celebrity among
spiritualists and others, and whose powers illustrate the highest stage
in the development and exposition of the alleged phenomena of Spirit-
Materialisation. The following account of a seance held on Monday,
Sept. 10th, 1894, is taken, by kind permission of the Editor, from the
Sydney Sunday Times of Sept. 16th, and I give the report as written
by its representative in preference to my own for reasons before men-
tioned :—“lt was on Monday evening last that I attended at the re-
sidence of Dr, MacCarthy in Elizabeth Street, Hyde Park, to witness
by invitation a Materialisation Seance conducted by a lady who attained
celebrity in England some years since, and was referred to by Mr.
Stead in his new year’s number of Review of Reviews for 1892, entitled
‘More Ghost Stories,’ as the one person in the United Kingdom of un-
doubted materialising faculty, and undoubted character, who could
almost always secure the presence of phenomena, and who had never
been detected in a trick of any kind.”
In addition to the medium there were present
Mrs. Eves
Miss B
Dr. MacCarthy
Mr. P. J. MacCarthy, dental surgeon
Mr T. S Henry, architect
Mr. N. Joubert, of Hunter’s Hill
Mr. Rumble, of North Sydney
Mr. Wallis (of Winchombe, Carson and Co.)
Dr. PICKBURN
Messrs. Stewart and Morgan, from Melbourne, members
of the Victorian Psychical Research Society
And the representative of the Sunday Times.
Refore proceeding to witness the Materialisation, it was decided
to hold a short dark seance, as it was explained, to get the power up.
This took place, as usual, in the kitchen, and we were no sooner seated
and had commenced to sing than a hand-bell was lifted off the table,
rung melodiously in the air over our heads, carried backwards and
finally deposited on the floor behind us.


A tambourine was then wafted about the room, striking me several
smart raps on the head, jam bed down on the head of another sitter, and
finally encircled round the medium’s left arm whilst Mr Stewart had
hold (as he assured us) of her left hand. A light was struck and the
tambourine was found in the position described, in the same manner as
occurred at a previous seance, and attested by statutory declarations
in our last issue.
After this the company proceeded to the room where the
materialisation took place.
The apartment is a bedroom about 16 feet by 11 feet, situated on
the second floor, facing the street. The bed had been pushed back to the
front wall, leaving about twelve feet between it and the opposite wall.
Across the south-west angle of the room, at a height of about seven
feet, was placed a curtain-rod about four feet long, from which hung
a pair of dark-colored curtains, screening a space just large enough to
conceal a low chair for the use of the medium. Nothing else what-
ever was in the screened corner.
The only furniture in the room beside the bed consisted of a
wai'drobe, a small round table, on which Dr. MacCarthy rested his
auto-harp, and the chairs for the sitters.
I examined the interior of the wardrobe, to make sure that no
person or apparatus was concealed there, and even looked under the
bed. The door of the room was locked, and the key given into my
charge, and the sitters placed themselves in a semi-circle facing the
screened corner, my own seat being in the centre. The gas was
turned out, but a lamp was left burning low, and partially shaded in
the recess at the side of the fireplace, giving sufficient light to distin-
guish the sitters and the various objects in the room.
The proceedings were opened by singing Mrs. Beecher Stowe’s
beautiful poem, commencing, “It lies around us like a cloud,” the
touching air being accompanied by Dr. MacCarthy on his instrument.
When this was finished another tune was started, and soon I saw an
irregular luminous appearance on the right side of the curtain. It
gradually increased in length, and then shifted its position to the
centre, and shortly assumed the form of a man about six feet high,
enveloped in white drapery. The lower part of the features were
partially swathed in the folds of the wrappings. The arms seemed
only partially developed, no hands being visible, and, strange to say,
the lower part of the figure appeared to taper off, leaving no defined
limbs visible, and only very slight drapery where the form came in
contact with the floor.
The effect of this apparition was indescribably weird, and, what-
ever the impression may have been upon those to whom it was not a
novelty, it certainly seemed to me a most awesome thing.
Here before me was a form resembling, and yet not resembling
a human being, and said to be a denizen of another world—a shadowy
substance which seemed to gaze upon the company with passive
dignity, and whose movements were the embodiment of silence.


The singing ceased, and t-he question was put, Whom had the
Spirit come to see ? The names of various sitters were mentioned,
and at that of one of the Melbourne visitors it slightly bowed its
head.
The gentleman indicated went forward right up to the form,
mentioned the names of several deceased relatives, at one of which
the figure bowed again. The gentleman, however, failed to recognise
any resemblance to his relative, and after a vain endeavour to take
the spirit-hand, which, as before described, did not appear to be
materialised, he retired, the form immediately afterwards vanishing
behind the screen.
The vocal exercises were then resumed, and before many minutes
hod elapsed another white patch appeared, emerging from between
the curtains, and grew gradually till it assumed the form of a child
about three feet six inches in height. This was generally recognised
as “ Cissie,” to whom the tambourine and bell performances of the
dark seance had been attributed. She came forward, took a box of
chocolate creams off the table, rattled the box, took two out, and
placed them between Dr. MacCarthy’s lips, then helped herself to
some, and began audibly sucking them.
The question was asked whether I might go and touch her, to
which she appeared to bow assent; but on my going forward she
glided within the screen. She soon emerged again, however, and I
ventured a second time, with the same result, and a third attempt
met with no better success, the little figure each time eoquettishly
■evading me, and ultimately disappearing altogether.
The next figure to appear was identified as “ Geordie,” to whom
reference has previously been made in these articles. The form was
that of a man somewhat over the middle height, with a bearded face,
and, like the previous visitants, enfolded in snow-white wrappings.
He seemed to evolve from the luminous stage more rapidly than his
predecessors, as his full stature was almost immediately revealed.
He came and stood out in front of the screen, and, after a few
seconds, said, in a hoarse whisper, “ Don’t ask me to do anything, as
the medium is not very well.” Then, asking if we would like to see
the medium, he retired behind the curtain. We heard the hoarse
voice saying, “ Get up, stand up,” and then both came out together,
the medium, who was in a dark dress, waving her hand and heaving
a deep-drawn sigh, as though from exhaustion, went back into the
curtained recess. “ Geordie” then, turning full towards me, so that the
unearthly figure and pallid features were distinctly visible, said,
il Mr. Times, what do you think of this, Mr. Times?”
Somewhat taken aback, I ventured to reply that it was indeed
more wonderful than I had expected, and soon afterwards be began
to dematerialise. He did not go back behind the curtain, as the
others had done, but the head gradually sank, and the form to lose
both length and breadth, until nothing was visible but an up turned
face in the centre of a small nebulous patch in the middle of the


floor, when from the strange uncanny lips came distinctly the words,
“ Good night, God bless you,” and all that was left of “ Geordie ”
vanished from our gaze.
A somewhat longer interval occurred before any further appear-
ance, but all at once, during the singing, we saw once more the white
nucleus in front of the screen slowly rising, and also extending for-
wards until it gradually assumed the appearance of flowing drapery,
revealing before us the figure of a beautiful woman, with pale but
sweetly expressive features, and long dark hair hanging down over
her shoulders.
She was hailed as “ Josephine,” another alleged frequent visitor
to the circle, and with perfectly silent movement she moved towards
the table in front of Dr. MacCarthy, who lifted a wreath of flowers
which lay upon the table and placed it round the figure’s neck. The
form bowed its head to receive them, and then silently glided behind
the screen, where the wreath was afterwards found. The next form
to appear was also that of a female, but the features were somewhat
indistinct, and she was stated to be a stranger. After a few seconds
this form disappeared, and then “Cissie” made a second appearance.
This time she did not emerge from the curtain, but materialised in the
room.
The little white nebulosity first appeared growing slowly upwards
till the childish form, with black, chubby features, became perfectly
developed. Then, retiring for an instant within the screen, she
re-appeared, and danced upon the floor, producing a sound such as
would be made by nimble, tiny bare feet. She moved backwards and
forwards, played upon the auto-harp, but did not speak, and then
demateralised before us, reversing the process by which she had made
her appearance, the form and substance gradually sinking and fading
away to the vanishing point.
After this another youthful, but sowewhat indistinctly revealed,
form, slighter but rather taller than “Cissie,” appeared in the centre of
the screen, but disappeared after a few seconds ; and as the power
appeared to be waning, the light was restored, and the seance ter-
minated.
The medium was found sitting behind the screen in a somewhat
exhausted condition, but in a short time revived.
It was stated to me that the forms were unusually weak to what
they sometimes are, a fact accounted for by the ill-health of the
medium. This may or may not be so, but although no special tests
were used on die occasion, the various appearances, as may be judged
by the above plain, unvarnished narrative, were sufficiently remark-
able to excite the greatest wonder and surprise.”
I now give a record of a quite historic seance, which took place
on Saturday, September 30th, 1894, for the enlightenment of Mrs.
Annie Besant, then in Sydney.
The following is an accurate report by the Sunday Times’ repre-


sentative, who was present, and appeared in that paper on October
7th, 1894 :
“ Sunday Times,” October 7tii, 1894.
A seance for spirit materialisation possessing more than ordinary
interest, not only on account of the nature of the manifestations, but
because of the presence of a visitor of world-wide fame, took place in
Sydney on Saturday, 30th ultimo.
It appears that Mrs. Annie Besant, though herself an earnest
investigator of occult phenomena, and claiming to have had a won-
derful personal experience in connection with her researches into the
esoteric mysteries of Theosophy, had never witnessed the actual
materialisation of fully-developed spirit forms ; but having heard of
the remarkable manifestations occurring through the mediumship of
Mrs. Mellon, on arriving in Sydney communicaced with that lady,
asking to be given the opportunity of being present at a seance.
Just at the time of Mrs. Besant’s arrival Mrs, Mellon was seized
with a severe attack of illness, and it was at first feared would be
unable to comply with the request; but fortunately, both for herself
and the distinguished visitor, she recovered more rapidly than was at
first anticipated, and the seance was accordingly arranged to take
place just prior to Mrs. Besant’s last lecture, on the date mentioned,
at the residence of Dr. MacCarthy, Elizabeth-street, Hyde Park.
So soon as the affair got wind, both Mrs. Mellon and Dr.
MacCarthy were fairly besieged with applications from persons
desirous of being present, both within and without spiritualistic
circles, the applicants including leading men in political, social and
journalistic society. Both the exigencies of space and a consideration
of the unfairness of introducing a number of new and possibly
inharmonious influences, however, necessitated the invitations being
strictly limited, and the circle was consequently restricted to eighteen
persons, including the representative of the Sunday Times. Amongst
others present were a member of the Upper House, a doctor of
philosophy, the Rev. G. Walters, Dr. Pickburn, Mr. T. S. Henry
(architect), Mi\ C. L. Wallis, and Mr. N. Joubert. Mrs. Besant was
accompanied by her daughter, Mrs. Besant Scott, and there were also
present four other ladies.
As Mrs. Besant was to lecture in the Opera House in the
evening, the seance was held in the daytime, and the subdued light
which constitutes one of the favorable conditions for materialisation
was obtained by an arrangement of curtains and Venetian blinds by
which the degi’ee of light could be regulated as required, although it
may be mentioned that at no time during the seance was the semi-
darkness too great to prevent reading the time by the dial of an
ordinary watch.
The arrangement of the room was much the same as on the
occasion of the seance previously described in the Sunday Times,
except that all superfluous furniture was cleared out to make room
for the larger number of sitters, who were seated on three rows of


chairs, occupying fully two-thirds of the floor space. The cabinet,
as it is technically called, consisted simply of a brass curtain rod
and pair of curtains fixed across one comer of the room, behind
which was placed a low chair for the medium.
At about 3 o’clock the proceedings commenced by most of the
sitters joining in singing, and after two or three airs had been got
through, whilst in the midst of “ Ye banks and braes,” a tall form
enveloped in white drapery appeared in front of the cabinet.
At first the outline was indistinct, but gradually it took on that
of a man, and was recognised by previous sitters as that of “ Geordie.”
Soon the singers ceased, and the ghostly visitant, instead of
remarking “Thank you!” after the usual polite manner of earthly
auditors, observed in somewhat gutteral tones : “ I say, that’s not
very good singing.” Those not too much awe-struck by the appa-
rition laughed, but Geordie chipped in again, “ I say, there’s a lady
here,” and just then a female form appeared to the left of Geordie,who
evidently prided himself on the manner in which he was doing the
honors as M.C., and added, “ She comes for Dr, S.” The gentleman
indicated rose, and asked, somewhat nervously, “What is the lady’s
name?” “ How should I know ; she is a foreigner!” was Geordie’s
prompt reply.
He then remarked; “ There are three of us here,” and had
scarcely spoken when the little spirit known as “ Cissie ” was seen
standing on Geordie’s right, all three forms being distinctly visible
together.
The gentleman for whom the strangei spiiit nad come here made
some advances forward, and asked if he might shake hands with her,
but was informed by Geordie that she had no hands. She appeared
to be not very strongly materialised, and soon afterwards disappeared
within the cabinet after bowing several times.
Cissie now came out of the cabinet, took up a hand-bell which stood
on a small table near, and rang it vigorously. Some of the company
asked her to go over to Mrs. Besant, but she appeared either some-
what shy or not sufficiently strong to do so at first, although Geordie
encouraged her by saying, “Go out, little one.”
She was then asked to place her foot upon a slate which had
been previously dusted with soot in order to obtain, if possible, a foot-
print. She appeared to do so several times, but the impressions as
afterwards seen were very indistinct, as though it had been brushed
by drapery.
Cissie executed a sort of baby hornpipe, then apparently commenced
searching for something. She crumpled and tore up several papers
lying on the table, and, after retiring into the cabinet, re-appeared.
“Come along, dear,” said Mrs, Besant, encouragingly, and the
little figure toddled across and handed her a flower, received one from
her in return, played a few chords on an auto-harp, and then retired,
kissing her hands as she disappeared.


Dr. MacCarthy next formally introduced Geordie to Mrs. Besant,
saying: “ This is George Thompson, Mrs. Besant; he is commonly
known as Geordie. Allow me to introduce Mrs. Besant, Geordie ; one
of the most remarkable women of the age, or of any age.”
Geordie replied, “ I know it,” bowing gracefully; and added,
“ most delighted to meet you, Mrs, Besant.”
JOSEPHINE.’
From a photograph taken March 16, 189 -
The following conversation then took place between Dr.
MacCarthy and Geordie :
Doctor; “ Geordie, will you answer me one or two questions ?
Tell me; are you George Thompson T


Geordie; “ I am, and no other.”
Doctor ; “ Do you carry with you your own distinct and com-
plete intelligence, or are you the desire body or Kama-rupa or
■“ spook ” of the Theosophists 1”
Geordie : “ I have my own complete intelligence. Do you take
me for a lunatic ? lam not a desire body nor a spook—neither am I
the sub-conscious intelligence of anyone present, doctor.”
The latter part of the reply being a palpable hit at the Doctor’s
favourite theory, provoked some laughter amongst the circle.
Doctor : “One more question, Geordie. Have you been retarded
in your development since you first materialised T
Geordie : “No ; on the contrary, I have progressed.”
Mrs. Besant here asked if she could see the medium, and Geordie
having answered yes, he brought Mrs. Mellon outside the cabinet,
when Mrs. Besant was led forward by the doctor and took the
medium’s hand, Geordie still standing alongside in view of the whole
circle.
Geordie then retired, and after a brief interval another female
form appeared, which, by its graceful proportions and long flowing-
hair, was easily recognised as “Josephine,” another frequent visitor
to the circle. She bowed to the company, advanced with an almost
imperceptible motion towards Mrs. Besant, who handed her some
flowers, bowed her acknowledgement, and then, by request of some of
the sitters, dematerialised outside the cabinet, the form gradually
diminishing until only a small luminous cloud with a trace of the dark
hair was visible on the floor, and then vanished altogether.
Geordie then re-appeared, and remarked, “ I don’t think I can
do much more, I’m afraid I’m overdoing it.” He then asked that
someone should go to the medium, and thereupon instantaneously
vanished as the doctor entered the cabinet.
He found Mrs. Mellon in a very exhausted condition, and states
that her pulse was very rapid and feeble, scarcely perceptible. Mrs.
Besant also went forward and took her hand, and, as showing the
power of contact, the doctor states that after a few moments the pulse
resumed its force and volume, and its rate lowered almost to normal.
Subsequently the' medium, whilst apparently in a trance, was said
to be under “ control ” by Cissie, who informed the sitters, in child-
ish accents, that when she was crumpling up the papers she was look-
ing for chocolate creams, and was much disappointed that none had
been provided, as when materialised she was very fond of those sweet-
meats.
She also informed the Sunday Times representative that some
day she would perform the feat known as the ring test, or passing
matter through matter, by placing a ring upon his arm whilst he had
hold of the hand of another person.
The sitting lasted altogether about one hour and three-quarters,
and was undoubtedly of a most astonishing as well as interesting-
character.


Extract from letter of Rev. Georye Walters.
(To the Editor “ Sunday Times.”)
Sir,- —Having, at your request, perused the proof of an article-
describing a seance held at Dr. MacCarthy’s house, at which Mrs.
Besant and others, including myself, were present, I can say
unhesitatingly that the article gives a simple, straightford, unvar-
nished accoont of what did occur.—l am, etc.,
George Walters.
The following opinions, expressed by Mrs. Besant-Scott to a
Melbourne Herald reporter after the above seance, are interesting ;
“ Geordie’s” ‘ turn’ having ended, Josephine came on. She
asked the company after their health, &c., and accepted some flowers
which Mrs. Besant offered her.
“ Cissy,” a little African, next appeared, and expressed her dis-
appointment that she could not have some chocolates. She spoke in
very badly broken English, and handled the words “molecular inter-
spaces” with inartistic inability. They seemed to catch in her throat,
and she had great difficulty in getting through with them.
“ Cissy” having retired, another spirit was called. It seemed
somewhat ill at ease. A Frenchman was present, and on being told
that the newcomer was a friend of his, exhibited the greatest excite-
ment, gi-asping a chair by both hands in his fright. The spirit fled in
good time, and then Geordie, Josephine and Cissy came out together.
Josephine subsequently threw a carnation at Mrs. Besant, into whose-
lap it fell.
Mrs. Mellon appeared with Geordie afterwards, and about this
there was an element of suspicion. It is quite possible, I think, for
her to be supporting a lay figure by her left hand, as she and Geordie
declined to shake hands.
When asked as to the dematerialisation, she said : “ The forms
gradually faded away towards the floor until they became small'
specks, which eventually disappeared.”
When asked if she thought deception was practised at this
seance, Mrs. Scott said, “Well, I was dubious when I saw the
curtains go out in the direction of the wardrobe ; but as to the-
dematerialisation, there is something about it which I cannot
explain.”
Now, with all due deference to Mrs. Besant-Scott, she has un-
wittingly incorrectly described two important points—firstly, that
Josephine spoke ; and, secondly, that Cissie herself spoke. Josephine
never spoke, either directly or through the entranced medium, and
Cissie spoke only through Mrs. Mellon’s voice, or, as it is termed,,
through the entranced medium under control of Cissie.
The most devout and regular attendants at Mrs. Mellon’s seances
never profess to have heard either “ Josephine” or “ Cissie” speak,
and the only materialised form that I have ever heard speak is “Geordie.’'
I will ask my readers to bear this in mind, as it is an important point


in the chain of evidence which I will discuss further on. Ihe “un-
explainable dematerialisation” I will also discuss.
The reporter also describes the little figure of “ Cissie” as
toddling across and handing Mrs. Besant a flower. As a matter of
fact, Mrs. Besant went over to receive the flower, and the figure of
“ Cissie” was never at any time more than twelve inches in front of
the curtains, though the hands, of course, reached further.
The expei iment with the sooted state was tried by myself as a
test, and proved a very good one. Mrs. Besant and myself examined
the slate in full light afterwards, and found only the marks caused by
the drapery.
With the exception of this discrepancy, these are correct reports
of authentic seances from the point of view of an ordinary spectator.
Anybody who gained admission to the inner circle of a famous
materialising medium would see a very similar exhibition.
In the course of my research on the subject, I had witnessed a
great many such seances. I had come in contact with Mrs. Mellon
in her capacity as a professional medium, and it was in the aspect of
an investigator only that I had dealings with her.
With a view to recording and publishing my observations, I kept
a complete record of each seance as it took place, with my criticisms
upon the same. Those readers who wish for an account of Mrs.
Mellon’s other seances will find very full details in Part 111. of this
Book,
The literature of Spiritualism teems with such accounts of Spirit-
Materialisations, and such exhibitions seem to satisfy the longings
-and cravings of the majority of Spiritualists. But they do not
satisfy the investigator ; and though he may not detect any absolute
proof of fraud, neither has he, in all this, any positive proof of
genuineness.
The difference between the Spiritualist and the sceptical inves-
tigator is this : that the sceptic doubts everything until evidence is
brought forward which precludes the possibility of fraud, while the
Spiritualist goes there prepared to believe everything he sees and
hears, and shuts his eyes to any possibility of fraud.
Thus we find thousands of witnesses ready to uphold the genuine-
ness of phenomena which they have seen, for the reason that the
great majority of the witnesses of such phenomena are, for very good
reasons, Spiritualists, and leave their reasoning powers behind when
they attend these exhibitions.
Faith as blind and credulous as any other, holds sway here, and
such people, without taking further trouble to think, accept, as com-
pletely convincing evidence of such astounding phenomena, exhibitions
such as I have described.
There is no searching of the medium beforehand—nothing to
show that the medium is not masquerading as a “spirit” outside the
cabinet, or manipulating lay figures and muslin drapery. The whole
proceedings are so hedged round with such suitable, and in fact such


absolutely necessary conditions, that trickery is made easy, and great
indeed must be the faith that can accept such evidence as establishing
so grave a question.
I do hot for a moment wish to infer that Spiritualism rests solely
upon evidence such as this. Although materialisation holds with them
an important place, many Spiritualists profess to find greater and more
inspiring evidence in other and lesser phenomena—such as alleged
trance and direct spirit communication—on which to build their faith.
With these other phenomena the present treatise does not deal ; they
may or may not be worthy of investigation, but they are beyond the
limits of the question under consideration.
With regard to the reliability of the evidence of witnesses, it is
remarkable how few persons have the faculty of exact observation at all
developed. This is largely a matter of training, and it often happens
that most important circumstances, and perhaps some crucial point,
are entirely overlooked through the lax observations of witnesses.
Ask two people to describe from memory any common object of
every-day life, and one will note every detail with exactness, while the
other will have but a hazy idea. It therefore follows, that in a field of
such research as that in question, the value of the testimony of wit-
nesses is far from equal, and that scientific or expert evidence can
alone be counted worthy of consideration.
I have frequently, after certain seances, heard witnesses state
that a certain form had walked out into the middle of the room, or had
“ dematerialised ” or vanished in the middle of the floor, while I myself
and others from more careful observation could state positively that
such was not the case, and that such a statement was an exaggeration,
to say the least of it. There is a vast difference between a form
vanishing in the middle of the floor and “dematerialising” six inches
in front of the curtains of the cabinet. Such discrepancy of evidence
is easily understood when we bear in mind the laxity of observation
and of speech with which so many people are blessed. If there is any
possibility of the existence of a loophole for trickery or deception, then
such evidence is not worth adducing at all.
All the negative evidence which the thousands of spiritualistic
witnesses bring forward is only negative evidence after all, and there-
fore worthless as evidence. It only goes to prove that these thousands
of possible dupes did not detect the trickery it any existed, while no
amount of such evidence can prove that trickery did not take place.
Where there is a possibility of fraud—and even a very great probability
judging by the history of the subject—the careful investigator will
begin by presuming these alleged phenomena due to trickery, and hold
that opinion until he finds direct and irrefutable evidence to the con-
trary. And how is he to obtain this evidence, which must be scientific
or expert ? Such evidence must be based on carefully-considered ex-
periment, practically and carefully carried out, taking absolutely
nothing for granted, allowing no sentiment to interfere, and precluding
every possibility of fraud. Experiments such as this were carried out


some years ago by William Crookes, F.R.S., in England, and Professor
Johann Zollner in Germany, and tended to establish the probability of
hitherto unrecognised natural laws and abnormal forces, which were
grouped by them under the name of “Psychic Force.” No spiritualism
entered into the calculations of these scientists ; they professed to deal
with natural—though little understood—phenomena, and treated their
experiments from the purely material standpoint. Following on the
experiments of these men, Psychical Research Societies have been
formed in most of the large cities of the world, and the Psychical Re-
search Society of London numbers among its members some of the
leading men of the present day. [
This w T as my standpoint when I took up the subject, and from
this material aspect I have always-viewed psychical investigation.
In the lesser so-called spiritualistic phenomena I have found, from a
material point of view, much that is worthy of study and research;
and while I see absolutely no evidence on which to base the hypo-
thesis of a spiritual origin for any of these, T believe that a greater
knowledge of the natural laws, which undoubtedly govern these
phenomena, may be turned to practical and material advantage.
That a telegraphic message may be sent from point to point
without a connecting wire is already an established fact. Why not
eventually dispense with the electric battery also 1 Every year gives
some new fact to science, and shows but more plainly the limited
view of Nature which our present knowledge allows us. But this
does not prove spirit materialisation any more than the existence of
the force we call electricity or steam power does. Having, however,
taken up the study of these lesser so-called phenomena of spiritualism
with this object, I was also anxious to experiment with, and test for
myself, its so-called greater phenomena of materialisation. W T ith
this in view’, I attended a great number of these orthodox seances
with the medium, IVlrs. Mellon, and my own observations carefully
noted, so far from being in support of the genuineness of the pheno-
mena, tended to make me even more sceptical.
Exhibitions such as these might be reverently regarded by
“ faithful believers ” but to the practical investigator they were most
unsatisfactory. When, therefore, some intimate friends and fellow-
investigators proposed to form a committee and to carry out some
interesting experiments and “tests,” with a view to clearly estab-
lishing the genuineness or otherwise of the phenomena occurring
through Mrs. Mellon, I readily consented to join with and assist
them.


CHAPTER 11.
The “ Test ” Seances and Criticisms.
TEST NO. I.— The Materialisation of Spirits while the
Medium is sitting Outside Cabinet.
With the object of carrying out these experiments with the
medium, Mrs. Mellon, a committee consisting of the following persons
was formed in the month of June, 1894 :—Mrs. E , Mr. J.
F , Mr. N. Joubert, Dr. M , Mr. P. J. M , Dr. Pickburn,
Mr. Rumble. Mr. T. Shekleton Henry, Mr. Chas. L. Wallis.
The “ tests ” wore formulated and proposed by Dr. M ,
after consultation with the medium, and it was arranged that they
should take place at 223 Flizabeth-street, Sydney. It was agreed to
publish the results, and I undertook the writing of the record of
each as it occurred. As these experiments were to take place in
Dr. M ’s house, he naturally took the direction and arrangement
of details, and settled what “ tests ” were to be applied, in fact it
was through the personal influence of Dr. M that the medium
consented to undergo any tests at all.
This lady talked so much of the cruelty of tests which she
professed to have undergone in England, of “ straight jackets, wire
cages, bags, wires, seals, and cords,” that Dr. M agreed that she
should not be subjected to any such “cruelties” at his hands, #nd
experiments were therefore arranged with the idea of suiting all
parties.
The requisite “ sympathetic element ” was supplied by the
presence of three spiritualists on the committee ; in fact that would
seem to be their chief qualification for being there. The object of
the first “ test ” was to demonstrate the genuineness of the pheno-
mena of materialisation, by the medium sitting outside the cabinet
in view of the spectators, and then producing “spirit ” forms.
This first “test’ seance took place on Tuesday, 26th June,
1894, and we assembled as above, with the addition of Mrs. R ,
at 8.33 pm. The accompanying plan, drawn to scale, shows the
arrangement of the room, sitters, and curtained recess or “ cabinet.”
Mrs. Mellon and her husband arrived shortly before 9 p m., and
then the door and windows of the room were locked and sealed.
Mrs. Mellon consented at my suggestion to take her hair down, and
permitted me to measure it, and then tie it up in a peculiar knot at
the back, in such a manner that it could not be untied without
notice. I also proposed to place a tape round her neck or body and
seal the same to the back of the chair, but to this she would not


Scale ? J - > ■ f ‘ '?Vert
Plan of Room in which first “Test” Seance took place, at 223
Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
A-A—Medium (Mrs. Mellon) on chair.
B-B— Small table on which were pencils and paper.
A—Mr. N. Joubert.
B —Mr. T. S. Henry.
C —Mr. E. Rumble.
D—Dr. Pickburn.
F—Mr. F-
G-Mrs. R
H-Mr. C. L. Wallis.
J—Dr. M .
E—Mrs. E
Mr. Mellon attending to lamp.


consent, excusing herself on the plea that the smell of sealing-wax
made her ill.
A small bamboo table (B-B), on which were two or three sheets
of foolscap paper (previously examined and initialled) and a pencil,
was placed against the window and about a foot from the curtain of
“cabinet.” The lamp, shaded with a pink globe, was placed at the
back of the sitters, as shown on plan, and to this Mr. Mellon attended
throughout the evening, and regulated the light to suit the
“ spirits.” No offer was made by the medium to allow herself to
be searched, and Dr. M appeared to rely upon her bona-tides.
We relied upon him in that matter.
At 9 p.m. she took her chair (at A. A. on plan) outside the cabinet,
and the gas was turned completely out. The light from the shaded
lamp was very dim, and I could only see the piece of white tape on the
medium’s hair showing against the dark back ground of the curtains,
and barely distinguish the dim outline of the back of her chair and
elbows. She sat with her back to the sitters and facing the curtains,
saying that the light on her face from the lamp would be disturbing.
A few chords on Dr. M ’s auto-harp and a little singing
from the company, and after about eight or ten minutes a white hazy
form seemed to grow gradually up from Mrs. Mellon’s lap and at the
same time extended downwards to the floor beside her knee. This at
first appeared like a long strip of white drapery, and then fluctuated
and distended until part of the drapery covered the medium’s shoulder,
though I could not detect any movement of her back or elbows while
this was going on
The drapery had now assumed the rough shape of a draped female
form with head covered, and then slowly what appeared to be an? arm
went out, like the arm of a semaphore, and pointed towards the fire-
place. The process was then exactly reversed and the form was lost
to sight, apparently somewhere down near Mi’s. Mellon’s lap.
Next a short form of the same draped character appeared about
twelve inches from the medium on the side nearest the window. It
was about the height of a child of 4 or 5 years, and after a few minutes
appeared to be reabsorbed into the medium.
Mrs. Mellon then informed us that these were “Josephine” and
“ Cissy” “ trying to materialise,” but that they were unable to do so
properly outside “ cabinet,” as it required so much extra power. The
effect was certainly very wonderful, but the light was so dim that one
could not see what was going on in front of the medium. We ex-
pressed ourselves so far satisfied—we could not do otherwise ; we were
under promise not to leave our seats (to personally investigate) ; and
though the darkness and absence of searching provided ample oppor-
tunity for trickery, it clearly would never do to make such an
accusation without proof. This form of exhibition was new to me
and to most of the others present, and one cannot be expected to
have an explanation ready on the spur of the moment for all the


“phenomena” at the command of a medium of twenty-five years
standing.
Mrs. Mellon then retired into the “ cabinet,” and was said to be
entranced or “ controlled” by “ Cissie,” who talked through her in the
usual childish manner for some time, while (as she informed us)
“Josephine” was materialising inside. “Josephine” shortly after
appeared clothed in white, with bare arms and neck, and long dark
hair hanging down over her shoulders. She walked out into* the
CISSIE’S HANDj
Photographed ( full size ) from original pencil drawing by herself.
middle of the room, took some flowers which were handed her by Dr.
M. , separated them, and then came over and handed me one at
arm’s length. At request she then allowed Dr. M. to measure
her hair with tape for comparison with the previous measurement of
the medium’s. This he did in the most reverent manner possible, and
did not take the opportunity, which he might, of ascertaining that it


was not a wig that he was measuring. “ Josephine” then retired to
cabinet, and after a short interval “ Cissie” appeared between the
opening of the curtains and took a box of chocolates, which were
handed to her by Dr M. . She then romped about with the
sound of bare feet upon the floor, and dodged round the back of the
curtains and out of the side next the window. She was requested
then to place her hand upon the sheet of foolscap on the little table,
and without coming away from the curtains she placed her hand
apparently on the paper and traced round its outline with the pencil.
After the seance the paper was examined, and the drawing reproduced
was found upon it. “ Cissie” returned to “cabinet,” and then a tall
attenuated form which bowed to the name of “ Wahrungha” appeared
between the curtains and shook hands with Dr. M. , who advanced
for the purpose—(Dr. M. afterwards described the hand as not
fully formed) —and then appeared to bring the medium out and showed
her to the sitters. Dr M again advanced and shook hands with
the medium. Only one of her hands was visible
Both the form and the medium then vanished behind the curtains,
and, after a short interval of singing, we were informed that the
power was exhausted, and that nothing more would occur that night.
The gas was accordingly lit, and the medium emerged from the cabinet
apparently rather tired. Her hair was found to be in the same
condition as when tied up by me, and on comparison of the measure-
ments of the hair, “Josephine’s” was found to be about three inches
longer than Mrs. Mellon’s. This, together with the knot constructed
by me, proved at any rate that whether “Josephine” be Mrs. Mellon
herself or not, Mrs. Mellon’s own hair does not do duty on these
occasions. This brought the first “test” to a close, and we departed
with plenty of food for reflection.


CHAPTER 111.
TEST NO. 2: The First Photographic Seance. “ Geordie
Photographed.
The second of the series of “ test ” seances with Mrs. Mellon was
held this afternoon (Sunday, July loth, 1894), in a room on the second
floor at 223 Elizabeth Street, Sydney. The accompanying plan shows;
the exact arrangement of the room, cameras, sitters, medium and,
“ cabinet.”
The object of this “test” was to obtain photographs of the
“ materialised ” forms, if possible in daylight, for the principal reason
of proving their reality, and objectivity, and that they were neither
due to hallucination nor hypnotism. Photographs of “ materialised
spirit ” forms had been taken by Dr. M in daylight on previous,
occasions, notably that of “Josephine,” reproduced in this book; but as-
they were not taken under “ test” conditions, they were not
satisfactory as evidence.
Now, the ordinary “spirit photograph,” as understood by
spiritualists, means the image left on the sensitised plate of a shadowy,
unsubstantial, or vapourous form or forms, which forms, they assert,,
are always hovering round about us, although generally invisible to the
human eye. These shadowy beings are said by spiritualists to be the
spirits of departed friends, etc. ; and they claim that, although invisible
to the human eye in its normal state, under ceitain conditions
these spirits affect the sensitised plate of the camera, and thus leave
their image. This is the “ spirit ” photograph in the true sense of the
word, and these airy, unsubstantial beings, are not “ materialised ” to-
undergo the process of photography, but are in their supposed usual,,
and humanly speaking, invisible state. Such photographs have
frequently been exhibited, and have been reproduced in Mr. Stead's-
journal from time to time ; but the testimony as to their genuineness
is, like the photographs themselves, too shadowy to allow of their being
considered evidence at all. It is well known that such photographs
may easily be produced by a little trickery and manipulation of the
plates or back-ground ; though, in spite of the conviction of several
persons for this offence, there are not wanting plenty of dupes who
spend their money in obtaining these dubious portraits of their deceased
friends and relatives.
There are several methods by which spurious spirit-photograps are
produced,forinstanceby manipulation of the plates either before or after
they are placed in the camera, or the higher department of fluorescence
may be employed and any object rendered capable of being photo-
graphed which, to the normal human eye, is utterly invisible. If the
object be so prepared in a dark room as to reflect only the ultra-violet rays
of the spectrum, it will be easily photographed, although invisible to-
the sharpest eye


Scale i t . ■ ■ ■ ■ ■
Plan of Room at 223 Elizabeth Street, Sydney, in which the
Photographic “ Test ” took place.
A-A—Dr. M ’s Camera. B-B—Mr. P. J. M ’s Camera.
C-C —Medium (Mrs. Mellon) seated.
A—Dr. M .
B—Mr.P. J. M
E—Mr. F
F—Mr. Rumble.
C—Mr. T. S. Henry.
D—Dr. Pickburn.
G—Mr. C. L. Wallis.
H—Mrs. E .


By the agency of fluorescence, figures depicted upon a back-
ground by such a substance as disulphate of quinine may become
visible to the camera. Such a solution, although to the eye it is
colourless like water, is to the camera as black as ink, and in this
manner a back-ground screen might be prepared.
But through the mediumship of Mrs. Mellon, the forms to be
photographed were “ materialised,” that is to say substantial and
visible to any eye, and with the ordinary human attributes, as wit-
nessed at the usual seances, which have already been described in
Chapter I.
The photographing was to take place in daylight, a thing hitherto
unknown with any other medium ; and results in the way of “ spirit ”
photographs were expected which would surpass what had gone before.
Due care had been taken in the purchase and sealing up of the plates
in the presence of witnesses, to prevent any tampering in that direc-
tion ; and the “ cabinet ” having been constructed under my own
supervision and examined by everybody previously to taking their
seats, there was clearly no chance of manipulating a background, were
it otherwise possible in daylight.
The plates used were Ilford’s rapid dry plates, and were purchased
by Mr. Rumble and Dr. M at Frost and Shipman’s, George-
street, Sydney, on July 13th, 1894, and sealed by Mr. Rumble in the
presence of Dr. M and the assistant, with Mr. Rumble’s own
seal, and were then taken to 223 Elizabeth-street, and locked and
sealed up in a cupboard there in the presence of two witnesses.
The committee assembled at 2.30 on the afternon of July 15th,
and the cupboard was unlocked and the sealed packet inspected by all.
Then the sealed packet was carefully guarded down to the dark room
by Dr. Pickburn, Mr. Rumble and Dr. M , and the seals broken
:and all the plates transferred to slides in the presence of these
witnesses, never leaving their sight until placed in the two cameras
upstairs in the seance room. We had all now assembled in this room,
and the two cameras, which had been previously focussed, were placed
in position, as shown at A-A and B-B on plan.
The medium had arrived, and was removing her hat and cloak. I
had expected that Dr. M would say something about searching
beforehand to make the “ test” complete. He had not said anything
however, so I stated to him that he ought to insist on this point, as it
was the crucial one of the whole proceedings. With considerable
deference he suggested it to Mrs. Mellon, and she rather hesitatingly
consented to be searched by Mrs. E in an adjoining room. Mrs.
E—— reported that this had been done,and brought the medium into the
seance room, and the door was then locked and sealed at 3 o’clock, and
the key retained by Mr. Wallis. After Mrs. Mellon had arranged the
sitters as shown on plan, and with their backs to the “cabinet,” and
the blinds had been adjusted so as to regulate the bright sunlight from
the windows, she took her place inside the cabinet at 3.5 p.m., and
-drew the curtains. These curtains had been so arranged with pulleys


that they worked easily and rapidly, and the cords brought down
behind in such a way that one pull opened and another pull closed
them. It had also been stipulated and agreed to that no person should
look round when the curtains were opened and the signal given to
expose the cameras, and even Dr. M and his brother, who
attended to the cameras, were under promise to uncover the lenses
without looking round. This was explained by the medium as a neces-
sary condition, for the reason that the direct gaze of the human eye
would disintegrate the “materialised forms.” After a considerable
interval of singing to the accompaniment of the auto-harp, the signal
to expose the cameras was given at 3.32 p.m. by the curtains being
drawn apart. An exposure of two seconds was given, and the curtains
then closed. Mr. P. J. M ’s camera missed tire, or rather he was
late in exposing.
I sat with my watch and note-book on my knee, and noted the
time and particulars of each event.
Mrs. Mellon, who was apparently not entranced, then remarked
from within the “ cabinet” that she thought she was out of focus and
behind “ Geordie,” but that they would try again.
We sang again at request, and Mrs. Mellon made a few more
remarks from behind the curtains, and said that “ Geordie ” informed
her that he would show himself to us afterwards, but that we were
not to look now.
At 3.45 p.m. Mrs. Mellon was ‘controlled” by “ Cissie,” and
speaking from within the “cabinet,” in “ Cissie’s” childlike voice, said
that she came to give us instructions about taking the next photo.,
and further remarked that Dr. Pickburn was looking round from the
corner of his eyes, and that “that made ‘Geordie’ shrink and bored
holes in him,” and again requested that we should not look round.
Under the circumstances this was a very pardonable curiosity on
Dr. Pickburn’s part, and I myself, and others must, plead guilty to the
same offence ; but it furnished valuable evidence further on.
I noticed also that Mrs. E and Mr. Wallis had provided
themselves with a hand mirror, though undetected from the “ cabinet,”
and stated afterwards that they obtained an excellent view of
“ Geordie” while the curtains were parted for the photographing
At 3.49 p.m. the signal was given and both cameras exposed
again for two seconds.
The blinds were then drawn down and the room slightly dark-
ened, and we turned round in expectancy of “ GeordieV’ promised
show, the cameras being kept ready.
After five minutes’ waiting, “Geordie” suddenly peeped out of
the “ cabinet,” and quickly drew in again. I got an excellent view
of his face, and can describe it as very shining, and not at all lifelike.
The cheeks were very highly coloured, and the whole expression was
lifeless, unreal, and fixed. This was the same impression the other
spectators received, and was explained afterwards by the spiritualists
as being due to “ Geordie’s” intense desire to remain absolutely still
for the photograph.


1 may here remark that the readiness with which Spiritualism
finds an explanation or excuse for any possible point of objection that
may be raised is really wonderful. Immediately “ Geordie ” drew
back into the “ cabinet'’ Mrs Mellon called out to Dr. M to go
over. He went and examined her pulse, and stated to us that
“Geordie” had disappeared, and that the medium was alone in the
“cabinet,” although we had all seen Mr. “Geordie” just two seconds
previously. This was quick work, and beat his usual dematerialising
record.
At 4 p.m. Mrs. Mellon said that there was a lady “ materialising ”
in the cabinet, whom she did not know. All this time we were facing
the cabinet, and when the form appeared and stood for about 3 seconds
between the curtains, we all had a good view of it. The light, it will
be remembered, had been previously subdued to allow “Geordie” to
meet our gaze, added to which the daylight was now failing. This
may account for the fact that both Mrs. E and Dr. M thought
they recognised a deceased relative in this strange lady. Dr. M ,
although saying that he thought the light insufficient, was anxious to
photogragh this lady, and exposed the cameras for another 4 seconds
while we turned our backs. Then the plates were changed, and the
same form opened the curtains again and stood for 10 seconds for a
second exposure. All these plates turned out afterwards to have been
wasted over this lady, as they were failures from insufficiency of light.
I was very well satisfied with the good look I had at her, however,
and noticed that the face was fair and animated, and the eyes blue.
In fact the face bore a striking resemblance to the medium, and
the contrast between the pallor and animation of this face and the high
colour, shiny gloss, and rigidity of “ Geordie’s,” was very marked.
Here I may say that there were more spiritualistic explanations given
to account for this resemblance to the medium.
“ Cissie ” took “control” again at 4T5 p.m. Mrs Mellon in the
usual childish accents of this influence, said that the last form was a
lady apparently between thirty and forty years of age, unknown to her,
and appeared to have died of a wasting disease; and also said that
there was a child inside the “ cabinet ” “ materalising.” However, this
form did not appear, and Mrs. Mellon then said that she thought the
power was exhausted, and terminated the seance at 4 20 p.m.
Dr. Pickburn, Mr. Rumble, Dr. M and Mr. P. J. M then
took the slides down stairs to the dark room and witnessed the removal
and development of the plates.
The medium, apparently exhausted, remained seated inside the
cabinet until the rest of us went down stairs to get tea; some refresh-
ment being sent up to her in the “ cabinet.”
The negatives, when developed, were handed round for the
inspection of all, and, with the exception of the failures already
enumerated, were very clear and well-defined portraits of “ Geordie.”
The photographs from these negatives are already well known to the
Sydney public, and some of the best have been reproduced for


publication. After the negatives had been shown to the medium, she left
the house to return home.
The result of this seance was very gratifying, and the great
advance which these negatives showed upon all previous “ Spirit-pho-
tographs” was considered to redound greatly to the medium and the
photographers. Theoretically they were complete “tests,” as to the
reality of Spirit materialisation. The chain of carefully considered
evidence, duly witnessed step by step by several reliable persons,
from the purchase and sealing up of the plates in the shop down to
their development afterwards in the dark room, was unbroken and
theoretically complete, and apparently left no loophole for any possi-
bility of trickery. From a practical view, however, the weakest point
in this whole chain of evidence was the fact that while there were
several witnesses to attest every other point, there was only one
witness to the searching. To the majority of those present this
appeared but a trifling matter; in fact, so trifling that it was almost
overlooked. Dr. M and others considered the honafides of the
medium to have been sufficiently tested in England to accept her ipse
dixit without more enquiry. He promised, however, to strengthen
this point of evidence at the next “test,” on my suggestion that other
witnesses to the searching would strengthen what appeared to my
mind to be the most crucial point of the whole “ test.”


CHAPTER IV.
TEST No. 3: The Second Photographic Seance, and the Result.
TEST No. 4 : The Third Photographic Seance, and Remarkable
Developments.
The* Second Photographic Seance of this series of experiments
took place on the afternoon of Sunday, August sth, 1894, at 223,
Elizabeth-street, Sydney. Mr. R. C. T. Morgan, of Melbourne,
Secretary to the Psychical Research Society of that city, then on
visit to Sydney, was invited to be present, and, with that exception,
the circle comprised the same persons as enumerated in the account of
the first photographic test.
The object of this second attempt at photographing the “ mate-
rialised spirit ” forms was to obtain photographs showing the medium
more distinctly beside “ Geordie,” and sufficiently clear to place her
identity beyond dispute. In the series of photographs obtained at the
last sitting, “ Geordie” himself appeared well developed and clearly
defined, while the medium unfortunately was unrecognisable, the
blurred image of her face being just apparent over “ Geordie’s” right
shoulder. The parcel containing the dry plates had been purchased,
locked up, sealed, and the whole transaction duly witnessed, as on the
previous occasion.
We assembled in the same room as for the last seance, the
arrangement of the room, sitters, cameras, and “ cabinet” being
almost exactly the same as that shown on the plan in Chapter 111,
except that Dr. Pickburn and myself were placed at first behind the
other sitters on this occasion, but subsequently moved.
The cameras were focussed on the “ cabinet” as before, and all was
ready when the medium arrived just before 3 o’clock.
Following out my suggestion, Dr. M had decided to ask the
medium to allow two persons to witness the searching, and Mrs. Mellon,
on arrival, consented to permit Mrs. E and a domestic to carry
this out in an adjoining room. This they professed to have done
thoroughly, and brought Mrs. Mellon into the seance room at 3.10 p.m.,
the door being then locked and sealed. Mrs. Mellon then re-arranged
the sitters somewhat, making me change places with Mr. Morgan,
thus placing Mr. Morgan at my back and between me and the
“ cabinet.” She then took her seat inside the cabinet at 3.20 p.m.
Here let me say that, after the satisfactory view of “ Geordie ”
obtained through the mirror on the previous occasion by Mrs. E
and Mr. Wallis, everyone of us had come provided with a mirror on
this day, and, as far as I can ascertain, the medium was unaware before-
hand of our clandestine intentions.


After singing for forty minutes without any remark from the
‘ cabinet ” and no result except a movement of the curtains as if some-
one were peeping out at us, one of the sitters next me remarked that
he thought that “Geordie” must have detected the mirrors. If he
(“ Geordie ”) was sharp enough to catch Dr. Pickburn looking round
on the previous occasion, he or anybody else peeping out from the cur-
tains, could not fail to see nine mirrors held up in a very expectant
attitude. Anyhow at eight minutes past 4 p.m. Mrs. Mellon said,
“ Are you ready, doctor ?” And then further said that “ Geordie n
was in the “cabinet” materialised, but seemed to be melting away
again as something was wrong. At this remark Mr. Wallis looked at
me significantly.
Another tedious half-hour of singing without result, and without
any remarks from the cabinet, proved a trifle wearisome, Mrs. Mellon
did not speak all this time and was thought to be entranced. At 4-30
p.m the sound of rapping was heard to proceed from the cabinet, and
on enquiry if the “ spirits ” had a message to communicate, the follow-
ing was rapped out: —
“ Geordie is disgusted with you for having mirrors.”
Mrs. Mellon then, in a tone of apparent great annoyance, asked
“ What does this mean ?” “ Who had mirrors ?” and was informed
that all present had them. She then said that it was a mean advan-
tage to take, as we had been told previously that to look at the “ spirit
forms ” in daylight, caused them to melt and bored holes in them.
We all apologised, and replied that we were unaware that looking
at the reflected image in a mirror would have the same disintegrating
effect as that supposed to be produced by the direct gaze from the
human eye.
We then promised to put the mirrors away if Mrs. Mellon would
try for a little longer. We sat till 5-10 p.m., but without result, and
then broke up the sitting, after having experienced one of the most
tedious afternoons that I remember.
The medium appeared very much annoyed, and inclined to
severely blame Mr. Wallis as the originator of the “mirror test” (as
I may call it), although we all pleaded guilty on this occasion.
After she had departed, a council of war was held, and it was
decided that the committee should subscribe towards a present of
jewellery to be given to the medium as a solatium to her injured
feelings, and in the hope that we might be forgiven, and the oppor-
tunity of another photographic seance allowed us.
An evening or two after that, a small gathering was held at the
Hotel Metropole, and on behalf of the committee an apologetic and
glowing speech was made, and Mrs. Mellon was formally presented
with some valuable jewellery.
Mrs. Mellon passed over our offence; we were forgiven, and
promised another sitting from her, which would take place on the
following Thursday afternoon.


We accordingly assembled on the following Thursday, August 9ih,
1894, for the third photographic seance. Besides the medium, there
were present Dr. M , Mrs. E , Mr. N. Joubert, Mr. C. L. W allis,
Mr. Rumble, Mr. F——, Mr. R. C. T. Morgan, Mr. P. J. M , and
myself. The photographic plates had been purchased on the previous
day, and the same precautions of sealing up the packet, locking and
sealing the cupboard, etc., carried out as before in the presence of
witnesses, so that there was no possible loophole for these plates to be
tampered with beforehand.
A 2 p.m. the cupboard was unlocked, the packet taken down stairs
to the dark room, and the plates transferred to the slides in the pres-
ence of several witnesses and then escorted up to the seance room. This
was the same room as that used for the photographing before, and the
arrangement was similar to that on other occasions described, and
shown on the last plan.
After focussing the cameras, Mrs. Mellon was searched by Mrs.
E and the domestic in an adjoining room, and then brought into
the seance room, and the door locked and sealed at 2-38 p.m. Mrs.
Mellon then took her seat in the “ cabinet,” and the Venetian blinds
were regulated to admit the proper light. We sat with our backs to
the “ cabinet ” as before, and sang to the accompaniment of the auto-
harp.
At 3-20 p.m. Mrs. Mellon was “controlled” by “ Cissie,” and,
with her usual childish manner of speech, requested Mr. Joubert to sit
at the back between the rest of us and the cabinet, while I had to
change places with him and move further away.
She then informed us that we were to close our eyes directly we
heard the curtains move, and to keep them closed while the curtains
were open. This was evidently done to guard against a repetition
of the “mirror test.”
At 3-25 p.m. Mrs, Mellon, in her normal voice, said ; “Are you
ready, Doctor?” We then closed our eyes as promised, while the cur-
tains were drawn aside for about 5 seconds, and an exposure of 3
seconds taken with both cameras.
Mrs. Mellon then said from within the “ cabinet,” “ I am afraid I
moved.”
The curtains rattled again, the same performance of closing our
eyes was repeated, and the cameras again exposed for 3 seconds. The
plates were then changed at 3 30, and we indulged in another interval
of singing. At 3 - 45 p.iri. Dr. M was again asked if he were ready,
and all the eyes again closed, while the curtains were once more drawn
aside and another exposure of 3 seconds taken. Mrs. Mellon then said,
“That last ‘ materialised spirit’ was the form of a lady, but I don’t
know who she is.” The two previous shots had been taken at
“ Ceordie,” the wish having been expressed beforehand that he should
be again photographed together with the medium.
At 3-55 pm. Mrs. Mellon said, “I’m afraid that they’ll not be
able to do any more,” so at 4 o’clock we broke up the sitting and


unlocked the door. The medium remained inside the cabinet to rest,
while the plates were taken downstairs to the dark room and developed
in the presence of Mr. Joubert. Mr. Morgan, Mr. P. J. M and
Dr. M .
The rest of us adjourned downstairs for tea, and refreshments
were sent up to the medium in the cabinet.
The portraits of “ Geordie ” were found on development to be
remarkably good negatives, showing “ Geordie ” and the medium
standing beside him, clearly defined and easily recognisable. One of
these portraits has been reproduced for publication, and with the
exception of a slight change in position the others are similar to this.
With regard to the last exposure of the cameras at the supposed
“ form of a lady,” the plates on development showed what appeared
like the draped form of an old woman. The head was draped round
with white, so as to conceal the eyes and chin, and the only features
visible from this shroud-like covering were the mouth and nose. There
was some dispute afterwards as to the sex of this individual, some of
those who saw the portrait claiming it to be a man.
I will refer to all these photographs again in a later chapter.
There were no failures this time : all the negatives were good, and the
result of this highly-successful photographic seance was considered k>
be a “ triumph.” Nothing like this had ever been achieved before in
the way of “ spirit photographyand we congratulated both our-
selves and the medium upon the successful issue to what we were
bound to consider (theoretically speaking) a most complete and
thoroughly perfect “test.” In theory, this chain of evidence was
complete and unbroken ; we had taken every precaution against the
fraudulent manipulation of the plates, etc.; the medium had been
searched by two witnesses ; and yet the “ spirit forms ” appeared and
were photographed on the sensitised plates. Was not this complete
evidence of the genuineness of the “ phenomena T”
The foregoing accounts are the records which I intended
to publish, and comprised my contemplated book. Those who
will take the trouble to refer to the first number of the Cosmos
Magazine will see the contemplated work advertised there to that
effect. Now, although I felt inclined at this point to accept
the genuineness of these phenomena, on the strength of the appar-
ently irrefutable evidence of the last photographic test, I had no
intention of ascribing these or any other phenomena to a spiritual
origin. I am, and always have been, strongly averse to Spiritualism ;
and it was only from the material and physical standpoint that I was
investigating its so-called phenomena. Even if these phenomena were
proved genuine (and our last test appeared at the time to support this),
I preferred to consider them due to some little-known natural laws,
some abnormal concentration of force, which was able to objectivate
and materialise the thought forms evolved from our own conscious or
sub-conscious intellects. This certainly appears rather an abstruse


AND MRS. MELLON.
Photographed by daylight, August 9, 1894.


theory, but supported, as it seemed to be, by other transcendental
physical phenomena, it is more reasonable and logical than the
spiritualistic hypothesis to account for the so-called phenomena of
materialisation. Those who will refer to the above-mentioned
advertisement will find there absolutely no mention of either spirits
o*r Spiritualism, and such has always been my attitude in the matter.
To accuse me, therefore, of inconsistency in my present attitude
is as wrong and as unjust as to call me a spiritualist. My only object
has been to probe the truth, or otherwise, of certain alleged phenomena.
‘ Before proceeding to describe other events, and my further train
of reasoning which led up to them, I will here give Mrs Mellon’s own
account qf her sensations whilst undergoing these photographic tests,
This account, written by herself after due thought and deliberation
was supplied to me some time after the last-mentioned “test” took
place, to be published with my records of these “ tests.” I give it
here for what it may be worth, and without further comment. Mrs.
Mellon says:—
“ Concerning the photographing of the materialised spirit forms
my sensations, etc.
“Commencing with ‘Josephine,’ a photograph of whom was
taken by Dr. M on the afternoon of March 16th, 1894. I
felt, during the early part of the process, a chilling and benumbing
sensation steal all over my body, while the psychoplasm was being
taken from me, and which came principally from my left side and
from the tips of my fingers.
“This psychoplasm, or vapoury mass, fell at my feet in waves
and clouds, very beautiful to look at; then, as it arose and fell, I
could see flashes of glorious light here and there, like rays of bright
sunlight on a rippling brook.
“ I felt that the veil between us was partially lifted. I felt that
certain laws in operation would quicken the forces that would even-
tually cause a temporary materialised form to present itself. (That
temporary forms can and do build up from elements, gases, and
particles of matter in the atmosphere, combined with the magnetic
nerve, aura, etc., taken from the medium and sitters, is an absolute
fact, of which we have abundant proof.) And as I gazed, with half-
closed eyes, I saw this moving, living mass gradually, but surely,
assume a distinct human shape. The face, head and hair were the
last to make their appearance.
“ I felt impressed from the first it was my dear guide * Josephine’
who was materialising ; and, as she grew stronger, I became convinced
that my impression was correct.
“ During this interesting process I could see other beings, very
shadowy, certainly, but perfectly distinct, making passes with their
hands from right to left, and vice versa , over the form of ‘ Josephine.’
I saw her stagger several times as though she would fall, but as the


psychoplasm continued to flow from my side the form became stronger
and clearer, whilst I, up to this stage, had been gradually getting
weaker. My hands then commenced to tingle and burn, while my face
became rigid. I could not move a muscle, my tongue clove to thereof
of my mouth, I could not have uttered a word to save my life. I felt,
as it were, under a spell, although my brain was clear. I was perfectly
conscious the whole time, from beginning to end. However, this
rather unpleasant sensation lasted only when Josephine’s head and
face were being materialised ; and as I got the signal (three tiny taps
of my chair) to open the curtains, I felt a sudden rush of power flow
up my arms ; but the rigidity of my face did not relax in the slightest
degree until after ‘Josephine’ was photographed, when she suddenly
collapsed, causing me to shake violently. I felt that I must call some-
one to me to hold my hands for a few moments, in order to resuscitate
me a little. This I immediately did, asking one of the sitters, Mr.
R ,to please come to me at once. After holding my hands some
few minutes, I felt greatly restored.
“ Such a manifestation as the materialised form cannot possibly
be put down to any hypothesis but the true one—viz., the Spiritual.
“ Have we not been walking amid the shadows already too long
and at last have come into the light and glory which we must recog-
nise and take into our hearts.
“ With regard to my sensations during the photographing of the
spirit known as ‘ Geordie ’ :
“First: My face did not become rigid as in the case when
‘Josephine’ was materialised, but I felt much more reduced in size. My
arms were attenuated, my face felt drawn and pinched, and I felt
frightfully hungry. I was perfectly conscious the whole time. I could
talk as well as • Geordie,’ who spoke just before he was photographed.
•‘After the photographing took place, the form immediately col-
lapsed, throwing me into a violent tremor. I called to Dr. M
to catch hold of my hands, which he did, at the same time feeling my
pulse which was found to be abnormally high and irregular.
“ I was so exhausted after this sitting that I almost fainted away,
since which time I have suffered from general weakness.
“ I may state that both before and after the sitting I con-
sented to be taken into a bedroom by a lady and her maid, and under-
went the painful ordeal of having my clothing examined, I always
make it a point of wearing only coloured clothing when I am to hold
a seance, and, at the lady’s suggestion, I discarded the ordinary white
underwear for coloured flannels.
“ f thought this suggestion ridiculously absurd at the time, but I
do not regret having complied with the lady’s wish, if by doing so I
have strengthened the evidence of the manifestations, the only white
article about me being a silk handkerchief. The little child known as
1 Oissie ’ was photographed by J. Stewart Smith, Esq., at his own
residence in Edinburgh on September 3rd, 1890, and in daylight,
between the hours of 2.30 and 3 o’clock in the afternoon ; the sitting


was, as you see from the time stated, a short one, published in the
Medium and Daybreak on October 3rd, 1890. ‘Cissie’ has attended
me almost ever since the beginning of my development as a medium
some twenty-four years, and her first effort at materialising must date
back twenty-two years. She was a mere child, then about six years of
age ; however, there is some doubt as to her correct age. I only judge
it to be, as I have stated, from her appearance. I used to see her
clairvoyantly, long before she learned the Science of Materialisation.
‘ Cissie’ could not at first speak a word of English, but can now speak
fairly good English, and tells us that in spirit-life she is now grown up ;
but that when she comes into my aura and takes on the earth’s
conditions, she feels as she did when in earth life, and therefore always
manifests as a child.
“ ‘ Cisserina’ is her spirit name but for convenience sake we call her
1 Cissie ’; she is a dear little thing, and is quite worthy of all the love
and affection in which she is held by our many English friends at
home, and has always been to me as a dear friend and comforter.”


CHAPTER Y.
TEST No. 5 : The Seance fok Weighing the “Spirits,” and
the Result.
Although I here speak of this Weighing Seance as test No. 5, 1
do so for the reason that Mr. R. C. T. Morgan, of Melbourne, under
whose direction it was arranged and carried out, has talked of it in
Melbourne as a “ test,” and not because either Dr. M , myself, or
others present considered it as such. It was altogether an informal
affair, arranged on the spur of the moment for the personal enlighten-
ment of Mr. Morgan ; was not held under any pretence at “ test” con-
ditions, and included no searching of the medium, neither was she
secured in any way to the scale on which she was supposed to sit.
Mr. Morgan has, however, brought it forward as evidence in support
of his views, both in the Melbourne newspapers and before the
Psychical Research Society of that city ; and so I will here criticise
the occurrence as it stands, and consider what value can be given to
this evidence and why it cannot be put forward as a “ test.”
We assembled at Mrs. Mellon’s house, 5 Waverley Road, Wool-
lahra, Sydney, at 8 p.m. on Monday, July 30th, 1894, and among
others present were Mr. and Mrs. C. L. Wallis, Mr. Morgan, Mr.
Joubert, Dr. M and myself.
Two of Fairbank’s weighing machines had been hired by Mr.
Morgan, from Lassetter and Co. during the day, and had been
conveyed to Mrs. Mellon’s house during the afternoon. The weights
and particulars were noted by myself as they occurred, which records
I afterwards supplied to Mr. Morgan. I will now quote his own
words in describing the proceedings :
“I assisted to hang the curtains of dark material across the
corner of the room, and all the preparations, it v\ ill be observed, were
made in the presence of all the sitters.
“ One of the two weighing machines was of a type usually found
upon a railway station for weighing goods, having a back and pro-
jecting arm with index inscribed.
“ This machine was then wheeled behind the curtain, the index
arm or beam projecting from behind the curtain into the room, and in
front of this arm and within two feet of the curtain I placed my
chair, being, perhaps, four feet in front of the first row of sitters.
The second or smaller machine, standing only some twenty inches
high, was placed in front of the curtain in full view of the sitters,
and 14| inches from the curtain.
“ Dr. M undertook to attend to this machine and to the
weighing of the forms, while I noted the register of the machine
upon which Mrs. Mellon sat.


“ A small bull’s-eye lantern, with a crimson glass, was provided to
read the index. Mr. Henry, in the circle, was deputed to note the
weights when called by Dr. M and myself. Mrs. Mellon was
first weighed and her weight ascertained to be 7 stone 12 lbs., and the
box upon which she sat weighed 8 lbs., making a total weight upon her
scales of 8 stone 6 lbs. She took her seat behind the curtain at 8.35
p.m., and her weight was again taken and found to be the same as
before—viz., with the box 8 stone 6 lbs. Needless to say no person
could enter the room without unlocking the doors and being observed
by every one present, and such person would have to pass through
three rows of sitters and even after that be exposed to the scrutiny of
Dr. M and myself, who were posted in front of the circle and
close to the curtain. At B.so—the intervening 15 minutes being filled
up witli singing to the accompaniment of Dr. INI ’s auto-harp—
‘ Cissie,’ the little mulatto girl who manifests through Mrs. Mellon,
came out into the room through the centre of the curtain and where it
divides, and behind which curtain, as previously stated, Mrs. Mellon,
sac upon the scales ; and that she did actually occupy that position
during the whole of the sitting I can without hesitation affirm, as
although I did not keep the lantern on the scales the whole time, I did
so every few minutes, never allowing a minute to elapse without feeling
and testing the beam of Mrs. Mellon’s scales to ascertain that her
weight still rested upon the platform. This important fact should be
borne in mind in reference to all the manifestations of which I shall
speak. ‘ Cissie,’ whose dark features and hair were distinctly visible
to me as I sat within two feet of her as she emerged from the centre of
the curtain, stepped out apparently cautiously to the smaller scales out-
side the curtain, and was asked by Dr. M to step on to the
platform of the scales. She first put one foot upon the platform and
shook it, causing it to oscillate, and the vibration was distinctly audible
not only to those near but to all those in the room.
“ After trying it for a few moments, she stepped boldly on to the
platform, and I heard her little bare feet dance upon the iron stand,
producing a sound readily recognised but difficult to describe.
“ After the vibration had ceased, Dr. M held a small lantern
in position so as to read the index on the scales ‘Cissie ’ stood upon,
and after repeatedly satisfying himself that it was correct, announced
that the weight registered was 1 stone 2 lbs. 1 took Mrs. Mellon’s
weight at the same time and found it to be 6 stone 6 lbs., showing a
loss, or reduction of two stone, but as ‘ Cissie ’ only absorbed 1 stone 2
lbs. the other 12 lbs. remains to be accounted for ; but I believe from
what followed that ‘ Geordie ’ was at the same time materializing or
preparing to do so whilst ‘ Cissie’ was outside the curtain.
“ There was a space of 14| inches between the curtain and the out-
side scales, and when ‘ Cissie ’ was outside I was careful to ascertain
that nothing connected the form of ‘ Cissie ’ with anything behind
the curtain, and that nothing but vacancy (if the use of such a terra
involving a paradox is admissible) intervened or occupied this space of


14| inches, and I think I should add that no article whatever, no piece
of furniture was left behind the curtain. All that was there was the
medium, the scales, and the box used as a seat.
“ After the weight had been called by the Doctor and verified by
myself and noted by Mr. Henry, ‘ Cissie ’ stepped off the platform
and bowed repeatedly, kissing her hands to the sitters, the sound pro-
duced by the lips being distinctly audible and as natural as though
produced by any mortal. In fact it was difficult to realise that she
differed in any respect from an ordinary child, with this exception, that
whilst taking on temporarily the garment of the material body in order
to render herself visible to our material senses, she had not acquired
the faculty of speech.
“ After retiring behind the curtain, ‘ Cissie ’ dernaterialised and
controlled Mrs. Mellon, speaking for about four or five minutes, enquir-
ing after and sending messages to several who are not in this audience.
She also said that she had not done all she had wished to do as
‘ Geordie,’ who was present, was reserving most of the power for him-
self, as he intended to do something important.
“It was now six minutes past 9 o’clock, and whilst ‘Cissie ’
was controlling the medium I took the weight of the latter, and found
it 6 stone 11 lbs. In a few minutes a tall female form appeared, but
beyond the fact that it was a female it was impossible to recognise the
features, but it was taller than Mrs. Mellon, and stood for two or three
minutes in front of the curtain pointing to one of the sitters, but from
the fact that there were then three rows of sitters some difficulty was
experienced in determining for whom shecame, every question as to whom
she pointed, being followed by the shake of the head, denoting nega-
tion, although the hand continued to point through the misty half-
transparent drapery. This form then retired, and at 9.25 ‘Geordie’
stepped outside the curtain, coming from the centre where it divided.
He did not speak, but obviously knowing the object of the sitting, he
straightway struck with his bare feet, first right and then left, the plat-
form of the scales, causing a vibration audible all over the room.
“ He did this several times, and then without invitation stepped up
and stood upon the platform, upon which he stamped several times,
the thud of his bare feet being distinctly heard and also the vibration
of the platform.
“Dr. M then took his weight, being very careful about it,
and reassuring himself of its correctness, occupying about two minutes
in the process, and reported that it was 7st. 21b. I then took Mrs.
Mellon’s weight, and found it was sst. 31b., and I am assured that it
was practically this weight whilst ‘ Geordie ’ was being weighed, as I
kept my finger on the balance of the medium’s scales whilst
‘ Geordie ’ was being weighed, and there was no difference from that
time until a few seconds after I read the index on the medium’s scales.
After ‘Geordie’ had retired some two minutes, I again took Mrs.
Mellon’s weight, and found it had fallen to 4st. 131 b., the explanation
being that ‘ Geordie ’ was developing for the direct voice.


“ At 9.35, or ten minutes after he had first appeared, ‘ Geordie ’
came out again, but this time at the further end of the curtain near
the wall, and not from the centre as before ; and in the direct voice
said quite distinctly, although in somewhat hoarse tones, ‘ More
light.’
“ Mr. Mellon, who was sitting in the third row and furthest away
from the curtained recess, turned the gas jet up higher, although not
full up, but ‘Geordie’ was dissatisfied, and said in a distinctly con-
fident tones ‘ Turn it full up.’
“ Mr. Mellon complied, and ‘Geordie’ immediately said, ‘That’s
grand,’ and stood in the light that gave the most vivid view of the
materialized form it has been my privilege to witness. His features
were distinctly visible, and any person who has seen his photograph
would have recognised him at once. He remained in full view of all
the sitters for about 30 seconds, and so bright was the light that one
gentleman who was present, as a practical illustration of the bright-
ness of the light, took out his watch, which has the dial engraved
upon the outside, and holding it at arms length from him easily ascer-
tained the time.
“ Now at this time I was careful to ascertain that Mrs. Mellon’s
seat was still occupied, and for that purpose kept constantly feeling
the beams of her scales and ascertained that they still stood at 4st. 131 b.
‘ Geordie ’ was at too great a distance from the scales for the explana-
tion or suggestion that it was the medium representing him, for if
that were the case the only weight left upon the scales would have
been the box, which weighed only 81b.; and it must also be remem-
bered that 4 Geordie ’ stood clear of the curtain and furthest from
the place where the medium sat. ‘Geordie’ then retired, and at
9.58 ‘ Cissie ’ came out again from the centre of the curtain, and
danced upon the floor and kissed her hand, when Dr. M asked
her to play upon his auto-harp. At first she appeared timid, and
retreated backwards, when he knelt down and held the harp towards
her she advanced a step, and gaining courage touched the strings with
her fingers several times, producing sounds audible to all the sitters,
and I distinctly saw her fingers, though covered with the misty
drapery, touching the chords.
“I again took the medium’s weight and found it 6st. 21b., and
again before 4 Cissie’ i-etired it fell to sst. 121 b
“ After ‘ Cissie ’ left, Mrs. Mellon asked for Dr. M , stating
she felt much exhausted, and the doctor put his hand through the
curtain and took her pulse, reporting that he found it 130, very
irregular and mucli reduced in volume and force Of course, excite-
ment will quicken the pulse, and did it present no other feature, it
would bear little significance, but its irregularity and reduction in
volume and force are very important when considering this question
of materialisation.
“ At 10-15 was rapped out, ‘ Cannot possibly do any more ; light
up.’ On lighting up, Mrs. Mellon’s pulse was taken by the Doctor


and found to be 88, and she was also immediately weighed and
found, with box, to be Bst. 61bs., and I carefully inspected the recess to
note whether anything appeared to be changed and to ascertain
whether the medium’s dress or hair showed any signs of disarrange-
ment.”
Before criticising the above account, let me again state that I did
not at the time consider these informal experiments in any way worthy
to be called a “ test.” So strongly did I hold this opinion, and so
much was I impressed with the possibility of trickery, and the com-
parative ease with which such scales, placed in such a position, and
under the lax conditions of the present instance, could be easily and
imperceptibly manipulated by the medium, that I stated to Dr.
M and Mr. Morgan, immediately after this seance, that I
could not consider these experiments at all in the light of evidence,
and that they established no proof whatever. When the other
persons had gone, I further demonstrated to these two gentlemen, in
the presence of Mrs. Mellon, that I could, by standing with one foot
on each scale, so regulate the balance of my body as to throw what
weight I liked upon either scale. I stood upon the scales myself and
showed them this, and that it was quite possible for the medium, with
shoes and stockings removed, to have stood up and with one arm held
the figure of “ Geordie ” outside the curtains, while she placed one bare
foot upon the smaller scale and stamped with it. She could thus, with
one foot on each scale, throw the bulk of her weight on to whichever
foot she pleased, while Mr. Morgan, with his finger on the balance
beam of the larger scale, would be unaware that she whs not seated
and would feel only the expected fluctuation of the balance of this
larger scale, supposed to be due to the loss of weight by the medium.
Let it be clearly borne in mind that the platforms of these two
scales were only 14| inches apart, and that the platform of the larger
measured inches, and that of the smaller only 4 inches in height
from the floor. As a further experiment to demonstrate this, I
requested Mrs Mellon to stand upon the scales herself, and the follow-
ing entry in my pocket-book, recorded at the time, shows plainly the
result, although we had the full light to read the scales by;—
“ Mrs. Mellon standing with one foot on each scale, and without
the box used as seat.
“ Weight registered an smaller scale—fist. 6|lbs.
“Weight registered on larger scale—lst. BJdbs.
“Giving a total weight of Bst. 11b.
“ Mrs. Mellon’s weight, taken both before and after seance upon
one scale, was carefully ascertained to be 7st. 121bs.
“This, when compared with the above weight of Bst. 11b, shows
a difference of 3lbs.
“ The increase of 31bs. in the total weight above is due to the
impossibility of reading both scales simultaneously during the above
experiment.”


Here, then, is the explanation to the supposed combined weight
of “ Geordie ” and the medium which Mr. Morgan talks of, as showing
the grand total of 12st. 51bs. The weights taken on this occasion
were certainly not taken simultaneously. They were taken in the
dark, and after a good deal of fumbling on the part of both Dr. M
and Mr. Morgan, due, doubtlessly, to their unacquaintance with
weights and scales. It took the two of them to find the weights for
“Geordie,” and, after this had been ascertained and noted by myself,
Mr. Morgan turned his attention to Mrs. Mellon’s scale.
The whole process took two or three minutes, so that there was
ample time for the medium to throw whatever weight she pleased upon
either scale.
Let it be also borne in mind that the medium was neither searched
nor secured to her seat or to the scale in any manner, so that it was
quite possible for her to move about inside the cabinet on the larger
scale just as she pleased, or even to put one foot on the floor without
detection, the singing covering any rustling or possible sdund of move-
ment. From the sound made by “ Geordie,” I was certainly under
the impression that there was only one foot on his scale. If people
expect to hear two feet, no doubt imagination will help them. With
regard to the combined weights of “ Cissie ” and the medium, given as
7st. 81bs., here again there is a considerable discrepancy between that
and the medium’s normal weight, with box, of Bst. 61 bs. This difference
is due without doubt to the same cause ; the impossibility of register-
ing two weights simultaneously on such machines. Let anybody ex-
periment in this way for himself and he will find that unless the
weights are recorded exactly simultaneously (an utter impossibility
without a scientific apparatus) the result may be anything he pleases.
In this instance there was nothing to prevent Mrs. Mellon kneeling on
the larger scale inside the curtains and placing both hands outside on
the smaller scale ; her head and shoulders, also outside the curtains,
draped to represent the small figure of “ Cissie.” Her hands could
thus patter on the platform of the smaller scale ; and I defy Mr. Morgan
or any one else to distinguish in the dark between the sound of hands
or feet. And then, again, Mr. Morgan states that he was careful to
ascertain that nothing but “ vacancy ” existed between “ Cissie ” and
the curtains. Now, for this piece of evidence he is relying solely
upon his eyesight—the easiest deceived of all the senses. He was
not even allowed to turn the small lantern on to the form
(being told that to do so would bore holes through it), and the light
was so dim that it was utterly impossible to have detected a dark
dress against the dark curtains. At the distance of a few inches away
from “ Cissie’s ” face it is impossible to distinguish any features.
This has been stated to me by Dr. Pickburn, Rev. G. Walters, and
others who have been privileged to approach this form, and the light
is always so dim that nothing but the contrast of the black face
against the white hood-like drapery and of the white drapery against
the dark background of curtains is discernible. The evidence of Mr.


Morgan’s eyesight cannot, therefore, carry much weight on this point.
Afters ards, when “ Geordie ” requested more light to show himself
by, the gas jet in the front room was turned well up, and he merely
thrust his head out of the curtains. Even then, were a mask or false
beard used, the light was not sufficient at that distance to detect it.
For further evidence on these points I will refer my readers to a letter
in a following chapter from Mr. Wallis to the Psychical Research
Society of Melbourne, and with these remarks will dismiss the so-called
weighing test as unworthy to be considered a test at all.


CHAPTER VI.
Test No. 6 : The alleged Exposure of Friday, 12th October
1894, AND WHAT LED UP TO IT. TIIE EVIDENCE OF THE
Various Witnesses ; Further Revelations by the Presi-
dent op the Spiritualists’ Association ; Public Comment
and Interesting Correspondence.
Before describing the occurrence of Friday, 12th October, 1894,
which I here classify as “ Test No. 6,” I will first relate the train of
events and process of reasoning which led up to my decisive action on
that occasion. On the strength of the last, photographic “ Test,” I
was inclined to believe that there was something genuine about these
phenomena. My sceptical observations and opinions up to that date,
had to give way in the face of the apparently reliable evidence of this
“ Test.” As an impartial investigator, I honestly acknowledged at the
time that the result of this apparently complete chain of evidence (as
established by this last photographic “Test”) was certainly in favour
of the genuineness of these manifestations. Theoretically, this chain of
evidence was perfect and unbroken ; each successive step had been
carefully witnessed and guarded. Certainly, if I had myself had the
direction of these “ Tests,” I would have imposed much more stringent
conditions, and not felt the same compunction as Dr. M in impos-
ing restrictions upon the movements of the medium whilst in the
cabinet. There was no necessity for this far-fetched delicacy in treat-
ing of the matter; we were dealing with a professional medium, who,
although not directly paid a certain sum for undergoing these “ Tests,”
yet indirectly was most substantially repaid by valuable presents of
jewellery, &c., besides receiving suchan invaluable advertisement(in sup-
port of her professed abnormal powers) from the presence at these “Test”
seances of several well-known and respected citizens. It was proposed
to jointly attest the records of these “ Tests,” and the publication of
these records by myself, would not have been the least important adver-
tisement she was about to receive. Such a document could have been
flourished in the face of the public for all time ; and not only would
tend to firmly establish the reputation of this medium, but would be
held up in the future by spiritulists, as strong supporting evidence to
the whole of the alleged phenomena of “ materialisation,”
These thoughts passed through my mind when I began to write
up these records for publication ; and the seriousness of the step I was
taking, and its possible future bearing upon the broad question of
spiritualistic phenomena, made me pause and consider whether I was
justified in doing so ; and whether, after all, the evidence of this one
“ Test ” was sufficiently strong to bear down all my previous sceptical


observations, and to answer all objections to the alleged genuineness
of these occurrences. I instituted careful enquiries to ascertain
whether there was any other testimony forthcoming ; whether there
was the evidence of any previous Tests elsewhere to support the
genuineness of Mrs. Mellon’s professed powers. Mrs. Mellon had over
and over again referred to “ cruel and barberous ” Tests which she had
undergone in England; had talked of Tests she had given before
scientific men and learned societies throughout Great Britain; had
referred myself and all enquirers here, to Tests given before Professor
Sidgwick, Mr. Myers, Mr. Balfour, Professor Stewart and many
other well-known men in London and Oxford ; and particularly before
the Psychical Research Society of London some years ago.
She made these much-talked-of Tests the excuse for refusing to
■undergo any further strict “ Tests” in this part of the world, and in
fact refused to undergo any at all, until she came in contact with Dr.
M . So plausibly, and with such an appearance of truth, did she
talk of these previous “ Tests,” and describe them, that I and many
others were led into attaching some weight to these assertions. Dr.
M , notably, without taking the precaution of further inquiry (on
the strength of her ipse dixit), made some very incautious state-
ments in an article written by him at this time. I, how-
ever, was not so impressed with the honesty of mediums in general
that I could afford to commit myself to print upon the ipse dixit of
any one ; besides which I had more at stake than the other members
of our investigation committee, inasmuch as I was attaching my name
to the proposed publication. On making enquiries, therefore, it came
to my knowledge that neither Mr. Myers nor Professor Sidgwick, of
London (two gentlemen whose names had been much quoted), had
received any satisfactory tests from Mrs. Mellon at all. I shall refer
more particularly to letters on this matter further on. This left all
her statements open to very grave suspicion, and I therefore called on
Mrs. Mellon to request to he allowed to see any documentary evidence
she might have in support of her statements.
Naturally, one would suppose that some such documents would
be treasured up by her : letters, newspaper cuttings, or the published
proceedings of the Psychical Research Society of London, referring to
the matter.
Nothing of the kind was forthcoming, however ; and only a pile
of old numbers of the Medium and Daybreak, and other Spiritualistic
periodicals, were placed in my hands. I took these away and waded
through them diligently, but without finding one single record of a
Test. They contained nothing but accounts of regular orthodox
seances written by credulous Spiritualists. Naturally I became more
sceptical than ever. I knew' positively that numerous requests for
tests had been refused by Mrs. Mellon, both in Sydney and in Melbourne.
Two friends of mine in Sydney (whose names I can give, if required,)
had guaranteed her the sum of one hundred pounds for a short series
of tests. This had been declined on the plea of ill-health, although at
the time, she was holding seances regularly. Another handsome offer


from the Melbourne Psychical Research Society, was also declined this
year on a similar plea. I had also seen some correspondence from the
honorary secretary of the same society, requesting to be allowed to try
a simple test with a wire cage (similar to the Test at Sunday Times
Office, described later on) when on a visit to Sydney ; and this had
been declined. I had myself proposed several simple methods of
testing the “phenomena,” such as the tape and sealing-wax, previously
described ; modified handcuffs ; or even to be allowed to gently
embrace “ Cissie.” All these had been evaded by excuses.
Things certainly looked very queer. What could possibly be the
object of all these excuses and all these evasions, if her powers were
genuine 1
Again, I carefully went through all my own notes and records of the
seances I had attended ; the photographing was the only event worthy
of consideration as real evidence in support of genuineness. Then I
went through this chain of photographic evidence link by link, weigh-
ing it thoroughly. I found that, as I said before, the most crucial
point—the evidence as to searching of the medium—was the weakest;
and had the least supporting testimony. The evidence of these two
persons, who had been deputed to carry out the searching, was there-
fore the crux of the matter ; and on the reliability of these two
witnesses, alone rested the whole question.
As far as my personal experiment and research extended, the
whole question of “Materialisation ” itself, hinged upon the evidence
of these two witnesses.
Now, what were their duties ; and what were their opportunities
for carrying out those duties ?
They were required to search thoroughly a professional medium,
who, after twenty-five years’ acquaintance with her profession, may
fairly be assumed to possess more than the average feminine sharpness
of wit and adaptability to immediate circumstances, and to be more
than a match for such searchers as these two witnesses ; even
supposing that they carried out their instructions to the letter. With-
out intending any disrespect to the lady who supervised this searching,
I had to acknowledge to myself that she was not a sufficiently strong-
minded or determined woman to carry out such an important office.
Of a naturally refined and timid disposition, it would be an easy matter
for a woman such as the medium, to outwit and deceive her, under
these circumstances. The domestic being also a firm believer in the
medium’s powers, and not being exactly a free agent, would naturally
follow the lead of her mistress.
Were the opportunities of these two witnesses such that their
evidence on this point, could be considered sufficiently reliable ? Could
such an important matter be accepted on such evidence 1
I decided in the negative. After consulting several mutual friends
of Dr. M ’s and mine, I found they agreed with me that such
evidence was too doubtful to rely upon. I was then in a most un-
pleasant predicament. There was absolutely no evidence before me
supporting the genuineness of these so-called phenomena. I could not


go to Dr. M and express my opinions, as both he, and his lady
relative who had conducted the searching, would have taken immediate
offence. Previous expostulations had met with no success. My first
impulse was to go to Mrs. Mellon and demand a proper and conclusive
test : but, on consideration, I felt that such a course would be both
impolitic and useless. I knew that from her previous attitude and
steadfast refusal of all tests (except Dr. M ’s mild ones), that I
would have m-t with a direct refusal, and probably been excluded
from further seances, as being an evil, sceptical, and inharmonious
influence ; thus altogether losing any possible chance of settling the
question. I therefore determined to wait and attend two more
seances with the object of observing more keenly the modus operandi,
if possible. The suspicious circumstances which I had noted from
time to time throughout my previous sittings, I then formulated and
classified as follows :
1. Mrs, Mellon’s persistent refusal to undergo tests.
2. Her objection to being searched.
8. No sceptics ever allowed to approach the “ forms,” and parti-
cularly not allowed to approach “ Cissie” on any occasion. One would
think that an effort would have been made to convince reasonable
sceptics like myself, by allowing us sufficiently close to afford us proof
of genuineness. Undoubting believers like Dr. M were allowed
to thus reverently approach “Cissie,” and to have their hair pulled
and even their hands touched by her “ spirit-hand.” But they did not
require convincing ; they were already firm believers, or considered safe.
4. I noticed that “ Cissie,” upon every occasion, made her appear-
ance either at the centre opening between the curtains or at the side
openings, and that she never on any occasion crossed the front of the
curtains, but always retired again through one opening, dodged round
at the back of the curtains, and came out again at either of the other
openings. If she wei’e an independent “form,” as she professed to be,
and not connected with the “cabinet” or the medium, what was to
prevent her occasionally crossing the face of the curtains 1 The adult
forms, when as “strong” as “Cissie, were able to come out into the
room, and walk about in the semi-darkness without dodging about
behind curtains. This was a point that I always considered most
suspicious.
5. I also noticed that u Cissie” varied considerably in height, and
that whenever she made her first appearance (to receive chocolates
touch the auto-harp, etc.), she was about four feet high, and had hands,
but no feet. She would then retire again behind the curtains (osten-
sibly to gain strength), and next appear with her pattering sound of
feet, but without hands, and measuring less than three feet high. Her
movements were wonderfully quick and childlike, and at first rather
non-plussed me ; but I found, by experimenting in such a position
myself, that it would be quite possible for the medium to move about
quickly and noiselessly behind the curtains with her hands upon
the floor, the weight of her body resting upon her knees, her hands
an head only, projecting in front of the curtains.


6. Another important point was the fact that “ Cissie ” has never
upon any occasion come out into the room away from the curtains,
which was compatible with my opinion that the connection between
“Cissie” and the medium was too solid to permit her crossing the
front of the curtains. Whenever she has shown herself she has never
advanced more than about 12 inches in front of the curtains at most,
and even in the so-called weighing test the smaller scale was placed so
close to the curtain as to permit this.
7. The so-called dematerialisations always took place close against
the curtains. Now, I have seen a clever conjuror beat this, and
“ materialise ” and “ de-materalise ” a form under the same conditions,
and site feet away from the curtains.
8. “ Cissie’s ” hands were always under the drapery, and whenever
she touched the auto-harp or took the chocolates the hands were always
covered and hidden by the drapery.
9. Although requested to do so by me, “ Cissie ” would not make
her appearance to be photographed by us in daylight on the occasion
of “ Geordie’s ” last photographing. (I had given no previous notice
of my request.)
10. And then with regard to “ Cissie’s ” photograph, taken in
Edinburgh in 1890 (and a copy of which is in my hand), the doll-like
appearance is even more marked than in the case of the photograph of
‘‘ Geordie ” taken by ourselves, while the Edinburgh occasion was
not even a pretence at a “Test,” and the conditions were much more
lax than our own. (For a full account of this, see a later chapter.)
11. “Geordie’s” doll-like appearance, both in his photographs
and when seen through the mirrors with his mask-like face. Only one
of the medium’s hands is visible in these pictures, and “ Geordie”
certainly looks like a lay-figure.
12. I submitted all these photograpns, including the Edinburgh
one of “ Cissie,” to examination under a powerful microscope, and the
result was certainly startling. None of these faces will stand expert
examination. It is remarkable also that a hem or selvage is distinctly
visible across “ Geordie’s” drapery, a very questionable adjunct to
“ Spirit ” clothing.
13. The medium has never been touched in the “cabinet” or spoken,
while any of the forms have been walking about the room. In-fact
there was never any proof that the medium was in the cabinet at all
on these occasions,
14. The medium and “ Geordie ” have never spoken simultaneously,
although rapidly in succession. He is the only “Spirit” form who
ever speaks. His quality of voice is the easiest to imitate, The other
forms never speak, although they appear to be often stronger and
better materialised; as for instance “Josephine,” “Mrs. MacTaggart,”
etc.
15. The strong resemblance to the medium in figure and move-
ments of the adult forms who come into the room. This is most
noticeable in the case of “Josephine.” (For corroboration of this
opinion, refer to Mrs. C. A. Edwards’ statement further on.) On the


occasions when I was privileged to touch “Josephine’s ” finger tips, I
noticed that her arms and hands exactly resembled Mrs. Mellon’s ; and
again in the photograph taken of “Josephine” by Dr. M , the
resemblance of the original picture (taken from the first negative) to
the medium was so noticeable, that Mrs. Mellon exacted a promise
from Dr. M that he would not print from it. This photograph I
have before me as I write, but I gave a promise that I would not
publish it with the others.
16. I am aware that no ladies have ever been allowed to be with
Mrs. Mellon, when dressing, preparatory to holding a se'ance. Several
ladies, intimate friends of hers, have told me that they have frequently
endeavored to be present in this way, and have offered to help her
dress, etc., but have been refused admission on various pretexts.
17, Mr. Mellon always remains at the back of the circle, and
attends to the light himself when any important manifestations take
place, such as “Josephine” or “ Geordie ” perambulating the room.
If Mr, Mellon is not there, nothing very important takes place outside
the cabinet, although even then a person to be depended on (to
promptly turn the light out, if necessary), such as Mr. R , attends
the gas or lamp at the back.
This list of evidence against the genuineness of her professed
abnornal powers I then submitted to Mr. Wallis and Dr. Pickburn,
both members of the Test Committee. I found them also very
sceptical, and both agreed with me as to these observations, and also
agreed that further action was necessary to clear up this mystery.
Not wishing to act decisively without due caution and further
deliberation, I attended another seance. My previous observations
were fully borne out and strengthened, and I felt fully convinced that
we were being fooled by a systematic course of trickery and impos-
ture. At this seance I atteinpted, as already described, to institute a
little quiet test (without any previous notice to the medium) by
endeavoring to obtain a print of “ Cissie’s ” foot upon a sooted slate.
The result as regards the print was a failure, but as a test it succeeded
just as I expected, and proved to me conclusively that “Cissie” had
no feet (unless, possibly, by receiving notice beforehand). I therefore
determined to take action at once. My first impulse was to broach
the matter to Dr. M , but on reflection I felt that to do so would
be useless. I knew that he was so much influenced by the medium,
and had such an unreasoning faith in her powers, that he would
absolutely refuse to listen to any suspicions, however well founded.
This opinion has been since borne out by his unreasonable line of
action in the face of the most conclusive evidence. I felt more
strongly on his account than on my own, that any action which would
rescue him from the toils of those whom I believed to be cruelly
duping him, would be doing him the greatest service that one
friend could render to another. While appreciating and respecting his
brilliant intellectual attainments, I was yet aware that his peculiarities
of temperament, his wilfulness, combined witli indecision of character,
made it impossible to reason with him as one could with most men.


He would have unconsciously let the matter leak out, and the
medium would have been warned and on her guard. I consulted with
four friends of his upon this point, and they, knowing his tempera-
ment intimately, agreed that it would be unwise to apprise him at all.
To have denounced the whole thing as a fraud, without conclusive proof,
would have been both unjust, and useless in its result. The only
course open to me, therefore, was to act decisively upon my own
responsibility, and in such a manner that there could be no loophole
for escape or excuse if my suspicions proved correct. On the other
hand, had I found that I was wrong in my opinions, and on applying
my own “ test,” had discovered anything abnormal about the alleged
“ phenomena,” I would have been the first to apologise and make
reparation. No personal feelings entered into the question, and I had
absolutely no animus against the medium ; I considered her simply in
the aspect of a medium or unit in a broad question of deep importance.
By her own conduct in repeatedly refusing “ tests,” she had forced me
into this action ; and however unpleasant the duty might be, I never-
theless felt it to be a duty , both to my immediate friends and to the
public, which I could not shirk. My friend and fellow-investigator,
Mr. Wallis, expressed himself ready to support me in the matter, and
relied upon my judgment to act on the first favorable opportunity.
Knowing Dr M ’s excitable temperament, and wishing, on the
grounds of long friendship, to avoid any personal conflict of opinion
with him on such an occasion, we resolved to take the opportunity
while he was absent in the country. This presented itself on the
evening of Friday, 12th October, and the occurrence is best told in my
own statutory declaration of what took place, and in the statements
of the various witnesses which are appended, My friendship for Dr.
M- precluded my taking action on any occasion in his house ; the
tactics of the medium did not give an opportunity elsewhere but in
her own house. For reasons best known to herself, she has refused
recently to give exhibitions in a public room, and has also declined to
do so in other private houses. I was forced, therefore, to take this
action in her own house, and although payment was not actually
charged on this occasion, I consider that ample payment in kind was
received. The medium has talked about the obligations of hospitality,
etc. Now, what can be thought of any person who will ask a number
of others to a house to systematically trick and befool them, and trifle
cruelly with the emotions of many ? Where does any obligation enter
into such an occasion 1 Was I to sit quietly and see this going on
before my eyes ; to see an old lady duped into tears, and do nothing 1
To have done so would have made me a party to these proceedings, and
is against every instinct of honor and morality.
The following are the statements of what took place ;
I, Thomas Shekleton Henry, of Lincoln’s Inn Chambei's, Eliza-
beth-street, Sydney, in the colony of New South Wales, architect, do
solemnly and sincerely declare as follows : That on the evening of
Friday, the 12th day of October, 1894, I went to Mrs. Mellon’s house
in the W T averley-road, near Queen-street, Woollahra, Sydney, for the


purpose of attending a seance at which so-called materialised spirit
forms were professed to appear. That the following persons were
present besides myself: Mr. Mellon, Mrs. Mellon, Miss Mellon ; Miss
Elverstone, Miss St. Hill; Mrs. Gale, of Paddington; Mr. Wilton
and Mrs. Wilton, of Melbourne; Mrs. Smith, of New Zealand; Mr.
Edwards and Mrs. Edwards, of Darling Point, Sydney : Mr. Chas. L.
Wallis, of Messrs. Winchcombe, Carson, and Company, woolbrokers,
Sydney; Mr. N, Joubert, of Hunter’s Hill, Sydney; Messrs. Royd-
house and Kidgell, of the Sydney Sunday Times ; Dr. Storder, and
Mr. Rumble.
We assembled in a double room on the ground floor, divided by
folding doors, which were opened and thrown back, and the curtained
recess or “ cabinet” was arranged in one corner of the back room, and
composed of heavy dark curtains about seven feet long, reaching to
the floor, and hung upon a rod or string.
The sitters were placed in two semi-circular rows in front of this
recess, and also in the back room. A small bamboo table was placed
against the wall about three feet from the “cabinet,” and between the
last person in the row to my left and the “ cabinet.” On this table I
placed three clean sheets of foolscap paper and two pencils, the paper
having been passed round, examined, and then initialled by me.
Mrs. Mellon, after arranging all the sitters in such places and at
.such distance from the “cabinet” or curtained recess as she pleased,
seated herself on a chair inside this curtained recess, about 25 minutes
past 8 o’clock. I was placed about the middle of the front row of
sitters, and about 10 feet from the “cabinet.” The gas was then
turned out in the back room, and Mr. Mellon, who remained in the
front room, turned the gas in the front room down very low, and then
wound up and started going a musical box. The sound of rapping
was heard to proceed from the “ cabinet,” and understood to mean
“turn the light still lower,” which was accordingly done by Mr.
Mellon, and we were requested to join hands and sing when the
musical box ceased.
After singing for about eight or ten minutes, a very tall form
appeared between the curtains, draped in loose white material, with
what appeared to be a black face, although no features could be seen.
It came just outside the' “cabinet,” and, being requested to indicate
for whom it had come, bowed itself at the mention of Mr. Wilton’s
name, indicating that it was the spirit of a friend of his, and then
retired into the “cabinet,” after extending one arm in the direction of
the window.
I felt certain, from the shape and movements of this figure, that
it was an imposture and a trick. After another short interval of
singing, a form, diaped completely in white, with a small black shawl
round the middle, came from the “ cabinet,” and approached Mrs.
G-ale, who sat at the right extremity of the front row of chairs.
This form bowed when addressed by the name of Mrs. Gale’s
■deceased niece, and Mrs. Gale, sobbing, and in great emotion, rose
and kissed the head of this form, which then retired to the “ cabinet.”


This form was barefooted, and had every appearance of Mrs. Mellon’s
figure, the face being hidden by white drapery.
Next the form known as “Josephine” appeared, dressed in light
garments, with bare feet and arms, and head draped in white, the face
being visible but unrecognisable in the dim light.
This so-called “ Josephine ” walked out into the room and took a
bouquet of flowers and a pair of scissors from Mr. Rumble, and was
requested to distribute the flowers. Finding them wired (I had pro-
vided the bouquet myself) and difficult to separate, she left them and
retired to the “cabinet,” where she appeared to gradually sink down
towards the floor between the curtains, a process which I have fre-
quently seen before, and can as easily explain. I recognised
“Josephine ” as being the same form that I have frequently seen before
on such occasions, and known by that name, and always bearing a
strong resemblance to the figure and movements of Mrs. Mellon.
After another interval of singing, the small form known as
“ Cissie ” appeared at the curtains, and was recognised by myself and
the other persons present who had seen previous seances as the
form known by that name, and purporting to be the spirit of a small
black child who had died some years ago. The face, which appeared
black, was draped round with white material, which hung down to the
floor, and the hands moved about under the drapery. This form bobbed
about and nodded its head in the usual child-like manner, never com-
ing away from the curtains,
Someone on my left (I believe it was M rs. Gale) went over and
handed the so-called “ Cissie ” the usual box of chocolates, which
“ Cissie ” rattled and proceeded to eat, and a gentleman on my right
(I believe it was Dr. Storder) asked to be given a chocolate, and reached
forward to receive it. I asked for a chocolate, but did not get one.
I have repeatedly asked but have never on any previous occasion
been allowed to approach the so-called “ Cissie.” The choco-
late box was then deposited inside the curtains and “ Cissie ” reached
to the little bamboo table on which were placed the three sheets of
initialled paper and the two pencils. The table appeared to be too far
away from the “cabinet,” and her arm, in reaching over for it, had to
be extended, and I noticed that it was much longer than any arm a
child of that height would naturally have.
When the so-called “Cissie” tried to draw the table closer, the
two pencils rolled off on to the floor. I went over on the pretext of
picking up the pencils, seized the form of the so-called “ Cissie,” and
found that I had hold of Mrs. Mellon, and that she was on her knees,
and had a white material like muslin round her head and shoulders.
I can swear positively that when I seized the form Mrs. Mellon
was on her knees. She struggled, but I held her firmly and called for
the light to be turned up.
Someone struck matches, and then I saw that M rs. Mellon had a
mask of black material over her face, the aforesaid white drapery round
her shoulders, her sleeves drawn up above the elbows, the skirt of her


dress turned up, and her feet bare. She was on her knees, and I held
her in the position in which I had caught her.
The matches were blown out, and I was assaulted by two or three
men present, Mr. Mellon catching me by the throat and tearing off my
necktie.
I never let go my hold of Mrs. Mellon, however, until the gas in
the back room was lit and turned full on, and everyone present had
an opportunity of seeing Mrs. Mellon in the position and in the
condition in which I had caught her. I looked inside the “ cabinet ”
and saw lying upon the floor inside the “ cabinet” a false beard. I
called Mr, Roydhouse over, and he picked up the beard, but it was
snatched from his hand. As soon as I relaxed my hold Mrs. Mellon
tore the black mask from her face, and the drapery from her shoulders,
and hid them under her petticoat. I then entered the “ cabinet ” and
found on the floor a small black shawl, some old muslin, Mrs. Mellon’s
shoes and stockings, and a small black cotton bag about nine inches
square, with black tapes attached to it.
I did not think it necessary to retain any of these articles as sa
many witnesses saw both them and the whole proceedings.
I was perfectly cool and calm throughout and made no error in
my observations or judgment. Mr. Chas. L. Wallis was the only per-
son present to whom I communicated beforehand my intention of
taking action to expose what I suspected to be a fraud and common
trickery.
I have witnessed a great many previous seances by Mrs.
Mellon, and on every such occasion the so-called phenomena produced
have been of a similar character.
I have seen nothing that could not be done by common trickery
(Signed) T. Shekleton Henry.
Declared before me this 17th day October, 1894, Alex. Dean, J.P
I attended a materialising seance at the house of Mr. and Mrs
Mellon, Waverley-road, on Friday evening, October 12, 1894.
The following persons were present besides myself : —Mrs Smith
(N.Z.), Mrs. Wilton (Melbourne), Mrs. Gale, Mrs. Edwards, Miss St.
Hill, Miss Elviston, Miss Mellon, Messrs. Eoydhouse, Henry, Joubert,
Rumble, Etherington, Wilton (Melbourne) Kidgell, Edwards, Mellon,
Dr. Storder. A “ cabinet,” composed of two curtains hanginar closely
side by side from a rod was fixed in one corner of the room. Into the
recess thus formed, the medium, Mrs. Annie Mellon, retired at about
8.30 p.m., and the sitters, arranged in the usnal semi-circle before the
curtains, sang several airs, preluded by selections from Mr. Mellon’s
musical box.
After an interval of a few minutes, what appeared to be a very
tall form showed between the curtains in the centre. The light was
very dim, and features quite indistinguishable, though the face looked
black. This form did not free itself from the curtains, Next
appeared a female form draped in white, but v earing also a black


shawl. She was supposed to be the materialised spirit of a niece of
Mrs. Gale, to whom she walked out from the cabinet, and returned.
Again an interval of a few minutes, and then the form known to
regular sitter’s at these seances as “Josephine” came out from the
curtains and took a large bouquet of flowers. She appeared to try to
cut the strung which bound the flowers with a scissors handed her by
Mr. Rumble, but failed, and retired to the centre of the curtains, and
appeared to dematei'ialise by gradually sinking down to the ground,
and then disappearing altogether.
A few minutes passed in singing as before, and then the little
black form, purporting to be “ Cissie,” showed at the centre of the
curtains, kissed her hands, and took a box of chocolates handed her
by Mrs. Gale. She then reached out from the curtains and took a
small stool standing close by with sheets of paper and a pencil
on it (left so in case the alleged “ spirits ” should wish to write
messages). As she placed the stool before her the pencil fell off, and
Mr. Henry immediately asked, “ May I get the pencil for you, Cissie?”
and, leaving his seat, stooping low down, went over to the form, and,
grasping its arm, (called out, “ Light up !” This was a pre-arranged
signal to me, and I immediately struck three matches and held them
together above my head.
By the light thus afforded— fully sufficient for the purpose —I saw
Mrs. Mellon kneeling on the floor in front of the curtains, and Mr.
Henry standing over her holding her arm. I could not see Mrs.
Mellon’s face, because she was hiding it by holding it towards the
curtains and very close to the ground ; but I saw distinctly her light-
blue dress, and that she was enveloped around the upper part of her
body in white muslin or some such material.
My matches were then blown out by one of those pi’esent, and I
struck another, which was also blown out. I then endeavored to light
a gas jet directly over Mr. Henry’s head, but could not turn the
tap, and so went back into the further section of the room and lit two
jets there. All this occurred in a very few seconds. I returned to
the scene of action, and saw that Mrs. Mellon was not then covered
by the white drapery ; that the white drapery had disappeared ; that
Mr. Henry was still holding Mrs. Mellon in much the same position,
and that Mrs. Mellon’s shoes and stockings were lying on the floor,
also a dark shawl and a small black-stuff bag. These are the only
articles that came directly under my observation, but I was not nearly
so well situated as others for seeing details, as I was engaged, against
obstruction from one or two of the sittei’s, in attempting to establish
a light.
Directly Mr. Henry made his seizure, Mr. Mellon tuimed out the
low light at the back of the circle, and rushed forward at Mr. Henry
in an attempt to free Mrs. Mellon from his grasp.
(Here follows the usual form of statutory declaration, signed in
the presence of Mr. A. Sinclair, J.P., October 23.)
(Signed) C. L. Wallis.
Bridge-street, Sydney, N.S.W.


Mr. T. S. Henry.
Dear Sir, —At your request I now forward you a brief record of
my recollection of certain occurrences at the “ materialisation ” seance
held last evening (Friday), at the residence of Mrs. Mellon, Waverley-
road, Sydney. By way of preface, let me say that being on a short
visit to this city, I lately wrote to Mrs. Mellon, enclosing a card of
introduction to her from a mutual friend—a prominent and widely-
respected Melbourne spiritualist —and soliciting the favour of a
“ sitting ” for myself and my wife. After some correspondence, Mrs.
Mellon replied on the 10th instant, acquiescing, and appointing Friday
evening at 8 o’clock. Shortly after the hour named Mrs. Wilton and
I arrived at the medium’s house in Waverley-road. There were several
ladies and gentlemen present, all strangers to us, and we were placed
by Mrs. Mellon in the front row of the circle. After a few prelimin-
aries, Mrs. Mellon having entered the cabinet, and the gas-light having
been turned very low, the seance commenced. I need not now dwell
upon the familiar early features of the meeting—the appearance at
different times (not simultaneously), and whilst the medium was sup-
posed to be within the cabinet, of sundry figures draped in white,
alleged by some of the sitters to be “‘Elsie,” “Josephine,” &c., but
will pass on to what was the event of the evening,
A small form, childlike in stature, and dressed in white garments,
emerged from the cabinet. It made a noise such as that produced by
smacking the lips together, and was greeted as “ Cissie ” by several
persons present
A lady present spoke to it, and said she had some chocolates for
“ Cissie,” who then appeared to walk in the direction of the lady and
received a box of sweets. This she shook vigorously, as if pleased,
and continued the smacking noise. One sitter asked “ Cissie ”to give
the medium a chocolate; another (I think yourself) said, “Won’t you
give me a chocolate, ‘ Cissie V Come and give me one.” Just about
this time there was a sound near the “form” as of several lollies being
let fall on the floor, and then came other noises like that of someone
stumbling or striking against the leg of a table or chair in the vicinity
of the “ cabinet.” i heard a sitter near me say, “There’s something
wrong!” Then a man’s voice (your own) called out, “ Turn up the
light.” Several matches were at once ignited, but it seemed some
seconds before anything like a good light was obtained. By this time
the commotion had increased ; men and women were standing up, and
a struggle was going on near the “cabinet.” As soon as I could catch
a glimpse of the centre of commotion, I observed a form almost
kneeling upon the floor a few feet from the “cabinet,” and grasped by
you. Over the face of that form was a black object like a mask—
perhaps a piece of black cloth bound closely round the face. I caught
sight also of some flowing white drapery, like muslin, about the body,
and I noticed that the figure was not that of a child.
The gas now was burning brightly, and I saw on the floor of the
room a pair of black stockings, a pair of lady’s shoes, a small black
bag, and some flowers, apparently artificial. These articles were


shown by one of the company, who said they had just been found
inside the “ cabinet.”
Of the remainder of the proceedings in this sorry affair I need
say nothing. That you had any intention of seizing the medium, or
the “ materialised forms,” I had not the slightest suspicion, and great
was my surprise at the sudden disturbance.
I am, dear sir, faithfully yours,
(Signed) Wyn. J. E. Wilton.
Petty’s Hotel, Sydney, October 13, 1894.
Mr. T. S. Henry.
Dear Sir, —I can corroborate the principal statements in Mr.
Wilton’s letter referring to Mrs. Mellon’s seance last night, merely
adding that although I did not notice the face of the “ form ” that
was struggling on the floor in your grasp, still I distinctly saw that
the figure was that of a woman, ami was elaborately draped in white
muslin. —Yours sincerely, (Signed) L. Wilton.
STATEMENT BY MISS ST. HILL.
After a little while the little black girl, known as “ Oissie,”
appeared at the curtain. She did not come out into the room, but
some of the sitters went to her with chocolates, which she ate. She
gave some to Mr. Rumble. She then went to a stool where some paper
and a pencil were. On dropping the pencil Mr. Henry went forward
i,o pick it up.
The next thing I heard was “ Light up! ” Someone struck
matches, and [ distinctly saw Mr. Henry holding Mrs. Mellon on her
knees, still wrapped in the white drapery, which was supposed to be
Cissie’s.” She had a black mask on her face, and was struggling,
drawing the white drapery off, which showed her blue gown beneath.
She seemed to be crying,
Mr. Mellon, who was seated behind, put out the gas and rushed
forward. Mr. Wallis came out and lit the gas, and when I turned
again Mr. Henry was still holding Mrs. Mellon, while several were
trying to draw him away. She drew her dress over her head and got
back behind the cabinet.
I passed up and saw Mr. Roydhouse with what seemed to me to
be a beard. He had picked it up off the floor in the cabinet, and
while looking at it it was dragged quickly out of his hand by someone.
I then took Mrs. Gale upstairs, and when I returned saw Mrs.
Mellon’s shoes and stockings, which were afterwards put on her. Her
sleeves were drawn up above the elbows, and she seemed much
distressed. In the cabinet some black drapery was lying, what
seemed artificial flowers (though they may have been real), a woollen
cap, and outside was lying a black bag,
I should have said that, as in the case of all the other seances, the
light was very dim, and the faces of what are called the spirit forms
•could not possibly be distinguished.


This is an accurate and truthful account of what I saw.
(Signed) Mary Alexia St. Hill.
330 Victoria-street, Darlinghurst, Sydney. Sunday, October 14,
1894.
Mr. N. Joubert states that when the light was struck he saw the
medium in a half-kneeling position on the floor in the grasp of Mr.
Henry, and went over to her assistance. He saw some drapery around
Mrs. Mellon, but did not see the articles described in the previous
tatements.
Mr. Roydhouse, Editor of the Sunday Times, says ;—“ It was my
first materialisation seance. The forms spoken of as “the black man,”
“Josehine,” and “Mrs Mac Taggart,” had appeared as described in
the account of the Sunday Timed special, given above, when the event
occurred which broke up the seance. When the form spoken of as
“ Cissie” appeared, it advanced to the circle upon being spoken to by
a lady, who said she had some chocolates for it. “ Cissie,” who seemed
to be between three and four feet high, with, what appeared in the
dim light, a black patch for a face, was making a noise (even before
she obtained a chocolate) like smacking her lips. A gentleman in the
circle (front row) asked for a chocolate, and leant forward to get it.
The chocolate was seemingly tendered, and was heard to drop on the
floor.
“ Then Mr. Henry, who was sitting in front of me, left his chair
and went towards “ Cissie,” asking, as I understood, for a chocolate.
“Cissie” was in the meantime scribbling with a pencil on some paper
left for the purpose. The next moment a cry was heard, a scuffling
noise, and Mr. Henry’s voice requesting a light. The gas, which had
been turned low, was now turned right out apparently, for complete
darkness reigned. Mr. Henry continued to ask for a light, and Mr.
Rumble and Mr. Mellon to say “ No.” I had no idea that a seizure
had been made. The impression on ray mind was that the medium
had been taken ill, and Mr. Henry, as a particular friend, had gone to
her assistance. Matches were struck, but went out again almost im-
mediately, and the confusion became greater. Eventually the liuht
was turned on, and Mr. Henry was seen to be holding the medium
almost in the centre of the vacant space between the first row of
sitters and the “cabinet.”
“ Mr. Henry, upon noticing me, requested that I should “see for
myself,” and then, of course, I divined what was happening. I noticed
that the medium had some white drapery about the lower part of her
figure, and one leg was bare—shoe and stocking absent. Both legs
might have been bare, but I can only be positive in my statement as
to one. While Mr. Henry was still holding her I was looking behind
the curtain of the cabinet —the curtain having been partly drawn
and saw some articles lying on the floor. There were, among other
things, a slipper, some small articles of black or dark material, a black
mask, and a pair of false whiskers. After looking at these, I went
behind the curtains and picked up the false whiskers. I was holding


them by one prong when the medium came in and seized them by the
other half, and pulled. I sought to retain them, and then allowed
them to go. One cannot wrestle with a woman. The medium then
gathered up some of the articles behind the curtains and sat on them,
remaining in the “cabinet.” A lady drew the curtains to screen the
medium, and it was not unnaturally suggested that the very exciting
and sensational scene should be brought to a close by the retirement
of the visitors.
“ Before going, however, the medium’s husband volunteered to give
a test seance under any conditions I would name, when he would
undertake to prove beyond question that the medium would do all
that was claimed. This was agreed to. It may be mentioned that, in
reply to a question, I stated before the whole company what I had
personally seen behind the curtain. Someone asked, “ Where are the
mask and whiskers now?” I answered them that I could not search
the medium. I inquired, however, if the medium would furnish any
explanation of the strange proceedings, but was told that she was
suffering from shock, and could not do so that evening.
“ I have merely stated the plain facts in the foregoing, without
comment or deduction.”
Mr. Kid gill states :
“Mr. Henry then again called out “ Strike a light,” upon which
several matches were struck, and the medium was seen upon her knees
almost in the middle of the space between the “ cabinet” and the
sitters, in Mr. Henry’s grasp, and with some white drapery partially
around her. The light then went out, but more matches were struck,
and the gas eventually lighted, when I noticed Mrs. Mellon, still held
by Mr. Henry, and near her oq the floor was a fancy slipper and some
other small articles, including something like a piece of black silk, but
they were removed by someone too quickly for me to see what they
were.
“In the meantime, Mr. Roydhouse had gone to the “cabinet,”
and, in reply to a question by Mr. Henry, stated that he had seen a
black mask and false whiskers, and had hold of the latter. A pair of
lady's stockings were also pointed out on a side table.”
The exposure was complete and irrefutable, and my unexpected
coup had taken everybody, except Mr. Wallis, by surprise. Mr.
Mellon’s action in so promptly turning out the gas, and rushing at me,
showed cleaidy that he knew more than he professed. WTien we
retired to the front room the medium was surrounded in the “ cabinet”
by two or three lady spiritualists present, who drew the curtains and
assisted her to dress. Meanwhile a discussion took place in the front
room, and some of the spiritualistic gentlemen said that it was a pity
this had taken place, but that they had seen genuine phenomena on
other occasions.
Compare this with their subsequent attitude. Mr. Mellon de
dared over and over again that nobody was more surprised than he


and that he had known her for twenty-five years; implying a complete
admission of the fraud on this> occasion. He asked what we intended
to do, and begged that nothing would be said, and that his wife
would promise to give us satisfactory proof of her materialising power
in a week’s time We consented to say nothing of the matter until
the following Wednesday, on which date he promised, at her sug-
gestion, that a satisfactory test should be given at the offices of the
Sunday Times newspaper, the arrangement of details being left to
Mr. Roydhouse and myself^
Mrs. Mellon also stated emphatically, in answer to a request for
some explanation of her conduct, that she was entranced the whole
time, and remembered nothing of what occurred.
Compare this statement (which was noted by a number of wit-
nesses present) with her excuses and explanations further on.
It may and has been asked, why none of the properties, such as
the mask, false beard, or drapery, were retained by myself and others.
Now, in the first place, my hands were not at liberty to enable me to
catch any of these articles. I was engaged in holding the medium
with one hand, while with the other I had to protect myself from her
husband and three or four spiritualists who assaulted me. The
medium had one hand free, with which she quickly tore off the mask
and drapery, and secreted them under her petticoats. Certainly,
some of the other witnesses might have secured some of these articles,
but they were all so taken by surprise that they did not render me
the assistance which I expected. Mr. Wallis was fully engaged in
trying to light the gas, in the face of persistent opposition. The
whole affair was witnessed by so many persons, however, that further
proof was not necessary; and even had these articles been retained
and produced before the public, I have no doubt that I and others
would have been accused of bringing them there ourselves. This
very accusation was made in the case of the alleged exposure of
Hackett, which I shall refer to later on.
On the following Monday, Messrs. Wallis, Joubert, Roydhouse,
and myself met in consultation at the office of Mr. Roydhouse, and
the following conditions for the proposed test were formulated and
agreed to, and afterwards submitted and agreed to by Mr. Mellon,
acting on behalf of Mrs. Mellon :
Conditions :
“ 1. That the medium should permit herself to be searched im-
mediately prior to the seance by two lady searchers, one of whom to be
nominated by Mrs. Mellon, and the other by the Editor of the
Sunday Times.
“ 2. That the medium should be placed in a wire-netting cage,
the door of which was to be locked and sealed.
“ 3. That should a materialised form appear two persons to be
named at the seance should encircle it by joining hands whilst it de-
materialised.
“ 4. That a spirit form should be requested to draw the curtain
in front of the cage showing the medium, or in the event of the form


being unable to do so, that the curtain should be drawn by means of
cords retained in the hands of two of the sitters.
“ 5. That no light should be displayed except by the person in
charge of the gas during the appearance of any form • but that there
should be sufficient light when the curtains were withdrawn to plainly
see the medium in the cage.”
On Wednesday October 17th, we met as arranged at the “Sunday
Times ” offices, and the following extract from the issue of that paper
for October 21st, 1894, fully describes the proceedings :
“In accordance with the above, the proprietors of the Sunday Times
had a cage specially constructed, about three feet square and six feet
in height, and made of timber and wire-netting, fitted with a door, a
patent padlock, and two wooden buttons. This cage was placed in a
corner of the room chosen for the seance, and in front of it hung a
pair of heavy curtains, to be manipulated by cords. A professional
searcher was also engaged to act in conjunction with the searcher
nominated by Mr. Mellon.
“A gas jet on the opposite side of the room was fitted with an
orange-tinted shade, that being the colour of the light said to be most
favourable to the development of the phenomena.
“ At eight o’clock the following persons were present:—Messrs.
J. B. Mellon, E. Rumble, N. Joubert, A. G. Edwards, Etherington,
T. S. Henry, C. L. Wallis, H. M. Evans, H. Paterson, Zollner,
Roydhouse, and Kidgell, Drs. MacCarthy and Pickburn, Mrs.
Edwards, Mrs. Gale, Mrs. Amelia Smith (N.Z.), Mrs. Eves, Miss
Elverstone, and Miss St Hill.
“ The medium having submitted herself to a thorough search, and
the ladies appointed to that duty having reported that she had no
“ properties ” of any description upon her person, the lady nominated by
Mr. Mellon at the same time protesting against the thoroughness of
the operation, which she considered an unnecessary indignity. Mrs.
Mellon then entered the cage and seated herself in a chair placed
therein.
“ The position of the sitters was settled by mutual arrangement.
Dr. MacCarthy and Mr. Paterson, were appointed to encircle the
figure (should one appear), and Mr. Mellon was given control of the
light.
“ The door of the cage was locked and sealed, the key given into
the possession of Mr. H. M. Evans, and the curtains drawn in front
of the cage. The gas was turned down, and the company commenced
to sing (Dr. MacCarthy accompanying on his auto-harp) the beautiful
poem by Mrs. Beecher Stowe.
“ After several other airs had been sung, Mrs. Mellon called from
the cage that the light was too strong, and it was therefore turned
very low. Singing was then resumed, and soon after, or about half-
an-hour from the time the medium had entered the cage, three smart
raps were heard. Questions were asked whether the light was too
high or too low, both of which were answered in the negative. A
resort was then had to the alphabet, and the letters ‘q ’ and ‘u ’


were spelled out. In reply to an enquiry if the word was ‘ quick,’
affirmative raps were given, and at first it was thought it referred to
the music, but someone asked if it meant to go to the medium, when
the rapping again indicated an affirmative Dr. MacCarthy at once
drew aside the curtains and had the light turned up, when the
medium was seen in an apparently prostrate condition. The door
was at once opened, and Drs. MacCarthy and Pick burn went in and
reported that Mrs. Mellon had faintad.
“ She was taken out and restoratives supplied, but it was very
evident that her condition precluded the possibility of the continuance
of the seance that evening, and the room was speedily vacated by all
but the invalid and those in attendance upon her.”
The whole thing was a miserable fiasco , a piece of audacious
bluff” to gain time, and resulted Just as I and others expected.
Before we dispersed an attempt was made by Mr. Mellon, and others
on his behalf, to induce the editor of the Sunday Times and other
witnesses to say nothing, and personal insults and accusations were
addressed to myself. These I passed over with complete indifference.
My friends felt that it was not a personal matter, and that in the
public interest the fullest publicity should be given to the whole pro-
ceedings. The Sunday Times reported the affair in full. Newspaper
interviews, letters, and statements on both sides filled the newspapers
of Sydney and Melbourne for the succeeding week, and in the more
distant colonies and cities of Australia the public journals also took
the matter up, showing the widespread public interest evoked.
The newspapers and public opinion unanimously supported my
action, and I received numerous private letters and expressions of
approval and sympathy. The Melbourne Psychical Research Society
at once took the matter in hand, and a request was made to show
cause why Mrs. Mellon should not be removed from membership of
this society. Great surpriee and disgust were caused to me at this
time by the unlooked-for and unjust attitude of one for whom I had
had a long personal friendship, and for whose sake, as much as from
my own endeavor to reach the truth, I had undertaken this most un-
pleasant duty. Under the influence of ill-advisers, he made this the
ground for a bitter personal feeling against myself, and allowed me
to be unjustly attacked through the columns of the Daily Tehgrvph
by certain sycophantic followers. I forgive all this, and will not
make it more difficult for him to make the amende honorable , which
I feel sure will come in time.
Mrs. Mellon also published a statement in explanation of her
case, which statement caused a good deal of mirthful comment from
the comic journals. No doubt it was accepted as a thoroughly satis-
factory explanation by a great many credulous Spiritualists ; but even
the more intelligent Spiritualists must consider it an insult to their
intelligence. The fact that no money was paid on this particular
occasion has alone saved her from legal proceedings. These are her
explanations :


“ I was in my normal state during the Avhole of the stance on the
12 th instant; that is, I was not in a state of trance, as I sometimes
am, during the materialisation of spirit forms, and was quite aware of
what was going on.
“ The next thing I was aware of was Mr. Henry holding my left
wrist, and I saw I was completely enveloped in drapery. The drapery
soon dematerialised, and was seen to dissolve in a kind of steam by
Mrs. Gale and one of the gentlemen present.
“At a subsequent private seance, I enquired of ‘ Cissie 7 how it
all came about, and she tells me that there was a very inhar-
monious feeling at the meeting, and she and her friends felt that
something was going to happen. They therefore thought it better not
to entrance me that evening, because it would have been much more
dangerous to me had I been in an abnormal condition. So, whilst in
my normal state, they drew only from the lower part of my body,
principally from my legs—in fact, at one time I felt as though I had
no legs at all ; they were rendered very small and shrunken, and that
is how 1 t-xplain my shoes and stockings coming off.”
Now, one would naturally ask why, if she “ was quite aware of
what was going on,” it should be necessary to enquire of “ Cissie ” at
a subsequent private seance 1 A little more dust cast in the eyes of
her still faithful followers! The explanation of the shoes and
stockings falling off is really too laughable. Can it be possible that
any Spiritualist even can “ swallow ” that ?
The charge of fraud upon this occasion did not rest upon my
testimony alone. Miss St, Hill, Mr. Roydhouse and myself saw the
false beard, and saw Mr. Roydhouse pick it up and handle it; while
they, and four more witnesses, saw the drapery and other articles, and
have thus stated.
Here, then, are seven witnesses of undisputed integrity and
intelligence. The impartiality of these witnesses is beyond dispute.
They had all been invited by Mrs. Mellon herself, and considered
respectable and credible persons by herself, and had no exposure taken
place would probably have been asked, as on other occasions, to allow
their names to appear in support of the genuineness of these
“ materialisations.”
Although none of them are Spiritualists, they are earnest and
thoroughly impartial investigators, and have been and are willing to
testify to anything that is proved to their satisfaction. Therefore, the
assumption of bias cannot be brought against these witnesses.
Again, the assumption of collusion will not hold. Mr. and Mrs.
Wilton I had never seen before in my life, and had no conversation
with them until after the occurrence. Mr. Roydhouse and Miss St
Hill were also ignorant of my intentions and had no previous conver-
sation with me. Mr. Wallis Avas the only person present aAvare of my
intended action. On the other side, there is the statement of five
witnesses, Mrs. Gale, Mr. Joubert, Mr. Rumble, Mr. Etherington, and
a doctor of philosophy (Avho has not thought fit to publish his name),
who contradict the other Avitnesses as to the articles above mentioned,.


although some of them—Mr. Joubert, notably—admit seeing the white
drapery round Mrs. Mellon, getting over that by the excuse that it
was whisked off supernaturally, and melted.
Whether that excuse is within reason, must be left to the public
to judge.
All these, with the exception of the doctor of philosphy, are
professed and ardent spiritualists, and without inferring anything
against spiritualism or its followers, these five persons cannot be said
to be unbiassed witnesses.
Now the evidence of these five persons is only negative evidence
after all, and, as negative evidence, is worthless as against the positive
evidence of other witnesses. The negative evidence of any number of
persons can not carry the same weight as the positive evidence of seven
other persons. “ There are none so blind as those who will not see,” and
“ for the sake of their cause,” these spiritualists no doubt preferred to
shut their eyes to what was plain to everybody who cared to look.
Anonymous statements by a doctor of philosophy, however high
his position in the educational world, can not weigh much against the
evidence of witnessess who have the courage to append their names.
The value of this gentleman’s testimony and his capabilities for clear
judgement, may be gauged by the fact that up to that time he had only
witnessed two materialisation seances ; the first being the historic
occasion on which Mrs. Besant attended, and the second the notable
night of the exposure. His behaviour on the first occasion was so
remarkably emotional that both Mrs. Besant and Dr. M found it
necessary to reassure him. (See Chapter I )
This was hai’dly the attitude one would expect from a doctor of
philosophy commencing investigations, and savoured more of an
emotional temperament predisposed to belief in the supernatural.
For any man to be convinced by any one seance such as that, of
the spiritual origin of the “phenomena,” shows clearly an emotional
and biased mind.
An analysis of the case, therefore, amounted to this: That out of
the eighteen persons present besides the medium, seven persons, all
credible and unbiased witnesses, testified to the facts, as stated above.
Five persons strongly biased denied it! Mr. Mellon and his daughter,
from natural bias, if nothing else, cannot be accepted as witnesses. The
remaining four persons, all spiritualists, preferred to remain neutral.
The attitude of these four persons was significant. The public verdict
was plain, and this evidence quite sufficient to prove the charge, but
it remained for spiritualists themelves to supply still more crowning
testimony to these facts.
A good deal of comment was caused by the attitude of those four
persons who maintained silence. Of these four, Mrs. Smith, of New
Zealand, prior to her return to that colony, informed the editor of the
Sunday Times that she was not satisfied. Miss Elverstone, it is be-
lieved, was not in a position to see what occurred. INIr. and Mrs. A.
G. Edwards, of Darling Point, were the remaining two.


The last-named lady is President of the Sydney Association of
Spiritualists, which official position renders her testimony of great
importance ; and her husband also is a prominent Spiritualist. In
the Sunday Times of Nov. 4, 1894, the following statements of her’s
appeared.
Statement of Mrs. Caroline Amelia Edwards, of Gladys House,
Yarnabbie-road, Sydney:—
“ Having preserved silence thus far upon the late expose at Mrs.
Mellon’s house, chiefly from motives of sincerest sympathy with that
lady in the humiliating and degrading position, as a woman, into
which she was thrown. . . . Pitying her as I still do, and did.
determined me to take the neutral part I have hitherto maintained,
and leave her to rise or fall on the success or otherwise of her test
seances. But circumstances have arisen which compel me, for justice
sake, to make my statement of facts to you and the public. . .
Common justice and truth demand that I now make a statement of
facts that I have hitherto held back I further desire
to point out that the explanation of such facts as I adduce is not to
be explained away by the usual feeble hypnotic suggestions. .
“At the seance at Mrs. Mellon’s residence on October 12th, I
was seated in the front row, between Mr. Henry and the foreign gen-
tleman, who wishes his name withheld. When the supposed spirit
form of Mrs. McTaggart appeared, I (having been a dear friend of
that lady in her lifetime) asked if I could speak to the form, when it
immediately and rapidly went back behind the curtains.
“When ‘Josephine’ appeared, whom I had always suspected to
be Mrs. Mellon herself, the form stooped to take the flowers, with a
motion which I recognised as distinctly characteristic of Mrs. Mellon.
“ When the form of ‘ Cissie ’ was seized by Mr. Henry, I heard
the exclamation made, and saw him seize the figure. I was by his
side in an instant, and on the first match being lighted I distinctly
saw a mask, or what looked like one —at any rate, some black covering
—on the lower part of Mrs. Mellon’s face. I saw her forehead and
part of the fringe of her hair above it; I also saw white" drapery over
her head and right shoulder, but the arm and shoulder which was held
by Mr. Henry were covered by the blue dress, Which I saw at the
same moment.
“The scuffle which ensued has been accurately described in the
Sunday Times, whose report of the whole affair was true and accurate
in every particular. Immediately on Mrs. Mellon retiring to the
cabinet I followed, but did not go with her. I found her in a
squatting position, not lying on the floor. I knelt down by the side
of her, and took her hands in mine.
“ Sticking up from the bosom of her dress, which was of Y
shape, I saw a lump of coarse, dark hair, the portion visible being
fully inch one way and nearly an inch longer the other. I pushed
it down her bosom, distinctly feeling it to be hair. I was so horrified
at the time at the prospect of exposure, and the fear that she might
be searched, that on the spur of the moment I said, “Give me any


thing you have to hide,” in reply to which she said, “No, no, I have
nothingbut at my suggestion she pinned the front of her dress
higher. *Mrs. Mellon at that time seemed perfectly cool and collected.
“ Mrs. Smith, of New Zealand, then came into the cabinet, and
assisted me in putting on Mrs. Mellon’s upper petticoat and skirt,
which were off, but put on the dress skirt wrong side out, and so had
to reverse it, which, of course, took more time, Mrs. Mellon remaining
squatting in a painful position all the time this was being done.
“ Mrs. Gale subsequently came in and knelt on the other side of
Mrs. Mellon, who was still in the same painful position, which she
continued in despite of Mrs. Gale and I beseeching her to change it,
until eventually, at Mrs. Mellon’s request, Mrs. Gale left her and me
alone after all the visitors had left.
“ When alone, Mrs. Mellon allowed me to assist her to rise. She
then stooped, and, raising her petticoats slightly in front, she drew
something from the back, and fastened whatever it was under the
skirt with two or three pins. She then put her shoes and stockings
on, and left the cabinet. I wished her ‘ Good night,’ and came away.
“On the afternoon of the day when the test seance was to be
held at the Sunday Times office, I called on Mrs. Mellon. She asked
me to help her. I asked her in what way, and she said, ‘ Oh, you
know ; one medium can always help another.’ I said I could not help
her, and she then said, ‘ Then lam lost ! I shall fail to-night!’ ”
She did fail, as we have seen, and after ample time and oppor-
tunity for the production of phenomena had been allowed her.
One cannot help sympathising with Mrs. Edwards, seeing the
painful position in which she was placed; and she must be congratu-
lated in having come forward fearlessly at the call of honor and of
common justice.


CHAPTER VII.
The So-called “Tests” Criticised. Local Opinions Discussed.
A prominent member of the Melbourne Psychical Research Society,
in summing up the case, expressed himself as follows : —“ That Mrs.
Mellon was guilty of fraud on that occasion I have now no doubt, and the
only question that crops up is, has she been defrauding and fooling the
public all these years ?” That is exactly the question the public is asking,
and the one that I am now about to discuss.
I have fully and faithfully described the so-called “tests ” which took
place early in the present year, and have also described two typical ortho-
dox seances witli Mrs. Mellon, which were not “ tests.” I was present at
all these occurrences and on numerous other occasions, of which I have
kept records, which want of space prevents my publishing here ; and I
say, without hesitation, that I have seen absolutely nothing produced by
this medium which differed in any material respect from the so-called
phenomena to which we were treated on the night of the exposure. I
have also had numerous private sittings with this medium and Dr. M
only, and without a cabinet. Although there has been every requisite con-
dition and every opportunity for the production of materialisation or other
phenomena on these occasions, nothing whatever has occurred, after sitting
for many hours. The so-called “ tests ” were unworthy of the name. My
own course of observation resulted in a long list of evidence showing
grave suspicion, borne out by the observations of others. I am, therefore,
forced to tbe conclusion that on every occasion on which I have been
present, all that I have seen has been the result of common trickery.
I have seen absolutely nothing occur at any time through this medium
that I could not do myself under the same conditions and with a little
practice.
With the exception of numerous Spiritualists (whose judgment on
the matter may be questioned), the only individual who comes forward to
uphold the abnormal character of any of the occurrences which I have
witnessed is a certain medical gentleman in Sydney. One point that he
lays great stress upon is, the assertion that he sounded “ Geordie’s ” heart-
beats upon one occasion, and is positive that “ Geordie’s ” client was not
that of a woman, and that the female mammse were absent. Now, with all
due deference to his professional status, his unsuspecting character renders
him easily duped, and I may be pardoned if I refuse to accept his unsup-
ported evidence, knowing that he has been equally positive over a former
matter in which he was proved to have been wrong. I observed the whole
proceedings carefully, and believe that his opportunities for examining the
chest (through the clothing) were not such as to warrant so decided an
opinion, and his attitude on this as on other occasions was that of a


“ reverent believer,” rather than of a sceptical expert. And so, when he
says that he has “witnessed the entranced sensitive, Mrs. Mellon, of
Sydney, considerably reduced in size from the material evolved in the
materialising process,” and on other occasions “ seen, touched, and spoken
to the medium and form together,” I must regretfully admit that I believe
that he has been easily duped, and has allowed his sentiments to obscure
his judgment. When he says that the “ form ” was outside the curtains,
and showed him the entranced sensitive reduced in size, as above, he was
trusting to his eyesight only, and that in almost darkness. He did not
touch the sensitive on this occasion, nor otherwise assure himself that he
was really looking at her, and not merely at her outer clothing propped up
upon the chair to represent herself. And so also with regard to touching
the medium and form upon another occasion. He had nothing to prove
that the medium’s right hand did not represent herself, while her left hand
represented “ Geordie’s ” hand. This I suspect to have been the case on
the occasion of Mrs. Besant attempting to shake hands with both Mrs.
Mellon and “ Geordie ” at that memorable stance, already described,
when “ Geordie” and the medium were on view outside the curtains
together, with only one hand each, and even then these two hands not seen
simultaneously. I have seen this particular performance frequently. These
points may therefore be dismissed as unworthy to be considered evidence.
So much for all the seances with this medium that I have seen myself, and
upon which I give my opinion without hesitation.
Now, of the earlier stances in Australia whjch I did not attend, I
have before me complete and authentic records, with the exception of
perhaps two or three ; and I have also interrogated several reliable wit-
nesses to these occurrences. All this evidence, both documentary and
from these witnesses, clearly proves that none of these earlier seances differed
in any respect from those that I have witnessed myself, and on this evidence
I believe the phenomena then observed, to have been produced in the same
manner.
Now, one or two of these seances have been quoted in the newspapers
by Spiritualists as showing strong evidence in favour of their assumption,
•of genuineness—the moonlight seance at Hunter’s Hill notably. Several
witnesses have stated to me positively that this performance differed in no
way from the others, and was open to the same grave suspicions. Again,
there is a letter from another Spiritxialist—Mr. A. R. Rose-Soley—pub-
lished in the Daily Telegraph , Oct. 22nd, 1894. In defence of Mrs.
Mellon he describes a seance which took place at his cottage, Balmain,
Sydney, about the end of the year 1892. Without going into the evidence
of other witnesses to the occasion, his own letter, published as above, is
quite sufficient evidence for my purpose. There was no searching, tying,
-or sealing of any sort ; and yet he talks of this being “ under test con-
ditions ” and “ imposture being impossible,” and in the same breath goes
on to describe how the medium was confined behind copper wires stretched
across from wall to wall behind the curtains, “ the space between the wire
lines being only large enough to admit the passage of au arm.” That is
quite sufficient ; and out of his own words he stands convicted of blind,
unreasoning credulity. It was just that “ passage of the arm ” —holding


and dangling the mask and drapery to represent “ Cissie ” —which we may
reasonably assume produced this, the only one, “ manifestation ” obtained
outside those wires, throughout that and several other sittings.
Many unsuspecting people lay much stress on the “ de-materialising ,T
or apparent melting away of the “ forms ” down to a little spot upon the
floor. Mrs. Besant herself seems to think that this one point proved the
genuineness of tire only one such seance which she has seen. This is a
simple artifice, when understood, which I shall explain further on, and here
recommend to the perusal of Mrs. Besant and others, the proceedings of
the London Society for Psychical Research, 1886-87, vol. iv., page 61. I
myself and others (before I had gone so deeply into the evidence) felt
rather impressed by this point, and I must give Mrs. Mellon the credit for
having worked it very cleverly.
The following words of Mr. Percy Wakefield, of Bondi, Sydney, a
reliable witness, are strong additional testimony. Speaking of Mrs.
Mellon’s arrival in Australia, he says : —“A w T eek or two elapsed, and I
was informed that Mrs. Mellon was about to hold a series of seances at
the rooms of the Psychological Research Society in Pitt Street. The
series was to consist of four seances, and a charge of £2 was made for
admission to the series. I attended the first series, and not being satisfied
with the result, paid another £2 in the hope of witnessing something more
convincing during the next series. I had seen nothing but what could
have been done with the aid of a few masks and a little drapery, and inas-
much as the room was much darkened on all occasions, and we were
expected to watch the phenomena with clasped hands—being warned on
no account to break the circle—l was by no means sure that masks and
drapery were not employed. During the second series—in one sense —I
was much better satisfied —that is to say, I was satisfied that the pheno-
mena were the result of no abnormal power. ,
I should probably have carried my investigations further, however, had
not a “ scene ” occurred at the concluding seance, when Mr. W. J. Allen r
who had been present at them all, openly expressed the opinion that he
had seen nothing but what he could do himself with the assistance of a few
stage properties. Upon hearing this, Mrs. Mellon, who usually remained
behind the curtains in an apparent state of trance for some time
after the seance was over, stepped out into the room in a
perfectly normal condition, observing that if Mr. Allen was
going into the cabinet —which he certainly showed no inclination
to do—she thought that she had better come out. So poor an
excuse for a sudden recovery from a state of trance, which usually lasted a
considerable time, weighed with me a good deal ; and, altogether with the
fact that from first to last nothing had transpired but what was capable of
a very simple and commonplace explanation, led me to make up my mind
that the thing was not worth while troubling any more about.”
Mr. C. L. Wallis, who has attended nearly every one of Mrs.
Mellon’s stances since her arrival in Australia, and kept fully-written
records of each, also gives valuable evidence. These are some extracts
from letters written by him to the Melbourne Psychical Research Society :
—“ Nothing whatever in the shape of an abnormal or occult appearance


was to be seen when I struck the light, and the ‘ properties ’ found are a
full and perfect explanation of the way in which the manifestations were
produced. So far as I could discern, this seance was not different in any
fundamental respect from many others that I have witnessed with Mrs.
Mellon as medium.” And, referring to the so-called “tests,” already
described in full, he says : —“ I was present at all these seances, and say
most decidedly that no ‘ tests ’ worthy of the name were applied, and that
there were loopholes for fraud in all directions. . . . The form caught
by Mr. Henry was Mrs. Mellon. She did not fall off her chair, but was
on her knees when he caught her. The white covering of her
shoulders was commonplace earthly muslin, and I stand aghast before the
one hysterical gentleman who saw it ‘ disappear like steam,’ and before
Mrs. Mellon’s statement that it ‘ faded and dissolved.’ Regarding the
attenuated legs, I merely remark that at least two gentlemen in the room
had ocular demonstration to the contrary.” Writing of his view of
“ Geordie ” through the mirror, he says : —“ I would not have missed
such an opportunity for £IOO ; it was the most satisfactory test I ever
had—a test, not, however of the genuineness of the medium, but of her
fraudulent practices. Had I not seen ‘ Geordie ’ walk out into the room
at other seances, I should have denounced the thing then and there. I
know now that ‘ Geordie’ has a dual personality, and when he stands for
his photo, is a ‘ dummy ;’ when he walks and talks, his existence and Mrs.
Mellon’s are convertible terms. Mrs. Mellon’s statement that she has not
taken money is directly untrue. When she held her first public geance
here she charged 10s. per sitting, and I paid £4 for eight seances. My
partners, Messrs. Winchcombe and Carson, paid £2 each for four seances ;
and I could readily mention ten or twelve people who paid the same fee.
She has received numerous and valuable presents, and altogether the
business has paid very well.”
This is very clear evidence as to the origin of all the so-called phe-
nomena produced by this medium since her arrival in Australia, nearly
three years ago.


CHAPTER VIII.
Mrs. Mellon, the Foremost and most Remarkable Materialising
Medium of the World. Her Life Reviewed. Her own
Statements as to Early History of her Materialising Sirits
“ GeORDIE,” “ CISSIE,” ETC., WITH EeTRACTS FROM ACCOUNTS OF
Seances Held by Her in England.
At the outset of this chapter, let me again repeat what I have already
said in my preface to this book, that it is only in the aspect of evidence on
a broad question of widespread interest, that I herein review the life or
doings of any individual, and I again assure such persons that I have
absolutely no personal feeling on the matter, beyond a natural repugnance
to imposture of any kind.
In an article devoted to “ Spiritualism and Spiritualists,” in Mr.
Stead’s publication, entitled “More Ghost Stories,” 1892, the following
passages occur, describing Mr. Stead’s personal research and relating to
Mrs. Mellon:—“ During these investigations, I have made great efforts
to obtain the services of a trustworthy materialising medium who has not
at any time been detected in fraud. There are three or four materialising
mediums who give seances in London ; but, whether from misfortune or
their own fault, their names have all been associated at one time or another
with the production of fraudulent phenomena. lam speaking of what has
been communicated to me by fervent spiritualists, whom I have consulted
in the hope that they might be able to furnish me with the address of a
trustworthy materialising medium. The net result of my inquiries came to
this—that in the whole of the United Kingdom, so far as was known to
the Spiritualist community, there was only one person of undoubted
materialising faculty and undoubted character, who could always secure the
presence of phenomena, and who had never been detected in a trick of any
kind. ... I refer to Mrs. Mellon, late of Kewcastle-on-Tyne.”
This is very negative praise, indeed, and we have already seen the
sequel to it in Australia ; but the fact that spiritualists themselves have
for some time past regarded Mrs. Mellon as the only trustworthy medium
is, in itself, significant ana valuable testimony. It is in this light that I
give Mrs. Mellon her duly accredited place, as “ the foremost and most
remarkable medium of the world,” and proceed to review the history of her
early powers, with the object of eliciting the evidence such history may
throw upon the whole question of “ Materialisation.”
I have by me notes and records of about one hundred of Mrs.
Mellon’s stances, collected by me from various authentic sources and
spread over the last twenty years—a fair average, I consider, on which to
base an opinion as to their general character. These include full records
of the most important occurrences held during that period, and reliable
evidence as to the “ Tests ” undergone before her appearance in Australia.


The following particulars as to her earliest developements as a medium 1
quote from an autograph letter in my possession;—
“My first materialisations took place in the city of Newcastle-on-
Tyne, England, in the year 1872, and at first got only hands and faces,
and my Newcastle friends with me gave me much time and patience-to the
development of this phase of mediumship, hoping that in time we would
ultimately succeed in getting the fully materialised form. We were not
discouraged by repeated failures, hut persistently persevered in our attempts,
until success came in the form of a lady, who was recognised as the sister
of a gentleman present, and whose brother, Mr. H. A. Kersey, is the much
esteemed president of the Newcastle-on-Tyne Spiritual Evidence Society
and beloved conductor of the Children’s Progressive Lyceum—a gentleman
whose earthly life was saved by spirit friends after being given up by the
doctors. So miraculous was the cure, that he vowed from henceforth he
would devote the remaining years of his earth life to promulgating the
glorious truth of spirit return. Needless to say he has kept his word, for
a more indefatigable worker in the cause could not possibly be found.
Josephine, at this time, commenced to materialise, and was very successful,
full accounts of which were published by the late Alderman T. P. Barkas,
F.Gr.S., etc., in the Newcastle-on-Tyne Daily Chronicle and in other pro-
minent papers, and later were re-published in the Northern Daily Leader,
and which accounts caused widespread interest, not only in England and
Scotland hut also in other parts of the world, bringing scientific men from
far and near to witness and test the genuineness of this remarkable phe-
nomena. I may mention the names of two well-known gentlemen, M.
Axakoff and Professor Butteroff, who came from St. Petersburg, Russia,
to attend seances. After this I was visited by other well-known
scientific gentlemen, among whom I may mention F. W. H. Myers, Esq.,
and Professor Sidgwick, of London and Cambridge, for whom I held
seances, some of which were held under strict test conditions. This visit
resulted in my signing an agreement for twelve months to visit London
and Cambridge four times during the year, for the purpose of giving test
seances.
“ Regarding test stances held in Liverpool and other cities in
England, and in Glasgow and Edinburgh, that were so very successful,
although at the time of which I write I was not a fully-developed medium
—far from it, nevertheless, the manifestations were of such a startlingly
wonderful nature as to puzzle the minds of scientific investigators. Many,
some would say, tempting offers of engagements were proposed for me to
visit America, Paris, The Hague, and other parts of the globe, but my
people objected to my leaving England.
1 think it was in 1873 that the spirit known as ‘ Geordie’ came to
me. He was very powerful, and soon learned how best to utilise the
psychic power or force, but was a long time in acquiring the use of his
vocal organs, and, after many attempts to speak, could for some time only
articulate the words ‘Yes’ and ‘No.’ But now he can talk quite fluently.
His talking entirely depends on the strength of power at his disposal.
Sometimes he will pirt most of the power into his voice, when we can only
see his head and bust ; whereas, at another time, he will use the power for


materialising his body, and walk about the room, and, should the power be
very strong he will take a chair, sit down beside us and join in our
conversation.
“ I have the undoubted testimony of hundreds of people who have
seen, recognised, and conversed with their spirit friends in my presence.
“ With the exception of periodical visits to Scotland (where I have
many friends), I was never out of England until I came to sunny Aus-
tralia, nearly three years ago, where I have held some remarkably success-
ful stances, both in Sydney and in Melbourne.”
Naturally—and for very good reasons—the great majority of persons
who witnessed Mrs. Mellon’s exhibitions in Great Britain were spiritualists
—faithful, all-believing followers—who required no tests, accepting all
they saw and heard, and asking for more. A great number of the records
before me of these early seances are written by such witnesses, and have
delighted the readers of spiritualistic journals from time to time.
Now, even presuming these numerous spiritualistic witnesses to be
reliable (a question that I do not here raise), their evidence is merely
negative evidence, as I pointed out before, and goes to prove nothing
either one way or the other. This evidence may be therefore dismissed as
worthless. Such seances may be classed as spiritualistic worship in
distinction to research. The learned Russian professors and others
mentioned in Mrs. Mellon’s foregoing account, were no doubt introduced
to the marvels at these orthodox seances ; there is no record of their
having been allowed to introduce any tests, and no doubt they were placed
under an agreement not to leave their seats to personally investigate.
When these gentlemen wished to institute experiments with this medium,
their tempting offers were declined on plausible excuses. Again, I have
also the records of a number of pseudo-tests, or what profess to have been
“ completely convincing tests ” carried out by a few spiritualists and others
from time to time. On critical examination of this evidence, these “tests”
turn out to be no tests at all, the conditions being so lax that fraud was not
only possible, but probable throughout.
In this category appear accounts of such seances as those held at
Weir’s Court in 1877, at which the wax moulds of “spirit” hands and
feet are reported to have been obtained through the mediumship of Mrs.
Mellon (then Miss Fairlamb) ; also the photographing of “ Geordie’s ”
head at Edinburgh, the resultant portrait of which I have seen, and give
my firm opinion, after long and careful examination of the same, that
“ Geordie’s ” head is none other than Mrs. Mellon’s, with a false beard on
and draped ; and the photographing of “ Cissie ” in 1890, already referred
to and explained. All this is worth no more than the first category of
negative evidence, except, perhaps, as giving greater proof of the cleverness
and capability of the medium. But, on the other hand, all these
spiritualistic records have a distinct and decisive value as evidence in
another way. They show clearly and without doubt, that all these early
seances of Mrs. Mellon’s, right up to the time that she left England, were
of exactly the same character as those we have been treated to in Aus-
tralia ; and that the “ phenomena ” produced then (throughout those many
years), may be justly ascribed to the same origin as what we have most


recently seen. As evidence in this respect, these documents are most
valuable, and no one can read of the doings of “ Geordie,” “ Cissie,”
“ Josephine ” or “ Minnie ” for the last twenty years without being struck
by the everlasting repetitions—the same remarks uttered then as now ;
the same little tactics to amuse and entertain the sitters while the medium
is dressing and preparing in the cabinet ; the same want of originality or
change about the “ spirits.” “ Josephine ” seems to have taken the place
of “ Minnie ” —a “spirit” who used to perform in exactly the same manner
but under a different name. And then we see accounts of the “ spirits ”of
departed friends appearing very frequently at these seances, as a particular
honor to some one present who was more credulous than the rest. These
are the thousands who can testify to having seen their departed friends
through Mrs. Mellon’s powers. Many of us have seen exactly the same
thing here in Sydney, and these thousands of poor deluded fools are ready
(on the strength of a completely disguised form seen in semi-darkness) to
publicly testify to their own folly. It is quite sufficient to read these
records published from time to time in the Medium and Daybreak —out
of their own mouths they have convicted themselves. Here are a few
extracts : — Medium and Daybreak , May 27, 1892 (speaking of
“ Geordie”). —“A pair of scissors were handed to him by a gentleman,
with a request that he would cut off a small portion of his beard and allow
him te keep it as a momento of this, to him, most marvellous event. He
brandished the scissors several times over his head, . . . entered the
cabinet for a moment , then returned with the scissors and the coveted
portion of his beard.” I have italicised the important point in this, which
requires no further explanation. Medium and Daybreak, Oct. 23, 1891.
—“ The dematerialising of “ Cissie ” outside the cabinet carried the greatest
conviction to the company present. . . . which brought the sitting
practically to a close, to the satisfaction of all but one {a spiritualist ), who
did not take the slightest action to prove his allegations .” I can quite
understand this gentleman’s hesitation before attempting to prove his
allegations single-handed, having recently received some rough treatment
myself at the hands of spiritualists, as already recounted. Medium and
Daybreak, Oct. 3, 1890—(speaking of the photographing of “Cissie”). —
“ But the important point is that no one looked at the px-ocess, for to do so
in such a strong light interferes with it. The Avhole party
exercised the greatest self-denial in not looking ; their one and only
thought was to enable the spirit and medium to be photographed.”
Exactly so, we have seen the same tactics over “ Geordie,” only in that
case we were not quite so self-denying, but did look surreptitiously. The
same writer continues :—“ Many years ago we were present at one of Mrs.
Mellon’s stances at Weir’s Court, Newcastle. ‘Cissie’ was walking in
front of the cabinet, sucking sweets which some sitter had given her. The
writer was called up to her, and was offered a kiss. As she was only of
the stature of a little child, he had to stoop down on one knee to do so,
and naturally put out his hand to place it against the child’s back. This
she at once observed, and by a quick motion of her hand prevented it. The
mouth was quite normal, as the kiss proved ; the lips were moist and
sticky from the sweets she was sucking.” Mrs. Mellon had a narrow


escape from being caught that time. It was the perusal of this passage a
few months ago, that helped to confirm me in my own opinions as to
“Cissie’s” origin and construction. I could quote many such extracts had
I the space at my disposal, but these are quite sufficient evidence.
I come now to, by far, the most interesting part of the evidence,
and, with the exception of the last two months, perhaps the most
important period in this medium’s whole professional career. Mrs.
Mellon has continually referred all inquirers here to tests which she
professes, to have successfully undergone in England, and notably
before the Society for Psychical Research of London, and has made
these the excuse, in many cases, for declining to undergo further tests
in Australia. She has made much capital out of the names of Mr.
Myers, Professor Sidgwick, of London and Cambridge, and other
members of the above society, whom she professes to have satisfied as
to her alleged mediumship. A friend of mine was most incautiously led
into furthering this belief, by his statements in an article in the first
number of the Cosmos magazine. Mr. Myers has been communicated
with in reference to these much-talked-of tests, and a reply received
to the effect that the London Society was not satisfied. 1 have also
before me the Proceedings of the Society for Psychical Research,
London, vol. 4, 1886-87, and I find there a x’ecord of these tests
written by Mrs. Henry Sidgwick, which clearly expresses the opinions
of the society and of these members named above. Unfortunately,
this volume only reached my hands since the exposure, and Mrs.
Mellon, in answer to repeated enquiries of mine, professed herself
ignorant of its publication, and, unlike other less important events,
professed to have kept no records of these tests—perhaps, for very
good reasons, as we shall see.
Here are some extracts from this volume referring to a long series
of tests with Mrs. Mellon (then Miss Fairlamb), and also to Miss
Kate Wood, who developed with her. Page 49 to 54, vol. IY.,says ;
“ Mr. Sidgwick, Mr. Myers, and Mr. Gurney had a series of seances
for materialisation with Miss Wood and Miss Fairlamb in Jannary,
February, and March, 1875, at Newcastle. . . . We did not con-
sider that decisive evidence had yet been obtained. The seances were
now adjourned to the house where I lived. . . , Having arranged
our tests as described, we began a series of four seances. At the first
a vague white figure, which might have been a doll, or perhaps mere
drapery, appeared at the doorway, but did not come out. The second
was a complete failure. At the third a small vague figure again
appeared, and raps were made in places beyond the reach, we thought,
of the hands or feet of the medium ; but, of course, she might have
brought something Avith her to make these with. We were getting
depressed, especially, as on this last occasion, the disentrancement
took a very long time So ended this series ; and at the
next, which was held at the same place in the following July, and
lasted three weeks, a different test was used The seances
were nearly unsuccessful until the last. On the Friday and Saturday
preceding, the sitters had been brought up one by one to what pur-


ported to be materialised forms, but the face was not in a place in
which it would have been impossible for the medium’s face to be, and
on the Friday it appeared to some members of the circle that the face
was not satisfactorily connected with the drapery that purported to
conceal the body. On Saturday, the 24th, at the last of the series of
twelve seances, Miss Fairlamb was placed in the hammock, and Mr.
Sidgwick observed the indicator of the balance Then a
form came out and kissed me through the white veil in which it was
wrapped Afterwards Miss Wood was called up to the
form, which looked small, and did not move very easily; it might have
been a woman on her knees After the seance I asked
leave to search Miss Fairlamb. This she sharply and decidedly de-
clined. She was reminded that she bad agreed to be searched, but
she said that was before, not after, the seances. This refusal produced
an unfavorable impression on us, and left the evidence at best incon-
clusive Another series of seances was held with them
through a period of three weeks, in August and September, 1875, at
Cambridge. The results were again inconclusive, and in some respects
suspicious ; for the form came out of the cabinet three times, and it
was found by trial afterwards that the medium could each time have
come just so far without breaking loose from the fastenings. This
coincidence was suggestive.
“January, 1877, we tried a final series of seances for materialisa-
tion at Newcastle. Miss Wood and Miss Fairlamb had by this time
quarrelled, and used to sit separately. We first used, as a means of
securing Miss Wood, a long bag of machine-made white net, which
she got into, head and all. The bag was so long that the end could be
brought outside the cabinet, where it was drawn together with tape,
and the ends of the tape nailed and sealed to the wall close to the
mouth of the bag. We held four seances in this way with no result,
and then the “ spirits,” through M iss Wood, told us to give up that
test. Then we substituted a graduated tape, tied round the neck, and
another round the ankle. The tape was sealed below the knot on to a
piece of paper, and the seals traced round with pencil, and later with
sympathetic ink, which we thought would betray the fact if heat were
applied to the seals. The ends of the tapes were brought out of the
cabinet, nailed through large sheets of white paper to the floor, and
sealed over the nails. The light allowed at these seances was
exceedingly poor. A small white figure came to the entrance of the
cabinet—a british but irregularly-shaped object, which on one occasion
danced up and down, and which I remember thinking at the time
might be the pillow provided for Miss Wood’s head. This occurred
at three successive seances. At the fourth we were told by
raps that the medium was choking. I went to examine, and
found that the knot had been moved an inch or more away from
the seal, and close up to the neck, so that the tape appeared too tight.
The “spirit,” speaking through Miss Wood, claimed to have done this
in playing with it. After vainly attempting to loosen the knot, which
I could not do in the bad light, I cut the tape and removed it, leaving
the ankle tape as the only security. We heard a good deal of rustling
of the paper to which this was sealed, more than at any previous seance.


After a considerable time, and much singing and talking, a ligure—
apparently that of a full-grown woman—draped in white, came out.
The light was too low to distinguish anything but the general outline
of the ligure. I think the face was veiled, and when she touched my
hand I could feel something like soft muslin between her hand and
mine. The ligure (twice at least) came out too far from the point
where the tape was attached to the floor for it to be possible that it
could be Miss Wood, with her ankle still bound. When the figure had
finally retreated, we were kept a long time waiting and singing before
the seance was declared at an end. We then examined the fastening,
and found the attachment to the floor intact, but the seal near the
knot torn from the paper and split, one half remaining attached to
each tape. A slight strain required to bring the two halves of the
seal together showed that the knot was not exactly as it had been, and
judging by knots made on other nights, which I had kept, it was much
tighter than I had made it. Also the part of the tape round the ankle
was creased, strained, and dirty all over, as if it had been much
handled and pulled. We felt sure that either it had been forced over
the heel, or that a loop large enough to pass over the foot had been
obtained by moving the knot to a place below the seal, an operation
which the splitting of (he seal rendered just possible. At any rate,
the indications of deception were palpable and sufficient, and we were
not surprised to hear a few months later that a more aggressive
investigator had violated the rules of the seance, and captured Miss
Wood personating the “ spirit.” Some persons may, perhaps, wonder
why we had not adopted such summary methods of investigation our-
selves, but there was an implied understanding with the medium that
we should not do so, which we should not have felt justified in
breaking. For my own part, though I have no wish myself to adopt
such methods of investigation, I think that both Spiritualists and non-
Spiritualists ought to recognise that “ exposers ” have thrown valuable
light on the subject.
“ While these final seances were going on with Miss Wood, we were
also holding seances with Miss Fairlamb under different conditions, but
with the same general result, namely, that all that occurred was within
the power of the medium. We were also then concluding a series of
collateival investigations with some other Newcastle mediums—the
Petty family, who exhibited somewhat similar manifestations. This
investigation had been carried on as long as those with Miss Wood and
Miss Fairlamb, and with equally unsatisfactory results. I have now
to observe that several other unsuccessful and unsatisfactory series of
seances contributed to the thoroughly tm/avorable impression left by
that last set at Newcastle.”
This evidence is clear and emphatic, and leaves no doubt as to
the thoroughly unfavorable impression produced. Far from being
evidence in favor of the alleged phenomena produced by Mrs. Mellon,
it is evidence in support of very grave suspicions ; and, after review-
ing all this, and also the spiritualistic evidence which has gone before,
1 have no hesitation in saying that I believe the so-called phenomena
produced by this medium throughout her professional career, to have
been all due to the same origin as what we have seen in Sydney.


CHAPTER IX.
The Broad Question op the So-called Spiritualistic Phenomena
of Spirit Materialisation Considered. The Evidence on
Which it Stands.
In considering the broad question of the alleged phenomena of ma-
terialisation, I have first reviewed the evidence of my own personal
research. This evidence is all the more valuable in its relation to the
whole question, from the fact that I have had the good fortune to have
been able to experiment with the “foremost and most remarkable”
medium of the present day—the “ only one person who could almost
always secure the presence of phenomena,, and who had never been
detected in a trick of any kind,” up to within a few months ago. A
review of this medium’s career has left us with a lot of worthless
negative evidence from professed Spiritualists, which is no evidence at
all; besides which it has furnished us with a large amount of the
most valuable positive evidence against the probability, not to say
possibility, of the existence of any such phenomena. Let us now see
what evidence the lives of other “ materialising ” mediums adduce.
Of the only other materialising medium with whose exhibitions
I am personally acquainted, some interesting evidence is also to hand.
I refer to Hacket, a seance with whom I described in my first
chapter. News of his alleged complete exposure in New Zealand
arrived a few months ago, and has since been confirmed by the con-
fession of one who was his unwilling accomplice.
We have also seen a i-ecord of the doings of Miss Wood, the
companion of Mrs. Mellon, and of her final exposure, as recorded and
published by the Society for Psychical Research, of London, which I
have already quoted. Every other materialising medium has likewise
been detected in trickery at one time or another, as we have seen re-
corded and acknowledged by Spiritualists themselves, in Mr. Stead’s
journal. I could go on and give particular cases without number, but,
in the face of the above evidence, it is unnecessary, and the con-
fessions of the Fox sisters, of Eva Fay, Bullock, and others, are well-
known and notorious facts.
On the other hand, let us now consider whether there is any
existing reliable evidence in favor of the phenomena of materialisation
at all. The statements of some thousands of credulous Spiritualists
may be at once dismissed as worthless, and the only evidence admis-
sible is that of scientists or experts who have practically experimented
on the matter. To what, then, is this alleged mass of evidence in
support of the phenomena reduced 1 To the statements of two or
three men such as Mr. Barkas, of Newcastle, Mr. Epes Sargent, of
Boston, U.S.A., and Professor William Crookes, of London, men of
otherwise high scientific repute, who profess to have so experimented,
and whose brilliant attainments in other directions have received due
recognition. Whether their scientific attainments have been of any
service to themselves in this field of research, and whether their expe-
riments with these alleged phenomena have been as careful and prac-
tical as the case required, is a matter open to very grave question. I
am not alone in the opinion that the brilliant scientist makes the
worst investigator, and for many reasons is often more easily hood-
winked than men of lesser genius. His methods are stereotyped ; he


works, as a rule, secluded in a laboratory, or abstracted in a world of
his own, his duties necessarily removing him from the every-day world
of human nature, which is in itself the best school of wisdom. And
it is this particular knowledge of human nature which best fits an
individual for research into this realm of mystery, and without a
large amount of which the scientist, with all his apparatus, self-
registering indices, scales, and measurements, will fail more com-
pletely than others. .In experimenting on this subject with such per-
sons as are termed mediums, forces (by this I mean the human forces
of cunning and trickery) come into play, with which the scientific
genius is least of all acquainted.
This calculation does not enter into his abstruse problems; he
soars above such trivialities. And yet it is just this calculation, in
dealing especially with alleged materialisations, which is all important;
and it is for this very reason that I cannot accept the evidence of these
three individuals upon this particular matter, when I would not
hesitate to accept it upon ordinary scientific matters. Such has been
the attitude of the scientific world and of public opinion with regard
to these individuals; although Spiritualism holds up the opinions of
these men in the face of modern science, and feels quite satisfied. I
am not, however, dealing with public opinion, but sifting impartially
all the evidence before me; and I find absolutely no single case of
reliable evidence in favor of the alleged phenomena. With regard to
the two first-named investigators, although their testimony is much
quoted by Spiritualists, I do not know of any scientific publication of
their experiments. Mr. Crookes has, however, published a scientific
treatise upon his experiments with many of the alleged phenomena of
Spiritualism ; and it is most noticeable that, although he devotes much
space to claiming the attention of the scientific world to the lesser
alleged phenomena occurring through Home, he says but little of his
experiments with “materialisation.” In his writings he by no means
claims the attention for this that he does for the physical phenomena,
which he groups under the heading of Psychic Force •, neither does
he advance his opinions on “ materialisation ” as either conclusive to
himself or to the world. This reticence is most marked, and it is a
pity that Spiritualism is not equally modest in making use of the
little that he does say Apart from all that, these experiments which
he quotes were nearly all carried out by himself alone with the
medium, and therefore lack the weight of corroborated testimony.
Not that I hesitate to accept the truth of Mr. Crookes’ statements,
but it is easier for one witness to be duped than for several. The
question of the lesser physical phenomena is outside the scope of these
pages. Now, in all this mass of so-called evidence in, favor of
“materialisation,” there is not a particle of reliable evidence in its
support. It is only logical, on the other hand, to conclude, therefore,
that the positive evidence of innumerable exposures is a full and
complete explanation of all the alleged “ phenomena” of “spirit
materialisation.”
Until some better evidence is forthcoming, we must be excused
for refusing to believe in what, to say the least of it, is most highly
improbable.


PART 11.
CHAPTER X.
Some Possible Explanations for the So-called Phenomena of
Spirit Materialisation Illustrated, Art and Science
Combined. A Warning to the Credulous.
INASMUCH as the preceding chapters are an exact and truthful
(vj record of occurrences, let me state at the outset, that this chapter
is equally based upon actual observation. Nothing that lam about to
say is intended as a burlesque upon what has gone before, but is
written as a serious and timely warning to many credulous persons
who may be on the verge of this slough of deception and falsehood—
trembling in the balance between reason and the blindest of faith,
and may help such as these to see more clearly the dangers before
them. That there are not wanting thousands of fools, who, in spite of
repeated exposure and of warning, continue to bow before the wlies of
cunning imposters, to worship and reverence the very rogues who trick
and befool them, is a disgrace to the boasted intelligence of this
nineteenth century. For such as these there is but little hope; the
“contagious mental disease” has reached its incurable stage. And
there is yet another large class of persons who, from sheer self-conceit
and a belief in the infallibility of their own judgment, can not bring
themselves to acknowledge a mistake. Such persons lack the honesty
and courage to acknowledge that they could possibly have been duped,
and, though knowing it in their own hearts, prefer to plunge still further
into this slough of deception, hoping vainly to shelter themselves.
For such characters as these one can only feel the supremest contempt.
But to those persons, predisposed to dabble in occult mysteries, of
emotional and credulous temperament, who hanker after super-
naturalism with all its forbodings, with unwholesome longings to
penetrate the veil that hides the futiu’e, but who are yet upon the
brink, to those I say pause while you have time, and learn something
of the wiles of the wizards whom you would consult, Bear in mind
that the history of modern Spiritualism, so far from showing the class
of persons who call themselves mediums to be the pure-minded apostles
of a cause, the honest interpreters of the faith which they profess, has
proved them, without exception, to be unscrupulous persons, many of
them expert conjurors, well versed in every trick and wile by which
they can entrap the unwary. They deal in surprises, and abstract the
attention of their audience to minor points, while the most important
though apparently most trivial point in the performance is entirely
unnoticed. I do not wish to infer from this that “ Materialisation ”
requires any particular cleverness or knowledge of conjuring; it is
more or less a confidence trick, and depends principally upon the
audacity of the medium in the use of a few necessary properties.


I have seen three “ spirit ” forms appear at the curtain together.
This impresses one at first as very wonderful; for in the darkness and
glamour of the surrounding conditions, one is apt to forget that the
medium has two hands, which each support a lay figure or strips of
drapery, while the medium’s own draped personality does duty for
the third.
Any one reading the foregoing accounts of seances, will observe
that the greatest interval of waiting and singing is always before the
most elaborate form appears, and that many ruses to gain opportunity
for carefully packing up the properties after a seance, are also resorted
to, the medium often declaring that a form is in the cabinet materi-
alising, but has not the power to come out. With regard to producing
a spirit form over six feet high, nothing is easier. The medium holds
a mask on the end of a telescopic rod, or even with one hand above her
head, while flowing drapery conceals the medium’s own head and body,
I have invariably noticed that these tall forms are not materialised
according to natural proportions, and dislike the light. It is also
most remarkable that when any of the “ spirits” come out from the
“cabinet” and write on paper provided for that purpose, that the
handwriting is unmistakably that of the medium. I will here refer
my readers to the facsimile drawing of “ Cissie’s” hand on page 1 9. Let
any woman place her hand upon a sheet of paper, keeping the fingers
slightly bent, and trace round the fingers roughly with a long pencil,
finishing at the top of the thumb and base of the little finger.
With reference to the materialisation outside the cabinet, described
on page 18; this could easily be accomplished by a telescopic rod or
cross-jointed XXXXX collapsable implement of light dull japanned
steel, such as is used in drapers’ shops for reaching articles in the
windows. An implement of this description, which can be made to
extend for five or six feet, when closed, fits into a very small space and
could be easily secreted about a woman’s clothing. [t would also be
invisible in the semi-darkness
For a complete explanation of the “materialising and demateri-
alising ” in view of the spectators, on which so much stress has been laid
by Mrs. Besant and others, I can not do better than refer again to the
following words of Mrs, Henry Sidgwick, taken from the volume
which I have already quoted. Describing a series of seances with a
medium named Haxby, one of whose materialising “ spirits ” was
named “ Abdullah,” she writes as follows :
“Abdullah dematerialised and materialised in the circle, that is,
he appeared to most of the circle to diminish in size, and finally
vanish in front of the opening of the curtains of the cabinet, and
also to appear in the same place and gradually grow up to his full size.
This happened more than once. From my position being nearer than
anyone else’s, and from my seeing Abdullah more in profile while
growing and diminishing, I was able to see the whole process dis-
tinctly. He went down on his knees—rather hastily (others observing
this, too)—and then gradually bent down and forwards, moving his body
back into the cabinet as he did so, and keeping the curtains closed
above him. Finally he went flat down on the ground, leaving only




Ffo37^t
his head exposed, and then drew it in. I was able to see that he was
lying down inside the cabinet, as the curtains do not quite reach the
floor, and I saw the long line of white drapery all the way from the
opening of the curtains towards the wall. The -growing was done in
exactly the same manner, a small bit of white being shoved out first,
and then the head, Ac. . . , Before this seance all the members
of the circle, including an enthusiastic Spiritualist, whom I will call
Mr. X., had been told what to expect. Mr. Sidgwick was present,
and he appends this note to my sister’s account :
“ I was seated at the furthest point in the circle; at the same
time in witnessing Abdullah’s disappearance 1 was unable even to
imagine it anything else than the medium withdrawing gradually into
the cabinet, having first fallen on his knees, and then gradually
lowered his head. But Mr. X., who sat nearly as far off as, but
certainly not farther than, I did, remarked, when the performance was
over, that £ all our doubts must now be removed,’ and afterwards to
Mr. H., on going away, that our materialisations were better than
theirs in Paris.”
Experiences like this make one feel how misleading thipaccounts
of some completely honest witnesses may be. For the materialisations
in Paris were those which the Comte de Bullet had with Firman,
where near relatives of the count were believed constantly to appear,
and which are among the most wonderful " recorded in Spiritualistic
literature. And after all it appears that these marvellous seances
were no better than this miserable personation by Haxby.
Wax moulds of “spirit” feet and hands have been referred to.
I have no doubt that these, when produced unbroken, had been
previously manufactured and £< planted” in the £l cabinet.” The
occasion when ££ Geordie ” handed round the fragments of a broken
mould which had been obtained in view of the spectators, does not
sound at all wonderful when we realise that the mould of her own foot
was probably made by the medium.
The accompanying illustration, showing how both adult and child
forms may be manufactured by anybody, explains itself. When the
“ spirit ” perambulates the room, the mask,-beard, drapery, or other
distinctive disguise by which the particular ££ spirit ” is to be recognised
by its friends, are worn by the medium.
In concluding these pages, let me state that, although I believe that
there may be little-known natural phenomena worthy of scientific in-
vestigation, it is not through the channel of the professional medium
that they will be found, if found at all. Table seances among private
persons, while apparently an innocent amusement, invariably lead to
pernicious consequences. The whole matter is too fraught with mental
danger to the unwary, to be touched upon by any _but the most
sceptical and hard-headed investigators. For this and other reasons
1 think that every investigation committee should include one or more
professional conjurors, and without doubt a key would then be
obtained to much that passes for abnormal phenomena.
The unrestricted dabbling of credulous and emotional people in
such matters is both utterly demoralising to themselves and hurtful to
the community at large,
[The End.]
(Registered under the Copyright Act, 1879, 42 Vic. No. 20.)
W. M. Maolardy & Co., Printers and Stationers, 82 Pitt Street, Sydney.


Holdsworth, Macpherson & Co
232 George St.,
NEAR BRIDGE STREET-
i * L x! :i'■
"V


t-' ■if 4/^
