

SPURGEON’S
SERMONS.
Anthnrised by Mr. Spurgeon.
ENGLISH EDITION.
"Let it be understood, until further notice, that no Sermons are
genuine reports, unless they bear the title ‘The New Park Street
Pulpit;’ or the names of ‘Alabaster and Passmore;’ or else the
words ‘Authorized by Mr. Spurgeon.’ Necessity compels us thus to
act, since otherwise, prints without our revision or sanction are adver-
tised, and no one can tell what is ours and what anothers.”—C.H.S.
PART IV
Price One Shilling.
SYDNEY:
FOR SALE BY G. R. ADDISON, 487, BRICKFIELD HILL,
GEORGE STREET SOUTH.
Agent for the Sale of Spurgeon's Sermons.
1858.




SPURGEON’S SERMONS.
(ENGLISH EDITION.)
In Parts, containing Six Sermons, stitched in a neat
Wrapper, One Shilling; post-free, Fourteen Penny
Stamps.
PART I.
Confession of Sin: a Sermon
with Seven Texts.
Preaching for the Poor.
Christ lifted up.
Secret Sins.
The Blood Shedding.
Rahab’s Faith.
PART 11.
A Faithful Friend.
The Leafless Tree.
The Snare of the Fowler.
The Fruitless Yine.
Spiritual Resurrection.
The Uses of the Law.
PART 111.
David’s Dying Prayer.
Regeneration.
Mercy, Omnipotence, and
Justice.
Heavenly Rest.
Salvation by the Lord.
A Simple Sermon for Seek-
ing Souls.
PART IY.
How to keep the Heart.
Particular Redemption.
The Goodman’s Life and
Death.
A Preacher from the Dead.
Waiting only upon God.
The Sound in the Mulberry
Trees.
PART V.
India’s Ills and England’s
Sorrows.
The condescension of Christ.
Fear Not.
Thy Redeemer.
Things that accompany Sal-
vation.
The Mysteries of the Brazen
Serpent.
PART VI.
The Loved Ones Chastened.
The Security of the Church.
The First Great Command-
ment.
True Christian’s Blessedness
Instability.
Light at Evening Time.
PART YII.
The Warning Neglected.
The Destroyer Destroyed.
The Holy Spirit and the One
Church.
The First Christmas Carol.
What have I done ?
The Immutability of Christ.
G. R. ADDISON, Agent for the Sale of SPURGEON’S
SERMONS, 487, Brickfield Hill, George Street South;
»nd at the Book Stall, Railway Terminus, Sydney.


The New Park Street Pulpit.
HOW TO KEEP THE HEART.
A Sermon
DELIVERED ON SABBATH EVENING, FEBRUARY 21, 1858, BY THE
REV. C. H. SPURGEON,
AT NEW PARK STREET CHAPEL, SOUTHWARK.
“The peace of God which passetli all understanding shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ
Jesus.” —Fhilippians iv. 7.
It is remarkable that when we find an exhortation given to God’s people in one
part of the Holy Scripture, we almost invariably find the very thing which they
are exhorted to do guaranteed to them, and provided for them, in some other part
of the same blessed volume. This morning my text was, “ Keep the heart with all
diligence, for out of it are the issues of life.” Now, this evening we have the promise
upon which we must rest if we desire to fulfil the precept:-* The peace of God
which passetli all understanding shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ
j6 Thi S evening we shall use another figure distinct from the one used in the morning
of the reservoir. We shall use the figure of a fortress which is to be kept. And the
promise saith that it shall be kept-kept by “ the peace of God which passeth all
U ’ lnasmucirfs the^ca^is the most important part of man-for out of it are the
issues of life-it would be natural to expect that Satan, when he intended to do
mischief to manhood, would be sure to make his strongest and most perpetual at-
tacks upon the heart. What we might have guessed in wisdom is certainly true in
experience; for although Satan will tempt and try us m every way, though eve y
S e of the town of Mansoul may be battered, though against every part of the
Jails thereof he will be sure to bring out his great guns, yet the
he levels his deadliest malice and his most furious strength, is the Hear - Juto the
heart already of itself evil enough, he thrusts the seeds of every evil thing, and
doth his utmost to make it a den of unclean birds, a garden of poisonous trees, a
river flowing with destructive water. Hence, again, arises the second necessity
that we should be doubly cautious in keeping the heart with all diligence; for if,
on thlone hand, it be the most important, and, on the other hand, Satan, knowing
this makes his most furious and determined attacks against it, then with double
force the exhortation comes, “ Keep thy heart with all diligence. And the promise
also becomes doubly sweet from the very,fact of the double danger—the promise
which says, “ The peace of God shall keep your hearts and minds through Christ
J °We shalknotice. first of all, that which keeps the heart and mind. Secondly, we
sh “:TZiin it fo r we are to understand this promise as connect wi h
certain precepts which come before it. And then, when we have had this we> shall
Nos. 180-81. Penny Pul P lt » Nos * 2 > 919 ~ 2o *


try to show how it is true that the peace of God does keep the mind free from the attacks
of Satan, or delivers it from those attacks when they are made.
I. First, then, beloved, the preservation which God in this promise confers upon
the saints, is “the peace op God which passeth all understanding,” to keep
us through Jesus Christ. It is called peace ; and we are to understand this in a
double sense. There is a peace of God which exists between the child of God and
God his Judge, a peace which may be truly said to pass all understanding. Jesus
Christ has offered so all-sufficient a satisfaction for all the claims of injured justice,
that now God hath no fault to find with his children. “He seeth no sin in Jacob,
nor iniquity in Israel ; ” nor is he angry with them on account of their sins a
peace unbroken and unspeakable being established by the atonement which Christ
hath made on their behalf.
Hence flows a peace experienced in the conscience, which is the second
part of this peace of God : for, when the conscience sees that God is satisfied,
and is no longer at war with it, then it also becomes satisfied with man; and
conscience, which was wont to be a great disturber of the peace of the heart, now
gives its verdict of acquittal, and the heart sleeps in the arms of conscience, and
finds a quiet resting-place there. Against the child of God conscience brings no
accusation, or if it brings the accusation, it is hut a gentle one a gentle chiding of
a loving friend who hints that we have done amiss, and that we had better change,
but doth not afterwards thunder in our ears the threat of a penalty. Conscience
knows full well that peace is made betwixt the soul and God, and, therefore, it does
not hint that there is any thing else but joy and peace to be looked forward to by
the believer. Do we understand anything of this double peace ? Let us pause
here and ask ourselves a question upon this doctrinal part of the matter Let us
make it an experimental question with our own hearts:—•‘Come, my soul, art thou
at peace with God ? Hast thou seen thy pardon signed and sealed with the
Redeemer's blood ? Come, answer this, my heart; hast thou cast thy sins upon
the head of Christ, and hast thou seen them all washed away in the crimson streams
of blood ? Canst thou feel that now there is a lasting peace between thyself and
God, so that, come what may, God shall not be angry with thee—shall not condemn
thee shall not consume thee in his wrath, nor crush thee in his hot displeasure ?
If it be so, then, my heart, thou canst scarcely need to stop and ask the second
question—ls my conscience at peace ? For, if my heart condemn me not, God is
greater than my heart, and doth know all things ; if my conscience bears witness
with me, that I am a partaker of the precious grace of salvation, then happy am I!
I am one of those to whom God hath given the peace which passeth all under-
standing. Now, why is this called “the peace of God?” We suppose it is because it
comes from God —because it was planned by God—because God gave his Son to
make the peace —because God gives his Spirit to give the peace in the conscience—
because, indeed, it is God himself in the soul, reconciled to man, whose is the peace.
And while it is true that this man shall have the peace—even the Man-Christ, yet
we know it is because he was the God-Christ that he was our peace. And hence
we may clearly perceive how Godhead is mixed up with the peace which we enjoy
with our Maker and with our conscience.
Then we are told that it is “ the peace of God which passeth all understanding.”
What does he mean by this? He means such a peace that the understanding can
never understand it, can never attain to it. The understanding of mere carnal man
can never comprehend this peace. He who tries with a philosophic look to discover
the secret of the Christian’s peace, finds himself in a maze. “ I know not how it is,
nor why it is,” saith he; “I see these men hunted through the earth; I turn the
pages of history, and I find them hunted to their graves. They wandered about in
sheepskins and goatskins, destitute, afflicted, and tormented; yet I also see upon
122 138


the Christian’s brow a calm serenity. I cannot understand this; Ido not know
what it is. I know that I myself, even in my merriest moments, am disturbed; that
when my enjoyments run the highest, still there are waves of doubt and fear across
my mind. Then why is this? How is it that the Christian can attain a rest so
calm, so peaceful, and so quiet? ” Understanding can never get to that peace which
the Christian hath attained. The philosopher may teach us much; he can never
give us rules whereby to reach the peace that Christians have in their conscience.
Diogenes may tell us to do without everything, and may live in his tub, and then
think himself happier than Alexander, and that he enjoys peace; but we look upon
the poor creature after all, and though we may be astonished at his courage, yet
we are obliged to despise his folly. We do not believe that even when he had dis-
pensed with everything, he possessed a quiet of mind, a total and entire peace, such
as the true believer can enjoy. We find the greatest philosophers of old laying
down maxims for life which they thought would certainly promote happiness. We
find that they were not always able to practise them themselves; and many of their
disciples, when they laboured hard to put them in execution, found themselves en-
cumbered with impossible rules to accomplish impossible objects. But the Christian
man does with faith what a man can never do himself. While the poor under-
standing is climbing up the crags, faith stands on the summit; while the poor
understanding is getting into a calm atmosphere, faith flies aloft and mounts higher
than the storm, and then looks down on the valley and smiles while the tempest
blows beneath its feet. Faith goes further than understanding, and the peace
which the Christian enjoys is one which the worldling cannot comprehend and
cannot himself attain. “ The peace of God which passeth all understanding.”
And this peace is said to “keep the mind through Christ Jesus.” Without
Christ Jesus this peace would not exist; without Christ Jesus this peace, even
where' it has existed, cannot be maintained. Daily visits from the Saviour, con-
tinual lookings by the eye of faith to him that bled upon the cross, continual draw-
ings from his ever-flowing fountain, make this peace broad, and long, and enduring.
But take Christ Jesus, the channel of our peace away, and it fades and dies, and
droops, and comes to nought. A Christian hath no peace with God except through
the atonement of his Lord Jesus Christ.
I have thus gone over what some will call the dry doctrinal part of the subject
—“ The peace of God, which passeth all understanding, shall keep your hearts and
minds through Christ Jesus.” I cannot show you what that peace is, if you have
never felt it; but yet I think I could tell you where to look for it, for I have some-
times seen it. I have seen the Christian man in the depths of poverty, when he
lived from hand to mouth, and scarcely knew where he should find the next meal,
still with his mind unruffled, calm, and quiet. If he had been as rich as an Indian
prince, yet could he not have had less care; if he had been told that his bread
should always come to his door, and the stream which ran hard by should never
dry—if he had been quite sure that ravens would bring him bread and meat in the
morning, and again in the evening, he would not have been one whit more calm.
There is his neighbour on the other side of the street not half so poor, but wearied
from morning to night, working his fingers to the bone, bringing himself to the
grave with anxiety; but this poor good man, after having industriously laboured,
though he found he had gained little with all his toil, yet hath sanctified his little
by prayer, and hath thanked his Father for what he had; and though he doth not
know whether he will have more, still he trusted in God, and declared that his
faith should not fail him, though providence should run to a lower ebb than he had
ever seen. There is “the peace of God which passeth all understanding. I have
seen that peace, too, in the case of those who have lost their friends. There is a
widow —her much loved husband lies in the coffin; she is soon to part with him.
139 123


Parted with him she has before; but now, of his poor clay-cold corpse—even of
that she has to be bereaved. She looks upon it for the last time, and her heart is
heavy. For herself and her children, she thinks how they shall be provided for.
That broad tree that once sheltered them from the sunbeam has been cut down.
Now, she thinks there is a broad heaven above her head, and her Maker is her
husband; the fatherless children are left with God for their father, and the widow
is trusting in him. With tears in her eyes she still looks up, and she says, “ Lord,
thou hast given and thou hast taken away, blessed be thy name.” Her husband is
carried to the tomb; she doth not smile, but though she weeps, there is a calm
composure on her brow, and she tells you she would not have it otherwise, even if
she could, for Jehovah’s will is right. There, again, is “the peace of God that
passeth all understanding.” Picture another man. There is Martin Luther stand-
ing up in the midst of the Diet of Worms; there are the kings and the princes, and
there are the bloodhounds of Rome with their tongues thirsting for his blood ■
there is Martin rising in the morning as comfortable as possible, and he goes
to the Diet, and delivers himself of the truth, solemnly declares that the things
which he has spoken are the things which he believes, and God helping him, he
will stand by them till the last. There is his life in his hands; they have him
entirely in their power. The smell of John Huss’s corpse has not yet passed away,
and he recollects that princes, before this, have violated their words; but there he
stands, calm and quiet; he fears no man, for he has nought to fear; “ the peace of
God which passeth all understanding,” keeps his heart and mind through Jesus
Christ.” There is another scene: there is John Bradford in Newgate. He is to be
burned the next morning in Smithfield, and he swings himself on the bedpost in
very glee, and delights, for to-morrow is his wedding day; and he says to another,
“Eine shining we shall make to-morrow, when the flame is kindled.” And he
smiles and laughs, and enjoys the very thought that he is about to wear the blood-
red crown of martyrdom. Is Bradford mad! Ah, no; but he has got the peace ot
God that passeth all understanding. But perhaps the most beautiful, as well as
the most common illustration of this sweet peace, is the dying bed of the believer.
Oh, brethren, you have seen this sometimes —that calm, quiet serenity ; you have
said, Lord, let us die with him. It has been so good to be in that solitary chamber
where all was quiet, and so still, all the world shut out, and heaven shut in, and
the poor heart nearing its God, and far away from all its past burdens and griefs
now nearing the portals of eternal bliss. And ye have said, “ How is this? Is not
death a black and grim thing? Are not the terrors of the grave things which
make the strong man tremble?” Oh yes, they are; but, then, this one has the
“ peace of God which passeth all understanding.” However, if you want to know
about this, you must be a child of God, and possess it yourselves ; and when you
have once felt it, when you can stand calm amid the bewildering cry, confident of
victory, when you can sing in the midst of the storm, when you can smile when
surrounded by adversity, and can trust your God, be your way ne’er so rough, ne’er
so stormy; when you can always repose confidence in the wisdom and goodness of
Jehovah, then it is you will have “ the peace of God which passeth all understanding.”
11. Thus we have discussed the first point, what is this peace? Now the
second thing was, how is this peace to be obtained ? You will note that although
this is a promise, it hath precepts preceding, and it is only by the practice of the
precepts that we can get the promise. Turn now, to the fourth verse, and you
will see the first rule and regulation for getting peace. Christian, would you
enjoy “the peace of God which passeth all understanding?
The first thing you have to do is to “rejoice evermore.” The man who never
rejoices, but who is always sorrowing, and groaning, and crying, who forgets his
God, who forgets the fulness of Jehovah, and is always murmuring concerning the
124 140


trials of the road and the infirmities of the flesh, that man will lose the prospect
of enjoying a peace that passeth all understanding Cultivate, my friends a
cheerful disposition, endeavour, as much as lietl. in you, always to bear a sm,le
shout with you- recollect that this is as much a command of God as that one
wh°ch”av “ Thou Shalt love the Lord with all thy heart.” “ Eejo.ee evermore
f„“e of Gods commands, and it is your duty, as well a, your privilege.to try
and nractise it Not to rejoice, remember, is a sin. To rejo.ee, « a duty and
such I duty that the richest fruits and the best rewards are appended to it
Rejoice always, and then thepeaceof Godshall keep your hearts and minds. M >
of us by civics way to disastrous doubts, spoil our peace It is as I once
remember to have heard a woman say, when I was pasmng down a toe, a chM
Stood cryino- at the door, and I heard her calling out, Ah you are crying i
nothing I will give yoA something to cry for.” Brethren, it is often so with
God’s children. They get crying for nothing. They have a miserable l J®P° sl ’
or a turn of mind always making miseries for themselves and thus y
something to cry for. Their peace is disturbed, some sad trouble coi ,
hides his face, and then they lose their peace. But keep on singing, even w
the sun does not keep on shining, keep a song for all weathers,^ get .
Will Stand clouds and storms; and then, when you know how always to rejoice,
you shall have this peace. . _ , ~ » tc vou
7 The next precept is, “Let your moderation be known unto all me . y
would have peace of mind, be moderate. Merchant, you cannot push that
speculation too far, and then have peace of mind. Young man you
so fast in trying to rise in the world, and yet have the peace of God which
rth ill understanding. You must be moderate, and when you have got
Si! ryou delves, then yon shall have peace. Sir, you with the red
must he moderate in your anger. You must not be finite so « ■
flying into a passion with your fellows, and not quite so long in getting cool ag ,
because the angry man cannot have peace in his conse« Be
thou undertakest, Christian; moderate in your expectations. Blessed is
J he„“y reaches half as high, whereas, if he had aspired lower he.would be
Z&ZZXI ~
C ‘Se’last precept that yon have to obey is, “be eareful for nothing but in
everything by prayer and supplication make known your requests unto God.
You have peace unless you turn your troubles up. You have no place
m which to pour your troubles except the ear of God. If you tell them to your
friends you but put your troubles out a moment, and they will return again.
tl’l them to God you put your troubles into the grave; tl% will never rise
again whenTou h!ve eommf.ted'.hem to him. If you roll your burden anywhere
again when you Uke the stone of Sysiphus; but just roll your
burden Tnto God, and you have rolled it into a great deep, out of which it will
burden unto uo , Cast your troubles where you have cast your sins;
; e „ V uhave a ea y s. P yo„r sins into the depth of the sea,
Never keep a trouble half an hour on your own mind before you tell it to God.
As soon as the trouble comes, quick, the first thing, tell it to your Rather.


Remember, that the longer you take telling your trouble to God, the more your
peace will be impaired. The longer the frost lasts, the more likely the ponds will
be frozen. Your frost will last till you go to the sun; and when you go to God—
the sun, then your frost will soon become a thaw, and your troubles will melt
away. But do not be long, because the longer you are in Avaiting, the longer will
your trouble be in thawing afterwards. Wait a long while till your trouble gets
frozen thick and firm, and it will take many a day of prayer to get your trouble
thawed again. Away to the throne as quick as ever you can. Do as the child did,
when he ran and told his mother as soon as his little trouble happened to him ;
run and tell your Father the first moment you are in affliction. Do this in every-
thing, in every little thing—“in everything by prayer and supplication make
known your wants unto God.” Take your husband’s head-ache, take your
children’s sicknesses, take all things, little family troubles as well as great
commercial trials—take them all to God; pour them all out at once. And so
by an obedient practice of this command in everything making known your
wants unto God, you shall preserve that peace “ which shall keep your heart
and mind through Jesus Christ.”
These, then, are the precepts. May God the Holy Spirit enable us to obey them,
and we shall then have the continual peace of God.
111. Now, the third thing was to show how the peace, which I attempted to
describe in the first place, keeps the heart. You will clearly see how this peace will
keep the heart full. That man who has continued peace with God, will not have
an empty heart. He feels that God has done so much for him that he must love
his God. The eternal basis of his peace lays in divine election—the solid pillars of
his peace, the incarnation of Christ, his righteousness, his death—the climax of his
peace, the heaven hereafter where his joy and his peace shall be consummated; all
these are subjects for grateful reflection, and will, when meditated upon, cause
more love. Now, where much love is, there is a large heart and a full one. Keep,
then, this peace with God, and thou wilt keep thy heart full to the brim. And,
remember, that in proportion to the fulness of thine heart will be the fulness of thy
life. Be empty-hearted and thy life will be a meagre, skeleton existence. Be full-
hearted and thy life will be full, fleshy, gigantic, strong, a thing that will tell upon
the world. Keep, then, thy peace with God firm within thee. Keep thou close to
this, that Jesus Christ hat h made peace between thee and God. And keep thy
conscience still; then shall thy heart be full and thy soul strong to do thy Master’s
work. Keep thy peace with God. This will keep thy heart pure. Thou wilt say
if temptation comes, “ What dost thou offer me ? Thou ofFerest me pleasure ; lo !
I have got it. Thou ofFerest me gold ; lo ! I have got it; all things are mine, the
gift of God ; I have a city that hands have not made, ‘ a house not made with
hands, eternal in the heavens.’ I will not barter this for your poor gold.” “ I will
give you honour,” saith Satan. “I have honour enough,” says the peaceful heart;
God will honour me in the last great day of his account.” “I will give thee
everything that thou canst desire,” saith Satan. “I have everything that I can
desire,” says the Christian.
* “I nothing want on earth;
■ Happy in my Saviour’s love,
I am at peace with God.”
Avaunt, then, Satan! While I am at peace with God, lam a match for all thy
all f nS * Ydou °ff erest nie silver; I have gold. Thou bringest before me the
tern nL ° /I? 6 earth; . 1 have something more substantial than these. Avaunt,
ments in^ maU kind! Avaunt ’ thou fiend! Your temptations and blandish-
st on one who has peace with God. This peace, too, will keep the
126
142


leart undivided. He who has peace with God will set his whole heart on God.
Oh'” says he, “why should I go to seek anything else on earth, now that I have
)und my rest in God? As the bird by wandering, so should I be if I went
Isewhere. I have found a fountain; why should I go and drink at the broken
istern that will hold no water? I lean on the arm of my beloved; why should
rest on the arm of another? I know that religion is a thing worth my following;
;hy should I leave the pure snows of Lebanon to follow something else? I know
,nd feel that religion is rich when it brings forth to me a hundredfold the fruits
,f peace; why should Igo and sow elsewhere? I will be like the maiden Ruth, 1
dll stop in the fields of Boaz. Here will I ever stay and never wander.”
Again, this peace keeps the heart rich. My hearers will notice that lam
.assing over the heads of the morning’s discourse, and showing how this peace
ulfils the requisites that we thought necessary in the morning. Peace with God
-eeps the heart rich. The man who doubts and is distressed has got a poor heart;
tis a heart that has nothing in it. But when a man has peace with God, Ins
ieart is rich. If I am at peace with God I am enabled to go where I can get
■iches. The throne is the place where God gives riches. If I am at peace with
lim, then I can have access with boldness. Meditation is a great and another
ield of enrichment. When my heart is at peace with God, then I can enjoy
neditation; but if I have not peace with God, then I cannot meditate profitably;
or “the birds come down on the sacrifice,” and I cannot drive them away, except
ny soul is at peace with God. Hearing the word is another way of getting rich.
[f my mind is disturbed I cannot hear the word with profit. If I have to bring
ny family into the chapel; if I have to bring my business, my ships, or my horses,
[ cannot hear. When I have cows, and dogs, and horses in the pew, I cannot hear
the Gospel preached. When I have got a whole week’s business, and a ledger on
my heart, I cannot hear then ; but when I have peace, peace concerning all things,
ind rest in my Father’s will, then I can hear with pleasure, and every word of
the gospel is profitable to me; for my mouth is empty, and I can fill it with the
heavenly treasures of his Word. So you see the peace of God is a soul-enriching
thing. And because it keeps the heart rich, thus it is it keeps the heart and mind
through Jesus Christ our Lord. I need hardly say that the peace of God fulfils the
only other requisite which I did not mention, because it was unnecessary to do so.
It keeps the heart always peaceable. Of course, peace makes it full of peace-
peace like a river, and righteousness like the waves of the sea.
Now, then, brother and sister, it is of the first importance that you keep your
heart aright. You cannot keep your heart right but by one way. That one way
is by getting, maintaining, and enjoying peace of God to your own conscience. I
beseech you then, you that are professors of religion, do not let this night pass over
your heads till you have a confident assurance that you are now the possessor of
the peace of God. For let me tell you, if you go out to the world next Monday
morning without first having peace with God in your own conscience, you will not
be able to keep your heart during the week. If this night, ere you rest, you could
say that with God as well as all the world you are at peace, you may go out to-
morrow, and whatever your business, lam not afraid for you. You are more than a
match for all the temptations to false doctrine, to false living, or to false speech that
may meet you. For he that has peace with God is armed cap-a-piej he is covered
from head to foot in a panoply. The arrow may fly against it, but it cannot pierce
it, for peace with God is a mail so strong that the broad sword of Satan itself may
be broken in twain ere it can pierce the flesh. Oh! take care that you are at peace
with God; for if you are not, you ride forth to to-morrow’s fight unarmed, naked;
and God help the man that is unarmed when he has to fight with hell and earth.
113 127


Oh, be not foolish, but “ put on the whole armour of God,” and then be confident
for you need not fear.
As for the rest of you, you cannot have peace with God, because “there is
no peace, saith my God, to the wicked.” How shall I address you. As I said
this morning, I cannot exhort you to keep your hearts. My best advice to you is,
to get rid of your hearts, and as soon as you can, to get new ones. Your prayer
should be, “ Lord, take away my stony heart, and give me a heart of flesh.” But
though I cannot address you from this text, I may address you from another.
Though your heart is had, there is another heart that is good; and the goodness of
that heart is a ground of exhortation to you. You remember Christ said, “ Come
unto me all ye that are weary and heavy ladenand then his argument would
come to this, “ for I am meek and lowly of heart, and ye shall find rest to your
souls.” Your heart is proud, and high, and black, and lustful; but look at Christ’s
heart, it is meek and lowly. There is your encouragement. Do you feel to-night
your sin? Christ is meek; if you come to him he will not spurn you. Do you
feel your insignificance and worthlessness? Christ is lowly; he will not despise
you. If Christ’s heart were like your heart, you would be damned to a certainty.
But Christ’s heart is not as your heart, nor his ways like your ways. I can see
no hope for you when I look into your hearts, but I can see plenty of hope when I
look into Christ’s heart.
Oh, think of his blessed heart; and if you go home to night sad and sorrowful,
under a sense of sin, when you go to your chamber, shut to your door—you need
not be afraid—and talk to that heart so meek and lowly; and though your words be
ungrammatical, and your sentences incoherent, he will hear and answer you from
heaven, his dwelling place; and when he hears, he will forgive and accept, for his
own name’s sake.
123
144


The New Park Street Pulpit.
PARTICULAR REDEMPTION.
A Sermon
DELIVERED ON SABBATH EVENING, FEBRUARY 28, 1858, BY THE
REV. C. H. SPURGEON,
A T THE MUSIC HALL, ROYAL SURREY GARDENS.
“Even as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom
for many.”—Matthew xx. 28.
Wn. to* it was my duty to occupy this pulpit,.“SS' f“m
gregation assumed the appearance o S , an evangelist,
111 the streets of this city to listen to the Word Jwas then simp W
preaching to many who had not
most blessed change has take p > fixed as that of any minister
multitude gathered together, my g « M pulpit observe the countenances of
in the whole city of London. I ulaces as nearly as possible, for these
™ y 1 and! privilege andthe pleasure of knowing that a very
many months; and 1 have tne pri g the persons who meet together here,
large proportion, certain y curiosity, but are my regular and constant
arc not personswho stray “er from From being
hearers. And observe, y v. pf > omP vour castor. You were once a motley
evangelist, b b J und toget her by the ties of love;
every person, that as botn tne congi g difference. It has been my wont to
teaching itself should m *“lfspel I toe very seldom, in this place,
address you from the simple truths ot the gospel ' h ich I have thought
attempted to dive into the deep things of God. fte s I b _
suitable for my *°°srega 1 morning ’There are many high and mysterious
£trinS S wWch n iha\e often taken the opportunity of handling in my own place,
shall not ay upon the oflhl'^^“tha^Sldlod^!
shall not stagger to preaeh in the the final
PmevtanllTthe saints; I shall not withhold that
the effectual calling of God’s elect; I shall endeavour, as GodhallL helpme, to keep
back nothing from you who have become my flock. Seemg that many ot you
have now “tested that the Lord is gracious, ’ we will
whole system of the doctrines of grace, that saints may b P
their most holy faith.
<.- 129
140


I begin this morning with the doctrine of Redemption. “He gave his life a
ransom for many.” , . ,
The doctrine of Redemption is one of the most important doctrines ot the system
of faith. A mistake on this point will inevitably lead to a mistake through the
entire system of our belief. .
Now, you are aware that there are different theories, of Redemption. All
Christians hold that Christ died to redeem, but all Christians do not teach the
same redemption. We differ as to the nature of atonement, and as to the. design
of redemption. For instance, the Arminian holds that Christ, when he died,, did
not die with an intent to save any particular person; and they teach that Christ’s
death does not in itself secure, beyond doubt, the salvation of any one man living.
They believe that Christ died to make the salvation of all men possible, or that
by the doing of something else, any man who pleases may attain unto eternal life;
consequently, they are obliged to hold that if man’s will would not give way and
voluntarily surrender to grace, then Christ’s atonement would be unavailing.
They hold that there was no particularity and speciality in the death of Christ.
Christ died, according to them, as much for Judas in hell as for Peter who
mounted to heaven. They believe that for those who are consigned to eternal
fire, there was as true and real a redemption made as for those who now stand
before the throne of the Most High. Now, we believe no such thing. We hold
that Christ, when he died, had an object in view, and that object will most,
assuredly, and beyond a doubt, be accomplished. We measure the design of
Christ’s death by the effect of it. If any one asks us, “ What did Christ
design to do by his death ?” we answer that question by asking him another—
“ What has Christ done, or what will Christ do by his death?” For we
declare that the measure of the effect of Christ’s love, is the measure of the
design of it. We cannot so belie our reason as to think that the intention of
Almighty God could be frustrated, or that the design of so great a thing as the
atonement, can by any way whatever, be missed of. We hold —we are not afraid
to say what we believe—that Christ came into this world with the intention of
saving “ a multitude which no man can number;” and we believe that as the result
of this, every person for whom he died must, beyond the shadow of a doubt, be
cleansed from sin, and stand, washed in blood, before the Father’s throne. We do
not believe that Christ made any effectual atonement for those who are for ever
damned; we dare not think that the blood of Christ was ever shed with the
intention of saving those whom God foreknew never could be saved, and some of
whom were even in hell when Christ, according to some men’s account, died to
save them.
I have thus just stated our theory of redemption, and hinted at the differences
which exist between two great parties in the professing church. It shall be now
my endeavour to show the greatness of the redemption of Christ Jesus; and by so
doing, I hope to be enabled by God’s Spirit, to bring out the whole of the great
system of redemption, so that it may be understood by us all, even if all of us
cannot receive it. For you must bear this in mind, that some of you, perhaps, may
be ready to dispute things which I assert; but you will remember that this is
nothing to me; I shall at all times teach those things which I hold to be true,
without let or hindrance from any man breathing. You have the like liberty
to do the same in your own places, and to preach your own views in your own
assemblies, as I claim the right to preach mine, fully, and without hesitation.
Christ Jesus “gave his life a ransom for many;” and by that ransom he
wrought out for us a great redemption. I shall endeavour to show the greatness
of this redemption, measuring it in five ways. We shall note its greatness, first
of all, from the heniousness of our own guilt, from which he hath delivered us;
secondly, we shall measure his redemption by the sternness of divine justice ; thirdly,
we shall measure it by the price which he paid, the pangs which he endured ; then we
shall endeavour to magnify it, by noting the deliverance which he actually wrought
out; and we shall close by noticing the vast number for whom this redemption is made,
who in our text are described as “ many.” ...
I. First, then, we shall see that the redemption of Christ was no little thing, if
we do but measure it, first, by our own sins. My brethren, for a moment look at
the hole of the pit whence ye were digged, and the quarry whence ye were hewn.
Ye, who have been washed, and cleansed, and sanctified, pause for a moment, and
look back at the former state of your ignorance; the sins in which you indulged,
130 146


the crimes into which you were hurried, the continual rebellion against God in
which it was your habit to live. One sin can ruin a soul for ever ; it is not m the
power of the human mind to grasp the infinity of evil that slumbereth in the bowels
of one solitary sin. There is a very infinity of guilt couched in one transgression
against the majesty of heaven. If, then, you and I had sinned but once, nothing
but an atonement infinite in value could ever have washed away the sin and made
satisfaction for it. But has it been once that you and I have transgressed ? Nay,
my brethren, our iniquities are more in number than the hairs of our head ; they
have mightily prevailed against us. "We might as well attempt to number the sands
upon the sea-shore, or count the drops which in their aggregate do make the ocean,
as attempt to count the transgressions which have marked our lives. Let us go
back to our childhood. How early we began to sin ! How we disobeyed our parents,
and even then learned to make our mouth the house of lies ! In our childhood, how
full of wantonness and waywardness we were! Headstrong and giddy, we pre-
ferred our own way, and burst through all restraints which godly parents put upon
us. Nor did our youth sober us. Wildly we dashed, many of us, into the very
midst of the dance of sin. We became leaders in iniquity ; we not only sinned our-
selves, but we taught others to sin. And as for your manhood, ye that have
entered upon the prime of life, ye may be more outwardly sober, ye may be some-
what free from the dissipation of your youth; but how little has the man become
bettered! Unless the sovereign grace of God hath renewed us, we are now no
better than we were when we began; and even if it has operated, we have still
sins to repent of, for we all lay our mouths in the dust, and cast ashes on our
head, and cry, “ Unclean! Unclean 1 And oh! ye that lean wearily on your
staff, the support of your old age, have ye not sins still clinging to your garments?
Are your lives as white as the snowy hairs that crown your head? Do you not still
feel that transgression besmears the skirts of your robe, and mars its spotlessness?
How often are you now plunged into the ditch, till your own clothes do abhor you!
Cast your eyes over the sixty, the seventy, the eighty years, during which God hath
spared your lives j and can ye for a moment think it possible, that ye can number
up your innumerable transgressions, or compute the weight of the crimes which you
have committed ? oye stars of heaven! the astronomer may measure your dis-
tance and tell your height, but oye sins of mankind ! ye surpass all thought. O
ye lofty mountains! the home of the tempest, the birth-place of the storm ! man
may climb your summits and stand wonderingly upon your snows; but ye hills
of sin! ye tower higher than our thoughts; ye chasms of transgressions! ye are
deeper than our imagination dares to dive. Do you accuse me of slandering human
nature? It is because you know it not. If God had once manifested your heart
to yourself, you would bear me witness, that so far from exaggerating, my poor
wmrds fail to describe the desperateness of our evil. Oh! if we could each of us
look into our hearts to day—if our eyes could be turned within, so as to see the
iniquity that is graven as with the point of the diamond upon our stony hearts,
we should then say to the minister, that however he may depict the desperateness
of guilt, yet can he not by any means surpass it. How great then, beloved, must
be the ransom of Christ, when he saved us from all these sins! The men for whom
Jesus died, however great their sin, when they believe, are justified from all their
transgressions. Though they may have indulged in every vice and every lust
which Satan could suggest, and which human nature could perform, yet once
believing, all their guilt is washed away. Year after year may have coated them
with blackness, till their sin hath become of double dye; but in one moment of
faith, one triumphant moment of confidence in Christ, the great redemption takes
away the guilt of numerous years. Nay, more, if it were possible for all the sins
that men have done, in thought, or word, or deed, since worlds were made, or time
began, to meet on one poor head—the great redemption is all-sufficient to take all
these sins away, and wash the sinner whiter than the driven snow.
Oh ! who shall measure the heights of the Saviour’s all-sufficiency ? First, tell
how high is sin, and, then, remember that as Noah’s flood prevailed over the tops
of earth’s mountains, so the flood of Christ’s redemption prevails over the tops of
the mountains of our sins. In heaven’s courts there are to-day men that once
were murderers, and thieves, and drunkards, and whoremongers, and blasphemers,
and persecutors ; but they have been washed—they have been sanctified. Ask
them whence the brightness of their robes hath come, and where their purity hath
been achieved, and they, with united breath, tell you that they have washed their
147 131


robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. oye troubled consciences !
O ve’weary and heavy-laden ones ! O ye that are groaning on account of sin . the
areat redemption now proclaimed to you is-all-sufficient tor your wants ; and
thoulh yoim numerous sins exceed the stars that deck the sky here is an atone-
ment made for them all—a river which can overflow the whole of them, and carry
I,l measure of the a t o„emeut-the greatness of our guilt
II Now, secondly, we must measure the great redemption by the sterisness of
Divine justice. is love,” always loving ; but my next SfseJere i n his
at all interfere with this assertion. God is sternly just fl« y evt e m his
dealings with mankind. The God of the Bible is not the God of some men s
imagination, who thinks so little of sin that he passes it by without demandmg any
punishment for it. He is not the God of the men who imagine that ur trans
gressions are such little things, such mere peccadilloes that the God of heaven
winks at them, and suffers them to die forgotten. No i. J {sr a els Lob
hath declared concerning himself, “The Lord thy God is a « »
own declaration, “I will by no means clear the gui y. ne as severe
sinneth, it shall die.” Learn ye, my friends, to look upon God as severe
in his justice as if he were not loving, and yet as loving as if he were not severe
His love does not diminish his justice, nor does his j ustice in he least degree make
warfare upon his love. The two things are swectly hnhed t. get er n the atone
ment of Christ. But, mark, we can never understand the fulness c>f the atonanet
till we have first grasped the Scriptural truth of God s immense justice
was never an ill word spoken, nor an ill thought conceived, nor an evil deed done
for which God will not have punishment from some one or another. He will eit lcr
have satisfaction from you, or else from Christ. If you have no atonement to
bring through Christ, you must for ever lie paying the debt which you never can
pay in eternal misery ; for as surely as God is God, he will sooner lose Ins Godhead
than suffer one sin to go unpunished, or one particle of rebellion uurevenged You
may say that this character of God is cold, and stern, and severe. I cannot help
what you say of it ; it is nevertheless true. Such is the God of the Bible ; and
though we repeat it is true that he is love, it is no more true that he is love than
that he is full of justice, for every good thing meets in God, and is carried P
fection, whilst love reaches to consummate loveliness, justice reaches to the stern-
ness of inflexibility in him. He has no bend no warp m his character ; no at r
so predominates as to cast a shadow upon the other Love hath its full and
justice hath no narrower limit than his love. Oh! then, beloved think w gre
must have been the substitution of Christ, when it satisfied God for all the sinsrf
his people For man’s sin God demands eternal punishment; and God hath pre
pared a hell into which he casts those who die impenitent. Oh! my brethren, can
ye think what must have been the greatness of the atonement wlmdi was the
substitution for all this agony which God would have cart upon us. if he had
not poured it upon Christ. Look! look! look with solemn eye through the shades
that part us from the world of spirits, and see that house of misery which men call
hell !Ye cannot endure the spectacle. Remember that mthat] place ' there areispmts
for ever paying their debt to divine justice ; but though some of them have been
for these four thousand years sweltering in the flame, they are no nearer a 1 S
than when they began • and when ten thousand times ten thousand years shall
have rolled away, they will no more have made satisfaction to God for their guilt
than they have done up till now. And now can you grasp the thought of the
greatness of your Saviour’s mediation when he paid your debt, and paid it a at
once • so that there now remaineth not one farthing of debt owing from Christ s
people to their God, except a debt of love. To ustice the believer oweth not ling ;
though lie owed originally so much that eternity would not have been long enough
{ suffice for the paying of it, yet, in one moment Christ did pay it all, so that the
man who believeth is entirely ustified trom all guilt, and set free from all pumsh-
St, through what Jesus hath done. Think ye, then, how great Ins atonement
if I must^ust n paus{ h here, and utter another sentence. There are times when God
the Holy Spirit shows to men the sternness of justice in their own consciences.
There is a man here to-day who has just been cut to the heart with a sense - •
He was once a free man, a libertine, in bondage to n0I f; L than'that of
Lord sticks fast in his heart, and he has come under a bondage worse than that ot
148
132


It i • riov he tells me that his guilt haunts him everywhere. Tne
gypt. T see hl ™J° h d v ay t ’he Voli star, may escape the cruelties of his master and
ggro slave, guided by 1 f but this man feels that if he were to
?ach another land where he maybe - f gu ilt. He that hath been
ander the Tid».T«n »;« and him ,
ound hy many irons, can > eth prayers and tears and good works
berty; but this man tells yonthat he has sinner still, and
„t cannot got the try?“‘‘ ss ible. The captive in the
mancipation, do what he may, ™ . t in body; through Ins dungeon
ungeon is sometimes eagle that is no man’s slave.
,tails his spirit leaps and fl es to think one bright, one happy
hit this man is a sla\e in ms tn °iigi > has entered into his spirit,
honght. His sonl. U ' slavery in sleep, but
nd he is sorely afflicted. * P dreams of hell> by Hay he seems to feel it; he
his man cannot sleep; by g , t an( i d 0 w hat he may he cannot
cars a horning fhrnjco of hetakes the sacrament,
[uench it. He has been confirmed he has been naptisen and obeys
ic attends a church or he frequents a chapel he y
very canon, but the ferfsteCgry, l”°isUsThe sick, he clothes the
ions of weariness and woe, this ay preach this glorious Gospel
,„d happy are you that you fe.th.s, fhr „w to you I gretm you
>f the blessed God. you are me man iui obtain peace and
ias satisfied stern justice; and now Pursues vou “Look you there!
:onscience, is just to say to jour p V tj not stol3 y 0U ‘ m ’y tears would not
Hhrlst died for me; n,y h good worh sjy t „’ ere Logs the bleeding
S? S Hark'to his death-shrieU him dte! Art tbou e ass " t ° h “ a u
*“* and nfiud through Jesus Chris, thy
r i i + y n chalt thou know the greatness of his atonement, .
w! “in the third place, we may measure the greatness of Christ’s Redemption
by THE PRICK HE PAID how the pangg ofour Saviour; hut yet
somegSpse of them will afford us a little idea of the greatness of the price which
he paid for us. 0 Jesus, who shall describe thine agony?
“ Come, all ye springs,
Dwell in my head and eyes; come, clouds and rainl
Mv grief hath need of all the wat’ry things,
That nature hath produc’d. _ Let ev ry vein
Suck up a river to supply mine eyes,
My weary weeping eyes; too dry lor me,
Unless they get new conduits, new supplies,^
To bear them out, and with my state agree.
_ _ , „ 011 fr orpr from th v birth, a man of sorrows and griefs acquaint-
-0 Jesus! thou wast a sufferer f y perpetual shower, until the last dread hour
ance. Thy sufferings felJon thee mji ne pP & doud torrent , a cata ract of grief,
of darkness. Then not in a >o«, der j it is a night of frost and cold;
thine agonies did dash upon . e J in pray er. Hark to his
hut he is all abroad. U!S night the sleeps i - and lo £ k f n his face r Was
groans! upon mortal countenance as you can there behold?
ever sue su ® g? „ M sou i i s exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. He
Hear his traitors and is dragged away. Let us step to the place where
rises: he is seized by traitors 0 God! and what is this we see? What is
just now he vas en 0 a 0 e s uinod' Whence came it? Had he some wound
this that stains the ground? I is I"°° d - « H e sweat, as it were,
which oozed afresh through his \ h f ' uu± „ 0 agonies that surpass the
great drops of blood. fallmg do fferit \ at cannot be compassed in language
SSpnsS Zu
S/the o°peLg W onhe tragedy- hira tho “ C "“ C "’


to witness the consummation of it. He is hurried through the streets; he is dragged
first to one bar and then to another; he is cast and condemned before the Sanhedrim;
he is mocked by Herod; he is tried by Pilate. His sentence is pronounced—“ Let
him be crucified!” And now the tragedy cometh to its height. His back is bared;
he is tied to the low Roman column; the bloody scourge ploughs furrows on his
back, and with one stream of blood his back is red—a crimson robe that proclaims
him emperor of misery. He is taken into the guardroom; his eyes are bound, anc
then they buffet him, and say, “ Prophecy, who it was that smote thee?” They spi;
into bis face; they plait a crown of thorns, and press his temples with it; they
array him in a purple robe; they bow their knees, and mock him. All silently he
sits; he answers not a word. “When he was reviled, he reviled not again,” bu;
committed himself unto him whom he came to serve. And now they take him, anc
with many a jeer and jibe they drive him from the place, and hurry him througl
the streets. Emaciated by continual fastings, and depressed with agony of spiri
he stumbles beneath his cross.” Daughters of Jerusalem! he faints in your streets
They raise him up; they put his cross upon another’s shoulders, and they urge hitu
on, perhaps with many a spear-prick, till at last he reaches the mount of doom
Rough soldiers seize him, and hurl him on his back; the transverse wood is laic
beneath him; his arms are stretched to reach the necessary distance; the nails are
grasped; four hammers at one moment drive four nails through the tenderest parts
of his body; and there he lies upon his own place of execution dying on his cross.
It is not done yet. The cross is lifted by the rough soldiers. There is the socket
prepared for it. It is dashed into its place; they fill up the place with earth; and
there it stands.
But see the Saviour’s limbs, how they quiver ! Every bone has been put
out of joint by the dashing of the cross into that socket! How he weeps !
How he sighs ! How he sobs ! Nay, more, hark how at last he shrieks in
agony, “My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?” 0 sun, no wonder
thou didst shut thine eye, and look no longer upon a deed so cruel! 0 rocks! no
wonder that ye did melt and rend your hearts with sympathy, when your Creator
died! Never man suffered as this man suffered. Even death itself relented,
and many of those ivho had been in their graves arose and came into the city. This
however, is but the outward. Believe me, brethren, the inward was far worse.
What our Saviour suffered in his body was nothing, compared to what he endured
in his soul. You cannot guess, and I cannot help you to guess, what he endured
within. Suppose for one moment—to repeat a sentence I have often used—suppose
a man who has passed into hell—suppose his eternal torment could all be brought
into one hour; and then suppose it could be multiplied by the number of the saved,
which is a number past all human enumeration. Can you now think what a vast
aggregate of misery there would have been in the sufferings of all God’s people, if
they had been punished through all eternity? And recollect that Christ had to
suffer an equivalent for all the hells of all his redeemed. I can never express that
thought better than by using those oft-repeated words: it seemed as if hell was
put into his cup; he seized it, and, “ At one tremendous draught of love, he drank
damnation dry.” So that there was nothing left of all the pangs and miseries of
hell for his people ever to endure. I say not that he suffered the same, but he did
endure an equivalent for all this, and gave God the satisfaction for all the sins of
all his people, and consequently gave him an equivalent for all their punishment.
Now can ye dream, can ye guess the great redemption of our Lord Jesus Christ?
IV. I shall be very brief upon the next head. The fourth way of measuring the
Saviour’s agonies is this: we must compute them by the glorious deliverance
WHICH HE HAS EFFECTED.
Rise up, believer; stand up in thy place, and this day testify to the greatness of
what the Lord hath done for thee! Let me tell it for thee. I will tell thy experi-
ence and mine in one breath. Once my soul was laden with sin; I had revolted
against God, and grievously transgressed. The terrors of the law gat hold upon
me; the pangs of conviction seized me. I saw myself guilty. I looked to heaven,
and I saw an angry God sworn to punish me; I looked beneath me and I saw a
yawning hell ready to devour me. I sought by good works to satisfy my conscience;
but all in vain. I endeavoured by attending to the ceremonies of religion to appease
the pangs that I felt within; but all without effect. My soul was exceeding sorrowful,
almost unto death. I could have said with the ancient mourner, “ My soul chooseth
strangling and death rather than life.” This was the great question that always
134 150


perplexed me: “ I have sinned; God must punish me; how can he be just if he
does not? Then, since he is just, what is to become of me?” At last mine eye
turned to that sweet word which says, “ The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth
from all sin.” I took that text to my chamber; I sat there and meditated. I saw
one hanging on a cross. It was my Lord Jesus. There was the thorn-crown, and
there the emblems of unequalled and peerless misery. I looked upon him, and my
thoughts recalled that word which says. “ This is a faithful saying, and worthy of
all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.” Then said
I within myself, “ Did this man die for sinners? lam a sinner; then he died for
me. Those he died for he will save. He died for sinners; lam a sinner; he died
for me; he will save me.” My soul relied upon that truth. I looked to him, and
as I “ viewed the flowing of his soul-redeeming blood,” my spirit rejoiced, for I
could say,
“ Nothing in my hands I bring,
Simply to this cross I cling;
Naked look to him for dress;
Helpless, come to him for grace!
Black, I to this fountain fly;
Wash me, Saviour, or I die!”
And now, believer, you shall tell the rest. The moment that you believed, your
burden rolled from your shoulder, and you became light as air. Instead of darkness
you had light; for the garments of heaviness you had the robes of praise. Who
shall tell your joy since then? You have sung on earth, hymns of heaven, and in
your peaceful soul you have anticipated the eternal Sabbath of the redeemed. Be-
cause you have believed you have entered into rest. Yes, tell it the wide world
over; they that believe, by Jesus’ death are justified from all things from which
they could not be freed by the works of the law. Tell it in heaven, that none can
lay anything to the charge of God’s elect. Tell it upon earth, that God’s redeemed
are free from sin in Jehovah’s sight. Tell it even in hell, that God’s elect can
never come there; for Christ hath died for them, and who is he that shall
condemn them ?
Y. I have hurried over that, to come to the last point, which is the sweetest of
all. Jesus Christ, we are told in our text, came into the world “to give his life a
ransom for many.” The greatness of Christ’s redemption may be measured by the
extent op the design of it. He gave his life “ a ransom for many.” I must now
return to that controverted point again. We are often told (I mean those of us
who are commonly nicknamed by the title of Calvinists —and we are not very much
ashamed of that; we think that Calvin, after all, knew more about the gospel than
almost any man who has ever lived, uninspired)—We are often told that we limit
the atonement of Christ, because we say that Christ has not made a satisfaction
for all men, or all men would be saved. Now, our reply to this is, that, on the
other hand, our opponents limit it: we do not. The Arminians say, Christ died for
all men. Ask them what they mean by it. Did Christ die so as to secure the salva-
tion of all men ? They say, “ No, certainly not.” We ask them the next question—
Did Christ die so as to secure the salvation of any man in particular? They answer
“No.” They are obliged to admit this, if they are consistent. They say “ No; Christ
has died that any man may be saved if”—and then follow'certain conditions of salva-
tion. We say, then, we will just go back to the old statement —Christ did not die
so as beyond a doubt to secure the salvation of anybody, did he? You must say
“No;” you are obliged to say so, for you believe that even after a man has been
pardoned, he may yet fall from grace, and perish. Now, who is it that limits the
death of Christ ? Why, you. You say that Christ did not die so as to infallibly
secure the salvation of anybody, We beg your pardon, when you say we limit
Christ’s death; we say, “No, my dear sir, it is you that do it. We say Christ so
died that he infallibly secured the salvation of a multitude that no man can number,
who through Christ’s death not only may be saved, but are saved, must be saved,
and cannot by any possibility run the hazard of being anything but saved. You
are welcome to your atonement; you may keep it. We will never renounce ours
for the sake of it.
Now, beloved, when you hear any one laughing or jeering at a limited atonement,
you may tell him this. General atonement is like a great wide bridge wflth only half
151 135


an arch; it does not go across the stream : it only professes to go half way; it does
not secure the salvation of anybody. Now, I had rather put my foot upon a bridge
as narrow as Hungerford, which went all the way across, than on a bridge that
was as wide as the world, if it did not go all the way across the stream. lam told
it is my duty to say that all men have been redeemed, and I am told that there
is a Scriptural warrant for it—“ Who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified
in due time.” Now, that looks like a very, very great argument indeed on the other
side of the question. For instance, look here. “ The whole world is
gone after him.” Did all the world go after Christ? “ Then went all Judea,
and were baptized of him in Jordan.” Was all Judea, or all Jerusalem
baptized in Jordan? “Ye are of God, little children,” and “ the whole world lieth in
the wicked one.” Does “the whole world” there mean everybody? If so, how
was it, then, that there were some who were “of God?” The words “world” and
“all” are used in some seven or eight senses in Scripture; and it is very rarely
that “ all ” means all persons, taken individually. The words are generally used to
signify that Christ has redeemed some of all sorts —some Jews, some Gentiles, some
rich, some poor, and has not restricted his redemption to either Jew or Gentile.
Leaving controversy, however, I will now answer a question. Tell me then, sir,
who did Christ die for ? Will you answer me a question or two, and I will tell
you whether he died for you. Do you want a Saviour? Do you feel that you need
a Saviour? Are you this morning conscious of sin? Has the Holy Spirit taught
you that you are lost? Then Christ died for you, and you will be saved. Are you
this morning conscious that you have no hope in the world but Christ? Do you feel
that you of yourself cannot offer an atonement that can satisfy God’s justice? Have
you given up all confidence in yourselves? Andean you say upon your bended knees,
“ Lord, save, or I perish?” Christ died for you. If you are saying this morning,
“ I am as good as I ought to be; I can get to heaven by my own good works,” then,
remember, the Scripture says of Jesus, “I came not to call the righteous, but
sinners to repentance.” So long as you are in that state I have no atonement to
preach to you. But if this morning you feel guilty, wretched, conscious of your
guilt, and are ready to take Christ to be your only Saviour, I can not only say to
you that you may be saved, but what is better still, that you will be saved. When
you are stripped of everything but hope in Christ, when you are prepared to come
empty-handed and take Christ to be your all, and to be yourself nothing at all,
then you may look up to Christ, and you may say, “ Thou dear, thou bleeding
Lamb of God! thy griefs were endured for me; by thy stripes lam healed, and by
thy sufferings lam pardoned.” And then see what peace of mind you will have;
for if Christ has died for you, you cannot be lost. God will not punish twice for
one thing. If God punished Christ for your sin, he will never punish you. “ Pay-
ment, God’sjustice cannottwice demand, first, at the bleeding surety’s hand, and then
again at mine.” We can to day, if we believe in Christ, march to the very throne of
God, stand there, and if it is said, “ Art thou guilty?” we can say, “ Yes, guilty.” But
if the question is put, “ What have you to say why you should not be punished for
your guilt?” We can answer, “ Great God, thy justice and thy love are both
our guarantees that thou wilt not punish us for sin; for didst thou not punish Christ
for sin for us? How canst thou, then, be just—how canst thou be God at all, if
thou dost punish Christ the substitute, and then punish man himself afterwards?”
Your only question is, “ Did Christ die for me?” And the only answer we can
give is—“ This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ came
into the world to save sinners.” Can you write your name down among the
sinners—not among the complimentary sinners, but among those that feel it,
bemoan it, lament it, seek mercy on account of it? Are you a sinner? That felt,
that known, that professed, you are now invited to believe that Jesus Christ died
for you, because you are a sinner; and you are bidden to cast yourself upon this
great immovable rock, and find eternal security in the Lord Jesus Christ.
136
152


The New Park Street Pulpit.
A PREACHER FROM THE DEAD.
A Sermon
DELIVERED ON SABBATH EVENING, FEBRUARY 26, 1857, BY THE
REV. C. H. SPURGEON,
A T THE MUSIC HALL, ROYAL SURREY GARDENS.
" And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they he persuaded
though one rose from the dead. —Luke xvi. 31.
Man is very loath to think ill of himself. The most of mankind are very prone
to indulge in apologies for sin. They say, “If we had lived in oetter times
we had been better men; if we had been born into this world under happier
auspices we should have been holier; and it we had been placed in more ex-
cellent circumstances we should have been more inclined to the right. Ihe
mass of men, when they seek the cause of their sin, seek it anywhere but in
the right place. They will not blame their own nature for it; they will not
find fault with their own corrupt heart, but they will lay the blame anywhere
else. Some of them find fault with their peculiar position. “If,” says one,
“I had been born rich, instead of being poor, I should not have been dis-
honest.” “Or if,” says another, “ I had been born in middle life, instead of
being rich, I should not have been exposed to such temptations to lust and
pride as I am now; but my very condition is so adverse to piety, that I am
compelled by the place I hold in society, to be anything but what I ought to
be.” Others turn round and find fault with the whole of society; they say
that the whole organism of society is wrong; they tell us that everything in
government, everything that concerns the state, everything which melts men
into commonwealths is all so bad that they cannot be good while things, are
what they are. They must have a revolution, they must upset everything;
and then they think they could be holy! Many on the other hand throw the
blame on their training. If they had not been so brought up by their parents,
if they had not heen so exposed in their youth, they would not have been what
they are. It is their parent’s fault; the sin lay at their father’s or their
mother’s door. Or it is their constitution. Hear them speak for themselves. If
I had such a temper as so-and-so, what a good man I would be! But with my
headstrong disposition it is impossible. It is all very well for. you to talk to me;
but men have different turns of mind, and my turn of mind is such that I could
not by any means be a serious character ; ” and so he throws the blame, on his
constitution. Others go a deal farther, and throw the blame on the ministry.
“ If,” say they, “ at one time the minister had been more earnest in preaching,
I should have been a better man ; if it had heen my privilege to sit under
sounder doctrine and hear the Word more faithfully preached,.l .should have
been better.” Or else they lay it at the door of professors of religion, and say,
“ If the church were more consistent, if there were no hypocrites and no for-
malists, then we should reform !” Ah ! sirs, you are putting the saddle on. the
wrong horse, you are laying the burden on the wrong back ; the blame is in
your hearts, nowhere else. If your hearts were renewed you would be better;
but until that is done, if society were remodelled to perfection, if ministers
were angels, and professors of religion were seraphs, you would be none the
better; but having less excuse for your sin, you would be doubly guilty, and
perish with a more terrible destruction. But yet men will always be having
it, that if things were different they would be different too; whereas, the diiier-
ence must be made in themselves, if they begin in the right place.
Amongst other whims which have occured to the human mind, such an one
No. 143. Penny Pulpit, No. 2,813.


as that of my text may sometimes have arisen. “ If,” said the rich man in
hell “if one should-arise from the dead, if Lazarus should go from heaven to
preach, my hardened brethren would repent.” And some have been apt to
sav u lf my aged father, or some venerable patriarch could rise from the
dea*d and preach, we should all of us turn to God.” That is another way of
casting the blame in the wrong quarter: we shall endeavour, if we can, to re-
fute such a supposition as that this morning, and affirm most strenuously the
doctrine of the text, that “ If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither
will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. Let us proceed wnh
this subject.
Suppose a preacher should come from another world to preach to us, we must
naturally suppose that he came from heaven. Even the rich man did not ask.
that he or any of his compeers in torment might go out of hell to preach.
Spirits that are lost and given up to unutterable wickedness, could not
visit this earth; and if they did, they could not preach the truth, noi
lead us on the road to heaven which they had not trodden themselves, lhe
advent of a damned spirit upon earth would, be a curse, a blight, a withering
blast; we need not suppose that such a thing ever did or could occur. Ihe
preacher from another world, if such could come, must come from heaven, tie
must be a Lazarus who had lain in Abraham’s bosom, a pure, perfect, and holy
being. Now, imagine for a moment that such an one had descended upon
edrth; suppose that we heard to-morrow a sudden piece of news-—that a vener-
able spirit, who had been a long time buried, had on a sudden burst his cere-
ments, lifted up his coffin-lid, and was now preaching the word of life. Oh .
what a rush there would be to hear him preach! What place m this wide
world would be large enough to hold his massive congregations. How would
you rush to listen to him! How many thousands of portraits would'be pub-
lished of him, representing him in the dread winding-sheet of death, or as an
angel fresh from heaven. Oh! how would this city be stirred : and not this
city only but this whole land ! Nations far remote would soon hear the news ;
and every ship would be freighted with passengers, bringing men and women
to hear this wondrous preacher and traveller who had returned from the bourne
unknown. And how would you listen ? And how solemnly would you gaze
at that unearthly spectre! And how would your ears be attentto his every
word! His faintest syllable would be caught and published everywhere
throughout the world —the utterances of a man who hadbeen dead and was alive
again. And we are very apt to suppose, that if such a thing should happen,
there would be numberless conversions, for surely the congregations thus
attracted would be immensely blest. Many hardened sinners would be led to
repent: hundreds of halters would be made to decide, and great good would
be done. Ah! stop: though the first part of the fairy dream should occur, yet
would not the last. If some one should rise from the dead, yet would sinners
no more repent through his preaching than through the preaching of any other.
God might bless such preaching to salvation, if he pleased; but in itself theie
would be no more power in the preaching of the sheeted dead, or of e
glorified spirit, than there is in the preaching of feeble man to-day. I hough
one should rise from the dead, they would not repent. .
But yet, many men would suppose that advantages would arise from the
resurrection of a saint, who could testify to what he had seen and heard.
Now, the advantages, I suppose, could only be three. Some wou t say
there would be advantage in the strength of evidence which such a man could give
to the truth of Scripture ; for you would say, If a man did actually come from
the pearly-gated city of Jerusalem, the home of the blest, then there would
be no more dispute about the truth of revelation. That would be settled.
Some would suppose that he could tell us more than Moses and the prophets
had told us, and that there would be an.advantage in the instruction which he could
confer, as well as in the evidence which he would bear. And, thirdly, there
may be some who suppose that it would be an advantage game in le manner in
which such an one would speak , “ For surely,” say they, he would speak with
great eloquence, with a far mightier power, and with a deeper feeling than
any common preacher who had never beheld the solemnities of another world.
Now, these three points one after another, and we think we will settle them.
999
286


I. First, it is thought that if one did come from the dead to preach, there
would be a confirmation of the truth of the gospel, and a testimony
borne at which jeering infidelity would stand aghast in silence. Stop, we will
see about that. We do not think so We believe that the resurrection of one
dead man to-day, to come into this hall and preach, would be no confirmation
of the to any person here present who does not believe it already.
If, my friends, the testimony of one man who had been raised from the dead
were of any value for the confirming of the gospel, would not God, have used it
before now ? This shall be my first argument. It is undoubtedly true that some
have risen from the dead. We find accounts in Holy Scripture of some men
who by the power of Christ Jesus, or through the instrumentality of prophets,
were raised from the dead; but ye will note this memorable fact, that they
never any of them spoke one word which is recorded, by way of telling us what
they saw while they were dead. I shall not enter into any discussion as to
whether their souls slept during the time of their death, or whether they were m
heaven or not. That would be a discussion without profit, only gendering dis-
putes, which could yield no fruit. I only say, it is memorable that there is not
a record of any one of them having given any description of what they saw
while they were dead. Oh, what secrets might he have told out, who had laid
in his grave four days! Do ye not suppose that his sisters questioned him.
Do ye not think that they asked him what he saw—whether he had stood before
the burning throne of God, and been judged for the things done in his boy,
and whether he had entered into rest ? But, however they may have asked,
it is certain he gave no answer; for had he given an answer we should have
known it now; tradition would have cherished the record. _ And do ye lemem-
ber, when Paul once preached a long sermon, even until midnight, there was a
young man in the third loft named Eutychus, who fell asleep, and fell down,
and was taken up dead ? Paul came down and prayed, and Eutychus was res-
tored to life. But did Eutychus get up and preach after he had come from the
dead? No; the thought never seems to have struck a single person m the
assembly. Paul went on with his sermon, and they sat and listened to him,
and did not care one fig about what Eutychus had seen ; for Eutychus had no-
thing more to tell them than Paul had. Of all the number of those who by
divine might have been brought again from the shades of death, 1 repeat the
assertion, we have not one secret told; we have not one mysteiy unravelled
by them all. Now, God knoweth best; we will not compare our surmises to
divine decision. If God decided that resurrection men should be silent, it was
best it should be ; their testimony would have been of little worth or help to us,
or else it would have been borne.
But again, I think it will strike our minds at once, that if this very day a man
should rise from his tomb, and come here to affirm the truth of the gospel,
infidel world would be no more near believing than it is now. Here comes Mr. Inhdei
Critic. He denies the evidences of the Bible ; evidences which so clearly prove
its authenticity, that we are obliged to believe him to be either blasphemous or
senseless, in that he does so, and we leave him his choice between the two. But
he dares to deny the truth of Holy Scripture, and will have it that all the
miracles whereby it is attested are untrue and false. Do you think that one
who had risen from the dead would persuade such a man as that to believe.
What? when God’s whole creation having been ransacked by the hand of
science, has only testified to the truth of revelation—when the whole history of
buried cities and departed nations has but preached out the truth that the Bible
was true —wffien every strip of land in the far-off East has been an exposition
and a confirmation of the prophecies of Scripture ; if men are yet unconvinced,
do ye suppose that one dead man rising from the tomb would convince them.
No; I see the critical blasphemer already armed for his prey. Hark to him,
“I am not quite sure that you ever were dead ; sir, you profess tobe risen fiom
the dead ; I do not believe you. You say you have been dead, and have gone t?
heaven ;my dear man you were in a trance. You must bring proof from the
parish register that you were dead.” The proof is brought that he was dead.
* Well, now you must prove that you were buried.” It is proved that he was
buried, and it is proved that some sexton in old times, did take up his dry bones
and cast his dust in the air. “ That is very good ; now I want you to prove
223 287


that you are the identical man that was buried.” “Well I am, I know I am;
I tell you as an honest man I have been to heaven, and I have come back
again “ Well then,” says the infidel, “it is not consistent with reason ;it is
ridiculous to suppose that a man who was dead and buried could ever come to
life again, and so I don’t believe you, I tell you so straight to your face.” That
is how men would answer him ; and instead of having only the sin of denying
many miracles men would have to add to it the guilt of denying another ;
but they would not be so much as a tithe of an inch nearer to conviction ; and
certainly, if the wonder were done in some far-off land, and only reported to the
rest of the world, I can suppose that the whole infidel world would exclaim
“ Simple childish tales and such traditions have been current elsewhere ; but we
are sensible men, we do not believe them.” Although a churchyard should start
into life, and stand up before the infidel who denies the truth of Christianity ;
I declare I do not believe there would be enough evidence in all the church-
yards in the world to convince him. Infidelity would still cry for some-
thing more. It is like the horse-leech; it crieth, u Give, give! 1 rove a
point to an infidel, and he wants it proved again ; let it be as clear as noon
day to him from the testimony of many witnesses, yet doth he not believe it.
In fact, he doth believe it; but he pretendeth not to do so, and is an infidel in
spite of himself. But certainly the dead man s rising would be little worth
for the conviction of such men. v
But remember, my dear friends, that the most numerous class ot unbelievers
are a set of people who never think at all. There are a great number of people
in this land that eat and drink, and everything else except think; at least, they
think enough to take their shop shutters down of a morning, and put them up
at night; they think enough to know a little about the rising of the funds, or
the rate per cent, of interest, or something like how articles are selling, or the
price of bread ; but their brains seem to be given themfor nothing at all, except
to meditate upon bread and cheese. To them religion is a matter of very small
concern. They dare say the Bible is very true, they dare say religion is all
right; but it does not often trouble them much. They suppose they are Chris-
tians ; for were they not christened when they were babies ? They must be
Christians—at least they suppose so ; but they never sit down to enquire what
religion is. They sometimes go to church and chapel and elsewhere; but it
does not signify much to them. One minister may contradict another, but they
do not know ; they dare say they are both right. One minister may fall foul
of another in almost every doctrine; it does not signify, and they pass over
religion with the queer idea—“ God Almighty will not ask us where we went
to, I dare say.” They do not exercise their judgments at all. Thinking is such
hard work for them that they never trouble themselves at all about it. Now,
if a man were to rise from the dead to-morrow these people would never be
startled. Yes, yes, they would go and see him once, just as they go and see
any other curiosity, the living skeleton, or Tom Thumb; they would talk about
him a good deal, and say, “There’s a man risen from the dead, and possibly
some winter’s evening they might read one of his sermons; but they would never
give themselves trouble to think whether his testimony was worth anything or
not No they are such blocks they never could be stirred ; and if the ghost
were to come to any of their houses the most they would feel would be, they
were in a fearful fright; but as to what he said, that would never exercise then-
leaden brains, and never stir their stony senses. Though one should rise from
the dead, the great mass of these people never would be affected. _ .
And besides, my friends, if men will not believe the witness of God, it is impossi-
ble that they should believe the witness oj man. If the voice of God. from the top of
Sinai and his voice by Moses in the hook of the Law, if his voice by the divers
prophets in the Old Testament, and especially his own word by his own bon,
who hath brought immortality to light by the gospel, cannot convince men,
then there is nothing in the world that can of itself accomplish the woik. No,
if God speak once, but man regardeth him not, we need not wonder that we
have to preach many a time without being regarded; and we should not harbour
the thought that some men who had risen from the dead would have a greater
power to convince than the words of God. If this Bible be not enough to con-
vert you, apart from the Spirit, (and certainly it is not) then there is nothing
288 224


in the world that can, apart from his influence; and if the revelation which God
has given of his Son Jesus Christ in this blessed hook, if the Holy Scripture be
not in the hands of God enough to bring you to the faith of Christ, then, though
an angel from heaven, then, though the saints from glory, then, though God
himself should descend on earth to preach to you, you would go on unsaved and
unblest. “If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be per-
suaded, though one rose from the dead.” That is the first point.
11. It is imagined, however, that if one of “the spirits of the just made
perfect ” would come to earth, even if he did not produce a most satisfactory
testimony to the minds of sceptics, he would yet be able to give abundant infor-
mation concerning the kingdom of heaven. “ Surely,” some would say, if
Lazarus had come from the bosom of Abraham, he could have unfolded a tale
that would have made our hair stand upright, while he talked of the torments
of the rich man; surely, if he had looked from the gates of bliss, he might
have told us about the worm that dieth not and the fire that never can be
be quenched : some horrible details, some thrilling words of horror and of terror
he might have uttered, which would have unfolded to us more of the future
state of the lost than we know now.” “ And,” says the bright-eyed believer,
“ if he had come on earth he might have told us of the saints’ everlasting rest:
he might have pictured to us that glorious city which hath the Lord God
for its eternal light, the streets whereof are of gold, and its gates of pearl.
Oh ! how sweetly would he have descanted upon the bosom of Christ, and the
felicity of the blest. He had been
“Up where eternal ages roll;
Where solid pleasures never die,
And fruits immortal feast the soul.”
Surely he would have brought down with him some handfulls of the clusters
of Eshcol; he would have been able to tell us some celestial secrets, which
would have cheered our hearts, and nerved us to run the heavenly race, and
put a cheerful courage on. Stop ; that is a dream too. A spirit of the just
descending from heaven could tell us no more that would he of any use to us
than we know already. What more could that spirit from heaven tell us of the
pains of hell than we do already know? Is not the Bible explicit enough? Did
not the lips of Christ dreadfully portray the lake of fire ? Did he not, even he
who wept over men, did he not in awful language tell us that God would say
at last, Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his
angels?” Do you need more thrilling words than these? “ The worm that
dieth not, and the fire that is not quenched.” Do you need more terrible
warnings than these, —“The wicked shall be cast into hell, with all the nations
that forget God?” Do you want more awful warnings than this—“ Who among
us shall dwell with everlasting burnings ?” What! do you want a full er declara-
tion than the words of God. “Tophet is prepared of old; the pile thereof
is wood and much smoke; the breath of the Lord like a stream of brimstone
doth kindle it?” You cannot want more than Scripture gives of that. Even
that you try to run away and escape from ; you say the book is too horrible, and
tells you too much of damnation and hell. Sirs, if you think there is too much
there, and therefore reject it, would you stand for an instant to listen to one
who should tell you more? No; ye do not wish to know more, nor would it
be of any use to you if you did. Do you need more details concerning the
judgment, that day of wrath to which each of us is drawing nigh ? Are we not
told that the king “ shall sit on the throne of his glory, and before him shall
be gathered all people; and he shall divide them the one from the other, as
the shepherd divideth the sheep from the goats.” Suppose there were one here
who had seen the solemn preparation for the great assize—one who had stood
where the throne is to be planted, and had marked the future with a more
piercing eye than ours. Yet of what avail would it be to us ? Could he tell us
more than Holy Writ hath told us now—at least, any which would be more
profitable ? Perhaps he knows no more than we. And one thing lam
sure of, he would not tell us more about the rule of judgment than we know
225 289


now. Spirit that hath returned from another world, tell me, how are men
iudged ? Why are they condemned? Why are they saved? I hear him say,
“ Men are condemned because of sin. Read the ten commandments of Moses,
and you will find the ten great condemnations whereby men are for ever cut
olf.” I knew that before, bright Spirit; thou hast told me nothing ! “No,”
says he, “ and nothing can I tell.” “Because I was hungry, and ye gave me no
meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink; I was sick, and ye visited me
not; I was in prison, and ye came not unto me; therefore, inasmuch as ye did
it not unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye did it not to me. Depart,
ve cursed!” “ Why, Spirit, was that the word of the King?” “It was,” says
he. “ I have read that, too ; thou hast told me no more.” If you do not know
the difference between right and wrong from reading the Scripture, you would
not know it if a spirit should tell you; if you do not know the road to hell and
the road to heaven from the Bible itself, you would never know it at all. No
hook could be more clear, no revelation more distinct, no testimony more plain.
And since without the agency of the Spirit, these testimonies are insufficient
for salvation, it follows that no further declaration would avail. Salvation is
ascribed wholly to God, and man’s ruin only to man. What more could a spirit
tell us, than —a distinct declaration of the two great truths. “ O Israel, thou
hast destroyed thyself; but in me is thine help found!”
Beloved, we do solemnly say again, that Holy Scripture is so perfect,. so
complete, that it cannot want the supplement of any declaration concerning
a future state. All that you ought to know concerning the future you may
know from Holy Scripture. It is not right to say with Young—
“ My hopes and fears start up alarmed,
And o’er life’s narrow" verge look down,
On what ? A bottomless abyss,
A dread eternity.”
It is not right to say that, as if it were all we know. Blessed be God, the
saint does not look down upon a bottomless abyss ; he looks up to the celestial
“ city that hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God.” Nor do even
the wicked look down upon an unknown abyss; for to them it is clearly re-
vealed. Though “ eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,” the tortures of the lost,
yet hath Holy Scripture sufficiently told us of them to make it a well-mapped
road; so that when they meet with death, and hell, and terror, it shall
be no new thing; for they heard of it before, and it was distinctly re-
vealed to them. Nothing more could we know that would be of any use.
Tattlers, idle curiosity people, and such like, would be mightily delighted with
such a man. Ah! what a precious preacher he would be to them, if they could
get him all the way from heaven, and get him to tell all its secrets out! Oh,
ow would they love him—how would they delight in him ! “For,” say they,
“he knows a great deal more than anybody else ; he knows a great deal more
than the Bible tells us ; he knows a great many little details, and it is wonder-
ful to hear him explain them !” But there the matter would end. It would be
merely the gratification of curiosity ; there would be no conferring of blessing;
for if to know more of the future state would be a blessing for us, God would
not withhold it; there can be no more told us. If what you know would not
persuade you, “Neither would you be persuaded though one rose from the
dead.”
111. Yet some say, “surely, if there were no gain in matter, yet there
would be a gain in manner. Oh, if such a spirit had descended from the
spheres, how would he preach? What eloquence celestial would flow from his
lips! How majestically would he word his speech! How mightily would he
move his hearers! What marvellous words would he utter! What sentences
that might start us from our feet, and make us quiver with their thrilling in-
fluence. There would be no dulness in such a preacher; it would be no fatigue
to hear him ; there would be no want of affection in him, and surely no want
of earnestness; we might well be pleased to hear him every day, and never
weary with his wondrous speech. Such a preacher earth hath never heard.
Oh, if he would but come! How would we listen!” —Stay! that too is a dream.
290 226


t j v Voiio tint T n7arus from Abraham’s bosom would not be so good a
I do believe that Lazarus hut whose lips have been touched with a
K&* O f «£* yoU h have a h r d _ a .h« have been a,
when r have s at beneath *•*%*«*£*&
been so grievously frigged and. smitten
If?hl\ Cl solemn “preaching of some mighty preacher whom God had inspired
for the time—if that did not save you, what can save you, apart from heiin-
fl nf tiip Snirit? And oh 1 you have heard more solemn preaching than
r-SabTSiictol;’TTmeTome, Tnd Vas
You have" not foTgTem ifttle Jfiy TeachTyou a
me?” That was a solemn sermon to you. What mo f e sh ete L
hive said ? Ye have not forgotten yet, how when your father lay a dying (.
holy man of Godlie had beln in 4 day
with vour brothers and sisters stood around the bed, and he addressed you one
by one Woman! you have not forgotten yet, despite all your sm and w cked-
nessTce then how he looked you in the face and said, “My daughter twere
better for thee that thou hadst never been born than that thou shouldst be a
despiser of Christ and a neglector of his salvation, Amd you have not for-
gotten how he looked when with solemn tears m his eyes he addressed yon and
said “Mv children, I charge you by death and by eternity, I chaige you, if
you’love your own souls, despise not the gospel of Christ; for ® a Tr thlnVaT’
and turn unto God and live.” What preacher do you want better than that.
What voice more solemn than the voice of that of your own parent upon the
confines of eternity? And you have not yet quite cleani ej c *P®* ftom -
fluence of another solemn scene. You had a friend, a so-called £ eaci he
a traitor one who lived in sin and rebelled against God with a high hand ana
an oSetched arm. You remember his death-bed when la? near I loileath
terrors got hold of him ; the flames of hell bega „ I• ’
before he had clean departed. . You have not yet forptten his
screams; you have not yet quite got from your visiom inijour^jeam that
hanrl ilirmicrh which the finger nails were almost pierced in agony, and that lace,
con tor ted direful witchin gs of dismay. You
from that horrid yell with which the spirit entered the realm of darkness and
forsook the land of the living. What more of a preacher do you want ? Have
von heard this preaching, and yet have you not repented? then verily, it
after all this you are hardened, neither would you be persuaded though one
1 ° AIG °but you say", you want some one to preach to you more feelingly. Then,
Sir, you cannot hav/him in the preacher you desire A
could not he a feeling preacher. It would be impossible for Lazurua. who had
been in Abraham’s bosom, to preach to you with emotion. As a perfect being
of course he must be supremely happy. Imagine this |rath of God
happy being preaching to you, about repentance and the wrath ol Cod.
nofsee him? there is a placid smile ever upon his. brow ; theflight of
heaven gilds his face ;he is talking about the torments , of . he , U > 14 as ever
for sighs and groans; but he cannot sigh; his face is just as placid as ever.
He is speakin| of the torments of the wicked, it was the tame for teara, he
cannot weep ; that were incompatible.with blessedness. The ma . P 3
of dreadful things with a smile upon his face; there is summer on his brow, and
227 291


winter on his lips—heaven in his eyes, and hell in his mouth. \ou could not
bear such a preacher; he would seem to mock you. Ay, it needs a man to
preach, a man like yourselves, who is capable of feeling There wants one
who, when he preaches of Christ, smiles on his hearers with love—who, when
he tells of terror, quails in his own spirit whilst he utters the wrath of God.
The great power of preaching, next to the power of Clod s Spirit, lies in the
preacher’s feeling it. We shall never do much good m preaching unless we
feel what we utter. “Knowing the terrors of the Lord we persuade men. A« w ,
a glorified spirit from heaven could not feel these things ; he could show but
little emotion. True, he could speak of the glories of heaven ; and how would
his face grow brighter, and brighter, and brighter, as he told the wonders of
that upper; world ! But when he came to cry “ Flee from the wrath to come,
the voice would sound as sweet when he spoke of death and judgment, as when
he spoke of glory ; and that would make sad discord, the sound not answenng
to the sense—the modulations of his voice being unfit to express the idea upon
the mind. Such a preacher could not be a powerful preacher, even though he
Ca And mm thing we may say, he could not preach more closely home to you
thanyou have had the truth preached to you I shall not say that you have
had preaching put very close to you from the pulpit. I have striven to be
very P personaf sometimes: I have not shunned to point, some qf you out in the
Congregation, and given you a word of rebuke, such as you could not mistake ;
nor tf I knew that any of you were indulging in sin 1 7° U „ 1
God that lam not afraid to be a personal preacher, and to shoot the airow at
each separate man when he needs it. But, nevertheless, I cannot preach home
to you as I would. Ye are all thinking your neighbour is intended, when it is
yourself. But you have had a personal preacher once. There was a great
preacher called at your house one day ; his name was Cholera and Death. A
terrible preacher he ! With grim words and hard accent he came and laid his
hand upon your wife; and then he put his other hand on you, and you grew
cold and well-nigh stiff. You remember how he preached to you then. He
made your conscience ring again and again; he would not let you lie still; he
cried aloud concerning your sin and your iniquity ;he brought all.your past
life to lio-ht, and set all your evil conduct in review. From youi childhood even
up till then he led you through all your wanderings: and then he took the
whip of the law to plough your back with furrows He affrighted
you with “the wrath to come.” You sent for the minister; you badehim pray;
you Sought you prayed yourself; and after all that that preacher went away,
Ind he had come on a fruitless errand ; no good had been done to you; you
had been a little startled and a little stirred, but you are to-day what you were
then unsaved and unconverted. Then, sir, you would not be converted, though
one rose from the dead. You have been wrecked at sea , you have been cast
into the jaws of the grave by fever ; you have been nearly smitten to death by
accident! and yet, with all this personal preachmg and with Conscience
thundering in your ears, you.are , to-day unconyertad ££££»%£*
that no outward means m the world can evex uiing
grace and make you a Christian, if Moses and the prophets have failed. All
Xerlte reason cannot aw“k«?yo,J jjowerfhi
piesseu voice i u e i s drawing thee by the hands of love
is God s pin . - t undrawn and left to thyself, thou
and the cords of a man. nui on . ii u Gravers to
wilt surelv die. Brethren and sisters in the faith, let us lift up oui Payers to
wilt sureiy die. am* PV mav be drawn to Christ—that they may be led to
may be persuaded, by the coming power ox K Tin h- 110 . fl t all ” O God the
“ all-in-all ” knowing that they themselves. die nothin*, at an. u Lrod tne
Holy Spirit bless these words, for Jesus Christ s sake. Amen and Amen.
292 228


The New Park Street Pulpit.
WAITING ONLY UPON GOD.
A Sermon
DELIVERED ON SABBATH MORNING, AUGUST 2, 1857, BY THE
REV. C. H. SPURGEON,
AT THE MUSIC HALL, ROYAL SURREY GARDENS.
“ My soul, wait thou only upon God.”—Psalm lxii. 5.
Calvin translates this verse, “My soul, be thou silent before God.” Rest calm
and undisturbed. Thine enemies are round about thee, and have sore beset thee ;
thy troubles do surround thee like strong bulls of Bashan; hut rest, my soul,
in God. Thine enemies are mighty, but he is Almighty; thy troubles are
grievous, but he is greater than thy troubles, and he shall deliver thee from
them. Let not thy soul be agitated. The wicked are like the troubled sea that
cannot rest: be not thou like unto them. Be thou calm : let not a wave ruffle
thine untroubled spirit. “ Cast thy burden on the Lord,” and then sleep on
his bosom. Commit thy way unto Jehovah, and then rest in sure and certain
confidence, for
“ He everywhere hath sway,
And all things serve his might;
His every act pure blessing is,
His path unsullied light.”
Oh! that we had grace to carry out the text in that sense of it! It is a hard
matter to he calm in the day of trouble; but it is a high exercise of divine grace
when we can stand unmoved in the day of adversity, and feel that
“Should the earth’s old pillars shake,
And all the wheels of nature break,
Our stedfast souls would fear no more
Than solid rocks when billows roar.”
That is to be a Christian indeed. Nothing is so sweet as to
Lie passive in God’s hand,
And know no will but his.
I shall, however, this morning stand to the authorised version. “My soul,
wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him.” Here is, first, an
exhortation, and secondly, an expectation.
I. We begin with the exhortation. The Psalmist was a preacher , and it
was quite right that he should sometimes make himself his congregation. The
preacher who neglects to preach to himself has forgotten a very important part
of his audience. He who never in his silent privacy speaketh a word to his own
soul, doth not know where to begin his preaching. We must first address our
own soul. If we can move that by the words we may utter, we may hope to
have some power with the souls of others.
And note where David begins his exhortation: “My soul, wait thou upon
No. 144. Penny Pulpit, No. 2,817.


God.” He addresses the very centre of his being. “My soul, I preach to thee;
for if thou goest wrong, all is amiss. If thou art amiss, mine eyes follow after
vanity, my lips utter leasing, my feet become swift to shed blood, and mine
hands meddle with mischief. My soul, I will preach to thee. My face, I will
not preach to thee. Some men preach to their faces, and try to put on their
countenances emotions which they never feel. No, countenance, I will leave
thee alone: thou wilt be right enough if the soul is so. I will preach to thee, O
my soul, and address my sermon to thee, Thou art mine only auditor : hear
what I say. “My soul, wait thou only upon God.” Let us, then, explain the
exhortation.
1. First, the Psalmist means by this, —My soul make God thine only object in life.
“My soul, wait thou only upon God.” Make him the summit of thy desires
and the object of thine exertions. Oh! how many men have made a fearful
shipwreck of their entire existence, by choosing an object inferior to this high
and noble object of existence, the serving of God. I could put my finger upon
a thousand biographies of men, who after having lived in this world and done
great things, have nevertheless died unhappily, because they did not first seek
God and his righteousness. Perhaps there never was a mind more gigantic
than the mind of Sir Walter Scott: a man whose soul was as fertile as the
newly broken soil of the land of gold. That man was a good man I believe, a
Christian; hut he made a mistake in the object of his life. His object was to
be a laird, to found a family, to plant the root of an ancestral tree the fruit of
which should be heard of in ages to come; magnificent in his hospitality,
generous in his nature, laborious in his continual strife to win the object of his
life, yet after all he died a disappointed and unsuccessful man. He reared his
palace, he accumulated his wealth, and one sad day saw it scattered to the
wind, and he had lost that for which he had lived. Had he fixed his eye upon
some better object than the pleasing of the public, or the accumulation of wealth,
or the founding of a family, he might have got the others, and he would not
have lost the first. Oh ! had he said, “ Now I will serve my God; this potent
pen of mine, dedicated to the Most High, shall weave into my marvellous sto-
ries things that shall enlighten, convince, and lead to Jesus,” he might have
died penniless, but he would have died having achieved the object of his wishes
—not a disappointed man. Oh if we could make God our only object we should
rest quite secure, and whatever happened it never could be said of us, “ He
died without having had what he wished for.” How many of you that are here
to-day are making the same mistake on a smaller scale ! You are living for
business. You will be disappointed, then. You are living for fame. As cer-
tain as you are alive you will die disappointed, grieved and sad at heart. You
are living to maintain respectability ; perhaps that is the utmost of your desire.
Poor aim that! You shall be disappointed ;or even if you gain it, it shall be a
bubble not worth the chase. Make God your one object in life, and all these
things shall be added to you, “ Godliness with contentment is great gain.”
There is no loss in being a Christian, and making God the first object; but make
anything else your goal, and with all your running, shouldyourun ever so well,
you shall fall short of the mark; or if you gain it, you shall fall uncrowned,
unhonored to the earth. “My soul, wait thou only upon God.” Say, “ I love
to serve him ; I love to spread his kingdom, to advance his interests, to tell the
story of his gospel, to increase the number of his converted ones: that shall
be my only object; and when that is sufficiently attained, * Lord, lettest thou
thy servant depart in peace.’ ”
2. But the Psalmist meant other things beside this, when he said, “My soul,
wait thou only upon God.” He meant, My soul, have no care but to please God.
Perhaps the most miserable people in the world are the very careful ones. You
that are so anxious about what shall happen on the morrow that you cannot
enjoy the pleasures of to-day, you who have such a peculiar cast of mind that
you suspect every star to be a comet, and imagine that there must be a volcano
in every grassy mead, you that are more attracted by the spots in the sun than
by the sun himself, and more amazed by one sear leaf upon the tree than by all
the verdure of the woods—you that make more of your troubles than you could
do of your joys,—l say, I think you belong to the most miserable of men. Da-
-294 * 254


vid says to his soul, “My soul, be thou careful for nothing except God; cast
all thy care on him ; he careth for thee ; and make this thy great concern, to
love and serve him; and then thou needest care for nothing else at all.” Oh!
there are many of you people that go picking your way all through this world;
you are afraid to put one foot down before another, because you fear you will
be in danger. If you had grace just to turn your eye to God, you might
walk straight on in confidence, and say, “Though I should tread on hell
itself at the next step, yet if God bade me tread there it would be heaven to
me.” There is nothing like the faith that can leave care with God and have no
thought but how to please him. “ Behold the fowls of the air; they sow not,
neither do they reap, nor gather into barns; yet your heavenly Father feedeth
them.” “ Consider the lilies of the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither
do they spin : and yet I say unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was
not arrayed like one of these.” Say not, “ What shall we eat? or, What shall
we drink ? or, Wherewithal shall we be clothed? (For after all these things do
the Gentiles seek :) for your heavenly Father knoweth that ye have need of all
these things.” Oh, happy is the man who says, “lam a gentleman commoner
upon the bounties of providence. Let God send me little, it will be enough ;
let him send me much, it will not be too much; for I will divide my wealth
with those who have less. I will trust to him. He has said, ‘ Thy bread shall be
given thee, and thy water shall be sure.’ Then let famine come, I shall not
starve; let the brook dry up, he will open the bottles of heaven and give me
drink. Whatever shall happen to this world, yet shall I be secure against
all ills.” Some people talk about being independent gentlemen. I know
an independent gentleman that lives on three shillings and sixpence a week.
He has nothing but parish allowance and the charity of friends; but he says
in sickness and in weariness, Jehovah will provide; if my Father knows I
want more he will send me more. And if you hint to him that his parish al-
lowance will be taken away, he will just smile, and say, “If it does not come
one way it will come another; for God is the chancellor of my exchequer,
he will never let my funds run too low. I shall have it for God has said
it. 1 They that wait on the Lord shall not want any good thing.’” That is
the right kind of independency—the independency of the man who knows no
dependence except upon God. My soul, let this be thy care, to serve God,
ana wait only upon Him.
3. Again, David meant this, — My soul, make God thine only dependence, and
never trust in anything else. It is marvellous how God’s creation illustrates
my text, —David bids his soul take God for its only pillar. Have you never
noticed how the world displays the power of God, in its want of any apparent
support ? Behold the unpillared arch of heaven ; see how it stretches its gigan-
tic span ; and yet it falleth not, though it is unpropped and unbuttressed, “He
hangeth the world upon nothing.” What chain is it that bindeth up the stars,
aftd keepeth them from falling ? Lo, they float in ether, upheld by his om-
nipotent arm, who hath laid the foundations of the universe. A Christian
should be a second exhibition of God’s universe; his faith should be an
unpillared confidence, resting on the past, and on the eternity to come, as the
sure groundwork of its arch. His faith should be like the world; it should
hang on nothing but the promise of God, and have no other support but that;
and he himself, like the stars, should float in the ether of confidence, needing
nothing to uphold him but the right hand of the Majesty on high. But, fools
that we are, we will be always getting other confidences. The merchant has a
man who so understands his business, that he thinks the whole establishment
depends upon that one man , and if he should die or give up his situation, what
would become of the business? Ah ! merchant, if thou art a godly man, thou
hast forgotten where thy confidence ought to be ; not in thy man, but in thy
God. The wife often saith, “ I love the Lord, but if my husband died, where
would be my dependence?” What! hast thou buttressed the Almighty even
with a husband’s love ? Trust thou in him, and make him thine only consola-
tion. He will supply thy needs out of the riches of his fulness. Oh we should
not have half the trouble we have, if we learned to live wholly upon God.
But we are so dependent upon creatures: we get leaning one on another; and
255


our dear friend, Into whose ear we have told our tale of misery, seems to he
quite necessary to our existence. Take heed, then; take heed! ye are trying
to prop that which requires no prop, when you lean upon your friend; you are
just dishonoring Christ, when you make him your joy and confidence ; and
when in some grievous day, your friend shall be smitten from the earth, then
you will begin to feel it would have been better for you if you had leaned upon
your heavenly Friend, and made no one your strength and your support but
God.
This would be a good lesson for some who occupy the pulpit. There is so
much time-serving everwhere. The Dissenting minister must make his prop
out of his deacons • and the clergyman will too much make his prop out of
some high officials in church or state, who are likely to promote him.
We shall never get an outspoken gospel until we get a set of men, who say “ I
don’t care for the whole earth ; if there is no one else right, and I conceive
myself to be so, I will battle the whole earth ; and I ask no man’s wish, or will,
or assent. “ Let God be true, and every man a liar.” Oh, we want a few of
those gigantic spirits who need no approvers—who can of themselves sweep
their acre of men and slay them with their strong broad sword of confidence ;
and when we get these care-for-nothings, who care only for God, then shall the
earth shake again beneath the tramp of angels, and God shall visit our land,
even as he did of old.
4. Again, beloved, "My soul wait thou only upon God,” that is to say, make God
thine only quide and confidence. When we get into trouble the first thing we do is
to knock at our neighbour’s door. “ Have you heard about my trouble? Come
and give me your advice.” If your neighbour were prudent he would say,
“My brother, have you gone to God first? I will give you no advice till God
has given you his counsel ? Jt is laughed at as an enthusiastic idea that men
should ever take counsel of God. ‘Oh,” say some, "it is superstitious to
imagine that God will evergive to hispeople guidance in their temporal affairs.”
It would be superstitious to you perhaps ; but it is not to a David, and it is not
to any other child of God. He saith, “My soul wait thou only upon God.”
Christian, if thou wouldest know the path of duty take God for thy compass; if
thou wouldest know the way to steer thy ship through the dark billows, put the
tiller into the hand of the Almighty. Many a rock might be escaped, if we
would let God take the helm; many a shoal or quicksand we might well avoid,
if we would leave to his sovereign will to choose and to command. The old
Euritans said, “ As sure a Christian carves for himself he’ll cut his own
ngers;” and that is a great truth. Said another old divine, “He that goes
before the cloud of God’s providence goes on a fool’s errand ;” and so he does.
We must mark God’s providence leading us ; and then let us go. But he that
goes before providence will be very glad to run back again. Take your trouble,
whatever it is, to the throne of the Most High, and on your knees put up the
prayer, “ Lord, direct me.” You will not go wrong. But do not do as some
do. Many a person comes to me and says, “ I want your advice, sir ; as my
minister, perhaps you could tell me what I ought to do.” Sometimes it is about
their getting married. Why, they have made up their minds before they ask
me, they know that; and then they come to ask my advice. “Do you think
that such and such a thing would be prudent, sir? Do you think I should change
my position in life ?” and so on. Now, first of all, I like to know, “ Have you
made your mind up?” In most cases they have—and I fear you serve God
the same. We make up our mind what we are going to do, and then we go down
on our knees, and say, " Lord, show me what I ought to do ;” and then we
follow out our intention and say, " I asked God’s direction.” My dear friend,
you did ask it, but you did not follow it; you followed your own. You like
God’s direction so long as it points you the way you wish to go ; but if God’s
direction lead the contrary to what you considered your own interest, it might
have been a very long while before you had carried it it out. But if we in
truth and verity do confide in God to guide us, we shall not go far wrong, I
know.
5. Once again : My soul, wait thou only upon God, for protection in times of
danger. A naval Officer tells the following singular story concerning the
296 256


sietre of Copenhagen, under Lord Nelson. An officer in the fleet says, I was
particularly impressed with an object which I saw three or four days after the
terrific bombardment of that place. For several nights before the surrender,
the darkness was ushered in with a tremendous roar of guns and mortars, ac-
companied by the whizzing of those destructive and burning engines of warfare,
Congreve’s rockets. The dreadful effects were soon visible m the brilliant
lights through the city. The blazing houses of the rich, and the burning cot-
tages of the poor, illuminated the heavens; and the wide-spreading flames, re-
flecting on tL water, showed a forest of ships assembled round the city for its
destruction This work of conflagration went on for several nights. but the
Danes at length surrendered; and on walking some days after among the ruins,
consisting of the cottages of the poor, houses of the rich, manufactories, lofty
steeples, and humble meeting-houses, I discned, amid thw barren field of deso-
lation, a solitary house, unharmed; all around it a burnt mass, this alon
touched by the fire, a monument of mercy. Whose house u that. I asked.
‘ That, ’ said the interpreter, ‘ belongs to a Quaker. He would ne^ nor
leave his house, but remained in prayer with his family during the 5?“"
bardment.’ Surely, thought I, it is well with the righteous, God has been &
shield to thee in battle, a wall of fire round about thee, a very Present help in
time of need.” It might seem to be an invention of mine, only that it happens
to be as authentic a piece of history as any that can be found. T ere 1S ano
story told, somewhat similar of that Danish war. Soon after the surrender
of Copenhagen to the English, in the year 1807, detachments of soldiers were,
for a time, stationed in the surrounding villages. It happened one day that
three soldiers, belonging to a Highland regiment, were set to forage among the
neighbouring farm-houses. They went to several, but found them stripped and
deserted At length they came to a large garden, or orchard, full of apple
trees bending under the weight of fruit. They entered by a gate and followed
a path which S brought them to a neat farm-house. Everything without bespoke
ouietness and security: but as they entered by the front door, the mistress of the
lmuse and her children ran screaming out by the back. Theintenor of the house
presented an appearance of order and comfort superior toivhat might be ex-
pected from people in that station, and from the habits of the country. A
watch hung by the side of the fireplace, and a neat book-case, well filled,
Sacted tSe attention of the elder soldier. He took down a book : . was
written in a language unknown to him, but the the name of Jesus Christ was
legible on every page. At this moment, the master of the house entered by the
do g or throughwim-hhis wife and children had just fled One of by
threatning sighs demanded provisions: the man stood firm, and undaunted, but
shook his g hefd. The soldier who held the book approached him, and pointing
to the name of Jesus Christ, laid his hand upon and t\ien
heaven. Instantly the farmer grasped his hand,shook it'vehemently,^ and then
ran out of the room. He soon returned with his wife and children laden with
milk, eggs, bacon, etc., which were freely tendered; and when money was offered
in return, it was at first refused; but as two of the soldiers were pious men,
they, much to the chagrin of their companion, insisted upon paying for all they
received When taking leave, the pious soldiers intimated to the farmer that
it would be well for him to secrete his watch; but the most significant signs,
he gave them to understand that he feared no evil, for hrs trust was in God
and that though his neighbours, on the right hand and on the left > J ad fled
their habitations, and by foraging parties had lost what they
nor a hair of his head had been injured, nor had he even lost an apple from his
trees.” The man knew that “ He that taketh the sword shall penshby the sword
so he just tried the non-resistant principle; and God, in whom he put implicit
confidence, would not let him be injured. It was a remarkable thing that in the
massacre of the Protestants in Ireland, a long time ago, there were thousands
of quakers in the country, and only two of them were killed; those two
had not faith in their own principles; one of them ran away and hid himself
in a fastness, and the other kept arms m his house ; but the others, unarmed,
walked amidst infuriated soldiers, both Roman Catholics and Protestants,
and were never touched, because they were strong in the strength ot Israel a
257 297


God, and put up their sword into its scabbard, knowing that to war against
another cannot be right, since Christ has said, “ Resist no evil; if any man
smite thee on one cheek, turn to him the other also.” “Be kind, not only to
the thankful, but to the unthankful and to the evil;” “forgive your enemie^;
bless them that hate you, and pray for them that despitefully use you.” Bu
we are ashamed to do that; we do not like it; we are afraid to trust God; anc
unti! we do it we shall not know the majesty of faith, nor prove the power o
tation is frorn him C ” 0n " My S ° U ’ th ° U ° nly Up ° n G ° d : f ° r my expec
• A *{ d "° w * my dear brethren and sisters, I cannot single out all your cases
but doubtless I have many cases here to which the text will apply. There is
poor Christian there ; he does not know much more than where his next mea
will come from. My brother, he that feeds the ravens will not let you starve
Instead of looking to find friends to console you, tell your story into the ear
cLrv/- A , S .i S u Ure “ Bibie is true he will not leave you. Shall a fathe
.f? ms children to die? No; the granaries of earth have no key but th
Almighty s will : The cattle on a thousand hills are his.” If he were hungry
he would not tell us. Shall he not supply your needs out of the riches of hi
goodness:
“ All things living he doth feed;
His full hand supplies their need.”
Shall he forget you, when he clothes the grass of the field, and when he makes
the valleys rejoice with food? But is your anxiety about your character? Has
some one been slandering you? And are you troubled and grieved, lest you
should lose your good name? If a man has called you every name in the world
do not go to law with him. “Wait only upon God.” If you have been re-
viled in every newspaper and falsely charged in every sheet, never answer-
leave it alone. Vengeance is mine ; I will repay, saith the Lord.” Practice
non-resistance in words, as well as in deeds. Just bow yourself, and let the
missiles fly over head. Stand not up to resist. To resist slander is to
make it worse. The only way to blunt the edge of calumny is to be silent: it
can do no hurt when we are still. Where no wood is the fire goeth out; and if
you wd! not refute nor answer, the fire will die out of itself. Let it alone
Wait thou only opon God.”
And now, what else is thy danger? What else is thy trouble? Art thou
afraid of losing thy dearest child? Is thy husband sick? Doth thy wife lie
upon the bed of languishing? These are hard troubles; they cut us to the
very quick : to see our dear ones sick, and we incapable of helping them is a
trouble indeed. Then the strong man’s eye doth weep, and fis lieart beate
heavily, because those he loves are sick. But “ wait thou only upon God.” Go
to thy chamber; tell the Lord thy dear one is ill; pour out thy heart before
him, and say to him, “My Lord, spare me this trouble, if it be thy will; take
not my friends away; but this know, O God, though thou slay me yet will I
trust in thee. Yea,
‘ Shouldst thou take them all away,
Yet would I not repine ;
Before they were possessed by me
They were entirely thine.
There! let it go : one look from thee
Shall more than make amends.’ ”
Oh ! it is a happy way of smoothing sorrow, when we can say, “We will wait
only upon God.” Oh, ye agitated Christians, do not dishonor your religion by
always wearing a brow of care ; come, cast your burden upon the Lord. 1
see ye staggering beneath a weight which He would not feel. What seems to
you a crushing burden, would be to him but as the small dust of the balance
See ! the Almighty bends his shoulders, and he says, “ Here, put thy troubles
298 258


here. What! wilt thou bear thyself what the everlasting shoulders are ready
to carry?” No;
“ Give to the winds thy fears;
Hope, and be undismayed ;
God nears thy sighs and counts thy tears,
He shall lift up thy head.”
No finer exhibition of the power of religion than the confidence of a Christian
in the time of distress. May God vouchsafe such a carriage and bearing unto
us ; through Jesus Christ!
11. And now I close with the expectation; and upon that I shall be very
brief. The Psalmist charges his soul to wait only upon God, because he had
no expectation anywhere else but there.
I know very well what some of you are after; you have got an old grand-
father, or an old grandmother, or an old great aunt, and you are most fiercely
kind to them, you are mostprovokingly loving ! You almost run to the extreme
of teasing them by the frequency of your affectionate embraces. If your
aunt does not know what you do it for, if she wants to know, let her write to
me; I can tell her. She has a few thousand pounds; Ido not say that you
have any affection for them, but I should not wonder if you have some expec-
tation of them, and that is just the reason why you are always waiting upon
her. You will take care of her, because you well know which way the wind
blows ; and you trust that one day, if you put your sails in the right position
there may be a valuable cargo brought to your haven —of course not at all
through your design ; you will go into deep mourning, and lament the old
lady s decease, but at the same time you will feel it to be a magnificent consola-
tion to you, almost greater than the suffering and affliction incurred, that you have
become the possessor of her wealth. Now, worldly-wise people always wait
where their expectations are. David says, “My soul, imitate, the worldly in
this; wait thou only upon God, for my expectation is from him.” That is where
I expect to get all I shall have, and therefore I will wait at that door which I
expect will be opened with the hand of munificent grace. What is there in
the world that you are expecting, except from God? You will not get it; or
if you get it, it will be a curse to you. That is only a proper expectation which
looks to God, and to God only. “My expectation is from him.” Well, you
expect to have bread to eat, and raiment to put on, till ye die, don’t you ?
Where do you expect to get it from ? The interest of that £6OO, or £l2OO of
yours in the funds. Well, if that is your expectation, and not God, he will
put some bitters in that little income of yours, and you shall find it, if suffi-
cient for your sustenance, not sufficient for your comfort. But you will be pro-
vided for, because you have a large business ! Well, the mill may be burned
down; the trade may break ; the stream of prosperity may run into another’s
lap, and you may find yourself yet a beggar in the street, notwithstanding all
you have, if that is your trust. No ; if you are expecting to get aught from the
world it is a poor expectation. I expect to be provided for till I die ; but I
expect that I shall have to draw from the bank of faith till I die, and get all I
need out of the riches of God’s lovingkindness. And this I know, I had rather
have God for my banker than any man that hath ever lived. Surely, he never
fails to honor his promises; and when we bring them to his throne he never
sends them back unanswered. You must hope in God, even for temporal
supplies. And after all, what a little thing the temporal supplies are! We
have heard of a king, who once went into a stable and heard a stable boy
singing. Said lie to him, “ And now, John, what do you get for your work? ”
„ yo ?,P lease . s * r »” 3a id, “ I get my clothes and my food.” “ That is all I
get said the King, “ for my work.” And that is all everybody gets. All else
that you have got besides is not yours, except to look at; and other people can
? 0 the same. When a man gets a large park I can ride through it as much as
le ’I have not the trouble of keeping it in order; he may take care of it,
a I * am much obliged to him for doing so. I can do as the poor Chinaman did,
'' 6 6 rn? before mandarin. The maiidarin was covered with jewels,
and the Chinaman said, “ I thank you for your jewels.” The mandarin was
surprised : the next day he was again saluted by the man, who said as before,
259 299


“I thank you for your jewels,” “Why.” said the mandarin, “What do you
thank me for?” Said the Chinaman, “ I always look at them every day, and
that is as much as you do; only that you are the pack horse that has to carry
them, and you have the trouble at night of taking care of them, whilst I can
enjoy them just as much as you.” And so, dear friends, if we are not rich, con-
tentment can make us so. Contentment gives the poor man broad acres ; con-
tentment gives him great riches upon earth, and adds great enjoyment to the
comparatively little that he has. “My expectation is from him.”
But we have better expectations than that. We shall die soon; and then
“my expectation is from him.” Do we not expect that when we lie upon the
bed of sickness he will send troops of angels to carry us to his bosom ? We
are believing that when the pulse is faint and few, and the heart heaves heavily,
that then some spirit, brighter than the noon-day sun shall draw the curtains
of our bed, and look with loving eyes upon us, and whisper, “ Sister, spirit,
come away!” And do we not expect that then a chariot shall be brought, a
triumphal chariot, such as earth’s conquerors have not seen ; and in it we shall
be placed, and drawn by coursers of light up the eternal hills, in majesty and
triumph, we shall ride to yon bright gates of pearl. Then shall the gates wide
open swing, and he shall say, “ Come in, ye blessed of the Lord; inherit the
kingdom prepared for you from before the foundations of the world.” We are
expecting wreaths of aramanth, and harps of gold, and crowns of glory; we
are thinking when we have done with this poor clay, the poor terrestrial stuff
this body’s made of, we shall be made white, like spirits who now shine as stars
before the throne of the majesty on high, and that we shall share those splen
dours and enjoy their happiness, for ever blest with them,
“Far from a world of grief and sin,
With God eternally shut in.”
Now, “My soul, wait thou only upon God,” if these be thine expectations.
And if thine expectation is based upon God, my soul, live for God ; live with
only this care, to bless him: live, hoping for a better world, but believing this
world to be good enough, if we had God in it. You know what Luther said
the little bird said to him. He sat upon the spray of the tree, and he sang —
“ Mortal, cease from toil and sorrow; God provideth for the morrow.”
And it chirped and picked up its little grain, and sang again. And yet it had
no granary; it had not a handful of wheat stored up anywhere: but it still kept
on with its chirping
“ Mortal, cease from toil and sorrow; God provideth for the morrow.”
Oh! ye that are not Christians, it were worth while to be Christians, if it were
only for the peace and happiness that religion gives. If we had to die like
dogs, yet this religion were worth having to make us live here like angels. Oh
if the grave were what it seems to be, the gaol of all existence, if the black
nails in the coffin were not bright with stars, if death were the end and our
lamps were quenched in darkness, when it was said, “ Dust to dust and earth to
earth.” Yet ’twere worth while to be a child of God, only to live here.
“ ’Tis religion that can give sweetest pleasures whilst we live;
’Tis religion must supply solid comforts when we die.”
Remember, he that believeth on the Lord Jesus Christ and is baptized shall
be saved; and you, as well as any other, if these two things be given you, shall
be saved. He that trusts in Christ alone for salvation, and then (to translate
the word baptized the right way, and it can only be rightly translated one way)
“is immersed shall be saved.” So stands the promise: believing first, baptism
afterwards; believing, the great thing, baptism the sign of it; believing the
great means of grace, immersion, the outward and visible sign of the washing of
the flesh and of the dedication unto God. “He that believeth and is baptized
shall be saved.” May God give you grace to obey both commands, and so
enter into eternal life! But remember, “He that believeth not shall be damned.”
He that neglects the great essential shall perish. May God grant that none of
you may know the terrible meaning of that awful word !
300 260


The New Park Street Pulpit.
THE GOOD MAN’S LIFE AND DEATH,
A Sermon
DELIVERED ON SABBATH MORNING, AUGUST 16, 1857, BY THE
REV. C. H. SPURGEON,
AT THE MUSIC HALL, ROYAL SURREY GARDENS.
“ For to ms to live is Christ, and to die is gain.”—Philippians ii. 21.
How ominously these words follow each other in the text —“live," “die."
There is but a comma between them, and surely as it is in the words so is it in
reality. How brief the distance between life and death ! In fact there is none.
Life is but death’s vestibule, and our pilgrimage on earth is but a journey to the
grave. The pulse that preserves our being beats our death march, and the blood
which circulates our life is floating it onward to the. deeps of death. To day we
see our friends in health, to-morrow we hear of their decease. We clasped the
hand of the strong man but yesterday, and to-day we close his eyes. We rode
in the chariot of comfort but an hour ago, and in a few more hours the last
black chariot must convey us to the home of all living. Oh, how closely allied is
death to life ! The lamb that sporteth in the field must soon feel the knife. The
ox that loweth in the pasture is fattening for the slaughter. Trees do but grow
that they may be felled. Yea, and greater things than these feel death.
Empires rise and flourish, they flourish but to decay, they rise to fall.
How often do we take up the volume of history, and read of the rise and fall
of empires. We hear of the coronation and the death of kings. Death
is the black servant who rides behind the chariot of life. See life ! and death is
close behind it. Death reacheth far throughout this world, and hath stamped
all terrestial things with the broad arrow of the grave. Stars die mayhap ; it
is said that conflagrations have been seen far off' in the distant ether, and
astronomers have marked the funerals of worlds, the decay of those mighty orbs
that we had imagined set for ever in sockets of silver to glisten as the lamps of
eternity. But blessed be God, there is one place where death is not life’s
brother, where life reigns alone ; “to live,’’ is not the first syllable which is to
be followed by the next, “to die.” There is a land where death-knells are
never tolled, where winding-sheets are never woven, where graves are never
digged. Blest land beyond the skies ? To reach it we must die. But if after
death we obtain a glorious immortality, our text i 3 indeed true: “ To die is gain.’’
If you would get a fair estimate of the happiness of any man you must judge
him in these two closely connected things, his life and his death. The heathen
Solon said, “ Call no man happy until he is dead ; for you know not what changes
may pass upon him in life.’’ We add to that—Call no man happy until he is
dead ; because the life that is to come, if that be miserable, shall far outweigh
the highest life of happiness that hath been enjoyed on earth. To estimate a
man’s condition we must take it in all its length. We must not measure that
one thread which reacheth from the cradle to the coffin. We must go further;
we must go from the coffin to the resurrection, and from the resurrection on
throughout eternity. To know whether acts are profitable, I must not estimata
their effects on me for the hour in which I live, but for the eternity in which I am
Nos. 146-7, Penny Pulpit, Nos. 2,823-4.


to exist. 1 must not weigh matters in the scales of time; I must not calculate
by the hours, minutes and seconds of the clock, but I must count and value
things by the ages of eternity.
Come, then, beloved; we have before us the picture of a man, the two sides
of whose existence will both of them bear inspection; we have his life, we have
his death: we have it said of his life, “to live is Christ,” of his death, “to die
is gain;” and if the same shall be said of any of you, oh ! ye may rejoice ! \ e
are amongst that thrice happy number whom the Lord hath loved, and whom
he delighteth to honor. _ _ ,
We shall now divide our text very simply into these two points, the good mans
life, and the good man's death.
I. As to his life, we have that briefly described thus : “ For me to live is
Christ.” The believer did not always live to Christ. When he was first
born into this world he was a slave of sin, and an heir of wrath, even as others.
Though he may have afterwards become the greatest of saints, yet until divine
grace hath entered his heart, he is “in the gall of bitterness and in the bonds
of iniquity.” He only begins to live to Christ when God the Holy Spirit con-
vinced him of his sin, and of his desperate evil nature, and when by grace he
is brought to see the dying Saviour making a propitiation for his guilt. From
that moment when by faith he sees the slaughtered victim of Calvary, and
casts his whole life on him, to be saved, to be redeemed, to be preserved, and
to be blest by the virtue of his atonement and the greatness of his grace, from
that moment the man begins to live to Christ.
And now shall we tell you as briefly as we can what living to Christ means?
It means, first, that the life of a Christian derives its parentage from Christ. “ For
me to live is Christ.” The righteous man has two lives. He has one which he
inherited from his parents; he looks back to an ancestral race of which he is
the branch, and he traces his life to the parent stock ; but he has a second life,
a life spiritual, a life which is as much above mere mental life, as mental life is
above the life of the animal or the plant; and for the source of this spiritual life
he looks not to father or mother, nor to priest nor man, nor to himself, but he
looks to Christ. He says, “ O Lord Jesus, the everlasting Father, the _ Prince
of peace, thou art my spiritual parent; unless thy Spirit had breathed into my
nostrils the breath of a new, holy and spiritual life, I had been to this day
“ dead in trespasses and sins.” I owe my third principle, my spirit, to the in-
plantation of thy grace. I had a body and a soul by my parents; I have received
the third principle, the spirit from thee, and in thee I live, and move, and have
my being. My new, my best, my highest, my most heavenly life, is. wholly
derived from thee. To thee I ascribe it. My life is hid with Christ in God.
It is no longer 1 that live, but Christ that liveth in me. And so the Christian
says, “ For me to live is Christ,” because for me to live is to live a life whose
parentage is not of human origin, but of divine, even of Christ himself. Again
he intended to say, that Christ was the sustenance of his life, the food his new-
born spirit fed upon. The believer hath three parts to be sustained. The body,
which must have its proper nutriment; the soul, which must have knowledge
and thought to supply it; and the spirit which must feed on Christ. Without
bread I become attenuated to a skeleton, and at last I die; without thought
my mind becomes dwarfed, ay, and dwindles itself until I become the
idiot, with a soul that hath just life, but little more. And without Christ my
newborn spirit must become a vague shadowy emptiness. It cannot live unless
it feeds on that heavenly manna which came down from heaven. Now the
Christian can say, “ The life that I live is Christ, ” because Christ is the food
on which he feeds and the sustenance of his new-born Spirit.
The apostle also meant, that the fashion of his life was Christ. I suppose that
every man living has a model by which he endeavours to shape his life. When
we start in life, we generally select some person, or persons, whose. combined
virtues shall be to us the mirror of perfection. “ Now, says Paul, “if you ask
me after what fashion I mould my life, and what is the model by which I would
sculpture my being, I tell you, it is Christ. I have no fashion, no form, no
model by which to shape my being, except the Lord Jesus Christ. Now, the
true Christian, if he be an upright man, can say the same. Understand, how-
-310 298


ever, what I mean by the word “upright." An upright man means a straight-
up man —a man that does not cringe and bow, and fawn to other men’s feet; a
man that does not lean for help on other men, but just stands with his head
heavenward, in all the dignity of his independence, leaning nowhere except on
the arm of the Omnipotent. Such a man will take Christ alone to be his model
and pattern. This is the very age of conventionalities. People dare not now
do a thing unless everybody else does the same. You do not often say, “Is a
thing right?” The most you say is, “ Does so-and-so do it? You have some
great personage or other in your family connection, who is looked upon as being
the very standard of all propriety ; and if he do it, then you think you may
safely do it. And oh ! what an outcry there is against a man who dares to be
singular, who just believes that some of your conventionalities are trammels
and chains, and kicks them all to pieces and says, “I am free !” The world is
at him in a minute ; all the ban-dogs of malice and slander are at him, because
he says, “I will not follow your model! I will vindicate the honour of my
Master, and not take your great masters to be for ever my pattern.” Oh! I
would to God that every statesman, that every minister, that every Christian
were free to hold that his only form, and his only fashion for imitation, must
be the character of Christ. I would that we could scorn all superstitious attach-
ments to the ancient errors of our ancestors; and whilst some would be for ever
looking upon age and upon hoary antiquity with veneration, I would we had the
courage to look upon a thing, not according to its age, but according to. its
rightness, and so weigh everything, not by its novelty, or by its antiquity,
but by its conformity to Christ Jesus and his holy Gospel; rejecting that
which is not, though it be hoary with years, and believing that which is, even
though it be but the creature of the day, and saying with earnestness, “ For me
to live is not to imitate this man or the other, but ‘ for me to live is Christ.’ ”
I think, however, that the very centre of Paul’s idea would be this; The end of
his life is Christ. You think you see Paul land upon the shores of Philippi.
There, by the river-side, were ships gathered, and many merchant men. There
you would see the merchant busy with his ledger, and overlooking his cargo,
and he paused and put his hand upon his brow, and said as he griped his
money-bag, “ For me to live is gold.” And there you see his humbler clerk, em-
ployed in some plainer work, toiling for his master, and he, perspiring with work,
mutters between his teeth, “ For me to live is to gain a bare subsistence.” And
there stands for a moment to listen to him, one with a studious face and a
sallow countenance, and with a roll full of the mysterious characters of wisdom.
“Young man,” he says, “for me to live is learning.” “Aha! aha;” says
another, who stands by, clothed in mail, with a helmet on his head, “ I scorn
your modes of life; for me to live is glory.” But there walks one, a humble
tent-maker, called Paul; you see the lineaments of the Jew upon his
face, and he steps into the middle of them all and says, “ For me to live is
Christ.” Oh! how they smile with contempt upon him, and how they scoff
at him, for having chosen such an object! “For me to live is Christ.”
And what did he mean ! The learned man stopped, and said, “ Christ! who is
he? Is he that foolish, mad fellow, of whom I have heard, who was executed
upon Calvary for sedition ?” The meek reply is, “It is he who died, Jesus of
Nazareth, the King of the Jews.” “What?” says the Roman soldier, “ and
do you live for a man who died a slave’s death? What glory will you get by
fighting his battles?” What profit is there in your preaching, chimes in the
trader. Ah! and even the merchant’s clerk thought Paul mad; for he
said, “How can he feed his family? how will he supply his wants if all he
liveth for is to honour Christ? Ay, but Paul knew what he was at. He was
the wiser man of them all. He knew which way was right for heaven, and
which would end the best. But, right or wrong, his soul was wholly possessed
with the idea—“ For me to live is Christ.”
Brethren and sisters, can you say, as professing Christians, that you live up
t° the idea of the apostle Paul ? Can you honestly say that for you to live
is Christ? . I w ill tell you my opinion of many of you. You join our churches ;
y°u highly respectable men ; you are accepted among us as true and
real Christians; but in all honesty and truth Ido not believe that for you to
299 - 311


live is Christ. I see many of you whose whole thoughts are engrossed with
the things of earth; the mere getting of money; the amassing of wealth,
seems to be your only object. I do not deny that you are liberal, I will not
dare to say that you are not generous, and that your cheque-book does not often
bear the mark of some subscription for holy purposes ; but I dare to say, after
all, that you cannot in honesty say that you live wholly for Christ, lou know
that when you go to your shop or your warehouse, you do not think, in doing
business, that you are doing it for Christ; you dare not be such a hypocrite as
to say so. You must say that yon do it for self-aggrandisement, and tor family
advantage. “ Well!” says one, “ and is that a mean reason?” By no means ;
not for you, if you are mean enough to ask that question ; but for the Christian
it is. He professes to live for Christ; then how is it he dares to profess to live
for his Master, and yet does not do so, but lives for mere worldly gain ? Let
me speak to many a lady here. You would be shocked if I should deny your
Christianity. You move in the highest circles of life, and you would be asto-
nished if I should presume to touch your piety, after your many generous
donations to religious objects ; but I dare to do so. \ou what do you do.
You rise late enough in the day: you have your carriage out, and call to see
your friends, or leave your card by way of proxy. You go to a party in the
evening; you talk nonsense, and come home and go to bed. And that is your
life from the beginning of the year to the end. It is just one regular round.
There comes the dinner or the ball, and the conclusion of the day; and then
Amen, so be it, for ever. Now you don’t live for Christ. I know you go to
church regularly, or attend at some dissenting chapel; all well and good. I
shall not deny your piety, according to the common usage of the term, but
I deny that you have got to anything lik? the place where Paul stood when he
said, For me, to live is Christ.” I, my brethren, know that with much earnest
seeking I have failed to realize the fulness of entire devotion to the Lord Jesus.
Every minister must sometimes chasten himself and say, “ Am I not sometimes a
little warped in my utterances ? Did I not in some sermon aim to bring out a grand
thought, instead of stating a home truth ? Have I not kept back some warning
that 1 ought to have uttered, because I feared the face of man?” Have we not
all good need to chasten ourselves, because we must say that we have not
lived for Christ as we should have done? And yet there are, I trust, a
noble few, the elite of God’s elect, a few chosen men and women on whose
heads there is the crown and diadem of dedication, who can truly say, “ I have
nothing in this world I cannot give to Christ I have said it, and mean what I
have said —
‘Take my soul and body’s powers,
All my goods and all my hours,
All I have, and all I am.’
Take me, Lord, and take me for ever.” These are the men who make our
missionaries; these are the women to make our nurses for the sick ; these are
they that would dare death for Christ; these are they who would give of their
substance to his cause; these are they who would spend and be spent, who
would bear ignominy, and scorn, and shame if they could but advance their
Master’s interest. How many of this sort have I here this morning? Might
I not count many of these benches before I could find a score ? Many there
are who do in a measure carry out this principle ; but who among us is there
(I am sure he standeth not here in this pulpit) that can dare to say he hath
lived wholly for Christ, as the apostle did ? And yet, till there be more Pauls,
and more men dedicated to Christ, we shall never see God’s kingdom come,
nor shall we hope to see his will done on earth, even as it is in heaven. _
Now, this is the true life of a Christian, its source, its sustenance, its fashion,
and its end, all gathered up in one word, Christ Jesus; and, I must add, its
happiness, and its glory, is all in Christ. But I must detain you no longer.
11. I must go to the second point, the death of the Christian. Alas,
alas, that the good should die; alas, that the righteous should fall! Death,
why dost thou not hew the deadly upas? Why dost thou not mow the
312 3°Q


hemlock? Why dost thou touch the tree beneath whose spreading branches
weariness hath rest? Why dost thou touch the flower whose perfume hath
made dad the earth? Death, why dost thou snatch away the excellent ot
the earth, in whom is all our delight? If thou wouldest use thine axe use it
upon the cumber-grounds, the trees that draw nourishment, but afford no fiuit,
thou mightest be thanked then. But why wilt thou cut down the cedars,, wh}
wilt thou fell the goodly trees of Lebanon ? O Death, why dost thou not spate
the church ? Why must the pulpit be hung in black ; why must the missionary
station be filled with weeping? Why must the pious family lose its priest, and
the house its head? O Death, what art thou at ? touch not earth s holy things;
thy hands are not fit to pollute the Israel of God. Why dost thou put thine
hand upon the hearts of the elect ? Oh stay thou, stay thou; spare the righteous,
Death and take the bad! But no, it must not be ; death comes and smites the
goodliest of us all; the most generous, the most prayerful, th: mosl holy, the
most devoted must die. Weep, weep, weep, O church, for thou hast lost tny
martyrs- weep, O church, for thou hast lost thy confessors, thy holy men are
Mien Howf, fir tree, for the cedar hath fallen, the godly fail, and the
righteous are cut off. But stay awhile ; I hear another voice Say ye> thusi unto
the daughter of Judah, spare thy weeping. Say ye thus unto the Loids flock.
Cease, cease thy sorrow: thy martyrs are dead, but are glorified y
ministers are gone, but they have ascended up to tliy lather, and to .then
Father - thy brethren are buried in the grave, but the archangel s trumpet shall
awake them, and their spirits are ever now with God. „ N .
Hear ye the words of the text, by way of consolation, 1 o die is gain. IN ot
such ?am as thou whitest for, thou son of the miser ; not such gam. .. thou art
hunting for, thou man of covetousness and self-love; a highei and a better
gtnin tc tTiHt wTvicli death brings to a Ohnstian* ,
g My dear friends, when I discoursed upon the former part of the verse, it was
all plain. No proof was needed; ye believed it, for you saw it cleaily. To
live is Christ,” hath no paradox in it. But To die is gam, is one of the
Gospel riddles which only the Christian can truly understand. To die is not
gain if I look upon the merely visible , to die is loss, it is not gam. Hath not
the dead man lost his wealth ? though he had piles ot riches, can he take any-
thing with hhn ? Hath it not been said, “Naked came I out of my mother s
womb, and naked shall I return thither.” Dust thou ait, and unto dust
shalt thou return.” And which of all thy goods, canst thou take with
The man had a fair estate and a goodly mansion ; he hath lost that. He can
no more tread those painted halls, nor walk those verdant lawns. He had
abundance of fame amf honor ; he hath lost that, so far as his own seme of iji.
concerned, though still the harp string trembles at Ins name. He hath lost his
wealth, and buried though he may be m a costly tomb, yet is lie as poor as the
beggar who looked upon him in the street in envy. That is not gain, it is loss
ana he hath lost his friends; he hath left behind him a sorrowing wife and
children, fatherless, without his guardian care; lie hath lost the friend of Ins
bosom, tlie companion of his youth. Friends are there to weep over him, but they
cannot cross the river with him ; they drop a few tears into his tomb, but with
him they must not and cannot go. And hath he not lost all his learning, though
he hath toiled ever so much to fill his brain with knowledge . vv hat is he non
above the servile slave, though he hath acquired all knowledge of earthly
things? Is it not said,
“ Their memory and their love are lost
Alike unknowing and unknown?”
Surely death is loss. Hath he not lost the songs of the sanctuary and the
prayers of the righteous ? Hath he not lost the solemn assembly, and the gient
gathering of the people ? No more shall the promise enchant Ins ear, no more
shall the glad tidings of the gospel wake his soul to melody. He sleeps in the
dust, the Sabbath-bell tolls not for him, the sacramental emblems are spread
upon the table, but not for him. He hath gone to his grave, he knoweth not
that which shall be after him. There is neither work nor device in the grave,
301 313


whither we all are hastening. Surely death is loss. When I look upon thee, thou
clay-cold corpse, and see thee just preparing to be the palace of corruption and
the carnival for worms, I cannot think that thou hast gained. When I see that
thine eye hath lost light, and thy lip hath lost its speech, and thine ears have
lost hearing, and thy feet have lost motion, and thy heart hath lost its joy, and
they that look out of the windows are darkened, the grinders have failed, and
no sounds of tahret and of harp wake up thy joys, O clay-cold corpse, thou
hast lost, lost immeasurably. And yet my text tells me it is not so. It says, “To
die is gain.” It looks as if it could not be thus, and certainly it is not, so far
as I can see. But put to your eye the telescope of faith, take that magic glass
which pierces through the veil that parts us from the unseen. Anoint your
eyes with eyesalve, and make them so bright that they can pierce the ether,
and see the unknown worlds. Come, bathe yourself in this sea of light, and
live in holy revelation and belief, and then look, and oh how changed the
scene ! Here is the corpse, but there the spirit; here is the clay, but there the
soul; here is the carcase, but there the seraph. He is supremely blest; his
death is gain. Come now, what did he lose ? I will show that in everything
he lost, he gained far more. He lost his friends, did he? His wife, and his
children, his brethren in church fellowship, are all left to weep his loss. Yes,
he lost them; but, my brethren what did he gain? He gained more friends
than e’er he lost. He had lost many in his lifetime, but he meets them all
again. Parents, brethren and sisters who had died in youth or age, and passed
the stream before him, all salute him on the further brink. There the mother
lheets her infant, there the father meets his children, there the venerable
patriarch greets his family to the third and fourth generation, there brother
clasps brother to his arms, and husband meets with wife, no more to be married
or given in marriage, but to live together, like the angels of God. Some of us
have more friends in heaven than in earth. We have more dear relations
in glory, than we have here. It is not so with all of us, but with some it is so ;
more have crossed the stream than are left behind. But if it be not so, yet what
friends we have to meet us there ! Oh, I reckon on the day of death if it were
for the mere hope of seeing the bright spirits that are now before the throne ;
to clasp the hand of Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, to look into the face of
Paul the apostle, and grasp the hand of Peter; to sit in flowery fields with
Moses and David, to bask in the sunlight of bliss with John and Magdalene.
Oh how blest! The company of poor imperfect saints on earth is good; but
how much better the society of the redeemed. Death is no loss to us by way
of friends. We leave a few, a little band below, and say to them, “Fear not
little flock,” and we ascend and meet the armies of the living God, the hosts of
his redeemed. “To die is gain.” Poor corpse! thou hast lost thy friends on
earth; nay, bright spirit, thou hast received a hundred fold in heaven.
What else did we say he lost? We said he lost all his estate, all his sub-
stance and his wealth. Ay, but he has gained infinitely more. Though he
were rich as Croesus, yet he might well give up his wealth for that which he
hath attained. Were his fingers bright with pearls, and hath he lost their bril-
liancy? The pearly gates of heaven glistened brighter far. Had he gold in
his storehouse ? Mark ye, the streets of heaven are paved with gold, and lie is
richer far. The mansions of the redeemed are far brighter dwelling places
than the mansions of the richest here below. But it is not so with many of you.
You are not rich, you are poor. What can you lose by death ? You are poor
here, you shall be rich there. Here you suffer toil, there you shall rest for ever.
Here you earn your bread by the sweat of your brow ; but there, no toil.
Here wearily you cast yourself upon your bed at the week’s end, and sigh for
the Sabbath; but there Sabbaths have no end. Here you go to the house of
God, but you are distracted with wordly cares and thoughts of suffering ; but
there, there are no groans to mingle with the songs that warble from immortal
tongues, Death will be gain to you in point of riches and substance.
And as for the means of grace which we leave behind, what are they when
compared with what we shall have hereafter? Oh, might I die at this hour, I
think I would say something like this, “ Farewell Sabbaths,—l am going to the
eternal Sabbath of the redeemed. Farewell minister; I shall need no candle,
814 gQ2


neither light of the sun, when the Lord Gocl shril give me light, and
life for ever and ever. Farewell ye songs and sonnets of the Uewe ,
I shall not need your melodious hurst; I shall hear the eternal and Rasing
5 join with the noble
Singl Tl ! gofngTo i tin™ Zion £SV to
that hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God J
friends, in the thought of these things, do we not, some of us, leei as it we comu
“ E’en now by faith we join our hands
With those that went before,
And greet the blood-besprinkled bands
Upon th’ eternal shore.
One army of the living God,
At his command we bow,
Part of the host hath crossed the flood,
And part are crossing now.”
We have not come to the margin yet. but we shall be there soon: we soon
eX And l°Jin one more thought. We said that when men died they lost their
kntwfedg ; ’we conect ourselves. Oh. no ; when the righteous die they know
infinitely more than they could have known on earth.
“ There shall I see and hear and know
All I desired or wished below ;
And every power find sweet employ,
In that eternal world of joy.”
millionth part of the mighty 'Sj? 1 ' jiTS gain.”' Take away, tale
-e
that mourning, refrain thy tears, clap your hands, clap your hands.
“They are supremely blest,
Have done with care and sm and woe,
And with their Saviour rest.”
What' ween' weep! for heads that are crowned with coronals of heaven? Weep,
tn e iteaeemu i’i v ? WVint w pen for men that are m the Savioui s
throbbing with eternal tor men.
bosom. No, weep to die Weep that you must tarry. But weep
Sf" e TtftS Stogtaok!with loving wonder, and they
315
303


exclaim, “Why weepest thou?” What, weep for poverty that it is clothed in
riches'? What, weep for sickness, that it hath inherited eternal health ? _What,
weep for shame, that it is glorified; and weep for sinful mortality, that it hath
become immaculate? Oh, weep not, but rejoice. “If ye knew what it was that
I have said unto you, and whither I have gone, ye would rejoice with a joy
that no man should take from you.” “To die is gain.” Ah, this makes the
Christian long to die—makes him say,
“ Oh, that the word were given !
O Lord of Hosts, the wave divide,
And land us all in heaven! ”
And now, friends, does this belong to you all? Can you claim an interest in
it? Are you living to Christ? Does Christ live in you? For, if not, your
death will not be gain. Are you a believer in the Saviour ? Has your heart
been renewed, and your conscience washed in the blood of Jesus? If not, my
hearer, I weep for thee. I will save my tears for lost friends; there, with this
handkerchief I’d staunch mine eyes for ever for my best beloved that shall die,
if those tears could save you. O, when you die, what a day ! If the world were
hung in sackcloth, it could not express the grief that you would feel. You
die. O death ! O death ! how hideous art thou to men that are not in Christ!
And yet, my hearer, thou shalt soon die. Save me thy bed of shrieks, thy look
of gall, thy words of bitterness! Oh that thou couldst be saved the dread
hereafter ! Oh ! the wrath to come ! the wrath to come ! the wrath to come !
who is he that can preach of it? Horrors strike the guilty soul! It quivereth
upon the verge of death ; no, on the verge of hell. It looketh over, clutching
hard to life, and it heareth there the sullen groans, the hollow moans, and
shrieks of tortured ghosts, which come up from the pit that is bottomless, and
it clutcheth firmly to life, clasps the physician, and bids him hold, lest he
should fall into the pit that burnetii. And the spirit looketh down and seeth
all the fiends of everlasting punishments, and back it recoileth. But die it
must. It would barter all it hath to coin an hour ; but no, the fiend hath got
its grip, and down it must plunge. And who can tell the hideous shriek of a
lost soul ? It cannot reach heaven ; but if it could, it might well be dreamed
that it would suspend the melodies of angels, might make even God’s redeemed
weep, if they could hear the wailings of a damned soul. Ah ! you men and
women, ye have wept; but if you die unregenerate, there will be no weeping
like that; there will be no shriek like that, no wail like that. May God spare
us from ever hearing it or uttering it ourselves! Oh, how the grim caverns
of Hades startle, and how the darkness of night is frighted, when the wail of
a lost soul comes up from the ascending flames, whilst it is descending in the
pit; “Turn ye, turn ye; why will ye die, O house of Israel?” Christ is
preached to you. “This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation,
that Christ Jesu3 came into the world to save sinners.” Believe on him and live,
ye guilty, vile, perishing ; believe and live. But this know —if ye reject my
message, and despise my Master, in that day when he shall judge the world in
righteousness by that man, Jesus Christ, I must be a swift witness against you.
I have told you —at your soul’s peril reject it. Beeeive my message, and you
are saved; reject it —take the responsibility on your own head. Behold, my
skirts are clear of your blood. If ye be damned, it is not for want of warning.
O God, grant ye may not perish.
310
301


The New Park Street Pulpit.
the sound in the mulberry trees.
A Sermon
DELIVERED ON SABBATH EVENING, MAY 81, 1857, BY THE
REV. C. H. SPURGEON,
AT NEW BARIC STREET CHAPEL, SOUTHWARK.
1 r in the tops of the mulberry trees, that then thou shalt
“““ ““ “**»- «•
David had f oUg, 'j Loriha* h'oLn'forth upon mine enemies before
victory; so that he said, the L Philistines had come up in great hosts,
me as the breach ot waters. t ] iat Israel, when the ark of the
and had brought their got s thpv'mieht feel quite sure of victory. How-
Lord was brought into o 1 rout, b irned their images
ever, by the help of God David easily them . Note, however, that
in the fire, and obtained a glorious David di(l no t go up to fight
when they came a second tim g Once he had been victorious; he might
them, without enquiring of the Lord. cases—" I shall be victorious
have said, as many of us have said, if once I shall triumph yet
again; I may rest quite sine that it 1 t T ord’s hands?” Not so, now,
again. Wherefore should Igo and se strength of the Lord ;he would not
David. He had gained ™ e vic ‘“\ y red tde S a rae . He went and asked the
venture upon ang’jher, until he ad “hem?” and when he was informed that
sacred oracle, Shall Igo ip g . them, but to encamp so as to surprise
he was not immediately to march ag £ s i ng l e moment to the mandate
them at the mulberry-trees, he did n aeu ;1 h s^ou i d hear the sound in the
of God; and when lie was bidden to wait, untune - n an m haste to
tops of the mulberry-trees befoie he mulberry-trees began to smg at
nSh to battle at once but he Saves. He would wait
the top by reason of the wnid that iushed . along my spear nor my hand
until God’s sign was given , I should go to war at my own charges, and
till God hath bidden me do it, lest 1 snoum go
lose all I have obtained. David to take no steps without God. The
My brethren, let ns learn from D business , or chana-ed your situation
last time you moved oi went into did . and were blessed in the doing
in life, you as:ked God s “d succeS sful man, you have always sought
of it. You have been a P‘ , hls of providence necessarily runs in a con-
God, but do not think thatthe■sue t^orrow wit h o ut seeking God’s advice
tinuous current; you yto onC(Jj and that will be until you
venture upon a step which y ; t may be because you have trusted in the
die. You have been wise hitherto, may “e h c y understanding; you
Lord with .11 yo™ hear, and L o rd," andlike JehoshapTmt to
AhaVh-aid! “I trill no, go up drill I have enquired of the Lord, _ and you
517


fiave not to ask priests of Baal, but you have said, “Is there not here one, a
prophet of the Lord, that I may enquire at his hands?” Now, keep on in the
same way; do not, I beseech you, go before the cloud. If Providence tarries,
tarry till Providence comes; never go before it. He goes on a fool’s errand who
goes before God; but he walks in a blessed path who sees the footsteps of
Providence, and reads the map of Scripture, and so discovers, “ This is the way
wherein lam to walk.” This may be imputed to some one here ; I thought I
would begin with it, for it may be I have some young man here who is about
unadvisedly to take a step which may be his ruin, temporarily ; I beseech him,
if he loves the Lord—l speak to none but those who are already Christians.—
I beseech him not to venture until he has sought counsel of God, and unless he
has a firm conviction that he is doing it not merely for his own advantage but
to help him in serving his God the better. Unless he can be sure that he has
God’s approval of his step, let me —by the mistake that many have made, by the
mischief that he will do himself unless he listens to me, —let me beseech him to
stop, and not take so much as one half a step, or lift his foot, until he has sought
of God, and has had the answer, “ Go up against them.”
Thus I have introduced the text: but now I would refer to it in another way
altogether. David was not to go to battle, until he heard a sound of a rustling
in the tops of the mulberry trees. There was a calm, perhaps; and God’s
order to David was, “ You are not to begin to fight until the wind begins
rustling through the tops of the mulberry trees or as the Rabbis have it, and
it is a very pretty conceit if it be true, the footsteps of angels walking along the
tops of the mulberry trees make them rustle; that was the sign for them to
fight, when God’s cherubim were going with them, when they should come,
who can walk through the clouds and fly through the air, led by the great
Captain himself, walking along the mulberry trees, and so make a rustle by
their celestial footsteps. How true that may be, I cannot tell; my remark is
only this—that there are certain signs which ought to be indications to us of certain
duties. I shall use the verse in this way. First, there are certain special duties, which
are not duties to everybody, but only to some people. If we wish to know whether
we are to perform these duties, we must seek signs concerning them, and not go
and rush into a duty to which we are not called, unless we get a sign, even as
David got the rustling among the mulberry leaves. And then I should use it,
in the second place, thus. There are certain duties which are common to all of us ■
but when we see some sign of God’s Holy Spirit being in motion, or some
other signs, these are seasons when we ought to be more than ever active, and more
than ever earnest in the service of our Master.
I. First, then, in regard to special duties. I shall confine myself, I think,
to one. The office of the ministry is a special duty. Ido not believe, as some
do, that it is the business of everyone of us to preach ; I believe it is the business
of a great many people who do preach to hold their tongues. I think that if
they had waited until God had sent them they would have been at home now •
and there be some men who are not fit to edify a doorpost, who yet think that
if they could but once enter the pulpit they would attract a multitude. They
conceive preaching to be just the easiest thing in all the world, and while they
have not power to speak three words correctly, and have not any instruction
from on high, and never were intended for the pulpit, for the mere sake of the
honor or the emolument, they rush into the ministry. There are hundreds of
men in the ministry starving for want of bread and entirely unsuccessful, and
I believe in regard to some of them that the best thing they could do would be
to open a grocer’s shop. They would be doing more to serve God and to serve
the church if they would take a business, and preach now and then as they had
time to study, or else give it up altogether, and let somebody come and preach
to the people who had something to tell them. For alas, alas, a preacher who
has nothing to say will not only do no good, but will do a great deal of harm.
The people who hear him get disgusted at the very name of a place of worship;
and they only look at it as a kind of stocks, where they are to sit for an hour
with their feet fast, quiet and still, listening to a man who is saying nothing
because he has nothing to say. I would not advise all of you to be preachers;
Ido not believe God ever intended that you should. If God had intended all
306 SIS


his people to he preachers, I wonder how even He in liis wisdom could have
found them all congregations; because were all preachers where were h
hearers ? No, I believe the office of the ministry, though not like that ot the pries
hood, as to any particular sanctity, or any particular power that we possess, is
yet like the priesthood in this—that no man onght to take it to himself, saiehe
that is called thereunto, as was Aaron. No man has any right to add *ess a
congregation on things spiritual, unless he believes that God has given him
special calling to the work, and unless he has also m due time received cerl
seals which attest his ministry as being the ministry of God. Ihe rightly or-
dained minister is ordained not by the laying on of bishops or Presbyter s
hands, but by the Spirit of God himself, whereby the power of God is com-
municated in the preaching of the word. , , T
There may be some here who will say, How am Ito know whether lam
called to preach ?” My brethren, you will find it out by-and-bye, I dare say
and if you are sincerely desirous to know when you are m the path ot duty in
endeavouring to preach, I must bid you do as David did. He noted the rustling
in the leaves of the mulberry trees. And I must, have you notice certain sigh is.
Do you want to know whether you can preach ? Ask yourself this question,
“Can 1 pray? When I have been called upon in the prayer-meeting, havel
been enabled to put my words together and has God helped me in the matter.
So far so good. “ Well then I will go and try, I will preach in the stieet, tor
instance.” Suppose nobody listens to me, suppose I go and take a room, or
go to a chapel, and nobody comes to hear, well, there is no rustling among the
mulberry trees; I had better stop. Suppose Igoto my wife and children, and
take a text, and just preach a little wee bit to them and to the neighbours,
suppose, after I have preached to them, I should feel that they could preach a
great deal better to me, there is no rustling among the mulberry trees, and 1
had better give it up. And suppose if, after having preached for sometime, 1
hear of none who have been brought to Christ there is no rustling among the
mulberry trees, I think the best thing I could do is, to let somebody else try ;
for suppose I have not been called to the ministry, it would have been a fearful
thino- for me to have occupied the watchman’s place, without having received
the watchman’s commission. He that should take upon himself to be a police-
man, and go and do the work of arresting others without having received a
commission, must be in danger of being taken up himself, for being a de-
ceiver. And it may be, if I had not been called to the ministry, and had no
seal of it, I had better leave it alone, lest I go without God s commission ; and
that would never answer my purpose, to begin without his having sent me ;
for if he have not sent me, it may be I shall break down in my errand, and do
no good. Ido not ask whether you are much instructed or learned, or all that;
I do not need to ask you; for I do not care about it myself But I ask you these
questions. Have you tried to address a Sabbath-school. have you gainec le
attention of the children. Having tried to address a few people, when they
have been gathered together, have you found they would listen to you
after you had preached ? Had you any evidence and any sign that would lead
you to believe that souls were blessed under you? Did any of the saints ol
God who were spiritually-minded, tell you that their souls were fed by your
sermon ? Did you hear of any sinner convinced of sin ? Have you any reason
to believe that you have had a soul converted under you? If not, it . you will
take one’s advice for what it is good for-and I believe it is advice which God a
Holy Spirit would have me give you—you had better give it up. *on will
make a very respectable Sundry-schoolteacher, you will do very well in a great
many other ways ; but unless these things have been known by you, unless you
have these evidences, you may say you have been called, and all that; 1 don t
believe it. If you had been called to preach, there would have been some evi-
dence and some sign of it. I remember two years ago, some man wrote to me
a note, telling me that it had been said to his heart and God the HolySpint
had revealed it to him, that I was to let him preach in this chapel. e ,
just wrote to him, and told him that was a one-sided revelation, and that as soon
as ever God revealed it to me that I was to let him preach here, then he should;
but until then I did not see that the revelation was quite a square one. Why
31U 307


should it be revealed to him and not revealed to me? I have heard no more of
him, and I have not had it revealed to me either; so that I do not suppose he
will make his appearance here. I say this because, though to a great many ot
you it would be nothing at all, there are a large number of young men here who
preach. I thank God for them —for anyone who is able to preach. But I will
thank God to stop those who cannot preach, because if they go about to preach
and have not the ability, and God has not sent them, they will just make fools
of themselves, though that you should not be greatly surprised at, because they
may not be far off already; but they will make the very Gospel itself come into
contempt. If they profess to preach who have not the call from God s Spirit, when
they begin to talk they will just bring more scandal upon the cross by a rash de-
fence of it than would have come if they had left it alone. Now, take care about
that. I would discourage none ; I would say to every young man who has a
grain of ability, and believes he has been called of God, and everyone who has
really been blessed, “ So far as I can help you I will help you; I will do so to
the very uttermost, if you need my help; and I pray God Almighty to bless
you, and make you more and more abundantly useful; for the Church needs
many pastors and evangelists.” But if there is no soul converted under you, if
you are not qualified to preach at all, you shall have my equally earnest prayers
for you that God may speed you —and I shall pray for you in this way, that
God will speed you by making you hold your tongue. I waited till I heard the
sound among the mulberry trees, else had I been uncalled and unsent. David
waited ;he would.not go to the battle till he had heard the signal from on high,
which was the signal for the battle, and the signal of the commencement of
warfare.
11. But now, my brethren I come to something more practical to many of
you; you do not profess to be called to preach; there are certain duties
BELONGING TO ALL CHRISTIANS WHICH ARE TO BE SPECIALLY PRACTISED AT SPECIAL
seasons. First, concerning the Christian church at large. The whole of the
Christian church should be very prayerful, always seeking the unction of the
Holy One to rest upon their hearts, that the kingdom of Christ may come and that
his will be done on earth even as it is in heaven ; but there are times when God
seems to favour Zion, when there are great movements made in the church,
when revivals are commenced, when men are raised up whom God blesses ;
tiiat ought to be to youlike “a soundof agoing in the tops of the mulberry trees.”
We ought then to be doubly prayerful, doubly earnest, wrestling more at the
throne, than we have been wont to do. I think this is just the time that de-
mands your extraordinary and special prayers. I look upon that great move-
ment in the Church of England, the preaching on Sabbath-evenings in Exeter
Hall, as a sign of rustling, a kind of “ a going in the tops of the mulberry
trees.” My brethren, I could pity the man that would be for one moment
envious, though a thousand such places should be full to the doors; I could
cry out to God for mercy on the man, who could be so great a sinner against
humanity and against the souls of men, as to wish that it should not prosper.
With all my heart I pray that God may bless it, and I exhort you just now, as
there appears to be a move in the right direction, now that some of the
ministers are more thoroughly roused up than they used to be, now that the
ordinance of preaching is more honored, now that there is a spirit of hearing
poured out amongst the people, I beseech you now, let your prayers be doubly
earnest. Do as David was commanded to do —rise up and bestir yourself, not
in a spirit of envy, not in a spirit of strife; do not bestir yourself, lest the
Church of England shall beat Dissenters. No, brethren, let us each bestir our-
selves that we may beat the devil. Let us each be earnest, and let us each,
when we see a movement in any section of the church, bold up the hands of
faithful men, and pray to God that if they are not faithful men they may be
made right, but that as far as they are right they may have a blessing. I think
the church of Christ has lived to a glorious period. I really think the day to
which we have lived now, is a day that ought to gladden the eyes of many of
God’s people. So far from being now, as 1 was a little time ago, in a gloomy
frame about the worshippers of the church, I seem to think I have lived now to
a happy era. Even the holy Whitfield himself never stirred up such a revival
308 320


of religion as God has been pleased to give now ; not by bis preaching did be
stir up a host of bishops and clergymen to come forth and prea.ch to the
poor. God lias been pleased of late to wake up the churches far and near. _ 1
hear the noise amongst the mulberry trees. Everywhere I hear of the doctiine
of grace being made more prominent, and the preaching of the gospel becoming
more earnest, more energetic, and more full of the Spirit. We nave seen in
our midst some called out of our church, whom God has blessed in the preaching
of the Word. There is in many places, and I allude especially to the Church
of England just now, “ the sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees.
Now, my brethren, is the time for us to bestir ourselves. Oh let us cry to you
more earnestly ; let our prayer-meetings be filled with men come lull ot
vehement petitions, let our private altars be more constantly kept burning, earn-
ing the smoke of prayer to ascend, and let our closets continually be occupied
by earnest intercession. Bestir thyself: there is a “ sound ot a going m the
of the mulberry trees.” , , . c
That is concerning the church at large; the same truth holds good ot a j
particular congregation. One Sabbath-day the minister preached with great
unction ; God clothed him with power, he seemed like John the Baptist in the
wilderness, crying, “ Repent ye, for the kingdom ot heaven is at hand. e
spake with all the earnestness of a man who was about to die; he so spake na
the people trembled, a visible thrill passed through the audience. Eveiy eye
was lived, and the tears seemed to bedew every cheek. Men and women rose
up from the sermon, saying “ Surely, God was m this place, and we have felt
his presence.” What ought a Christian man to say, as he retiresiftom the
house of God? He should say, “ I have heard this day the sound of the leaves
of the mulberry trees.” I saw the people earnest; I marked the mimster
speaking mightily, God having touched his lips with a live coal from oil c
2ta“ f saw the tear in every eye; I saw the deep, wrapt attention, of many
who were careless. There ware some young people there that looked as if h.y
had been impressed; their countenances seemed to show that theres was awo k
doing Now, what should I do? The first thing I will do is, I will bestn mysell.
But low shall I do it? Why, I will go home this day, and I will wrestle m prayer
more earnestly than I have been wont to do that God will bless the minister,
and multiply the church. Well, what next? Where do I sit. Was there a
young womL in my pew that seemed impressed? When I go this evening I
will look out for her ; I have heard the “ sound of the leaves of the mulberry
trees,” and I will bestir myself; and if I see her there, I will speak a word to
her; or, what is more, if I hear another sermon like it, and I see any who seem
to be impressed, I will try to find them out; for I know that two words from a
private person are often better than fifty from a minister. So that if I have
seen a young man impressed, I will touch him on his elbow and say, You
seemed asTyou enjoyed this sermon.” “ Yes I liked it very well.” “And
do you like spiritual things ?” Who can tell ? I may be made the means of his
conversion. At all events, I shall have this sweet consolation to go to bed with,
that I heard the “ sound of the leaves of the mulberry trees, and as soon as I
heard it I bestirred myself that I might serve my God, and be the means of win-
ning souls from hell. But, alas! my brethren, much ot the seed we sow seems to
be lost for want of watering. Many an impressive sermon seems to lose much of its
force because it is not followed up as it should be. God spurposes, I know,
are answered, his Word does not return unto him void; still, I think; we might
sometimes ask ourselves, have we not been too dilatory, too neglectful in not
availing ourselves of favorable times and seasons, when the power of the Spirit
has been in our midst, and when we should have looked upon it as the signal
for more strenuously exerting ourselves m the service of oui Mastei.
The same I might say of any time of general sickness, or any time of plague
or cholera or sudden death. There are times when the cholera is raging through
our streets’- the people are all trembling, they are afraid to die; mark, that is
the “ sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees. It is the business of
vou and I tobestir ourselves, when people are by any means led to serious thought,
when God is walking through the land, and smiting down first one and then
another, and the minds of the people are all on tiptoe concerning what the end
309 821


shall be; when there has been some alarming fire, when a sudden death has
taken place, in the street, or in the court, or in a house, it is the Christian’s busi-
ness to seize upon the time, and to improve it for his Master. “Now,” said
the Puritans, during the great plague of London, when the hireling parish
priests had fled from their churches—“now is our time to preach.” And all
through that terrible time, when the carts, filled with the dead, went through
the streets overgrown with grass, these strong-minded Puritans occupied the
pulpits, and boldlypreached the word of God. Brethren, that is what we should
do whenever we see a time more favorable than another for telling sinners of
the wrath to come. Let us seize it, just as the merchant looks out for every
turn of the market, for every rise and every fall; just as the farmer looks out
for a good season for sowing or planting or mowing. Let us look out for the
best times for seeking to do good. Let us plough deep while sluggards sleep,
and let us labor as much as possible in the best season, to make hay while the
sun is shining, and serve our God when we hear the “ sound of a going in the
tops of the mulberry trees.”
And now permit me to go back to a thought I have given you. Keep the
same idea in view in regard to every individual you meet with. If you have a
drunken neighbour; it is very seldom you can ever say a word to him*. His
wife is ill; she is sick and dying, poor fellow, he is sober this time. He seems
to be a bit impressed; he is anxious about his wife, and anxious about himself.
Now is your time ; now for the good word; put it in well. Now is your
opportunity. There is a great swearer, but he seems by some terrible providence
or other to become a little abashed, and he is not so profane as he used to be.
You should do as the ancient slingers did. If they saw a warrior lift his
helmet, in they would put the stone, before he could get the helmet down
again. So if you see a man a little impressed, and he is open to conviction,
do what you can, as God gives you opportunity; and if any of your acquaintance
have been in the house of God, if you have induced them to go there, and you
think there is some little good doing but you do not know, take care of that
little, it may be God hath used us as a fostermother to bring up his child, so
that this little one may be brought up in the faith, and this newly converted soul
may be strengthened and edified. But I’ll tell you, many of you Christians do
a deal of mischief, by what you say when going home. A man once said that
when he was a lad he heard a certain sermon from a minister, and felt deeply
impressed under it. Tears stole down his cheeks, and he thought within him-
self, “ I will go home to pray.” On the road home he fell into the company of
two members of the church. One of them began saying, “Well, how did you
enjoy the sermon? The other said, “ I do not think he was quite sound on such
a point.” “Well,” said the other, “ I thought he was rather off his guard,”
or something of that sort; and one pulled one part of the minister’s sermon to
pieces, and another the other, until, said the young man, before I had gone
many yards with them, I had forgetten all about it; and all the good I thought
I had received seemed swept away by these two men, who seemed afraid lest
I should get any hope, for they were just pulling that sermon to pieces that
would have brought me on my knees. How often have we done the same!
People will say, “ What d : d you think of that sermon ?” I gently tell them
nothing at all, and if there is any fault in it—and very likely there is, it is better
not to speak of it, for some may get good from it. I do believe that many a
sermon that seems nothing but perfect nonsense from beginning to end may be
the means of salvation. You and I may have more knowledge of the Scriptures,
322 310


we may be more instructed and enlightened : we may say, “ Dear me, I do not
know how people can hear that.” You may think people are not able to hear
it, but they are saved ; that is all you have to look after. A Primitive minister
has sometimes quite puzzled you: you have said, “ I dare say the good man
understands himself, but I do not understand him.” And yet he has got all
those people with their attention fixed; and you have seen souls brought to
God under the sermon, and therefore you must not say anything about it. You
are obliged to say, ‘'Well, it was not the sermon forme. Never mind t at,
it was the sermon for some one else. It is the best way for you not to hear t at
man again, but let him go on; he will get some people to do good to, are
I just throw this in, in an interjaculatory way. If you have got hold of
people’s ears, or a bit of their ear; if you have got them to say, I tlimk I will
come again,” do not putin any word that may keep them away; but bes lr
yourselves, to be the means of saving souls instrumental]y, when you hear these
signals from on high. ,
And I think my brethren, I must expressly make an appeal to you in regarc
to your own children. There are certain times in the history of my own be ovc
children, when they seem more impressible than at other seasons, I beseec 1 you
never lose the opportunity. Salvation is of God, from first to last, ut yet it is
your business to use all the means, just as if you could save them. Now t ere
are times when your son, who is generally very gay and wild, comes home from
chapel and there is a sort of solemnity about him you do not often see. When
you see that, get a word with him. Sometimes your little daughter comes
home ; she has heard something she understands, something that seems to have
struck her thoughts. Do not laugh at her, do not despise that little beginning.
Who can tell ?It may be the “ sound in the tops of the mulberry trees. Your
son, a boy of fourteen or fifteen, is often coming home apparently deeply in-
terested, and sometimes you have thought, “Well, I do not know, the boy
seems as if he listened rather more than others do. I think there must be a
good work in him.” Do not, by any harshness of yours, put a rough hand on
that tender plant; do not say to him, for instance, if lie commits a little fault, 1
thought there was some good thing in you, but there is no piety m you at all,
or else you would not have done it.” Do not say that, that is a damper at once.
Remember, if he be a child of God he has his faults as well as any other boy.
Therefore do not be too harsh or severe with him, but if you find the slightest
good say, There is the “ sound in the tops of the mulberry trees.” There may
be ever such a faint rustling, nevermind that is my opportunity; now will
be more earnest about my child’s salvation, and now will I seek to teach
him, if I can, more fully the way of God; I will try to get him alone and
talk to him. The tender plant, if it be of God, it is sure to grow; but
let me take care to be the instrument of fostering it, and let me take my
boy aside, and say to him, “Well, my son, have you learnt something of
the evil of sin?” And if he says yes, and I find he has a little hope an
faith though it may be rather a superficial work let me not despise it, but let
me remember, I was once grace in the blade, and though grace in the ear now
I would never have been grace in the ear if I had not been grace in the Ma e.
I must not despise the blades, because they are not ears ; I must not kill the
lambs, because they are not sheep ; for where would my sheep come from, it 1
killed all the lambs ? I must not despise the weakest of the saints, lor wiieie
should I get the advanced saints from, if I put weak ones out of the covenan ,
311 , 323


and tell them they are not the children of God? No, I will watch for the least
indication, the least sign of any good thing towards the Lord God of Israel,
and I will pray God that these signs may not be delusive, not like the smoke
that is driven away, nor like the early cloud and the morning dew, but the
abiding signs of grace began, which shall be afterwards grace complete.
And lastly, not to detain you longer Christian, in regard to yourself there is a
great truth here. There are times, you know, “ when thou hearest the sound
of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees.” You have a peculiar power in
prayer; the Spirit of God gives you joy and gladness ; the Scripture is open to
you: the promises are applied; you walk in the light of God s countenance,
and his candle shines about your head ; you have peculiar freedom and liberty
in devotion ; perhaps you have got less to attend to in the world and more close-
ness of communion with Christ than you used to have. Now is the time ; now,
when you hear the “ sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees.” Now
is the time to bestir yourselves; now is the time to get rid of any evil habit
that still remains; now is the season in which God the Spirit is with you. But
spread your sail; remember what you sometimes sing—
“ I can only' spread the sail;
Thou Lord must breathe the auspicious gale.
Be sure you have the sail up. Do not miss the gale, for want of preparation
for it. Seek help of God, that you may be more earnest in duty, when made
more strong in faith ; that you may be more constant in prayer, when you have
more liberty at the throne; that you may be more holy in your conversation,
whilst you live more closely with Christ.
And oh, with regard to some here, who to-night, or this morning, or at any
other time, have been led to think, “ Oh, that I might be saved!” If you have
any thought about it, any serious impression, I pray that God the Holy Spirit
may enable you to look upon the impression that is made upon you as the
“ sound of a going in the tops of the mulberry trees ;” that you may be led to
bestir yourselves, and seek God more earnestly; if God the Spirit has convin-
ced you in any degree, if he has impressed yon, if he has made you tremble, if
he has sent you home to pray, now, I beseech you, be in earnest about your
own soul; and if God has awakened you so far, look upon that as a token of
his grace, and say, “now or never.” It may be that this big wave will help
you over the great bar that is before the harbour’s mouth. This may be the
tide, which taken at the flood, leads on to heaven. Oh, that God might help
you to take it at the flood, that you might be carried safely over your convic-
tions and your troubles, and landed safely in the blessed haven of faith—that
haven which is protected by the atonement of Christ, and by the bar of ever-
lasting love. God bless you, for Jesus’ sake! Amen.
324
313


SPURGEON’S SERMONS.
(ENGLISH EDITION.)
Single Sermons, Twopence each ; post-free, four
penny stamps.
Confession of Sin : a Sermon
with Seven Texts.
Preaching for the Poor.
David’s Dying Prayer.
Regeneration.
Mercy, Omnipotence, and
Justice.
Independence of Christianity.
India’s Ills and England’s
Sorrows.
The Condescension of Christ.
The Loved Ones Chastened.
The Warning Neglected.
The Destroyer Destroyed.
The Holy Spirit and the One
Church.
Paul’s Sermon before Felix.
Search the Scriptures.
The Great Reservoir.
Secret Sins.
The Blood Shedding.
Rahab’s Faith.
Spiritual Resurrection.
The Uses of the Law.
Heavenly Rest.
Salvation by the Lord.
A Simple Sermon for Seek-
ing Souls.
A Preacher from the Dead.
Waiting only upon God.
Things that accompany Sal-
vation.
The Mysteries of the Brazen
Serpent.
The True Christian’s Bles-
sedness.
Instability.
Light at Evening Time.
The First Christmas Carol.
What have I done ?
The Immutability of Christ.
The Two Talents.
The Prodigal’s Return.
Christ Lifted up.
Double Numbers, Fottrpence each; post-free, six
penny stamps.
How to keep the Heart.
Particular Redemption.
Fear Not.
Thy Redeemer.
God the All-Seeing One.
The Work of the Holy Spirit
The Death of Christ.
A Call to the Unconverted.
The Security of the Church.
A Faithful Friend.
The First Great Command-
ment.
The Leafless Tree.
The Goodman’s Life and
Death.
The Sound in the Mul-
berry Trees.
The Snare of the Fowler.
The Fruitless Yine.
THE VOLUMES for 1855, 1856, and 1857, can now be
obtained, cloth, 7s. 6d. per volume; post-free, Bs. 6d. The
Three Volumes, complete, 215.; post-free, 235. 6d.
G. R. ADDISON, Agent for the Sale of SPURGEON’S
SERMONS, 487, Brickfield Hill, George Street South j
and at the Book Stall, Railway Terminus, Sydney.


SPURGEON’S SERMONS.
(ENGLISH EDITION.)
THE WHOLE AMOUNT CAN BE REMITTED IN POSTAGE STAMPS.
THE NEW PARK STREET PULPIT, Vol. 1., contain-
ing the Sermons published during the year 1855, with a
Preface by the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, and frontispiece of his
Birthplace, printed in tints, cloth, 7s. 6d.; post-free, Bs. 6d.
THE NEW PARK STREET PULPIT, Vol. 11., con-
taining the Sermons published during the year 1856, with
Preface by, and Portrait of, the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon,
cloth, 7s. 6d.; post-free, Bs. 6d.
THE NEW PARK STREET PULPIT, Vol. 111., con-
taining the Sermons published during the year 1857, with
Preface by the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, and Frontispiece of
the Music Hall, Surrey Gardens, the scene of the melancholy
catastrophe occasioned by the false alarm of fire. Cloth,
7s. 6d.; post-free, Bs. 6d.
***• The Three Volumes, complete, 215.; post-free, 235. 6d.
EXETER HALL SERMONS, preached by the Rev.
C. H. Spurgeon, at Exeter Hall, London, during the
enlargement of New Park Street Chapel, with Preface by,
and Portrait of, the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, cloth, 3s. 6d.;
post-free, 4s. 6d.
THE PULPIT LIBRARY, containing Twelve Sermons
(Revised and Corrected) by the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon,
hitherto unpublished; printed in Large Type, with Preface
and Portrait, cloth, 45.; post-free, 4s. 6d.
THE CHRISTIAN LAW OF SOCIAL LIFE; or, Love
thy Neighbour, by the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon. In neat
wrapper, 2d.; post-free, 4d.
REV. C. H. SPURGEON’S ALMANACK, and Chris-
tians’ Companion for 1858; Twelve Engravings with
Articles written thereon, by the Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, and
a Text of Scripture for every day in the year, &c., &c., one
penny; post-free, threepence.
HANDSOME STEEL ENGRAVING OF THE REV.
C. H. SPURGEON preaching in the Music Hall, Royal
Surrey Gardens, Proofs, Is.
BIRTH PLACE OF THE REV. C. H. SPURGEON,
Printed in Colours, with handsome border for framing, Is.
NEW PORTRAIT OF THE REV. C. H. SPURGEON,
engraved on Steel, by S. Allen, from a Photograph by the
London Stereoscopic Company, India proofs, Is. 6d.
*** The Three Engravings, making a perfect set, 3s.
G. R. ADDISON, Agent for the Sale of Spurgeon’s
Sermons, 487, Brickfield Hill, George Street South, Sydney;
and at the Book Stall, Railway Terminus, Sydney.
