

SQUATTERS
GOLD-DIGGERS,
THEIR CLAIMS AND RIGHTS.
J. B. HARDY, 8.A.,
LATE CHIEF GOLD COMMISSIONER.
SYDNEY:
W. R. PIDDINGTON, GEORGE STREET.


SYDNEY
POINTED BT BEADING AND WBLLBAKK,
BBIDGE STKBET.


[Extracts from Evidence of Chief Gold Commissioner
Hardy, before the Committee of the Legislative Council,
on the Gold Fields.]
17. By the Chairman: The great object of those Regulations is the main-
tenance of order at the Diggings, and the obtainment of as much revenue as can
be collected from the Gold ? The object is the maintenance of order, and the
collection of the revenue that the Government has fixed. Ido not know whether
it is the object of the Government to get as much as they can out of the Gold
Diggers.
18. By the Colonial Secretary : I suppose the object is to get the fixed License
Fee ? Yes. By the maintenance of order I mean also the carrying out of the
ordinary police regulations, and rendering operative all the laws of the Colony as
far as Courts of Petty Sessions are concerned, Courts of Requests, and so on.
19. By the Chairman: The settlement of any disputes as to boundaries?
Yes.
21. Has it occurred to you that, over and above the revenue which may be
sufficient to maintain the establishment for these purposes, which I may term
purposes of police, at the Diggings, it would also be desirable to obtain a revenue
from the Gold applicable to other and more general purposes ? That involves
the principle whether the Government ought to get as much as they could, or
whether they ought to be contented with less than they could get if they were to
go to the extent of their power.
22. By Mr, Wentworth : I take it there can be no doubt that the Gold Field
is the property of the public ? Yes, the Gold Field is, but the Gold is not ;
that is, the Gold brought to the surface is brought there by man’s industry, and
I cannot conceive that there is any justice in taxing one man more than
anotherl cannot conceive that Gold Diggers should be taxed more than the
rest of the community, always supposing that they pay the expense which
the Government is put to by their occupation of the Gold Field. The Gold is
under ground, and there would remain but for the industry of these men ; and
their industry brings that to light in the same way that the fleece of the flock is
brought to the market by the industry of the squatter.
23. Would not that doctrine strike at the foundation of all Royalties or taxes •
upon this occupation ? I have nothing to do with that.


24. By the Chairman : Do you not think it should be one object to obtain as
much revenue as can be obtained beneficially 1 Yes, as much as can be obtained
beneficially, but “ beneficially” is a word of very wide meaning. I think you
may get a very large revenue, and it might so happen that it would be more
beneficial to get a small than a large revenue.
So spoke the Chief Gold Commissioner in extremis —in his
hour of peril, the bitterness of official death imminent—his
Azrael present, threatening and relentless.
I shall not stop to paint the scene. Not unwarned, but
resolute—(impolitic, imprudent, rash, reckless, in the eyes of
desponding friends and rejoicing foes). But he knew his
own strength—strength to endure as well as fortitude to
dare. And a kindred spirit said, Go and Prosper.
It might seem scarcely necessary to assert, at this time, the
rights of the gold-digger. For events have established them
beyond the reach of narrow legislation. It seems now
almost a fable that any party should have advocated the
obstruction instead of the settlement of the gold field. Yet
Messrs. Wentworth and James McArthur, the men who had
the presumption to get up the Gold Fields Committee, gave
utterance to such trash, probably in a sincere, as it certainly
was in an ignorant, spirit.
I assert that the principle on which the gold field was from
the first, and at my suggestion, managed, was the true one—
namely, that the diggers should make all the profit they
could out of their occupation, paying the expenses necessarily
incurred by the government in consequence. That they
should pay for police protection, for the establishment of
Courts of Petty Sessions, of Post Offices, of Escorts—and, in
short, of every other item conducive to the general good, and
belonging to good government.
In Port Phillip, this is still matter of debate between vic-
torious diggers and a feeble government. It is argued by
the former that, as they pay to the general revenue by the
use of cxciseable articles, and, in every other way, in their
full proportion, they ought to pay nothing at all.. Forgetting
that, as the inhabitants of Melbourne, as of Sydney, pay


local rates and taxes, the principle for which they contend
has been long practically abandoned—that as the congrega-
tion of large numbers in those two localities gives rise to
wants that are foreign to small and scattered communities,
and such wants are supplied by those who engender them,
so it is just and reasonable that the local expenses of the
gold field should be paid by local taxation, such expenses
being foreign to those localities except for their intrusion.
In this Colony, neither diggers nor their advocates are so
wanting in moderation. There are differences of opinion as
to the mode in which the expenses of the gold field should
be paid—and, perhaps, in isolated instances, in both parties,
some want of proper appreciation of their true position. But
the great majority of the former, and the more respectable of
the latter, regard, as unquestionable, the principle first
applied to the Australian Gold Field. And if the govern-
ment ever abandon it, and suffer themselves to be deterred
from enforcing it, by the miserable example set them by the
Port Phillip government, or by any other consideration, they
will be unequal to their duties.
Nor is it probable that the barbarous notion will be
revived, that the gold field should be looked to as a
great source of public revenue. The broad has superseded
the narrow view, and no government, no public man of
character, will suggest that the magnificent result of
disembowelling the earth of her long buried riches, would
be improved by robbing hard labour of its reward. Policy,
prudence, the necessity of the case as well as justice, demand
that the gold-digger shall follow his occupation unrestricted,
without let or hindrance, so as he interferes not with the
public good in other particulars, and that his productive
industry shall not be taxed beyond that of other men. This
position was unanswerably defended in the evidence before
the Gold Committee.
198. You have said, as Gold is very far down in the earth, and of no value to
the public until it is dug out, the Gold digger ought to have the privilege of
digging for it for nothing. No; I said he ought to he required to pay a


moderate, and not an immoderate sum ; that is to say,—he ought to pay all the
expenses he puts the public to, and perhaps something more, in consequence of
his following this occupation.
199. What, in your opinion, are the expenses consequent upon that? The
general increase in the pay of public servants ? I cannot define it exactly, any
more than I can define exactly the expense the community are put to by the
occupation of Land outside the boundaries. I consider that the Gold digger
should pay whatever additional expense the Government is put to in consequence,
as, for instance, the expense of Police.
200. Do you not think these Gold diggers who have been the cause of
the destruction of the Bathurst road, by the traffic they have created, ought to be
taxed to put them in repair again ? If you make them responsible for the state
of the roads, I think you will be very hard indeed upon the Gold digger.
201. Do you, or do you not, think they ought to contribute to putting these
roads into repair ? They do it already; every dray that carries provisions to
them pays toll.
202. You think the payment of toll is all that can properly be demanded from
them ? As far as the roads are concerned.
203. Will you explain to the Committee the distinction you draw between the
Gold and the Gold Field; you say the Gold is not the property of the public,
but the Gold Field is ? I mean this—that the Gold is abstractly the property
of the Government; by the Government I mean the Queen. Much good it will
do anybody, while it remains ten or twelve feet under ground. It is only got up
by individual labor; and very hard labor too. Therefore there is a very great
distinction to be made between Gold in the ground and when brought up to the
surface ; and when it is got up, the man who has obtained it, is entitled to the
fruit of his labor, subject to the deduction I mention.
204. By the Solicitor General: Do you not think that the public, as the
owner of the Gold, is entitled to the value of the Gold subject to the payment of
a fair remuneration to the labor? Ido not recognise the system of your
measuring what a man is to be paid for his labor. There is no justice in
placing that branch of industry in a different position from others.
Here are the rights of the gold diggers —and here
are the duties of the government in that respect. For long
years to come, not buried with this or many succeeding
generations, the occupation of gold digging in this Colony
will go on and increase. To those who are acquainted with
the subject, who have the means of forming a just opinion—
the area of productive gold digging is, for the next hundred
years to come, boundless. Passing by other localities, from
Port Phillip to Manero, thick as the leaves that strew the
vales lie the golden contents of primeval treasure houses.
By what process crystallized, each grain in its matrix—by


what mighty agencies, how produced—broken from the
summits of mountain chains, or dragged from the profound
abyss—how, and by what means, we may never know. But
we know that, countless ages before man printed his first
footstep in the sand, an elaborate and powerful process
collected and concentrated the scattered grains, placing them
where they would be accessible to the intelligent industry
of the coming race, and to him alone. Yes —ages of
preparation, boundless provision, elaborate care, to form
existing gold fields—which small men and narrow minds
would have “ closed,” if they could, on their discovery.
THE SQUATTERS.
The parallelism between the cases of the gold diggers and
squatters —the clear light in which it was shown in other
portions of the evidence to which I have referred, was the
unpardonable sin of its author. Mr. Wentworth, to whom
was committed the task of refuting that officer’s opinion,
utterly failed in his task. The evidence was one series of
victories on the part of the respondent, and one long humili-
ation on that of the questioner. The policy defended, the
course indicated, after a blundering attempt to put them
down by an Act of Council, which its promoters had to
repeal in hot haste the next session, are universally received
as axioms—and it is not probable that they will be hereafter
questioned.
205. By Mr, Wentworth: Do you consider that these people are de jure
entitled to occupy the country, and to obtain the Gold, without the consent of
the Government ? I think it is as legitimate an occupation as grazing.
206. Do you think these Gold Fields are de jure open to the public 1 In
the same way as the occupation of the Waste Lands by Squatters.
207. Do you not conceive that the Government have a' perfect right to
prevent this Gold digging ? No ; I think they have not.
208. By the Colonial Secretary : If they thought it politic ? No; I think
the Government would do very wrong, even if they considered it politic.
209. By Mr, Wentworth: Suppose it should be the opinion of the Govern-
ment, that it is not to the advantage of the country that Gold digging shall he
permitted, have they not a perfect right to stop it ? I think it would be a very
improper and unjust interference with a man’s freedom of action.


210. It is an interference with a man’s freedom of action to levy a Royalty ?
No. When I talk of interference, I mean actual entire interference, not partial;
not that interference which is brought about by making the pursuit less profitable,
but the total prohibition.
211. Suppose the Government, instead of imposing a Royalty of ten per cent.,
were to impose a Royalty of twenty per cent. ? I think that would be unreason-
able.
212. And an improper interference with that freedom of action which belongs
to the public ? In that case it would not be an interference with liberty of
action, but an improper interference with a man’s profit.
213. There have been cases, I believe, where men have made at the
Gold Fields £3,000 or £4,000 in a day; do you think that a right
which all the population of a country can claim? I do not see why
they should not have the chance of doing so, in the same way as the man
who buys a section of land upon which there may prove to be a valuable
copper mine. But you can only deal with the subject in its general
bearings, and I believe the general result to be, that the digger gets about
an ounce of Gold a week.
217. I have been told you have an opinion that these Gold diggings are
peculiarly the right of the laboring classes, and that they ought to be reserved
for that branch of the population ? I never had such an opinion, and never
expressed such an opinion to anybody at any time.
218. At all events you think these diggings ought to be open to all classes
without distinction ? Without distinction.
219. I think I collect from you an opinion to this effect, that the Gold is not
the property of the general public, but of the diggers, the men who bring it to
the surface ? No, that is not a correct deduction from what I have said; I say
a deduction is to be made from the men’s gold, for the sake of paying the
expenses that the Government is put to by the men following thaLoccupation.
225. By the Chairman : I understood from a former part of your evidence
that you consider Gold digging as a pursuit incident to the occupation of
Crown Lands, the same as grazing is a pursuit incident to the occupation of
Crown Lands ? I think it as legitimate a pursuit as any other.
22G. You are aware that the revenue arising from Crown Lands is considered
applicable to Immigration, and internal improvements more particularly ? Yes.
227. Can you state any reason to the Committee why there should not be a
portion of the revenue arising from Gold, which is an incident to the occupation
of Crown Lands, applicable to the same purposes ? None whatever.
228. So far, if it were possible by any means to obtain a greater amount of
revenue from the Gold Fields, you would not say it was impolitic ? Yes, for
I say everything unjust in principle is impolitic, and I think it unjust.
229. In what way would it be unjust ? Because it is making a man pay
more out of his profits than on abstract principles of justice he ought to pay;
you do not accurately measure the profits of a grazier, and make him pay in
proportion to them, and I do not see why you should in the case of the Gold


Singularly enough, however, those who are loudest in
their defence of the gold digger’s rights, and most perti-
nacious in adherence to the views just given of the true
policy of gold field regulation, are at this moment entering
upon a hopeless crusade against the rights, equally unques-
tionable and similarly founded, of the squatters. One can
hardly he surprised, who has observed the course of events
in Port Phillip, that the government which succumbed to
the diggers because they were strong, should attempt to
impose on the squatters because they are weak. That
government finds itself “embarrassed” to the extent of two
millions sterling—of which they propose to “fund” the
greater portion (which means “ giving it a name,” according
to Mrs. Gamp, hut not paying one farthing of it), and to
raise the remainder, £600,000, by various taxes —amongst
others, by laying it on to the squatters. And the Sydney
Empire, the mouthpiece of the diggers in their hour of
danger, thinks it “ all right,” and a proper example to be
followed with respect to the squatters of this colony. In
this respect, the Empire holds the same place amongst public
writers that Mr. Wentworth held in the Gold Committee.
The writers in that paper ignore altogether the rights of the
squatters. They'would give them a temporary occupancy
only—would allow any acre of their lands to be applied for
and purchased by any one, and (forgetting their views as to
the rights of the gold-diggers) would tax them to the utmost
limits their profits would bear, just as Mr. Wentworth and
his party would have taxed the gold diggers.
In fact, Mx - . Wentworth had more ground for his opinion
than the anti-squatters for theirs—because the ounce of gold
that the digger takes out of the ground to day, is not there
to- morrow; while the squatter’s run grows again the grass
which is eaten. But there is not a leg for either to stand
upon; wool and gold are alike the riches of the Colony; it
is a policy untenable and barbarous to interfere with either,
farther than is necessary to the general good. The great
result of gold digging—the disentombing of sixteen or


seventeen millions sterling—that enormous fact is not to be
interfered with by placing its producers in a disadvantageous
position with reference to other branches of industry—nor
are the great Clothers and Feeders of millions of human
beings to be robbed of the fruit of their labours, and to be
made the scape-goat of a failing revenue.
It is clear, then, that the true principle with respect to
both branches, is, that each should pay the expenses, and
the expenses only, to which the country is put by their
occupations. But there was a time when the squatters were
not satisfied with this—just as the Port Phillip gold-diggers
object to the payment of their local expenses. In the days
ol the Pastoral Association, the squatters claimed to have
exclusive possession of their runs for ever—to keep the cream
of the Colony sacred to sheep hurdles, and to proscribe the.
plough in any hands but their own ; in fact, to perpetuate
the desert that they discovered, and to say to a soil, capable
of feeding the population of China, “thus far shall thou
produce, and no farther.” It hardly deserves refutation,
such a claim.
“ See the Colony parcelled out under fixity of tenure —To
A a poor section; to B a few open ranges and a valley or
two; to C what in Ireland is a province; to D what in
Europe is a kingdom; to E almost ‘a bright little world of
his ownto F the same in triplicate ;
“ ‘ Where the world’s so rich in splendid runs
’Twere a pity to limit ones love to a pair! ’
“ The new sera commences; the twenty years has passed—
no great time in an English village, but a life time in an
all busy, double-tide working colony, where centuries of the
still life of full grown Europe are condensed into the six
years’ rule of each shifting governor. And what then are
the lands of the squatters ? A has two additional flocks; D
half-a-dozen; and F has ‘ boiled down’ with admirable
constancy. A few additional shepherds proclaim the
dreariness of the land. But where are the fertile farms, the


frequent villages—•where the tall spire pointing the thoughts
to Heaven, the school busy -with ‘ the hum, the crowd, the
shock,’ of young Australia ? Alas! there have been no
intruders ; there has been fixity of tenure, a twenty years’
uninterrupted occupation. No doubt A has built a better
hut, D a substantial woolshed ; and F
" Where his rude hut hy the Yarra lay,
There are his young Barbarians, all at play—
and each and all declare the system to be admirable.”
This was the description given of the state of things under
this claim (known in squatting circles as “ fixity of tenure”),
in a pamphlet published at the time, and which fell still-born
from the press, because it combated the extravagant views
of both parties. And the picture was correct in its drawing
and true to nature. It is needless to trace the progress of
the dispute, or the circumstances which induced the squatters
and the government to adjust their differences ; what we
have to do with is the present posture of affairs. The
squatters have tacitly submitted to “intrusion,” as well as
to the payment of local expenses, and both parties agree
that the wants of the cultivators of the soil must be
supplied. Throughout the length and breadth of the
squatting lands, large reserves for small farms have been
laid out in all eligible situations, sufficient, and more than
sufficient, to satisfy the requirements of small settlers for
years to come. It is only necessary to ensure that the plan
is fairly and in good faith carried out —that the word of
promise is not kept to the ear alone. And if the anti-
squatters exert themselves in this direction, they will leave
conflicting interests well reconciled. That this is so, a glance
at the government charts will show. Take, for instance, the
chart of the Murrumbidgee River, for one hundred miles
down. Reserves of the finest river flats, in portions varying
from two to nine square miles, are appropriated to the
public, and taken from the squattages of which they formed


portions. The same with the Lachlan; no less than ninety
square miles of the former and one hundred and forty of the
latter river, are reserved in one hundred miles of each river.
Nothing can be objected to these selections in point of
quantity, or quality, or situation. And so things will go on.
When these lands are absorbed, when the demand outruns
the supply, I need not tell those who are at all acquainted
with the interior that hundreds of thousands of acres, in
every respect of equal quality and situation, remain for
selection. And the same necessity that now exists, acting
under the same powers, will satisfy the new requirements.
If the squatters dislike the gradual diminution of their runs,
they must console themselves with the fact, that owing to
the enormous supply the process will be slow, and under
the compensating power that exists so generally in nature,
the loss will be repaired in some other way.
I find, from the government chart of the Murrumbidgee,
that, from Gundigai to Wagga Wagga, a distance of forty-
four miles, there are reserves of various sizes, at intervals of
about five miles, as follows.
At Gundigai, a reserve of 20 square miles
„ Nangus, „ 8 „
~ Wantibadgery „ 12 „
„ Oura „ 6 „
„ Wagga Wagga „ ' 25 „
being a total of forty-five thousand acres.
Now these reserves are the river flats, the choice spots of
the whole line for agriculture. There is no “ locking up the
lands” here.. Nine hundred fifty-acre farms, in a distance
of forty-four miles, is no “bit by bit” reform to the old system
of “no intrusion.” And he is not a candid or fair man
who will say that this is not ample provision for the race of
cultivators, were they ten times as numerous as they are.
This is the actual and existent—it is the true and properly
adjusted condition of the land question beyond the


boundaries. The misfortune is, that up to this moment, the
system has not been carried out. Carried out, in letter and
spirit, it satisfies the utmost ■wants of the labouring class.
Let—l will not say the anti-squatters—but let every man
who is interested in the proper settlement, the true coloni-
zation of the country, see that good faith is shown by the
government in this matter. There has been enough, too
much, of fair-seeming and barren results. The government
of Sir Charles Fitz Roy was distinguished by fertility of
promises, and an inexhaustible fund of excuses for inaction,
and this was of them.
Yet let me do justice to the departed Governor, as well
as to Mr. Thomson, his coadjutor in doing nothing, and the
ready and plausible coiner of “ replies” and “ answers” to
minatory Questioners in Council—neither of whom I feared,
courted, or flattered, in office, and of whom I feel that I
can, out of office, without imputation of mean motives, give
a true picture.
Sir Charles Fitz Roy loved his ease, loved pleasure, loved
quiet. Mental enjoyments, in their true sense, he could not
understand—of those that were physical he had a keen
appreciation. Though outwardly decorous, and never
offending the public eye, he was not a moral man, and the
world knew it, and society was injured by what it knew,
and by what it more often erroneously suspected.
Though thus largely partaking of animal, and comparatively
little of intellectual, nature, Sir Charles was not by any means
a man of inferior intellect, or of bad dispositions. Quick of
perception beyond most men, of acutest observation, of
lively wit, of just appreciation of character ; to these qualities,
converse with the world, with affairs, and with human nature
in all its phases, gave a force which they would not possess
in a narrower sphere of action. What is called “good
society ” has its advantages in these respects. Its high scale
of education, its minute refinement, its customary association
with all that is high in talent and cultivated in art and
science, enable its habitues to “ play above their game,” and


to make much of ordinary talents. And this was not unseen
in the working of the late Governor’s mental character.
He was a true aristocrat in feeling, with a settled con-
viction that rank was true excellence. He read conversely
the motto “ virtus sola nobilitas ,” and though too well bred
to show it, really looked down on men of lower pretensions.
Yet, with all this, a high and generous spirit, and as kind a
heart as ever beat, were his, as all who knew him knew well.
Fewer words, and a less minute analysis, will suffice for
Mr. Thomson. Let not the colonists, however sensible to
his short-comings, forget that, at a critical moment, beset by
powerful and adverse influences, he stemmed a torrent that
would have overwhelmed a weaker man. If he had yielded
to the powerful band of idiots who urged him to “ shut up,”
and, at all events, to obstruct the occupation of, the gold
field—if he had shown a grasping or narrow spirit—but
enough of “ ifs”—he was equal to the occasion, recognised
the true policy of the time, and swerved not an inch from the
straight path. I am not giving him the merit of the
organization of the gold field, or its settlement in quiet and
good order —that, and the suggestion of the principle upon
which it should be occupied, belongs to me alone. But he
was quick to see what true policy required, and heeded not
foolish and timid counsels, numerous and powerful as they
were.
Let not the colony be mistaken as to the reality of the
opposition made, and, from the bottom of their hearts, felt,
to the occupation of the gold field. Putting aside other
notorious facts, these short-sighted men displayed their
wishes and intentions all through the proceedings of the
Gold Committee. Mr. Wentworth asks Mr. Essington
King, and persists in his view through fifteen questions,
whether it would be practicable to “ make a general law,
prohibiting gold digging during the sheep-shearing, har-
vesting, and ploughing season.” This gentleman was rabid
—like Goldsmith, he “talks like Poor Poll.” But he out
polls Poll, when he asks Major Wentworth, and subsequently


Mr. King, whether “it would not be desirable to compel
all persons getting licenses to swear, as a preliminary, that
they were not runaway servants!” He asks Mr. Gideon
Lang the same question as to stopping digging during
shearing and harvest. Mr. James McArthur asks Mr. Beit,
“ whether he thinks it should be the policy of the govern-
ment to throw impediments in the way of this pursuit, rather
than additional attractions”—and Mr. Beit, who had been
made mincemeat of by Mr.' Wentworth all through his
evidence, answers “yes!” Mr. "Wentworth asks the same
witness, with reference to a low license fee—“ Is it not the
duty of the legislature to prevent these gold diggings from
disorganizing the country ■ from one end to the other ?”
Questions of a similar tendency were put to the Chief Gold
Commissioner as well. And, in short, the dislike of these
gentlemen to the very name of the gold field is only to be
paralleled by the feelings of the more ignorant of the people
of Melbourne towards the squatters.
Let the colonists also know that to him is owing the
settlement of the difficulty of the land question. He hesitated
to carry out his policy—but that slowness of action is his
nature. But he has placed the matter in such a position
that the thing is done, so far as any alteration in principle is
concerned. He has proclaimed that the settlement of the
Colony by the allotment of freeholds to the labouring class
and the small capitalist—of freeholds taken from the wild
but fertile tracts that the Pastoral Association would have
converted into the exclusive property of the squatters —is an
established fact; and has shown, in this as in the matter of
the gold field, a wise, a great, and a courageous spirit.
This state of things satisfies all well informed and reason-
able men. It may not satisfy the extreme views of either
party. Not the grasping squatter, whom nothing less than
the fee simple will satiate—not the anti-squatter, who affects
unbounded regard for the labouring class, and does not
conceal an equally unreasoning dislike to the squatter ; who
looks upon the one class as everything, and the other as


nothing. Who thinks little of energies long directed, capital
lavishly employed, hopes reasonably centered, in the lands
discovered and subdued to great uses. Who is Ignorant of
the long, the desperate, the often hopeless struggles of the
men who set their fortunes on that desperate cast! What
have they done, these patient, long-enduring, these bold and
constant spirits ? Displaced wild nature, turning the desert
acres to splendid uses; themselves the life and soul—until
the gold discovery the sole life—of progress. Faint and
wearily without them colonial life would have trembled in
the palsied limbs, no great export to exchange for the varied
results of European abundance—the products of European
intelligence in arts, in literature, in manufactures, as much
out of the reach of this community as if an impassable gulf
lay between, instead of the great highway of nations.
“ Cut off from all that makes the comfort of civilized man
—from the joys of society, the conveniences of cities, the
refinements and elegancies which befit a people in the van of
civilization —solitary, desolate in our wide homes—anxious
watchers, laborious toilers—is it from us that you would
ravish the fruit of ceaseless industry?”
It really appears time thrown away to hold argument on
the subject—so clear is the policy of the government, so
strong the rights of the squatter, so obvious the advantage to
the community, that follows their practical recognition. But
what is going on in Port Phillip warns me to insist at length
on this point. At this moment, I have before me the Report
of the Commission on the Squatting question, appointed by
Sir Charles Hotham in that colony, and I find the monstrous
contradiction I have before referred to, shown at full length,
by the terms of that document. In a colony where no party,
neither the government nor the governed, now venture to
raise a voice against what I have laid down as the true
position of the gold-diggers, the exactly contrary conclusion
is come to with respect to the squatter. While to the gold-
digger it is, on all hands, conceded that he should not be
taxed, and that he should follow his occupation, without


diminution of his profits, except for local expenses; the
pastoral occupation is, in the report, pointed out as a great
source of taxation, a legitimate resource for baffled finance,
the newest as well as most approved way to pay old debts,
and to render caution in expenditure and moderation in con-
ception, altogether unnecessary.
“It is the property of the state,” says the anti-squatter,
“and ought to fetch its value, as much as the public
buildings which are let to private persons.” But “God
made the country and man made the town.” The govern-
ment which builds the house by government money, is
justified in asking and bound to get as much as the house is
worth. But the government no more spread out the wild
grasses of the interior than the gold of Ballarat. These
sources of wealth owe their existence to a hand mightier
than man’s. And the “ farming out” either of gold claims
or of squattages, as if they were stone houses or improved
acres, would be, in either case, an injustice and a mistake.
I write for honest and reasonable men—but there are men
who are honest and not reasonable—and these may, perhaps,
be led to believe that the squatter who uses one hundred
thousand acres, and the digger who uses the small plot
necessary to his operations, so differ in circumstances as to
render the reason that applies in one case, inapplicable in
the other. But, bear in mind, that it is conceded that the
squatter shall have temporary occupation, and not exclusive
possession of property in the land—that he shall hold it only
so long as it is not required for higher purposes—that his
folds shall give way to the plough, and the settlement of the
country by farms and villages shall go on without hindrance
from him. That, in short, he has a right to occupy what his
pastoral pursuit requires, and to add to public wealth and his
own by the use of the grass that would otherwise be useless,
just as the digger has a right to all the profit he can make out
of the gold buried under fifty feet of soil, and which, but
for his industry, would be there to the crack of doom—
fruitless to himself and the world in general, as if it were not.


“‘1 warn you against the inconvenience of insisting on
extreme rights and doubtful claims.’ So says Lord Stanley
in one of his despatches. Of this dictum few will deny the
soundness; concession of extreme right marks every phase of
social life, and distinguishes the civilized from the savage.
“ We, the squatters of New South Wales, aim at no
extreme right when we seek to follow our occupation without
let or hindrance other than is necessary to the common
weal; when we pray that we be not vexed, or impeded, or
injured by regulations which are injurious to us and un-
necessary to the rest of the colony; when we object to
contribute out of all proportion to the public purse.
“We have a right to breathe the air of Heaven —to walk
rejoicing in the sun-light—to quench the thirst in the
flowing stream or in the silent spring. To make use of those
varied productions which are suitable to our purposes and
accessible to our industry. If we have an abstract (not an
extreme) right to tame the steed of the desert, we have a
right to water him there—aye, to feed him on the grass over
which the unfettered feet of his race had freely wandered.
And the government has a right also (this no extreme rightJ
—a right to make us pay for the general uses of society, by
taxes on air, if they like, or on light; on gold, or on grass.
Enjoying the advantages of the social state, we willingly con-
tribute to the public purse—and, as philosophers, if not
as squatters, we should denounce as had a government which
would take from our shoulders the share of the burthen
which would fairly belong to us, to fasten it on those of the
other classes.”
I think that the above propositions have been proved, and
my conclusion is this—
Gold diggers have a right to dig for gold, subject to
general regulations for the management of the gold field.
They are bound to pay their local expenses—and it is for


the government to render, the necessary payment certain,
impartial, and sufficient. Woe to the government that
demands more, or takes less.
Squatters have a right to the occupation of their runs,
without other than the payment of local expenses. The
public have a right to purchase such portions of their lands
as from time to time may be necessary to satisfy the public
wants. The squatters have a right to demand that the
portions so taken from them shall be taken in such a mode as
to do them the least possible injury, consistently with the
public requirements, and the advantage of cultivators. If,
in exceptional cases, it shall be found necessary to take any
of the improvements, ample compensation shall be given to
the squatter who has expended his time, his capital, and his
labour, on the wilderness.
WHAT SHOULD BE DONE WITH OUR
GOLD FIELDS?
The matter of this pamphlet rather regards the abstract
than the practical question of the gold field. But it is a
matter of great importance, the terms on which the system
should be conducted, and I venture to make some suggestions
on the subject.
The choice seems to lie between an export duty (and such
a Mint charge as will be equivalent to it) and a license fee.
In my evidence before the Gold Committee, I expressed
an opinion, to which I adhere, that an export duty would be
in many respects the preferable plan. There would be a
deduction from a man’s actual earnings, instead of an in-
variable charge that acts alike, and in the same degree, on
the successful and the unsuccessful digger, and which is
consequently so far partial and improper in its action. But
since I expressed that opinion, a new element, the Mint, has
come into operation, and I am uncertain as to the co-opera-
tion of the two; and am out of the way of hearing the best


opinions on the subject. I can only say that I have no
doubt as to the fact that a sufficient per centage on the gold
raised, may be obtained by the export duty—such a pro-
portion, in fact, as will amply pay all local expenses. The
advantage of the plan is chiefly the fairness of its operation.
Local expenses will be hardly, if at all, diminished by the
change, because there must be a proper system of police,
and the same mode of settling disputes by a government
officer, that exists at present. As to the diggers settling
their own disputes by a tribunal of their own choosing, you
might just as well abolish every other judicial function. The
government that cannot govern —that leaves so important a
matter as the preservation of good order to such chances,
confesses its utter insufficiency. I speak from an experience
that deserves consideration. I know no more remarkable
fact in the circle of social facts, than this —that though the
Gold Commissioners appeared amongst the diggers.with the
unfavorable prestige of tax-gatherers, they were universally
popular and welcome. They were looked upon with confi-
dence, as the protectors and the just arbiters of the gold
field. The thousands of disputes that necessarily arise in
the gold field, were at once, without a day’s delay, settled,
without the expense, the delay, the tedious formality, that
impedes the way of justice in other places— sub Jove pluvio ,
in triviis et quadriviis; the witnesses necessarily on the
spot, and all the neighbours, the jury de circumstantibus ,
interested in a just decision, and present to assist in a just
determination. If our Gold Commissioners had been of the
usual government office type, gentlemen of the broad margin
and red tape school, staying at home at ease, making work
out of nothing, in well known and time-honored official
fashion —opening at ten and closing at four, gay triflers in
the realms of foolscap—the gold field would not have been
what it was, an honor and a credit to the government and
its directors.
If, however, the export duty is not established, and the
licensing system shall be retained, the fee must be increased


to £1 per month for every man occupying ground for
carrying on business, or actually working the ground for
gold. Mark this —the diggers will, in time, be tens of
thousands in this colony. No man can say how soon, but
every man who is competent to give an opinion, will say
that this is a fact. Under a ten shilling license, you must
either impoverish the general revenue, or establish an in-
sufficient force. Under the license system, there must be,
generally speaking, a commissioner and a party of men to
every thousand diggers. Suppose that there were forty
thousand diggers in our field—and the time will come, as
surely as the sun shines above us, that this will be the case—
and then fancy having to make up the deficiency of the ten
shilling license out of the general revenue.
In the evidence before alluded to, the Chief Gold Com-
missioner is asked whether he recommends the license fee of
thirty shillings to be reduced, and the answer is decidedly
in the negative. And his reason was, of course, founded on
the necessity and justice of making the diggers pay their
own expenses. In that existing state of the gold fields, this
could not be prudently done at a less rate of payment—and
the comparative paucity of the diggers, and their unlimited
choice of ground, made expenses comparatively heavy, and
their average success so large, as to render the payment un-
oppressive. But it was always his opinion, expressed fo the
government as well as on other occasions, that a great
digging population would make it necessary to reduce the
fee to one pound per month, such sum being enough, and
more than enough, for the expenses, and therefore as much
as the government could fairly exact. The present state of
things cannot be allowed to go on, unless we are contented
to take rank with Port Phillip in feebleness of government.
The gold must pay its expenses.
But it will be said that it will be very difficult to re-
impose a higher fee after it has been once abandoned. True
enough; but difficulties are a plentiful crop by the wayside
of life, and are placed there, not to be shunned or evaded.


but to be overcome. It is, of course, not every man that
could be trusted with a matter that requires brains and
courage above the average —it would be easy to breed a
Ballarat rebellion, or to re-enact the military exploitation of
the Turon, when that gold field was left without brains to
manage it. But when Wentworth and Co. stripped the late
Chief Gold Commissioner of his mantle, it fell upon one
worthy of it, in the South Country—one who possesses in an
eminent degree, judgment, temper, good sense, and firm-
ness —who would do it successfully, and without making
any fuss about it, and to whom the digging population would
universally say—“ Oh King, live for ever ! ”
[Perhaps some reader of the above remarks may imagine
that all this is something like a hint of the offer of ray own
services in the matter. Gentlemen, don’t be alarmed. The
day will come when the Australian gold field will be of ten
times its present importance—and, if I am in the colony, I
shall as surely have the control of it as there can be surety
about anything. But, to this event, there must be pre-
liminaries that involve much more than the present time—l
shall be in no ones way at present —certainly not till long
after the settlement of the present question.]
Por the present, and assuming that the license system is
continued, whether the fee be increased or reduced, the
government must cut its coat according to its cloth, in the
number of its officers. I had the number reduced before I
left the gold field, because the number of diggers had
diminished. A too facile government filled up the vacancies
again after I left.
