

St. Alban's
Church of England
ARMADALE
Fiftieth Anniversary
(1898-1948)
Parish Founded 1885
Present Church Erected 1898
Consecrated 1899
Vicar: THE REV. R. CAMPBELL FINDLAY, Th.L.
Hon. Sec.: MR. JOHN ROMANIS
Hon. Treas. : MR. A. G. SALISBURY, Dip. P.A.; A.I.C.A.
Churchwardens:
MESSRS. J. ROMANIS, W. R. Pook, P. B. ROBIN




A short history of St. Alban’s Church
ARMADALE.
(1885 - 1948).
In the year 1885, the Church of England population in
Armadale had increased to such an extent as to necessitate the
establishment of a branch Church of St. Matthew’s, Prahran,
to be known as a “Chapel of Ease.” From the records in ex'
istence, the action taken by the little band of Church people
met with immediate success. The Incumbent of St. Mat'
thew’s at that time was the late Rev. H. A. Langley, after'
wards Bishop of Bendigo, who resided in the parish (Grand
View Grove). The assistant Minister, the Rev. F. Webb,
divided his services between St. Matthew’s and the new
parish of St. Albans, but in June, 1887, he assumed full
charge of the new congregation, who made themselves re'
sponsible for his stipend.
The original building‘in Wynnstay Road was only 50 ft.
by 25 ft., and accommodated 170 people. The opening ser'
vice was conducted by Bishop Moorhouse, on Sunday, Ist
October, 1885, and, according to a report taken from the
“Argus,” of sth November, 1887, the progress of the district
had been so rapid that it was found necessary to enlarge the
building, which was effected by an addition of 25 ft. in line
with the first building, which would seat 250 people, and
by the erection of a vestry and organ chamber, the cost of
which was defrayed by the congregation.
The parish was soon separated from St. Matthew’s, Prahran,
and, on Thursday, 3rd November, 1887, the Lord Bishop
of Melbourne preached at the opening service, in connection
with the extension of the building, to a congregation which
filled the Church in every part. The bishop chose as his
text, the 2nd Book of Kings, 13th chapter, part of the 19th
verse: “Thou shouldst have smitten five or six times.” He
compared the laxity and lukewarmness of King Joash, in
neglecting to take the instructions of the dying prophet Elisha,
to smite five or six times with the arrow, instead of only
three times, with the half'heartedness and growing spirit of
unbelief of the present generation. An earnest exhortation
to assist the Minister of the Church in his efforts to infuse
a true spirit of Godliness followed.


It was during the ministry of the Reverend Frederick Webb
that preparation was made for building our present church.
In the St. Alban’s “Star” of December 4, 1891, there are
these words:—“The necessity for the erecti n of the per'
manent church has long made itself evident to the leading
members of the congregation, and seven gentlemen each pro'
mised donations of £lOO towards this object, but it was de'
termined, if possible, not to commence active operations
until the sum of £lOOO is in hand. . . .”
With the advent of the Reverend Newport White, who
became Vicar of the parish in 1896, strenuous efforts were
made by the congregation, with the result that the foundation
stone of the new building was laid on November 12, 1898, by
the Right Reverend Field Flowers Goe, Third Bishop of Mel-
bourne.
Less than a year later, on 17th June, 1899, the church was
consecrated, the boundaries of the parish defined, and rights
of nomination under the Patronage Act assigned. In 1906,
the Reverend W. E. H. Percival was inducted as Vicar, and
continued until his appointment as Dean of Bendigo.
The Sunday School at this time, met in a brick hall, on
the site now occupied by Law Somner’s Nursery, and was
ably presided over by Mr. Wallace Berger.
During the early years the Vicarage was situated in High
Street, then in Kelvin Grove, and finally, during the ministry
of the Reverend E. D. Fethers, the present valuable property
in Wynnstay Road was acquired.
Mr. Fether’s ministry began in 1908, and extended for
twenty'three years, until his retirement in 1931. The beauti'
ful altar reredos is in memory of his wife, Ellen, and was
erected by members of the family. Another beautiful mem'
orial is the fivedight east window erected by the Rutter
Clarke family in 1933. In the same year the east end of the
church and ambulatories were completed in brick. Other
memorial windows in the nave are in memory of Richard
Onians (1835T906), Frederick and Mary Eustace, and Jane
Ratcliff, all devoted servants of God and St. Alban’s parish.
Mr. Onians and Mr. Eustace were Churchwardens for a
long period, and the latter served for many years as Registrar
of the Diocese of Melbourne. The Osment family also had
a long and honourable connection with this parish, and the
choir stalls and handsome brass lectern are a remainder of
this. The Chapel windows dedicated this year, are in mem'
ory of Emmie CurwemWalker (1859T929).


It is interesting to know that our present pulpit was cut
from Omaru free stone by Mr. Benjamin Salisbury, father
of Mr. Salisbury, senr., and grandfather of our esteemed
Hon. Treasurer.
The Reverend C. H. Raymond was called to a changing
parish in 1931; many of the old lovely homes were being
broken up or divided into flats, and in the ensuing years
this process has continued. Nevertheless, many beautiful
modern homes were built prior to the second world war in
Hampden Road and adjoining streets. In 1934 Mr. Raymond
exchanged cures with the Reverend Canon J. T. Baglin, who
exercised a twelve years’ ministry, until the present Vicar,
the Reverend R. Campbell Findlay, was nominated and in-
ducted by the Archbishop of Melbourne in 1946. During
the last two years the chancel steps of the church have been
regraded and the brick wall between the chancel and nave
removed, giving much added beauty and dignity to the in-
terior. A War Memorial Chapel has been erected and the
church building surrounded by a low concrete curb, enclosing
green lawns.
November, 1948.
All past and present parishioners will be most welcome
at the various gatherings listed elsewhere to commemorate
our Fiftieth Anniversary.
Thank offerings may be sent to the Vicar or Hon. Treasurer,
and will be gratefully acknowledged.
VICARS OF THE CHURCH OF ST. ALBAN,
ARMADALE.
1885-7: Curacy under the Reverend H. A. Langley, Vicar of
St. Matthew’s, Prahran (later Lord Bishop of Bendigo).
1887-1896: The Reverend Frederick Webb.
1896-1904: The Reverend B. Newport White, M.A.
1904-1908: The Reverend W. E. H. Percival, B.A. (later
Dean of Bendigo).
1908-1931: The Reverend E. Denton Fethers.
1931-1934: The Reverend C. Hedley Raymond, Th.L.
1934-1946: The Reverend Canon J. T. Baglin.
1946—The Reverend R. Campbell Findlay, Th.L.


PROGRAMME OF EVENTS TO COMMEMORATE
THE FIFTIETH ANNIVERSARY OF ST. ALBAN’S
CHURCH (1898-1948).
Wednesday, November 10: Organ and Choral Recital, 8 p.m.,
under the direction of Mr. A. Wright Denniss.
Friday, November 12: Anniversary Ball, Prahran Town Hall,
attended by His Worship the Mayor and Councillors.
Tickets, 7/6. Evening Dress.
Sunday, November 14: Commemoration Day and Back to St.
Alban’s.
8 a.m.: Holy Communion.
11 a.m.: Civic Service, in the presence of His Worship
the Mayor and Councillors of Prahran City. Preacher:
Canon P. W. Robinson. Soloist: Miss Evelyn Godly.
5 p.m.: Back to St. Alban’s Tea, in Parish Hall. (Tickets
1/6, Parishioners). Former parishioners specially invited
to be guests of the parish. Short addresses by pioneers.
7 p.m.: Festival Evensong and Procession. Preacher:
The Very Rev. A. Roscoe Wilson, 8.A., Dean of Meb
bourne.
Saturday, November 20: Children’s Jubilee Party.


This Souvenir Booklet is being
sold at cost of One Shilling to
defray printing expenses.


