

St, Andrew's Presbyterian
Church, Donald
Souvenir
Issued on the occasion of the Opening of the New
Church, and containing a Brief History of the
Presbyterian Church in this District.
19th march, 1925 Price, 2/6


St, Andrew's Presbyterian
Church, Donald
Sowenir
Issued on the occasion of the Opening of the
New Church, and containing a Brief
History of the Presbyterian Church
in this District .
I9tl> march, 1925




A Brief History of the Donald Charge
The Presbyterian Church was the first of
any denomination to pioneer the distr'ct
for Christ, its earliest minister being Rev.
H. McKail, who resided and held services
at “The Willows,” a pine-log house on the
banks of the Richardson River, and close to
the town, about the year 1867.
This early Manse, it is interesting to
know, is still in existence being at present
occupied by the well-known Baker family.
The next minister was Rev. George Tait,
M.A., now clerk of the State Assembly, whq
wa s ordained at Donald, in the year 1870,
and remained two years ministering to
the squatters and their employees, and ,con-
ducting services over a very wide area, viz.,
Donald, Rich-Avon West, Carron‘ Banyen-
ong West, E. Charlton (at M£s. Thos,
Armstrong’s, and afterwards hr a brick
church) Spring Bank, The Springs, Wyche-
proof, Glenloth, Quambatook. Towannte
and Morton Plains Stations were also visit-
ed; Donald at that time consisted only of
a blacksmith’s shop, a store, and an\hotel.*
In 1872, however, a brick Presbyterian
Church was erected in the town.
‘X;.
Of the hardy race of pioneers, the major-
ity of whom were of Scottish descent thfe
following Presbyterians are recalled: —
Messrs. Craig (Corack), Jas. Aitken (Ban-
yenong), Dr. Curdy (“Break ’o Day,”
Carron), T. K. Scott (Rich-Avon West),
Thos. Guthrie (Rich-Avon East), Dr. Wil-
liamson (Swanwater North), Jas. Harvey
(manager for Dr. Williamson, Cope Cope)
Colin Simpson (Yorke Plains), Thos. Arm-
strong (E. Charlton).
In 1873 Rev. R. Kennedy, father of Dr.
Kennedy, of Geelong, arrived, and during
his stay a Sunday School was commenced
by Mrs. Kennedy at “The Willows.” St.
Arnaud was now excised and became a sep-
arate charge.
In 1874 Messrs. J. Flett, Alex. Adams,
J. Adams and three others came to Laen
from Warrnambool and after attending for
a time at outdoor services, they went to the
ranges, cut and felled timber, and built a
church at Laen. They opened it free of
debt in September, 1875. Their children are
still among our best workers.
In 1577 Rev. H. Swan succeeded Rev.
Kennedy, and remained some 6h years,
Charlton being detached during his minis-
try and made a separate charge.
Mr. Jas. Aitken was of great assistance
at that time in taking services, while Mr.
Wilson, manager of Banyenong West led
the singing. The Board of Management
consisted of Messrs. Harsant, Meyer, J.
Henderson, Kay, J. Aitken, Kelly, Wad-
dell Hamilton. About this time a choir
\yas ‘formed under the baton of Mr. Towers
(successor to Mr. Cole, precentor) and met
crfete, a week for practice. In 1885 Rev. D.
came and he and Mrs. Cameron
were the first to occupy the present Manse,
•the site of which was presented by Mr.
Jas. Aitken.
Then catne in 1888, Rev. D. McNeill, who
died after two months’ residence. He was
succeeded by Rev. McClelland followed by
Revs. Black, A. Ferguson, J. H. Shallberg,
D. W./ Smith, John Walker (now of Pt.
Macquarie (N.S.W.), J. G. Scarfe, and K-
C. Billinge.
At North Laen, services were conducted
early in the ’eighties, in a building present-
ed by Mr. G. Pyers, and which stood nearly
opposite to the present State School. Dur-
ing Rev. Black’s ministry (1892-5), how-
ever, a new building was erected on the
present site and is still in use. ,
At the Cope Cope services were at first
conducted at Mr. Jas, Harvey’s residence
(now occupied by Mr. R. Pilgrim), but
afterwards in the Church of England build-
ing.
In 1902, however, a Presbyterian Church
was erected during Rev. J. H. Shallberg s
ministry, the committee at the time consist-
ing of Messrs. John Gilmour, Andrew Mc-
Clelland, G. Bugge, John Crosbie, George
P. Scott, and Alex. Harvey.
It was during the Rev. John Walker’s
time that the movement for a new church
building at Donald was inaugurated, great
credit being due to the ladies of the congre-
gation in this matter. The close of Rev.
J. G. Scarfe’s ministry saw matters well on


the way, Messrs. Mitchell, of Jeffcott, giv-
ing splendid encouragement to the effort by
their donation of £SOO as a memorial to
their parents, who were early pioneers.
By the generosity of the Guthrie family
and many others the movement was
brought to successful issue, and at the close
of the second year of the Rev. K. C.
Billinge’s ministry, on 19th March, 1925,
the new church, an imposing brick structure
capable of seating 300 people, and with a
fine, majestic spire, was opened in the
presence of large and enthusiastic congre-
gations. Situated in the main street of the
town on a corner block and next to the old
church, which is still to be utilised as a
Sunday School and Social Hall, it is a land
mark for miles around, and a fitting testi-
mony to the faith and courage of the early
pioneers and their children.
REV. G. TAIT, M.A.
One of the Earliest Ministers
1870-1872.


“The Sands of Time”
NEW PRES BYTE BIAN CHURCH
Foundation Stone Laid by Senator Guthrie
Old Building Will Still Remain in Service
[Extract from the “Donald Times,” Tuesday, March 24, 1925.]
“The old order changeth, yielding place
to new,” and accordingly, on Saturday
afternoon, a large assemblage foregathered
for the purpose of witnessing the laying of
the foundation stone of the new Presbyter-
ian Church in Donald. The old building,
revered and respected by its ever-changing
congregation for fifty years and more, was
also a silent witness of the official “christen-
ing” of the handsome brick and steepled
structure which is to supersede it. Inter-
spersed among the spectators were several
of the fast-dwindling band of stalwart pion-
eers who, while evidently pleased at this
outward and visible sign of progress, tem-
pered their elation with many a silent re-
gret at the passage from favour of the old
edifice, or allowed their thoughts to dwell
for the moment on many a past inc'dent
or personal association of which they were
reminded. Mrs. James Walder, who wit-
nessed the opening of the old church in
1872, was noticed among the crowd, while
Mr. “Sandy” Muir, who carted the material
for the same building, was one of the most
interested spectators.
Proceedings opened with the customary
hymn and offering of prayer, after which
the Rev. K. C. Billinge, in the course of a
brief address said that the probable total
cost of the new building and appointments
would be about £4500, towards which they
already had £2446 in cash and promised
amounts. The deficiency was still fairly
large, but it was hoped that, by the time
the church wa s finally opened, it would be
considerably reduced. He had previously
stressed the point that no section of the
community was more dependent on outside
agencies and the decrees of Province than
was the farmer. Though man might labor
it was necessary for him to remember that
all lie had was God’s, and there was no
better investment than in the carrying on
of His work. He trusted that the amount of
the building fund would be shown to have
been considerably augmented as a result of
the present ceremony. He was also pleased
to see so many friends present, and to wel-
come the representative of other churches.
He had received a letter from Mr. Guthrie,
snr., who had expressed regret at his in-
ability to attend. Mr. W. H. Gray had also
forwarded an apology for unavoidable
absence.
At this stage Rev. Billinge made a pleas-
ing presentation on behalf of the congrega-
tion, handing to Sen. Guthrie a silver trowel
inscribed with the following words: —“Pre-
sented to Senator Guthrie, who laid the
foundation stone of the Presbyterian
Church at Donald, on the 23rd of February,
1924.”
Senator Guthrie, who was received with
applause, expressed himself as heartily ap-
preciative of the honour which had been be-
stowed upon him that afternoon. His par-
ents were amongst those of the early pion-
eers who had “blazed the trail” in these
parts. He himself was born in the year
that the old church was opened, and re-
membered the Rev. Swan, who was the
third minister in charge. He had also been
taught by Mr. Thomas Scott, who had lived
at Rich-Avon West. The pioneers of the
district were wonderful people, and, as he
spoke, many names thronged in upon him.
The Macreadys and Andersons, of Banyen-
ong, were succeeded by Mr. Donald, after
whom Donald was named. When he (the
speaker) had been in England in 1903, he
had had occasion to call in at an old shot)
at Cheltenham, giving his address as J, P.
Guthrie, Geelong, Australia, The occupier


of the shop had asked him if he were a
relative of Mr. Thomas Guthrie, of Rich-
Avon, near Donald. Upon explaining that
he was, the shopkeeper then informed him
that Donald had been named after his
father. Mr. James Aitken had been the
next owner of Banyenong, and had given
the land upon which the old manse was
build. In his turn he had been succeeded
by a valued citizen in Mr. W, Sproat, who
was among them on this occasion.
THE OLD CHURCH.
Opened September, 1872.
Other names which rose to his memory
were those of Messrs, Lockhart, Mills,
Neilson and Smythe (Morton Plains)
Craig (Corack), Sutherland and McLaugh-
lin (Rich-A von), Thomas Scott (Rich-Avon
West), Dr. Curdie (Carron), and Dr. Wil-
liamson (Cope Cope). His own people had
come to Rich-Avon in 1864. The Rev.
McKale was the first ordained clergyman
to take charge of the Presbyterian Church
in this district, and held services in the
Manse. The came Rev. Tait, and the Rev.
Kennedy had succeeded him. On the day
previous to coming to Donald to perform
this ceremony, the speaker had seen Mr.
Kennedy’s son, Dr, Thomas Kennedy, and
he had told him that he owed his life and
health to the Donald climate. He recalled
many interesting reminiscences of the days
of “King Billy” and his wives. This gentle-
man of colour was in the habit of wearing
no clothes, and, as the Rev. Kennedy ob-
jected to his frequenting the town thus
scantily attired, he presented him with
some old garments. “King Billy” there-
upon paid his next visit to the Manse in
state. He, himself, was wearing the bell-
topper, one of his wives had donned the
frock coat, another had the trousers wrap-
ped round her neck, and upon the third
had devolved the painful duty of wearing
the boots. (Laughter.)
Dr. Kennedy had also remarked on the
generosity of the settlers and pastoralists
of those days. One of the latter, though
hardly ever attending church, made it a
practice, when returning from distant parts
with provisions for months ahead, of tip


ping half of them off at the parsonage
without saying a word to anyone. He was
pleased to see some of that gentlemen’s
descendants among the crowd on the pres-
ent occasion. After Rev. Kennedy, the
ministers were Revs. Swan, Black, Camer-
on, Ferguson, Shallberg, Smith, Walker and
Scarfe, Rev. Billinge being their clergyman
at the present time.
In speaking of pioneers, it was pleasing
to see so many old people and their de-
scendants present. He had already noticed
“Sandy” and George Muir, Mr. W. Willey
one of the oldest church assistants in the
district, and Messrs. Pope brothers. He
had also hoped to meet Mrs. Kelly and her
daughters, Mesdames Tyson, Griffiths and
Hepworth. On the occasion on which he
was honoured by the electors by being voted
to the Senate, one of the first of many
letters of congratulation he had received
had been from Mrs. James Walder, of
Watchem, whom he wa s also very pleased
to see present. Those who followed after
did not know the struggles of those who
had arrived in the early days. The country
had been very heavily timbered, and the
“blacks” were numerous. Gradually it had
been recognised that closer settlement was
as necessary as it was now. Some of the
settlers failed, as it was a hard job to make
a living on the 320-acre blocks of those
days. Some of the braver spirits remained
and stuck it out. with the result that there
was now no more prosperous district in
Australia than that of Donald': The women
folk of those days were wonderful. Resi-
dents of to-day lived in comparative luxury.
The soldiers on the Rich-Avon settlement
were experiencing discomfort, but not the
hardships of the pioneer. He was pleased
to know that they were making good, al-
though, perhaps, the soldier settlers in some
other parts were not prospering to the
same extent.
Many of the younger generation appear-
ed to have forgotten what they owed to
religion. The pioneers could not be simil-
arly charged, and, whether there were
churches or not, they worshipped regularly
in their own homes every Sunday. We
should try to emulate them in their regard
for religion. It was very pleasing to see
some of their descendants carrying on in
the district, which had done so well for
them. They were all members of the great-
est Empire the world had yet seen, and
their most wonderful heritage was the right
to call themselves Britishers. Their nation
had been the greatest in history in the
matters of colonization, exploration and
the spreading of education and Christianity.
They had established those grand inistitu-
tions. the British and Foreign Bible Society
and the Red Cross. They were also respon-
sible for the emancipation of the slave,
the freedom of the seas, and adult suffrage
It was not seemly to be boastful or arro
gant, but it was comforting to know tha
the cream of the Empire were the Scots
(Laughter.) They had been the greates
pioneers, and year after year the Presby
terian Church had contributed more heavih
than any other towards the hospitals. Then
numbers were increasing. He knew it wa
often wondered why he took so great ai
interest in religion. It was because he re
cognised that Christianity and religion wer
the foundation of the Empire, of civiliza
tion, and of all worth having. The Bolshe
viks were at the present moment decryin
religion and marriage, and persecutin
their priests. It was to be hoped that n
other country would come to such a pas;
Finally, he would counsel them to stic
to their church but to avoid sectarianisi
in any form. They passed through thi
world but once, and if there were some littl
kindness they could do, let them not neglec
it. They should at all times be ready t<
help a lame dog over a stile, and shouh
hold out the hand of friendship to all de-
nominations.
The old church would continue to stan<
and to do its work for the community. The
foundation stone of the new one had beer
presented by Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Gray. Hf.
wished that gentleman were there, but wher
he had last seen him, he was engage,
at the back of his business premises, tryini
to sell horses at above their true value
(Laughter.) The land on which they wert
building had been presented to the churd
by the pioneer pastoralists.
Placing the stone in position, Senator
Guthrie performed the ceremony in th(
following words: —“To the Glory of God
now lay the foundation stone of the Pres
byterian Church in which, pleas?
God, will stand for generations; and maj
the residents of the district enjoy that last-
ing happiness which can only be gained by
a people of true religion principles.”
The stone bears the following inscription:
This Stone was Laid by
Senator J. F. Guthrie.
23rd February, 1924.
Presented by Mr. and
Mrs. W. H. Gray, Donald
A special collection was taken up during
the ceremony, and resulted in the sum o
over £lOO being obtained.
Those present then adjourned to the
Church, where afternoon tea was providec
by the ladies, and was greatly enjoyed.


St. Andrew’s Presbyterian Church
OPENED IN DONALD
ENTHUSIASTIC CELEBRATIONS
[Extract from the “Donald Times,” Tuesday, March 24, 1925.]
“In the presence of a large congregation
which was waiting to enter the new Presby-
terian Church on Thursday afternoon last,
the Moderator of the Presbytery, Rev. J.
R. Fiddian, performed the initial act by
handing the key to Mrs. W. H. Gray, who
opened the door. Mrs. J. Hannah then
entered, and a few seconds later the bell
pealed loudly forth from the tower for the
first time. Several minutes were occupied
in the seating of the congregation, which
taxed the spacious accommodation to the
very utmost.
The singing of the Doxology was follow-
ed by the opening hymn, after which Rev.
J. G. Scarfe, who preceded Rev. K. C.
Billinge in this district, read a scriptual
passage from the Ist Book of Kings. The
Rev. Shallberg, who wa s formerly in charge
of this district for eight years, then offered
a prayer.
Taking as his text a passage from the
eighth chapter of the first book of Kings
“This House which I have built,” the Rev.
J, R. Fiddian M.Sc., Moderator of the
Presbytery, delivered an appropriate
address. The opening of the temple must
have been a wonderful day to Solomon,
and, although the temples of olden times
had passed away, the words of Solomon
were full of aspiring thoughts, especially
on an occasion such as the opening of such
a fine church in Donald. Solomon made his
temple reflect the life of the nation, but
the most important aspect of his action
was the spirit of his prayer. The House
of God might be a beautiful structure, but
if God honoured it not, those who erected
it would have built in vain. It should be
a great day for the people of this district,
who had at last realized their efforts, and
had raised this house of prayer. In these
days of materialism in commerce, it was
certainly an inspiration to them to witness
the erection and dedication of a church such
as this which would stand for the belief
they held in God, Righteousness and Re-
demption after sin. When they saw fine
temples being erected to the glory of God,
it reminded one of those wonderful artesian
wells in Central Australia, which only re-
quired to be tapped for their benefits to be
felt. The House of God was a source of
inspiration, and many people would pass
through Donald and, viewing the new
Church, remark that that was what the
Presbyterians of Donald thought of their
religion. It was for them to live up to that
standard. Their work was not finished with
the completion of the church. Rather was
it just begun. If those same people who
admired the church from the outside were
to come inside and see empty pews, what
would be their opinion ? Members of the
congregation should be fully alive to the
added sense of responsibility placed upon
them and he would appeal to the minister
and the people to look to the future. The
congregation should combine to help the
minister in his work, as it was an inestim-
able encouragement to a minister to feel
that his words were reaching a representa-
tive gathering of the members of his
church. There were many other ministries
in the church, among them being the min-
istry of the flowers, which were brought to
beautify the interior, and the ministry of
the choir, and he trusted that God, who had
put it into their hearts to erect this splendid
church, would inspire them to continue the
work in every possible direction. The
church should be the institution by wh'ch
dissension would be healed and unity es-
tablished. In the name of the Presbytery
he congratulated the people of this district,
trusting that God’s rich blessing would be
upon the new church, and, that as the years
passed by, nothing would enter its life
which would destroy the “beauty of holi-
ness” within.
The first offering of the new church was
taken up by Messrs. C. Dunn, J. Hannah, R.
Adams and A. Muir.


HIGH TEA.
A successful High Tea was held afte’’
the dedication ceremony. The thanks of
the Board of Management are due to those
ladie s who assisted in the preparation of
foodstuffs which was made available, both
for the tea and for supper in the evenmg.
REV. K. C. BILLINGE,
Present Minister.
RE-UNION CONCERT.
Evening found the church crowded to the
limit of its capacity, there be ng a pleasing
proportion of old residents among those
present. Proceedings opened with a prayer
by the Rev. Porter, of Birchip, after which
the Moderator of the Presbytery, in the
course of his opening remarks, said that
the passing of the old church, although it
would still remain an adjunct, in the shape
of a Sunday School, would occasion many
a feeling of regret among the older
people. It had been his privilege to be
present at three dedication ceremonies,
one of them being at Rainbow, where
fully one-third of the church property
had been made and erected solely by the
muscle and energy of the members of
the congregation. He also referre d to
the “tin tabernacle” in Adelaide, which
had held many earnest congregations
Referring to the new Donald Church, a
man whom he had met that morning had
referred to it as “a religious church.” In
appearance it certainly wa s a “religious
church”, and was a substantial feature
in the wonderful strides that Donald was
making. It was beautiful to think that
the people of the district were not too oc-
cupied in other things to think about pray-
er and religious matters. What the fut-
ure of the church would be depended on
the members of the congregation person-
ally, and he would follow with interest
(he doings of the people of Donald. Re-
ligion had been subjected to a lot of crit-
icism in the past but he was convinced
that better days were coming. He trust-
ed that the impending items of the even-
ings entertainment would be “short and
sweet,” but that they would leave long
memories.
Rev. Billinge expressed himself as
pleased that the Presbyterians were
keeping pace with the progress of the
district, reflecting the goodness of Pro-
vidence in their house of worship. The
community should be thankful for Gcd’s
blessing in this respect, as at his last
charge, Creswick, they had had the de-
pressing experience of continually bid-
ding farewell to families departing from
the district. There certainly was a ten-
dency in places for men to place their
faith in their “headers” rather than in
God. He often thought that the state of
a people’s church buildings reflected the
value they placed upon their religion,
rmd the -sight of imposing houses of wor-
ship was always a pleasing one.
At this ' stage apologies for unavoid-
able absence were read from the follow-
lowing:—Mr. Wm. Mitchell, Rev. Henry
Swan, Rev. D. W. and Mrs. Smith, Mr. T.
O. Guthrie, Senator Guthrie, Mr. Geo.
Aitken Rev. Geo. Tate, and Rev. F. Robert-
son, of Avoca. Rev. Swan was unforunate-
ly prevented from attending on account of
illhealth, Mr. T. O. Guthrie had been called
away to Melbourne. Mr. Geo. Aitken, son
of the former owner of Banyenong Station,
though unable to attend, wrote an interest-
ing letter, saying he remembered sitting
in the Donald Church when his father con-
ducted the service in the “seventies,” while
Mr. Wilson, then manager of Banyenong
West, used to lead the singing. Rev,
George Tate also wrote saying that he had
been ordained at Donald, and had lived
there for two years in a pine log house
(“The Willows”) over the river. The dis-
trict was very large, and he preached at
Donald only once a fortnight, when the
town comprised only a store, a blacksmith’s
shop, and an hotel.
In concluding, Rev. Billinge paid a
tribute to the generosity of the Mitchell
and Guthrie families regarding the new
church. In connection with the opening
ceremonies, the congregation had also to
thank Mr. J. H. Bolden and Mr. C.
W. Gooden for their assistance
in the choral work, the members of the
choir, and the ladies who had worked so
hard to make everything a success.
Rev. Erskine of Maryborough, cleik of
the Presbytery, congratulated the Donald


congregation on having erected one of the
finest country churches in the State, He
had been asked to be brief in his remaiks,
but he generally took no notice of the men
in authority, and said what he had to say.
(Laughter.) He had a warm feeling for
Donald. In fact, he wa s nearly ordained
here. Our climate was to blame for his
ordination here not being an accomplished
fact. Just at that time he had spent about
six weeks here, and also a lot of money
in drink —ginger beer. (Laughter). On
THE NEW CHURCH
Opened March 19, 1925.
his return to Maryborough he found hr had
averaged about £l/4/ a week in this way.
If he remembered rightly, it was the hot-
test year they had known in this district.
While here he had become acquainted with
Mr. Waddell and Mr. and Mrs. Hannah.
He also remembered having joined in a
carol singing venture at Christmas. He
had been at Maryborough for 18 years,
and it gave him great pleasure to see others
prbgressing. In connection with the beau-
tiful stained-glass window in the end of
the church he suggested that they provide
an electric light outide the building during
the evening service. It would serve to
brighten the church, and would render the
evening service more beautiful. He re-
membered a little story of a girl who told
her beau she would accept his suit when
he had accumulated £IOOO. Two months,
later she asked him how much he had saved,
and he produced £2/10/. “Oh well,” said
she. “that’s near enough, let’s get married.”
(Laughter). There was evidently no ‘near
enough’ spirit existent in the Donald con-
gregation, as every detail had been faith-
fully attended to.
Mr. J. Flett, brother of Mr. Geo. Flett,
of Laen, when calied upon for his reminis-
cence, said that it was fifty-one years since
he had first seen the Donald distrct, which
had made great progress since that time.
He had been a member of the Laen congre-
gation while in this locality, and nad come
when Mr. Kennedy was here. He was one
of a party of six who had come to Charlton
to look for land. While there one of them


had suggested that they go to church, and
they went. Finally they settled at Laeo.
and at first attended the open-air services
which were held there in 1875. The six
men who had come from Warrnambool had
brought their religion with them and final-
ly, after deciding to build a church, they
succeeded in gathering together a small
amount of money. They had to go an I
take the timber from the ranges, and, by
September, they had raised the Laen Church
free of debt. ' After Mr. Swan left, Mr.
Cameron came, and he (the speaker) was
present at his ordination and induction. He
had also taught the younger families of the
old settlers abovementioned, and was g l ad
to see they had continued to observe the
religion which their fathers had brought
with them. In conclusion he appealed to
them to rally round their minister, and to
help him in every way possible.
Rev, R. McCoy (St. George’s Church of
England), congratulated the Presbyterians
of the district on the erection of their new
church. He had heard Rev. Billinga say
that a people’s regard for God might be
measured by the appearance of their
Churches. There was a lot of truth
in the observation. but yet in
view of the condition of the Churcn cff
England property at present, he hoped it
was not strictly true. (Laughter). He
trusted the new Presbyterian Church would
be an inspiration to his people to follow
the lead, even if they could not_ go one
better. In any case the Presbyterians had
done nobly, and had given to God of their
material wealth. The next thing to be done
was to give Him themselves.
Rev. J. W. Crean (Methodist Church\
said that before congratulating the Pres-
byterians on their new building, he wished
to congratulate his old University comrade,
Rev. J. R. Fiddian. It was more than
twenty-five years since they had been
together at ‘ “Queen’s.” Regarding the
church, after the dedication of the building
should come the full consecration of the
workers of the church to its welfare. He
was glad the church possessed a spire
which would point to heaven, while the
whole building would of itself preach a
good sermon. Implanted in man was a
strange desire to express his worship of
the unseen. One day of the week was
taken and made the Lord’s Day. We took
a small portion of ground in which to lay
our dear ones to rest, and called it God s
Acre. We also took bricks and mortar, and
built a home and a church. Although the
clay came from the same pit, and although
there was a sacredness about home a certain
sanctity was imputed to the material of
the church because it Was God’s. He would
give them a slogan “Aspire,” drawn from
their own building, and would ask them
to work in harmony with one arother and
with their minister; net reserving their
words of encouragement and praise until
he was leaving them. In conclusion he
would, as chairman of the North-Western
Synod, ask them to accept the congratula-
tions of the Methodists of that vast area.
Rev. J. G. Scarfe of Casterton, but for-
merly of Donald, said that since first com-
ing to Donald at the beginning of his
ministry here, he had dreamed of such a
church in the town as the one that had now
been erected. It was a monument to the
faithfulness of the ministers of the pasv.
The Rev. Cameron had been the first to
occupy the Manse, while Rev. Gallagher
was the first to preach in the old church.'
No small amount of praise was due to the
ladies of Rev. Walker’s time, who had con-
ceived the idea of a new church, and had
set the ball rolling. When he (the speaker)
had come to Donald the drought had been
responsible for giving a temporary set-back
to the movement. Repairs were badly
needed, and these were at length effected.
They would all remember the memorable
Sunday on which the collection amounted to
£IOO, and after this the idea of a new
church gradually implanted itself more
firmly in the minds of the of the people.
He had interviewed Messrs. Mitchell, of
Jeffcott, and they had finally decided to’
donate £SOO towards the erection of a new
church £s a memorial to their pai'ents, who
were pioneer settlers. This gave a great
impetus, and the final result of their labors
was now evident. He was pleased to see
a representative of the ladies unlock the
door. Their help was indispensable, and,
along with the committee, they had worked
hard and unselfishly to achieve their ob-
jective. The building was a credit to the
congregation, and Donald was a much more
important town after that day. He trust-
ed that the effort would be continued, and
that the high tower would be representive
of the high principles of the people. In
the white interior of the building he saw
the emblems of purity and harmony, and
trusted that these virtues would continue
to ex’st in their hearts, wiping out all jeal-
ousies and envy. The church was no place
for bickering it was the outstanding place
for the spreading of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ. Strength and beauty of Christian
character were also needed, and, having a
new minister, they should do everythihg
possible to work together harmoniously.
Attendance at church was essential, as it
was the people who attended that constitu-
ted the bricks of the church. Dr. Guthrie
had said that, “in the light of Christianity,
the church was more elevated than the
castle.” and he trusted that the people of
Donald would view their church in that
light. In conclusion, he congratulated
them, on behalf of the Presbyterians of the
Hamilton Presbytery, on their progressive
step.
Rev. Billinge also read a letter of con-
gratulation from the Rev. Walker, of Port


Macquarie (N.S.W.), afterwards calling
upon Mr. G. Flett, who said that, although
he had been in the district 44 years, having
arrived here as a boy of 13, he had seen
a great deal of progress, and was proud
to be an elder of the church. He trusted
that the lady workers and committee would
continue to spur on in their good work, and
congratulated them and the remainder of
the congregation.
REV. DONALD CAMERON.
Who conducted the first regular services in the new
Church on Sunday, March 22, 1925.
Or. R. A. Adams, speaking cn behalf of
the Boai'd of Management, thanked the
congregation for its support, particularly
in connection with the opening of the
church. At the commencement of the High
Tea he had wondered how they were go’ng
to provide for all those who attended, but
when he recollected that arrangements “at
the back” were in the capable hands of the
ladies, he had not further doubts. As a
councillor, he could say that it was always
a matter of pleasure to the Council to wit-
ness the erection of any building whicn
would add to the beauty and importance of
the town, as they held that there was not
a better town “up north” than Donald.
Before the conclusion of the function,
Rev 1 . Fiddian said that he had met a Manx-
man that morning who had quoted to him
the following lines, drawn from John Wes-
ley’s journal:—“lf their spirit is answer-
able to their appearance, I know not what
can stand before them.” This he could
apply to the Donald Presbyterian Church,
and its people. If their spirit were equal
to their appearance, they were to be an im-
mense power for good in the future.
During the evening, songs were rendered
by the following:—Mesrs. C. Gooden (who
also presided at the organ during the
opening services), E. W. Tolliday, and A.
Boyd. Mrs. Spencer acted as accompanists.


THE BUILDING.
The church building is of red brick, and
forms a handsome addition to the town,
surmounted as it is by an imposing steeple
or spire, set upon a brick tower at the cor-
ner of the church, and covered with slue;
copper. The whole is crowned by a spe-
cies of weathercock indicating the four
points of the compass the total height be-
ing over eighty feet. The building com-
prises the main body of the church, two
rear vestry rooms, a vestibule, and belfry,
and is built in the traditional form of a
cross. It is surmounted by the cross of
St. Andrew, and will be known a s St. An-
drew’s Presbyterian Church. The inside
whiteness of the ashlar-worked wa I ls
stands out in comparison to the dark-stain-
ed girders and finishings, while the con-
trast is further heightened by the paws,
pulpit, hymn boards and choir rails which
consist of Pacific maple. The Gothic style
of architecture shows itself in the windows,
the nave of the pulpit, and the furnishings
generally. Blue carpets, bearing golden
fleurs-de-lis, have been laid in the aisPs.
A handsome copper vase, presented by Mrs.
Spencer, in memory of her late husband
(Sergeant E. G. Spencer, a fo mer
missionary of this Charge). offers
additional adornment to the interior,
while the stained-glass windows installed
throughout add a pleasing finish to whet is
undoubtedly a splendid structure, of which
any community might well be proud. A
new Estey organ, presented by Mr. T. O.
Guthrie, is an imposing addition to the nec-
essary accessories. The building is well-
ventilated, and is roofed with red tiles.
The pulpit within occupies an elevated
position, and access is gained to it by stairs
leading from the vestry room or from the
main body of the church. An indirect light-
ing system, comprising six lights, has been
installed, and is in keeping with the fine
construction and equipment of the church.
The bell was presented by Mr. R. C. Han-
nah, a pedestal by Misses W. and J. Taylor,
a communion table by Mr. and Mrs. T.
Taylor a pulpit cushion by Mrs, Hutch-
ings, the Bible by Mr. W. Langley, two
cabinets by Mr. R. A. Adams, a pedestal
by Mrs. Harper, a hymn board by Miss
Hill, in memory of her brother, and the mats
by Messrs. Miller and Co,, of Melbourne,
new hymn book for organ from
Mrs. Duncan McDonald, now of St. Arnaud,
brass jardiniere by Mrs. P. McPherson
brass vase by Mrs. E. Tyson, blackwood
Baptismal Font by Mr. G. Muir, in memory
of his late wife, an old pioneer. The
cost of the church and furnishings is about
£5OOO, of which nearly £3OOO has been
secured. The architects were Messrs-.
Richards, .Coburn and Richards, of Ballarat
and the builder Mr. B, M. Basset, of Don-
ald. The property is surrounded by a con-
crete and iron rail fence, with handsomer
metal gates to match, this being the work
of Mr. Geo. Clempson, a local contractor.
St Andrew’s Church
[Extract from the “Donald Times,” Friday, March 27, 1924.]
UNVEILING OF HONOUR ROLL.
On Sunday last the opening celebrations
in connection with the above new church
were continued, the preacher at the morn-
ing, afternoon, and evening services being
the Rev. D. A. Cameron, who in years gone
by was stationed in this district, and who
is now director of Home Missions. During
the course of an impressive afternoon ser-
vice, he unveiled the Honour Roll and
Memorial Window, referring, in his address
to the letter written by St. Paul at the
time when Rome was being assailed on all
sides by her outlying provinces, which were
just commencing to recover them-
selves for the first time since
conquest. The Apostle spoke of what he
considered the greatest power in the world
—the love of God implanted in human
hearts. Of course many men throughout
the ages, and even now, had not agreed
with him. To some the greatest power in
the w'orld was military powder. Alexander
the Great said that, with a large enough
army, he would conquer the world, and
mould it according to his own ideas. Attila
the Hun, Napoleon and others had thought
along the same lines, but, having had a
measure of such power within their grasp,
they had all left the world the same, or
worse than they found it. Croesus, who
thought that money was everythihg to be
desired, said that, given enough money, he
would create a new world. Many me”
since his time had been in possession of
more money than they knew what to do
with, and all of them had left the world
much as they found it. There were also
those who relied upon the power of brains.
Poets since Homer’s time had endeavoured
to sing the world into /new state, while
the power of philosophy was explored by


Board of Management
Top Row, left to right.—J. GILMOUR, A. McCLELLAND, W. R. POPE.
Middle Row.—R. McCLELLAND, G. BUGGE.
Bottom Row.—J. CROSBIE, G. SCOTT, A. HARVEY.


such men as Aristotle, Plato, Cicero, and
Socrates, and was found wanting. Others
had relied upon statecraft, but had not
materially improved the world, while men,
even down to our own time, sought in dis-
covery and invention the salvation of the
world. Lord Northcliffe had said he could
become all-powerful by the acquisition of
enough newspapers. We had however, only
to read history to see that only since God
gave us the perfect man in Jesus Christ had
the world begun to live, and that the greatest
power had come through that love working
its will in the heart of man. Paul had
admired the people, of Ephesus, and han
prayed that God might give them wisdom
and righteousness. He held that if people
were properly introduced to Christ they
could not help loving Him, and the his-
tory of the world since His coming had
shown that humanity was being introduced
to Christ by the word and example of good
Christian people. At present we appeared
to think of God as someone cutting into
our lives —not exactly interfering, but
coming in when we did not wish Him to.
With a sort of grudge we took up the
duties and responsibilities of religion, but a
little thought would convince us that Christ
Himself understood us. The night in the
Garden of Gethsemane was sufficient proo.
of that, and on that occasion Christ did not
plead that it was unreasonable to expect
Him to face death, although He prayed,
“Let this cup pass from Me.” He was still
able to say, however, “Thy will be done.
If we achieved the right relationship with
Christ, it did not end there. It began with
likingi Him, and ended with worship and
adoration, when we recognised in Him the
supreme Love and Goodness. Tlie nex
thing to be desired was that we should
trust His judgment more. Had we not
often been in the train and met a fellow
traveller whose conversation we had en-
joyed for hour on end, but, having parted,
were of the opinion that we would not ac-
cept his judgment on everything? Paul
taught that, in thinking of Christ, just the
reverse was the case, He was wise in all
things, and his judgment was absolute.
Whether we were old or young, and no
matter in what walk of life we found our-
selves Christ was the wisest friend we had.
Paul wished the Ephesians to feel that way
about the Christian religion, and we should
ask ourselve s if we approached it in the
same manner. The third requirement was
that we should not only know Christ bethel
and trust in Him but that we should be
willing to work with Him. There was a
story about a number of men engaged in
the erection of a building. The first, when
asked what he was doing said that he was
working until the five o’clock whistle wem,
when he would knock off like a shot. The
second said he was getting 25/ a day, and
hoped the job would last a long time. The
third, when asked what he was doing, said
he was helping to build a cathedral. Hera
vve had instances of those who took no in-
terest in God, others who thought only ot
pay or reward, and others again who saw
God in everything. Those three men were
always coming into our lives, but we were
at our best when we saw God in all things.
Hence it was that the Apostle Paul prayed
that the Ephesians might be in that frame
of mind the whole time. Even now there
were many who would say that it was al-
right for the Apostle, but that it would not
do in this prosaic days. It was just in con-
nection with these times that Paul made Ins
strongest appeal, putting before us both
pictures —that of Christ on the cross and
that of the Resurrection, counselling us to
believe that it was just as much in our
power to rise again as it was the_ case of
Jesus Christ. Then would we realise what
we thought to be impossible, and thus it
was that Paul impressed upon us the neces-
sity of knowing God better, and, in pur-
suance of this ideal, we associated ourselves
in the work of the church. Referring to
the beautiful memorial window and honour
board, the speaker said that we had not
yet solved the problem of the Great War,
but it was evident that they felt that their
men went from this community because
they knew their country had called them.
The congregation’s desire was to demon-
strate their faith in the belief that God had
not failed these men while they were oc-
cupied in their great task. They wanted
their children to know that their men were
under God’s care during that time, and
that, although some had fallen, they were
still of the belief that He would make all
things work together for good. The speak-
er said he felt that the members of the
church had'done a great thing in_ thus
erecting the window and board, and, in the
name of the church, he dedicated them to
the Glory of God, in the trust that He
would enable them to see all things clearly.
Special singing included an anthem, “Sun
of My Soul,” by the choir under the baton
on Mr. J. H. Bolden, while Mr. C. Gooden
rendered a solo. “Comfort ye, My Peop l e,
from “The Messiah.”
THE MEMORIAL WINDOW.
The fine memorial window situtaed at the
end of the building is about twelve feet in
height, and is constructed in three sections.
On each side is a stained glass panel, exe-
cuted in various colours, purple, blue, green
and gold predominating and serving to
more effectively embellish and set off the
central panel. Artistically incorporated in
this is a fine representation of a knight,
cloaked in blue and crimson robe, which,
being thrown back, reveals the shining
armour the drawn sword, and the shield
of faith, emblazoned with a flaming cross.
A dark blue background serves to throw
the helmeted head into bold relief, while the
side panels bear the following enscrolled
inscriptions:—“Fight the Good Fight of


Faith,” and “Endure Hardness, as a Good
Soldier of Jesus Christ.” The effect of the
whole is very pleasing and impressive.
THE ROLL OF HONOUR.
Beneath tne window is affixed the honour
roll, executed in polished blackwood, and
bearing the following names of those of the
Presbyterian congregation who served in
the Great War, an asterisk indicating those
who made the supreme sacrifice:— A. Allen,
R. Allen, A. Bailes, L. Baker J. Baker, A
W. Barber*, R. H. Barber, J.’ C. Barrie, C.
G. Boswell*, 0. Davey*. W. Davison, J.
Duncan*, L. V. Dunn, R. H. Dunn*, W.
Dunn, J. Cameron, J. D. Freeland, R. Ged-
des, A. A. Gillies, R. Gilmour, W. Grey R.
V. Horsfall, S. Hannah S. Hepworth, W.
Hogg, D. Keith, G. Lees, B. Lewis, A. Mc-
Donald. G. McDonald, R. McDowall H. Mc-
Intyre, D. McLachlan, J. McPherson, A.
Muir, L. Muir, L. S. Muir*, N. Muir, N.
Peters. J. Regers, N. Rogers*, G. Tucker,
W. Turnbull, A. Tyson, F. Wardley G.
Wardley, W. Wardley, C. Westmore, H.
Willey, V. Willey, F. Young M. E. Kav*
E. G. Spencer*, O. Shepherd.
Office-Bearers ot the Donald Charge, 1925
Minister, Rev. K. C. Billinge.
SESSION.
Messrs. G. Flett (Session Clerk), W
Langley, J. Adams, A. R. Boyd.
BOARDS OF MANAGEMENT.
Donald—Messrs. L. Walker (secretary),
S' 4^ a . ms (treasurer), J. Hannah, A. Muir.
E. Muir, T Taylor, W. Cruickshank, C.
Crone J. Martin, M. Sunderland, F. Mar-
shall, 1. Seel W. Langley, A. R. Boyd, R.
Hamilton, C. Dunn.
North Laen—Messrs. A. Adams (secre-
cy). H. J. Flett (treasurer), G. Flett J.
Adams, L. Davison, J, Davison, A. Hep-
worth, A. Tyson, R. Geddes, W. Tyson, S.
Hepworth, Waterhouse.
J- Gilmour (secretary), L.
McClelland (treasurer), J. McClelland, G.
Madden. T. Gilmour, A. Gumming, R. E
Pilgrim, J. Crosbie.
LADIES’ GUILD.
President, Mrs. W. H. Gray; Secretary,
Mrs. S. Lance; Treasurer, Miss L. Raulston!
P.W.M.U.
President, Mrs. Langley; Vice-President,
Mrs. J. Billinge; Secretary, Miss A. Tvson;
Treasurer, Mrs. W. H. Gray.
BUILDING COMMITTEE.
Messrs. L. Walker (secretary), R. Adams
(Treasurer), W. Sproat, W. H. Gray, T.
Guthrie, W. Taylor C. Dunn, J. Hannah.
SUNDAY SCHOOL.
Superintendent, Mis. W. H. Gray; Secre-
tary and Treasurer, Mr. F. Marshall;
Teachers, Misses W. Taylor, Patterson, L.
Raulston, M. McPherson, D. and C. Beggs,
M. Cameron, I. Kay, G. Charlesworth L,
Bourne, A. Tyson.
Conductor: Mr. J. H. Bolden.
Secretary: Miss M. McPherson,
Mesdames W. Grey, A. R. Boyd, R.
Adams, McCracken, Agnew.
Misses M. McPherson, S. Boyd, G. Char-
lesworth, L. Raulston, A. Tyson, G. Mar-
shall, C. Beggs, V. Baldwin, D. Hill.
Messrs. W. Grey, T. Seel, A. R. Boyd M.
Sunderland, B. Draffin A. Adams.
Wholly Set Up and Printed at the “Times” Office, Donald, Victoria, Australia.


