

ST. ANDREW’S,
OE THE
PRESBYTERIAN COLLEGE:
3Us present position atifr |hospftls.
JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D., A.M.,
MINISTER OF THE SCOTS CHURCH, SYDNEY.
ajTtnmi:
J. G. O’CONNOR, CITY PRINTING OFFICE, 105 YORE STREET.
HI 3 74




jit. SUkcfo's, ar % Collect:
Its Present Position and Prospects.
As the requisite preliminary arrangements for the inauguration of this
institution are now all but completed, and as there is much misappre-
hension prevalent in regard to its actual position and prospects, I have
deemed it expedient and necessary to put forth the following paper on
the subject for the information of those whom it principally concerns.
It has been taken for granted, therefore, that we have only to open
the College and to commence operations forthwith; there being no doubt
as to a sufficient number of students coming forward to avail themselves
of its benefits and advantages. But this is a great mistake; for as
every student in the College must also be a matriculated student in the
University, it must be evident that if we have not a considerable num-
ber of students who have had sufficient previous training to enable them
to matriculate at once, our first and necessary duty must be to prepare
such students for matriculation. The University papers of the present
year inform us sufficiently what amount of previous training is implied
in matriculation. In these papers, therefore, we are informed that the
candidate for matriculation must
1. Write a paper in English on the different forms of government,
to show his proficiency in spelling and composition.
2. Translate into English a prescribed portion of an historical
work in French.
3. Translate into English from Latin a portion of Horace—rather
a difficult Roman poet for a young student.
4. Translate into English from Greek a portion of the works of
Xenophon, with exercises in Greek parsing.
5. Translate a portion of Greek prose into Latin, with exercises in
Latin parsing.
6. Solve certain prescribed questions in Algebra and Mathematics.
Now such an amount of previous literary qualification as all this implies
can only be expected from students who have been three or four years at
a Grammar School or other classical and mathematical school; and where
we are to get any considerable number of Presbyterian students with
such an amount of qualifications as this, on the opening of our College,
I cannot tell. We may get three or four, but I fear not more. In
short, to use a vulgar expression, we have been putting the cart before
the horse, and have been getting up a College without having previously
got up a Preparatory High School or Academy for the training up of
students to enter it. As far as lam personally concerned, I have only


to say that when the agitation for the College commenced three years
ago, I recommended very strongly that a minor agitation for the forma-
tion of a Preparatory School or Academy in Sydney should also be
commenced at once, having ascertained at the time that this could have
been done without endamaging the College in any way; for a public meet-
ing. of which W. Neill, Esq., J.P., of the Commercial Bank, was chairman,
had been held on the subject, and a Society formed for the express
purpose. But the late Rev. Mr. Purves having taken offence at the
proposal, for what reason I cannot tell, and having denounced the
measure at a meeting of the Provisional Committee of the College, of
which he was chairman, it was forthwith abandoned ; and here we are
now, with a College ready for opening, and no students in readiness to
enter it. ,
We may anticipate, with some degree of certainty, what is likely to
happen in our College from what has actually taken place in the other
two affiliated Colleges. The following, therefore, is the number of
students in St. Paul’s, or the Church of England College, and St. John s,
or the Roman Catholic, respectively, during the first five years of their
existence :
St. Paul’s, opened in 1865. St. John’s, opened in 1861.
In 1865 ... 7 students In 1861 ... 4 students
1866 ... 6 „
1867 ... 9
1868 ... 9 „
1869 ... 9
1862 ... 5 „
1863 ... 3
1864 ... 7 »
1865 ... 9
Of these students in St. Paul’s College, the Rev. Warden, Mr. Scott,
informs me that in
1865 one was a Presbyterian,
1866 three were Do.
1867 there were five Do.
1868 Do. Do.
1869 there was one ;
but I am sorry to say he adds, very despondingly, “ I see no prospect
of any considerable increase in the numbers of students for many years
to come.”
Now, whether the future Principal of St. Andrew's College is to
be sent for from home or selected in the colony, I can anticipate no
other result from his labours, in the event of his merely confining him-
self to his proper duties in his College, like the two Heads of Houses I
have mentioned, than that which is actually exhibited in the two Col-
leges already in existence, viz., so very small a number of students as
will warrant Mr. John Stewart, or some other colonial reformer, to move
in Parliament that the Affiliated Colleges be done away with altogether
as an egregious failure. In short, unless something else is done for the
Presbyterian College than has hitherto been even attempted in connection
with the other two, I am strongly of opinion that it would be preferable
to give up the undertaking at once as utterly profitless and impracti-
cable. That “ something else,” however, is the organisation and working
of the requisite machinery for ensuring to the College a large supply of


students, together with adequate support while pursuing their studies,
for all time coining. This I conceive to be quite practicable, and I shall
now show how.
Early in the present century the Presbyterian churches in America
found themselves in precisely the same circumstances as we are actually
experiencing at this moment in this colony—the supply of ministers
from the old country had almost entirely ceased ; the number of students
whose parents could support them as candidates for the ministry at col-
lege was yearly diminishing in proportion as the field of action was
becoming more extensive, while the difficulty of supplying the ordinances
of religion to the rising settlements all over the country was increasing
every day. In these circumstances it occurred to some master-mind to
form what has been designated “ The General Education Society” of
America ; the object of which was to select youths of piety and promise
from the humbler classes of society in all parts of the country, and to
raise the requisite funds for their support, while pursuing their studies
for the ministry, in the schools and colleges of the country. The idea
took remarkably well with the American churches ; numerous youths of
piety and promise were selected from all parts of the country, and funds
were raised for their support both in the preparatory schools or
Academies, and in the Colleges and Universities. Nay, so popular and
successful had the scheme proved that, at the period of my visit to the
United States, in the year 1840, the General Education Society had
actually trained up and sent forth into the great field of the world not
fewer than fourteen hundred ministers !
The principle of the Society was not to give the sums they
advanced for their beneficiaries as a charitable donation, but simply as
a loan, to be repaid by the beneficiary, as soon as practicable after his
settlement in the ministry ; for which purpose he had to give his pro-
missory note to the Society to enable it to continue the process without
pressing unreasonably on the churches. But in the event of the bene-
ficiary being sent to any missionary field, either within the States or
beyond seas, where repayment by the beneficiary was not to be expected ,v
his note of hand was forthwith cancelled, and his debt to the Society
deemed to be discharged.
There is something, doubtless, to be expected in the way of pro-
mising students for our College, from scholarships for their support, to
be founded for the purpose by wealthy and benevolent persons of our
communion, and to be won as the reward of merit at public examina-
tions. But the number of such scholarships will always be a mere
nothing in comparison with the future wants of our church, from Cape
Howe to Cape York ; for as Queensland cannot be expected to do any-
thing in the way of a College for many years to come, we shall have to
provide students as candidates for the ministry for that colony as w r ell
as for our own. In short, there is nothing like the American principle
and practice in providing for the future wants of our church.
Although the Americans were the first to apply this principle sys-
tematically and extensively, the practice has not been altogether unknown
in the mother country. In the last number of the Quarterly Review it
is stated that Lord Chancellor Plunkett, who was born in 1764, and
was one of the ablest and best men that Ireland lias ever produced, was the


youngest son of a Presbyterian minister in Dublin, who died young and
left his family in a state of dependence. Finding, however, that their
deceased pastor’s youngest son, Thomas Cunningham Plunkett, was a
lad of promise, his father’s congregation very handsomely advanced
the funds necessary for his residence and education in Trinity College f
Dublin, the whole of which he repaid with interest when he became a
barrister.
Now it was strongly impressed upon my mind, when first made
acquainted with the operations of the General Education Society of
America, that what had proved so successful there might be equally so
in Australia ; and I resolved that, if ever it should be in my power to
do so, I would at all events make the attempt. With this view, as the
sole surviving trustee of the Scots Church, I have for many years past
reserved the vacant piece of ground belonging to the church, in front of
my own residence in Sydney, for the erection of the requisite buildings
for a Preparatory Academy for candidates for the ministry intending to
prosecute their studies in St. Andrew’s College—provided always that
the public should approve of the undertaking, which I was prevented
from carrying out, as I have stated above, three years since.
There are two things indispensably requisite in order to place our
College on a proper footing and to ensure its continued existence. The
first of these is tutorial assistance for the small number of matriculated
students who can be expected to attend its classes during the first three
or four years of its history ; and this is all that the heads of the other
two Affiliated Colleges actually do. The second, which has never been
attempted in these Colleges, is the organisation of the requisite
machinery, on the American principle, for ensuring an adequate supply
of students for the College for all time coming. The first of these
objects the Principal, whoever he may be, will be easily able to supply
with the assistance of one or other of those University-bred men who
are now to be found in considerable numbers in and around this city.
The second, which I consider by far the more important of the two,
will, I conceive, require the utmost efforts of the Principal for a period
of not less than four years. That functionary, moreover, must be
animated with enthusiasm for the particular object he will thus have
taken in hand. He must be well acquainted with the colony in all its
principal localities, and he must have considerable personal influence
and ability to recommend his object to public fafour and support.
Now, whether 1 am possessed of these qualifications in a higher
degree than other possible candidates, it is not for me to state ; but if
elected Principal of the College, in the first instance and during its
period of nonage, as I desire to be, I could pledge myself, without hesi-
tation, to accomplish all these objects, should Divine Providence vouch-
safe me life and health for four or at the utmost five years longer. In
that event I should —Ist. Make the requisite arrangements, with the
assistance of some University-bred man in or near Sydney, for giving
tutorial assistance and superintendence to the few matriculated students
on the roll of the College for the first three or four years of its existence.
2nd. I should at once commence a Preparatory School or Academy in
leased premises for the training of desirable pupils, of whom I know
several already, who might be immediately available for training as future


students in the College. 3rd. I should then traverse the colony in all
directions, holding public meetings and forming auxiliary societies in'
its principal localities, to interest the public of our communion in the
grand object, and to raise funds for the erection and endowment of the
Preparatory School or Academy, as also for the board and education of
as many pupils or students as might be forthcoming—enlisting at the
same time such lads of 'piety and promise all over the colony as might
offer themselves to the help of the Lord, as candidates for the ministry
in our primitive and apostolic church.
That lads of piety and promise are to be found in sufficient num-
bers throughout the colony, to be boarded and educated as candidates
for the ministry on the American principle I have indicated above, f
have no doubt whatever. The following is an extract of a letter on the
subject from a respectable schoolmaster on one of our northern rivers,
of date Nov. sth, 1870:—“! have not fewer than nine fine healthy
sons of (I hope) piety and promise —the eldest under twenty-one. (It
was he who wrote you concerning the Rev. Mr. Thom’s lamented death
at the Richmond River.) I would wish, if I were able, to give every
one of them a College education. But what can Ido I —my means are
so limited and my duties as a teacher so heavy and laborious.”
I may add that no pecuniary risk or obligation would in any way
devolve upon the College Council, in the event of such subordinate
educational machinery as I have indicated being organised and carried
out. But as only a limited portion of the College buildings would re-
quire to be erected in the first instance, while the institution is in its
nonage, there would necessarily be a considerable amount of interest
accruing from time to time on the unexpended portion of the capital of
the College; and whether a portion of the fund thus accruing might
not be appropriated in supplementing the salaries of suitable masters in
a Preparatory School or Academy for the College would doubtless be a
matter of question hereafter. But no attempt to combine a Preparatory
School with the College, in the way of having pupils prepared for the
College within the College buildings, will on any account be tolerated.
The following question and answer on this subject are extracted from
the Report of the Select Committee on the original Presbyterian College
Bill, of which Committee I was chairman, in the year 1862 ; the
lamented Dr. Woolley, of the University of Sydney, having been
examined as a witness by that Committee :
“ 25. By the Chairman. —Do you think the constitution of the
Affiliated Colleges would be improved by allowing a certain period, say
two years, of preparatory education before entering the University 1
“ Rev. Dr. Woolley. —l do not —for two reasons : One is, that it
has been often tried and has not succeeded. They tried in some of the
Oxford Colleges to unite a School with the College, and the attempt
has always been found to be a failure ; they are now obliged to separate
the School entirely from the Colleges, and put it in a different part of
the town. There is no profit in trying to make the same organisation
work for the government of young men and boys at school: it is expen-
sive and confusing. I also think it might lead to misunderstandings
between Colleges of the University in some cases.”


There is the greater necessity, at present, on the part of the Pres-
byterians, for upholding and maintaining this part of the University
system, that the Wesleyans are desirous, in order to carry out certain
views of their own, to have the Colleges separated from the University
altogether ; for the very first result of such a change would be to trans-
form the Roman Catholic College into a great Monastery or Convent.
I cannot bring this paper to a close without adverting to the fact
that great offence has, I conceive, been justly taken by a large number
of the most intelligent and influential subscribers for the College, at the
manner in which the College Council has been constituted. This
offence has been taken chiefly on the two following grounds—First, be-
cause, notwithstanding that the late Synod of Australia, or the ministers
representing the Established Church of Scotland in New South Wales,
formed much the largest portion of the now United Church at the union
of 1865, there is not a single representative of that Synod or of the
Church of Scotland in the clerical portion of the College Council ; and
secondly, because, notwithstanding the high regard for superior or Uni-
versity education which the Presbyterian Church has always professed,
there is not a single University-bred man among the lay members
of the said College Council. This was certainly no fault of
mine; for as I had not fewer than three hundred proxies entrusted
to me for the selection of fit and proper persons, both clerical and laic,
for the College Council —in order to do justice on the one hand to the
late Synod of Australia and the ministers representing the Established
Church of Scotland, and to give something like an academical aspect
and character to the College on the other—l gave the whole three hun-
dred votes for the Rev. Colin M'Culloch, of Balmain, as a minister re-
presenting the Established Church of Scotland, and for Nicol Drysdale
Stenhouse, Esq., J.P. and M.A., as a University-bred layman and one
of the first scholars in the colony. But through the swamping influence
that was brought to bear, somewhat recklessly, on the election of the
College Council, these two very eligible men were both shut out from
the Council, to the great indignation and disappointment of a large
proportion of the best members of our communion throughout the
colony ; while the Council itself emerged from the ballot-box, as in
great measure a Committee, both clerical and laic, of Free Churchmen.
This predominance of the Free Church vote in the election of the
College Council arose partly from a large and disproportionate extent of
the available field for agitation for the College throughout the colony
having been occupied, somewhat adroitly perhaps, by remarkably zealous
Free Churchmen ; and partly also from a coalition, somewhat similar to
the one we have lately witnessed in political circles, between Free
Churchmen and United Presbyterians. This is perfectly evident from
the state of the vote on the occasion—Rev. Dr. Steel. 645 ; Rev. A.
Thomson, 621. I happened to come in only third best, doubtless from
greatly inferior merit—as the Rev. Dr. Badham, of the University of
Sydney, very modestly says of himself in his famous letter to his learned
friend of the University of Leyden, when he was passed over in the
allotment of the dignities of his church and relegated among the iron-
masters of Birmingham—my modest number being only 455. But
a second, or rather virtually a third Free Churchman came in in the


person of the Rev. James Cameron, A.M., of Richmond, who polled 417
votes, while the Rev. Colin M‘Culloch, having only 345, was shut out.
For my own part I was rather surprised to find myself in at all, in the
face of this overwhelming Free Church influence j it seemed, to use the
language of the interior, as if I had got in through a slip-rail into the
great Free Church Run, In like manner the lowest on the roll of the
eight lay members of the College Council having had 476 votes, while
Mr. Stenhouse, even with my 300, had only 417, he was also shut out
from the Council In one word, the ballot-box, in the case of the
election of the Council of St. Andrew’s College, was as much under
controul as that of France about a twelvemonth since under Louis
Napoleon ; and this is the result.
The attention of the Presbytery of Sydney having been called to
the subject at its regular monthly meeting on the 7th March last, in
consequence of a motion by the Rev. A. N. Mackray, M.A., of Ashfield,
calling upon the Presbytery to give certain specific advice to the College
Council in the choice of a Principal, adopted the following deliverance,
on the motion of the Rev. Colin M‘Culloch, after much previous debate
on the occasion :
“ That, whilst the Presbytery greatly regrets that the Council of St.
Andrew’s College does not fairly represent the various sections of the
Church, and, still more, that the proceedings at the election of the mem-
bers were in some respects calculated to encourage the suspicion that
this state of things was the result of design, it judges it inexpedient to
take any action in the matter, inasmuch as it possesses no jurisdiction,
either for the reparation of past mistakes or for the direction of the
Council in any procedure which the said Council may in future choose
to adopt ; and, for similar reasons, the Presbytery further deems it in-
expedient to interfere by petition or otherwise with the Council of St.
Andrew’s College, as to the method which that body may choose to adopt
in fulfilment of their statutory duty of electing a Principal.”
There is evidently, therefore, a strong feeling of dissatisfaction, on
the part of the Presbytery of Sydney, at the manner in which the
College Council has been constituted, as well as a great want of confi-
dence in the Institution on the part of the public of our communion
generally. This, to say the very least, is a very unfortunate circum-
stance in the infancy of our Institution.
Whether the swamping influence which was employed so success-
fully, but I must add so fatally for our Institution, in November last—
shutting out as it did from the Council men who had the confidence
and respect of the entire public, and whose appointment would have
given the College a character and prestige which it cannot possess in
the absence of such men —whether this influence will be employed in
excluding me from the office of Principal, during the nonage of the insti-
tution, and while there is so great a work as I have indicated to be done
on its behalf, I cannot tell. But, other things being equal, I think I have
surely the best right to that appointment. The College originated with
me —so early as in the year 1862. I fought all its battles, both in Select
Committees and on the floor of Parliament; and my family, going no
farther than my brother, my late brother-in-law and my sisters-in law,


have contributed, both in direct money subscriptions and in a prospec-
tive endowment for the College, more than all the other subscribers put
together ; our united contributions, including the late Mr. Baillie’s en-
dowment of two professorships, amounting to not less than <£11,140,
while the united subscriptions of all tbe other subscribers amount only
to about £8,900. I confess I have an intense desire to see the College
placed on a footing of great prosperity and of thorough efficiency for the
accomplishment of its great object; and as nothing, in my opinion, will
tend so effectually to the realizing of that consummation as the adoption
of the American plan I have described, I am naturally desirous to be
enabled to work out that plan, with all the details of which I have made
myself familiar, in this colony, so as to ensure a plentiful supply both
of students for the College and of ministers for the church. I have
already stated that four years, or, at the utmost, five, would be suffi-
cient for the working out of this plan so 'as to ensure its successful
working thereafter ; and so confident am I of complete success, that if
God should vouchsafe me life and health for that period, I would willingly
pledge myself to resign the office of Principal at its close for some
younger and perhaps abler man either from the mother country or from
the colony.
Sydney, 26th April, 1871.
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER, YOEK STREET, SYDNEY.




