

f I* .
OT. ANDREW’S COLLEGE.
Within the University or Sydney.
PROVISIONAL COMMITTEE I
Vice-Chairman.— Rev. Adam Thomson.
Secretary. —Rev. James Cameron, M.A., Richprond.
Treasurer —Robert Anderson, Esq., Sydney.
Rev. Dr. Lang.
Dr. Steel. /
A. C, Geekie, D.D., Bathurst. ■
Alex. M‘Ewen, Mudgee.
\ Wm. Grant, M.A., ShoalhaVen.
John Kinross, Kiama. -
B. Laughton, 8.A., ''Parramatta.
William Ross, M. A/(Wentworth).
WiHmm Ridley, Ml A.
S. F/Mackenzie, M.A., Goulburn.
Wazir FW, MD., LL.D.
George Bowinaih Esq., Richmond.
Neil StewarL/Esqv Parramatta.
Dr. Douglas, \
Hon. S. U. Gordon, M.L.O.
Hon. John Richardsorr Esq., M.L.C.
William Neill, Esq. \
D. L. Waugh, Esq., Jamberoo.
Alexander Dodds, Esq., M.L.A.
Matthew Whytlaw, Esq.
Captain Moodie.
The Provisional Committee of St. Andrew’s College having
appointed the election of the Council of said College to take
place on the 7th day of November next, the following extracts
from the Act of Incorporation relative to the mode of election
and qualifications of the Councillors are subjoined for the infor-
mation of the subscribers :
“ The first twelve Councillors, of whom four, but not more,
shall be ordained Ministers of the Presbyterian Church of New
South Wales, shall be elected by the subscribers to the funds
of the College—every subscriber of one pound paid to have one
vote ; every subscriber of ten pounds to have two votes; every
subscriber of twenty-five pounds, three votes; and every sub-
scriber of fifty pounds or upwards, to have four votes : all such
votes to be given by ballot, and subscribers not present at any
meeting for such purpose, who may authorise in writing any
other subscriber, shall bo allowed to vote-by proxy.”
“No person shall be deemed eligible as a Councillor who is
not a member of the Presbyterian Church of New South
Wales.’’
As it is very desirable that the names of parties to be pro-
posed for this office should be before the subscribers for some
time previous to the day of election, the Provisional Committee
invite subscribers to send in to the Secretary or Treasurer the
names of the parties they intend to nominate, not later than
the 20th October, after which the list of names received will be
published, for information of subscribers.
Forms of proxy and lists of subscribers may be obtained on
application to the different Ministers of the Church, or to any
member of the Provisional Committee.
Subscribers who have not yet paid their subscriptions are re-
spectfully and urgently requested to do so forthwith ; and all
those who have not yet subscribed, hub who may feel desirous
of doing so, to entitle them to a vote in the election of the
Council, are invited to send in their names, with the amount of
their subscriptions, to the Secretary or Treasurer, without
delay.
By order of the Provisional Committee.
JAMES CAM ERO N, Secretary.
Sydney, 21st September, 1870.
Addendum to b© read by the officiating Minister from tho
pulpit at y/i si. * 0
I have been requested to read to you this advertisement,
which has appeared in the Sydney papers, and to which T invite
your particular attention. If there be any among you -vyho
have subscribed to the funds of the College, but have not paid
their contributions, they are respectfully requested to do so at
once, and any who have not yet subscribed, but who may wish
to subscribe to the establishment of the College, will still have
an opportunity of doing so by sending in their names and
subscriptions direct "to the Treasurer or Secretary of
the Provisional Committee, or they may be entrusted to
myself or to Mr.
for that purpose.
}
J
