

*
|)prial Service of |ittormsion
FOR TROOPS PROCEEDING TO EGYPT.
SUNDAY, Ist MARCH, 1885,
3 1508 00785090 7
'/tfaosr*-


rder of Service,
Proper Psalms.—xx., xlvi., cxxi.
Proper Lessons. —ist Lesson ; Josh, i., 1-9. 2nd Lesson : Eph. vi. 10-20.
ANTHEM.
“In Jewry is God known; His Name is great in Israel. At Salem
is His tabernacle and His dwelling in Sion. There brake he the arrows of
the bow : the shield, the sword, and the battle.”—Ps. Ixxiv. 1,2, 3.
SPECIAL PRAYERS.
(To be used before the Prayer for all conditions of men.)
O most glorious and eternal God, the Lord of Hosts, in whose hand rest
all the issues of war, we humbly commit to Thy righteous judgment the cause
of our dear country in this her hour of trial. Send down, if it be according to
Thy gracious will, such blessing on our arms in Egypt that the clouds of
danger may be scattered before us, and the light of peace and happiness be
restored ; and grant that we, acknowledging Thee as the Giver of all victory,
may strive to use our power as a trust from Thee for the advancement of Thy
glory, and the welfare of all the people of the land, through Jesus Christ
our Lord, to whom with Thee and the Holy Ghost be all honour and glory,
world without end. Amen.
O God, who has taught us by the hour of trial to draw closer
the bonds of brotherhood, and to rejoice in claiming our share in the dangers
and the destiny of our nation, bless, we beseech Thee, with Thy gracious favour
and protection those who go forth willingly from these shores to serve our
dear country in her time of need. May Thy fatherly hand ever be over them !
May Thy spirit of righteousness and mercy rule their hearts ! Bring them
back, if it be Thy will, in peace and safety; and, whether in life or in death,
may Thy blessing rest upon them, for the sake of Him who gave Himself
for our salvation, Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


* S 77
HYMNS.
OH worship the King, all glorious above ;
Oh gratefully sing His power and His love ;
Our Shield and Defender, the Ancient of days,
Pavilion’d in splendour, and girded with praise.
Oh tell of His might, Oh sing of His grace,
Whose robe is the light ; whose canopy space :
His chariots of wrath deep thunder-clouds form ;
And dark is His path on the wings of the storm.
Frail children of dust, and feeble as frail,
In Thee do we trust, nor find Thee to fail:
Thy mercies how tender, how firm to the end,
Our Maker, Defender, Redeemer, and Friend.
O measureless might, ineffable Love,
While angels delight to hymn Thee above,
The humbler creation, though feeble their lays,
With true adoration shall lisp to Thy praise. Amen.
rYOD the all terrible ! King who ordainest
V-J Great winds Thy clarions, the lightnings Thy sword ;
Show forth Thy pity on high where Thou reignest :
Give to us peace in our time, O Lord.
God the Omnipotent ! Mighty Avenger,
Watching invisible, judging unheard,
Doom us not now in the hour of danger.
Give to us peace in our time, O Lord.
Godjthe all merciful ! earth hath forsaken
Thy ways of blessedness, slighted Thy word :
Bid not Thy wrath in its terrors awaken :
Give to us peace in our time, O Lord.
So shall Thy children in thankful devotion,
Laud Him who saved them from peril abhorr’d,
Singing in chorus from ocean to ocean,
Peace to the nations, and praise to the Lord. Amen.
W 5.3 5-5 /p gS.


ALL people that on earth do dwell,
Sing to the Lord with cheerful voice :
Him serve with fear, His praise forth tell,
Come ye before Him and rejoice.
The Lord, ye know, is God indeed ;
Without our aid He did us make :
We are His flock, He doth us feed ;
And for His sheep He doth us take.
0 enter then His gates with praise,
Approach with joy His courts unto ;
Praise, laud and bless His name always ;
For it is seemly so to do.
For why? The Lord our God is good ;
His mercy is for ever sure ;
His truth at all times firmly stood ;
And shall from age to age endure. Amen.
The Offering* at the close of the Service will he
the voluntary contributions now being sent in towards
tenance of the troops.
J. L. HOLMES AMD CO., TYPS., SYDNEY.
