

St. Ilnbrcto’s, or the College,
SYDNEY.
J' o Presbyterians, and the pRiENDs of poucATioN
GENERALLY IN yiCTORIA.
The Presbyterians of New South Wales have, after a long series of delays and
disappointments, succeeded at length in obtaining an Act of Parliament fox the establishment
of a Presbyterian College, in connection with the University of Sydney, in that Colony.
I had submitted to our Colonial Parliament a bill for the purpose in the Session of 1866,
which, after being amended and improved by our General Assembly, was finally passed,
and received the Royal assent on the 12th December last, ihe Presbyterians of the
Sister Colony are now therefore engaged in effecting that great national object, but as
the undertaking, which, it is believed, will prove of incalculable value to our ingenuous
youth, as well as to our communion generally, and be an honour to all Scotsmen and
Presbyterians in Australia, is a heavy and onerous one, especially in these times of depression,
they look with hope for some assistance to the members of their communion in the
neighbouring Colonies, and particularly to those Presbyterian colonists of Victoria who are
possessed of stock and stations in the Riverine territory of New South V ales.
The object of the proposed College is twofold : Ist. lo afford suitable residence
and supervision on economical terms for students pursuing their education in the highex
branches of useful learning in the University of Sydney. 2nd. To provide the means, by a
well-equipped Theological Institute, fox 1 the training up of a native ministry.
The proposed College will be governed by a Council, to consist of four ministexs and
eight laymen of the Presbyterian Church, who shall be elected to that office by the subsex ibexs
—every subscriber of One Pouxxd paid to have one vote; every subscriber of Ten Pounds to
have two votes ; every subscriber of Twenty-five Pounds to have three votes; and evexy sxxb-
scriber of Fifty Pounds and upwards to have four votes. The Council, when appointed, axe
to elect a Principal, who is also to be a Presbyterian minister, and who is to have a salary
from Government of £5OO a year. The other conditions of the Act are that, so soon as the
public shall have subscribed Ten Thousand Pounds (of which £4OOO must be actually paxd
and the remainder payable by equal instalments in one, two, and three years), the
Government shall advance an equal amount for the erection of the requisite buildings from the
Public Treasury, and shall continue to advance pound for pound, till the subscriptions of the
public shall have reached Twenty Thousand Pounds. The Government also give the College
a site for the erection of its buildings of seventeen acres of land within the University
Reserve.


My late brother-in-law, John Hunter BaiHie, Esq., who died fourteen years ago,
bequeathed the whole'of his property, subject to the life-rent of his widow, for the endowment
of two Professorships, which in all likelihood will be worth £4OO a-year each, in the Presby-
terian College. His widow, Mrs. Baillie, has also subscribed from her own resources One
Thousand Pounds in addition to her late husband’s munificent bequest; and upwards of Three
Thousand additional—making upwards of £4OOO in all—have already been subscribed in
amounts of £250, £2OO, £lOO, £5O, £25, £lO, £5, £3, £2, and £l. But £lO,OOO is a large
amount for the Presbyterians of our Colony to raise, as we have had a long period of
depression in New South Wales. Besides, as a proof of our fraternal feeling, we have been
contributing £5O a-year for the Aboriginal Mission of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
Let me hope, therefore, as one of the members of the Provisional Committee of the
Presbyterian College of New South Wales, that, notwithstanding the unfavourable times,
there will be a considerable number of subscriptions—perhaps of small amount individually,
“ although many a little makes a meikle ” —from members of our communion and from friends
of education generally in this Colony ; and especially let me hope that those Scotsmen and
Presbyterians in Victoria who derive no small portion of their wealth from our territory of
Riverina, will remember that we have the strongest claims on their Christian liberality, in
connexion with our humble endeavours to transform that vast moral desert into the garden
of God, by training up a native ministry for Australia.
As residents in Victoria cannot be supposed to be acquainted with the merits of
individual colonists of New South Wales, I shall be happy to be favoured with the proxies
of those who may be-pleased to contribute towards our College Fund; for the votes for tlie--
hrst Council will be given by ballot, and proxies are allowed. I may be entrusted 1 presume
with the discharge of this trust, when it is borne in mind that I was one of the first six
representatives of this Colony twenty-five years ago, when it was merely an appendage of
New South Wales, and that in that capacity 1 obtained for it, in the face of a large hostile
majority of our Legislature, the inestimable boon of Separation which you are celebrating
this day.
The Rev. George Mackie, South Yarra, Melbourne, has kindly consented to receive
and to transmit to me any communications or subscriptions that may result from this
Appeal.
JOHN DUN MORE LANG, D.D.
Minister of the Scots Church, Sydney, and Member of the Legislative Assembly
of JS'etv South Wales.
Melbourne, \et July, 1868.


T * ***
Subscribers’ INames.
•*
9
*
♦ ■
*
«■
#»
?■


