

OAF
1 DAD Registered at the G.P.0., Melbourne, for transmission by post q j
as a periodical. Od




ST. FRANCIS XAVIER
BOYHOOD IN SPAIN
On April 7, 1506, a sixth child was born in the castle of
Xavier in Northern Spain; and at Baptism he was given
the name Francis. The family was at that time prosperous,
but it was not to continue so for long. Navarre the
region in which the castle of Xavier stood, was in those
days independent of both France and Spain, though the
Kings of both those countries wanted to get possession of
it. When Francis was eleven-years-old, a war broke out
between France and Spain for possession of Navarre.
Xavier’s two elder brothers, Juan and Miguel, fought on
the side of the King of France, and fought so well that
they were regarded as dangerous enemies by the K ng of
Spain. He put a price on their heads; and when France
was finally defeated and peace made, they were condemned
to death. However, they refused to surrender, and held
out for another four years in the small fortress of Fuen-
tarabia, and were able in the end to make an honourable
peace, but only by forfeiting the greater part of the family
possessions. Francis was about fifteen years old when his
brothers came home from the war; and he saw what the
war had cost his family. His father had now been dead
some years; so Francis found himself as youngest son, in
a family which had lost its great prospects; and he had
to think of how to make his own way in the world.
He had been brought up at home in a very good Catholic
atmosphere. His mother and father were both truly
sound Catholics; his eldest sister was a nun in a convent
nearby; -and an uncle of his was a good and learned
theologian in Pampeluna, a town in Navarre. Xavier had
been used to seeing his family and all the servants
assemble each day in the chapel of the castle for Mass
in the morning and for prayers in the evening. Of course,
all the time his brothers had been in danger, there had
been special prayers for them, and no one doubted that
these prayers had kept them safe.
Francis had shown himself a bright and cheerful boy;
and everyone liked hm. Now, when he had to think of
his future, plenty of people were ready to advise him.
The army was a tradition in the family, which had pro-
duced a number of good soldiers. But he had seen his


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
brothers go out to war and come back; and in spite of
their bravery they had not done much for themselves,
or for the family. It was useless to think of staying at
home and running the estate, for there was very little of
that left. It was not enough for his brothers, let alone
for him as well. So he went off to Pampeluna to consult
his uncle Michael. Here he got good advice. Michael was
a well-known and much respected man. He had not
chosen the risks of war, but a life of study. Francis was
clever enough. If he would follow his uncle’s example, he
too, cou'd succeed. He might restore fame to the name
of Xavier, and perhaps, if he became a professor at one
of the great Universities, he might restore wealth as well.
So t was decided that Francis would go to the University
of Paris, and prepare himself for a great career as a
scholar.
AT THE UNIVERSITY OF PARIS
Francis was nineteen years old when he set out for
Paris. He was young, handsome, charming, sure to be
popular, especially since he was also an outstanding
athlete, excelling as a sprinter, and at the high jump. He
had made up his mind to succeed in his studies. He
came as a noble into the company of the students, and
before long found Irmself much sought after. He soon
had a large number of friends. He helped them with their
studies, and in return they helped him in many little
ways, for, owing to the poverty of his family and the
distance from his home. Xavier was always very hard up,
and often in want of necessities.
His very popularity proved to be a danger. His fellow-
students and his first tutor got him to join their fun. It
was not a very good kind of fun; and Xavier soon found
that they were leading him into trouble. They drank a
good deal too much, and gambled too. . That was bad
enough, but there were worse things as well. Xavier was
too determined to get on with his studies, and too hard
up, to join with them in their drinking and gambling;
but those were not their only amusements. Their fun
often took the form of impurity; and when Xavier found
that, he stopped. The temptation was great and the
occasion was there; and Xavier was a high-spirited lad
who felt the temptation very strongly. Some of his com-
panions were inclined to look on him as a spoil-sport, and
as wanting in manliness, in not doing as they did; but
Xavier would not give in. He showed his manliness in
doing what was hard and in not yielding to circumstances.
His faith and his home training stood him in good stead.


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
Another danger threatened Xavier also during these
years; and again the danger came from his friends.
Some of the Paris students were followers of Martin
Luther and the other heretics who had so recently rebelled
against the Church. They tried to get some of the best
students to join them. They were cunning in the way
they worked. They would just make friends with those
whom they selected, and help them in every way they
could, without letting their real intentions be known. Once
they had a man as their friend and constant companion,
they felt they would be able to lead him to think as they
did about the Church. Xavier was one they chose. It
was not difficult to make friends with him. His engaging
manner made him easy to approach, and he was always
grateful for any good turn done to him. For a while
everything went well from their point of view. Xavier
was often with them, and had no idea of their design.
They were like him in many tastes, and they wished to
make him Ike them in all. While this was going on,
Xavier first got to know Ignatius Loyola. At first Xavier
did not think much of Ignatius; for he saw in him a
Spanish nobleman who had become a beggar. He was
lame and old, and must have appeared stupid to Xavier,
for though he was fifteen years older, he was far behind
Xavier in his studies. They were not friends yet; but it
was Ignatius who saved Xavier from his false friends.
When he got the chance Ignatius put in a word of warn-
ing about these heretics. Xavier was not the man to be
dictated to in his choice of friends; but from the training
he had received at home, he loved the faith enough to be
put on his guard. He soon found that Ignatius was righc,
and saw in him the true friend who was not afraid to
risk offending him in order to do him good.
Francis came more and more under the influence of
Ignatius Loyola. Ignatius was already a saint, and God had
put it into his mind to get together a band of picked men,
learned and zealous, to serve God as priests. His first
idea was to go to Palestine to convert the Turks; but if
that failed (and it did fail through no fault of Ignatius
or his companions) he would place himself and his
followers at the service of the Pops, to use them as he
thought best for the Church.
Ignatius had not seen anyone better fitted than Xavier
to be in this picked band, so he set himself to persuade
Xavier to jo'n him. He did not have an easy task. Xavier
was grateful to Ignatius for the help he had given him:
but he did not see why he should abandon his plan. After
all, his plan was nothing to be ashamed of. He meant to
become a professor and mov) in society that was both


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
refined and intellectual, as befitted a nobleman. It would
not be difficult to secure some well-paid post, and from
his income he would be able not only to live according to
ms aristocratic taste, but also to help his brothers and
sisters at home. He had come to Paris to succeed for his
family as well as for himself. If he resolved now to
follow the invitation of Ignatius and live in poverty, pos-
sessing nothing, he would not be able to help those at
home; and he wanted to help them. He considered it his
duty to help them; and besides he intended, in the high
position he would achieve, to defend and expound Catholic
truth against the heretics. It took him a long time to be
convinced that it was better to follow Ignatius. In fact it
took nearly four years. Xavier had first met Ignatius in
1529. Two years later he was still firm in h s original
intention, for in 1531, he applied to the King of Spain
for his Patent of Nobility, which would help him in his
jareer. It was not until the end of 1533, that he made his
decis on to leave all this and follow Christ. When once
he had decided, there were no half-measures. There never
were half-measures with Xavier. When he said, “1 am
your man’’ he meant it; and he was Christ’s man through
thick and thin till death.
All this time Xavier had been going forward in the
University. He had been made a professor, and had under-
taken to lecture there for a few years. After December,
1533, while he cont’nued his lectures, and had a great
following among the students because he made the matter
so clear, he was only awaiting his release, for now he no
longer ambitioned the greatness which he could acquire
as a scholar. His mind was set on higher things; not on
his own glory, but on the glory of Christ. By this time
Ignatius had gathered some others about Irm, and by
August, 1534, a little band, consisting of Ignatius, Xavier
and six others met in a chapel on Montmartre and took
their vows together on the feast of the Assumption of
Our Lady. They were the first Jesuits. They vowed poverty
and chastity, and vowed also to attempt the conversion
of the Turks in Palestine if they could get there within
a year. Fading that, they would offer themselves to the
Pope, and undertake whatever work he assigned them.
At this time the only one of the Jesuits who was a priest,
was Peter Faber. Ignatius and Xavier were not ordained
until 1537.
When he was about to leave Paris in 1536, the long
delayed royal Patent of Nobility came to hand for Xavier,
together with notice that he had been appointed to a
position in Pampeluna which would give him an assured
income, without interfering with his activities or his


July 20, 1949, (No. 433.)
income as a professor. But Xavier was no longer interested
in these things. He laid them aside; and went on h ; s way
to a glory greater than Paris and Pampeluna could ever
have given him.
FROM PARIS TO VENICE
Xavier left Paris in 1536. He left Europe in 1541. In the
four and a half years between his departure from Paris
and his sailing from Lisbon, he did a great deal of
apostolic work, which is sometimes lost sight of when his
apostolate in the Indies is being considered. From Paris,
Xavier went to Venice. It is a long way; and the Alps
lie in between. It was never an easy journey until the
railways were constructed and the tunnels dug under the
Alps. In Xavier’s time there were no railways, and not
even any coaches; and even if there had been coaches,
he did not have enough money to pay his fare; so he did
the obvious thing. He set out with his companions to
walk the whole way. The journey took nearly two months;
and was done in the depths of winter, part of it through
country where a war was raging, and part of it through
territories which had been made hostile to Catholics
through the efforts of the heretics. One might imagine
that the journey itself would be mortification enough for
anyone; but Xavier and his friends did not think so.
They made their journey a pilgrimage and begged for food
along the way. None of us would like to beg; and, I
suppose, if we were born in castles and belonged to
families of long established nobility, and if we were in
addition, professors at the most famous University in the
world, we should find it harder still. All the same, Xavier
did it. Sometimes when the group of travellers came to a
town after a long day’s walk, tired, cold and hungry,
instead of looking for rest for the night they went to a
hospital and volunteered to look after the sick and attend
to their wants.
It is by no means easy work to look after sick people;
to make their beds, to feed them and do whatever else is
necessary; to bathe wounds and bandage sores. But it is
easy in the hospitals of today, compared with the work
in those of Xavier’s fme, when doctors in the hospitals
were few and the hospitals badly run. In those days only
the very poorest people went to hospitals; and they went
there not to get better, but to die. The majority of them
did die, often without receiving any attention whatever.
If they could make their own beds they did so; otherwise
the beds remained unmade. If the patients were very
ill they could not get out of bed to take food, or even
for the necessities of nature—so you can imagine the


July 20, 1949. (No, 433.1
horrible state they were in, and how filthy the beds and
rooms were. Furthermore, many of the patients would
have no bed; and part of the occupation of those who
worked voluntarily in the hospitals was to remove the
bodies of those who died during the day to make room for
ethers to die there too.
Xavier and his friends used to go to hospitals of this
kind after a long hard day’s walk, and attend to every
need of the patients, both the living and the dead. One
of the party describes briefly the kind of work they did
in the hospitals; “Tending patients, making beds, sweeping-
floors, scrubbing dirt, washing pots, digging graves, carry-
ing coffins, read'ng the services and burying the dead.”
There was no hospital-workers union. These men had
taken to heart the words of Christ: “As often as you
have done it to the least of these little ones, you have done
it' unto Me.” They saw Christ in the sick and the poor;
they helped them for the love of Christ. When they had
worked as long as they could, they took some food, if there
was any to be had, and lay down to sleep, usually on the
floor. In the morning they would visit the patients again,
perhaps repeat the tasks of the previous evening, then
hear Mass, if possible, and set out again. It was not an
easy journey.
Xavier believed that he had extra reason for adding
mortification to the ordinary hardships of the journey.
He had been vain of his prowess as an athlete; and now,
to make up for this, he bound cords round his legs so
tightly that after he had been walking a few days they
had sunk into the flesh of his legs, and nearly crippled
him. They could not be cut off without cutting away the
flesh, and were causing him great pain, which he did not
consider important; but they were likely to make it
impossible for him to continue his work for Christ—and
that was a serious matter. A doctor was called in; and
after an examination, said he would return the next
morning. All the companions prayed for Xavier. Next day
when the doctor returned, the cords had come away of
themselves. Simon Rodriguez, who was one of the party
records: “By a singular mercy of God he was completely
cured, and I am entirely ignorant how this sudden cure
was effected.” It was foolish for Xavier to do what he
had done, and he recognized that he had been foolish,
end did not repeat the mistake. We can overlook the
foolishness and see in what he did, a further proof of the
wholeheartedness with which Xavier gave himself to the
service of Christ.
When they reached Venice the travellers worked in the
hospital there, as they had done along the way. Xavier


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
spent some time also in Vicenza. Soon permission was
given by the Pope for them to be ordained. The ordina-
tion took place in June, 1537; and Xavier offered his first
Mass in July. In tears of devotion he gave evidence of
the depth of his faith, and of his devotion to Our Lord
in the Eucharist.
THE YEARS IN ITALY
After his ordination Xavier went to Bologna, where he
attended the sick and instructed the ignorant; and so well
did he work that his visit there is remembered to this
day; and Bologna was the first city to elect Xavier as
its patron saint. From this city Xavier was called to Rome.
He was so worn out with work, attending the sick, burying
the dead, begging for the poor and preaching to all, that
his companions thought he was dying. At the end of
1538, they gave him two months to live. He recovered,
and was secretary to Saint Ignatius until 1540, when, by
acc’dent, he was chosen to go to the Indies. By accident,
I said; but it was not really by accident, for God had
chosen him for this work.
Prom the time of his ordination Xavier had had signs
from God, and visions of his future work. He had been
heard to cry out in Ins sleep; “More, O Lord! Give me
more.” Though those who had heard him asked him to
explain his cries, he refused to do so; but long afterwards,
when he was in India, he confessed that in a vision or
dream he had seen himself toiling and labouring for
Christ in the Indies, and fainting from weariness. He had
been bearing a gigantic Indian on his back, and though
he was on the point of exhaustion, he cried out not for
relief, but for the honour of having more to bear for
Christ. Here is the secret of his zeal for souls. He loved
Our Lord, and for Him loved souls, and wished to labour
to save those for whom Christ had died. There is evidence
also, of his faith and his obedience. Though he had these
visions of his work, visions that were clear and several
times repeated, he was content to wait till the order
came from his superiors to set out for this work; and
while he waited he did such work for souls that he is
called the Apostle of Bologna and Vicenza, as well as of
the Indies.
THE CALL TO THE INDIES
Saint Francis Xavier was in Rome when St. Ignatius
gave him the order to go to the Indies; and to understand
how this came to pass, we must first consider the little
country of Portugal. This country, much smaller than
England, was at that time one of the greatest nations of


the world. Her sailors had found the way to India, round
the Cape of Good Hope at the southern end of Africa:
there was no Suez Canal then, to shorten the voyage.
Portugal had a rich empire in the East. Many Portuguese
had gone out there as traders, and many stories were
told of the wonderful things that were to be seen in India.
Goa, in India (it is near Bombay) was the capital of the
Portuguese Empire in the East. It was full of magnificent
buildings, and far richer than most of the cities of Europe,
so that it was called Goa the Golden. Some priests had
gone out with the settlers and traders; so Christianity
was again introduced into India; but there were not
enough priests to convert the pagans. . . . Perhaps they
did not try very hard to convert them. It was hard enough
to look after the Portuguese who had come there, and
had grown very rich and very careless. These wealthy
merchants made slaves of the poor Indians; and though
they had beautiful churches, they did not practise their
religion or try to lead the pagans to Christianity.
Now John 111, King of Portugal, was a very good man.
He felt that it was his duty to see that his new subjects
were taught the faith. He had heard of the Society of
Jesus, the new religious order just founded in Rome, and
thought the Jesuits were just the men he wanted. So he
wrote to the Pope and to St. Ignatius, and asked them to
gve him some men to go to India. As it happened then
were very few Jesuits in Rome at that time. At least two
had to be sent; and Xavier was not one of the two chosen.
But God’s plans work differently from ours; and He had
chosen Xavier. The Portuguese ambassador with whom
the two priests were to travel, had to set out very soon.
Bobadilla, one of the two named by Ignatius for India,
fell ill. He had a very bad leg, and could not possibly
travel. So Ignatius, who was himself sick in bed, and
much worried by the turn events had taken, sent for
Xav'er and said: “It looks as if I shall have to send you.”
Xavier’s answer was just four words long. “Well! Go
ahead! Here I am.” That is longer in English than it
was in the Spanish he used.
It was March 14, 1540. Xavier had to set out on the
15th. That did not leave him very much time. He had
to get the Pope’s blessing, to get his last orders from St.
Ignatius, to write out his vows of profession, to record
his vote for St. Ignatms as the first General of the Society
of Jesus, and to say goodbye to his fi’iends. But he was
found soon after he had got word to go, sitting with a
needle and thread in his hands, sewing a patch on to his
only spare pair of trousers. He managed to repair a gown


as well; and these with his breviary formed his only
luggage.
We can leave the description of his parting until we
speak of his sailing from Lisbon, to which city he was now
bound. When he left Rome and St. Ignatius, he left them
never to see Rome again, nor Ignatius this side of heaven.
The first stage of his long journey to India took three
months. During those months on the way to L sbon. he
occupied himself with the instruction and conversion of
some of his companions. At Lisbon he was long delayed,
in fact for nearly a year; and though he was impatient
to get to his task in the Indies, his stay was for the good
of Lisbon. He made such an impression there that long
afterwards Lisbon, following the example of Bologna,
elected him patron of the city; and he is still specially
venerated there and throughout Portugal.
The wonderful thing about Xavier is that he never
seemed to real zs how much good he was doing. He was
so forgetful of himself that he seemed not to notice what
efforts he was making; but he rejoiced at the good that
was done by others. He wrote from Lisbon, as he did
from other places, to say what great changes were made
in the lives of the people, and what piety was shown; but
he really seems to be unconscious of the fact that he
was the instrument of God for bringing about these
changes for the better. He saw what good was done by
others, his helpers, and praised them for it, and said that
he was able to learn a great deal from them. He did
not know that : t was by force of his example that they
were inspired to work so well.
XAVIER LEAVES HIS FRIENDS
As the day for sailing drew near, so did the loneliness
of Xavier increase. His loneliness had started when he
left Ignatius and his other friends. It was now to increase;
and he knew that it would be with him all his life. But
he did not falter. God had chosen him; and he had
chosen to follow God’s call. He would go on joyfully to
the end. When he left Rome one friend, Simon Rodriguez,
one of the original Jesuits, was with him; taut the King
now wished to retain Rodriguez in Lisbon, so Xavier would
leave Lisbon alone; and he knew what separation from
friends would cost.
The moment of parting from his friends at Rome was
a sad one. but one full of joy as well. It was full of joy
because Xavier saw in his departure for India the begin -
n ; ng of those labours for the love of Christ, Which God
had shown to him in vision. He was going to work that


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
would be hard, monotonous, discouraging; but he wished
to suffer and be weary for Christ, Who suffered and was
weary for us.
Xavier was a man of warm and lasting friendships. His
friendship with Ignatius was the greatest in his life. It
was a tender and human friendship in Christ and for
Christ. Xavier loved Ignatius and was never so happy as
in his company; and he felt strong affection for all his
other companions. They found in his bright, cheerful and
laughing nature a bond of companionship which each
meeting made more strong. Xavier was under no delusion.
He knew he would feel lonely for them all in foreign
lands; and he did feel lonely, sometimes almost to tears.
On the night before he was to sail from Lisbon, Xavier
wrote letters to those he had left in Rome. He begged
them to write to him in India. “You will not be able to
write more than once a year” he said; “but when you do
write, give me news of everybody by name. Make your
letters so long that I shall have a week’s reading in each.
Tell me every scrap of news. And above all, pray that we
may all meet again in heaven. I fear we can never meet
again on earth, so pray that we may meet in the end, in
heaven. Let whichever of us comes first to heaven, pray
to Christ Our Lord that He may give grace to all of us
to meet again in glory.”
Once Xavier had set out, there was for him no return.
He could not corns at the end of a hard day’s work to
talk things over with his friends. He could not talk to
them in person; so he talked to them in h ; s letters. He
told them of his work and of his weariness. He joked with
them, and he told them of the strange places he visited.
And for him all places were strange, for nowhere could
he hope to find his friends.
LISBON TO GOA
At last on April 7, 1541, Xavier’s thirty-fifth birthday,
the’lndia fleet stood out to sea from the Tagus. Tradition
says that Xavier preached to the people just before the
departure. His last words in Europe were of Our Lord.
The fleet moved off as he finished speaking; and the great
adventure was on. That adventure was an apostolate that
was to bring salvation to millions, and which still fires
men’s hearts with zeal and fills them with courage. We
may well believe that as Europe dropped below the horizon
Xavier’s thoughts were of his friends whom he would never
see again, of his flock whom he had not yet seen, and of
Our Lord who was with him, and for whom he undertook
the task. 7 ' ( .w .-v. ; ; cv.


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.1
Xavier sailed from Lisbon in April, 1541; he died in
December, 1552. Just a little more than eleven years of
life remained to him. The voyage to India took over a
year; so the tremendous labours he performed in the East
for Christ, are compressed into ten years and a few
months. Xavier was still young when he died; but in ten
years he had won whole nations for Christ; and the work
he did still lives.
Xavier left Portugal as the accredited representative of
both Pope and King. They gave him great authority; but
in his years of work he rarely appealed to this power.
Like St. Paul, who alone in the history of the Church can
be compared with him, Xavier looked on himself not as
the envoy of Popes or Kings or Emperors, but as the envoy
of Christ. Like St. Paul he wore himself out in labours
greater than those undertaken by any other man of his
time. Unlike St. Paul he did not receive martyrdom as
the crown of his work; but as he gave his whole life to
God it matters little, and to him it mattered not at all,
whether he died at the hands of enemies of the Faith, or
in the midst of his labours.
It was May, 1542, when Xavier arrived in Goa. His
activity began at once. All was not well with the Portu-
guese there. Xavier found that many of them were living
with women without marriage, and he set himself to
remedy this evil. He was not afraid to be friendly with
sinners. Our Lord had been so too. Like Our Lord, Xavier
loved sinners but hated sin. If he did not make friends
with sinners, how could he save them from sin? If we
see how he set about his task on one occasion, we shall
have an idea of his methods. One day he met a trader
in the street, and smilingly asked him: “Would you be
ready to give a meal to a poor priest? Just a quite little
dinner, with no fuss or bother.” The trader could hardly
refuse. At table Xavier showed himself charming and
friendly. He admired the children; laughed and played
with them, and told them stories; but when they had
gone from the room, and their mother with them, he
turned to the trader and said: “What is there to stop you
from marriage? This woman would make you a good wife.
She is already the mother of your children. Why not have
the blessing of God on your home?” In this way and
others like it, he led many back to their religion. He
preached also, frequently and fervently, at Goa; and many
who had ceased to take much interest in their religion
and had grown careless in their lives, felt that God spoke
to them through Xavier, and came back to God once more.
No one had any doubt that Xavier was a holy man and
a great friend of God; but that did not prevent them from*


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
playing some tricks on him. They had noticed that he
wore a poor gown of cotton which he patched from time to
time, till it was so covered with patches that, as they said,
they could almost have played chess on it. They felt he
must get a new one; but they could not persuade him to
accept a present of one made of silk. He said that was
too good for him; and it made no difference to him, that
n Goa even the slaves wore silk. So one night while he
was asleep they took away his old gown and left a beauti-
ful new one in its place. Next day at dinner they began
to joke with him about his new silk gown. At first he did
not understand: but then suddenly he saw for the first
time that he was actually wearing the new one, and had
been wearing it since morning. We are not told what he
did then; but we can be sure that he evened the score
somehow, most likely by collecting the price of the gown
from them for the poor.
MISSIONARY JOURNEYS FROM GOA
Xavier’s first missionary journey from Goa was to the
Paravas, a wretchedly poor tribe, who scraped a living by
pearl fishing. It sounds very romantic and luxurious; but
these unfortunate people were usually slaves of some
native chief who got all the pearls and none of the danger
and paid no wages, but left the miserable Paravas to live
in their wretched huts on the few fish they could catch
or the crops they could grow in the barren soil in the
time left over from fishing without pay for pearls. At
first Xavier did not know the language of the Paravas,
and worked through an interpreter; but soon he was able
to carry on by himself, though he did not yet have the
gift of tongues, that is, the gift of speaking new languages
without previous study of them. He translated the
Apostles’ Creed, the Our Father and the Hail Mary into
Tamil. He even made them into little songs which they
could all sing together. In a few months he had converted
them, and some of the neighbouring tribes as well. So
marvellously did God bless his work that in a single
month he baptized 10,000 of them himself. Their descen-
dants are all Catholics today. One Archbishop, several
Bishops and a large number of priests now carry on the
work in that d ; strict; and a remarkable thing about it is
this: they are all natives, and almost every one of them
is descended from those whom Xavier himself instructed.
If space permitted, I could tell you how Xavier saved the
poor converts from pirates by going out alone with his
crucifix to meet them when they landed to pillage and
murder; how he raised a dead child to hfe by his prayers:
how he prayed, preached and taught the truths we all


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
believe; how he got the gift of tongues, went to Ceylon,
converted a King and all his subjects; and how some of
his converts were martyred for the Faith. Yet not all his
work was done in India and Ceylon.
Xavier went as far as Singapore, the Moluccas, the
Philippines, Morotai, Ambo'na and many islands well
known to Australian soldiers during the recent war. It
is very probable that he came even to the shores of New
Guinea; but he did not know of Australia lying to the
south, which had still to wait more than two hundred years
for settlement, but of which he was to be proclaimed
patron in times to come. When he had visited most of
the Portuguese stations in the East, Xavier decided to
return to Goa. He was not just a reckless traveller and
sightseer: everything was part of a definite plan. He had
visited many places, taut it was in order to see for himself
their needs. Many other Jesuits had come to Goa in these
years; and Xavier intended to send them to places where,
from his own observation, he knew they would do most
good. He also intended to found a native seminary at
Goa, where native priests would be trained for all the
missions.
He had been shipwrecked more than once, had floated
on a plank in the sea for three days, had said Mass on a
volcanic island during an earthquake so violent that he
was afraid the altar would collapse. He had travelled in
rough seas in frail native boats, had been threatened with
violence and death by poison or the knife. He had stilled
storms at sea, cured the sick, worked many wonders: and
above all he had brought the Faith to many, and had led
many back to it. He had not been without his enemies, but
he had shown Irmself unafraid in every danger. When
offered antidotes for poison, he had refused them saying:
“God is sufficient for me.”
Xavier had wished at one time to go from Malacca to
some of the islands of the headhunters along the Borneo
coast or near Celebes. The inhabitants were said to be so
ferocious that, as Xavier reported, they made a sport of
murder; and when no one else was about whom they could
kill, they kept their hand in by murdering their wives and
children. That sounds bad enough; but when you reflect
that in these Islands there were active volcanoes and
frequent earthquakes, and that it was said to be impossible
to get any bread, or any meat save human flesh, you can-
not be surprised that Xavier’s friends did not want him
to go there. They bribed the captains of all the ships in
the harbour to refuse to carry him. Xavier heard of this,
and went to the church where he preached a sermon
reproving his friends for what they had done. “I am here


July 20, 1949. (No, 433.)
to do the work of Christ” he said. “I am not afraid of
danger or torture or death. I have come to preach Christ
to these people, and I am going to do it.” Then he went
down to the hai'bour, went on board the first ship he saw,
and told the captain he must take him where Christ called
h m to go. His friends had failed to stop him; taut some of
them immediately offered to come to protect him at need.
That was the power of attraction Xavier exercised over
his friends. The visit to the islands came off without any
loss of life, taut with some gain to souls. A mission was
afterwards established there, changing in time the ferocity
of the natives to the peace of Christ
CALL TO JAPAN
In March, 1549, Xavier returned to Goa. He sent men
out to various posts, according to his plans; taut he sent
no man to any place he had not himself visited. He
warned them of difficulties and dangers, made provision
for their needs, blessed them; and turned to consider his
plans for carrying the message of Christ still further
afield, to Japan.
Nearly eight years had passed since he had sailed out
from Lisbon. He had been in the East less than seven
years; but in that time he had performed a mighty task.
His plans were now complete for spreading and strengthen-
ing the Faith through all the regions he had visited. He
spent his time at Goa committing his careful plans to
writing and instructing those who would be responsible
for carrying them out. All the time a divine restlessness
filled his soul, and he felt drawn to even longer journeys
for Christ. After much prayer and careful consideration
he became certain that God wished him to go on to the
remote kingdom of Japan, of which he had heard wonder-
ful tales, though he had not till recently, met any
Japanese.
In 1547, there arrived at Malacca, a Japanese named
Angero, a fugitive from justice. He had fled from Japan
to China, and had there met some Portuguese who spoke
to him of the holy missionary, Father Francis. He heard
so much about Father Frances and his teaching that he
was anxious to meet him. It was now safe for him to
return home to his wife and family, taut he was ill at
ease. He felt that he would get no peace of conscience
till he met Xavier and got advice from him. Angero
came to Malacca specially to meet Xavier; but unfor-
tunately Xavier was not there when he arrived. He waited
some months and received some instruction in Christianity,
but still Xavier did not come. Finally it was rumoured
that he would not be coming to Malacca that year, so Angero


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
felt it would be useless to wait longer. He set out to
return to Japan. A terrific storm drove him back when
he was in sight of home, and he was forced to take refuge
in a Chinese port, where he met the Portuguese friend
who had first spoken to him of Xavier. This man, Alfonso
Vaz, was just about to sail for Malacca, and he persuaded
Angero to return with him in the hope of meeting Xavier
who would surely come there if he waited long enough.
Grace was already at work in the soul of Angero, who
felt a desire to become a Catholic, so strong that he could
not disregard it. In this way the spirit of Xavier reached
out to Japan and drew to him a troubled soul who could
not find peace, save through him. Angero arrived in
Malacca for the second time in December, 1548; and this
time Xavier was there. Angero lost no time in making
himself known to the saint; and he too, fell under the
charm of Xavier.
The Portuguese merchants had first reached Japan about
the time Xavier was in Lisbon. By the time he reached
India many stories were circulating about the wonderful
Empire of Japan. Xavier was not the man to act on mere
rumour; so he had been waiting his chance to get reliable
information about that country. Now he had his chance.
He made detailed enquiry from Angero about the people
and the country. He questioned all the merchants who
had been there. He prayed about the whole scheme night
after night, sometimes without leaving even an hour for
sleep; and when once he was convinced that God called
him to Japan, there was no looking back.
Xavier had to return to Goa; and he took Angero with
him. He studied the Japanese language, instructed Angero,
and finally had him baptized by the Bishop of Goa, as
the first-fruits of Japan, under the name of Paul of the
Holy Faith. In April, 1549, Xavier left Goa for Japan.
Paul the new convert was with him, and so were three
Jesuits one of whom was a priest. Xavier knew that this
might be his last voyage, for many ships were lost in the
typhoons of the China Sea; so, on reaching Malacca, he
wrote a long letter to St. Ignatius, telling him of his great
hopes, but not forgetting to mention the dangers in store.
The only ship that could be found to take him to Japan
was under the command of an old Chinese captain who
was known, not without reason, as The Pirate.
On June 24th, the anniversary of his ordination, Xavier
and his companions set sail with The Pirate. After many
adventures, not all of which were pleasant (the pirate
crew once drew lots to decide whether they would murder
their passengers or not), they arrived off the port of
Kagoshima in Kiusiu, the southernmost of the islands of


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
Japan. It was August 15th, the feast of the Assumption
of Our Lady and the fifteenth anniversary of the first
vows at Montmartre. Their voyage with the pirates had
not been a calm one, for once they had been in sight of
the shore of Japan, but were forced to run for nearly a
week before the south-west monsoon, which carried them
away from their goal. Yet favourable winds at the end
of that time had brought them to Japan, rather than the
good navigation or the goodwill of the pirates. They had
tried to make for China to pass the winter there, but fear
of an attack by their enemies whom they sighted in strong
force at one place and the China Sea storms, drove them
out to sea; finally they came to Kagoshima m spite of
themselves. God was at the helm to bring Xavier to that
country.
WORK IN JAPAN
Xavier was soon at work. The first Japanese he bap-
tized was named Kimura. He was later to have a grand-
son, Leonard Kimura, who became a Jesuit, and was
martyred seventy years later, and beatified by Pope
Pius IX. As he had been told, Xavier found the Japanese
intelligent, rather slow to be convinced of the truth of
Christianity, but once converted, unshakeable. The mag-
nificent history of the Japanese martyrs clearly shows
this constancy. It would be outside the story of Xavier to
sketch an outline of the origin and course of those per-
secutions which led to the closing of Japan to missionaries
for three hundred years. It is sad to reflcet that the trade
rivalry of the merchants of several European countries
led to the exclusion of the Portuguese traders and of all
missionaries: and the Japanese Church endured a per-
secution which in ferocity and persistence is unequalled
in history. Hundreds of missionaries and thousands of
native Catholics were put to death with unspeakable
tortures. In spite of it all the Catholic tradition lived on;
and several groups of Catholics were discovered after the
lapse of three centuries, by the first modern Catholic
missionaries to reach those parts of Japan. The most
notable group was at Nangasachi. There had been no
priest with them for generations; but when a French
missionary arrived there and celebrated Mass, they recog-
nized that he was of the same Faith as Father Francis
had been, and welcomed the return of priests to the for-
gotten flock. Over the centuries they had handed down
Catholic instruction from one generation to the next, and
had remained immovably true to the message of Xavier.
\ missionary from Japan recently assured me that these
villages of the hidden Christians were the ones where
Xavier himself had preached.


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
Xavier’s first attempts at preaching were not successful.
He did not yet know the language; and as the Japanese
regarded all foreigners as fools, his efforts were rewarded
with laughter and mockery. The chddren used to follow
him . and make fun of him, and throw stones. Soon, how-
ever, things began to change. It is hard to know whether
God gave Xav er miraculous help or not in learning the
language, as He had often done on past occasions, but
certainly it was not long before he began to make an
impression. His efforts were once more blessed by God.
He wrought several miraculous cures; but it was his
holiness more than his preaching and miracles that struck
the Japanese. Once more he moved about from place to
place, and decided where mission centres should be
founded. He managed to convert some of the pagan
priects, taut his success was mostly with the people.
The Japanese loved ceremony and display; and were
inclined to think very little of Xavier and his companions,
who were so poorly dressed. This led Xavier to think of
a piece of display, which would be amusing if it were not
for the motive that prompted it. He wished to prove to
the Japanese that he was poor from choice, and so lead
them to realize that he was not interested in their wealth,
but only in their souls. He recalled that he was the
ambassador of the Pope and of the King of Portugal: so
with the help of the Portuguese merchants he arranged
a magnificent procession. Followed by thirty Portuguese
richly dressed, and accompanied by music and a large
retinue, he presented himself at the court of a great ruler,
who called himself a king. Everyone was delighted, and
all realized, as Xavier wished them to do, that this humble
missioner could, if he wished, dress in the gorgeous robes
of an ambassador, and outdo them in grandeur and
ceremony.
RETURN TO GOA
This visit to Japan was a reconnaissance. As always,
Xavier kept in mind the fact that for the present all
activities were to be directed from Goa, the point of
arrival of all the missionaries coming to the East. He
had seen to what places he should send his men; and
now, after two years of pioneer work in Japan, he decided
to return to Goa to select men for this new and promis-
ing field. He had not succeeded as well as he had hoped,
for he had not reached the supreme ruler of Japan;
but he was full of confidence for the future. The civil
wars and revolutions which had impeded him, would not.
he was sure, last for ever.


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
During the voyage back to India, a smaller boat con-
taining fifteen people was being towed by the larger one
in which Xavier was. In the course of one of the terrible
storms which Xavier so often experienced, this boat broke
away, and was given up for lost. Even the larger vessel
was in great danger; so it seemed useless to hope that
the smaller one could survive. Xavier spent the time in
prayer. In the smaller boat were two men who were
unbaptized, and whom Xavier had tried in vain to convert.
He prayed for their salvation. After more than three days
the smaller vessel came safely to rejoin its companion.
All who were in it were safe, and they swore that all
the time they had seen Xavier with them, steering the
boat through the storm. The two Mohammedans asked
for Baptism, and the voyage was continued in safety.
Goa was reached in the beginning of 1552. Xavier
remained there till April, engaged in his work as Provin-
cial Superior of all the Jesuit missions. By this time his
letters to his brother Jesuits in Europe had been widely
read, and had kindled a flame of zeal throughout the
continent. That magnificent flow of missionaries to which
his letters gave rise has continued to flow to all parts
of the world down to our day: and just as his words
and example moved the men of his time to those feats
of courage and endurance by which many of them won
the glory of martyrdom, so he still stands as the great
model of missionaries in our own day, when he has been
procla ; med the chief Patron of foreign missions through-
out the world.
LAST JOURNEY
When Xavier left Goa on April 17, 1552, he knew that
he would never return. To his friends he said: “So live
on earth that we may meet in heaven. The end has
come for me on earth. I shall not return alive to Goa,
but my body will be brought here.” On his last night in
the city he preached once more; then going out from the
church he went on board the ship which was to take
him to Malacca. He had left everything in order. Those
who were coming from Europe that year had their posts
assigned. Xavier was bound for China. Everywhere
throughout the East, and particularly in Japan, he had
heard of the ancient civilization and culture of China;
and his practical judgement led him to the conclusion
that to win the East for Christ it would be necessary
above all, to convert China. This judgement is shared
by the missionaries of today. Francis Xavier was no
unpractical dreamer. He loved Christ to the point of
ecstasy, and all men for the sake of Christ. In giving


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
expression to his love, and organizing for the spread of
the Gospel, he was most far-seeing and capable; and
all the Catholicism of the East rests on the solid basis
laid down by Xavier. His work has survived the centuries
in spite of wars and earthquakes; in spite of revolutions
and the overthrow of Empires; in spite of the changes
brought about by manufacture and commerce, which have
changed everything in the world, except human nature
and the relationship of man to God. It was on the
basis of these two unchanging factors that Xavier worked
and planned; and that is why his work is not only
undestroyed, but indestructible.
DISAPPOINTMENT AND DELAY
A month brought Xavier from Goa to Malacca, where
he did not expect any long delay. In this hope he was
disappointed. He had often stayed at Malacca; often for
long periods. The Governor of Malacca had been his
great friend; taut recently there had been a new appoint-
ment. The new Governor was a brother of the retiring
one. His name was Alvaro ae Ataide, son of the great
navigator, Vasco da Gama, first man to round the Cape
of Good Hope. At first Don Alvaro was very friendly to
Savier. He had good reason to be so; for when the
saint arrived from Goa the plague was raging in Malacca.
Xavier did everything possible for those who were infected;
and when Don Alvaro himself fell ill, Xavier looked after
him, and said Mass in his presence several times. Every-
thing seemed to be going well. The Governor regained
his health and remained friendly.
Then Don Alvaro heard that a merchant, named Diego
Pereira, on whose ship Xavier was travelling to China,
had been named Ambassador to the Imperial Court.
Alvaro resented being passed over for a mere merchant.
Pereira had richly deserved the honour. He was not only
a close friend of Xavier and experienced in Chinese affairs,
but he was actually paying almost all the cost of the
expedition. He did this out of gratitude to Xavier who
some years before had blessed his business, after which
he had become very prosperous. Don Alvaro decided that
the appointment was an insult to him. He refused to
recognize any of the reasons which had led to the
appointment of Pereira; and he would not yield to the
authority of the Viceroy of India, or to the pleadings of
Xavier. He became a better enemy of Xavier who had
done him nothing but good; and he used all his power,
which was supreme in Malacca, to prevent him from
going to China. He pursued and ill-treated the saint,
and seized Pereira’s ship. So Pereira suffered a great loss;


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
and Xavier blamed his own sins for the misfortunes of
his friend.
So violent had the rage of Alvaro become that the
Bishop threatened to excommunicate him; but even that
made no uifference. He threatened Xavier publicly, and
defied all the powers of the Church. He made up his
mind to send the ship he had seized from Pei’eira on a
trading voyage to China on h i 's own account; and Xavier
decided to travel on it. in spite of the fact that all the
crew were now in the pay of Alvaro, who threatened
severe punishment to anyone who would help Xavier or
Pereira. It was thus on the ship of his enemy that
Xavier set out on his last voyage. His last act before
leaving was to say Mass and pray for Alvaro, who had
delayed him for two valuable months, and had ruined Its
plan for an honourable and peaceful entry into China.
The work he had done at Malacca and the troubles he
met there had worn him out. He wrote that he had
suffered more in these months than in all the rest of his
life. It is perhaps not beside the point to reflect what
happened to Alvaro. To the great grief of Xavier he was
excommunicated. He also fell into disgrace with the
Viceroy; and two years later he was taken in chains to
Lisbon, and degraded from his noble rank. He fell ill
of leprosy, and was avoided by everyone. But at last he
thought of praying to Xavier, and received the grace of
conversion: so that through the prayers of Xavier he
died a mod Christian death. Pereira too, recovered the
ship Alvaro had seized, and with it his good fortune. This
ship, the Holy Cross, had been blessed by Xavier, who
foretold that it would never be lost at sea; so it carried
its owner safely through many stormy seas, as his
friendship with Xavier had carried him safely through
the storms of life. Pereira died happily after a long
life, and went to join his great friend in heaven.
On this voyage, instead of running into the storms
which usually greeted Xavier at sea, the ship lay becalmed
for fifteen days. Water ran short, and everyone turned
tc Xavier for help. He told them to fill the empty water
casks from the sea. They did so; and he blessed the
casks, whereupon the water became sweet and excellent.
He worked other miracles too, on this voyage, and over-
came in great part the hostility of Alvaro’s men.
AT THE GATES OF CHINA
In August, the ship reached Sancian, which is one of
a litt’e group of islands near Canton. Here the Portuguese
had shelter for their ships. It was the nearest they were
allowed to approach to China; and even there they were


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
allowed to come only on sufferance. The Chinese authori-
ties allowed them only a short stay, and they were not
allowed to put up any permanent building. China was
then a closed land; it was death or imprisonment in
chains for any foreigner to go to the mainland, and death
at the hands of the Chinese authorities meant slow death
by ingenious torture. That was the risk that Xavier faced
with his eyes open. He was determined to go to the
mainland.
Naturally the Portuguese refused to take him there;
for they would certainly be seen and seized. They tried
to persuade Xavier not to go. They were sure he would
be captured and tortured to death. Xavier replied that
the only thing he feared was to be wanting in answering
the call of God. The Portuguese refused to make any
arrangements for him; for they feared that his venture
would fail and that they would lose their right to trade.
Thoughtful for others, as he always was, Xavier agreed
not to make his attempt till ail the Portuguese had left
Sancian. Then they would not get the blame if he were
taken. He arranged with the owner of a Chinese junk
to be taken secretly by night to the coast, and abandoned
there to make his own way, single-handed against an
empire. The Portuguese said the junk-owner would
murder him and throw the body ovex-board; but Xavier
was not dismayed. At last all the ships had left, except
the one in which Xavier had come from Malacca. The
men who remained on that ship were afraid to do much
for him. It was already November, and Xavier was left
on the island with one Chinese attendant, whom he had
converted. On November 20, he said Mass for the last
time. He became seriously ill, and probably knew that
death was near. Some on board the Holy Cross, with whom
he had made friends, decided to disobey the orders of
Alvaro; so they brought Xavier on board. But the violent
tossing of the ship made him worse, and he was taken
back to the island, where he lay in one of the flimsy
shelters which the Portuguese ran up each year when
they came. It was bitterly cold, and Xavier’s fever
increased. He grew delirious; but in his delirium he spoke
only of God and of the mission to China.
Thei’e was a shortage of food. Supplies on the ship
were running short; but they gave Xavier some food they
could ill spare. For three days Xavier lay in delirium,
and took no food. His weakness increased, and the fever
with it; but then the delirium ceased. The sick man
knew that death was at hand. His favourite prayers
rose to his lips; and the single attendant who was with
him heard him repeat over and over again, the ejacula-


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
tion: “Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost,”
and other short prayers to Our Lord and Our Lady; and
the Portuguese who came from time to time to visit him
from the ship heard him pray also in his native Basque
tongue, saying the prayers he had been taught by his
mother and which he had recited as a child.
DEATH OF XAVIER
On December 2nd, Xavier lay in the hut where the
Portuguese had placed him. The coast of China was
in sight before him. He had looked across at it so often
during his months on the island. Now, for the last time
he saw the sun set over China, and night came down on
Sancian. Only his Chinese friend Antonio was with him;
no other friend, no fellow-countryman, no fellow-Jesuit.
Xavier now held in his hands a crucifix; his thoughts
were no longer of China, but all of heaven, and of the
price Our Lord Jesus Christ had paid to open heaven
for men. At two o’clock on the morning of December 3,
1552, Francis Xavier passed from earth to heaven. No last
sacraments were his. No member of the Society of Jesus
which he loved so much, was near; only a poor, illiterate
Chinese. There he died in sight of China, which he
never reached, but to which he pointed the way so many
have taken since.
Next morning Antonio told the Portuguese that Xavier
was dead; and with their help he was laid away in a
hastily dug grave on the island. In the coffin with the
body they placed quick-lime, for it was thought that in
this way the flesh would be consumed, and when the
time came the bones could be taken up easily to be
moved to Malacca, or Goa, or Europe.
The ship that was at Sancian when Xavier died was
delayed by storms for more than two months. When it
was ready to set sail, some of those on board suggested
that they should carry with them the bones of the dead
man, that they might receive Christian burial. The flesh
would be by now wholly consumed by the quick-lime. So they
went to the grave to dig up the remains and see whether
they could reasonably be carried with them. To their
amazement they found the body entirely unconsumed, the
limbs flexible, the face bright and smiling, and a sweet
odour coming from the coffin. The saint looked like one
asleep. They decided to carry the body with them as it
was.
Nearly a year had passed since Xavier had set out from
Malacca on the ship that was now bringing back his body.
He had gone out more or less as a fugitive, and had gone


to what people were already calling a failure. God was
to show them what kind of failure it was. A plague was
raging again in Malacca in 1553. Things were far from
joyful. Then the ship bearing Xavier’s remains came to
port. Some were grateful enough to remember all that
Xavier had done there; and a procession was formed to
bring the body to the church. There was a sound of
music in the streets, and many who had lost hope began
to hope again. Xavier had been driven out from Malacca:
but now he was coming back. From the day of his arrival
the plague ceased; and no one else fell ill. The failure was
turned to triumph. Other miracles were worked. Blind
people recovered their sight; sick people were cured, and
one who was at the point of death, on hearing the church
bell ring for Xavier, prayed to him, and was immediately
restored to health. God now began to pour out proofs
that he was pleased, and more than pleased, with the
life of his servant who had died in obscurity and neglect,
but whose name was to resound through the whole world.
The body of Xavier was buried again at Malacca. And,
though it seems incredible, it was buried most carelessly
in a grave cut in rock, and so small that the corpse had
to be forced into it. So rough was the treatment that
new wounds were made, and the blood flowed as from a
living body, in that grave, without a coffin, the body of
Xavier remained for nine months, so loosely covered with
earth that the rain could reach it. No natural cause
could explain how the body had remained incorrupt even
as far as Malacca. Still, after nine months in that
unattended grave, when it was to be removed to Goa, it
was found fresh and flexible as that of a living man. No
one could now doubt that God was honouring his servant.
Prom Malacca came the move to Goa; and fifteen months
after his death Xavier’s body returned to that city, where
it still rests, still incorrupt, though a little shrunken after
almost four hundred years.
In the year 1615, just seven years before the canoniza-
tion of St. Franc’s Xavier, the right arm was detached
from the body in Goa, and brought in triumph to Europe.
Processions were held in the towns through which the arm
was carried on its way to Rome. By miracles and by
still more wonderful conversions, God showed once more
how much he wishes us to honour the saint who so
honoured and served Him. The glory has departed from
Goa; the glory that is of being the capital of the East
and the centre of all commerce there. But a greater and
more lasting glory remains. There is the body of St,
Francis Xavier to which numberless pilgrims come each
year; and great graces and favours are granted to them


ZA THE AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC TRUTH SOCIETY RECORD.
July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
by God It is not a thing of yesterday; it happens today.
In one town in India, St, Francis Xavier appeared in 'a
dream to a pagan who was blind and suffering from
leprosy, and told him to go on a pilgrimage to Goa. The
leper did as he was told; and while he was making a
novena there in the church, he was restored to health
and recovered his sight. Soon he put himself under
instruction and was baptized. For the rest of his life he
said: ‘T would sooner return to blindness and leprosy,
than lose the greatest gift that Xavier asked for me—
the gft of Faith.” It is not only from India that such
stories ccme, but from all over the world, especially from
those places where the special devotion, known as the
Novena of Grace, is performed in honour of St. Francis
Xavier. About that novena something will be said at the
end of this booklet.
SANCTITY OF XAVIER
No one can doubt that St. Francis Xavier is a great
saint. But how did he become a saint? He travelled about
a great deal; but t was not by his travels that he sancti-
fied his life. Globe-trotters are not as a class more ho'y
than those who stay at home. The journeys of the saint
were sanctified by the motive which prompted them all;
and that motive was the love of Christ, and of all men
for the sake of Christ. St. Francis Xavier had a great
personal charm of manner; but it was not this that made
him a saint. That charm was a gift which he used for
God. H s life sanctified the gift, which con'd have been
used for less worthy purposes, or even for bad ones. The
secret of St. Francis Xavier was that he was united with
God. We are all holy just so far as we are united with
God; we should ail be saints if we were fully united with
Him. and if we put away whatever threatened to draw
us away from God. It was by his life of prayer, which is
union with God, that St. Frances Xavier achieved holiness.
That life of prayer showed itself principally in three great
devotions which he always practised.
Xavier’s first great devotion was to the Most Holy
Trinity, that wonderful Mystery of Three Persons in One
God, which God has revealed to us, and which we rejoice
in bebeving on His Word, though we cannot understand the
depth of the Mystery. At his death this devotion showed
itself in the prayer which Xavier repeated unceasingly:
Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son and Holv Ghost. Those
who lived with Xavier tell us that these words were often
his prayer during life; so often that even the pagans who
heard these words and did not know what they meant,
learnt them from Xavier, and repeated them without


knowing why. From the way in which he said the words
“Most Holy Trinity” they felt that there was some power
in them which helped Xavier to do the great things they
saw him do. His second great devotion was to the Passion
of Our Lord. We remember how he held the crucifix in
his hand at the last, and thought of how Our Lord in
His love, died to save him and all men. But it was not
only at his death that Xavier practised this devotion. He
had been faithful to it all his life. In Paris, Venice. Rome
and Lisbon, he spent long hours thank ng God for the
redemption won by the Death on the Cross. In India,
after his day’s work, he was often to be found in the
church, with the crucifix in his hand. Often indeed, he
spent the whole night thus, and in the morning his friends
would find him there. Sometimes he was so rapt in prayer
that he d d not feel the cold, or any tiredness, or hear
or see his friends till they brought him back to himself
by calling loudly, or even by shaking him.
It would be hard to have a great devotion to Our Lord
in His Passion and not have a deep love of the Blessed
Sacrament; for in this sacrament, Our Lord, Who suffered
on Calvary, is present, and He is offered again to God in
every Mass. Xav’er had a wonderful love of the Mass;
and this was his third great devotion. As a priest he
offered to God the price of his own redemption; and in
communion he received into his heart that Lord of love
for whom he did so much. It was no wonder that at his
first Mass, Xavier shed tears of devotion, and that ever
after he celebrated Mass with reverence and love. When-
ever he was m doubt as to what he should do, he put
the whole matter before Our Lord at Mass. He took no
important decision without speaking about it to Our Lord.
His prayer at these times was simp’e, because his love was
great. He had given up what promised to be a brilliant
career for Our Lord’s sake, and he looked for no reward
but the grace to love. Our Lord was not to be outdone in
generosity; and even in the hardest times he so filled
Xav er s life with the sweetest of his peace, that Xavier
cried out: “Enough, O Lord, enough!” One of the most
common pictures of Xavier shows him holding open the
front of his gown over his heart that the coolness of the
air might relieve the burning heat of his loving heart.
Those who were present when Xavier said Mass, tell us
that his face often shone with joy, so that they could
see a brightness sinning round him as he moved quietly
and careful y through the ceremonies of the sacrifice.
When Xavier died, one of Alvaro’s men wrote to his
master: “The great man is dead; he has not much to
show for all he did.” But the failure at the gate of


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
China was only apparent. Xavier had left Goa in high
hopes. He was travelling with Pereira, who was ambas-
sador to the Emperor of China. Xavier was to be presented
to the Emperor, and so would start his work there with
the best possible chance of success. But things turned
out very differently. Alvaro de Ataide destroyed those
hopes at Malacca; and from Malacca, Xavier went on,
hoping to be able to do something in spite of the malice
of Alvaro. But he died like an outcast, without having
started the work he set out to do in China. All this made
Xavier more like to Christ Whom he served. When Our
Lord was crucified outside the gates of Jerusalem, His
enemies taunted Him with failure, and said that His
name would never be heard of again. We know how
wrong they were. The death of Our Lord was His triumph
over the world; by His death He redeemed us all. Xavier’s
.failure too, was like that. It was the beginning of his
triumph. He had offered up not only the career he had
left at Paris and Pampeluna for God; but also all his
labour as a missioner. It was all for God; and it ended
with God. God made of that life and death the triumph
by which the name and memory of Xavier is revered
throughout the world. His life is an example, his holiness
an inspiration to all those who follow his footsteps in
all the missions of the world, and especially to those who
follow the path that he marked out, and bring knowledge
of Christ to China and all the East.
The death of Xavier was in keeping with his life. He
lived for God alone; and he died as He had lived. From
that death he passed straight to the joy of heaven, from
where a stream of graces and miracles flows down on
those who ask his intercession; and he prays for all of
them that they may come to be with him, to adore and
enjoy the Most Holy Trinity, Father, Son and Holy Ghost
for ever.
THE NOVENA OF GRACE
The most popular and widespread devotion in honour
of St. Francis Xavier, is the Novena of Grace, which was
made known by the saint himself when he appeared to
Fr. Mastrilli in Naples. It has been given the name
because of the wonderful graces and miracles which have
been granted to those who make the novena with faith
and confidence.
Three hundred years ago a young man named Marcel
Mastrilli, Pved in the city of Naples. As a boy he had
heard of the wonderful things Francis Xavier had done
for God in India and Japan. He felt a great devotion
to this saint, who died only fifty years before he hitnself


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
was born. In spite of difficulties he obtained admission
into the Society of Jesus in 1618; and he desired above
all things to be permitted to imitate Xavier, by going to
Japan. He did not get permission, for his superiors had
other plans. He turned to plead with Xavier; and his
joy and confidence were great when St. Francis Xavier
was canonized on March 12, 1622. Mastrilli believed that
now his prayer would be heard; taut it was not to be. For
another eleven years, in the course of which he was
ordained priest, he continued his studies and work at
Naples, and Japan seemed as unattainable as ever. Then
in December, 1633, it seemed that the end had come.
Mastrilli was passing through a church in the city, when
a hammer let fall by a workman from a sixty-foot scaffold-
ing, struck Marcel on the temple, and laid him uncon-
scious. It looked as if this had knocked on the head
not only Marcel himself, but also any faint hope he might
still have of going to Japan.
Within a week Marcel was at the point of death. All
hope was abandoned, and the prayers for the dying were
being recited daily. But Mastrilli did not forget Xavier,
nor did Xavier forget him. The saint appeared and asked
Mastrilli: “Will you go to heaven or to the missions in
the East?” Mastrilli replied that he wished to do whatever
was the Will of God. Then Xavier told him to make a
vow that if he recovered he would go to the missions. The
next day, in the presence of his Provincial, Mastrilli made
this vow; but he still continued in danger of death, and
even appeared to grow somewhat weaker. A second
apparition took place on January 3, 1634, when St.
Francis Xavier told Mastrilli that he was not to die now, but
that he would work and suffer much for Christ before
he died, and that he would die a martyr. Before leaving,
St. Francis Xavier made this promise: All who earnestly
ask my intercessio?i with God for nine days, in honour of
my canonization, will infallibly experience the effects of
my great power in heaven, and ivill receive whatever they
ask that will contribute to their salvation. The abundant
fulfilment of this promise is seen in every Novena of Grace
that is made anywhere in the world.
On the occasion of this second visit from the saint,
Mastrilli was so completely cured that he was able that
night to write an account of all that had passed; and
m the morning he celebrated Mass at the altar of St.
Francis Xavier and resumed the common duties that had
been his before the accident. The fame of the miracle
spread far and wide; and the news of the promise led
many to make the novena with great devotion. The won-
derful graces that were granted as the practice of this


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
novena spread through Europe, Asia and America, caused
it to be known everywhere as the Novena of Grace.
What Xavier had foretold to Mastrilli came to pass.
The man whose life had been despaired of on one day,
was on the next, quite fit and well, and not even a scar
remained where the hammer had struck. The permis-
sion he had so long desired was now given him, and
Mastrilli went to Japan, where he suffered martyrdom on
October 17, 1637. He has been declared venerable by the
Church. Between his cure and his death he got many
to make the novena. He also had a design made for a
reliquary to contain the body of Xavier, His design was
carried out some years later, and the magnificent tomb
at Goa bears witness to the gratitude of Mastrilli to his
protector.
Fr. Mastrilli was a very good man; and he was asking
for a very good thing. He got it in the end through St.
Francis Xavier, and he got it just when things seemed
hopeless. His first novena lasted not nine days, but fifteen
years; but that was before St. Francis Xavier had made
his promise. If we make the novena with confidence in
the intercession of the saint, we shall get what we ask,
provided it contributes to our salvation.
PRAYERS FOR THE NOVENA
There is an indulgenced prayer for the novena; and
it is usual to add some other devotional practices when the
novena is made publicly.
The novena is usually made from March 4 to 12, in
thanksgiving for the canonization of the saint which took
place on March 12, 1622. It is made often also from
November 25 to December 3, in preparation for the feast
of St. Francis Xavier. It may, of course, be made at any
other time, either publicly or privately, for the promise
Ox the saint was not given for any particular date.
A common and convenient way of making the public
novena is as follows:
I. A statue or picture of the saint, and a relic if one is
available, is placed in a prominent place on the sanctuary,
with lights burning before it.
2. The Rosary of the Blessed Virgin is then recited in
common.
3. A hymn to the Blessed Virgin is sung by the con-
gregation.
4. The director of the novena gives a sermon or instruc-
- lon on the life of St. Francis Xavier, and draws some
lesson from it.


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
5. After the sermon the priest and people recite these
prayers together:
O most lovable and loving Saint Francis Xavier, in
union with you I reverently adore the Divine Majesty;
and because I rejoice exceedingly for the special gifts
which God bestowed upon you, of grace in your lifetime,
and of glory after your death, I give Him devoted thanks;’
and I beseech you with all my heart to obtain for me by
your powerful intercession the all important grace of
living and dying in a holy manner. I entreat you to obtain
for me also the special grace I desire to obtain in this
novena, (here you may mention the grace, spiritual or
temporal, you wish to obtain). But if what I ask of you
so earnestly is not for the glory of God and for the
greater good of my soul, obtain for me that which is
most suitable for both alike. Amen.
Our Father, Hail Mary, Glory be to the Father.
V. Pray for us St. Francis Xavier.
R. That we may be made worthy of the promises of
Christ.
Let us pray: O God, Who didst vouchsafe by the preach-
ing and miracles of St. Francis Xavier to join unto Thy
Church the nations of the Indies; grant we beseech Thee,
that we who reverence his glorious merits may also imitate
his example, through Jesus Christ, Our Lord. Amen.
6. Prayer composed by St. Francis Xavier for the Con-
version of Unbelievers.
O God the everlasting Creator of all things, remember
that the souls of unbelievers were made by you, and formed
in your own image and likeness. Remember that Jesus,
Your Son, endured a most bitter death for their salvation.
Permit not, I beg You, O Lord, that Your Son should be
any longer despised by unbelievers, but graciously accept
the prayers of holy persons and of the Church, the spouse
of Your most holy Son, and be mindful of Your mercy.
Forget their idolatry and unbelief, and grant that they,
too, may at last know Him Whom You have sent, the
Lord Jesus Christ, Who is our salvation, our life and re-
surrection, by Whom we have been saved and set free to
Whom be glory for endless ages. Amen.
7. St. Francis Xavier’s Hymn of Love is sung by the
congregation.
This hymn is from an original Spanish sonnet, believed
to have been composed by St. Francis Xavier. Whether
he composed it or not, it certainly expresses the manner
of his love for God. The music of this hymn is found
on page 32.


July 20, 1949. (No. 433.)
My God, I love Thee, not because
I hope for heaven thereby,
Nor yet because who love Thee not
Must burn eternally.
Thou, O my Jesus, Thou didst me
Upon the Cross embrace;
For me didst bear the nails and spear,
And manifold disgrace.
And griefs and torments numberless,
And sweat of agony;
And death itself—and all for one
Who was Thine enemy.
Then why, O blessed Jesus Christ,
Should I not love Thee well;
Not for the sake of winning heaven
Or of escaping Hell.
Not with the hope of gaining aught,
Not seeking a reward,
But with a love like Thine for me,
O ever-loving Lord.
E’en so I love Thee and will love
And in Thy praise will sing,
Solely because Thou art my God,
And my eternal King.
8. Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament.
9. Confessions each night of the novena.
10. It is customary to place two boxes at the altar rails
during the Novena. One of these is for the intentions of
those making the novena, which they may write down and
place in the box, which is placed on the altar each morn-
ing during Mass. Of course no name or anything of the
sort is written; and the intention slips are burnt at the
end of the novena. The second box is to contain the re-
cord of the favours granted. This box, too, is placed on
the altar during Mass, by way of thanksgiving; and the
contents are burnt at the end of the novena.
11. If possible, a procession bearing the statue of the
Saint through the church or better, through the church
grounds, is made on the closing day, or on some other day
which is deemed more suitable. A number of hymns can
be sung during this procession, which should take place
before the Benediction of the Blessed Sacrament,


July 20, 1949. (No, 433.)
12. If there is a relic of St. Francis Xavier, the venera-
tion of the relic should take place at the end of devo-
tions, on the last night of the novena.
INDULGENCES FOR THE NOVENA
For each day of any novena made publicly or privately,
an indulgence of three years is granted for the recitation
of the prayer: “O most lovable and loving Saint ” fol-
lowed by the Our Father, Hail Mary and Glory be to
the Father.
A plenary indulgence is granted at the close of the
novena on the usual conditions of Confession and Com-
munion and prayers for the intentions of the Pope.
Note: Those unable to say the novena prayers may gain
the indulgences by reciting the Our Father, Hail Mary and
Glory be to the Father five times daily for nine days
(S.C.lndulg. March 23, 1904; S.P.Ap„ May 20, 1933).
For the Prayer for the Conversion of Unbelievers there
is granted an indulgence of 500 days for each recital; and
a plenary indulgence, on the usual conditions, if the prayer
is devoutly recited daily for a month.
(Pius IX, Rescript, May 24, 1847; September 30, 1862-
S.P.Ap., December 6, 1918, and October 23, 1935).
WATER BLESSED IN HONOUR OF ST. FRANCIS XAVIER
All Jesuit priests, and all others to whom the privilege
has been extended by the Provincial of the Jesuit Fathers,
have the power of blessing water in honour of St. Francis
Xavier. This water is used for the same purposes as or-
dinary holy water, and has been the vehicle of many
graces and blessings, and of not a few miracles granted by
God through the intercession of St. Francis Xavier.
Nihil obstat:
D. P, MURPHY,
Diocesan Censor.
Imprimatur;
igi DANIEL MANNIX,
Archiepiscopus Melbournensis.
The Advocate Press, 143-151 a'Beckett Street, Melbourne






Specialists
in All Classes of
Church Plate and
Brassware
♦
537-339 Bourke Street, Melbourne, C.l.
Telephone: Central 1216 (3 lines)
