

ST. HELENA AS I SAW IT:
BY THE
REV. JOHN WALKER,
GERMANTON, N.S.W.
Extracted from a Travelling Diary.
ALBURY:
ADMS, COOPER, AND ADAMS, PRINTERS, "BANNER" OFFICE.
1886.




ST. HELENA AS I SAW IT.
At about a quarter past 5 a.m. the voice of the first
mate calling from the poop above our port, awakened and
set me a-dressing. It was still the grey dawn of the
morning when I gained the deck, and a thick small rain
falling. Nevertheless, there, on the port bow, loomed the
island of our expectations, and we only hoped that the
rain would soon cease, that we might miss nothing of the
long-expected view. At the same time we could just make
out the receding mail-steamer bound for the Cape of Good
Hope, which, it was pleasant to think, had just delivered
letters and papers for many of us from England and
Australia.
Our first clear view of St. Helena gave the singular im-
pression of a huge mummy lying on its back —the King
and Queen peaks on the left giving the idea of feet ; the
Turk’s Head in the centre looking like hands folded in
front; and the great Barn Bock representing a monster
head. The thin veil of mist brooding over the island
obscured details and heightened the somewhat weird ap-
pearance. As we drew nearer the rain ceased, and clear
and imposing before us stood St. Helena as a solid fortress
of rock. We sailed close under the great sea-wall, and
were charmed with the lovely coloring cast by the rising
sun on the battlements of bare rock. As we kept on,
Flagstaff Hill, rising to a height of 2000 feet, and the
SugarJoaf, a striking conical-shaped hill of nearly half
that altitude, came in view. At the foot of the latter are
two batteries—one at 100 ft., the other at 200 ft. above
the sea-level, and both add to the picturesqueness of the
place. In Flagstaff Bay, between the Barn and Sugar


loaf, flew hundreds of seabirds, some white, others dark-
brown, fishing vigorously, and presenting in tableau vivant
a proverb of their own—“ It's the early bird that catches
the fish !” Then appeared ahead two small boats, manned
each by two brown natives pulling towards us, who pre-
sently, gliding their craft alongside, began vociferously to
offer their services to the captain.
About 7 o’clock we rounded the Sugarloaf, and slowly
crept south-west down the coast towards the anchorage,
which only extends about a mile from the shore. Every
instant as we forged ahead new points of interest met us—
precipitous gorges with sides of barren rock running back
until they revealed some distant island oasis of spring-
green grass, overlooked by a white-faced house; great
masses of scoriated rock of many shapes, every peak of
which, facing the sea, seemed to bear a battery or hold a
cannon on its shoulders.
Before we had reached Eupert Bay, James’ Town stood
revealed, in so far as prospecting Munden Point would
allow. And very well it looked with its old-fashioned
quay, its pretty church spire, and white houses wedged
in between hills of no mean elevation, starting up precipi-
tately on either side. Opposite the town we were pleased
to see an English man-of-war lying at anchor. This
turned out to be H.M.S. Eapid, which had been in the
roadstead about a fortnight.
At 7.25 a.m. we dropped anchor —after taking repeated
soundings—opposite Munden Point, the northern promon-
tory of James’s Bay. Ere this a fleet of some dozen or
more small boats had pulled out from the quay and sur-
rounded us. Each contained two boatmen, half-castes of
different racial types and shades of color, graduating from
the sharp, thin-lipped, small-limbed, bronze-colored
Malayan to the thick-lipped, broad-faced, strongly-built,
true sable Hottentot and Negro. They were much less
noisy than report had led me to expect, only awakening
to a Bourse-like chorus when any new face among us
showed over the ship’s side, when arose the thin cries,
“ Going ashore, sir ?” “ Take No. 16, sir !” “ Don’t forget
No 16, sir!” and so each boatmen paraded himself and
his boat’s number, and sought thus to book our passage


with them. And it afterwards surprised me much how
well they remembered faces, and how the boatman whom
I had encouraged by an uncertain nod picked me out
when I was ready to go ashore.
Scarcely had we dropped anchor before the Government
Health Officer boarded us, when he was immediately sur-
rounded by passengers eager to hear the world’s news,
from which we had been shut out so long. Being of a
startling character, the doctor had a very wide-awake
audience. “ Probable war with Russia 1” “ Complications
about the Afghan frontier !” “ Great excitement in Britain
and throughout Europe !” “Recent rumors of a Russian
frigate cruising about, and consequent scare in St.
Helena ! u H.M.S. Rapid sent to afford protection !” &c«,
&c. . All this and more, accompanied by many interjected
queries and ejaculations of all kinds. The scene can be
better imagined than described. Then followed a con-
fabulation between the Health Officer and our doctor,
succeeded by the granting of pratique and the invasion of
the main deck and poop by male and female St. Helenists.
There were boatmen carrying their touting into the camp;
the coach proprietor, Thomas, distributing printed cards
advertising his horses and carriages; tidy-looking laun-
dresses white, brown, and black—offering their services
to such as might need them; dark fruit dealers with
stalks of golden bananas and baskets of figs and inferior
pears; hawkers bearing burdens of hen-eggs; and native
women, wan-faced but clean and respectable, offering
curios of their own manufacture, chiefly bags, bracelets,
and necklaces ingeniously fashioned of threaded Cassia
seeds, and photographs of the island. It was a bustling
and, to us, a novel scene; but there was no rude vocifera-
ting, and it struck me that these poor St. Helena pedlars
behaved themselves vastly better than would their push-
ing peers of London, or Liverpool, or Melbourne, in
similar circumstances. I did business with several, and
made more than one trip to my cabin with long-coveted
fruit purchased for less than is usual in Sydney—and
with curios to speak for St. Helena among friends in
Britain and Australia.
Hot long after we had reached our anchorage an Ameri


can man-of-war hove in sight, having followed in our
wake, and before we went down to breakfast at 8.15 she
dropped anchor abreast of us, some 300 yards further
from the shore. She was the corvette Lancaster, and had
merely called here to give her soldiers and men a run on
shore before sailing for the Brazils.
Breakfast over, there was a general donning of festive
array, everybody wearing a “ go-ashore” look; the gentle-
men specially presenting a most striking metamorphosis,
as, having laid aside their heterogeneous sea-sombreros
and well-worn jackets, they appeared in all the jaunty
smartness of fashionable black felts and well-preserved
coats. Puggerees which had been put on several hats had,
however, to come off, as a shower fell just as we were about
to start, and there were signs of more. Owing to the
ocean swell, the process of embarking in the small boats
was attended with some slight difficulty. The pull across
was very enjoyable; and the men-of-war commencing _to
salute each other in the suggestive way in which warships
are accustomed to make their acknowledgments, it was
grand to hear the roar of the cannon reverberating among
the rock-masses which towered above and around us.
A nearer view of the coast gave unmistakable evidence
of volcanic action, piles of scoriated basalt everywhere
assuming the most fantastic and irregular shapes. On the
honey-comhed ledges washed by the waves we saw some
good-sized crabs, but oysters, we learnt, were not procur-
able on the island. Approaching the very primitive-
looking stone quay, we hugged the shore to the left and
sighted an artistic natural arch—or “ fly buttress,” as our
architect passenger (I) might describe it among the rocks.
Having reached the end of the quay, the boat was run
stern-on against it, one of the men at the same time fixing
a short pole into the rudder-hole. We had then to mount
by turn on to the stern-rail, grasp the pole, and when the
boat rose with the incoming wave, quickly step on the
quay as we reached its level. To the uninitiated this
method of landing looked risky, but we all, ladies in-
cluded, managed it without mishap. Having paid our
fare (a shilling each), we waited until two other boats un-
loaded, and then, under the wing of Captain G a


party of about a dozen of us sallied forward for the town.
But we did not go alone. Quite a retinue of small brown
boys about us, persistently offering to run on and get
horses, conveyances, or, it seemed to us, to do any mortal
thing we wanted. Having the assurance of the captain
that the only way to stave off the whole body of urchins
was to engage one, I accepted the services of a bright-
eyed, smart boy of ten years, and sent him ahead to
secure a carriage for my wife, Miss M‘D., Mr. M‘V., and
me. Keeping along the quay, on the sea-wall, we were
much impressed by the grandeur of the great cliffs rising
precipitously on our left and ahead, with the little town
between these mountains peeping out at us as it looked to-
ward the ocean; and altogether, with the entire novelty
of the scene, it excited the imagination and refreshed the
eye after three long months at sea.
Some 300 yards from the end of the quay we reached
the gate of the town, approached by quite an old-world-
fashioned portcullis. Both sides of this drawbridge
(which is not now shut at night, as formerly) were lined
by tawny idlers of various ages, who curiously gazed
upon but politely saluted us as we passed. Here, meeting
Thomas, the coach proprietor, I hired from him for the
day a two-horse carriage to hold four, for which we had
to pay £2 10s. We then passed under a blue-stone arch
and out through the city gate —fairly picturesque in itself,
but rendered much more so by the green banyan trees on
either side of it. Having a budget of letters to post, we
at once made our way to the G.P.O.—a memorably unique
depot for Her Majesty’s mails. It had probably been a
military store in the “ good old times,” and consists of
two heavy-looking, ugly stone buildings—one broadside
on to the main street, and quite windowless towards the
town; and another right behind that, and separated from
it by a narrow, prison-like passage, approached from the
street by a double flight of dilapidated steps. Facing this
upstairs intermural lane is an orthodox letter-delivery hole
or trap-window—shut down when we called, and not to
be opened, a native informed me, until 10 o’clock! It
occured to me that 10 a.m. was rather late in the day for
the General Post Office in a metropolitan town to be open


ing, especially on English mail day. Under the circum-
stances, we went across the main street to Jackson’s the
chemist, who has a large shop and branch post office, and
sells all manner of things, from pills and potions and pre-
serves to calico, candles, cornflour, crockery, and curios.
Here we left all our letters, with money for the postage,
which has lately been reduced to 6d. per half-ounce to
England and lid. to Australia.
Messrs. G , E. L , and L being now
mounted on chargers eager to be off, and our carriage— a
low-set, rather elegant vis-a-vis phaeton without any
driver’s seat—having arrived, our party of four took their
seats, and away we went. We were driven by a dusky
postilion mounted on one of the horses; and with three
equestrians leading, and two other carriages (Yictorias)
following, we made quite an imposing cortege. Our
destination was, of course, Longwood, where Napoleon
the Great spent his last years and died. The nearest
way to Longwood is by the road which starts from the
left-hand or eastern side of James’ Town Valley, hut we
had arranged to go by the longest or western route, as
thus we would obtain the best view of the island.
As we trotted up the main street and turned rapidly to
the right up a narrow lane a little beyond the market,
swarthy faces looked out of every door, and groups eyed
us from the footway. At that moment we felt as though
we were vice-regal at least! Having a good deal of uphill
work to do, we were all gratified to find that our steeds
were staunch and well-conditioned. Scarcely had we left
the town before we began to ascend Ladder Hill, the
western promontory of James’s Bay, which rises almost
perpendicularly on that side to an altitude of 800 ft. above
the sea. Straight up the face of this mountain, starting
from near St. James’s Church and the Entrance Gates,
climbs the far-famed ladder which gives the hill its name.
I suppose there is no other such ladder in the world, for I
understand it is 993 ft. in length, 602 ft. high, has a slope
of 82deg., and 699 wooden steps and one stone one , each
step rising llin. The carriage-drive (which we were now
ascending at a very vigorous speed) is a steep zigzag road


9ft. in breadth, and hedged in by a rubble wall about a
foot thick and 3ft. high.
With the slight drawback of one or two light, short
showers, the drive was most exhilarating. Every moment
our view of town and bay became more perfect, and the
atmosphere lighter and more bracing. Then the ascent
was replete with incidents novel to us ! Every hundred
yards, at least, we encountered barefooted natives with
donkeys—one, two, three, sometimes six or eight—vari-
ously laden, but chiefly with gorse from the highlands for
firewood. Owing to the narrowness of the way and the
waywardness of the donkeys, some coaxing and applica-
tion of “ waddy ” on the one side, and engineering on the
other, were required at times before we could pass. Every-
where we were struck by the walking capacities of the
St. Helenists—very young, middle-aged, and very old,
withered people tramping up hill and down dale with
lithe and elastic step. When nearly halfway up the
mountain we passed two very erect officers in uniform on
bay or chesnut palfreys, whom we afterwards learnt were
Colonel Grant Blunt of the Royal Engineers, the Governor
and Commandant of the Forces, and the garrison doctor.
They did not notice us, and not knowing anything of their
ranks we did not salute them, with the exception of G ,
who told us afterwards with great glee that without having
the slightest notion who the gentlemen were, he touched
his hat and said, “ Good-day, Guv’nor !” which salutation
his Excellency gracefully acknowledged.
_ On the summit of Ladder Hill are the fort and exten-
sive barracks, built of stone, where once stood the public
gibbet, on which history telleth “ criminals were hung in
chains in full view of the town and harbor.” On the ridge
above, to the left, is the Observatory established by the East
India Co. over 50 years ago, and long fallen into disuse.
I should have chronicled earlier that our cortege had six
followers on foot, each carriage and horseman having a
gamin who had attached himself as page-in-waiting for
the day. This institution of boy-hanger-on would doubt-
less prove a superlative nuisance when the novelty of the
thing had worn off, but there is no doubt at all that they
provided us with a good deal of recurrent amusement, and


gave a pleasing feeling of being in “ furrin parts ” to the
day’s excursion which was worth the “ tips ” disbursed
in the evening. Up and down hill, whether we travelled
fast or slow, over pebbles, couch-grass, broken metal, or
rock, like shadows they pursued us, and whenever our
eyes caught theirs they grinned from ear to ear. Gates
met with en route they opened, running on before ; they
put on and took off, when required, the peculiar “ shoe ”
brakes of our phaetons; held the saddle-horses when
wanted, and, when we told them, gathered ferns and wild-
flowers. But the custom of their clan which made us
“ carriage folk ” very hilarious and the horsemen, I fear,
a little abusive, was their peculiar habit of hanging on to
the tails of the hacks! and in this they persisted quite
regardless of pace or speed. It was too amusing, for
instance, to see G , who is not a little man, sitting
his high charger with the grace of an officer of the Guards,
scudding across-country with the tail of his hack abnor-
mally prolonged by the addition of a brown boy, who
clung to the streaming caudal appendage with the clutch
of a baby-kangaroo. In justice to G ’s tactical skill
I must add that once or twice by a master effort he
induced his steed to make such a sharp plunge forward
that for a brief space a considerable hiatus was left betwixt
tail and boy, to the blank chagrin of the latter.
Our own particular acolyte I have already alluded to.
In course of conversation, as he ran beside our chariot, I
learnt that his name was John Eiiley; that his father
lived at the Cape of Good Hope; that his mother sup-
ported him, his brothers, and his sisters; that he went to
school and could read and write well ; and he intended
when he was big enough to go away on board a whaler.
The island is too poor to support its present population of
5000 souls, and I expect that a great many of the children
—with which every house and cottage in town and
country seems to swarm—will have to go “ when they are
big enough,” like our intelligent little cicerone John
Eiiley, and earn bread and meat in a perhaps less pictu-
resque but richer land.
In our progress we continued to pass companies of
people—generally females—driving strings of fuel-laden


donkeys in the direction from which we came. So tidy,
if not gaudy, were these women, that I sought an explana-
tion, and found the reason in the day (Saturday), when,
John told me, the hill people usually descend to the town.
Along the roadside we were a little astonished at seeing
in out-of-the-way places iron water-pipes laid for con-
siderable distances. It is thus that the Government uti-
lise the small mountain springs—the sole water supply of
the island—to meet the wants of the scattered settlers and
soldiers of Ladder Hill fort. We also noticed that in
every small brook tubs were sunk, two or three abreast, as
in the sandy beds of creeks in Hew South Wales, thereby
forming small tanks and drinking-troughs for stock.
Within a couple of miles from James’ Town are two
straggling settlements —the first, Douglas Village; the
second, Half Tree Hollow. The peasants’ houses every-
where are of a singular appearance, being built of blue-
stone or trap-rock rubble, and whitewashed; in shape,
oblong and somewhat squat, with almost flat roof —sloping
very slightly towards the corrugated iron.
The route which we had taken brought us in sight of
all the chief rural houses ot the island, and included in
the first half of our drive that of the Anglican Bishop, a
substantial two-storied building, pleasantly placed on the
side of a green hill running down into a ravine; the coun-
try residence of Mr. Solomon (of Solomon, Moss, and
Gidgeon, by far the most wealthy and influential business
firm in St. Helena), an enviable suburban retreat; and
Plantation House, the Governor’s official country resi-
dence, an extensive two-storied structure of no particular
style of architecture, but having a remembrance of the
classic. I was much surprised to find that not only is His
Excellency’s mansion utterly innocent of verandah or
balcony, but such luxuries (or necessities, as Australians
would deem them) are almost entirely unknown on St.
Helena. The only prominent exceptions to this rule that
I can recall are the Hew House at Longwood (which has
a substantial verandah) and “ Maldivia.” Plantation
House is delightfully situated on the side of a hill, at a
distance of about three-and-a-half miles from James’
Town, and having a rare outlook over hill and valley


away to the ocean beyond. The grounds, to the extent
of some 280 acres, have evidently had considerable care
expended upon them in the early days of the colony and
of late years, and the drive through them refreshed us
much with delightful memories and forecasts of England
in spring-time. The shorthorned cattle here and there
browsing looked pictures of sleek contentment, and to us
(mutton-satiated voyagers) gave tantalising promise of
prime beef. Clumps of English oaks, Scotch firs, and
many trees of tropic and temperate climes, give a delight-
ful freshness to the place, and provide a charming setting
for the house itself. Before the mansion stretches a well-
trimmed lawn, being very slowly crossed, when we saw
it, by an immense tortoise reputed to be 100 years old.
The lodge by the iron gate through which we left the
park is showy enough to gratify the most Oriental taste,
having sharp Gothic gables with a flaming-red roof. On
the hill behind Plantation House stands the church of St.
Paul’s, a comely edifice in the early-English style, to seat
500 persons. Not only is the church worth a visitor’s
notice on account of its lovely situation amid tree-covered
green, hills of fairest form—this being one of the most
beautiful spots on the island—but also as being the
Bishop’s chapel, and having about it a well-kept “ God’s
acre,” shaded by ancient cypresses of splendid growth.
The drive for the next two miles is one continual suc-
cession of delightful surprises, every turn in the road
presenting some new charm of scenery in rustic lane or
vale, or gorge or mountain crag. Trees were now no
longer scarce, as on the land upon the littoral, Scotch firs
being specially plentiful. Besides Oak Bank (the
Bishop’s former residence, a very centre of beauty) and
Willow Cottage in the valley below, less pretentious but
clean-looking dwellings dotted here and there on the route
give life and human interest to the landscape. Very
noticeable were the stacks of hay, neatly thatched in old
English fashion, standing on the hill-sides, and each en-
closed by a light, rough fence. Our way at times took us
through lanes recalling Devonshire, with hedges of black-
berry and gorse, and green banks with ferns at foot.
Although published statistics declare that there are on the


island over 4,000 sheep and some 1,500 head of cattle,
yet in our detour through its best-grassed portion we saw
only small stray groups of large stock, and barely a score
of sheep. As far as I could discover from observation,
couch is the chief grass of the place, although we also
passed through considerable patches of buffalo.
Approaching Sandy Bay Ridge, clumps of trumpet-
plants and an unfamiliar tree with a leaf resembling the
loquat skirted the road, with occasional scraps of what
our dusky postilion called u Booly Bush ” hedge. From
the crown of the Ridge the view is magnificent—the
country all round broken up into hill and gorge, some-
times carpeted with green, anon mere grey lichen-coated
rock. Ahead now loomed, bold and sharp, Diana’s Peak,
2704 ft. high, the bftiest point of the island.
But it is when the road abruptly sweeps eastwards that
a prospect reveals itself which I have no words to de-
scribe. I speak in the baldest prose when I confess that
I was bewildered, and solemnised with admiration. Not
having travelled in Switzerland—it never having fallen to
my lot to drink in the majestic glories of the Tyrol—what
I beheld between the mountain fastnesses of lonely St.
Helena at that moment came to me with all the startling
freshness of an unexpected revelation. The perfection of
the great alfresco picture consisted in its marked variety
of form and marvellous contrasts and richness of color.
To describe in detail is, I fear, to minimize the majesty of
totality, but I must make the attempt. From our feet the
land fell away into a rich, radiant valley glistening in the
sunlight; to the right it ran out in a ledge mantled with
greenest foliage, and bearing on its shoulders a white-
fronted house, well named Mount Pleasantto the left,
hill and mountain of infinite modification of outline,
grouped with the most effective regularity \ and beyond
the verdant valleys starting up absolutely naked and fall-
ing away backward to a height of 1500 ft. or 1600 ft., a
mass of bare rock owning tints and shades of color which
my pen utterly lacks genius to transcribe. About half-
way up the side of this solid mountain of stone, towers a
most singular fragment of basalt which goes by the name
of “ Lot” (surely it should be Lot’s wife!), its pinnacle


being 1480 ft. above the level of the sea. To the right,
on the furthest horizon of the rocky battlements behind
“ Lot,” stand out against the blue sky other but smaller
naked columns, called respectively “ Lot’s Wife” and the
<( Asses Ears, both of these being at a higher elevation
than 11 Lot. And as the last touch to this picture of
God’s painting, to the left of “ Lot,” through the vista of
the valley where living green and dead rock meet, opens
out the wide stretch of Sandy Bay, rolling away into the
straight horizon of a great and peaceful sea.
When at length we gave orders to our Jehu to drive on,
it was with sincere regret, and I continued to feed upon
the fading feast until it was quite withdrawn from view by
the intervening shoulder of a hill. Still, although we had
seen and left the loveliest, there was much very lovely yet
to see. Endless variety ! ravines, rocks, gentle knolls a
veritable kaleidoscopic exhibition, in which shape, color,
and grouping were every minute changed.
To give balance to my sketch of the island, and to pre-
vent possible misapprehension, this may be the best place
to state my opinion, formed from observation and enquiry
on the spot, as to the nature and capabilities of the soil.
Our visit was towards the close of an unusually wet
winter, and consequently when the country was looking
its best. Certainly there was no lack of grass, but the
soil is for the most part light and friable, and my experi-
ence in Australia goes for nothing if their herbage does not
prove ephemeral under test of the earliest summer heat,
when only by giving them a wide run can stock be kept
alive at at all. In a sentence, St. Helena cannot truth-
fully be extolled for its fertility. Here and there are
patches, doubtless, which, remaining under favorable con-
ditions, have a degree of richness, but the ordinary pas-
ture-land of the little colony is poor enough and already
stocked up to its limit; and the highlands, having been
recklessly denuded of trees, are yearly becoming barer
and more barren.. It is useless, therefore, for St. Helena
to endeavor to win the world’s favor on the score of the
fatness of her acres, for strangers on the outlook for stock
pasturage or plateaux for tillage will not believe in it.


The “ Old Rock”—as the islanders affectionately name
their home —has few wealth-producing qualities, and is
not likely to make many rich. Nevertheless, with varied
glories of scenery such as hers, and having so memorable
a connection with European politics and history, it only
needs that her unique claims to consideration shall be
bruited abroad to create so general a desire among tourists
and travellers to see her, that masters of all passenger-
ships traversing the South Atlantic would see it worth
their while always to call and spend a couple of days in
passing. Then would voyages to and from South Africa
and Australasia be rendered much less monotonous, and
the islanders would receive very material benefit.
Before leaving this subject I may be allowed to say—
what others with better right, because more intimate local
knowledge, have said in various forms before me—that
although the island is not rich in internal resources, yet if
the St. Helenaists were more enterprising and would give
more attention to the cultivation of cereals, vegetables, and
fruits, they would have appreciably more coin and more
comforts than they now possess. I have a strong convic-
tion that “John Chinaman” would make very much more
of the place !
But I must follow our cortege of carriages and horse-
men as it winds in and out over a level but tortuous road,
which is even now being cobbled by a Government “main-
tenance-man” with the perspirational vigor which distin-
guishes these civil servants, and which is facetiously de-
scribed as the “ Government stroke.” Cavalcades of don-
keys meekly bearing bulky burdens still continue to meet
us, though now at much longer intervals. Brambles,
prickly-pear (which luxuriates all over the island), aloes,
bracken and other ferns, and shapely ghorn-trees catch
the eye from hedge and bank and mountain-side. The
botany of St. Helena is said to be interesting, affording
nearly sixty specimens of indigenous plants; but lack of
time debarred us botanizing even to the most limited
extent. From the top of an elevation known as Brown’s
Hill, we were pleased to see on the slopes opposite two or
three cultivation paddocks in which Indian corn was just
showing above ground. Fields under cultivation are, I


must own, rather rarities on this interesting isle ! At the
foot of the abovenamed hill purls a very tiny stream, in
the course of which falls down a black rock a tiny cascade.
The tiny stream is spanned by a tiny bridge, and along
the course of the stream stretches a broad fringe of wide-
spreading yam-leaves. It may not be known to everybody
that the yam is a kind of dry potato, indigenous to most
tropical and semi-tropical lands, which grows to a great
length and flourishes in damp places, specially by running
streams. They are cooked for table like the potato, and
though dry are very wholesome food. As the New South
Welshmen are nicknamed “ cornstalks ” and the Tas-
manians “ gumsuckers,” so do the St. Helenians take their
sobriquet from the yam, and are termed “ yamstocks.” In
this same stream some of our party gathered some delicious
watercress, which brought back to me boyish memories of
Cheshire and just such brooks as this.
At one point of the road further on, we received a
pleasant surprise in sighting through a. deep ravine de-
bouching on the coast our rare old ship “ Parramatta,”
lying stately and still in the roadstead. Near here, also,
some young lambs skipping about indicated spring at
hand; and canaries in their wild state flitted between the
trees and sang very sweetly among the branches. Our
first glimpse of Longwood was across a deep and wide
gorge of barren rock. The interest in Longwood is almost
entirely dependent upon its connection with the great
exile, for not even a very imaginative local guide-book
could call the site picturesque, for it is flat, with only the
dusky “ Haystack ” peak for a distant background. About
three-quarters of a mile from Longwood, and beside
Halley’s Mount, where the celebrated astronomer had his
observatory during the years he was on the island study-
ing and classifying the stars of the Southern Hemisphere,
is the hamlet of “ Huts’ Gate,” which apparently consists
of St. Matthew’s Church (a very plain place of worship,
built of corrugated iron) and a “ pub.” At the front door
of the latter—which is yclept “ The Travellers’ Rest”—
stood, as we drove up, its podgy little black proprietor,
facetiously nicknamed “ Calaban ” by a previous “ Parra-
matta ” passenger two years ago. Poor child of Ham!


his eyes glistened as he surveyed us and counted heads,
seeing with the glance of a general the pleasant connec-
tion between his bread-and-cheese and our half-crowns.
But alas for him ! our leading driver so strongly recom-
mended the new dining rooms by Longwood-house that
we unanimously decided to push on, and as we drove past
I could not help sympathetically marking the chagrin of
the unlovely little Boniface {ebony face would perhaps be
the more correct title), whose sable features betrayed a
variety of unpleasant emotions as we hurried on to enrich
his rival. Although our thoughts now strayed much and
oft from scenery to the carnal victuals of our hopes, still
the splendid breaks right and left among the hills could
not escape notice; and, creeping luxuriantly over hedges
of clayey soil, patches of “ Mezembryanthemum ’ —com-
monly called “ Pig’s Face in flower, showed out bright
and tropical. Nearing our destination we met two or three
Parramattians who had come on horseback by the < shorter
route and had already dined at Calaban s. The drive from
James’ Town to Longwood, with stoppages, had taken
us just two hours and 40 minutes. All of us were grati-
fied that we had not stopped at Huts’ Gate.when we found
the Longwood hostelry to be a neat cottage in the middle of
a garden in which were growing bananas, &c., and offer-
ing for our accommodation large and comfortably-furnished
parlour and dining-room. It was amusing to see how we
revelled in a walk on the grass-plot and in the garden,
glorying in being once more on terra jirma. All were in
the best of tempers, and not unlike schoolboys out for a
holiday. When the first effervescence of spirits had
passed off we betook ourselves to the parlour and the
latest English papers, which we had got in the town and
now dived into for European news. Then came the sum-
mons which required no repetition, and in a twinkling
one of the merriest and best-natured parties I ever saw
closed around the dining-room table. We were waited
upon by a comely, neatly-attired, black-eyed native
damsel, and the lunch which she spread for us was voted
without a dissentient voice a masterpiece ot country
victualling. To say that the table laughed with an
abundant supply of ham and eggs, snow-white bread, and


freshest butter, jugs of milk and bottles of English ale,
plates of bananas and figs, is a most ineffective presenta-
tion of facts. It conveys an utterly insufficient idea of
the luxuries in which we revelled. To appreciate the
situation it must be remembered that we had been three
months at sea without tasting fresh butter, eggs, or fresh
fruit; and then those who have had a similar experience,
and only those , can sympathise with our sensations.
Ascetics will doubtless be horrified that food should be
so rhapsodically belauded, but still it is simple truth that
we thought that lunch lovely , and gloried in the incom-
parable fresh butter. Certainly we paid enough for what
we got—4s. a head, which, however, included something
for our drivers and runners—but in the circumstances we
would not have foregone the feast for more money; and I
unhesitatingly recommend visitors to patronise the Long-
wood restaurant.
Refreshed and in amiable mood, we started in a body
to see the sights. A pleasant walk of a few hundred
yards up a well-grassed incline dotted over with yellow
“ Everlastings ” brought us to the home of Napoleon’s
ruined hopes—the nest of his rock-bound cage. Of this
famous domicile there is not much to be said. It is not
now as it was when Buonaparte lived in it. The walls
are the same, and the rooms look somewhat as they did to
him, but the whole interior of the house is of modern
workmanship, though after the fashion of the “ original.”
In a sense, therefore, the visitor to Longwood sees the
rooms in which the famous Frenchman lived, and yet he
sees but a copy of them. Notwithstanding that such are
the facts, I felt a real interest in the place, scanning the
various chambers with sympathy, and henceforth Napo-
leon’s banishment and the enforced season of calm which
succeeded his turbid European life will be realized and
understood by me as never before. The house is an old-
fashioned, rambling cottage, with a flight of four or five
steps leading up to the front door. According to a local
historian, this building was originally a farmhouse, and
was at the time Napoleon arrived on the island
occupied as a country residence by the Lieutenant-
Governor. Being selected for the Emperor, the present


front room, with the verandah attached, was added
to the building by Sir G. Cockburn, and formed
the billiard-room and salon de reception. As we entered,
a young lady, daughter of the French officer in charge of
the property—Mr. L. D. C. Morilleau—received us and
showed us through the rooms. It may be well to state
here what is not, I think, generally known, that the old
house at Longwood, with three acres of land about it and
also 23 acres in Napoleon’s Yale, where the famous exile
was buried, were purchased by the British Government
from the private owners in 1858 at a cost of £SIOO, and
conveyed to the Emperor of the French and his heirs in
perpetuity. Both Longwood and the tomb are looked
after by the officer before referred to, who is a civil servant
of the French Government. The house is quite destitute
of furniture, with the exception of small pier glasses in a
couple of the rooms. Severn! notices in French and Eng-
lish in the various apartments reveal the purposes to
which they were put during the residency of Napoleon.
There were reception, drawing and dining rooms, writing
office, bedroom, bath and dressing rooms, and a billiard-
room which could not contain a full-sized table—unless, as
one has facetiously said, the players got underneath !
None of the apartments are lofty, and the houses
could never have been remarkably cheerful. Quite
the most interesting portion of the house to the
visitor is the drawing-room, or “ saloon of the Em-
peror,” as the mural notices name it, because, as we
heard it humorously remarked, there is something in it.
This room, which measures 24ft. by 15ft., was used by
Napoleon towards the close of his life as a bedroom,
and we are informed that “ here, on the sth of May,
1821, the Emperor breathed his last.” On that day
it is related “ the island was swept by a most tre-
mendous storm, which tore up all the trees by the roots.
About 6 in the evening, Napoleon, having pronounced
‘ Tete d’Arnffie,’ passed for ever from the dreams of battle.”
The spot where he died is marked off by a plain wooden
railing which encloses a space 7ft. x sft., in the centre of
which is a marble laurel-crowned bust of the great general
from a cast taken after death, and giving a very different


impression of Buonaparte’s features from that given by any
pictures I have seen. Suspended below the bust and in
front of the pedestal (alas ! that these words recall Mark
Twain’s excruciating joke!) hangs a wreath of immortelles,
from which one of our party, with the true relic-hunter s
instinct, annexes unobserved a white leaf. In the billiard-
room is the visitors’ book, in which, folio wing the multi-
tude of cosmopolitan pilgrims, we inscribed our name and
addresses. Looking hack to earlier pages of the hook I
was interested in reading numerous warm expressions of
love for the great “ Authoritarian” (as J. B. Seeley calls
him) which French soldiers visiting Longwood had ap-
pended to their signatures. Evidently, after so many
years, he who was the idol of his army retains something
of his old position in the memory of many of his country-
men. In this room, also, various knick-knacks made on
the island, photos, of the house, and other curios are ex-
posed for sale, and of course we each of us took away some-
thing as a souvenir. Upstairs, in a wing of the house, i 3
a row of attics which had probably been used by the ser-
vants. I expended much energy in climbing up the nar-
row staircase, and was not rewarded for the effortnever-
theless I consoled myself by practising a snobbish Ameri-
canism, and pencilled on a board of the sloping roof a
name—whose, matters not!
As we were about to depart, Mrs. Morilleau and her
eldest daughter met us, and* the former kindly told us all
she could about the house. It is no part of Mr. Moril-
leau’s instructions from his Government to shew visitors
through Longwood, hut his courteous wife and daughters
do so because the place is one of the chief attractions of
the island. Several of us then accepted a cordial invita-
tion to visit Longwood New House, which is now Mr.
Morilleau’s private residence. It is only about a hundred
yards from the old house, at the foot of the lawn, This
one-storied mansion was built for Napoleon by the British
Government, but although, as we were informed, he used
daily to visit it when it was building, yet he never occupied
it, dying before it was quite finished. It is substantially
built of stone, and has fifty-six rooms of various sizes,
covering an area of about 23,000 superficial feet. The


outlook is over a plateau to the stern, bleak Barn Bock,
which must often have seemed to the beetle-browed soldier
to frown upon and mock his yearnings to be free. New
Longwood has an elevation of 1,760 ft. above the sea.
Being shown into the drawing-room —a spacious and suit-
ably-furnished apartmentin the right wing—we spent a short
time in conversation and examining works of art, &c. We
were shewn a small cavte-de-visits photograph of the Prince
Imperial, bearing the autograph of the ex-Empress Eugenie,
presented to M. Morilleau by the Empress on the 17th
July 1880, when she visited St. Helena on her mournful
return from Zululand, the scene of her son’s violent death
by the assegai of a savage. We had further an oppor-
tunity of seeing the splendid billiard-room (which, how-
ever, has never been furnished), which measures about
40ft. x 25ft. at a guess, and must be 14ft. or 15ft. high in
the clear.
But the day was passing, and a heavy shower, which we
had just escaped, being ended, we cordially acknowledged
the courtesy of our kind lady entertainers, and bid them
adieu. We unfortunately missed seeing Mr. Morilleau, he
having gone to James’ Town on duty. Before leaving we
gathered in Longwood grounds a few flowers and leaves
to keep as tokens of the place where the expatriated Gene-
ral must have ranged with the chafed and desperate spirit
of a beaten man.
After hurriedly swallowing a cup of coffee provided with-
out extra charge by the polite young hostess of the restau-
rant, we jumped into our phaeton and rattled after our
friends, who had gone on some time before. Our way
now lay down a steep zigzag road to the green and secluded
retreat, about a mile off, where Napoleon most loved to
wander, and where on his decease, in the 52nd year of his
age and the sixth of his exile, his remains were laid to
rest. Here they lay for nineteen years, attracting troops
of visitors to the island and the tomb, until in the reign
of Louis Phillippe, on May 5, 1840, the anniversary of
his death, his body was formally demanded from the
British Government, and on October 15th, 1840, was ex-
humed and conveyed to the Hotel des Invalides at Paris.
Itjis a romantic spot—a mountain-sheltered nook, clothed


with greenery and pines, and looking down into a barren
ravine significantly known as “ The Devil’s Punch-bowl.”
The tomb is still kept much as it was 45 years ago, though
there is now neither tombstone or tablet, the ground about
it being enclosed by a circular wooden railing, and the spot
itself (which is covered with slabs) by an iron palisading
some 10ft. sqaare. Fringing the latter on the inside is a
thick row of geraniums, some leaves of which most of us
appropriated and pressed. On a ledge above the tomb is
the little stone-lipped well from whose cool, clear waters
the Emperor delighted to drink. To assuage thirst and
follow la mode , we also quaffed a mouthful and grew
momentarily sentimental. As we were about to depart,
three pretty little daughters of Mr. Morilleau got us to
write our names in the visitors’ book, which is kept in a
very “rough-and-tumble” sort of hut. Here also we found
some cleverly-made acacia seed hand-bags, the children’s
own handiwork, which we bought up as mementos of the
place, and also some small photos, of Longwood, in which
we also invested for the same reason.
Our company, which had been considerably swelled by
fresh contingents of fellow-passengers who had arrived
at the same focus by various routes, now again broke up
—the doctor and others who had walked following us
along the nearest —that is, the northern—road (a distance
of slightly over four miles) to James’ Town, while others
who had ridden by the rear way returned by Plantation
House. During the first half of the return journey the
scenery was for the most part a repetition of such vales
and hills as have been described; and we now were met
by the inevitable donkeys and donkey-drivers returning
from town. At one place, on passing a rambling set of
low buildings on a slight rise to our right, in front. of
which sat and lounged in true colonial manner a gossiping
group of ebony-visaged men, women, and children, I was
rather amused to see a large notice prominently posted on
a board, but fixed, unfortunately for passers-by, upside
down ! It would almost seem as though the art of read-
ing had not been fully mastered by these good people!
When, about two miles from James’ Town, we began
to descend from the inland highlands by a zigzag road, we


caught sight, away down in the valley to the left of the
track, of “ The Briars,” a place of picturesque and his-
toric interest, and now the residence of Mr. Moss (of
Solomon, Gideon, and Moss). It consists of two separate
buildings standing within artistically-laid-out grounds and
garden, and delightfully situated on a verdant plateau
hacked by rocky, precipitous, and majestic hills. _ Ine
farthest-off house, called “The Pavilion,” was occupied by
Napoleon while the necessary additions were being made
to Old Longwood, and it remains as when the famous
captive, 64 years ago, within its walls cursed his fate in
his early experience of its bitterness, and vainly dreamed
that by kicking against the pricks he might turn their
point and slip somehow through the bars of his island
prison. It was in this house that his celebrated dictations
to Las Cases were given.
On the drive down the hill two waterfalls are seen, the
larger, high up behind “ The Briars,” tumbling over the
shelf of a precipice to a great depth, and reminding one
of the thin cascade which is shattered into vapour as it
seeks the far-away bosom of Govett’s Leap m the Blue
Mountains of New South Wales. Nearing « The Briars
the rocks on our right are dotted with geranium plants in
scarlet blossom, growing wild but not luxuriantly. On
these stony hill-sides, also, little white houses are sprinkled
about everywhere, adorned by the minutest vegetable
gardens, in which spare but plucky little cabbages try
hard to live and grow. As the road nears the plateau it
looks down upon and winds with a cool breathing green
dell through which meanders a small stream, proving its
existence by the fresh life which marks its course.. On
the inhospitable rock-ramparts behind, and towering a
thousand feet above “ The Briars,” we make out white
goats moving like chamois and, like them, gleaning rations
from the most hazardous pinnacles.
The creek to which I have alluded, and which is known
as Chubb’s Spring, flows north-west along the valley at
the mouth of which James’ Town is built, and supplies
the town and shipping with abundance of excellent water.
Waving above its banks we also noticed clumps ot
bananas growing.


When about a mile from James’ Town our carriage and
r ’ >P n horseback, parted company with the others
—they keeping right on and reaching their destination by
the long, sloping carriage-road called “side path,” cut
transversely out of the side of the Rupert Hill, the
mountain on the left and eastern side of the town ; while
we, turning sharp to the left, reached by a zigzag road the
level of the creek and Maldivia, the residence of Lady
Ross, where we had arranged to meet Captain G .
Lady Ross is the widow of Major-General Sir Patrick
Ross, a previous Governor of St. Helena. Her
pretty and commodious cottage home is approached
through a long garden, which is carefully tended and rich
m fruits and flowers of many lands, the former including
pomegranates, mangoes, guavas, oranges, shaddocks”
limes, loquats, figs, bananas, palms, ginger, passion-fruit,
and cotton. Lady Ross had been apprised of our coming
by the Captain, who had been and gone, and she met us
at the door with a cordial welcome. Soon we were rest-
mg and chatting in her cosy drawing-room, and presently
refreshing ourselves with tea and biscuits. From all I
saw and heard of this lady, I must speak of her as one
who gladly gives her energies and influence to doing good,
and besides befriending the poor, in which St. Helena is
rich, she has built a church at the end of the town
To provide means_ for these benefactions, she buys*
collects from her friends, and manufactures curios, &c.\
which she sells to visitors, and the gains from these she
devotes to the above-named good purposes. We were
very pleased to be able to help forward practical Christian
work and at the same time get such souvenirs as pilot-bird
breasts, pressed ferns, specimens of a very pretty straw-
work done by the natives, photographic views, &c., which
otherwise we should not have been able so easily and
cheaply to procure. Lady Ross is always pleased to see
strangers, and I would strongly advise all who wish to get
mementoes of the island to give themselves the pleasure of
a visit to “ Maldivia.” After remaining an hour we took
ourselves away, Lady Ross and two lady friends accom-
panying us to our conveyance. The long halt had made


the horses so restive that we nearly had an accident before
the driver could get mounted. ~ .
Our course now lay down a steep declivity and right
through the middle of the town lengthways. At the
upper end of the town the street is only some ten yards
wide, and the dwellinghouses and shops, although built ot
stone, are rather of the “ back-street ” description. In
the main street, into which this road leads, the houses and
shops are large and substantial, Messrs. Solomon and Go.
having specially good premises. The public buildings are
creditable for the most part, and consist of St. James s
and St. John’s Anglican Churches, a Baptist Church, and
Eoman Catholic Chapel; two large hospitals—one civil,
the other military—extensive officers’ quarters and bar-
racks, a public market, mechanics’ institute, two or three
schools belonging to the Government, and the General
Post Office before described. There are also Botanical
Gardens at the south end of the town, which are about as
ill-kept as I have seen, and consist merely of a fair collec-
tion of fruit and other trees, which seem to grow or other-
wise without much interference. To me the most notice-
able and interesting plants in the Gardens are two or
three lofty date and cocoanut palms, the former crowned
with bunches of yellow fruit. Bound the stem of the
date palm, about a yard from the ground, a stnp ol tin
has been fixed, such as may be often seen in Australian
orchards where opossums are numerous. Ihe obj ect
here, I was surprised to learn, is to thwart the rats ot the
island, which run up the perpendicular stems with great
agility, making short work of the succulent dates unless
thus prevented. , .
But we could cast only a hasty glance at everything
and everybody (with regard to the latter, there are said to
be 3000 people in James’ Town, though from what 1 saw
I would have guessed the population at little over two-
thirds of that); the light was failing, and dinner-hour on
board was fixed for 6.30 sharp. So, after buying a few
things, getting a set of St. Helena’s postage stamps, and
a bouquet of flowers at Jackson’s, we drove on to the quay.
Having reached the place of embarkation, we parted
with both driver and runner, after tipping them with is.


6d. and 2s. respectively ; and several boatmen having duly
quarrelled about us for some minutes and told a great
many wicked fabrications to induce us to patronise them,
we eventually cut the Gordian knot by engaging the dingy
which had brought us over in the morning, and in eight
minutes thereafter, laden with flowers, curios, &c., &c.,
we managed to get safely aboard the “ Parramatta ” in
good time for dinner. And what a meal was that for
clamour of tongues ! Though all well tired, we were,
with a few solitary exceptions, in excellent temper, having
th® day to the full j and now the comparison of
notes and interchange of impressions gave everybody
something to say, so that we made quite the liveliest meal
of the voyage. After dinner some read home letters,
others papers, others discussed the prospects of war, while
yet others exhibited and compared photographs and curios.
Among the most valuable of the latter was a very perfect
piece of native carnelian, deftly cut on the island into the
form of a Bible, with a raised cross on the back, the pro-
perty of the Rev. 0. H. B . The carnelian is found
in Turk’s Cap Bay, on the north-east side of the island,
and is of good quality. Among my purchases which I
have not specified were some knob-headed vine walking-
sticks, which we obtained in the mountains from a little
dark girl for the moderate outlay of Is. each. X also pur-
chased in James’ Town some issues of the St. Helena
Guardian, & small four-paged fourpenny weekly journal
published in the town, and evidently from its appearance
and the tone of some of its paragraphs not a fortune-
making venture for Benjamin Grant, its printer and pro-
prietor. . I have considerable sympathy with a newspaper
man trying to run a journal where there are plenty of
people but very few dollars! From this broadsheet I
learn that many of the islanders are dissatisfied at the
gubernatorial arrangements, and a movement is on foot to
petition Her Majesty the Queen to appoint a civilian as
Governor, allowing Colonel Blunt to fall back into his
original position as Commandant of the Forces. Although
I have no reliable figures, yet I understand that the
garrison numbers close on a thousand men of all
grades. :


On referring to the chart of St. Helena, I find that
one way or another, from the ocean and inland, we have
managed to-day to see about three-fourths of the island,
the extreme length of which east and west is only 10 8
standard miles, and seven miles north and south.
It may he well to complete the foregoing sketch of this
interesting little isle by giving the following further par-
ticulars gleaned from the South Atlantic Meonoer and
other sources. The area of the island is about 47 square
miles, or 30,000 acres, of which 1133 are cultivated
7652 acres pasture, and 21,515 are waste . longitude
of St. Helena is 5° 42' west, and its latitude 15 55 south.
It was discovered by the uese dmir f bo^ o
Nova Galago on St. Helenas Day 1502. About ten
years after B a disgraced Portuguese
Lopez, made this his home, aud cultivated its resources
with energy for a few years, until he was recalled to his
ln 1640 the Dutch attempted to establish a
settlement, relinquishing it to the English East India
Company in 1651. In 1652, by the treachery of one of
the inhabitants, the Dutch again obtained possession, but
it was soon recaptured by three British sloops-of-war, and
thereafter granted by Charles 11. to the Inffia C .
In 1836 St. Helena was transferred to the Crown tor
form of government in this tiny colony is some-
what peculiar, and consists of a Governor representing the
Queen and a Legislative Council of three, representing
the church, army, and finance, viz., the Anglican
the Commandant of the Eorces, and a member of the firm
of Solomon, Gideon, and Moss. The Gojw« bemg^ at
nresent also the Commandant, I presume that the Council
now only consists of two. The Governor besides dis-
chargingfte special duties of that position, fills an extra-
ordinary number of offices, civil, military,
for which he receives the startling salary of £9OO per
annum ' The Colonial Secretary receives £250 , the
Bishop, I understand, receives from the Government fo
his public services £4OO a-year.


Viewed geologically, St. Helena bears distinct traces of
volcanic action, and it has been supposed to be the shat-
tered remains of an ancient continent connected in former
ages with the other rocks in the South Atlantic. The
shores abound with fish, especially mackerel and albacore
(we saw one of these latter hanging up on the quay which
must have measured 4ft. in length), which form the staple
food of a large number of the inhabitants who otherwise
would starve. The island is free from snakes or reptiles,
but there are scorpions, and we discovered a centipede
among some ferns which we brought away with us. As
to the climate, although the thermometer does not range
higher than 85°, or perhaps 87°, yet it must be remem-
bered that this is in the tropics and right in the course of
the constant S.E. trade winds; so that the climate can
scarcely be bracing, and I believe that consumption claims
more than its share of victims. The island provides for
sportsmen a moderate supply of game, including phea-
sants, partridges, and rabbits. Both pheasants and rab-
bits were seen by some of our passengers in the high
country. St. Helena seems to have been retrograding
every year since the opening of the Suez Canal, before
which time the number of ships visiting the Bock was
very large, and the trade consequently brisk. So great
was the falling-off, however, that in 1881, according to
published returns supplied by the ships’ agents, only 523
ships called, and in the year following 497. This year the
descension is maintained, for during January, February,
and March only 79 vessels had put into the roadstead,
from which it would appear that the probable total for the
year will be considerably under 400. Ships getting their
tanks replenished with water here have to pay for it to
some tune, viz., for every ton of 252 gallons, ss. to the
Government, and ss. 6d. for having it put on board. The
price of stores is correspondingly high : for example, beef,
although it has been recently lowered in price, is sold
wholesale at 18d. per lb., and mutton the same; pork
costs Bd. per lb. live weight; fowls 55., and ducks 7s. per
pair; and eggs 2s. per dozen. Sweet potatoes, which
grow plentifully on the island, fetch Bs. per cwt.; while
the price of the ordinary “ apple of the earth ” is 16s.


But of statistics this must be enough. The last thing
before turning in for the night, I went on the poop,
whence rain had banished us for awhile, and there was
delighted to catch the gay music of a drum and fife band
cheerily dancing over the waves from H.M.S. Rapid. But
I was ready for bed, and at an early hour was soundly
sleeping. The next morning (Sunday) we had breakfast
at 8 a.m., and at 9 o’clock eight of us went ashore, three
to attend service at the Roman Catholic chapel, and the
rest to have another walk on land and a last look at the
town before church-time. Ascending two rises of the zig-
zag road up the side of Ladder Hill, we got an excellent
bird’s-eye view of the whole town and bay. All along the
west side of the town, at the back of the main thorough-
fare, a thick fringe of unroofed, ruinous, very desolate-
looking habitations present irrefragable evidence of the
degree to which the colony has fallen back of late years.
Descending upon 'he town at the south end, we came upon
the cemetery, enclosed by a low stone dyke. It is now
no longer used—except as a receptacle for the garbage
and rubbish of the town ! Surely for the sake of common
decency, not to plead other reasons, the authorities should
forthwith do something to give the place an appearance
more in keeping with its sacred associations and character.
Turning northwards we looked in at the Botanical Gardens
above alluded to, and thence walked on to St. James’s
Church, beside the Entrance Gates. This church is the
largest in St. Helena, and will seat 700 people. It is
strongly built of stone, and stuccoed with a peculiar
brown, mudlike plaster, which gives it the appearance of
yellow freestone from the roadstead. Its architectural
siyle is the decorated or middle-pointed. Having pushed
on ahead of our party, I reached the church before any of
the congregation had arrived, and on entering, the clergy-
man of the parish, the Rev. J. C. Lambert, encountered
me and cordially invited me into his vestry. Then came
a pressing request to assist in the service, and I willingly
consented to preach. The subsequent service had, to
speak of no higher, a novel and romantic interest for me.
The choir, which was a large one, consisting of ten boys
and six or eight men of deepening shades of colour, were


white surplices, and the congregation,
though not large, was very unique in its constituent ele-
ments. Towards the front sat the captain, doctor, and
ten or more passengers from the “ Parramattaa naval
officer in uniform from the American man-of-war “Lan-
caster;” the ex-Colonial Secretary Knipe, &c. Further
back a row of red-coats from the Garrison ; to my right
(from the pulpit) Mr. Solomon and family and other lead-
ing white citizens; in various other parts of the church
white people of all degrees of social status ; then here,
there, and everywhere, coloured natives of all shades, from
ultra sallow to shiny black ; and lastly, many children,
white, brown, and black. I preached from Rev. m.,
20, and probably because I was a stranger the attention
from all was most marked. At the conclusion of the ser-
vice the Communion of tbe Lord’s Supper was adminis-
tered, some half-dozen of our passengers, with the captain
and about 20 islanders, remaining and partaking. Mr.
Lambert was very desirous that I should preach in the
evening, but the captain told him we had to sail after
lunch; so we parted with mutual expressions of goodwill,
and, accompanied by Mr. Solomon (of S., G., and
M.), returned on board our good old ship. After lunch,
Mr. S. and two ladies who had favoured us with their
company to this meal, left for shore, and immediately after
the order was given to “ Weigh anchor.” This took a
very long time owing to something going wrong with the
steam-engine which should have worked the windlass,
and it was 3 o’clock before the anchor was got off the
ground and we could swing round for sea, while the tars
shouted at the windlass-lever that prettiest of sea-shanties,
“ We’re homeward bound.” During all this leisurely
process, hundreds of faces quizzically watched us from the
two frigates, but as we began to move they both dipped
their ensigns to us, which compliment we respectfully re-
turned. For the next two or three hours all binoculars
and telescopes were in requisition, taking in the features of
the south-western coast-line, and when at sundown a gauzy
veil of mist fell over the receding island many of us regret-
fully said or thought a last “Farewell to St. Helena.”




