

ST.JUDES'
CHURCH OF ENGLAND
CARLTION..
JUBILEE
1866-1916


A BRIEF SUMMARY
ON the 22nd August, 1864, the Rev. John Barlow,
Dr. Fletcher, Messrs. Johnson, Lascclles and
=~-=yj Linacre, met at St. John’s Parsonage, Queens-
berry-street, to consider the question of erec!:-
ing a church in Carlton.. A committee was.
* formed, consisting of ths Rev. John Barlow, Dr.
Fletcher, Messrs. Linacre, Cupit, ReiLy, John-
|s|||| son, Mahalm and Lascelles, by whom a circular
was issued appealing for donations.. Ths follow-
ing names were added to the committee in
November:—Messrs. Blythe, Bristow, Henry and Walls. Mr. Las-
celles was appointed Secretary, and Dr. Fletcher Treasurer.
Tenders were called for in January, 1866, for the erection of a
temporary building for church and school purposes. Divine service
was first conducted on Easter Day, Ist April, 1866. The Rev. John
Barlow preached at 11 a.m., and the Rev. C. Stuart Perry at 7 p.m.
Bishop Perry preached in .the church on 15th July, 1866.
In March, 1866, the Rev. Charles Stuart Perry came to Carlton
to take charge of part of the Parish of St. John’s, of which the Rev.
John Barlow was the Incumbent, and the small wooden building was
soon unable to accommodate the steadily increasing congregation.
So greatly did God bless the work, that in April it was decided to take
immediate steps for erecting a stone or brick building, to be called
St. Jude’s Church. Carlton. Plans were prepared, and on 27th Sep-
tember, 1866, the tender of Mr. John Pigdon was accepted for the
erection of a portion of the church.
The foundation stone was laid by Right Rev. the Lord Bishop
of Melbourne on Thursday, 18th October, 1866. A copy of the hand-
bill which was used for the occasion is framed and hung in the
Vestry; a facsimile of it is given in this Souvenir. The following
quotation is taken from the report which appeared in the “Argus"
of 19th October, 1866, of the Bishop’s address:—
“The object of their assembling together was to ask God’s bless-
ing upon the work, that it might be begun, continued and ended in
God. His opinion was that, if they fully appreciated the efficacy of
prayer, they would make more use of that means of grace than they


■did. Whatever business they undertook should be begun, continued
•and ended in supplication for the blessing of God, for our happiness
in the present life, and prospect of happiness in the life to come,
depended entirely on the Divine favor. But what an appropriateness
there was in the invocation of the favor of Almighty God on such
•an occasion as this, when they were commencing a building which they
particularly called ‘the House of God,’ because it was a House in which
they hoped His Presence would be specially manifested—a House
in which they and their children for generations to come might hear
God’s Word preached—that Word which alone could make them
wise unto salvation, whatever some men might say about it. When
they thought of the various solemn objects to which such a building
was to be devoted, how could they begin it otherwise than with
prayer for God’s blessing upon it? His earnest hope was that as the
edifice had been begun in prayer, it would be carried on in the same
spirit, and that, when completed, it would be similarly consecrated
to the service of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.”
Divine service was first held in the church on Sunday; 3rd March,
1867. The Rev. Dr. Bromby preached at 11 a.m., the Rev. S. L.
Chase at 3 p.m., and the Rev. C. Stuart Perry at 7 p.m.
In 1863 the Parish was constituted, and the Rev. C. S. Perry
appointed Incumbent. The original boundaries were from the
■corner of Elizabeth and Queensberry-strcets running east, thence to
Nicholson-street, thence north to Park-street, thence west to Sydney-
road, and thence southerly to the starting point.
It was evident that God was bestowing His blessing upon the
work, for, in 1868, the present large and commodious Vicarage was
erected, the contractor being Mr. J. Wright.
Still further progress was made, and a meeting of parishioners
■and seatholders was held on the 19th January, 1869, to consider the
advisability of completing the church, in order to make provision
ior the increasing number of worshippers. Mr. Henry Hcnty, one
of the Trustees, presided, and pointed out the fact that the enlarge-
ment of the church was absolutely necessary. The following resolu-
tion was carried unanimously:—“That the Trustees be requested to
•draw up a scheme for the enlargement of the church, and to submit
the same to a meeting of the parishioners.”
The undermentioned gentlemen were appointed to be members
of the Building Committee, viz.:—The Trustees, Churchwardens, Dr.
Fletcher, Dr. Hardy, Messrs. Milne, Rickards, Francis, Derham,
Parkin and Flower. Several of those present made pro-
mises of financial assistance.


A beautiful marble memorial tablet, which was erected to his
memory in the church, bears the following inscription:—
“To the beloved memory of the Rev. Charles Stuart Perry
Born 27th July, 1829, ‘Fell asleep in Jesus’ February 27th, 1887. The
Parish of St. Jude was formed, and this Church erected, chiefly
through his exertions. For twenty-two years he laboured faithfully
for his Parish and people as ‘a good Minister of Jesus Christ.’ This
tablet was erected by the congregations and friends, who loved and
honoured him while living, and to whom being ‘dead he yet
speaketh/ ’’
The Rev. J. T. Evans was locum tenems from Ist January to
24th June, 1838. The Rev. Julius Lewis, a former scholar, was
appointed to the vacant Incumbency, and began his ministry on the
Ist July, 1888.
It was apparent that a Parish Hall was an absolute necessity
for the work, and in 1891 plans were prepared and a contract let
for £1561. The memorial stone was laid by the Right Rev. Bishop
Goe on the 7th November, 1891- Mr. Henry Rickards read the
scroll containing the history of the Sunday School, which was placed
in the cavity of the stone. The inscription on the silver trowel,
which was presented to the Bishop, is as follows:—“Presented to
the Right Rev. F. F. Goe, D.D., Lord Bishop of Melbourne, on the
occasion of laying the memorial stone of St. Jude’s Sunday School,
Carlton, November, 1891.” The trowel is now in the possession of
the Vicar, having been forwarded to him by the relatives of the late
Bishop Goe. The building was completed in February, and formally
opened on the 24th March, 1892.
Two Parochial Missions were held, one by the Rev. Canon
Flower, M.A., and the second by the Rev. W. D. Villiers Reid, each
being productive of great spiritual blessing to many souls.
On January 31st, 1898, the Rev. Julius Lewis resigned the Incum-
bency to accept the position of Archdeacon of Tamworth, in the
Diocese of Grafton and Armidale, New South Wales.
The Board of Nominators selected the Rev. Edwin Rodda, of
St. Saviour’s, Collingwood, and he was appointed as the third
Incumbent on the 22nd February. During his Incumbency, a
Mission for young people was conducted by the Rev. H. Braddock
and Mr. Edgar Shelly, with excellent spiritual results.
The organ and choir were removed from the gallery to the
chancel in 1900, and the choir was surpliced.
In September, 1902, the Rev. E. Rodda resigned through
indifferent health, and accepted the less strenuous work of the Parish
of Sorrento. He is now on the retired list of clergy.


The choice of the Board of Nominators fell upon the Rev. John?
Good, of Christ Church, Essendon. He was licensed to the Parish
on the Ist October, and inducted by the Yen. Archdeacon Hindley
on the 3rd October. Shortly after his appointment he conducted a
successful Mission in the Parish.
In 1903 Miss Landells was licensed as Deaconess, and did excel-
lent work. In consequence of her approaching marriage, she resigned
in 1906. Sister Agnes began work in February, 1914.
In 1907 the interior of the church was renovated, at a cost of
nearly £4OO, and in 1911 the Council of the Diocese spent £4OO in
repairing the Vicarage.
The Rev. W. T. C. Storrs, M.A., conducted a Mission in
November, 1913, and in 1914 Mr. Clark, of the Children’s Special
Service Mission, was a means of great blessing to our young people
through his mission.
A few of the old parishioners are still residing in the Parish, viz.,
Mr. and Mrs. John Williams. They were present at the first service-
held. Mr. Williams has established a record in connection with the
choir, his membership extending over 50 years. Mrs. Williams was
one of the candidates at the first confirmation in 1867, and is still
an active worker in the church and Sunday School. Mrs. Kemp,
who is considerably over 90 years of age, has only recently removed'
from the Parish, while Mr. Henry Rickards is still a resident.
Another record is that of Miss Ellis, who has been on the Sunday
School teachers’ staff for over 44 years. Miss Ellis has charge of
the Kindergarten department.
Owing to the invaluable financial assistance granted by the
Council of the Diocese towards the stipend of a cprate, the Parish
was privileged to have the following at work for short periods, viz.:—
The Revs. E. Walker, R. Long, Th.L., C. P. Lee, Th.L., and A. R.
Mace, B.A. Unfortunately, the Council is unable i to contribute any-
thing towards the stipend of a curate at present.
The first confirmation service took place on 23rd June, 1867, when
25 candidates were presented to the Bishop for the laying on of
hands. The total number confirmed to date is 918.
The dates on which the Bishops of the Diocese preached for
the first time in St. Jude’s are as follows:—Bishop Perry, 15th July,
1866, in temporary church; in new church, 25th August, 1867; Bishop
Moorhouse, 10th November, 1875; Bishop Goe, 22nd May, 1887;
Bishop Clarke, 26th July, 1903.
The first baptism was on 15th April, 1866, and for the remainder
of that year 42 were baptised. The total to date is 11,137.
The first marriage was celebrated on 24th May, 1866, and the?
number in the register is now 1551.


Office-Bearers of the Church, Jubilee Year, 1916
Vicar:
Rev. J. GOOD.
Deaconess:
Sister AGNKS.
Churchwardens:
Messrs. J. Hornsby. F. K. Oldmeadow. R. J. Woods.
Vestrymen:
Alessrs. J. W. Gaythorpe. J. Lennox (Hon. Treasurer). R. A. Mooney
{Assistant Secretary), j. Selwood, H. Sutton (Hon. Secretary, absent
on leave).
Parochial Nominators:
Messrs. T. H. Allison, J. I’.. J. Hornsby and H. Rickards.
Representative in Synod;
Mr. j. Armitage.
Auditors:
Messrs. T. Davies and W. H. Heggie.
Verger:
Mr. G. Tranter, 46 Me 1 hvraith-street. North Carlton.
ORGANISATIONS.
Choir:
Organist and Conductor; Mr. Waite.
Hon. Secretary; Miss Moira Good.
Hon. Treasurer: Mrs. Woods.
Members; Messrs. Barlow, Budds, Clark, Good (on active ser-
vice), Lennox, Miller, McKinley, Williams, Wills; Mesdamea Bolitho,
Boxall, Lennox. Woods: Misses Boxall, Clark, A. Clark, Field,
B'ostcr, M. Good. Hamilton, Kemplay, Knight, Marshall. Norris,
ißogerson, Snow, Warren, Williams.
Organ Blower; Master C. O’Neill.


The Choir, Past and Present.


On the 2nd March, 1885, the northern portion of the Parish was
separated, and formed into a new one, named St. Michael’s. The
work of God has been greatly blessed in the daughter parish.
The Parish has been a recruiting ground for the Ministry, and
the following clergy have been connected with the church, some as
scholars and Sunday School teachers, viz.; —The Revs. J. Caton, A.
Caffin, E. Veal, Dean Lewis, Canon Hancock, B. W. Miller, C. A.
Brewer, F. W. Ramsay, K. E. Hamilton.
The Mission Field has claimed some workers from St. Jude’s.
The Rev. F. W. and Mrs. Ramsay are in New Guinea; Rev. K. E.
Hamilton was in the Sudan, but is now working under Bishop Pain
in Gippsland; and Miss Armfield is in West China. There are
branches of the Gleaners’ Union, Girls’ Missionary Band and Sowers’
Band. The Gleaners are partly responsible for Mr. Joynt, Our Own
Missionary, at the Roper River.
The Ladies’ Guild was formed in July, 1903, and has fully
justified its existence. Its object is for the glory of God in furthering
the spiritual and temporal work of the church. Several members
are District Visitors, and their work is greatly valued in the Parish.
Financial assistance of a very substantial nature has been afforded
the Vestry.
Sister Agnes is in charge of the Mothers’ Union, and a quiet,
steady work is being done for the Master. The weekly meetings
are proving to be times of blessing to many.
The work of the C.E.M.S. has been in abeyance for a time,
but another start has been made, and, with God’s help, there should
shortly be a band of keen, earnest men in the Parish praying and
working for souls.
The Girls’ Guild still continues on its successful course.
The “Parish Paper” has completed its twelfth year of publica-
tion, and enters upon the new year with the prayer that God will
use it greatly for His glory.
Wonderful results have followed the adoption of the principle
of straight-out giving for the work of God. In answer to prayer,
and with the generous assistance of many, a large burden of debt,
£2OOO, has been paid off.
The following is from the “Parish Notes” of November, 1907: —
“DIRECT GIVING.—Since October, 1903, the sum of £1326 has
been raised over and above the ordinary revenue, for the payment
of debts and repairs. Comment is unnecessary. Thanks be to the
Lord.”
The call of the Master comes afresh at this Jubilee season; a
definite call to fresh surrender to the Lord Jesus Christ, as King


and Saviour, then in humble reliance upon His promise to “Go for-
ward” in the work, seeking, according to His word, first His King-
dom, that is the salvation of precious souls, and then His abundant
blessing upon the work and every individual in the Parish.
In looking back over the past 50 years, and realising what has
been accomplished through the loving and ever-ready assistance of
the devoted band of workers who, never “weary in well-doing,”
have faithfully and loyally rallied round the various clergy, holding
up their hands in prayer, as Aaron and Hur did to Moses, and thus,
by God’s grace, making it possible for them to accomplish so much
in the name of the Lord. The opportunity of using this Souvenir
to convey to them deep and heartfelt thanks is gladly availed of.
It is impossible in this brief summary to thank all who have, by
prayer and loving self-sacrifice, helped to make dear old St. Jude’s
what it is; but the Master knows, and loves, and cares, and to Him
we ascribe all honor, glory and praise for what has been accom-
plished through such weak instruments.
“This one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind,
and, reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press
toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus.” —(Phil, iii: 13-14.)
The Vicarage.


SUNDAY SCHOOL STAFF
Superintendent;
THE VICAR.
Assistant Superintendent (Primary);
Miss Baker.
Assistant Superintendent (Kindergarten):
Miss Ellis.
Hon. Secretary:
Mr. W. F. G. Williams.
Hon. Assistant Secretaries:
Messrs. L. Budds and R. A. Mooney.
Hon. Treasurer:
Mr. Brenton Good (On active service).
Hon. Acting Treasurer:
Mr. L. Budds.
Hon. Librarian:
Mr. A. Barlow.
Organists:
Mr. L. Budds: Misses Howard, Kemplay and Richardson.
Teachers:
Mr. Gaythorpe; Mesdames Baddeley, Veale, Williams; Sister
Agnes; Misses Baddeley, Baker, Booth, Drummond, Ellis, Good, E.
Good, M. Good, Kemplay. Knight, Norris, Richardson, Warren,
Wright.
Junior Helpers (Primary and Kindergarten):
Misses Cheese, Day, M. Good, Howard, Jose, Mayne, Morgan,
Nicholls, B. Pender, Snow, Soulie, Stephenson, Veale.


The Ladies’ Guild:
President: The Vicar.
Vice-Presidents: Mrs. Good, Mrs Williams,
lion. Secretary: Mrs. Woods. Hon. Treasurer; Mrs. Allison.
Committee: Mesdames Denham, Freeman. Heydon, Hornsby
Rodriquez; Misses Ferguson, Field, Good.
Gleaners’ Union:
President: The Vicar.
Hon. Secretary: Miss Kemplay.
Box Secretary; Miss Moira Good. Librarian; Miss Knight.
Literature Secretary; Miss M. S. Good.
Girls’ Missionary Band:
Sister Agnes.
Sowers’ Band:
Misses Good and Kemplay.
Mothers’ Union:
President: Mrs. Good.
Girls’ Guild;
President: Miss Eileen Good.
Hun. Secretaries: Misses Schuyler and FMwards.
Hon Treasurer: Miss Moira Good.
Instructress: Miss Doyle.
Church cf England Men’s Society:
President; The Vicar.
Hon. Secretary: Mr. Budds. Hon. Treasurer: Mr. G. Wills.
Delegates: Messrs. Barlow and Budds.
Young People’s Club:
President; The Vicar.
(Boys).
Vice-President: Mr. Ga} r thorpe.
(Girls).
■Vice-President: Miss Booth.


