

St. Joseph's College
DIAMOND JUBILEE
1875
1935




Dedication
Ja stie«d<i ai .a 93 ene|acfoArt;
Jo fParti and fiterteni fJupi&j
Jo tL Staff of
Si. Caffege.
Envoy
Cf fuJtime o( Wo a A and piay,
Oil dfudmud iiiantAd an 3 deaiaud wAifed,
loul,s «( miatA and timed a( dmifed,
WamUinyd *AaouyA Aappy meadd,
Cf aecoat) o( out Jayd and deedd.
Ond you, wAa dean iAede payed tAnouyA
. Jaude, (oa a moment, ad you do,
So paay if,at We, ad (oat A We yo
>/nta tAc yeatd We may not A„oW,
find a dofaee (aa oua needd
V)ll.id 3ayd and Ain3£f 3ee3d.


St. Joseph's College
HONG KONG
DIAMOND JUBILEE
1875-1935


To My Alma Mater
(St. Joseph's College)
With tender emotion
And earnest devotion
I love to recall my boyhood’s bright days
When unto full measure
My hours were a pleasure
In the hall of St. Joseph’s—in the light of her ways!
I shall never forget
What I owe to thee yet
Or find aught on earth that is equal to thee:
Wherever I roam
1 shall ne’er find a home
Such as thou, Alina Mater, wert once unto me.
I still love to dream
Of our glorious team
In the football eleven, now famous in story.
With its victories many
And defeats few, if any,
And its well deserved title to fame and to glory.
There’s many a College
Where learning and knowledge
Alone are the subjects of praise and song:
We will give them their due
But to thee we’ll be true
Who taught us in virtue abrve all to be strong.
I thank you then, Brothers,
Not forgetting the others
Who cared for me kindly in weal and in wo 3 :
But I know your reward
In the peace of the Lori
Is greater thin aught which this world cm bestow.
J. B. IT.


Dost Boly Father
Ping P.P.Y
r °tt>cr %ft?pfXU, yiiwtor of ogepb's rssotig . cmo;, prostrate
femtlLJs at ttx feet of ijcmr 1l 3 olntegg. humhti) tvgs the _
F r »tSfcpjp& ?&ipasfo(ic * V'cnecficfions
for tf v pupils' Ttx v alumm, ttvir fatuities, Jit tfx~ friend anO benefactors
occasion of tlx butnemb jmtntec of ttx' oUegrc^>
■ ?>*-•'«.'» CZ? <*»!»-/ £***<■'* _ -y~J.
njt c-t A-i-t-i y sty // ‘tyy 0
CZ


HIS MAJESTY KING EDWARD VIII.


God bless the King
Whose reign has now begun:
Endue bim with Thy strength and grace
Till ev’ry vict'ry’s won.
Hear, Lord, our prayer.
Let our cry come to Thee,
find me mill bless and praise Thy name
Tor all eternity.
yincent Ware/////
The photo on the page opposite is the reproduction of the
autographed picture presented to the College by Tlis Majesty in
1922, on the memorable occasion of his visit to the Colony as
Prince of Wales .


The Most Honourable Brother Junien-Victor
Our Superior General


J. M. J.
INSTITUT des FRÈRES
DES
ÉCOLES CHRÉTIENNES
Maison Saint-Joseph
LEMBECQ-LEZ-HAL
(BELGIQUE)
Lembecq, le 3 Mars 1936.
Mon T. C. F. Stephen, Directeur du College de HONGKONG (Chine)
Mon Men cher Frere DIRECTEUR ,
En m annonpant les prochaines solennites par lesquelles vou,h vans proposes de
celebrer lea iSoees de Diamant de votive beau< College , vous m'avez cause une reelle
satisfaction .
C esf de grand cceur quo je m'nnirai a vous et d eos nombreux Eleves, actuels et
ancicns , en cctte memorable cireonstance.
Que de bienfaits de toute nature out etc accordes par la divine Bonte, a vos
1) edecesseurs et d l ears disci piles, depuis le 7 novembre 1875, jour on vos premiers
devanciers debarquaient d Hongkong !
Bien modestes furent lcurs debuts, moms de cent eleves frequentaient lears
classes. Mats le grain de senere est dereuu promptement un grand arbre, et des multitudes
sc sont abritees d sou ombre.
II est done fort d propos de rendre graces d Dieu, pour ces soixaute annees dime
prosper it e in inter romp ice, et de rappeler les no ms des bons o/evriers qui se devouerent an
succes de rotre belle oeuvre: Bienfaitenrs qui font encouragee, Direct cura qui en out
assure la bonne marche, Freres et Ma it res clout les obscurs labours out en sentence les
dines d 1 adolescents pour la vie eternelle en memo temps qui ts les armaient pour les lattes
de la vie d'ici-bas.
Bepondant done d votre desir, e'est been volontiers que je vous envoie ma benediction
de Super tear et de Fere, pour vous, bien cher Frere Direct ear, vour vos Freres et vos
Collaborateurs, pour vos Eleves et tears families, sans oublier vos chsrs Audens.
Croyez, bien cher Frere Directeur, a ma pater nolle et religieuse affection en
Not re-Seign e u r.
F. Junien-Victor
S n per ion r-Gen era l .
Lembecq, March 9th 1936.
To the Rev. Brother Stephen, Director, Hong Kong, China.
My very dear Brother Director,
The news that you gave me of the coming celebrations of the Diamond Jubilee of
your beautiful College gave me real pleasure.
With all my heart I join with you and your many pupils, past and present, on this
memorable occasion.
Who can tell how many blessings of all kinds have been bestowed by the divine
Goodness on your predecessors and their disciples since that 7th November 1875, when the first
Brothers landed in Hongkong?
Very humble were the beginnings; less than a hundred pupils attended their classes.
But soon the grain of mustard seed grew into a large tree in whose shadow multitudes found
shelter.
It is therefore quite appropriate to give thanks to God for these sixty years of
uninterrupted prosperity and to recall the names of the good workers who devoted themselves to
the success of your sp'endid mission: Benefactors who encouraged it, Directors who secured its
progress, Brothers and lay masters who by their obscure labours sowed the good seed of eternal
life into the souls of youths while arming them for life’s struggle.
In compliance with your desire, most willingly, do 1 impart my blessing of Superior and
Father, dear Brother Director, to your Brothers and co-labourers, your pupils and their families—
not forgetting the dear Old Boys.
Believe, dear Brother Director, in my paternal and religious affection in Our Lord.
Bro. Junien-Victor
Superior General.
m -i, ftt -i- mxsfc *fa m. 4-*at au- ® a 11«i® z*aa*■-# * a: m -t-m m«*ft t- *
A? T « iAWf ft mlt-W W Z Z Z -i: «E *» & M IS RSI® II Ait ft W iERIi!
§ # -w w t-t ¥ai«m z ® & as •» s m at. m am. m * m -t m n
|' | H>f ft -fi &S <£ U Ttj AAZZ4:■I: ft A Mi W; ffi Sc f&Zh IS Mat am&&HB & f® SS
yX 4 1-: mft z « »pi ft m z -iv 1a za»±a a * s a m its it« aa. a am%m« ■ t at
S m ft ** %■ KZM it Hm.m fi UJjftK »HQ+ ® » fit */Ml tt * -|- m(H»Z A A R
■sr 2. ft,« St: l® fi Bt w- #** @i P ffi # Si 4- ,W AftA4 at w ft —± ® R


DELEGATIO APOSTOLICA
IN SINIS
N. 171/36
His Excellency Mgr. M. Zanin
Archbishop of Trajanopolis
Apostolic Delegate to China
Peiping, le 12 Mars 1926
Reverend Fiere
J’ai appris avec plaisir la nouvelle da prochain Jubile de Diamant do ce
College St. Joseph dirige par la Congregation si meritante des Freres des Ecoles
Chretiennes. Depuis longtemps y en ejfet, je connais Votre glorieuse Societe et j'ai
pour elle la pins grande estime .
Je swis done fort henreux d'avoir cette occasion d? exprimer de nouveau
mon attachement a tons les Fils de Saint Jmn-Baptiste de la Salle et cVadresser d
tons cenx de Votre College de Hong-Kong , ainsi quia tons Vos chers sieves, anx
Anciens comme d cenx d'aujounVhni , une specials benediction, presage des nonvelles
graces divines qne je demands pour Vo us tons.
Le grand bien qne ce College a fait et continue a fairs d la jeunesse cst
ires apprecie non set dement dans la ville de Hong-Kong , mais encore ailleurs; je
fans des voeux pour qne dans cette vote de profits moraux et intelleetnels il prorjrcsse
toujours davantage pour la prosperity de la Chine.
Veuillez, tres Reverend Frere , a&cueillir cette benediction et ccs
voeux de bonne fete et avec la promesse des prieres qne fadresserai speciale-
ment an Saint Patron de Votre College, Vassurance de mon-ajfectneux devouement
en N. S.
M. Zanin.


Reverend Brother Stephen, Director,
Hong Kong.
The Very Rev. Bro. HYACINTH-MARIA,
Our Assistant Superior General
March 5, 1936.
Dear Brother Director,
It is indeed a pleasure for me to join in the festivities that mark the
conclusion of three score years of labours of our Brothers in Hong Kong. Though
I have not yet had the pleasure of seeing St. Joseph’s College, I am well acquainted
with its past history and its present glory. The prospect of seeing the College in
the not distant future is a pleasure that still awaits me.
For the present, however, I congratulate you and all the members of
your community on the completion of sixty fruitful years, and I can only pray
that the next sixty years will be as productive of spiritual and material blessings as
were the years that are now past. With this as my earnest prayer, I remain, dear
Brother Director,
Yours very cordially and sincerely,
(Sd.) Bro. Hyacinth Maria.


Very Rev.
Brother
James
O. B. E.
Visitor "of
the Christian
Brothers’ Schools
in the Far East.
AD MULTOS ANNOS!
It is with feelings of unalloyed pleasure
that I gratefully accept the cordial invitation
of the Management of St. Joseph’s College to
contribute a few lines to the Diamond Jubilee
Souvenir. It is, therefore, from all my heart
that I offer the College Staff, the Student
Body, the Old Pupils and all Well-Wishers a
message- of warmest greeting and sincerest
congratulations on the attainment of your
sixtieth Anniversary.
In my capacity of Visitor of the Christian
Brothers’ Schools in the Far East it has been
my unique and honoured privilege for many
long years to watch its progress and to witness
at close range the splendid work achieved and
the full measure of satisfaction given by this
admirable and life-giving centre of learning.
I consider it a grateful duty to bear testimony
to St. Joseph’s as a demonstrated success on
religious, moral and cultural lines. It is safe
to state that the youth of Hongkong for three
generations have been singularly favoured by
its existence and amply enriched by its
ennobling ideals. It is to its everlasting glory
and credit that the eternal principles for which
it stands and the essential spiritual growth of
the youth confided to its care have never lor a
moment been lost sight of and that its steady
march and gradual development during a
period of sixty years have been nurtured with
sympathetic understanding to the end of
contributing, to the various communities of
the Colony, outstanding members of society
renowned for their culture, grace and loyalty.
Like all Institutions, destined by Heaven
to thrive and prosper, St. Joseph’s has also
been blessed with the Cross. It has passed
through periods of trial and adversity, endured
heroic and persevering struggles over the long
years of its history. Nevertheless, protected
and sustained by the all-powerful hand of
Divine Providence which never fails, it has
valiantly survived its days of tribulation and
has all along upheld its prestige and maintain-
ed the high standard of efficiency and pros-
perity it possesses to-day. Well might all
those who have so bravely and successfully
guided its destinies exclaim with the Prophet:
Non nobis , Do mine , non voids, sed nomine
tuo da gloriam! It has. recorded its removes
and vicissitudes in the evolution of long years
with the result that it stands to-day an impos-
ing and enduring monument worthy of its
great traditions and something which the
people of Hongkong look up to with pride and
admiration.
The greatest glory of St. Joseph’s College
is perhaps to be found in the testimony of the
past students. It has been singularly blessed
and signally honoured by the noble baud of its
worthy Alumni who are to be met with in ever
increasing numbers all over the Far Fast.
They gladly and eloquently testify to the
saving and beneficent influence of their Alma
Mater during their formative years, and now
that they have attained positions of eminence
and fame they cherish an abiding and grateful
remembrance of their Old College. Yes,
indeed, Old Josephians! You are proud of
your Alma Mater, and your Alma Mater is
proud of you!
May St. Joseph’s College continue in the
future its grand, useful and meritorious work
of the past. May God ever increase and
multiply its fruitfulness and may the special
Patron of the Universal Church ever guard
and protect the venerable Institution which
bears his own sacred name! F lor eat et
crescat ad m altos annos!


COLLEGE SAINT FRANCOIS XAVIER
CHANGHAI
Mon Cher Frere Directeur,
C'est avec joie que j'apprends que le College Saint Joseph de Hongkong
va celebrer son Jubile de Diamant.
A cette occasion je vous adresse mes felicitations les plus cordiales et me
joins a vous et d vos Freres pour remercier Dieu qui a repandu sur votre belle
oeuvre ses benedictions pendant soixante ans. Qu’il continue a vous benir et d
faire prosperer votre College pour le plus grand bien de la jeunesse de Hongkong l
Les Freres da College Saint Francois Xavier sunissent d moi pour
vous envoyer leur message fraternel de felicitations.
Veuillez agreer, Mon Cher Frere Directeur, V assurance de mes
sentiments tres respectueux.
F. Antonin
Directeur.
DE LA SALLE KYO SHOKU KWAI
79. MYAMAL-CHO
HAKODATE, NIPPON
17th March , 1936.
Dear Bro. Director ,
My wannest and fraternal felicitations on the occasion of the Diamond
Jubilee o? your fine College. I wish the Celebration to be a complete success.
Yours affectionately in Christ,
Bro. M. Laurent
Director
YORK BUILDING, HONG KONG.
Dear Brother Stephen,
Please receive my hearty congratulations on the occasion of the celebration of
the Diamond Jubilee of the College, never forgetting Brothers Basilian, Alphonse
and yourself for the great help you gave me and for your kindness to me.
I remain, dear Bro. Director,
} our pupil as of old,
J. N. Atienza.
ST. TERESA’S CHURCH
KOWLOON
Dear Dro. Director,
It is with great pleasure that I hear that my dear Alma Mater is about
to celebrate her Diamond Jubilee.
L wish my dear Old School every blessing.
May God spare many of us to celebrate its Centenary with even greater
ju bilatious.
Your most grateful
old pupil,
(Fr.) L. Fung.


A View from the College (west end)


REV. BRO. AIMAR
To whose wise administration we owe
our present buildings


His Excellency the Governor
Sir Andrew Caldecott, Kt., C.M.G., C.B.E.,
who graciously consented to preside at the
Diamond Jubilee Sports and to present the Prizes.


HIS EXCELLENCY MGR. HENRY VALTORTA
BISHOP OF LEROS
VICAR. APOSTOLIC OF HONG KONG


REV. BRO. STEPHEN, DIRECTOR OF ST. JOSEPH’S COLLEGE.


HISTORICAL SKETCH OF ST. JOSEPH'S COLLEGE.
HONG KONG, 1875
IppARLY ATTEMPTS. —The dawn of the
§lll history of the Catholic Church in Hong
Kong almost coincides with the foundation in
the Island of a British Crown Colony. The
Procurator-General of the Propaganda Fide
in Macao, Father Theodore Joset, was trans-
ferred to Hong Kong, 2'2nd April 1841, and
appointed Prefect Apostolic, with jurisdiction
on the Island and the territory around it
within a radius of eighteen miles. Then in
1.845, a number of Portuguese began to desert
Macao to find a living in Hong Kong, and
they formed the nucleus of a Catholic popula-
tion deeply attached to the faith of their
forefathers. Here, as elsewhere, the Church
did not falter in her mission of “teaching all
nations”, and from the outstart the ecclesias-
tical authorities took in hand the organisation
of Catholic Schools. These schools, however,
for lack of support, did not flourish, so that
when in 1858 the Fathers of the Foreign
Missions of Milan first arrived in Hong Kong,
the work of religious education was non-
existent; but Providence just then sent to the
scene a man of an all-encompassing zeal
The Old Catholic Cathedral
and indomitable energy: Father Timoleone
Raimondi. In 1860 he opened in Staunton
Street a school for European children, which
began to supply the local offices with English-
speaking Portuguese clerks, and in 1864 a
commercial school, St. Saviour's College, was
started. The curriculum was eminently
practical and the boys who completed their
course had not the slightest difficulty in
finding employment. At the same time an
orphanage was opened at West Point for the
destitute Chinese boys, and it did its work
satisfactorily.
The zealous Prefect Apostolic however,
was not content until he had secured the
services of a religious congregation for his
schools: he felt that tins alone could afford
them a pledge of efficiency and continuity.
He met at first with very little success, and
no wonder! The immediate needs of urban
centres far more important than the then
insignificant Catholic settlement of Hong
Kong had to be satisfied first. Finally, on
the 15th February, 1874 the zealous Prelate
was assured by Brother Patrick, Assistant-
The Ist “Mission House”


THE MOST HONOURABLE BROTHER IRLIDE.
SUPERIOR GENERAL.
( He sent the Christian Brothers to Hong Kong)
REV. BRO. HIDULPHE, 1ST. DIRECTOR OF
ST. JOSEPH’S COLLEGE, HONG KONG.
(Photo Laken in 1885.)


General of the Institute of the Brothers of the
Christian Schools that a few Brothers would
be sent to him as soon as possible. On the
17th November following, Mgr. llaimondi
was made Bishop of Acanthus and Vicar-
Apostolic of Hong Kong. His consecration
took place five days later, 22nd November.
The new Bishop soon left Rome for his
mission, now dearer to him than ever, and was
solemnly received at the Cathedral on 19th
January, 1875, amid the general enthusiasm
of the Catholic population and the respectful
sympathy of all the religiously-minded people
in the Colony.
During his short stay in Europe, Mgr.
Raimondi had made all arrangements with
the Superior-General of the Brothers and he
was expecting these daily.
ARRIVAL OF THE BROTHERS
Einally the day so long awaited came: on
the 7th November, 1875, the “Hough’ ’of the
Messageries Maritimes steamed into port,
bringing the six pioneers who formed in Hong
Kong the first community of the Brothers of
the Christian Schools: Brothers Hidulphe-
Marie, Hidulphe-de-Jesus and Herbertus-
Joseph who were from the Brothers’ Boarding
school in Marseilles; Brothers Adrian-Edmund,
Adolphus of Mary, from the Novitiate of
London, and Brother Isfrid from the Procure
Generate of the Institute in Paris. Nothing
was wanting in the cordial welcome given
them by the people as w’ell as by the devoted
Italian clergy; and as their Visitor, Brother
Lothaire-Marie, was also there to greet them,
they at once felt quite at home. Brother
Benitde-Henri had also preceded them by a
fortnight and the eight sons of St. John Baptist
de la Salle, together, addressed fervent thanks
to God for the safe arrival of their little band,
after a tedious voyage of 42 days. Bro.
Hidulphe-Marie took charge the very next
day, Bth November 1875, of the English school,
placing it under the protection of St. Joseph,
special patron of the Institute of the Brothers.
Henceforth St. Saviour’s College was to be
known as St. Joseph’s College.
The new Director was a sturdy son of
Auvergne in Central France and had already
governed with success the Brothers’ Schools
in Agra and Colombo; he at once set on
his work of organisation. He took in the
situation at a glance. On the arrival of the
Brothers 75 boys were attending the English
classes and were accommodated in four rooms
in Pottinger Street; this limited space had so
far been sufficient for all the boys that had
sought admission, but the number of pupils
was likely to increase in the near future as
hundreds of Portuguese families had been made
destitute by the disastrous typhoon which had
swept over Macao in 1874 and they had taken
Pottinger Street, to-day
refuge in Hong Kong. After a few weeks the
enrolment had almost doubled, and it became
evident that an extension to the present build-
ing must even then be contemplated. But
the Mission was poor and so was the Catholic
population, and thus it was decided that for
lack of accommodation, no Chinese boys would
be accepted for the time being. This restric-
tion, however, was not pleasing to Mgr.
Raimondi, who in June 1876 purchased for
$14,000 a fine house situated at No. 9, Caine
Road, and the Brothers at once moved into it.
Baxley Lodge, Caine Road
It was more spacious than the one they were
vacating, but considered to he ill-adapted to
the requirements of an educational establish-
ment. Here a class was opened in January,
1878, for Chinese boys who desired to learn
English conversation and correspondence.
Brother Adolphus was entrusted with the
class, which numbered 30 in July 1878.
All the while the health of the zealous
Director had been unsatisfactory; in October,
1879, it broke down altogether and the doctors
ordered his immediate return to France; so
that on November Ist he embarked on the M.
M. Steamer “ Yangtse’k This departure was an
event which fully demonstrated how well he
had conquered universal sympathy: His Lord-
ship the Bishop had given him his confidence,
teachers and pupils were deeply attached to
him, parents of the hoys came in large
numbers to bid him farewell and express their
wishes for his speedy recovery and ail accom-
panied him to the wharf. He died in Mar-
seilles 11th May, 1886.


H. E. MGR. T. J. EAIMONDI BISHOP OF ACANTHUS
1ST. VICAR-APOSTOLIC OF HONG KONG.


St. Joseph’s College comes under
the Grant-in-aid Scheme
After the departure of Bro. Hidulphe (Ist
Nov. 1879) there ensued a short interregnum,
the College being administered for five months
by Bro. Bernard. Two notable events took
place during this time: the first Government
inspection on 29th January 1880, and the
Distribution of Prizes on 9th February.
Sir John Pope Hennessy succeeded Sir
Arthur Kennedy as Governor of Hong Kong
and arrived in the Colony on 22nd April
1878, from the Windward Islands and his
on education w'ere decidedly in advance
on those of his predecessors: a few' verbal
alterations in the Education Code, alterations
w'hich were sanctioned by the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, removed one of the
disabilities of the confessional schools.
Henceforth all schools were entitled to
Government Grants, that devoted four hours
to secular teaching, being left perfectly free
to devote the remaining portion of the school
time to religious teaching; the result of this
happy change was that the number of grant-
in-aid schools and of students attending them
doubled during the period of Sir John Pope
Hennessy’s governorship.
The Brothers had at once applied for
the admittance of St. Joseph’s College as a
Grant-in-aid School when the conditions were
amended; they submitted to Government
inspection as soon as it became evident that
they w r ere to have complete latitude to devote,
to the religious formation of the boys entrusted
to them, the full time allotted to it by their
Constitutions. A grant w r as payable for each
boy passing an examination held each year
by H.M.’s Inspector of Schools, no boy being
presented who had not attended school 200
days during the year. On 2nd January, 1880,
Dr. Eitel, the Inspector of Schools, examined
at the College 152 boys who had fulfilled the
Code requirements and all but 12 gave him
satisfaction; such a result could be regarded
as very creditable. There were then altogether
200 Portuguese and 56 Chinese bo3 r s attending
the College.
On the 9th February following, H. E. the
Governor distributed the prizes to the most
successful candidates. Sir John heartily con-
gratulated the boys; remarking, however, that
they were rather w 7 eak in the English sections
of the curriculum.
ST. JOSEPH’S COLLEGE AT ROBINSON ROAD
In April 1880, Bro. Cyprian w’as ap-
pointed Director of St. Joseph’s College. He
iiad been a distinguished teacher in New' York
and Quebec and had held the directorship of
several schools in his native land of Canada
previous to making a stay of three years in
London and Paris. Endowed with a very
happy temperament, always meek and gentle,
while professing towards his superiors the
deepest respect and the most entire submis-
sion, the new Director had soon conquered
universal sympathy. His breadth of views
and kindly feelings towards all very seldom
failed to elicit an equally hearty return in
others. At once he saw what he could do
with the personnel and the material means
at his disposal and devoted himself with an
unbounded zeal to the general improvement
of the pupils.
The Brothers were indeed labouring under
very trying conditions: the building which
was large and commodious as a dwelling-house
was becoming more and more inadequate for
the needs of a fast-growing school.
The kind Bishop deplored the situation
but it was notin his power to remedy it, until
he could procure a new property in Glenealy in
March 1881 ; there was a house on the estate
and the Brothers moved into it on 23rd May;
matsheds v r ere erected to be used as classrooms
until the new College Building should be
completed; on June 6th the classes moved into
these matsheds.
Sir John Pope Hennessy contributed
$6,000 to the building expenses as a grant on
the usual conditions, and on 3rd November lie
himself laid the foundation stone of the new
College; many old Boys who were in school in
the early days still remember how they lined
up to form a guard of honour, and in what
stirring language Sir John addressed them after
performing the ceremony. Less than a year
after, on 15th Sept. 1882, Bro. Cyprian had
the pleasure of inviting the Officer Adminis-
tering the Government, Mr. Marsh, and the
Director of Education, Dr. Eitel, to inaugurate
the new classrooms: 190 boys were admitted
on the first day.
t'
The material deficiencies having been
overcome, intellectual progress followed pari
passu: at the Prize-Giving ceremony of 1884
(12th Jan.) presided over by H. E. the
Governor, Sir George Bowen, the Bishop
reported that 205 boys had been examined
under the Grant-in-aid scheme and syllabus,
and only 15 failed. Of the 19 boys in
Standaid VI examined in English Composi-
tion only one failed to satisfy H.M.’s Ins-
pector of Schools. The curriculum embraced
music, drawing, Latin, French, Portuguese
and Chinese; the diversity of subjects was
intended to satisfy as many of the needs of
the necessarily cosmopolitan clientele of St.
Joseph’s, as possible:
“Yarii son dcgli uomini i capried
A chi piace la torta a chi ip&sticcY
as the Italian poet so picturesquely puts it.


From the same report (January 1884)
we learn that the two Belilios Scholarships
for English Composition and Literature were
awarded that year for the first time.—His
Excellency in reply said: “Monsignor
Raimondi, Bro. Director, and Gentlemen: I
received s ) hearty a welcome on my first visit
to St. Joseph's College on July Ist, and I derived
so much satisfaction from all that I saw on
that occasion, that I gladly accepted the
invitation of your excellent Bishop to preside
at the interesting occasion of the annual
distribution of prizes. (Cheers) Before per-
forming that agreeable task 1 wish to address
a few words to my young friends, the pupils
of this College, which I desire them to regard
as supplementary to the brief address which I
delivered on my former visit. I congratulate
all those who have been successful in winning
prizes at the recent examinations. At the
same time 1 exhort those who have failed on
this occasion to try again with fresh spirit on
the next occasion. And let not these young
men nor their parents think that the unsuccess-
ful competitors have gained nothing by the
struggle through which they have passed.
They may rest assured that though they may
not have succeeded in gaining the particular
distinction at which they aimed, they have
acquired much useful knowledge; for they
have acquired powers of thought and of appli-
cation, which may prove useful to them •
during the rest of their lives. There is an
old story of a farmer who, upon his death bed,
told his sons that he had a treasure buried in
a certain field and that if they dug the whole
field over they would be sure to find it. The
sons dug the field, but no gold was there. In
the next season, however, there was what to
them was the treasure —an abundant and
valuable harvest. That was the treasure
which their father really wished them to seek
for and which they found. So it is with the
unsuccessful competitors of this College,
They have not found the treasure which they
sought for, namely, a prize from the
examiners, but they have found a prize of
more permanent value, that is, powers of
thought and study which will be of practical
assistance in whatever career they may
choose to pursue in after life. (Cheers)
When I last addressed you, my young friends,
I reminded you that every native horn or
naturalised British subject in Hong Kong
from whatever race he may have sprung, is
equal with those of the British race, a son and
heir to the British Empire; and that it is alike
his duty and his interest to make himself
master of the English language which he will
find a powerful aid to success in life here and
elsewhere; for the English language, like the
English race, is fast overspreading the world
from one end of it to the other. I trust that
the golden words which you have just heard
on this subject from the eloquent lips of your
Bishop will sink into the hearts of you all.
Most of you here to-day are, I think, of
Portuguese or Chinese origin. I need hardly
remind you that I have opened the minor
posts in the public service to competitive
examination; and that there is an extensive
field of honourable employment before the
native youths of this Colon} 7 . I find indeed
that among 89 members of the clerical staff
of the public offices, there are now only 12
Englishmen, that is, less than one-seventh of
the whole number and that the rest are
mainly of Portuguese or Chinese origin.
Moreover, I intend to propose to the Colonial
Legislature that, in this, as in other colonies,
a certain number of the promising students
from the principal colleges shall be sent to
England, at the public expense, there to
complete their education as members of the
legal or medical professions, or as engineers
or accountants. (Cheers) A noble career will
thus be brought within the reach of every
youth in this Colony —whatever his race may
be. It has always been the wise and generous
policy of England to admit to the privileges
of her own citizenship the alien races within
the wide bounds of her Empire. To the
British Empire of the present day may be
applied with greater truth the fine lines
applied by Claudian to the Roman Empire of
old
“ Haec est in gremio victos quae sola
recepit,
Humanumque genus cemmuni nomine
fovit
Matris, non dominae ritu; civesque
A r ocavit
Quos domuit ”
This is the policy of England, which in British
India and throughout her eastern colonies has
established a free press, together with civil
and religious liberty; which has promoted
education among every class of the population;
which has admitted natives more and more
largely to the public service in its various
branches; and which has everywhere promoted
the extension of local and municipal institu-
tions. I will now proceed to distribute the
prizes.” (Applause)
It may be interesting to read below the
programme of the variety entertainment given
by the College boys on the occasion.
Prelude ... ... ... Master P. A, Marques
The Things I Love ... Master J. Fonseca
Class VI
Why Chime the Bells? ... Master J. Preysler
Class V
The Drowning Fly Master H. White
Class IV
Piano Recitation j Masters L. Alvares
(and J. V. Braga.
Please, Give Me a Penny,
Sir (Song) ... ... Master F. Panenberg
Class 111
Quarrel of Brutus and (Masters J. Braga
Cassius (Shakespeare) ... land M. Danenberg
Class II
You’re Another or Nothing j Masters J. V. Braga
of the Sort (Duet) ... (and W. White


Class I and Special Class
“Cherry Bounce’', A Farce
Old rents Master F. M. Luz
Gregory, his sjrvant ... Master M. Danenberg
Gammon (Farmer) ... Master S. V. Ribsiro
Spinage (Ditto) Master E. M. Robart
Homespun, Gregory’s
Father ... ... ... Master F. M. de Jesus
Doctor’s Boy ... ... Master J. P. Braga
Closing Address ... Master F. Montalto de Jesus
GOD SAVE THE QUEEN
Master J. P. Braga, whose name appears
in the programme is the Hon. Air. J. P. Braga,
0.8. E., member of the Legislative Council of
Hong Kong. Air. H. Dixon, i. 5.0., for so
many years the soul of most of the Catholic
activities in the Colony is also one of Bro.
Cyprian’s pupils, and speaks of his master in
very glowing terms.
The Prize-Giving was the last public
function held at the College during Bro.
Cyprian's directorship; three days after, 15th
January 1884, Bro. Ivarch-Louis arrived in
Hong Kong to replace him; there were then
382 boys on the rolls, of whom 90 were
Chinese. .
In 1885, however, Bro. Cyprian was re-
called to Hong Kong, to be the College Pro-
curator; this was- an occupation congenial to
him as he was an accomplished accountant,
and everybody expected he could be still of
great service for many years in that capacity,
when he was struck by a premature and un-
expected death.
He was attacked by dysentery at the
beginning of Alarch 1887, and after two
months of a lingering sickness was ordered to
proceed to Japan for a rest. He left Hong
Kong on 2nd Alay, by the “Tanai” which
reached Kobe on the 7th. Here the poor
Brother had to stay as he was too weak to
proceed. The missionary in charge of the
station, Rev. Er. Chatron. of the Missions
Etraugeres of Paris brought him, on the
Doctor’s advice, to the European Hospital
where he procured for him all possible care
and attention, but the dear patient had come
to the end of his earthly career. We think
we cannot do better than quote extracts from
the letter which the venerable missionary
wrote to the Brothers to relate the last
moments and. the burial of the dear patient.
“ He was remarkably quiet and con-
tinually offered to God prayers of resignation
to His Holy Will. In the morning lie saw
you all in the Chapel, praying for him, and he
followed you through all the exercises of the
day.
“‘Father,’ he said to me, ‘Prayer is a
very good thing, and I unite myself to those
that mv dear children otter up for me. They
are very pious and I love them with my
whole heart, and assuredly they will supply
my deficiency. However, the Sacraments will
make those prayers more efficacious and I
desire to receive them. 1 And day after day
he prepared for the Sacraments of Penance
and Extreme Unction, which he received
with the liveliest feelings of piety. It was on
Tuesday, 10th May.
“Towards three o'clock, the pains dis-
appeared; though very weak, he enjoyed peace
and all his lucidity of mind. He said to me
yet some pious words and answered perfectly
the ejaculations that I would suggest to him.
Little by little, quite slowly he sank, and the
agony began, quiet, and noiseless: just like
the sleep of the just. It may have lasted
about five minutes. I sustained his head
between my arms and as I pronounced the
words of the Ilitual; ‘ Sascipe, Do mine ,
servant tit am 5 his beautiful soul left this
earth to rise up to heaven.
“ You have one more holy protector near
God and our dear Japan a powerful interces-
sor. The funeral took place next morning,
May 13th. In the midst of the assistants
was M. i’abbe Mercier, chaplain on board the
“ Turenne. 11 The faithful wished to have the
honour of carrying the coffin. The schools,
the convents, the foreign residents of Kobe,
made it a duty to accompany the dear
departed to the cemetery, where he was
buried near one of our confreres.
“Assuredly your loss is great, but through
it your religious family has taken possession
of our dear Japan. The prayers which will
be offered up for the much regretted departed
will be a great blessing for this country. He
himself will intercede in our behalf. As for
me who have witnessed such a holy death, it
is with the greatest confidence that I add to
my prayers of every day: 0 dear Brother
Cyprian, pray for us.”
Rev. Bro. LOUIS, Director (1884-1889)


When Brother Ivarch-Louis took charge
of St. Joseph's College, the latter had already
conquered a prominent place among the lead-
ing educational establishments in the Colony
and its influence radiated through all the
countries of the Far East. The Old Boys had
started on 15th. June 1883 the publication
of a fortnightly literary journal, “Our Boys,”
to which the pupils of the College also con-
tributed. These activities were encouraged
by Brother I. Louis who also sponsored the
foundation of a Literary Club and a Debating
Society. The opening of the Literary Club
and Library was thus related by “Our Boys”:
The formal inauguration of the Literary
Club and Library took place on Sunday, 15th.
June 1884. There were present, His Lord-
ship the Right Reverend Bishop Raimondi,
the President, the Secretary, Treasurer, the
members of the Consulting Committee and
about a score of honorary members.
The President opened the proceedings
with a lengthy speech in which he asked the
boys to have unity of mind as well as of
persons. He then counselled them to work as
one body and not as several distinct and
separate bodies. He also hoped that the same
spirit that had prompted and animated the
boys to enlist themselves as members of the
club would remain in them steadfast and
unflagging through time, and that they should
never permit people to say that they were
attracted to become members because the
Club was a novelty. They should do all to
show that their motive was purely love of
learning. A succinct outline of the formation
of the institution and the object of its found-
ing were then given. After various other
remarks the President brought his speech to a
close by warmly thanking the Bishop for his
generosity and kindness and wishing him a
long life so that he may continue to work
towards the advancement of education.
His Lordship then spoke some very
encouraging words, and promised to do every-
thing in his power towards the support of the
venture. He said that much could not be
expected from the Club which was then in the
prime of its existence, but in the course of
time very much good would be derived from
it. He then retired and left the boys to enjoy
themselves in reading and talking.
THE DIRECTORIAL BOARD OF THE LITERARY CLUB AND LIBRARY
President... ... ... C. E. Ozorio
Secretary C. E, Osmund
Treasurer... ... ... J. C. Gomes
Assistant Secretary ... Aug. White
\ F. P. PI. Remedios
I F. X. Jesus
Consulting Committee -J A. J. Brandao
I J. Y. Braga
!_ R. M. von Brandt
THE DIRECTORIAL BOARD OF THE DEBATING SOCIETY
President C. E. Osmund
Secretary... ... ... C. E. Ozorio
Treasurer... ... ... J. C. Gomes
f P. P. PI. Remedios
| F. X, Montalto De Jesus
Committee ... -{ A. J. Brandao
i J. V. Braga
t R. M. von Brandt
Hon. member and
correspondent ... ... J. S. Loureiro
If Brother Cyprian is still remembered
as a strict and austere superior, the name of
Brother Louis stands for meekness and kind-
ness, so much so that among the pupils and
their parents he was known as “ the good
Brother." Brother Louis was no doubt
endowed with the happiest dispositions for
getting on well with the little cosmopolitan
world entrusted to his charge. He excelled
at entering into everyone’s views and winning
his sympathy. It is not surprising that the
only reference to his directorship in Hong
Kong to be found in his biography should be
the laconic remark: “he acquitted himself of
all the duties of his charge to the satisfaction
of all concerned.” Does not this sound very
much like the “Bene omnia fecit ” of the
Gospel? Crosses, however, were not wanting:
hardly a few months had elapsed after the
decease of the saintly Brother Cyprian when
another cruel loss was sustained by the com-
munity : Brother A ter, Pro-Director, died
suddenly of a stroke of apoplexy on 6th.
January, 1888. A Parisian by birth, Brother
Ater had joined the Institute of the Venerable
De la Salle in New York and had come to Hong
Kong on 13th. May, 1887 after a stay in the
Manchester Industrial School. He was laid
to rest at Happy Valley near the mortuary
chapel amid the fervent prayers of the clergy
and the faithful. Other causes of sadness
were not lacking; some of the early labourers
collapsed under the heavy burden, and had to
be sent back to Europe, ruined in health.
Brother Benilde returned to Paris on 21st.
April, 1885 and died less than two years after-
wards. Brother Gericus, who had arrived in
March 1883, had to return to his native
Auvergne in July 1885, where he died the
following December. Brother Lewis of Mary,
after working for three years, was sent back
to Colombo quite sick and he also died there
School begins once more.


the Young, who had just been appointed
Director of St. Joseph’s Institution, Singapore.
Bro. Francis had made a first stay in Hong-
kong between 1889 and 1895.
We find the organisation of the studies
then very much the same as they remained
until 1915: the three higher classes prepared
their students for the Oxford University
Examinations, viz. Senior, Junior and
Preliminary, and it was quite usual to see St.
Joseph’s College heading the results list both
in quantity and quality.
In 1903 a further addition was made to
the Buildings greatly improving its appear-
ance, in fact, rendering it imposing: the two
wings which gave additional accommodation
for over 100 pupils while relieving the con-
gestion. Government contributed $5,250 to
this building.
Bro. J. Francis was a man of experience
who knew the local conditions and his director-
ship was marked by a considerable increase in
the school enrolment, which went up to 453 in
1903; that year he was transferred to Malaya,
(December 29th., 1903), and Bro. Joshua acted
as Director until September 1904; when forced
by sickness to relinquish the helm, he
abandoned it to his Sub-Director, Bro.
Sylvester.
The second part of this short history of
St. Joseph’s College is given in diary form as
it consists mainly of past reminiscences
collected from the College logbook or newspaper
articles relating some of the events that
brought the College from time to time into the
limelight during the period 1905-1935.
The Dreams of Youth.
Can no one bring me back the dreams
That once enchanted me,
Of ladies bright and armoured knights,
And days of chivalry ?
When on my charger brave I rode
To win a fair renown
I battled for the cross of Christ
And hewed the fo3man down.
Or by the rivulet that sprang
From some mysterious cave,
And over moss and pebbles tossed
In many a dancing wave.
To dream in wonderment alone
Far from the haunts of men,
And pass the golden winged hours
That will not come again.
O bright and fresh the world then
Which now is bleak and drear,
And bright and green the hopes which now
Like autumn leaves are sere.
The glory of the dawn is fled
That was so wondrous fair;
The hopes that in my heart were fed
Will never blossom there.
And none can bring me back the dreams
That once enchanted me.
For life has lost its charm, and half
Of its sweet mystery.
F. J. B.
H. E. MGR. L, PIAZZOLI
2ND. V. A. OF HONG KONG.


MR. HENRY DIXON, I.S.O. (1905)
Mr. HENRY DIXON, born 19th August,
1865. Joined the Brothers’ School —St.
Joseph’s College in 1875, from the Regimental
School. Entered Class 2, under Brother
Edmund; Director: Brother Hidulphe. Left
College in 1882 and entered, as a writer, H. M.
Storekeeper’s Dept., and served eight years
until 1890, during which he acted as chief clerk.
Transferred to Colonial Service in the General
Post Office as Superintendent—Money Order
Dept, on Ist May 1890 —Mr. Alfred Lister
being Post Master General at the time.
Retired from Government Service on pension
on Ist Sept. 1933 after continuous and un-
broken service for a period of 51 years.
Whilst in the Post Office, was transferred
to Shanghai British Post Office as Postmaster,
during the absence on Home-leave of Mr.
W. J. Solly, from- 12th April 1901 to 13th
October 1902.
Made a Justice of the Peace —16th July
1926, and a Companion of the Imperial Service
Order on the 3rd June 1927.
Parochial Activities: President of the
Confraternity of the Blessed Sacrament,
Wanchai Branch; President of the Society of
St. Vincent de Paul, Wanchai Branch;
President of St. Raphael’s Burial Society and
President of the Catholic Union Club.
Wanchai (East H ong Kong)


Rev. Fr. Spada’s Sacerdotal Silver Jubilee, 1909.
An “At Home”
A Picnic Party
Some
“Old Boys”
St. Joseph’s College Association Dinner, 1914


Gleanings from the College Log-Book
9th May, 1905. A fire broke out in the
College, it was extinguished by the Brothers
and Boarders.
Ist October, 1905. Consecration of the
Catholic Bishop of Hong Kong. The boys
presented an address to the New Bishop; he
granted them a holiday.
2'Jnd December, 1905. H. E. the Governor
distributed the Prizes.
6th February, 1906. Bro. Basilian left
for Europe.
7th February, 1906. Bro. Cornelius fills
his place.
9th February, 1906. Arrival of H.li.H.
the Duke of Connaught.
10th February, 1905. Illuminations at
St. Joseph's in the evening.
13th February , 1906. Illuminations
again. St. Joseph’s put up “Adieu .
12th March, 1906. A holiday given by
Bro. Provincial Lnier-do- Jesus.
26th March, 1905. Enter-School Sports.
The College boys won U prizes.
13th September, 1906. School assembled
but the boys were dismissed nt 9.15 on account
of a terrific typhoon. The boys and teachers
visited the wreckage. The College subscribed
$75.00.
Rev. Bro. IMIER DE, JESUS
Provincial Visitor, and Later (1909) Assistant General;
Superior General 1913-1923.
Silver Jubilee of the Transfer of the
College to Robinson Road.
3rd November, 1906. To-day marks the
twenty-fifth year of the establishment of St.
Joseph’s College, the well-known educational
institution conducted by the Christian Brothers.
To mark the occasion His Lordship Bishop
Pozzoni celebrated Mass at the College this
morning and during the afternoon a special
service was held in the Cathedral. This even-
ing Brother Sylvester and his staff will be “ At
Home” to visitors who are invited to attend
an entertainment given by the scholars.
In his Report, Rev. Bro. Director said:
“In view of complying with the wishes of
the Inspector of Schools, Chinese is taught in
the College at present for one hour every
school day. In addition to the above subject
we have established a shorthand class and a
typewriting class, as also the teaching of book-
keeping, mensuration, and the elements of
vocal music. The results of the Oxford Local
Examination were very good. We presented
but one boy in the Senior and he succeeded
very honourably. We presented three in the
Junior and two succeeded. Eleven boys sat
for the Preliminary and nine succeeded, one
of them coming out with Third Class Honours
and Distinction in Geography. I am glad to
say that a good number of parents take a
great interest in the weekly report. There
are, however, some parents who do not prize
it at its just value, and seem to ignore its
existence. Our monthly and quarterly ex-
aminations continue to be held faithfully and
the results are sent to the parents that they may
see what their sons are doing and how they
are conducting themselves. The boys of the
college continue to take great interest in the
inter-school games and sports. Unfortunately
their play-ground is so limited that their
success must naturally be far from satisfying
their aspirations.’ 1
12th December, 1906. A Football Shield
Match with Ellis Kadoorie’s. St. Joseph’s
won by 3 to nil.
25th January, 1907. Bro. Director paid
a visit to H. E. the Governor.
30th January, 1907. Football match
with Yaumati Government School. St.
Joseph's won by 4 to nil. Bro. Director and
Bro. Stephen went to Ellis Kadoorie’s Prize
Giving.
sth Debraary, 1907. Distribution of the
Hygiene prizes at Government House by H.E.
the Governor. C. Sequeira won the Ist Prize
sbo.


THE “OXFORD” CLASSES—1907.


ST. JOSEPH’S COLLEGE 1907
Mbat Me niMQbt Ibave Been
Have we not all, amid life’s petty strife.
Some pure ideal of a noble life
That once seemed possible ? Did we not hear
The flatter of its wings, and feel it near,
And just within our reach ? It was, and yet
We lost it in this daily jar and fret,
And now’ live idle in a vague regret.
But still our place is kept, and it will wait
Beady for us to fill it soon or late:
No star is ever lost we once have seen,
We always may be what we might have been.


2nd July, 1907. Arrival of Brother L.
Paul.
12th July , 1907. Bro. Cornelius left for
Australia.
16th November , 1907. Football Shield
match with the Diocesan Boys’ School. St.
Joseph’s won by 3 goals to nil.
3rd January , 1908. Prize-giving. His
Excellency Sir Frederick and Lady Lugard
distributed the prizes.
25th February , 1908. Lady Lugard dis-
tributed the Shorthand certificates.
13th March 1908. Departure of Brother
Gabriel, Vr., and Brother James, Director of
St. Xavier’s, Penang, for Manila.
Rev. Bro. GABRIEL
Visitor of the Christian Brothers’ Schools
in the Far East (1896-1912)
20th March, 1908. Arrival of Brother
Christian to replace Brother Sylvester. Enter-
tainment given in honour of Brother Sylvester
on the occasion of his departure.
Rev. Bro. Christian
His Excellency SIR FREDERICK LUGARD,
K.C.M.G.
HIS EXCELLENCY MGR. POZZONI.
THE LATE
VICAR APOSTOLIC OF HONG KONG.
Letter From Rev. P. De Maria to
Bro. Sylvester on the eve of his departure
from Hong Kong.
“ I hear with pain of your departure from
Hong Kong. Sincerely I regret that St.
Joseph's College, and let me say it, the Colony
shall miss you. It is now about 14 years since
I have been in some way connected with the
College, and this is the simple truth: the
College has never been in such a flourishing
condition as it is now. May God prosper
you in the colony where you are going, and
enable you to do the same good as you have
done here, and remember me in your
prayers.’’


Letter From H.E. the Governor to Bro.
Sylvester on the eve of his departure
from H.K.
“ I hear with much regret that you are
leaving the colony at once. I hope that the
responsible post you are about to assume is in
the nature of a promotion, and I most heartily
wish you success in it. You will be a great
loss to us here.”
Farewell to Bro. Sylvester, Director.
On Thursday evening sports were held at
Causeway Bay by the pupils of St. Joseph’s
College, in honour of Brother Sylvester, the
retiring Director. They were carried through
very successfully and at 5.30 p.m. Brother
Kieran, Assistant Visitor, presented the prizes.
The students of the College gave a very
interesting little entertainment on Friday
evening, as a send-off to their old Director.
At 10.30 this morning, all the boys of the
school numbering over 350, lined up in the
College Compound to accompany Brother
Sylvester on board the “Marmora”.
22nd June, 1908. Brother Wilfrid arrived.
REV. BRO. WILFRID
6TH JULY, 1908. BRO. DOSITHEUS ARRIVED.
Rev. Bro. DOSITHEUS
Director of St. George’s School
Taiping F.M.S.
9th July, 1908. Farewell Dinner in
honour of Rev. Bro. Stephen, leaving for
Europe. “Farewell! a word that must be,
and hath been, a sound which makes us
linger —yet —-Farewell.”
“ We part —but to meet again”.
9th September, 1908. Shorthand results.
9 passed, 3 failed.
11th November, 1908. Received Oxford
Results. 31 passes.
16th November, 1908. Pope’s Jubilee.
Illumination.
16th November, 1908. The Papal Jubilee
Celebrations in Hong Kong.
The celebrations in Hongkong in con-
nection with the Papal Jubilee were continued
yesterday.
At the Cathedral every available seat in
the large sacred edifice was filled and accom-
modation was taxed to the utmost. Besides
the members of the various ecclesiastical
bodies represented in Hongkong there were
also present members of the Consular Corps
and the A.D.C. on behalf of H.E. the Governor.
As usual St. Joseph’s College was seen
to the best advantage especially when viewed
from the harbour. A mammoth cross in red
lights surmounted the enormous pile of build-
ings on the southern side/the main elevation
also displaying the pretty device of a brilliant
star in red. The Robinson Road entrance to
the College was decorated with the Papal flag,
and the British and Portuguese national
colours.
2nd July , 1909. Sir Francis Piggott
said: “ The local institution was only a part
of a great brotherhood; wherever education
was in need of help, there they were always
ready to give it. I think the world owes
them a debt of gratitude as well as this
Colony.”
10th July, 1909. Bro. Stephen left for
Singapore.
Annual Distribution of Prizes,
22nd December, 1909
The Governor's Address. The Governor
said: I congratulate both the staff and boys
<>n their continued success and progress in St.
Joseph s College. This year, we have just
heard, you have obtained 36 passes in the
Oxford Local Examination as against 31 last


SOME OLD PUPILS


year, and I am glad to notice that the increase
is confined to the Senior and Junior and not
to the Preliminary examination. This is a
good augury for success in the Matriculation
Examinations for the University. I hope that
the boys of St. Joseph’s will be successful not
only in passing the Matriculation Examination
but also in carrying off one or more of the
King Edward scholarships.”
Brother Director said—“ Our Oxford results
this year were very satisfactory. We presented
36 boys and all passed, viz., 7 Seniors, 14
Juniors and 15 Preliminaries. J. B. Xuyen
obtained Second Class Honours and Distinction
in French in the Senior, while H. Ozorio
secured Third Class Honours in the Prelimin-
ary. Six of our Chinese boys figured promi-
nently among the successful students. A
noticeable feature of the examination judging
from the private results was the excellent pass
which nearly all our boys obtained in English
Composition. We are very much pleased to
see that many of our boys are working hard to
fit themselves for the Hongkong University
with which your Excellency’s name will be
forever associated. Our Shorthand and Type-
writing classes continue to do good work.
Thirty-seven boys sat for Shorthand Certificates
during the year. Twenty obtained Third Class
certificates. Thirteen entered for Second Class,
and four for First Class certificates, but the
results have not yet come to hand. Our thanks
are due to the members of the Shorthand
Committee of Hongkong, especially to Mr. A.
Bamsay, of the Daily Press, for the facilities
they have afforded in connection with the
examinations. Twenty-eight boys follow the
Typewriting Class. We have arranged with
the National Shorthand Association of London
for the holding of periodical examinations for
Typewriting Certificates. Eight boys have
entered for the first examination, which we
expect will take place in about a fortnight.
Football is still the favourite game of the
Hongkong schools. Our boys take very great
interest in it. For the first time we won both
trophies; our First Team won the Schools
Football Shield, and our Junior team won the
beautiful cup presented by Your Excellency
to the schools of the Colony.
The library in connection with our Oxford
Class is still a source of pleasure and profit to
our boys. We have considerably enlarged it
during the year, and it numbers at present
close on five hundred volumes.”
7th May, 1910. Death of King Edward.
17th September, 1910. Bro. Henry left
for Penang.
Rev. Bro. HENRY
Director’s report. 1910
Our last Oxford results were very en-
couraging. Six Seniors were presented for
the examination and all passed, F. Lopes
getting distinction in Spanish. Twelve
Juniors sat for the examination and 9 passed,
J. Thuan and E. Marques getting distinction
in Eeligious Knowledge. Sixteen Prelimin-
ary boys were presented and all passed, the
total number of passes being 31.
His Lordship Bishop Pozzoni’s Speech:
“ Your Excellency. As representing the
Catholics of Hongkong I must thank you
very sincerely for the interest you have taken
in our school. It is certainly a great encou-
ragement both to teachers and pupils to know
that after they have done their work well
they will be honoured by your presence and
also by the kind words of advice which your
Excellency addresses to them. We are all
pleased to know that St. Joseph’s College
holds such an important place among the
educational establishments of Hongkong, and
there was no doubt that the work it accomplish-
ed during the past year really deserved com-
mendation. (Applause). The teaching of the
Brothers had been very successful during the
past year and no doubt the moral of the
remarks of your Excellency will stimulate
both the Brothers and the pupils to renewed
efforts for the future.”
26th May, 1911. The Governor presented
Shield and medals to Ist Team for football.
29th September, 1911. In his address the
Bev. Bro. Director said: “To those who can
recall the old St. Saviour’s School, founded by
the late Bishop Kaimondi, at Pottinger Street,
then changed to St. Joseph’s College housed
in Buxley Lodge,” Caine Boad, and sub-
sequently moved to its temporary habitat in
the grounds of ‘ Glenealy the big pile of
buildings on Bobinson Boad to-day stands as
a veritable monument to the educational en-
terpiise of the Catholic Mission authorities in
Hongkong.


College
Bo


CHAMPIONS IN ATHLETICS


St Francis Xavier Patron of the
Catholic Missions .
1906
1923


St. Joseph’s College has been as singularly
successful in the field of sports as in that of
study. £ Mens sana in corpore sano ’ has
been a motto so frequently inculcated in the
minds of the students that they have taken
the trite saying well to heart. St. Joseph’s
College Football Club won the Inter-School
Football Shield which it holds for the present
year. The magnificent trophy can be seen in
the College parlour. Sir Frederick Lugard s
Cup was won by the School’s second team on
the first occasion it was put up for competition.
28th November, 1913. H. E. the Governor
visited the School.
6th December 1913. Report of Rev. Bro.
James, 0.8. E., Visitor:
“ Made the annual visitation of St.
Joseph’s College from Dec. Ist to Dec. 6th.
and am pleased to report that the current
work in all departments is progressing very
satisfactorily.
I recommend the erection of a new
wing in order to relieve the congestion and
also to make provision for a suitable play shed
which I consider very necessary.”
19th December , 1913. Annual Prize Dis-
tribution by H.E. the Hon. Mr. Claud Severn.
18th March, 1914. Departure of Rev.
Bro. Adrian, Director.
2nd April , 1914. Arrival of Rev. Bro.
Peter, Director.
23rd April, 1914. Annual Dinner-Old
Boys’ Association.
30th April , 1914. Rev. Bro. Peter
Chrysologus died in the hospital.
Ist May, 1914. Funeral of Rev. Bro.
Peter Chrysologus.
21st May, 1914. Arrival of Rev. Bro.
Aimar, Director.
9th July, 1914. Rev. Bro. Cornelius left
for Singapore.
Rev. Bro. CORNELIUS
Director of St. J. I., Kuala Lumpur
23rd September , 1914. Swearing-in of
Scouts by H. E. Major General Kelly.
29th Junitary , 1916. Annual Distribution
of Prizes. Bishop Pozzoni Presided.
6th September, 1917. The New School
is opened to-day at Kowloon.
Ist October , 1917. Inter-School Swim-
ming Shield won by St. Joseph’s Team.
2nd October, Report of 1917
6 candidates passed the Matriculation and
3 the Senior Local Examination of the
University of Hongkong; 24 passed the Junior
Local, making a total of 33; Noel Braga
obtained Distinction in English, E. Aubouy
and R. Vabois in Drawing.
The College had a most successful athletic
season. In the Hongkong Schools Football
League the College performed the creditable
feat of capturing, both the Junior and Senior
premierships. The Hon. Mr. Claud Severn
in handing the shield to the captain of the
Senior team said that the team had a tine
record. In the Hongkong Schools’ Sports the
College won the Team Race for the sixth year
in succession.
The College Branch School in Kowloon,
for the convenience of the younger European
children, was opened on the sth Sept, last, and
is attended by 65 young pupils.
26th January , 1918. Prize Day presided
by the Hon. Mr. H. E. Pollock, K. C.
13th February , 1918. Great Earthquake
(50 seconds).
26th February , 1918. Race Course
catastrophe.
3rd September, 1918. The Brothers took
possession of the “German Club”, Kennedy
Road.
Bth October , 1918. Inter-School Swim-
ming Shield won by St. Joseph’s Team.
30th January , 1919. Prize Day presided
over by H. E. the Hon. Mr. Claud Severn,
C.M.G.
31st January, 1919. The annual prize
distribution of St. Joseph’s College took place
yesterday at the new college premises in
Kennedy Road, the erstwhile German Club.
There were present H. E. the Hon. Mr. Claud
Severn, C. M. G., (the officer administering
the Government,) Bishop Pozzoni, Major
Morgan and a large gathering of the students’
parents.
In our Branch School in Kowloon the
enrolment was 90 and the average attendance
82.
7th September , 1919. Bro. Paul is put
in charge of the School in Robinson Road.
17th February, 1920. Bro.
Corentin Bene (Sub-Dir.) left for
Europe.
Rev. Bro.
CORENTIN RENE
Sub-Director


St. Joseph’s College, Kennedy Road —3rd September, 1918
The former College Chapel in the ex-Club “Germania” 1918-1925


OUR ALMA MATER'S CALL
1. All through our College a voice is
resounding:
Promptly respond to ■ your duty’s sweet
call;
Hearken you all, for the trumpet is
sounding,
Your Master’s proclaiming her watch
words to all.
Chorus. —Forward, her children dear;
Ever with hearts sincere,
Render with joy to your Mater her due;
All that is vile reject, Heaven wall ever
protect
Sons of St. Joseph’s valiant and true.
2. “Labour will conquer,” your motto still
bearing,
Forward with courage in ways that are
i just;
True to your standard be doing and
daring,
As faithful Josephians in Heaven you
trust. Chorus.
3. Onward and upward in life’s earnest battle,
Joyously bearing the brunt of the fight,
Nobly forgiving for aught that may pain
you,
And bravely defending the cause of the
right. Chorus.
4. Seek not the bubbles displayed by this
world:
Heaven is the centre .to which' you must
tend;
Serve Him alone w ho at death can reward
you,
And vo w to be faithful and true to the
end. Chorus.


1920 Report
Oxford Preliminary—27 passes, one with
Honours.
Hongkong University Junior—3o passes,
seven winning distinctions. William Graham
Lawson got Distinction in Arithmetic,
History, Geography and Stenography; Hugh
Braga, in English and Arithmetic; Francis
Young and Andrew Meslier in French; and
Rurnjahn Abdool Razack, Lee Teck Joe and
Jose Alves in Arithmetic.
Matriculation —17 passes, Peter N.Y. Ban
and Yung Kai Yip obtaining Honours.
Besides these, three secured the Senior
Certificate.
16th January , 1921. Bro. Marcian took
temporary charge of the College, as Interim
Director, Rev. Bro. Aimar being in much
need of a rest.
25th January , 1921. Prize-giving, pre-
sided over by H. E. the Governor.
4th March, 1921. Contributed §483.(>0
to the Famine Fund.
16th to 18th March, 1921. Annual
Retreat for boys.
13tli April , 1921. Doctor’s Report on
the Boarding Department. “ This is to certify
that I have this day made a complete in-
spection of St. Joseph’s College. I found the
dormitories and class-rooms clean and well-
aired. The quarters are a little cramped, but
with the opening of the new building that will
be relieved: this applies chiefly to the bathing
accommodation. ’ Otherwise I found every-
thing quite satisfactory.”
(Signed) F. I). Allan, A.B.
22nd April, 1921. Inter-School Sports
—great enthusiasm shown. The College did
very well, winning the three Team Races and
the Two Championships.
17th May , 1921. Bro. Alphonsus left for
Manila. He had been twenty years teaching
in Hong Kong.
24th May, 1921. Distribution of Prizes,
for Essays, by Col. F. J. Bowen.
31st May, 1921. Funeral of a former
pupil who died as the result of an accident
in bathing. A detachment of Boy Scouts was
sent at the request of Col. F. J. Bowen.
Opening of the New School Building
sth September, 1921. H.E. the Governor,
Sir R. E. Stubbs, K.C.M.G., performed the
opening ceremony and manifested special
interest in and sympathy with the work of
the Brothel’s.
His Lordship, I). Pozzoni, gave the
Liturgical Blessing proper to a new School or
College.
SIN E. E. STUBBS, G.C.M.G.
11th October, 1921. Visit of the
Members of the Education J >oard. Dr. Pearse,
N. Feesd ale MacKintosh, A. X. Silva-Xetto
and E. Ralphs, Inspector of Schools. They
visited all the classes, inspected some of the
copy-books. They particularly admired the
writing in the lowest class (8A). They were
also highly pleased with the maps in the
Higher Classes.
3rd November, 1921. Incorporation
Bill passed.
sth Nor cm her, 1921. The proposer of
the Bill for the College Incorporation was the
Hon. Mr. Pollock and the Seconder the Hon.
Mr. Bird (Palmer and Turner).
30th November, 1921. “ Visited St.
Joseph’s College. Saw all the classes except
Classes I and II which were sitting for
the Hongkong University exam. I was
struck by the intelligent and cheerful appear-
ance of the boys and their readiness in answer-
ing questions. It is evident that the Brother
Director and his Brothers are imparting a
thorough religious and moral education.
Physical culture is also well attended to.
The Kowloon Brauch School has now 4
classes and shows signs of good improvement
since last year.”
(Signed) Rev. Bro. James, 0.8. E.
Visitor of C. B. Schools.
22nd January , 1923. News received of
the death of His Holiness Pope Benedict XV.
E.I.P. Flag at half-mast.
21 tli January, 1922. Arrival of Rev.
Bro. Michael sent to take charge of the College
as Director.


2nd February, 1922. Brother Marcian
bade Good-bye to the boys and left for
Singapore by the 8.1. boat at 1 p.m.
3rd March, 1922. Strike still on. All
our servants left, so I gave the boys a holiday
till Monday.
6th March , 1922. We are still without
servants. The Boarders and Bro. Cajetan
are doing heroic work.
Rev. Bro. CAJETAN, Prefect of Boarders
3rd April, 1922. We are preparing to
have both buildings illuminated for the Prince
of Wales.
sth April, 1922. Many boys are busy
preparing things for the Prince’s visit. Over
300 boys will march to the Cricket ground on
Friday to see the Prince.
27th January, 1923. 590 boys present.
Brother Aimar has returned to take charge
of the College and Brother Michael goes to
Manila.
Rev. Bro. MICHAEL, Director
21st February, 1923. Annual Prize-
giving, His Excellency the Governor presiding.
Rev. Father McNulty S. J. gave four
instructions to the Catholic Students —from
21st to 24th during the Annual Retreat.
21st April, 1923. Annual Athletic Sports
at the Race Course. It was a successful
function; Mr. E. Ralphs distributed the prizes.
24th May, 1923. Empire Day —Holiday.
Parade. Distribution of Prizes for Empire
Essays: Classes 1,2, 3 and 4.
Church Service at 9 a.m.
21st June , 1923. Brother Paul takes,
charge of the Kowloon School.
19th January, 1924. School in the
morning. Arrival of the Very Rev. Brother
Anacletus —Assistant Superior General.
Rev. Bro. ANACLETUS, Assistant of the Superior General
22nd January, 1924. Holiday in honour
of Rev. Brother Assistant Superior’s visit.
22nd February , 1924. Funeral of His.
Lordship Dr. D. Pozzoni. The College Scouts,
led the funeral procession and 500 Boys-
marched from the Cathedral to the Happy
Valley Cemetery. R.I.P.
26th February, 1924. Holiday. Distribu-
tion of Prizes.
Sir Claud Severn, K.8.E., C.M.G., pre-
siding.
The Vice-Chancellor, and the Director
of Education were present.
Sir Claud said that the Report of the-
Inspector of Schools on St. Joseph’s College
was most excellent and most enthusiastic, and
added: “I agree with it, because I can see
that you are making year by year a steady
advance.”
24th May, 1924. Holiday. Empire Day,,
about 400 Boys attended the Commemoration
Service.
M. H. Bro. ALLAIS CHARLES
Late Superior Greneral


I was very favourably impressed indeed and
I congratulated the Brothers. I may wish
that they would send more Boys to the
University. It is not, I know, their fault
that more do not come.
W. W. Hornell,
Vice Chancellor,
Hongkong University.
3rd September, 19:2d. “I have visited
the School to-day and I have been very much
pleased to know that all the former boys are
back, no absentees, all in earnest preparing
for the Annual Examination on November
next.”
Gh M. Spada.
Very Rev. G. M. SPADA, Vicar Delegate
14th January, 1925. Brother Aubert
•arrives.
Uth February , 1925. H.E. Sir B.E.
Stubbs presents Prizes to the Boys.
20th Aprils 1925. Inter School Sports—
The College wins the Governor’s Shield; scores
-51 points out of 92; the rest scored 41.
V. R. C. Boxing Tournament
25th April , 1925. St. Joseph’s College
won the cup presented by Mr. W. S. Bailey to
the School securing the greatest number of
points. This cup having been won by our
boys two years in succession becomes the
property of the College.
15th May , 1925. Feast of St. John
Baptist de la Salle. The indefatigable or-
ganisers, Jos. Tang and C. Wing Hung had
thought of signalling this feast, coming 25
years after the canonisation of Our Holy
Founder, with elaborate celebrations including
solemn offices in the Chapel.
22nd May , 1925. S. A, Bumjahn and
H. D. Bumjahn won the tennis championship
of the Colony (Open Doubles) defeating
O’Callaghan and Gawler.
27 th May , 1925. Entertainment at
Catholic Union Club in aid of St. Louis
Orphanage.
28 th May , 1925. H. B. H. Prince George
arrives by S. S. “Mahva” en route for Shang-
hai where he is to join the “Hawkins”.
3rd June, 1925. The College Basket
Ball Junior Team wins the Shield presented
by the Hongkong Basket Ball Association.
20th June, 1925. For the last few r days
there has been trouble in several schools in
the Colony. Handbills have been distributed
to the students urging them to strike in
support of the Shanghai agitators.
We have had no defections so far, but the
strikers have threatened our boys.
22nd June , 1925. St. Joseph’s College
has the remarkable honour of being the only
English school in the Colony not affected by
the strike.
3rd July, 1925. Hongkong and Canton
continue to be quiet. The Government
servants left to-day. We shall have to go to
the Post Office now for the mails.
4th July, 1925. 4 boys went to work at
the G.P.O. to-day.
18th July , 1925. About 20 boys have
since the sth inst. been working with Kev. Bro.
Cassian at the G.P.O. where their services
have been very kindly appreciated.
31st July , 1925. We finish working
at the G.P.O. to-day; the authorities have
engaged new hands "that must be trained as
speedily as possible.


ANNUAL PRIZE DISTRIBUTION: 1925
Io Mav 19:24 our classes were visited by
the Vice-Chancellor of the University, his ap-
preciative remarks on our work as recorded in
our log book, are as follows:- I have spent
a most interesting morning at this school.
The classrooms are excellent and work is ob-
viously systematically and carefully auanged
and graded. The written work, especially in
the lower classes, was quite good. \\ hen the
new building now under construction is com-
plete, the school will be as well housed as
any school of the kind that I have evei seen.
I was very favourably impressed indeed, anti
I congratulate the Brothers. I only wish
that they would send more boys to the Uni-
versity. It is not, I know, their fault that
more do not come.’
llev. Bro. Director said: “ Uev. Bro.
James, o.tj.e., made bis annual visit eail\ m
November. In his report he states that he is
glad to know that the new extension includes
a spacious chapel on the top floor, which
will afford ample accommodation for all our
Catholic students.
During the year 23 pupils entered for the
Matriculation Examination of the Hongkong
University. Of these 16 passed, 3 with Hon-
ours. Eight pupils entered for the Senior
Local Examination and 5 passed. Fifty-four
pupils entered for the Junior Local Examina-
tion, and of these 18 passed.
English holds its proper place in the Cur-
riculum and the detailed results of the Matri-
culation and Senior Local Examination show
that all the College candidates who entered
passed in the English section, A.J.C. Victor,
with distinction.
Our Science class is still in its infancy.
A few Junior candidates passed in Physics in
the last examination and there are now 50
boys going through a three years’ course; our
laboratories will be fully equipped in the
course of the year.
With reference to the College Troop of
Boy Scouts, the Scoutmaster, H. Braga
reports as follows:- “December last saw the
end of another successful year of Scouting for
the College Troop. We had our usual Sum-
mer and \\ inter camps, hikes and bathing
excursions. Besides these, for the first time
in the history of the Local Boy Scout Move-
ment, the troop visited Macao during they
Christmas holidays. The Hon. Mr. Mon-
tague Ede has very kindly consented to act as
Troop President. The troop came in a good
second in the Prince of Wales’ Banner Com-
petition. Second Wong Man Cheong from
the College Troop represented Hongkong at
the Imperial Jamboree held at Wembley.
The Mac G rath cups were competed for
again last year. The patrol cup was won by
the Curlews with 1,7*29 points. The Hawks,
and the Eagles obtained 1,705 and 1,665 points
respectively. Patrol leader T. Braga and
Second T. Hamet, with 2,016 points, tied for
the first place in the competition for the best
all-round scout. Both their names will con-
sequently be inscribed on the cup. Patrol
leader D. Liu came next with 1,970 points to
his credit.”
His Excellency the Governor, Sir Edward
Stubbs, k.c.m.g., said that this was the fifth or
sixth time he had the pleasure of presenting
the prizes at St. Joseph’s College. He found
that whenever he gave away the prizes at St.
Joseph’s he was suffering from a cold. He
therefore did not propose to make a long
speech to them on educational subjects. He
would merely say that he had always taken a
deep interest in the College, not only because
he had every confidence in it, but because he
had seen remarkable work done by the Chris-
tian Brothers elsewhere. He hoped that the
prosperity that the College and pupils had
seen during fifty years, would continue for
fifty years more.
WILFRED LAWRENCE
W. Lawrence started swimming at very eariy age
under the guidance of the Secretary of the V. R. C.
and scored several successes in the aquatic Sports
meetings when still quite young.
It was in 1928 that he first came into the lime-
light as the goal-keeper of the Portuguese Sporting
Association. The following year he represented
Portugal in a match against Scotland, which the
former won.
1931 to 1934 was a period of inactivity due to an
attack of asthma but in 1934 he was completely cured.
A group of Japanese swimmers, some of whom were
holding Olympic records, passed through the Colony
and gave an exhibition swim in V. R. C. Lawrence
adopted one of their strokes, and after a month’s
practice, won the 100 yards in 59 1/5 seconds.
In the Interport trials, he won the 100 yards and
caused a sensation by beating Roza-Pereira in the 440.
After his return to Hongkong, he beat Roza-
Pereira, in the Harbour Race, which the latter had
won for four years consecutively. In the Interport
trials of 1935, he broke all his own records, these
being some of his times: 100 yards 57 1/5 seconds,-.
220 yards, 2 mins. 35 seconds; 440 5, mins. 26 2 5
secs.; 880, 1 1 mins, and 47 4/5 secs. At the Interport,
he beat Noel Hammond of Shanghai in all the races
except the 100 yards, thereby earning the well-
deserved title of “the best swimmer in China”, which
Hammond had held before.


4th August, 1925. Opening of the
Retreat at 5.30 p.m. The Exercises were
preached by Rev. Fr. P. Lynch, S. J., of the
Ateneo, Manila.
GENERAL POST OFFICE
HONG KONG
Bth August, 1925.
Sir,
I have the honour to express my
appreciation of the valuable assistance
rendered by the staff and pupils of St.
Joseph's College during the strike and to
thank you for your placing their services at
the disposal of this Department.
I may add that the efficiency of the
boys teas considerably increased by the
supervision and instruction of Brother
Cassian in whose charge they were and I
should be obliged if the enclosed letter could
be transmitted to him.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Sd.) M. J. Breen
Postmaster General.
The Bev. Brother Aimar,
St. Joseph's College,
Hong Kong.
GENERAL POST OFFICE
HONG KONG
Bth August, 1925.
Sir,
1 have the honour to inform you that
I have now made permanent arrangements
for the performance of the duties in the
Post Office which were formerly carried on
by the emergency staff, and I wish to take the
opportunity to thank you , and through you
the St. Joseph's boys for the valuable services
which you and they have rendered to the Post
Office during the strike.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Sd.) M. J. Breen
The Bev. Brother Cassian,
St. Joseph's College,
Hong Kong.
15th August, 1925. Baptism and Ist
Communion of 2 old Boys of St. Joseph’s
College, now studying Medicine at the
University: Lam Shiu Wall and Jjam Shin
Chun: Peter and Paul.
A 3rd boy, who left from a lower class
was also baptised with them, having been
prepared by P. Shiu Chun. Bro. Director had
a tea-party in their honour.
No change in the strike situation.
Ist September, 1925. We re-open school
with 460 boys this side. Practically all
present in Kowloon.
9th September, 1925. 7th Anniversary of
the installation of the Community in Kennedy
'Road.
12th September, 1925. The attendance
is now 84% of the pre-strike figures.
23rd-26th September, 1925. j levs’ Re-
treat, preached by Rev. Fr. Lane.
27th-30th September, 1925. Tridunm of
Supplication to St. Theresa of the Child -Tesus
in the Cathedral.
3rd October, 1925. Woo Challenge Cup:
Half-mile Championship of the Colony—Tan
Chin Hin. High Dive open to the Colony—
-Ist G.A. Jack (76a pts.), 2nd C. MacKenzie.
Quarter-mile Championship of the Colony—
A. F. May.
Roys’ High Dive. Gustavo Remedies
(Class 4A).
GOVERNMENT HOUSE
HONG KONG
October 21th , 1925.
Dear Brother Aimar,
The Gnrernor has expressed a wish
to present St. Joseph's with something for the
new (liapel, and has ashed me to make a
suggestion. I should- be much obliged if yon
could let me know of something which he
could give. I think the cost should be up to
$lOO.
I 'ours sincerely,
(The Private Secretary).
T. Gaisford St. Lawrence
23rd Harbour Race. —A. May, Ist (28
min. 1/5 secs.)
24th October , 1925. H.E. th e Governor
opens the A lew Wing of St. Joseph's College.
Rev. Rro. Director said: “The hall will be styled
the Li Shek Pang Hall in memory of the late
Li Shek Pang, whose family donated $12,000
to the College. The second floor is occupied
by the Laboratories for the teaching of Phvsics
and Chemistry. \\ e are very grateful to Mr.
Woo Hay Tong for a donation of sso]T)f)
towards their equipment which in addition to
a special grant by the Government will enable
us to furnish them with quite up-to-date
fittings.
It seems to me that this building with its
recreative Halls, Science rooms and Chapel is
an epitome of our school activities.
The cost of the building was $120,000
whilst the furniture and laboratory fittings
cost $20,000, The Government contributed
$50,000 and a further sum was received in
donations.”
\\ hen His Excellency, who was accom-
panied by Mr. T. Gaisford St. Lawrence
(Private Secretary) arrived, there were pre-
sent: The Rev. Brother Aimar (Director of
the School), Father G. M. Spada, Father Yai-
torta, Father Robert, Mr. G. N. Orme
(Director of Education) and Mr. E. Ralphs
(Inspector of English Schools).


GOLDEN
JU3ILEE
GROUPS
1925


GOLDEN
JUBILEE
GROUPS
1925


GOLDEN
JUBILEE
GROUPS
1875-1925


DUAS PALAVRAS
Insiste o Kevdo. Director do Colegio
de S. Jose, men exmo. amigo, que, em
comemoraqao do sexagesimo aniversario da
fundaqao do estabelecimento escolar de S.
Joao Baptista de La Salle, nesta Colonia, eu
tambem escreva, como professor da escola de
portugues, algumas palavras sobre esta casa
de instruyao.
0 que hei-de escrever, pois?
Consultando a historia da Colonia, sei
hoje que, em 1875, o Revdo. Bispo Raimondi,
•estando, nessa ocasiao, em Roma, insistira
junto da Santa Se que enviasse para Hongkong
os Revdos. Brothers.
Chegaram e reorganizaram logo a escola
de S. Saviour situada, naquela data, em
Pottinger Street. Reorganizada a escola,
principiou ela apenas com 75 alunos, na
maioria estudantes portugueses. Como naquela
data havia poucas escolas e o numero de
alunos aumentava consideravelmente, tiveraju
de mandar construir um novo edificio, sitnado
em Robinson Road, edificio hoje demolido e
transformado em predios de habitacao.
Centenas de portugueses receberam ni a
sua instruqao inglesa, e ainda hoje quasi toda
a comunidade portuguesa confia a educacao
dos sens filhos aos Revdos. Brothers.
Havia nessa casa escolar uma classe
especial de ensino da lingua portuguesa,
ministrada por um individuo de nome Roza,
ora falecido.
Este ensino durou pouco tempo pit falta
de numero de alunos e constancia do professor.
Assim correu ainda por miiitos anos a
Escola de 8. Jose sem uma classe de portugues
para alunos nossos.
Vein a Guerra.
Como o numero de alunos matriculados,
•externos e internes, aumentava, dia a dia,
resolveram eomprar o edificio do Ciube
Alemao.
Com o auxilio do Governo desta Colonia
esto edificio foi modificado em estabeleci-
mento do instrueao e la estu o Colegio de S*
Jose a atestar quanto pode o amor ao trabalho,
e a mais nitida compreensao do dever!
Ocorre-me, neste momento, preguntar a
mini mesmo: so a missao portuguesa tivesse
pensado melbor na educacao crista dos filhos
da comunidade portuguesa e se aqui tivesse
plantado a sua semente, nao hoje a
comunidade portuguesa colocada em melhor
situacao ?
Fica a resposta para outro lugar
Hoje, honra Ihe seja feita—abenemerita
sociedade de S. Joan Baptista de La Salle,
em Hongkong, possue dois vasfcos edificios
escolares, mn em Kowloon Tong, La Halle
College , reeentemente construido, e outro, em
Kennedy Hoad, St. Joseph's College.
Como boa politica do Goveino da
Repiiblica, e devido aos esforqos de dois ex-
Governadores de Macau, Sis. Carlos da Maia
e Correia da Silva, ja falecidos, o Governo de
Macau subsidia uma escola de portugues
nestes colegios e nos eonventois italianos, e ha
‘257 alunos que a])rendem a lingua portuguesa.
Tem-se preguntado se os Revdos. Bro-
thers poem, as vezes, peias no ensino da
lingua portuguesa nos sens estabelecimentos
escolares. Xenh u 111 a.
Se os Revdos. Brothers teem hoje o sen
nome ja conquistado e possuem aqueles dois
predios que honrain a instituicao a que per-
tencem, aos ])ortugueses, em grande parte,
devein ; e cornigo, vezes varias, confessaram
isto!
J. A. D’Almeida.


GREETINGS FROM ENGLAND
When I received a request from the Rev.
Brother Director to contribute an article I was
in some doubt as to my qualifications for such
a task, but a paragraph at the end of his
letter reassured me. “ Many old pupils have
promised to contribute” were his words, and
they at once brought to mind the Empire
Day Essay competitions of my schooldays.
Entries were usually prompted by the secret
thought “If so-and-so can do it so can I”.
In this instance I feel I am, once more, in
good company.
St. Joseph’s received me with open arms
at the commencement of the Summer Term
1923, although the school was then filled to
capacity and I was of the Protestant faith.
This was the first kindness of many. I was
bewildered by the cosmopolitan nature of my
surroundings and very much in awe of the
black-gowned Brother who presided over the
class into which I had been drafted. The
methods employed seemed different from and
more advanced than those I had been taught
to follow and I was not surprised to find
myself near the bottom of the list after the
first term-end examinations. A great deal of
struggling enabled me to get a remove at the
end of the year, by which time I had been
accepted by mj 7 fellow students as one of
them. The next eventful year was 1925,
when the colony was plunged into the turmoil
of a general strike. Everyone will remember
Rev. Brother FELIX
the part St. Joseph’s boys played in giving
their services to assist the authorities to carry
on. They became drivers and conductors of
trams, lift-men, and waiters, and some of
them had the good fortune to act as bell-
boys on the Canadian Pacific and Dollar
Line Steamships, visiting Manila, Hawaii,
Honolulu and eventually the United States;
in the same year the College celebrated its
Golden Jubilee. The year I matriculated,
1926, was marked by the most terrible flood
in the history of the Colony. Torrents swept
down the hillsides, carrying with them
boulders, trees and tons of soil, most of which
seemed to occupy the basement and the
ground floor of the Boarders’ House! An
army of coolies spent several weeks removing
the debris to the court-yard where it remained
in the form of a small mountain for some
time.
E. MATHIAS, ESQ.
My last day at school was the excuse for
a class demonstration. By kind permission
of Brother Felix, who was my guide,
philosopher and friend through the mathe-
matical maze, we staged a tea-party in Class
1, at the end of which speeches were called
for. I have no recollection of what was said,
but I still have a faded photograph of the
occasion with the signatures of those present
set out in my autograph book in the form of a
class room plan. I have lost touch with most
of the friends of those days. Brother Cassian
I have heard from frequently and I have also
corresponded with Albert Bodrigues who is
now a leading light in the Medical firmament.
Another of my friends, Jack Young, followed
me to England and I have met him often
since. We still talk of the grand times we
had in the laboratories and of the day when
we almost blew ourselves up with a jar of
hydrogen. A great number of others who
knew me will probably read this and I should
like them to know that I have not forgotten
our days together.
I now spend my life in following the
occupation of a Chartered Accountant and I
have to thank St. Joseph’s for equipping me
with the qualities of patience, perseverance
and mathematical efficiency required for my
profession.
All that I have left to say is that I could
wish for no greater joy than that of being
present for the Jubilee Celebrations. If any
of my contemporaries are concerned in this
publication, 1 am sure they will be glad to
join with me in heart-felt wishes for the long
life and continued success of our beloved
Alma Mater.
E. Mathias.


24th October, 1925. The Governor gave
the Boys a Holiday.
Letter From Government House
29th October , 1925. His Excellency the
Governor having intimated his desire to make
a present to the College for the new Chapel,
Brother Director suggested that a hanging
lamp would be quite suitable, so the Private
Secretary, Mr. T. Gaisford St. Lawrence sent
up a beautiful electric lamp worth $lOO.
October 1925. Harbour Race. The
Mckinnon Challenge Cup, (presented by Capt.
A. Mckinnon), won by A. May.
27th November, 1925. Day of Public
mourning for the late Queen Mother.
19th March, 1926. St. Joseph’s Day —
Inauguration of the New College Chapel.
27th April, 1926. The College received
the official visit of H. E. the Governor, ac-
companied by the Hon. Mr. A. E. Wood,
Director of Education.
Sir Cecil dementi arrived at 9.00 a.m.
and was shown through the laboratories, the
classes, the Boarders’ quarters and even the
Brothers’ floor. He showed himself much
pleased with everything as the following lines
he wrote in the log book testify:
“I visited and inspected the College
which is fortunate in the possession of
very fine buildings. The boys look well
and happy and 1 was much pleased with
all I saw. I wish the College all success.”
(Signed) C. Clementi,
Governor of Hong Kong,
27th April, 1926.
3rd May, 1926. Arrival of Rev. Bro. Paul
Visitor.
4th May 1926 Brilliant Pupils
Clever Young Essayists of
St. Joseph’s College
A representative of the Daily Press, by
courtesy of the Rev. Brother Airnar, Director
of the School, read yesterday some of the
prize-winning Empire Day Essays written by
students of St. Joseph’s College.
“If the teachers of English in other
Hong Kong schools teach this subject as
successfully as do the masters of St. Joseph’s
College, and if the pupils of those other
schools can write as well as these young
students, educational enthusiasts need have
no cause for worry.
C. F. Young, a pupil of Class I. writes,
on the “ History of the Foundation of the
British Empire in India."
Kwok Sze Ying, of the same class,
chose the same subject.
E. Mathias, 2a, writes on the u British
Empire Exhibition .” One wonders whether
this youngster has visited Wembley, since
his scenes are so well depicted.
One would think that the essay of P. A,
Xavier, 3a, on “ The British Navy," was the
work of an English boy and an intense patriot
at that.”
6th May, 1926. The Hongkong Inter-
School Sports were held on the H. K. F. C.
ground at Happy Valley. St. Joseph’s College
retained the Championship and the Governor’s
Shield for the Second consecutive year with a
total of 39 pts. and also won “all the cups”.
Lewis Woo won the Canton Nanyang Brothers
Challenge Cup for the Second year in succession
and C. Figueiredo won the Ellis Kadoorie
Challenge Cup. Perhaps the best events were
the relay races and in these St. Joseph’s
established a superiority from the gun and
never looked like being beaten.
12th May, 1926. Hongkong Boy Scouts
Bally. Scoutmaster H. Braga is presented
with the Silver Cross, awarded by the Boy
Scout Association for gallant conduct during
the Hing Fong Rescue Work.
loth May, 1926. Feast of St. John
Baptist de la Salle —College Sports. Solemn
Mass in the Chapel by Mgr. H. Valtorta.
16th May, 1926. Solemnisation of the
feast of St. John Baptist de la Salle at the
Cathedral. Mgr. O’Doherty Archbishop of
Manila celebrated Holy Mass in the Cathedral
and Mgr. Valtorta gave an eloquent sermon.
17th May, 1926. On the Hongkong Foot-
ball Club’s ground, at Happy Valley, the Jubilee
sports of St. Joseph’s College took place.
GOVERNMENT HOUSE
HONG KONG
October 26th , 1925.
Dear Brother Aimar,
With reference to your letter of this
morning the Governor likes the idea of giving
an electric lamp such as you described for
your Chapel.
Will you please therefore order it and
ask for the account to be sent in to the
A. D. C., Government House, within the next
2 days*
If it could be managed it would be
nice if the lamp could be brought here in
the morning on its way to St. Joseph's for the
Governor to see it.
Yours Sincerely,
T. Gaisford St. Lawrence,
Private Secretary.


The Gold medal for the “Victor Ludorum”
was won by C. Figueiredo, who obtained 10 pts.
by winning the Long Jump, the Quarter and
Half Mile and running second in the 220 yards
—a fine all round performance.
17th May, 1926. Third Day of the
Golden Jubilee.
4 p.m. The Brothers l£ at Home.” 5 p.m.
Thanksgiving Service in the Chapel. 5.30
Distribution of Sports Prizes by A. E. Wood,
Esq., D. E, after a short Gymnastic Display.
6. Concert very much appreciated. Mr.
J. P. Braga delivered an address. Tea was
served to the guests and the Regimental Band,
East Surreys, was in attendance. About 1,000
parents, past Pupils and friends, attended the
various functions.
13th Jane, 1926. Solemn Consecration
of our new Bishop, Mgr. H. Valtorta at the
Cathedral by H. E. Mgr. C. Costantini, Papal
Delegate at Peking, assisted by Bishops Nunes
and Fourquet.
19th May, 1926. H. D. Rumjahn and
S. A. Rumjahn retained the Tennis Champion-
ship which they had won the year before,
defeating Majors Pratt and Stevenson.
18th May, 1926. The celebration in con-
nection with the Jubilee of St. Joseph’s College,
Hongkong, culminated in a reception and con-
cert yesterday evening, when parents of the
pupils, past students of the College and friends
and well-wishers, gathered in large numbers to
congratulate the Brothers of the College and
enjoy their hospitality. On this occasion the
class-rooms, as well as laboratories and other
adjuncts recently acquired by the College, were
thrown open for inspection, the visitors includ-
ing the Director of Education, Mr. A. E. Wood,
(who later gave away the prizes won in the
previous Saturday’s Annual Sports Meet), Mr.
E. Ralphs and Mr. G.P.de Martin (Inspectors
of Schools).
The Band of the East Surreys was in
attendance and tea and refreshments were
served.
11th Jane, 1926. The Catholic com-
munity of Hongkong was well represented at
the Theatre Royal when a reception was held
in honour of the Right Rev. Monsignor
Valtorta, Bishop of Leros, and A'icar Apostolic
of Hongkong. He was presented with an
address which was read in eleven different
languages.
The Vicar Apostolic took his seat, accom-
panied by the Papal Delegate, from Peking,
His Grace Archbishop C. Costantini, and the
Bishops of Macao and Canton, the Salesian
Band playing the Papal Hymn.
Mr. CHARLES CHEN CHIN HIN
National Champion.
China’s representative at the Olympic Games 1936.
His Excellency the Governor, Sir Cecil
Clementi, K.C.M.G., on arriving outside the
Theatre Royal had a guard of honour, consist-
ing of the St. Joseph’s College Troop of Boy
Scouts. He was accompanied by Capt. C. H.
Steele, .a.d.c., and Captain H. B.L. Dowbiggin
(h.k.v.d.c.) and Captain B. L. Forster.
17th June, 1926. His Lordship paid an
official visit to the College. An address was
presented by Master Leonard Silva of Class I.
Madame Flint had kindly taken charge of the
bouquet.
His Lordship was accompanied by Very
Rev. Fr. Spada and several clergy, and by
Messrs. H. Dixon and Choa Po Sien.
18th June, 1926. Death of Mother Superior
Felicie, of the French Convent, Causeway
Bay.
Her death came as a great shock to the
Catholic community here, and will be a matter
of widely-felt sorrow.
3rd July , 1926. His Grace Mgr. Con-
stantini, Papal Delegate to Peking, visited the
College, attended by Mgr. Valtorta.
11th July, 1926. Baptism of Edward
Henry Cheung, by Rev. Fr. Banchio.
19th July, 1926. An electric storm is
followed by a terrific downpour which carries
away the nullah and boundary walls on the
western side of the College property.
23rd to 29th August, 1926. The Brothers’
Annual retreat was preached by His Lordship
Mgr. H. Valtorta.
23rd October, 1926. Conclusion of the
South China Aquatic Sports. Our champion
Chen Chin Hin gets 4 first prizes: 100 metres,
'JOO metres, 1500 metres and the Harbour race.


OLD JOSEPHIANS
Mr. Dee C. Chuan
Mr. Antonio Escudero
Mr. Manuel B. Asensi
Dr. Y. N. Atienza
Dr. Antonio Daniel Vazquez,
M.D.; L.R.C.P. and M.R.C.S. (Eng.)
M. Antoine Lè-Quang Trong
District Officer
Cochinchina
The late
Mr. E. J. Noronha, j.p.
Prof. F. Gonzalez
Mr. Lois Ayam


WESTERN VIEW OF THE HARBOUR FROM ST. JOSEPH’S COLLEGE.
CHINESE LITERARY CLUB. (BOARDING DEPARTMENT.)
DINNER IN HONOUR OF REV. BRO. STEPHEN, DECEMBER 1934.


31st October , 1926. Celebration of the
Feast of Christ, the Universal King. At 8.30
a.m. Pontifical High Mass; at 4 p.m. procession,
Sermon by Rev. Fr. A. Riganti and Solemn
Benediction.
29th November , 1926. Monday, Tuesday,
Thursday, Friday and Saturday, have been set
apart for the fulfilling of the obligations towards
gaining the Jubilee Indulgence.
Bth December , 1926. The generosity of
the committee of St. Joseph’s College Football
Club, in loaning the use of their ground at
Happy Valley to members of the crew of the
H.M.S. Hermes every Wednesday afternoon,
was suitably rewarded by the Commander of
the aircraft carrier, who in the name of the
footballers presented the College with a hand-
some silver cup.
13th January , 1927. Results of University
Examination; 10 Passes in Matriculation; 1
in Honours; 5 Distinctions; 2 Senior Local
Passes —29 Junior Local Passes; 6 distinctions.
16th March , 1927. Annual Prize-giving
Mr. W. Hornell presiding.
21st April , 1927. Sports. Mr. Ralphs
distributed the Prizes.
At the conclusion of the sports; Mr. E.
Ralphs presented the prizes to the winners.
Before doing so he said: “I do want to thank
you all for asking me to come and distribute
the prizes to-day. I always enjoy coming to
St. Joseph’s College because 1 always get a
warm welcome and made to feel that I am
amongst very old friends.”
27th April , 1927. Inter-School Sports.
The College wins the Governor’s Shield for
the third Year in succession.
26fh July , 1927. Death of Bro. Gadilonien
(Bro. Joseph) in the French Hospital. Burial
the same day. R.I.P.
3rd November , 1927 . M. E. Ralphs in-
spected the Classes. He expressed his satisfac-
tion with all he saw.
3rd January , 1928. Bro. D. Joseph, Sub-
Director arrived frtm Manila (Philippine
Islands).
Rev. Bro. JOSEPH, Sun-director
'Hih January , 1928. Rev. Bros. Marcian
and Claude arrived from the Straits Settle-
ments.
24tli February , 1928. Rev. Bro. Paul,
Visitor, arrived from Singapore.
28th February , 1928. “Visited the School
and inspected the Higher Divisions. I was
pleased with the keenness and alertness of the
pupils especially in the Junior Section. The
Science Department —Physical & Chemical
Sections—is well patronized and thoroughly
equipped. In the middle Divisions a number
of boys seem to be over age for their standards
and In some instances are not up to code re-
quirement in English."
(Signed: Bro. Paul.)
Rev. Bro. Marcian, Director, 1921.


ST. JOHN AMBULANCE BRIGADE
ST. JOSEPH’S COLLEGE DIVISION 1928
Back row from left to right:—
Chan Kwok Hay, Choy Wing Hay, Pak Mow Fun, Cheung Koon Sing.
Harry Lau, Ho Siu Um.
Second row from left to right:—
Yip Him Fong, Chan Chak Kan, Lawrence Leung, Choa Wing Ki.
Au Yeung Cheung, She Kwong Hung, Philip Chan.
Front Row (standing) Woo Pak Chuen and Woo Pak Foo.
Front Row (sitting) Staff Sgt. Gilmour, R. A. M. C.,
Edward Cheung, Dr. W. T. Cheung, Robert Choa,
and Rev. Bro. Cassian.


Mr.
R
O
B
E
R
T
C
H
O
A
St. Joseph's College Division
St. John Ambulance Brigade
In February 1927, Mr. E. Ralphs, then the
Assistant Commissioner of the St. John Ambulance
Brigade and Director of Education in Hong Kong,
called on Rev. Bro. Aimar and invited the College to
form a division in the Brigade with the view to enlist
the co-operation of Chinese students of the College in
this useful Civic Service and to afford those who
volunteer to serve in it an opportunity of undergoing
a training in first-aid and ambulance field-work.
The idea appealed strongly to Bro. Aimar who lost no
time in inviting Mr. Robert Choa (who had matriculat-
ed three years before) and Mr. Edward Cheung (then
on the staff of the College) to assist him in forming the
division and to serve in it as Ambulance Officers. At
the same time Bro. Aimar appointed Bro. Cassian to
be a director of the Division in an unofficial capacity.
Encouraged by the enthusiasm of about a dozen
of the cream of the young students of the College who
enlisted themselves in the cause, Mr. Choa and Mr.
Cheung at once set to work for the formation of the
first St. Joseph’s College Division of the S. J. A. 8.,
receiving their appointments as Officers-in-Charge of
the Division in March the same year. Dr. W. T.
Cheung, M. 8., 8.5., a cousin of Mr. Edward Cheung,
was invited and gladly gave his consent to become
the Surgeon of the Division, whilst Mr. Chak Tai Kong
and Mr. Yu Kai Cheung, then Divisional Superintendent
and Sergt. of the H. K. Y.M.C.A. Division respectively,
kindly offered to assist the Officers-in-Charge to drill
the recruits. Thus First-Aid classes and regular drill
were soon conducted, and a score or so of young men
in khaki could be seen marching up and down the
College compound once or twice every week after
school hours with all the alertness of Tommy Atkins.
One of the first appearances which the S.J.C. Division
made in public was at a Chinese Theatrical Per-
formance given in the same year (1927) for the enter-
taining of the troops sent to the Colony in connection
with the troubles in China. Later in the same year
the Division took part in a “Field Day” at Stanley
where the whole Brigade of the St. John Ambulance
devoted the greater part of the day in some very
useful field-work under their Officers, and spent
the late afternoon in a very enjoyable swim in
the cool waters of the well-known Stanley beach.
The strength of the Division was increased to twenty
members at the end of 1927, and through the good
offices of Mr. A. Morris the Corp. Superintendent, the
Division was fortunate enough to obtain the regular
assistance of Staff Sergt. Gilmour of the R.A. M.C. in
drilling the members and recruits.
In 1928 the Division was represented in the
swimming competition opened to all members of the
Brigade and carried off the Brigade Championship
(“Chater” Challenge Shield) besides capturing the
following trophies:— Team Race (Ellis Kadoorie
Shield), 100 yards championship (Ho Bros. Cup), and
the 50 yards back stroke (Chan Chan Nam Cup).
During the winter months when a small-pox
epidemic broke out in the Colony, the St, Joseph’s
College division took part in the Vaccination Cam-
paign, and between October, 1928 and April, 1929,
members of S. J. C. division vaccinated over 6500
people at the various street stations established in the
congested areas of the Colony. Latterly, house-to-
house vaccination was in progress, the S. J.C. Division
being assigned the Causeway Bay district at parts of
which small-pox was prevalent. In December the
same year the Division took part for the first time in
the Annual “Ralph Shield” competition of the Brigade
conducted by the officers of the Royal Army Medical
Corps. Considering that it was the first time we par-
ticipated in such a competiton the results were quite
satisfactory, the Divisional being awarded 469 marks
against 498 scored by the Kowloon Division who
were the winner of the Shield that year.
The second year First-Aid lectures being com-
pleted, examination was held in the beginning of I 929,
the outside examiner this time being Dr. Arthur Woo,
M. 8., B.S. (London), etc. Besides the members who
passed the first year’s exam, four more members
qualified for full membership in the Division, which
brought the number of members who completed the
two-years course to 1 6 and those completed the one-
year course to 4. The Division again took part in the
Annual Inspection and received the swimming
trophies won the previous summer. The Division
repeated the swimming laurels of the previous year by
winning (jointly with the Chinese Athletic Division) the
Brigade Championship, the team Race, and the 100
yards Championship. In June this year Mr. R. Choa
secured the kind consent of the late Mr. Woo Hay
Tong to become the Patron of S. J. C. Division and to
contribute the sum of $2OO a year towards its upkeep.
Towards the end of the year Mr. Robert Choa,
who had only been appointed to be Divisional superin-
tendent of the S.J.C. Division a few months before, was
obliged to resign from active service in the Division
owing to increased business duties and to an injury in
the leg received the year before, which prevented him
from all strenous outdoor work. His resignation was
very much regretted not only by the members of the
S. J. C. Division but also by the superior officers of the
Brigade, whose confidence he had completely won
during his three strenuous years of service in the
Brigade, years which took up a great deal of his time
and energy for which he considered himself amply
rewarded by the fact that the Division was then, as it
were, well on its feet and had already contributed its
bit in the many spheres of the Brigade’s useful work
under his guidance. A dinner was given in his
honour on the 9th October, 1929, which was attended
by the Corps’ Sup. A. Morris and Corps’ Officer J.
Ralston and the Officer and members of the S. J. C.
Division, at the conclusion of which a silver cup,
suitably inscribed, was presented to Mr. Choa as a
memento of his connection with the S. J. C. Division.
During the year Dr. Y. Y. Tang, M. 8., B.S. (H.K.)
kindly consented to serve as one of the Division
Surgeons in place of Dr. C. H. Wan who had resigned.
As this article on the S. J. C. Division of the S. J. A.
Brigade draws to a close, it is the feeling of the con-
tributor that it will not have achieved its object if a
word of sincere appreciation and thanks (much
belated though it seems!) to all those who were con-
nected with the Division, was not said.


SPORT PERSONALITIES
A. GOSANO
THE RUMJAHN COUSINS
A. V. Gosano, though only 28 years of
age, may be described as a veteran in Inter-
port football, having played for the Colony
against Shanghai every year since 1926,
except in the 1932 game, when he could not
get the necessary leave to make the trip to the
Northern port.
He first learned how to play football at
St. Joseph’s College, being a member of the
champion Inter-Schools’ team (Intermediate)
in 1919-20, while he w r as captain of the senior
team in 1921-22. He first figured in League
Football when playing for the Recreio, who
were runners-up in the Junior League in
1923-24 and champions the following season.
Playing in his first Interport match in
1926, Gosano was elected captain of Hong
Kong in 1930, while he was also vice-captain
twice. In 1931 he toured Java with the Com-
bined Chinese Athletic and Shanghai Chinese
football team, and in the following year he
toured Manila with the St. Joseph’s eleven.
Gosano has played in all four of the
Portuguese Interport football matches (Hong
Kong v. Shanghai) being captain of the local
side on two occasions.
Football, however, is not Gosano’s only
game for he is a tennis player of high
standard. He won the Singles championship
of the Recreio (1935) and w r as runner-up three
times, while he also won the Doubles cham-
pionship of the same club four times, in
addition to being runner-up twice.
At billiards Gosano has also made a name
for himself, being in the Volunteer team that
won the Soldier’s Club tournament in 1933.
He has also distinguished himself at athletics
and aquatics, while at hockey he has proved a
very capable centre-forward for the Recreio.
Although he has not figured much on the
cricket field recently, Gosano played for his
school in 1921 and 1922.
H. D. Bumjahn, the Interport tennis
player and joint holder of the Colony Doubles
Championship for the last 11 years, first
learned how to play tennis from the late Mr.
R. J. Birbeck, who was the Headmaster of the
Ellis Kadoorie Indian School when “ H.D.”
was there in 1916.
It was in 1921 that he first participat-
ed in the Colony championships and he
had the distinction of reaching the final of the
Open Doubles with his cousin , Omar Rumjahn.
A few months later he secured Inter-
port recognition, and on his return from
Shanghai (where Hong Kong was beaten) he
again partnered Omar in the Doubles and won.
In 1923 Omar left the colony for Tientsin
and H. D. joined forces with S. A. Rumjahn,
another cousin. What has happened since
then is history.
Dp to a few years ago he also played
cricket for the Indian Recreation Club senior
eleven, being a very steady batsman in
addition to being one of their most reliable
fielders. At football, too, he has met with
considerable success, and while at school
represented St. Joseph’s College at athletics.
Although S. A. (Sirdar) Bumjahn is
best known to followers of sport for his
prowess on the tennis court, he is an excellent
all-round athlete and has many sporting in-
terests other than tennis.
He is the holder of the colony lawn
tennis Singles championship, having won it
four times in all, while, with his cousin H. D.
Rumjahn as his partner, he has held the
the Doubles Championship for 11 years.
He first figured in the H. K. C. C. tennis
tournaments in 1920, when only sixteen years
of age, and in that year reached the semi-final
of the Open Doubles. He has played in three
Interports, and at the age of 19 was the
captain of the Hong Kong Interport, tennis
team which went to Shanghai. Since 1921
ho has represented the Indian Recreation
Club in the “A Division of the League.


Cricketers 1932
Class 8, 1928


Rev. Bro. CLAUDE, Sub-director
12th March , 1928. Distribution of Prizes
at 5.15 p.m. Mrs. E. Ralphs gave aw r ay the
Prizes and addressed the Yisitors and Boys.
Mr. A. E. Wood, D.E., Mr. Ralphs, 1.E.5.,
were present. Concert: Music and Recitations
were very good. Mrs. Ralphs gave the Boys a
Holida} 7 .
12th April , 1928. The Old Boys’ Associa-
tion w T as re-organised and named —The
Christian Brothers’ Alumni Association.
23rd April , 1928. Site for Kowloon
College purchased at public Auction.
11th May, 1928. Annual Athletic Sports.
His Lordship Bishop H. Yaltorta distributed
the Prizes.
15th June 1928. Feast of the Sacred
Heart. Exposition of the Blessed Sacrament
in the College Chapel.
1/th October, 1928. Feast of Blessed
Bro. Solomon . His Lordship Bishop Yaltorta
said Mass and gave the Boys an instruction
at 8 a.m.
14th January. 1929. Mr. J. P. Braga is
nominated by H. E. the Governor Member
of the Legislative Council.
Bev. Bro. Marcian s Tribute to Bro. Joseph.
All old Boys have known the late Bro.
Joseph, but few have fully realised the extent
of his services. I here are psychologists who
tell us, that the most important period of our
education, is that of early youth between
the ages of four and ten years. If this be
true, we may form an idea of the influ-
ence for good, exerted by Bro. Joseph during
his twenty-seven years of devoted attention to
the formation of the little ones who started
their College career in Class Eight, on the
first round of the ladder. It is but fitting
then, that something should be done to per-
petuate his memory. A very effective means
of doing so, would be that suggested by some
members of the Association, the establishment
of one or more scholarships for the lower
classes.”
23 rd January , 1929. Old Boys’ Annual
Dinner. 225 present.
The Hon. Mr. Braga, who is the pre-
sident of the Association was supported by
the following committee members: Messrs.
J. M. Graga Ozorio, Andrew Tse, Robert
Choa, Frank Barnes, Francisco L. Marques,
and C. Dragon {Hon. Secretary). Others pre-
sent included the following:- Rev. Bro. Aimar,
{Vice-patron), Mr. E. Ralphs (Inspector of
English Schools ), Mr. G. P. de Martin
(Assistant Inspector ), Rev. Fathers G. Byrne,
S. J., F. Biotteau, G. Spada, F. R. Noval, A.
Riganti, V. Samson, L. Rossi, L. Banchio,
W. J. Borer, A. F. M. Parisotti, and the
Chaplain of the French cruiser Jules Michelet,
Dr. F. M. Graga Ozorio, Dr. R. A. C. Basto,
Dr. C. F. da Roza, Messrs. Henry Dixon, i.s.o.
(Past President), W. G. Fitz-Gibbon, J. M.
da Rocha, J. P. Xavier, C. H. Basto, A. H.
Basto, M. F. Baptista, F. J. Tavares, Noel
Braga, Hugh Braga, Simon Tse Yan, M. A.
Figueiredo, Leo D’Almada, Jnr., L. E.
Guterres, Lim Hoy Lan, J. Y. Chanatong,
C. A. R. da Roza, J. Noronha, E. A. Noronha,
Lee Yat Choi, G. Aquino, J. Baptista, A. F.
Osmund, P. Julyan, S. M. Margal, F.
Rodrigues, Aubrey Edgar, Sydney Edgar, C.
A. V. Ribeiro, J. G. Remedios and A. Y.
Gosano.
Referring to the College being built near
Kowloon City, the Hon. Mr. J. P. Braga
remarked that this enterprise redounded to
the credit of Bro. Aimar and his staff. It
was not the product of a faint heart. It
required breadth of vision and a confidence in
Greater Hong Kong, as Kowloon would no
doubt in time come to be called. Bro. Aimar
and the members of his Community were an
asset to Hong Kong. It was men of their
type who were wanted for the greater develop-
ment of the Colony.
In supporting the toast, Bro. Marcian
said he was particularly pleased to have the
opportunity of congratulating the Hon. Mr.
Liaga on the choice made of him by the
representatives of His Majesty the King for
membership in the local Legislative Assembly.
It was an honour to the College and to the
Association, as well as to himself personally.
It was a pleasing duty on this occasion
to pay a tribute to Mr. Dixon, and a well
merited tribute, for his devotedness to the in-
terests of the Association, and to thank him
tor the noble example of charity which he had
given to the young men. In the name of the
Association, Bro. Marcian thanked Mr. Joseph
Ghanatong for his generous donation of $lOO.
25th February, 1929. Bro. Denis arrived
from Manila.
hv \! Stl E T m Cl ri 1929 '■ Distribution of Prizes
by Mr. W. W. Hornell, Vice-Chancellor.


(At the Silver Mines.)
Class 2
1929
The Sequeira Family.


Matriculation Class 1930
Mr. Roy Pereira and friends
Mr. George Li
Mr. Francis Lim, B.Sc.
Mr. J. Sousa, Macao Seminary
Castle Peak
Messrs. E. Choa, M. Martin and A. Gosano
at the La Salle Sports 1936
Mr. Allan Li
A. Osmund, Esq.
At Caroline Hill, School authorities
Ceo Alves, Penang Novitiate


Rev. Fr. E. Teruzzi, Chaplain to the
Catholic Boy Scouts Troops.
Rev. Fr. R. W. Gallaher, S. J. Ph. D.,
Rector of Wah Yan College (H.K.)
The Founders
of
the Society of
St. Vincent de Paid
Hong Kong.
Knights of the Plessed Sacrament, 1923
The Children of Mary, 1923


Boarders 1928
Junior Class 1930
Bro. Alphonse among Athletes
the School Champions 1932.


Mr. W. W. Hornell, Vice-Chancellor of
Hong Kong University, presided, and amongst
those present were the Right Rev. Bishrp
Henry Valtorta, Rev. Fr. Byrne, S. J., Rev.
Fr. Gallagher, S. J., Hon. Mr. J. P. Braga,
M. Dufaure de la Prade (Consul for France),
Soeur Beatrice, the Mother Superior of the
French Convent, Mr. and Mrs. Woo Hay
Tong, and others.
Mr. Hornell remarked that on a previous
occasion, he had emphasised the all-sacrificing
devotion of the Brothers who left their homes
and all they had, to give themselves to their
work. In doing so, he said, they were
serving a cause which they recognised to be
greater than themselves.. He commended the
spirit of the Brothers to the boys of St.
Joseph’s College. In the world to-day there
were too many people with the ca’canny
idea —a policy which sought to do as little as
possible and demanded a great deal more than
could be given.
He did not say that there were no griev-
ances, but unless they could recover for the
workers of the modern world something of
that pride in their work which animated the
workers of the Renaissance civilisation, as
they now knew it, it was doomed.
In conclusion, Mr. Hornell said that the
boys had the world before them and, in the
work which lay ahead, they were not to pro-
ceed with the niggardliness of those whose
highest endeavour in life was never, in any
circumstances, to give themselves away.
(Applause).
An enjoyable concert, arranged by Fr.
Riganti, preceded the prize-giving ceremony,
those contributing in addition to the organiser,
being Prof. E. Gualdi, Mr. J. Braga, the
College Choir, and a number of pupils.
Prior to giving away the prizes, Mr. W.
W. Hornell said he wished to congratulate the
Director of the College on a very successful
year, and to thank Fr. Riganti and those who
had just taken part in the excellent perform-
ance to which they had listened.
Scholarships
The 30 Woo Hay Tong Scholarships,
each of the value of $6O a year, are
awarded, 24 on the results of the annual ex-
amination to boys in the upper classes, while
six holders are nominated by Mr. Woo Hay
Tong. Brother Director expressed his most
sincere thanks to Mr. Woo Hay Tong, and
said he was sure the pupils who are
benefiting by his generosity desired to tender
their most grateful thanks to him.
Very Rev. FR. KIGANTI.
Vicar General , Rector of St. Joseph's Church
and President of St. Patrick's Catholic Club
15th May 1929, Empire Day in Hong Kong
Empire Day was celebrated at St. Joseph’s
College, when the students numbering over
800, assembled in the recreation hall for the
distribution of prizes awarded in connection
with the Empire Day Essay competition and
the recent niter-class football games.
Later the boys attended the Empire Day
service at the Cathedral, Caine Road. The
St. Joseph’s College Division of the St. John
Ambulance Brigade was present at the cere-
mony under the command of Mr. Robert Choa,
Division Superintendent. The College Scout
Troop was also present under the supervision
of Mr. Charles Dragon, a.s.m.
21st September, 1929' Brother A.
Matthias arrived from Manila on the S. S.
Eulda.
sth tC: 6th November , 1929. Mr. E. Ralphs
and Mr. A. R. Sutherland finished their annual
inspection.
7th November , 1929. Holiday given at
the request of Mr. Ralphs, Director of
Education.


ST. XAVIER’S INSTITUTION
PENANG, S. S.
REV. BRO. MATTHIAS, DIRECTOR OF S. J. C. 1931—1935
NOW DIRECTOR OF ST. XAVIER’S INSTITUTION,
PENANG, S. S.
29th March, 1936.
Dear Bro. Director ,
Kindly accept my felicitations on the occasion of the
Diamond Jubilee of St. Joseph's College.
I regret I cannot be present in person at the celebrations,
but yon can rest assured that I shall be with you in spirit.
May St. Joseph's College - continue to carry on the glorious
work it has been doing for the past sixty years with God's choicest
blessings upon its Staff and its Pupils.
Bro. Matthias


Rev. Bro. PAUL
6th December , 1929. The Governor of
Macao visited the College. He was accom-
panied by his A.D.C. and the Portuguese
Consul. At the request of the Bro. Director,
a half holiday was given.
29th December , 1929. Bro. D. Joseph,
Sub-Director, leaves for Manila. He is
appointed Director of La Salle College. Bro.
A. Matthias is appointed pro-director of the
College.
23rd February , 1930. Y. Rev. Bro.
Anacletus, Asst. Sup. General, arrives on a
visit to H. K. and China.
Ist March, 1930. Y. Rev. Bro. Anacletus
distributed the Annual Prizes to the boys.
3rd May , 1930. Annual Sports —a very
successful Athletic meeting. Mr. Ralphs
presented the prizes.
15th May , 1930. Feast of St. John
Baptist de la Salle. His Lordship Bishop H.
Yaltorta celebrated Holy Mass at 8 a.m. and
gave tbe_Aovs an instruction.
21st Jane, 1930. Feast of St. Aloysius.
Fr. MacDonald gave the boys an instruction.
19th September, 1930. H.E. Sir William
Peel, the Governor, visits the College. We
read in the Log-book —
“ I visited the College and was
much impressed by its buildings
and accommodation, and parti-
cularly by the pupils. They are
a healthy and intelligent band of
boys and the school is to be con-
gratulated on its successful work.
(Sgd.) W. Peel.
sth November , 1930. Laying of the
Foundation Stone of La Salle College by
H. E. the Governor, Sir William Peel.
H. E. Mgr. C. Costantini blessed the
stone, and delivered an address in Latin.
7th January , 1931. The Matriculation
results are excellent. 19 passed. 6 Honours.
22 Distinctions. The Junior results are fairly
good, 40 passed with 35 Distinctions.
6th March 1931. Mr. Chan Leung, Chief
Inspector of Schools, Kwangtung Province,
accompanied by the Director of Education,
Mr. G. P. de Martin and Mr. Y. P. Law visited
the College.
16th April , 1931. Bro. Edward arrives
from the Straits.
Rev. Bro. EDWARD
EDWARD
7th January , 1932. School reopens. La
Salle College opens officially to-day.
Rev. Bro. E. XAVIER
E. XAVIER
Science Teacher
14 th March, 1932. V. Rev. Bro. James
presided at the annual Distribution of Prizes.
The Matric and Junior Classes were present,
also Class 3-4 A. (private function)
25th April, 1932. Bro. Hubert arrives
from Manila to join the Staff.
29th April , 1932. Half Day; Inter
School Sports: St. Joseph’s College won the
Championship.
18th February , 1933. Distribution of
Prizes. His Excellency Bishop Yaltorta
presided. Dismissal at 11 a.m.


Double Tenth Boarding Department 1930
Rev. Bro. Aubert (Sub-Director) and the Boarders - 1927
Matriculation Class 1934-1935
Bro. Anthony’s Class 1930
Mr. G. F. d’Aquino


MATRICULATION CLASS 1933
JUNIOR. CLASS 1931


Annual Prize Distribution, 1933
The Eight Rev. Bishop H. Yaltorta gave
away the rewards at St. Joseph’s College Brize
Day, which was held at the College on
Saturday. Bishop Yaltorta expressed the
earnest hope that the College would continue
to maintain its high reputation among the
Colleges of the Far East. “But this in a
great measure depends on the student body
composing it."
Brother Matthias in his Report among
other things said: — I wish to congratulate
E. Hoffman and A. Williams for securing
distinctions in English.
Cricket: — During the course of the
year our cricket eleven played several clubs
and a few schools. Considering that we are
newcomers in this branch of sport we did very
well. We won two matches against the D.B.S.
and suffered defeat twice at the hands of our
old rivals, the Queen’s. Of eight other matches
we won three, drew three, and lost two. I take
this opportunity to thank the Hong Kong
Cricket League for its generous financial help,
the Indian Recreation Club, the Club de
Recreio, the Craigengower Club, and the
University Club for the use of their respective
grounds.
6th March, 1933. Rev. Father Mac-
Donald gave a very interesting lecture in the
Hall to the Senior Bovs on the Life of OUR
LORD.
14th March, 1933. Rev. Bro. James,
O. B. E., Yisitor, Christian Brothers’ Schools,
went round all the classes with Rev. Bro.
Director Matthias. “ The boys in all forms
looked bright, cheerful, and happy and showed
evidence of a good spirit of work. I was
particularly struck by the discipline prevailing-
all over the College and the good manners of
the pupils."
stli May, 1933. St. Joseph’s College won
the Governor’s Shield with 25 points.
St. Stephen’s College, 21, Central British
School, 16.
24th May, 1933. Empire Day: About
400 boys attended service in the Catholic
Cathedral. Rev. Father Gallagher preached.
Ist June, 1933. Mr. Joseph Foch resign-
ed from the staff.
23rd June, 1933. Feast of the Sacred
Heart of Jesus: Exposition of the Most Blessed
Sacrament, Lecture by Rev. Father Bourke,
S. J.
11th October, 1933. Joseph Chan (Matric)
died at 2.30 a.m. in the French Hospital. He
had received Baptism at 9 p.m. the previous
day.
Joseph Chan
12th October, 1933. The funeral of Joseph
Chan was well attended by the Matric Class
and by the Boarders.
16th October, 1933. Retreat for the boys,,
the Rev. Father Peter presiding.
2nd November, 1933. Mr. A. R.
Sutherland inspected classes 8, 7, 6 & 5.
Rev. Bro. Visitor visited the classes.
27th November, 1933. Total on Roll, 702,
Present, 651; Catholics, 245.
13th February, 1934. Distribution of
Prizes, Mr. N. L. Smith presiding.
21st March, 1934. Annual sports. La
Salle College won the Invitation Relay. His
Excellency Bishop Valtorta gave away the
prizes.
sth April, 1934. An old pupil the Rev.
Father Luke Fung said Mass in the College
Chapel this morning at 8 a.in. He began liis
studies in Class 8, and in 1922 passed the-
Matriculation.
REV. FATHER LUKE FUNG
12th April, 1934. His Exc. the A. D.
to China, Mgr. Zanin. visited the school. An
address was presented to him by the Rev.
Bro, Visitor James, 0.8. E.
15th May, 1934. Feast of Saint John
Baptist de la Salle —Successful concert by
pupils.


VIEW FROM THE COLLEGE (EAST END)


KING GEORGE V SILVER JUBILEE ILLUMINATIONS 1935
Kowloon
The College
Hong Kong


3rd July, 1934. Examination in Classes
1,2& 3. Mr. Sayer, Director of Education,
accompanied by Mr. A. R. Sutherland visited
the Classes.
12th July, 1934. School: Masters Li
Fook Wo, Li Fook Tsung bade good-bye.
They leave for America.
17th October, 1934. Retreat given by
Rev. Father Kelly, S. J.
27th November, 1934. “I finished my
last annual Inspection of St. Joseph’s College.
I was very pleased with the work I saw and
with the conduct of the pupils. I asked the
Acting Director to grant the School a half
holiday.”
A. R. Sutherland, Inspector of Schools.
7th December, 1934. 24 members were
admitted into the Sodality. Our Scouts won
the Prince of Wales Banner.
26th January, 1935. Mr. Burney, Educa-
tional Expert, visited the School.
29th April , 1935. Sunday, 28th. His
Excellency Bishop Yaltorta blessed the
Troop flag in the School Chapel. He was
afterwards entertained to tea. At 5 p.m. the
Troop assisted at Procession. The Holy Year
Jubilee was closed.
Ist March, 1935. ‘T visited all the classes
with Rev. Bro. Director Matthias. The current
work throughout was quite satisfactory. The
pupils in all departments looked cheerful,
happy and enthusiastic.”
(sd.) Bro. James.
Visitor of C. B. Schools.
3rd Jane, 1935. King’s Birthday: Rev.
Bro. Romuald, Provincial, arrived.
4th September, 1935. Bros. L. Paul and
Adolphus joined the Staff,
25th September, 1935. Rev. Father
Gallagher visited the Classes.
30th September, 1935. Number on Roll,
769 —Number present, 789 —Number of
Catholics, 251 —Number of Chinese Catholics,
112 —Number of Protestants, 27 —Number of
Mohammedans, 25 —Number of Chinese, 579
—Number of Portuguese, 82 —Number of
other Europeans, 39.
3rd October, 1935. Meeting of Head-
masters at the University re-School
Certificate.
Bth March, 1935. Annual Sports: Mrs.
G. R. Sayer gave away the prizes. Ideal
weather: very large gathering.
6th May, 1935. Public Holiday: Silver
Jubilee of His Majesty the King. 9.15 a.m.
Address read to the assembled classes; 10.00
a. m. Service in the Catholic Cathedral.
Received congratulations of the Director of
Education, Mr. G. R. Sayer. The School
illuminations were very artistic.
27th November, 1935. Distribution of
Prizes at 4 p.m. The Hon. Mr. J. P. Braga,
0.8. E. presiding.
7th November, 1935. His Lordship addressing the boys on
the 60th anniversary of the foundation of the College,—Mass of
thanksgiving.


The Honourable Mr. J. P. BRAGA, O.B.E.
Prize Distribution 1935
The Honourable Mr. J. P. Braga, 0.b.e.,
said: It is with a great deal of pleasure that
we have just heard in brief terms a review
from the Brother Director of the activities of
St. Joseph's College during the past year.
It is a record of good work, of progress and
advancement such as has always been
associated with the uniformity and excellence
of the educational achievements of our
leading Catholic boys’ school in Hong Kong.
On your behalf and for myself I would like
to say how gratified we feel at the School’s
success, and how heartily we congratulate the
Director and his staff of teachers, as well as
the scholars, for the team work that has
contributed towards these good results.
The College building, its magnificent
situation, and its healthy environment, all
provide the elements that make for the
success of any institution of this kind, and
I am happy to think that students, not only
from the Colon}’, but also from far-off places
in the South, resort to this College for its
excellent equipment and for the facilities
which the staff affords in imparting sound
knowledge and a good grounding in subjects
of education conforming with the Govern-
ment requirements.
1935
The Top-floor
Directors of St. Joseph’s College:
1875-1925
The first Director, Bro. Hidulphe, re-
turned to France in November, 1879. His-
successor was Bro. Cyprian. He arrived in
February, 1880, and died at Kobe on the 10th
May, 1887.
In January, 1884, Bro. Louis came from
Saigon and remained till March, 1889, when
he returned to Cochin-China as Director of
Institution Taberd and afterwards as Visitor
of the Indo-China Province. From 1889-
1894 Bro. Abban was Director. On the latter
being appointed Visitor of the District, Bro. 0.
Gregory was transferred from Colombo to
Hong Kong and took charge of the College for
a few months only.
From 1895 up to date the Directors have
been: —
Bro. James the Young 1895-1899
Bro. Julian Francis 1899-1903
Bro. Joshua 1903-1904
Bro. Dotto Sylvester 1904-1908
Bro. Christian 1908-1913
Bro. Adrian Edmund 1913-1914
Bro. Peter Chrysologus .... ....1914.
He died at Hong Kong on the 30th April,
a month only after his appointment.
Bro. Aimar 1914-1921
Bro. Marcian .... .... ....1921
Bro. Michael .... .... ....1922
Bro. Aimar 1922-1931
Bro. Matthias 1931-1935
Bro. Stephen .... .... ....1936
1927


Sir WILLIAM and Lady BRUNYATE at St. Joseph’s College Sports Prize Distribution (1921).
St. Joseph’s College Annual Average Attendance 1875-1935.
Rev. Bro. AUBERT, Sub-Director.
Rev. Bro. RICHARD.
Rev. Bro. JOHN, (Old Josephian)


St. John Baptist de la Salle, Founder of the Order
of the Brothers of the Christian Schools.


Sir William Peel's Testimony
HIS EXCELLENCY SIR WM. PEEL AT THE OFFICIAL
INAUGURATION OF LA SALLE COLLEGE.
On the occasion of the Sports Meeting
held at La Salle College on sth April 1933,
Sir William Peel, Governor of Hong Kong-
said :
“ With the long experience I have of
educational matters in the Far East, I am not
at all surprised that La Salle College should
already have 700 pupils, for I know of no
Institution or Corporation that has succeeded
so well as the Eev. Brothers in that field of
action.”


LA SALLE COLLEGE
NORTH-WESTERN VIEW
We can hardly celebrate our sixtieth
anniversary without saying a word of our
younger Brother across the harbour. In the
graph of the average enrolment for the sixty
years of the existence of St. Joseph’s College
a sharp drop can be seen in 1931. On the 3rd.
December of that year La Salle College was
inaugurated by the Brother Director Aimar,
five Brothers, four secular teachers and three
hundred and three pupils, -200 of whom came
from the St. Joseph’s Junior School in
Chatham Road. Kowloon.
Coming after the housing of St. Joseph’s
College in very comfortable quarters at
Kennedy Road, the acquisition of a beautiful
site of over ten acres at Kowloon Tong and
the erection of the majestic buildings which
now crown it. truly represents a gigantic
achievement.
La Salle Coliege to-day, with its 850
pupils, stands high among the educational
establishments of the Colony and has already
won fame, for its pupils have shown their
mettle both on the playing fields and in
examination halls.
La Salle College will carry on the
traditions of St. Joseph’s and will educate for
the Church enlightened Christians, and for
the State useful and loyal citizens.


LA SALLE COLLEGE STAFF 1936
LA SALLE COLLEGE BOARDERS


CLASS I A. LA SALLE COLLEGE 1985
Class I B. La Salle College 1935


LA SALLE COLLEGE
Class 4A
A group of Converts.
Class 7A


La Salle College Footballers.
The Kings Silver Jubilee Theatricals at La Salle.


La Salle College —Front View.
Mr. G. P. de Martin at La Salle Sports.
The First Group of Converts of the College, 1932
Mr. J. Leurquin
French Consul General
in Hong Kong.
An Old
Pupil of the Brothers
in Paris.


Rev. Brother Cassian, Sub-Director of La Salle College
A group of Converts, La Salle College
St. Joseph’s Branch Sochol
Chatham Road.


CATHOLIC ACTION AND CATHOLIC SCHOOLS
CONVERTS
1935
Father Martindale has objected to the
title Catholic Action as being too mechanical
a rendering of the Italian “Azione Cattolica.”
The term he prefers, Lay Apostolate, is cer-
tainly nearer to the definition of the move-
ment although it seems to me that what his
title gains in accuracy it loses in impressive-
ness and vigour. According to Pope Pius XI,
Catholic Action is the participation by the
laity in the mission of the hierarchy. “Catholic
Action is a true apostolate in which Catholics
of every social class participate and come to
group themselves in thought and work around
centres of sound doctrine and manifold social
activities legitimately constituted and assisted
and sustained by the authority of the Bishops.”
(Pius XI)
So, while it is true that every action
which a Catholic performs as a Catholic is
really a work of Catholic Action, yet according
to these words of His Holiness, the character-
istic mark of the work is organisation. Zeal,
or “an ardent desire to share in the apostolate”,
is its mainspring and consequently Catholic
Action centres are not mere debating-clubs
but sources of intense activity.
There are several principal ways in which
Catholic Action manifests itself. First, when-
ever an important question touching Chris-
tian principles arises, members of the Lay
Apostolate unite to defend the truth. This is
what occurred in the United States a few years
ago when the Legion of Decency was started.
Definitely, here was a case when the laity
could work more effectively than the clergy.
The latter had always denounced indecent
films but their words were unheeded. It
required the Legion of Decency with its
strangle-hold on the box-office to make the
Hollywood magnates take notice. In Dublin,
the management of a cinema turned a deaf
ear to the many protests of a group of young
Catholics against the showing of a certain
film. Polite letters proving useless, these
young men turned to action. They bought as
many tickets as they could; as soon as the
objectionable part of the film was shown, they
stood up iu a body, protesting loudly, and
walked out. The majority of the audience
joined fhem. The result was that the film
was taken off. This was Catholic Action in a
Catholic land.
The Catholic Actionist is so proud of his
faith that he must needs proclaim it from the
housetops. It becomes in him a force, like
that of compressed steam moving a piston.
It must show itself. This means letting
everyone know that he is a Catholic. In
office, shop, factory, club —wherever he makes
an appearance, they know what he stands
for. He is not like those people about
whom it comes as a surprise, almost as a
shock, to learn that they are Catholics.
He is not afraid of actively supporting
Catholic enterprises. He attends Catholic
Clubs and socials. He buys a Catholic
paper and reads it, not furtively in the
privacy of his room, but openly in the bus and
in the office. He leaves it lying around that
it may do good to others. The parish church
he attends may be only a tin shed, but to him,
it is worth more than the most beautiful of
stolen cathedrals. Its poverty is a sign
of Christ’s blessing. The parish priest may
be in appearance but a Father Brown and his
homely sermons may not stand comparison
with the florid orations of the neighbouring
minister, but the loyal member of Catholic
Action listens to him and loves and defends
him as a representative of Christ. He does
not critically compare Catholic with non-
Catholic organisations, but he improves the
former by belonging to them.


And most obviously of all, Catholic Action
consists in actual co-operation with the clergy
in religious works. In places where priests
are few’, young people volunteer to act as lay
catechists and do an incalculable amount of
good. In fact, the Church could make no
headway without their help. Sacrificing their
leisure hours on Sundays they go out into the
suburbs of the large cities and gather together
the little children to teach them the faith. It
is done everywhere. In Manila, volunteer
catechists run around in their cars on Sunday
mornings to various determined places and
pick up bands of little urchins and bring them
into town. There, after a good catechism,
they take part in games until the time comes
for the run back to the places they call home
where they continue the good work by talking
about it for the whole week. Then there is
the work of the Conference of St. Vincent de
Paul, whose dominant trait is charity. In
some places you have the Catholic Evidence
Guild, the members of which are trained to
lecture to the crowds. Then, more recently,
the Catholic Writers’ Guild has been started.
This is a body of competent writers who defend
or explain the faith by means of pamphlets,
books, or even letters to newspapers.
These are some of the works to which lay
apostles devote themselves; but there is
another, the greatest: it is the apostolic
function par excellence because it is the office
of the Apostles themselves whom Jesus Christ
appointed to go and teach all nations.
Doubtless all persons engaged in the works I
have mentioned share in this mission in so far
as they teach. But Christian educators par-
ticipate in the apostolic mission more fully
because they devote their whole lives to the
work. If Catholic Action by definition is the
participation in the mission of the Apostles
and if that mission is to teach mankind, then
Christian education is the supreme work of
Catholic Action. This then is the answer to
those who inquire what St. Joseph’s has been
doing all these years. Sixty years ago, when
the number of Catholics in Hongkong was
small, a little group of Brothers took on the
management of a Catholic school for boys
in the Colony. They started the grandest
work of Catholic Action. At present this
work is shared by others, but here was
the honour of beginning and bearing the
burden of the day and the heats.
The loftiest maxim of the public school
boy in w hose hands lies the guidance of Eng-
land and the Empire, is “ Play the game."— °
The Catholic boy is told in his school
that the eternal principles of Justice and
Charity Thou shalt love God above all things
and thy neighbour as thyself for God’s sake°”
are the raison d etre of all reasonable beings.
The Catholic school trains the physical,
intellectual and spiritual side of her pupils
whereas the other schools ignore the spiritual
which is the most important. If, as a
certain local headmaster asserted, the main
j )b in life is to earn one’s daily bread, then the
more fully equipped a person is for this all
important function the better for him, and
blessed are the rich, and where is the need to
worry about anything else ? But if, as faith
and reason tell us and, as our schools insist,
man hath not here a lasting city but is born to
know love and serve God and live forever with
Him in another life, then the more one brings
this principle to the fore the better one will
succeed in one’s main job. Surely, the citizen
who has not this thought as the basis of ail his
actions is not a fully educated citizen. A
world which neglects the end for which it is
created cannot go right.
The masses are far more instructed now
than ever before. Cheap printing, compulsory
schooling, facilities for travel, and modern
scientific discoveries are responsible for that.
But the world does not seem to have benefited
much by its instruction. Caliban retorts to
Prospero: “You taught me speech, and now I
know how to curse.” This seems to be the
case with the world. The more it knows, the
more it bungles things. And the reason is
that its knowledge derives from false
principles. The application of the principles
of the Gospel is the sole cure for society’s ills.
The Pope has demonstrated this and the
( hurch insists and has always insisted on it.
Members of Catholic Action by propagating
the truth are helping to restore the reign of
sanity. But in the foreground of those who
are really saving civilisation stand Christian
educators.
They are helping Catholic Action in
another way: by training cultured Catholic
laymen. There, can, of course, be no Catholic
Action without Catholic culture. For how can
men love and be proud of what they do not
know ? Still more, how can they defend it or
spread it ?
Now, a pupil of a Catholic college such as
-it. Joseph s, after ten years of almost daily
Catechism, can hardly be called uninstructed
in the faith. He may not be able to give a
pu )lic \ indication of the infallibility" of the
Pope, but at least he can answer all the
culinary questions which non-Catholics some-
times put to their Catholic friends. Moreover,
the daily Catechism they have heard and the
example of virtuous teachers often inspire
. em .J' 1 | a to pass on to others the good
that they have received and generate in them
a tmst to know more about the priceless
m leiitance which is theirs. And in this con-
nectrnn, if there were anything 1 might be
allowed to urge, it would be that a club or
** u y eiicle be formed for the study of apolo-
-IC?* . ie school programme is already
as * ar as possible, and so such work
vxoutd have to he done in what is generally
1 a oluh, but certainly there should be
naii} young men willing to spend some of
VA * r “tune at the deep study of their
T lon ’. better time could there be for
ormmg of such a circle than this year?
Bro. Edmund.


To Our Friends And Benefactors
A Chapter of Thanks
It has been said:
“He who has a thousand friends
Has not one friend to spare
And he v ho has one enemy
Shall meet him everywhere.”
We have not, thank God, met that enemy
anywhere yet, whereas our friends have shown
themselves to be legion.
It seems as though the words of the
prophet of old had once more gone forth: “To
the North, give up; to the South, keep not back.
Bring ‘friends’ from afar and from the ends of
the earth.”
To all, our hearts go to-day in grateful
remembrance.
The magnitude of the task before us would
be well-nigh overwhelming were it not at the
same time so congenial and sweet —for truly
can it be said of gratitude as well as of mercy :
“It is not strained, but droppeth as the gentle
rain. It is twice blessed —it blesseth him that
gives and him that takes.”
After Almighty God, the author of all
good gifts, in whose loving care we will
trustingly rest, St. Joseph, our glorious Patron
and Protector, under whose patronage we have
been enabled to reach this 60th year of our
existence, has first claim to our gratitude.
Our thanks next go to our ecclesiastical
superiors represented by our beloved Bishop,
Mgr. H. Yaltorta, whose unfailing sympathy
has all along been such an inspiration and
encouragement.
Then come our own kind religious
superiors who, far and near, share with us
to-day the happiness towards which they have
contributed in such large measure.
To His Majesty’s Government, the
Educational authorities, nay, the very War
Department, (we have the free use of the
Murray Parade Ground), we are indebted for all
the amenities we have been so long enjoying.
Special mention must be made of the re-
verend clergy who, one and all, have stood
prominent among this host cf well-wishers and
benefactors, winning our admiration for their
entire devotion to our spiritual welfare whether
in annual retreats or daily ministrations.
In the other local religious bodies we have
never met with anything but the warmest
sympathy and most touching readiness to
oblige in a thousand delicate ways.
This we delight in acknowledging and for
it we call down Heaven’s choicest blessings.
May these descend in equal plenitude
upon the Brothers themselves and their hard-
worked, loyal staff. “ Ils ont eie a la peine,
qu’ils soient a Vhonneur ”
Nor can we forget the architects and
doctors who in their various capacities have
stood by in the hour of need and are respon-
sible for the present healthy condition of both
the College and its inmates.
It now remains for us to tell how
deeply we feel our indebtedness to all our
Old Boys who at the first call and in any
capacity rallied so loyally round their Alma
Mater and made of this Jubilee an event
unforgettable in the annals of the College.
The celebrations have been to us both a
revelation and a lesson; the revelation of a
wide-spread sympathy which we fully
appreciate, but a reminder as well which we
shall not forget, that “to whom much is given,
from him also much shall be required.”
Very Rev. Father L. Robert,
Superior General of the Society of tire
“Missions Etrangères”, Paris.
SIMON TSE YAN, Esq.


Li Fook Shue, Esq.
The late
Mr. Li Shek Pang
Li Koon Choon, Esq.
1. —Woo Pak Chuen, Esq.
2.—Woo Pak Kwai, Esq.
3.—Woo Pak Foo, Esq.
4.—Woo Pak Shau, Esq.
5. —Woo Pak Fook, Esq.
The late Mr. Woo Hay Tong


Li Ping, Esq.
The “Grand Old Man” of H. K.
Mok Kon Sang, Esq.
Rev. Brother Denis
Late Rev. Bro. Cuthbert
(an old Josephian, 1916)
Rev. Bro. Rupert
Missionaries from many lands.


My dearest Lord
Give me grace to serve Thee
And Thy will to do,
Then welcome be Thy sunshine
And, Lord, Thy crosses too.
THE COLLEGE HALL.-ANNUAL EXAMINATION
Thus I schooled him Jo go and come—
To speak at the word—at a sign be dumb;
To stand to his task* not seeking others to
aid him;
To share in honour what praise fall
ror the task accomplished and—over all
lo swallow rebuke in silence. Thus I made him.
//. jL t/j/i/ljt/


LAY STAFF OF ST. JOSEPH’S COLLEGE, 1935-1936.
From Left to Right .
Sitting Mr. H. G. Asome, Mr. V. A. Chan Wai, Mr. Benedict Cheung, Rev. Bro. Matthias (Director), Mr. R. A.
Pereira, Mr. Mark Kei Fun, Mr. Jos. B. Lam.
Standing: Mr. Chow Dick Cheung, Mr. J. Sim Tze Young, Mr. Lim Kim Huan, Mr. Anthony Lim, Mr. Quah
Cheow Cheang, Mr. Patrick Ho, Mr. Yan Shu Fan, Mr. Pang Cheuk, Mr. F. Ooi En<* Bee
Mr. F. J. Boay.
MATRICULATION CLASS
From Left to Right.
Sitting: Robert Li, Algy Ho, Francis Ho, Rev. Bro. Claude (Sub-Director), Rev. Bro. Matthias (Director) Rev Bro
Hubert (Chemistry Teacher), Cheng Kai Yuen, Chua Siu Hoo, G. Karpusheff.
Middle Row: Kwok Cheuk Ming, Peter Lara, Li Fook Tai, G. Singh, Chong Ah Chee, G. Whittick, S. Barzvcki Chow
Shun Cheung, Lee Yiu Pui, Franky Ah Toung, Chung Wai Ting.
Back Row: Wong Tsang Yu, Leung Tat Shing, John Wu, Yu Shiu On, Leung Kwok Tsun, Vincent Poon Fung Ying
Fai, Wong Yiu Cheong, Mark Shui Suen, Choy Kwok Bing, Foulo Yeh.


5 urgical Instruments
ameras (Leica and Siemens Cine)
J-J ospital Equipment
Epidiascopes, etc.
I nstruments for Geodetical, Astronomical and Meteorological Work
and X-ray Apparatus
[ elescopes, Binoculars, etc.
C hemicals, Drugs and Patent Medicines
lnstruments
P. O. BOX 137
SCHMIDT 8c CO.,
GLOUCESTER BUILDING ARCADE
HONG KONG
dfd
dfd
TEL. 27430
CHEMISTRY LABORATORY


fax
y<
r
i
: J /ICC
B/ioApectu6
IX
t'u.st , f IuUH) , Kui It UUj Scluiol,
X; U ufi Cfcaotlaoine
PHYSICS LABORATORY


CLASS 2-A
From Left to Right.
Sitting: C. Kwok Chiu, J. Botelho, B. Tavares, Rev. Bro. John (Form Master), Rev. Bro. Hubert (Chemistry Teacher)
L. A. Rozario, A. Alves, P. Cheng, E. Tavares.
2nd Row: J. Manson, C. Yat Kuen, Pedro Lee, C. Po Ning, S. Che Tan, A. Kwok Kee, Robert Lee, Eugene Choa,
P. Fung, Ip Y T u Chiu, Li Yip Kan.
3rd Row: Z. Kossakowski, L. Kan Yuen, M. Sequeira, Tan Get Hee, Lee Sai Wall, C. Lau, W. Mak.
Last Row: L. Neves, Raymond Wai, Sia Peng Hui, Li Fook Kuen, Francis Li, L. Rodriguez, U. Shiu Lun A Pereira
I. A. Madar, G. Kai Yan, Wong Tok Chai.
From Left to Right. CLASS 2-B
Sitting: Ho Cheuk Yan, Mr, H. Asome (Form Master), Rev. Bro. Hubert (chemistry Teacher). M. Tso, M. Joanilho.
2nd Row : Wai Chak Lau, Henry Kan, J. Kitchell, M. Hassan.
3rd Row: F. Tam, Ng Yuen Sui, Ching Kwai Fan, Lai Chou Kwai, Ong Chit Harm, Leung Ge Shau, T. Maher,
Yeung Man Sak, Woon Kok Ying, A H. Abbas, Cheng Kam Kwan.
4th Row: To Lit Pun, Sia Hong Choo, Tsui Yam Nang, J. Lam Wai Chak Yuen, Li Tsun Hang, B. Shroff, Chia Pee-
Teck.


COMMERCIAL CLASS A
From Left to Right.
Sitting: A. L. Ho, K. K. Tong, A. Ozorio, I. Y. Chung, Rev. Bro. Hubert, Rev. Bro. Matthias (Director), Mr. Jos. B.
Lam (Form Master), Carlton Ahwai, Ng Sui Cheong, Wong Shui Hai, Eugene Petrove.
Middle Row: P. Sousae, J. A. Leigh, F. Cullen, Kee Yau Nin, Anthony Pang, Stephen Ding, Thomas Kew, G. Sequeira,
Louis A, Lou, S. H. Lee, Chong Ah Chong, E. Ibarra.
Back Row': K. L. Kwok, S. Y. Wong, Stanley Lee, Albert Quark, Chow Chung Wah, Hector Souza, H, Conception,
William Chen, J. Olaes, W. H. Tang, I. Kitchell, Wong Bark Lim.
COMMERCIAL CLASS B
From Left to Right.
Sitting: Chan Ting Hong, Chua Tiow Yeong, Lim Tou Hwa, Mr. V. A. Chan Wai (Form Master), Rev. Bro. Matthias
(Director), J. Lee, C. Thompson, Kan Pak Wing, A. Toledo.
Middle Row ; Kwok Yiu Tak, Wong Sui Pan, Lam Tsa Wai, So Pok Fai, Law Yuk Wing, Yan Chang Wong, Mason Lou,
A. Soto, Yeung Kwai Hing, Lau Kwok Hung.
Back Row: E. Fisher, J. Xavier, Soon Foo Shun, A. K. Rumjahn. Wong Cheang Ping, Yeung Hok Ling, Victor Chan,
Peter Yapp, Choi Yuk Ki, Yan Tat Sai.


TYPISTS.
GROUP I
TYPISTS.
GROUP II


COMMERCIAL CLASS
Typists (Commercial Class) Group III
The College “Glee Club”
MR. LIM KIM HUAN, SUB-MASTER.
Converts, 1930.


CLASS 3-A
From Left to Right.
Sitting: F. Hollands, Lee Nam Po, Mo Luen Cheung, A. Leonard, Rev. Bro. Brendan (Form Master), L. Vas, J.
Ahwai, R. Rocha, E. Tavares.
Middle Row: R. Pereira, C. Pereira, G. Sim. B. Young, A. Chow, Hui Sek Fye, G- Choa, Ng Sau Chee, Lee Yan Chiu, A.
Gomes, Charles Ma, Au Fook Suen, J. Sui, K. Singh. Ma Wai Lock, Li Shu Yau, V. Karpusheff, Shek
Chun Chee.
Back Row: C. Marcal, Fung Shun Chov, Chan Wing Cho. R Gardner, W. Fitz-Gibbon. A. Sequeira, P. Chak, J. Lim,
A. Havers, Cheng Shou Kwong, Chang Chi Hong, P. Mack, Lai Chow Wo.
CLASS 3-B
From Left to Right.
Sitting: Chan Kwok Chong, Tsui Yui Lock, Law Chi To, Ng Chik Tong, Wong Tiug Tsai Rev. Bro. Justin (Form
Master), Ho Hung Kin, Choi Tze Chong, K. Singh, William Lee, Chan Kwok Kew.
Middle Row: Frank Law, Wong Hing Shuen, Hon Chuen Kwan, Hudson To, Peter Lam, Johnson Wai, Fung Cheung
Choy, Au Leung Wah, Luke Man Keung, Tong Man Leung, Law Yat Sun, Paul Tsang, Hue Ka
Cheung, Lai Luen Kui, Lam Cheung Hing, chan pak Cheung, Ding Fook Hoi.
Back Row: Philip Chow, N. F. Hoosenally, Yu Wah Tak, Kwok Hon Ming, Fung Hon Hung, Li Fuk Yim, Yan Chang
Hung, Mak Ping Kwong, Liou Kam Shing, Chow Chun Andrew Cheung.


CLASS 4-A
From Left to Right.
Sitting: A. Oliveira, P. Souza, N. Andrade, E. Paterson, Rev. Bro. Charles (Form Master), Rev. Bro. Hubert, I.
Silva, C. Hollands, P. Carmo.
Middle Row: H. Ribeiro, P. Chia, Silva, J. Wan. G. Hill, J. Choa, A. Grimmitt, E. Rozario, J. Kelly, G. Young, G.
Tavares, C. Agabeg, C. Julyan, C. Castilho.
Back Row: W. C. Cheong, C. Gorla, G. Havers, P. Kelly, R. Gomes, J. Tso, R. Nakao, G. Sullivan, J, O’Young, J. Kee,
F. Chan, J. Cullen, F. Santos, L. Li.
CLASS 4-B
Sitting: Kan Yuet Fei, Wong Wing Cheung, Shing Kara Cheung, Ho Hung Shu, Mr. Chow Dick Cheung (Form
Master), Rev, Bro. Matthias (Director), Lara Hung Chi, M. Ali, Siu Chi Yuk.
2nd Row : Wong Kai Cheong, Wong Hoi To, Chan Ho Cheong, Wong Sik Tong, Wong Ting Shek, Garwood Leung
Henry Pang. Ho Hung To, Chan Sze Hin, Au She Sum.
3rd Row: Kwok Ying Kau, Lam King Gar, Chiu Yat Sing, Lawrence Chan, Boon Kwong Yuen, Chan Tze Yung, Hon
Sui Man, Francis Ayam, Li Fook Chu.
Last Row: Wong Kwok Bun, Mak Wai Fong, Ip Tai Chu, Lau Kwok Chu, Ma Wai Sheung, Kan Yuet, Wan, Shing
Kam Wing, Ching Man Chi, Tze Hung, Liu Wai Yung, Ma Soon Wah, Kai Hung, Chan Po Kuen.


CLASS 4-C
From Left to Right.
Sitting: Ng Chung Ning, Ronald Ho, Chong Hee Yean, Dickson Chan, Rev. Bro. William (Form Master), Ng Man
Tai, Hussian Moosdeen, Chan Chong Mun, A. Moosdeen.
2nd Row : Yeung Kwok Ming, Hui Chi Tang, James Bowen, A. Rahman, Wong Yung Kay, Ma Kam Sing, Ng
Chi Hung.
3rd Row : Wong Jun Ying, A. G. Saleh, Fung Tze Wan, Tang Kam Shing, Johnny Leung, Mak Kei Cheong, Lee Woon
Fan, Jacob Ip, Chan Chui Hung, Luk Hon Chee, Yuen Yeun Lau, Ma Yan Sang,
Last Row: Ma Lam Chan, Chu Mung Hung, Chan Kee Cheong, Ng Sui Wah, Chau Wai Po, Poon Kwong Yuen, Chau
Kam Ming, Shum Shui Mo, Chan Yue Choi, Lee Vun Tat, Lo Wing Cheong, Chan Kai Hong.
CLASS 5-A
From Left to Right.
Sitting:Vinvent Tavares, Rennie Rineiro, C. Foster, Chia Sau San, Rev. Bro. Paul(Form Master), Rev. Bro.
Matthias (Director), Fung Ping Kan, Woon Kok Foon, Meno Rozario, Antonio Souza.
Middle Row: Edmund Gander, Chiu Chu Chi John Lcnnenen, Kenneth Andrew, Woo Chin Hui, Ronnie Vas. A.
Fallon , Shibasaki Joseph Tong, Patrick Fallon, Philip Tavares, Chow Chun Kau, John
Fallon, Tam Kam Shung, Wong Chak Wang, Reggie Andrew.
Back Row: Luk Fook Kui, Tam Kai Cheong, Wong Sui Sing, Chak Sui Ki, Wong Yuk Lam William Koo Zamora
Noel, Km Long Xuynh, Francis Neves, Shing Kam Wah, Archie Gardner Yu Sai Kit Manuel Lee.


CLASS 5-B
From Left to Right.
Sitting: Chan Sik Chiu, Lam King Kai, Male Wing Sang, Mr. Quah Cheow Cheang (Form Master), Rev. Bro.
Matthias (Director), Ngai Park Kee, Lau Hing Choy, Tam Yim Tho, Ip Tai Yuen.
2nd Row : Ma King Tak, Chan Wai Yee.
3rd Row : Leung Hing Kee, Kan Pak Wah, Ip Hon Chuen, Suen Wah Luk, Au Chung Choi, Lam Yung Hon, Chiu
Yati Yim, Chui Y T at Soon, Chan Yee Yan, Cheung Tim Fat, Shung Shing Chung, Wong Ping She, Chan
Kun Hee, Chan Ying Cheong.
Back Row: Chan Tat Cheong, Chan Kai Fun, Ho Kai Iu, Wong Chi Keung, Wong Hong Sang, Yee Ka Shan, Hui
Chung Fat, Choy Chung Ying, Lam Shiu Kam, Lo Chi Cheung, Tong Man Yue, Ng Pang Ying, Lee
Wan Yuen.
CLASS 5-C
From Left to Right.
Sitting: B. Abbas, Pang Tsing Yung, Li Chi Hing, Chin Sit Pian, Mr. Ooi Eng Bee (Form Master), Rev. Bro.
Hubert, Wong Yue Tong, Choi Ching Chee, Tang Chat Sum.
2nd Row: Leung Min Fun, George Law, Fung Kim Chung, Chong Kit Yee. Chan Man Tuek, Hung Yan Hing, S.Singh,
Au Yee Chuen, Ho Lin Kit, Daniel Ayam, Tin Kwong Wah, Lam Tze Ho, Li Chi Sun, Li King Tim.
3rd Row : Tsoi Lee Kok, Tsang Ming, Au Yee Kwan, Wong Wah Chong, Loo Sai Kwong, Lau Cho Yuen.
4th Row: Ng She Chiu Yung Hon Kucn, Chan Yee Kan, Lam Ping Kwan, Tong Kam Yee, Cheung Wing Tong, Chan
Yee Tak, Tang Shui Ming, Chan Yuen Chee, Au She Shing, Ho Lin Tim, Ho Sik Kwong, Lo On Lam.


CLASS 6-A
From Left to Right.
Sitting: George Blore, George Sequeira, Rev. Bro. Hubert, Rev. Bro. Cronan (Form Master), Richard Dedear, John
Kong, Peter Kung.
2nd Row: Lin Francis, Yung Po Ming, George Mok, B. M. Omar, Joseph. William Soonendram, Fernando Pereira,
Charlie Castro, Sammy Salmon, Armando Crestejo, Orlando Vas.
3rd Row: Cheng See Sum, Thomas Lim, Tang Yan Shau, Leung Chi Wing, Shin Kui Wing, Tsui Tak Fong,
Henry Baker, Mok In Kwong.
Back Row: Frank Haynes, Arthur Dand, Clarence Kitson, Lau Cheung Fai, Andrew Choa, Robert Cheng, Gerardo
Tavares, Wong Chak Ming, Collum Begdon, Deifino Barradas, William Fallon, Teddy Chao.
CLASS 6-B
From Left to Right.
Sitting: Kan Yuet Wing, Lo uis Fook, Fong Shau Kai, Mr. Lim Kim Huan (Form Jaster), Rev. Bro. Hubert, Chan
Oi Tung, Wong Lok, Chan Choi, Chau Yiu Suen.
2nd Row: Dominic Cheung. Yip Yan Cheung, Hohn Carl Yick, Cheng Kim Hung, R. Hamet, Enrique Seto, Kung Wah
King, Henry Chan, Siu Che Wah, A. Harteam.
3rd Row: Hon Chun WAh, Ho Khoon Wong, Woo Shing Soong, Lo Kwok Hing, Cheng Koon Hong, Yan Chan Ming,
Fong Shau Yip, Wong Kwok Leung, Tong Kwok Wing.
Back Row. Yung Kam Ling, Sin Che Ching, Cheung Wei Yuen, Seto Wah, An Yun Nam Tsang Kwok Wing, Leung
Hon Cheung, Lee Cheung Jim, Leung Man Chang, Kwok Chi Kwan Lam Tsun Kong


CLASS 6-C
From Left to Right.
Sitting : Chow Kam Kin, Li Yuet Ching, Ng Tze Bun, Mr. Patrick Ho (Form Master), Rev. Bro. Matthias (Director),
William Cullen, Poon Hon Ming, Chu Hau Chui, Hui Kai Cheong.
2nd Row : Li Yat Chi, Peter Tong, Ho Yew Yong.
3rd Row : Poon Tso Ting, Wong Loi Fat, Ma Hon Yau, Yong Kwai Fong, Nicholas Tam, Lui Wing Cheong, Lam
Ping Kee, Edmund Wu, Cheng Kam Tak, Lau Hung Fun, Pang Chi Lun, Augusto Xavier.
Back Row : Li Sze Kee, Heung Lee Sang, Peter Tam, Li Tang Fong, Chan Tze kin, Lee Kam Sing, Cheung Vai Pong,
Tong Chan Ying, Hui Kai Luen, Lall Singh, Ma Ho Tong, Fung Po Kan.
CLASS 7-A
From Left to Right.
Sitting : P. G. Gilbert, John Anderson, Rev. Bro. Alban (Form Master), Poon Tso Yut, Francis Botelho.
2nd Row: Rene Ohl, Henry Crestejo, Marcos Roza, Alvaro Andres, Simon Lee, Paulo Rosa, Gustavo Fong, H. Tavares,
R. Barradas, Francis Gutierrez,
3rd Row : Edward Pereira, Harvey To, Dick Gutierrez, Victor Gutierrez, H. Tominaga, Hakuno Sha, To Wing
Kwong, Fu Tack Sing, Liem Thian San, Lee Pak Cheong.
Back Row : Henry Carmo, Chan Tek Cheong, John Castilho, Wong Chak Lam, Lam On Sui, H. Nomura, Peter Fallon,
R. Cordeiro, Freddy Morales, Dicky Becker.


CLASS 7-B
From Left to Right.
Sitting: Hanson Drummond, Eric Ho, Mr. Francis J. Boay (Form Master), Rev. Bro. Hubert, Kan Yuet Hung,.
Frank Woo, Tsang Toe Ming.
2nd Row : Lam Shu Ching, Joseph Rodrigues, Loo Sai On, Ho Shou For, Look Fook Hene.
3rd Row: Ng Yin Cheong, Ho King Ming, Ip Wing Mow, Cheung Pak Huen, Lam Yung Tai, Chan Wing Tung,
Lau Cho Kon, Leung Ming Chuen, Ng Yin Fan, Poon Hon Shiug, Lam Sat Chung, Lau Kam Wing,
Robert Kee Yan Tak.
Back Row: Wong Hing Loo, Chan Hon Man, Lam Shu Sum, Kwok Lock Yiu, Saifuddin Kayamally-Hoosenally, Lo
Siu Ki, Ho Ping Kwan, Wong Pak Chun, Wong Pui Lam, Ip Tai Cheung, Ng Tai Fat, Lai Chai Hung.
CLASS 7-C
From Left to Right.
Sitting: Rung Chin Fat, Hoo Lin Kin, Ng Choi Choy, Mr Jamst Young (Form Master), Yuen Ying Hung,
Ng Man Sui, Cheng Yum Chiu.
Middle: Cheung Hon Lun, Horace Lo, Leung Chin Kan, Ho Sec Cheung, Lee Ping Leung, Leung Shun Tong,
Cheung Tin Ngoi, Tin Mom, Chuen.
Back Row: Wong Kwok Hong, Ho Chip Kan, Leung Jhin To, Herbert Lo, Lau Hon Choy, Lo Ka Chun, Li Yuk Mong,
Ng Chan Sing.


CLASS 8-A
From Left to Right.
Sitting : Regi Coelho, S. Delgado, F. Castilho, Rev. Bro. Hubert, Rev. Bro. Adolphus (Form Master), John Morales,
Arthur Pereira, Louis Sousae, Gustavo Crestejo.
2nd Row: Regi Gonzales, Robert Thompson, William Liang, Jab Mahuvawala, F. Karim, Pang Kwok Ng, Wallace
Landolt, William Sousae, B. M. de Sousa, Ala Kai Ki, Chou Wing Kee, Chou Hon Pak, Ernest Sousae.
3rd Row: Tam Kai Tai, Yee Yeung Ping, Yeung Shiu Chow, Chan Sin Chow, Chan Hook Sian, Hiroshi Kase.
4th Row: George Erwin, I. M. Omar, Tjan Boon Hong, Sieu Lee Hong, Chan Ting Wo, Tam Wah Yam, A. Joanilho,
Lo Wai Tak, Sieu Ding Heung, Tse Siu Kan, Lo Wan Yin, Ghan Wai Yam.
CLASS 8-B
From Left to Right.
Sitting: Chow Wai Hung, Hong Sing, Chan Shak To, Hr. Benedict Cheung (Form Master), Kev. Bro. Matthias
(Director), Roger Koo, Li Fook Hoa, Lam Lai Ming, Wong Kam Chuen,
2nd Row: Ip Wing Kin, Chan Yuen Cheong, Anthony A. Raptis, Leung Kun Sin, Johnnie Sum, Choa Hak Ming, Lee
Kam Chuen, Stephen Fisher, Ng Yin Hong, Fu Tack Wah.
3rd Row: Li Fook Ming, Leung Siu Cheong, Hui Yip Kwong, Ho Shau Tai, Leung Fook Chuen, Li Chun Yip, Lui
Wai Wong, Lam Kwong Shing, Shek Wing Hap, Wong Siu To, Chan Wing Yau, Yam Kam Pong.
Back Row: Yu Ping Hang, Lau Yick Chuen, Shu Shum Pui, Kwok She Kin, Chan Ming Chew, Ho Shau Hak, Tang
Ming, Lui Chun Hung, Kwok Chang Kee, Shum Kung Sit, Ho Zen Shuen, Wong Wing Kwan.


BOYS ADMITTED IN 1936.


PHYSICAL INSTRUCTION
Sgt. Harding, R. M., drills each class three times a week.


The Reverend Brothers, 1935
Rev. Brother Matthias at the Parting dinner
previous to his departure for Penang (27 Dec. 1935)


ST. JOSEPH'S NOVITIATE PULAU TIKUS. PENANG.
Francis Rosario on the Eve of his Departure for St. Joseph’s
Novitiate, Penang. The Rosary Church Servers Picnic.


THE COLLEGE CHAPEL


TO MY SPIRITUAL FATHER
Joseph Takai
What shall I give as tribute
For the long, untiring years
You have shriven and helped me
In the Sacrament of tears?
X have wandered afar from my childhood,
And you have grown grey and old,
Since first in your healing presence
The story of life was told.
I have placed in your holy keeping—
In the strength of your wise control,
The sorrow and desolation,
The joy and the peace of my soul.
The heights and the depths of my nature
The side that is earnest and true—
The side that is all unworthy
Are known but to God and to you.
Joseph Tang, Esq.
Paul Wu
REV. FATHER PETER GARBELLI (CHAPLAIN OF THE COLLEGE).
Chung Ah Chee
Louis Lou
Prefect of the
Sodality of the
M. B. V. M.
1935-1936
You have borne with my fo dish fancies,
With my weakness and sin and strife,
And, patient as was your Master,
You have pilo L ed my life.
You have shown me the mercy of Heaven,
And it fell on my heart that day
When you paust d at the Benediction
Feeble and old and grey!
I am one of the many pilgrims,
Who turn to your guiding hand,
And just for its kind upholding
The surer and better stand.
And prayer is my tribute, Father,
For the long, untiring years,
You have shriven and brought me comfort
In the Sacrament of tears.
J. B. H.
Frederic Yeoh Eng Soon.
The Boarders.—l 934


The Archconfraternity of the Most Infant Holy Jesus
I. ITS NATURE
1. It is a crusade in behalf of Christian
teaching;
2. It is a powerful means of Christian and
religious formation;
3. It is an effective help in fostering Priest!v
and Religious vocations.
11. ITS OBJECT
1. I hat God may have the place of honour
in all educational establishments:
2. i hat teachers and pupils, everywhere and
always, may be free to observe the laws
of God and of Holy Church;
3. I hat the faith of children may not be ex-
posed to danger in schools in which
God is ignored;
*4. That apostolic vocations may be increased
and children blessed with Christian
teachers.
HI.—CONDITIONS OF MEMBERSHIP
Any Catholic who is interested in the
Mel fare of children may become a member.
All that is strictly required for member-
is to have one’s name entered on the
Register of the Archconfraternity at an ap-
piosed centre. The Confraternity of St.
Joseph s College, being affiliated to that of
e hlehem, has the power to enrol members.
ie names of those who desire to register
should be sent to the Secretary. This enrol-
ment will place such members under the
special care and protection of the Divine Child
and entitle them to share in the many spiritual
advantages of the Archconfraternity.


ALTAR BOYS’ CONFRATERNITY OF THE DIVINE INFANT
Oh ! see upon the altar placed
The victim of the greatest love!
Let all the earth below adore,
And join the choirs of heaven above.
How little, oft, am I inclined
To come and kneel where Jesus lives!
How feebly I desire to find
The blessing He so freely gives.
The Altar Boys’ Confraternity of the
Divine Infant is a section of the Archconfra-
ternity of the Divine Infant Jesus, established
in the College, December 1934. Its first Pre-
fect was Kobert Luzurriaga, the post being
now held by Eugene Choa.
This Section is mainly intended for boys
who wish to serve Mass in and out of the
College. It strives to make known to others
the realisation of the Ileal Presence of Christ
in the Eucharist. Eucharistic programmes are
arranged in which conference on the liturgy,
lectures on the Divine Infancy, stories which
deal with the Blessed Sacrament, have a place.
Special periods of adoration are allotted to
groups. Guards of Honour are organised on
such feasts as Holy Thursday and the Feast
of the Sacred Heart. Frequent visits to the
Blessed Sacrament are encouraged.


I am the Immaculate Conception
Immaculate Mother,
* We come at thy call,
And low at thy altar
Before thee we fall.
Ave, Ave, Ave, Maria.
W e pray for our Mother,
The Church upon earth,
And bless, sweetest Lady,
The land of our birth.


SODALITY
The Sodality of the Most Plessed Virgin was established in St. Joseph's College, 2nd
February 1914, by Brother Adrian, Director. Its members are recruited from among the
Catholic boys, past and present, of the College. Four things mark our Sodality: 1. Special
devotion to Our Lady. 2. The desire to lead a more than ordinarily good life. 3. A certain
exclusiveness which aims at keeping from membership such as would be content with only
ordinary service of Our Lady. 4. The practice of weekly Holy Communion.
Some of the Prefects of the Sodality since its foundation are as follows:
Gabriel Xuong Chee
C. F. Roza
J. Corominas
Andrew Tse Tak On
Anthony Xavier
L. A. da Roza
Robert Choa Wing King
Joseph Tan Xing
Carlos M. Victor
J. M. Remedies
Ralph Poon
Carlos Agon
Gabriel Windsor
Joseph Fong
Louis Lou
The total strength of the Sodality, Past and Present members, is of -J6B members.


The Institute of the Brothers throughout the World.
St. Teresa of the Holy Infant Jesus
Converts 1930
Some statistics relative to the strength
and activities of the Institute of the Brothers
of the Christian Schools were provided by
Bro. Francois de Sales (Secretary General) in
the course of three radio addresses from Paris.
“In Europe,” he said, “the Brothers are
to be found in Italy, Switzerland, England,
Ireland, Belgium, Holland, Austria, Romania,
Hungary, Poland, Spain, Germany and Cze-
choslovakia. They have reopened many of
their schools in France. In the principality
of Monaco they are the official instructors.
“Altogether, the Christian Brothers have
1,277 institutions in 64 countries in which
live 14,106 Brothers and more than 4,700
novices, representing in all 75 different na-
tionalities. They have 8,013 classes with a
school population of 313,000 pupils, and in-
numerable post-graduate activities frequented
by 123,300 youths.
“There are 1,400 Brothers in mission
lands where they have 129 houses and give
instruction to 48,000 children. They are in
Madagascar as well as Burma and may be
encountered in the Congo as well as in Turkey.
“1 nfortunately the Christian Brothers of
Mexico have been dispersed, but there are
324 Brothers, conducting 20 schools attended
by 5,960 students in Cuba, Nicaragua, Pana-
ma, and the Dominican Republic. South
America has 1,251 Brothers instructing 29,400
pupils in 105 schools.” (N.C.W.C.).
Pupils of St. Joseph’s 1906
(Chinese School)


An Ever Growing Tree.
The Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools in Mission Lands.


g|T. JOHN BAPTIST DE LA SALLE is
iS rightly revered as the Founder of an
important religious Congregation, who reached
the heights of holiness. There is, however,
another aspect of him which is too commonly
overlooked. He has unequivocal claims to be
regarded as the great Pioneer of Popular
Education.
In opposition to the traditional practice
.of bis day, he was the first to insist that
pupils should be first taught to read French,
their mother-tongue, rather than Latin.
For the slow and ineffective method of
individual teaching, he substituted the simul-
taneous method, which has since been adopted
universally.
St. De La Salle is the founder of the
first Normal School for teachers. He establi-
shed his “ Seminary for Country School-
masters" at Bheims in J 684. A second
followed in 1085,■ and a third in Paris, in
1099, a full century before the establishment of
a similar institution at Yverdon (Switzerland)
by the famous pedagogue Pestalozzi. His
Order itself, which is essentially and solely a
teaching congregation devoted to popular
education, merits for its Founder a place
among the greatest educationists the world
has ever known.
At St. You, near Rouen, St. De La Salle
opened the first Professional and Technical
College. It was also the earliest organised
Boarding establishment. An old prospectus
of St. Aon reads: “Pupils are taught com-
merce, finance, military science, architecture
and mathematics. ’ There were, moreover,
workshops for sculpture and carpentry, and
ironworks. A large tract of the garden was
set apart for agricultural training, and another
for botany. W eaving and knitting were also
taught.
St. De La Salle is again the originator of
evening courses for adults, which enabled
workmen and apprentices to improve their
intellectual culture, with a view to bettering
their situation.
f pon these foundations, laid with such
piactical wisdom and far-sightedness, the
Biothers of the Christian Schools have erected
a world-wide educational organisation, which
embraces all branches of learning. While
lemaining faithful to the sound and unalter-
able educational principles of its Pounder,
then Institute keeps abreast of modern pro-
gress and goes on spreading its activities ever
further afield. The very rapid survey under-
taken here, of its development since the death
of St. De La Salle in 1719, can give but a
faint idea of its world-wide extent and
importance.


Tributes to
St. De La Salle
sji|p§E here reproduce a few of the many
interesting testimonies to the great
work of the Institute of the Brothers, given
by well-known European statesmen and
writers: —
“I have been for a long time system-
atically in favour of making education a
Government monopoly; well, I declare to-day
(after the Revolution of 1848) that I would
like to see the Brothers established not only
in every town, but also every village.”
(Thiers, President of the French Republic.)
“ The Brothers are the indefatigable
pioneers of civilisation.” (Constans, formerly
Minister of the Interior.)
“ I admire the robust faith of the Brothers,
their astonishing patriotism and spirit of
initiative.” (Last letter of Prince Henry of
Orleans to M. Doumer.)
“ I consider the Brothers as the best
■educators of my people.” (King Edward VII.)
“The Brothers have in hand a treasure
that makes them appreciated by every nation;
the art of forming children. The finest gift
that France has made to our country is to
have sent it the Brothers.” (An Anglican
Bishop.)
At a meeting of the French Chamber on
March the 4th, 1904, Ferdinand Buisson
■could not withhold his admiration for the
founder of the Christian Schools. He referred
to St. De La Salle as: “that intelligent
precursor who was so far in advance of his
age, and who consecrated forty years of the
most absolute, patient, and inexhaustible
devotion to the obscure work of which he was
practically the only person then in France to
divine the greatness and importance—because
the only person who foresaw the necessity of
organising popular, gratuitous, and Christian
education —a sort of Catholic Pestalozzi, only
living a century earlier than Pestalozzi. I
cannot refuse my admiration to J. B. de La
Salle, who though a rich canon, renounced his
fortune in order that being poor he might
have the privilege of associating himself with
other poor men for the education of the
children of the people. 5 ’
“No educator has ever attained to the
height of J. B. de La Salle.” (Taft, former
President of the United States.)
Gustave Lebon, in his book —Psychology
of Education, ch. VI, writes: —“ The first
thing to do in order to compete with the
Brothers would be to study their methods.
We are free to have, as far as Religion is
concerned, opinions entirely different from
theirs; but we ought to try to acquire sufficient
independence to recognise their superiority,
above all when it is so overwhelmingly
manifest. I cannot, I think, be suspected of
Clericalism; but I avow that if 1 were minis-
ter for Education I would appoint as Director
of Primary and Secondary teaching the
Superior General of the Brothers of the
Christian Schools.”


On March the 2nd, 1900, in the French
Academy, the Count <T Haunssonvilie said:
“I knew, as everyone else did, that the
Brothers taught youth to read and write, and
that appeared to me a most important work;
but I was ignorant of the power and force of
their Institute, the considerable part it plays
in popular teaching, and the success it has
obtained in modern teaching. I did not know,
in a word, how great were these humble
Brothers. It is possible that in the Church
there are men more brilliant, but it is certain
there are none more useful. No one will
quarrel with me when I say that in the
gratitude and veneration of Catholics, the
Brothers are second to none.”
Edward Drumont, in the issue of the
Libre Parole for the 29th of April, 1907,
wrote; “For those who will write the moral
history of this country, the Institute of the
Brothers will ever be an object of admiration.
It may be said of them as of the Sisters of
Charity, that no nation in the world has ever
produced the like. The Brothers, and the
Sisters of Charity, have been the marvellous
fostering influence of what the soul of France
has in it of the spirit of devotion and
sacrifice.”
Gustave Herve, about the same time
wrote: “Society to be good, requires good
educators. Formerly, it was the Brothers
of the Christian Schools; they educated me
till I was ten. They were models of
patience and devotion. They respected
authority. They were the conservators of
ancient France. I understand that M. Barres
regrets them.” Yes, M. Barres regretted the
Brothers, “ who,” as he said, “ carried across
the world their old costume, conforming little
perhaps to modern fashion, but yet so French.”
And the last word that Maurice Barres wrote
to the Brothers, May 1923, was a cry of the
heart: “I admire you as much as is possible
for anyone to do.” One cannot forget that it
was in trying to defend the Brothers, and to
get them recalled, that this great Frenchman
spent the last efforts of his life.
In his Theory of Social Order , De
Bonald calls St. De La Salle a hero in the
eyes of the political world, and his Institute
“a masterpiece of wisdom and of the know-
ledge of men.”
“To be the sons of him, who more than
two centuries ago, forestalled the educational
reformers in France, England, and the New
World, is no mean calling.” (Francis
Thompson—Life of St. De La Salle.)
Taine, the historian, calls the Institute
of St. De La Salle a masterpiece, the
benefits of which are incalculable. “It is,”
he says, “one of the finest glories of the State
and of the Church, one of the greatest social
forces of our time.”
A “Catholic Action Party” in Hong Kong


The Times , in its Educational Supple-
ment of December 7th, 1935, devoted its
principal review column to an account,
which we reproduce here of a quite new
translation of the Brothers' famous handbook,
The Conduct of the Schools, written by
St. John Baptist de la Salle and first pub-
lished in 1720 (not 1717, as The Times re-
view states).
This extraordinary book, bequeathed to
the Brothers by their holy Founder, has been
their vade-mecum for two centuries. With
them it has gone to every country and lias
been translated into many a language.
The boys and their parents will be the
first to appreciate the compliment which The
Times pays to the Brothers’ Schools by its
notice of this book and the code for which
this book stands. For all engaged in educa-
tion here indeed is “a book so wise—so
eminently wise—as to deserve being bound
with a frontlet on the brow and a talisman on
the wrist.”
REPRINT FROM THE TIMES
Supplement, December 7th, 1935)
THE CONDUCT OF THE SCHOOLS,
or
SCHOOL MANAGEMENT.
By Jean Baptiste de la Salle. Trans-
lated, with an introduction, by F. de
la Fontainerie. McGraw Hill. 9s. n.
In a forty-page introduction the trans-
lator of this classic work lias said much of
what there is to say about the saintly founder
of a great school system, so well organised
that it could be adapted, and has been adapted,
to the conditions of almost every country and
every class. The Christian Brothers’ schools,
all over the world, still run according to the
code which St. Jean Baptiste de la Salle
revised, at the end of his long life, in the light
of the teaching experience of the Brothers of
his time. This little hook represents his last
testament to the schools, but he never forced
his own opinions upon them, being always a
•great believer in having things “ thrashed
out.”
La Salle, who was a youth of good family,
possessed, as his portraits show, of great per-
sonal charm, was at 16 a canon in the
Cathedral of Reims. In 1670 he went to
Paris for theological studies, but any academic
or high ecclesiastical career which might have
lain before him was ruled out by family
claims; when he was 21 he went home to take
charge of his brothers and sisters. Like other
saints, he gives the impression, through life,
of doing things which he is impelled to, not
things he wishes. His spiritual director’s
hope had been that he would resign office and
work among the poor; his Archbishop inter-
veiled, but his director by bis will left him
responsible for a small teaching congregation.
So, without intention of his own, he found
himself with “pool' schools” on his hands, in
the darkest era, for the poor, of French
history; the country impoverished by war,
property-owners concentrated by the King in
Paris; poverty, ignorance, and neglect brewing
trouble in the provinces. One would-be-
benefactor after another, seeing the state of
things, asked La Salle’s advice or .offered
support, and he found himself by degrees
directing an ever-growing group of charity
schools. It has been thought curious that he
never took credit for his results. When he
had organised something he would often let it
go, “as if it were not his mission." Put it is
the mark of any great man to be more con-
cerned with the thing done than with the
means of doing it, and perhaps he never quite
let go the hope that some day his unsought
and uncongenial burden might be lifted from
him; it never was. Lack of official recogni-
tion, moreover, made it heavier; it was not
till six years after his death that .Benedict
XIII. constituted the Christian Brothers a
religious congregation.
Towards the end of La Salle's life,
looking back upon years of struggle —per-
secution by the Jansenists, persecution by the
Gallicans, persecution by people who educated
for money and resented his doing it for
nothing-—he wrote that if God had revealed to
him the trials and sufferings the work of the
schools would bring him, courage would not
have sufficed to make him undertake it. But
to the teachers in the schools he was always
the same father and friend that he had been
at the beginning, when, as a very young man,
he had taken them into his house and fed
them at his table. He never made plans for
himself, except to be ready to follow the
dictates of Providence, and, that he put the
same spirit into his schools has been one of
the secrets of their success. Another has been
the status given to the teachers who, neither
laymen nor priests, have a definite mission of
their own, exact rules to live by, and an
elastic but well-defined code for the treatment
of the young.
Over half of the 313,000 and more child-
ren in the Christian Brothers' schools pay no
fees, but the scope of some of the schools, in
Italy especially, resembles that of public
schools in England. Schoolmasters who en-
tertain doubts concerning “compulsory chapel”
might look at the rules for religious obser-
vance, which have been little modified since
this hook was first published at Avignon in
1717, and are still enforced without much
hardship, though far stricter and more exact-
ing than anything that a Protestant school has
ever required.


A C. Y. M. S. “At home”
a? s m # m
M A * *
*g& •
g« • *»«&««#«» • B**«*:# • Vi&it
& iWaaißtS-frj&fllSlfc# • • HU
• itfia+n n • •
$ ® li th M sg $ +.#rfi; ft*) Xlf i ®l @f • K-ft+SfE
34***# • «lJ»SS»E##afcH. •
• fiX 15 • RtMMlttW
% •»«
• A'V-• l/MSrflir.
S«^6 A, >S?5?-»' • s^am
mmSiM • *BSstft*iK • -A —■=¥»«»* •
‘‘fWfj&M ■ XVXiAXAifuIiAK . . -£
• 05*£SUS*SS®BJB •
._ @-~A—• MsmmtSiM
w# • »*—W-aJHiEiR* •
jgWBISIS • ifiiMt A ',iii?: • fiW-to;r;;,/i. ffl
#
• XK&iir
ttM • ifrM;£*#|e]@ • «A®i«4n • • as
ifn I‘ SV. % fttxi IJI ® A nT> Jft fS • tfjScfli'ffittS • U’l?«V IH
• ft**# • SffiPft • • iiliS|st
M .I ® §— A—/WH H r.USI'B lli • •
t|iifcß. , ffi?A • • £jf v.m*-mt.
•§/§«*£s. • nism •
*#W*4WE£M ■ •
Af mS. f • *&#;«*£
BcttWiSt • It*C3ll+fi®*.Xx • *#-£*«
• *#«##
wa-w • . - A
- • Afi-W&sS; •
sxAjifin • rr*s*#*«m±«+jES;ia
• Itffijf’f-Sfirssi. j(i]a
*«#«• *»#### • ***** • ttH-iffi# • *
‘ 2.W*KSMflsEft,R@f*A
‘ 8? A ; • jEIrBW
SSISS: • *«;#!
X fifAX-A'i' • •


Some Brothers’ Schools the World Over
Inglewood (England)
St. Michael’s College, Drachenburg, Germany.
Laval-des-Rapides, Quebec.
St. Joseph's Institution, Singapore.
St. Mark's College, Alexandria.
Pocantico Hills. New York.
St. Mary's, Quebec.
St. Patrick's School. Katong, Singapore.
La Salle College. Manila P. I.
St. P[?]s, Rangoon.


Public Monument erected at Rouen (France)
in honour of St. De Salle by a world wide
suscription.
• n-M^mwmz
®\Mh • ipteM-it • • * a
•
A • SAP-AA
•
• ifn-AM
m-
• i£• fji
W3&BMIMW&W • • AJiXA
«S • • sUSs’!lsM£ •
zmiwmnm • mmmmim • ea-sw**
•a • & • xmmzmm
• • fflSlJKffi • MASS* • **lt*«L
ri’l+'i '!• A'd ; A ifii Li •
--1—• l« r.i'i L' |-
WA • • • *&A7fr
• AMr«» • • JMf
Wfc- -HU-A0? • 18±AWH+A •
T-l'tfA • SAWtiWIgM® • -It
aabs •
g • -A
oae-amiau • sATtt
• !T-#mft Afi«ici|Wft- -® . Jiifflai
a*±iP±*f¥*FWfft(-AH/V^ps-A'bpa^p)®
®l: • E -A-t:HA(«±3F-S;®ttßj • (« IAJV.-ii afttfc
** • fl-AffH+Aßr • -W •
AP/i • ffiMni-ABf •
-AOO*r- •
• • . Bujsr.+-;ft • £
» ff: &?S | - M A # fi| ® if!/ v . isK.


(£S • {£«®t#XiMX«EX-ISA • Xft-gE
X'A-
ft DC yin £ tf B
• W
• iiii.'ii. Asv!iA • 4XS
• WftSJrAWA •
«R-W? • Wffi.aA>nS-(«X:ffi»±.»ri • tHS«*
RfVaS'rfa* ’ • ÜBA32I '■)-■¥<
MBSM •
l:tf «R • WSfcMWfr*
2XXt»M»I«M* SSJPR • »**-#« • «
- ,’l. -’“Vj • itX'lXrXA[s] iXXXC &
mm • ****«*-*»«**« • ##Axxi'fe*
»$M4n •it @ *i“/ii ftA tsAb—X Art PAHS
A • »»X- • »«Xi'UH(iiAT—
-tx-A • • smth
• • Pi
»»»«*««»« •
• • Ft’ifflAWA.ft ■ Sk
Aiß®l#lS'#ttßWß • AX • XiS-
•
• WWS-HIISSW •
Xi&.««£lW •
AEEA-i@AtiS£<ftiJc •
S-Jft • A »RRgR S« • 7itt • R4«tt!W
H'Xii'MW* • i!fciSiS)ffF)fSfiß' • IHi—ff A Art.ilUMt
- X—AHHXK • X~. • Jt-XiX«±
AW*AA • WEX'-fcßt • XH : ./v TXftiSAA •
-&m LXi(ft;SWAXS • ;'rf—A fi,AXX<«Ltf A
tt • A • A-AA-AX£7|jffll'l
• ■W-RWfft-W • HftHPl* • fiXIS IAPCSti)# - !
y» r v • 4tlrWa»;&@lftXi'<g±2i'iAX-AA •
pgrft • XiX-.AXia SXAX'HA • • SSfiXV
m-kffl • *'l'R-Sfcß4* • • 4lL*
{ i- A •
aWjH^RA^-A-bAXvRSftrtM^JKiIDB
- ffij«E%tBSRR • Ktt ffiffiffi X4@i!«® ifi • 4
l;-XAfXXXl KA • ft-® 3i»3aft • ffifth
«•»*«» • tiff muff • • ffi'!'
•«» • • sks« •
- *RR • jdR?fR • ilttiJtfi • &a««sa* • US
• i£UtXeSSSE
• «x-.w#f? • umimm • SfrWißitft • ks-a
- A-A*f-«8«;SfW • 4-1) 3fc##K X-S
w • *Hswaw**ja# • #ww®x@: • aa®
*t«» • ].^C'ffAX-AA
S*TOS»»#••*«*&
#«• IrAXAA • VMftX-fc Fulfil •
IE« • @®»a •
mmmzm± • • swax— a •
RttSSr • •
Hmmu-kS-v •
ft % iffl 2: ‘lf B
«£±iSM:iX • &«9Sj« •
A A • • 4 fiii AM I'tiAMSJti!
vmmmiii'm •&% & zm&amz.ih' (* • xvx
jfcflHS-XS'B'A+A • M+SKATXBsA&JiKXI
ft •
mz • USA* • M K£ • iSiM • ftHAixJ*
a • *Ria**« • tseft2.it&4umm& • i»>n%
Wii • MAWt • #(Sl£iis • Mtk&Z&trX • WtSfiS
-i!i •
#«±l£*#:i»Bn A6#« • W¥.4 u • *ittt •
• WUftft • H®rti • • j'Xi
«±-t-A7TW+A • »fflXH+ra«ls; • JUi+A
na«A • «oS#i«sA •
• to *«».#.* • mm.¥-jz.&mttizvi
• • »««»*isausg • ftR
tt*M*»R-JUB • •
&3SR**f±*R**# • wm
Mfik • *+S+A*SAi« • *«.*» • ifiiAtt
|-A • XXXi'i'AX-
ITr • WA+A • Jt'l'H® AX fiVi'i A
ft •
4 XiiWAfnW • tv,';Li • M»iX • LAWS •
h %mm ■ %bim-z.mk • • A>t*
• ftfStffiS-XA • =»»!+
• XSfJAX-flr • ■'MET A
If AX* A •


•««® • em • nm • fa
ffirttSS • E/&zm • ®® • S®WiSfilS@ • Pjff«
dtfSfflrifcitlffl • tfWAJtffi-ASPi'AAA • W-
• SI£AffiAAATTAAA • #*** • 8X
'etl?#rffiAl»r(M vJZmmm* •
TTA • • F*,a*l'A' • • ffiEA
ft AM • »®?AtfciS±HHH;±Aft'&«!!» •
• PsffiH!f4:AW*irA*fA*
• ej&zwhmzmz • msr««4iSA •
«MAP4;A-AOILA-feAltWiSyAri.l:ffiA •
iAE-l-A • mt vnwi • 'AifeHAA •
Aii«MP4i •
A • • A ffi A A iSSrM •
AlKfcarßl/A«W*ft)A-A-AA-»W;«a:
mz • • iwifc®«
AXfflffiff.MiiiJnMHP'i • MAAnfctSiAAISJ:
-7fH-|-AA • T t'i'iA-pA
• Ain Al ffi • AA®Aoi<*±K#
• • • ]ifc|ffif&7f«±-
HAA7IA . • fItAXMJtIXS-
bf l-WPAAt? • A’SVgif • lAi AIS/i.idft
■“fffSAWIIH • •
-AHAA-«±PSffi7iiA±ffiAiljAWA*i* •
aar«±AriAAH A • • -ASH
A«J:Affij'r.[ll k • fiPuAAffiAA • MPAQ^H
K • • ffi
■ A Ai Aiicf 7 A P/£ • sii)lb • A(±
fgA T'.f|;g,Wi(nAi •
JAAAA«±¥«AAW • ■‘fbfeAAJSITA • S-
SAAKS • • DPA'ft fi'ij? •
—A— S.A^.SfiA#^AffiftlJHlM • fiX-K.I:
AX(P • HMiX • UUSn] C 3 • WA- • A
s-hs • mmmzmm • M«Pixxi-A*ff. «t«
AffiSEA • «JAEf!ffiA* •
ffiff-ffin- • Aifii£P(Rilfift;r*ffilSAAH , .'i • 3t-
A—A li A'l A lit fie iR A. • Xrfg- l;Afs ASiA ! i A iid{
»E«Sife7]{®eA)i!ifA • JSEH±.«S?^BL*
• T-S'ffA»
X •
fi«# * WA • • A® feJlhft.L
ftfifiiJ • fiiSliSbi • WAte-K
T-fif*A • /5A— • V-f ff3t
®acsi • xiffißAEflii*. %-%Mzm£
• 3&5&A AA • i«S'Sf#ifeiW»iS • MtLfkAJi&yi
ffi JtSiffiWl&iAffi • •
• mmm
br • fiW-fT® ■ H fiHVUfffiSaii • 5‘ H®H!l®.#WSi:
• $• llOt*r3c««±-7TS I 0 A • «:««*=+/?
A • 'AfrBA • ««4*H-T-ATfA+A •
»#Bt • SsSKitMfiW • - T -n'A-t-A
• k • a—
ntam • vr>»R£*** • thmm^
• ;£ A A APJ.Ii -X\®[W.K A
ft-btimi • Matt •
JIB iftffi <6 ffi E, S*X«/i ft f'lffi is; AA * • HvSf Wc
m • E*»±s»3tarcii§ • mmmV'Wvt • n&w
*»«» • ffi mm • • waa • m.mn • »«e
AWifMSXISAWWI*
fcflffiJS&KKift • JffiffiDAWAK • Kffißfl#S
• • wmi • • -Rffi*iu«f»
M • iTXWSJfcfHtsi • WSPJIAS
±«S? • APiftfW it l-»(|s'®:fftag)SS • S-A©
A#l® ffiti AX&ftm tk/BffixmK • «»A
nBHlAi|l|iW«jJ*Wi • »lll|*lE£#
• »«-£««« • »!S9;#«X£fi»»S •
«¥«s* wß«tmMMu«itt±x
lb • •
JfcXrS-l&mfH® • ffiiiffiSiftifßljfS: • MM
&#m&& s • A'l'-ruifcttunjiffiaff • a,Siam
»A4S •
• -« • %mmr~
Yfr • A A • 5® ISM®
AAMtADIA.. «#THMttaa&£SMS • MjS
ASSAA-A • #SAA-ffi • ffiX-AAfj'A *
xAHrrAffirrXimxAxxm • kaaaaaa
»si««iEtttrsEKßS«±sticm« • ®w®
• —AH+#B@Jg, • —AJXAiKX •
ffi A® 1! A AiSffiWi A • A
A-i®iftXA •
llXXttfSiiX'T- • PUHA'-IJ•
TTA • #ttA-SH+HBjy.A£J|k& -. Jp®« Hg&
• »aißffiA-T-A • *HfcLi*oBfliS;£*
• flW&liAAiii • SSAAgIAi. • ffluSttHM*.
bTW A.S A'n-;® ArBW •
• A fp-S-it A-15« J; - ffi ®A A
TiAH —A • HAS®—T-k ff#A A• at
>! 1 —A A ffi A AS' i’i -t -|-A itM?, 4 ti • BPKMKirX AH
A-Wc • SAtiWSi , )A.A:EA : • ffiatSSf At#®#
ffifcft • Jt-PlliraWftSi • inWSßfe • -SSb&ftftPlat
X* • sL&m±2M'm • A AXKIttX
1: • AittXMK •


BOY SCOUTS
ST. JOSEPH’S
COLLEGE
“THE PURPOSE OF LIFE”


MR. QUAK CHOW CHEONG, SCOUTMASTER OF THE FIRST HONG KONG
TROOP (ST. JOSEPH'S COLLEGE), DISTRICT SCOUTMASTER
THE ETHICS OF SCOUTING
The Catholic Church has taken a sane
stand in the matter of Scouting. She does
not condemn all pleasure, play or recreation
She knows that human nature cannot be
remade and that periods of relaxation are a
physiological necessity. Its doctrine con-
cerning pleasure is fully in harmony with the
nature of man. Out of this consideration she
lias encouraged the modern Scout movement
whose aim is twofold: to bring the young back
to nature from winch modern city life bars
them, and to interest them in games and
activities that, whilst affording the needed re-
laxation, also develop the mind and train
character. Therefore, I say that the Boy
Scout movement is the next best thing to
religion, coming particularly at a time,—psy-
chologists understand well to be the perilous
time, —the wonderful, mystic, beautiful period
that we call adolescence; that period when
Almighty God is making over the bodv of the
boy and changing him into the man; that
wonderful period when Almighty God is
laying up in the bosom of man the energies
that are to make him a homebuilder in the
future; a period that psychologists understand
perfectly as determining largely the question
whether that boy will walk through the world
upright, with his face to the stars, like a man,
or whether he will wallow through the world
like a beast, with his face to the filth. Scout-
ing takes hold of the boy through the mystic,
wonderful period of which I speak, with sub-
lime beautiful ideas; a reverence for God and
lo\e of humanity, that will take the place of
e\d influence and give him the consecration
that a good man can give.
Scouts, be real scouts, loyal to your oath,
lespectful to your scoutmasters and patrol
leaders, and by your example lead others to
join.


THE IST HONG KONG TROOP (ST. JOSEPH’S COLLEGE)
WINNERS OF THE PRINCE OF WALES BANNER 1935 & 1936
THE PRINCE OF WALES BANNER
THE 1ST HONG KONG TROOP (ST. JOSEPH’S COLLEGE)
FOUNDATION OF THE MOVEMENT IN HONG KONG, SEPTEMBER 20, 1913


Presentation of the “Prince of Wales” Banner, to the Ist. Hong Kong Troop, 1936. St. Joseph’s College.
History of the Ist H. K. (St. Joseph’s Troop)
The College Troop was formed in September 1913,
as the result of a meeting of the scholars of St. Joseph’s
College, presided over by the Rev. Brother Director
Adrian, on which occasion Major F. J. Bowen gave a
splendid address on “Boy Scouts I ’. At the conclusion
of this meeting 48 boys expressed their desire to join
the movement. Within a very short time the Troop
numbered 100. About the same time, the “Old Boys’’
of the College held a meeting and formed a senior
troop of young men under the name of St. Joseph’s
Bodyguard. Major Bowen was appointed Chief
Scoutmaster, with Mr. G. E. Roylance as his Assistant.
On the declaration of war in August, 1914, the
Troop immediately volunteered their services to the
Government. The Senior Troop was mobilised and
slept at their Headquarters every evening for about
six weeks.
A strong Association was formed in July, 1915.
to control the Boy Scout Movement in the Colony.
Several of its officers, however, were called away for
war service and the Senior Scouts were absorbed by
the Volunteer and Special Police Corps, and in the
year following its formation, the Hongkong Boy
Scouts Association was dissolved.
The Junior Troop still carried on; but lack of
public interest and financial support prevented any
advancement, and towards the end of 1917, Scouting
in the Colony was practically non-existent.
Lieutenant-Colonel Bowen returned to the Colony
in 1920, following the cessation of hostilities. He
was as keen as ever on the Scout Movement and
immediately called up a meeting of “old scouts’’ from
the former College Troop, in a few weeks over 70
scouts were enrolled with Mr. Gutierrez as Scout-
master. Funds were collected, mainly through
Capt. H. S. McGrath, and scouting was once
more firmly established in Hongkong. This time the
movement had come to stay, for other troops were
also formed. They met for the first time at a public
display held on the Murray Parade Ground on Jan.
Bth, 1921.
The College Troop had a great reputation for
public service. Scouting activities had to be suspend-
ed for several months owing to the strike in 1925.
The boys, however, did useful work during the first
strenuous weeks of the trouble in the Colony. In the
capacity of scouts, several members of the Troop
acted as Telegram messengers, office boys, etc, Mr. H.
Braga was presented with the Silver Cross of the Boy
Scouts’ Association for saving the life of a young
Chinese girl.
Mr. H. Braga and Mr. B. M. Talati were the next
Scoutmasters, then Mr. C. Dragon took control of the
Troop until his transfer to La Salle College in 1932
when Mr. Quah Cheow Cheang took charge of the
College Scouts. Mr. Quah, being a new man to the
movement, found some difficulty at first in managing
the troop. The encouragement by Bro. Matthias,
then Director of the College, helped a great deal in
bringing the troop up to the present standard of
efficiency. Mr. M. G. Lenz and Mr. G. Roylance
were later appointed Assistants.
In 1934 the troop entered for the Prince of Wales
Banner Competition which consisted of two rallies
and one camp. The troop just did well in the rallies
but topped the list in the camp-competition, thus
winning the Banner. Possessing the Banner, the
troop automatically became the Governor’s Troop.
In 1935 the troop managed to hold the Banner
for the second time. This year it had the valuable
help of an instructor—Mr. Sidon of the Deep Sea
Scouts Formation.
In February 1935, the Scoutmaster of the troop
had the privilege of being made District Scoutmaster
for Hongkong.
A jamborally of the local scouts, cubs, guides and
brownies, was held to celebrate the Silver Jubilee of
the Accession of H. M. King George V and the
College Troop, being the Governor’s droop, had the
honour of leading the contingent in the March Past.
The College Troop is just one small body of the
Great Brotherhood of Scouts, The ever-alertness of
the boys to render service at any time, the friendly
attitude shown to other scouts, and the prompt
obedience to orders clearly show that the Chief’s ideal
of a scout has found a hearty response in the College
Troop.


H. E. Sir Wm. Peel visits the College, 1930
New Building Robinson Road 1917
The First Recruits—Chinese Volunteers—Hong Kong.


The Sunny Side of Scout Life


The
College
Surroundings
Splendid
Situation on
Kennedy lioad
(Mid-level)


RECEPTION HALL
SENIOR BOYS' DORMITORY


THE BOARDERS
BILLIARD CLUB
Boarders
Quintet
Swatow Boarders


SCIAL HALL - BOARDING DEPARTMENT
OUR “BENJAMIN BOARDERS” 1935 - 1930


BOARDERS’ DAY


BOARDERS' PICNIC PARTIES


Birds of a Feather Flock Together


ATHLETICS
Hold fast, then, to this sound and wholesome
rule of life: indulge the body only so far
as is needful for health.
—Seneca.


Relay Team
1935 - 1936
Mr. Y. C. Chan
Basketball Coach
Bro. E. Hubert
Sportsm aster
J. Sim
Sports Manager
A Keen Contest
High Jump
Liter-Schools Sports
1935
U. S. S.
Black Hawk
Inter - Schools
Sports
1932
Sequeira
Leading.


ST. JOSEPH’S MANY TROPHIES 1935-1936
The Diamond Jubilee Year, a successful Year
SWIMMING-INTER-SCHOOL CHAMPIONS, 1935-1936
INTER-SCHOOL SPORTS
St. Joseph’s College Sixth victory
Commenting upon the sports, Mr. Mulcahy congratulated St.
Joseph’s College on its success. He said that he imagined the
winners’ aggregate of 45 points constituted a record. He could not
remember having seen anything better before. The College had
fully deserved the success, not for any individual feats but for
all-round performances of the boys.
Mr. Sayer then presented the Canton Nanyang Brothers
Challenge Cup t-o E. Petrove, winner of the 800 metres, the Sir Paul
Chater Challenge Cup to the La Salle College, and the Governor’s
Shield (for the School gaining most points) to St. Joseph’s College,
members of whose team were also presented with medals.
The Previous Holders of the Governor’s Shield were:—
1022 St. Paul’s 1931 St. Paul’s
1023 St. Paul’s 1932 St. Joseph's
1924 St. Paul s 1933 St. Joseph’s
1925 St. Joseph’s . 1934 D. B. S.
192 G St. Joseph’s 1935 D. B. S.
1927 St. Joseph’s 1936 St. Joseph’s
1928-30 No Contest
FOOTBALL
Thin year the College safeguarded the traditions handed
down to them by past generations. The school met several teams
in friendly encounters, the results of which are tabulated below:
Queen’s College vs S. J. C. o—2 Won
Murray Barracks ~ S. J. C. o—7 Won
King's College „ S. J. C. o—6 Won
Murray Barracks ~ S. J. C. o—60 —6 Won
La Salle College ~ S. J. C. o—o Drawn
R- M. C. A. „ S. J. C. I—6 Won
La Salle College ~ 8. J. C. 2—o Lost


BASKET BALL
Senior
Ching Wah vs St. Joseph’s 11- 75
Wall Yan vs St. Joseph’s 25- 63
St. Paul’s vs St. Joseph’s 17- 39
Wah Kiu vs St. Joseph’s 22- 29
Wah Tai vs St. Joseph’s 8- 37
Diocesan vs St. Joseph’s 19- 70
Sai Nam vs St. Joseph’s 12- 40
King’s vs St. Joseph’s 7-106
H. K, U. vs St. Joseph’s 26- 42
Junior
Wah Yan (B) vs St. Joseph’s 9- 71
St. Paul’s vs St. Joseph’s 9- 61
Queen's vs St. Joseph’s...... 20- 40
King’s vs Sd. Joseph’s 16- 60
Wah Yan (A) vs St. Joseph’s 25- 50
Pong Lam vs St. Joseph’s 10- 24
Chung Nam vs St. Joseph’s 14- 52
Wantsai vs St. Joseph’s 0- 87
Jr. T. Sch. vs St. Joseph’s 28- 62
HONGKONG JUNIOR BASKET BALE CHAMPIONS 1935.
HONGKONG SENIOR BASKET BALL CHAMPIONS 1935.


FOOTBALL
The College Football Field at Happy Valley
Footballers, 1927


SPORTSMEN—PAST AND PRESENT


BOVRIL
HELPS YOU
TO WIN
THE RACE OF LIFE
;+• tfn xk
--
BDVRIL
SOLE AGENTS:
JOHN D. HUTCHISON & CO
KINO’S BUILDING
m m ft
Vs W til fli sir
COLLEGE TENNIS TEAM 1936
From Left to Right:
George Choa, Francis Chow, Eugene Petrove, William Chen, Lim Tou Hua.


Harbour Race
Champion 1922
A. May
William Chen, College Champion 1934
R. M. Omar
St. Joseph's College Champion 19 15-1918
Hongkong Schoos' Champion 1916-1918
Eugene Petrove, College Champion 1935


Subscribers to the St. Joseph’s College Fund 1920-1926
The family of the late Mr. Li Shek Pang.
Wop Hay Tong Esq.
H. Dixon Esq.
Alessrs. Sang Ijee & Co.
Sir Ellis lVndoorie.
Afok Kon Sang Esq.
Alessrs. Xanyang Brothers.
Messrs. Carroll Brothers.
Wong Kwong Tin Esq.
Ng Sik Wing Esq.
Simon Tse Yafc Esq.
Adok Cho Chuen Esq.
Char. Chee Esq.
Li Pak Sheung Esq.
Ho AVing Tsun Esq.
The Sun Co.
The Sincere Co.
Sum Pak Ming Esq.
J. Ah Chanatong Esq.
F. Martens Esq.
C. da Silva Esq.
Afessrs. Little, Adams & AVood.
Messrs. Ku Ixayu & Sons.
C. F. Carvalho Esq.
S. Ad. Soares Esq.
J. Ad. Alves Esq.
Ching Iving Sin Esq. ,
Lo Po Loung Esq.
Messrs. P. Ah Botelho 6c Bros.
B. Ad. Castro Esq.
Messrs. Yue Mow & Co.
Tong Yuet Cho Esq.
Messrs. Lam Woo & Co.
Ada Dook Chack Esq.
Leung Si Loong Esq.
J. P. Xavier Esq.
J. M. Ribeiro Esq.
J. M. Remedios Esq.
Chan Akin Ting Esq.
J. Ad. Pereira Esq.
Messrs. Kwong Lan Sang
F. X. Chow Esq.
Subscribers to the Diamond Jubilee Fund 1935-1936
Dr. S. S. Strahan, Hr Wr? T.k
A. A. Guterres.
A. P. Pereira Esq.
Q. Castilho Esq.
C. F. Yas Esq.
L. G. Pinna Esq.
S. A. Marcal Esq.
J. P. Souza Esq.
Esmail Bros.
J. A. de Almeida Esq.
G. A. Souza Esq.
R. M. Silva Esq.
F. A. Rosario Esq.
A. P. Rosario Esq.
E. C. Olaes Esq.
A. M. Omar Esq.
C. E. Wong Esq.
R. M. Omar Esq.
J. B. Pomeroy Esq.
R. H. Wong Esq.
E. E. Osmund Esq.
A. A. Olaes Esq.
L. Osmund Esq.
J. P. Xavier Esq.
H. A, Koronha Esq.
R. J. Everest Esq.
F. A. Gilt Esq.
L. F. Ah Ribeiro Esq.
J. Neves Esq.
S. Rosario Esq.
R. M. da Silva Esq.
V. AI. Barradas Esq.
H. Dixon Esq.
J. P. Xavier Esq.
F. H. de Carvalho Esq.
C. L. Rocha Esq.
J. Baptista Esq.
L. B. Finnigan Esq.
H. da Jjuz Esq.
Hon. Mr. J. P. Braga, 0.8. E.
Messrs. Kong Lee Dairy Farm.
The Trade Commissioner for Siam.
Eu Tong Sen, Esq.
Lois Ay am Esq.
Dr. F. Bunje.
F. H. Barnes Esq.
H. B. L. Dowbiggin, 0.8. E.
H. K. A. Hancock.
Dr. Y. Karanjia.
Prof. W. I. Gerrard.
L. G. Ribeiro Esq.
Messrs. Ellis & Edgar.
The Mary knoll Sisters.
The Manager, Kwong Ming Theatre.
Messrs. Wing Lee & Co.
Very Rev. Fr. Braga, C.S.
Ng Nai Chee Esq.
Ching Yok Chong Esq.
L. Chan Bing Hang, Esq.
Cheng Kok Kew Esq.
Chia Pee Chye, Esq.
Ho Hung Chiu, Esq.
Messrs. Benjamin & Potts.
Dr. R. H. Kotewall.
A. Quark Esq.
Jerome Law, Esq.
The Chinese Bazaar.
Butler Bros.
Krofser.
Dr. S. C. Chan.
M. Beraha Esq.
Isack & Co.
Columbia Films.
C. H. B.
Tang Shin Kin Esq.
British-American Tobacco Co.,
(China) Ltd.
Banque de lTndochine.
Dr. R. A. C. Basto.
A. V. Barros Esq.
R. Shim Esq.
S. G. Chen Esq.
K. W. Chaun Esq.
Le-Quang-Trong, Esq.


PROMOTERS


AN ACKNOWLEDGMENT
(Qhe (Diamond jubilee Committee thank
all those who helped them so generously
to publish this Souvenir yllbum.
If some names, photos, or literary
contributions have been omitted, it is because
time, space, and funds did not permit us to
include all that we received.
C S he Gommittee also wish to put on
record that the Afanager and St off of the
STANDARD PRESS have spared no pains
to make the printing of the a
success. TShey have even turned to the best
advantage the old photos and damaged blocks
that were in our possession.


“A Friend in Need is a Friend Indeed”
J. M. Noronha, Esq.
We gladly avail ourselves of this opportunity of
recognising the services of all our friends and of tendering our
heartfelt thanks to them and to our benefactors. It is only
fitting to recall the invaluable help given by loyal Old Boys
during the periods of trial and adversity through which their
Alma Mater passed.
Many serious difficulties of a financial nature were
overcome and negotiations for the acquisition of sites success-
fully concluded thanks to the most loyal services unselfishly
rendered by Mr. J. M. Noronha during the eventful years
1917-1926. To testify to this and to express quite definitely
our gratitude to him is a pleasant duty on the occasion of the
Diamond Jubilee of his Old College.


Compliments of the
ROMAN CATHOLIC MISSION
jm,
m
fj


Compliments
of
ALEZ
Music Teacher
at
St. Joseph’s
sod
La Salle Colleges


Compliments of
THE
MARYKNOLL SISTERS
Maryknoll Convent School
KOWLOON 5 V
AND
HOLY SPIRIT SCHOOL
HONG KONG


Compliments
of
RICCI HALL
Compliments of
WAH YAN COLLEGE
1
I
I
m
m


With Compliments
of
ST. FRANCIS’ SCHOOL
CANOSSIAN SISTERS OF CHARITY
BOARDING AND DAY SCHOOL FOR GIRLS
•*»*
It* -
* «5-
&
M
s*
iiii
mr*
Day School for Boys
up to the age of 6 years
PHI CHING CHINESE SCHOOL
FOR GIRLS AND SMALL BOYS
TERMS MODERA TE
Hostel for Professional and
Business Girls
Application for prospectus
should be made to:
Rev. Mother,
CANOSSIAN INSTITUTE
CAINE ROAD
With Compliments
of
St. Mary’s School
KOWLOON


ANGLO-FRENCH SCHOOL
Directed by the Sisters of St. Paul of Chartres (France).
CAUSEWAY BAY
HONG KONG
(School under the control of the H.K. Government).
Preparation for the
School Certificate Examination of the H.K. University,
Cambridge School Certificate Examination
London Matriculation
Trinity College of Music, London, (Local Examinations)
Other Courses: Art - Languages.
Typewriting, Shorthand.
Boarding and Day School for Girls.
Kindergarten for Girls and Boys.
For all particulars, application should be made to the
Reverend Mother Provincial,
Compliments
of
St. Agnes’s Girls’ College


Compliments of
ST. PAUL’S GIRLS’ COLLEGE
HONG KONG
Compliments
of
St. Paul’s Boys’ College
Hong* Kong*


THE SHORTHAND AND COMMERCIAL BUREAU
9, ICE HOUSE STREET
THE LEADING INSTITUTION IN
THE COLONY SPECIALISING IN THE
TRAINING OF STENOGRAPHERS
AND ACCOUNTANTS
DIRECTOR: JEROME E. LAW.
ALL MEW
B. S. A.
MODELS
ARE HERE
SOUTH CHINA AGENTS:
BRITISH BICYCLE CO.
16, HENNESSY ROAD,
HONG KONG
PHONE FOR LEAFLETS (Tel. No. 23979)
look af fie special features of
BICYCLES
B.S.A. forged steel Hubs,solid-centre
Pedals, central pull or caliper Brakes,
Terry Spring Seats, Dunlop Tyres—
these features help to make B.S.A.
the finest Bicycle value.


Compliments of
STANDARD PRESS
QUALITY PRINTERS
8, DUDDELL STREET
and/or
ICE HOUSE STREET
oxon oxqh
oSOSS! aNOIIcirif


g
¥
s
u
a
HONG KONG
fll
13*M
THE MOST MODERN DEPARTMENT STORE IN HONGKONG
Every Variety of Goods Stocked
* OUR MOTTO *
'EFFICIENCY AND COURTESY '
ft w m %
I=l
DP
A
M
WANG BROS. & CO.
10, POTTINGER STREET, PHONE: 23580
Dealers in Neu) and Rebuilt
Typewriters, Adding and Calculating
Machines, Duplicators, Cheque Writers,
Numbering Machines
and Accessories, etc., etc.
EXPERT REPAIRERS & CLEANERS
SOLE AGENTS FOR
“EAGLE” BRAND
TYPEWRITER RIBBONS & CARBON PAPERS
“OHMER” CASH REGISTERS


d
Help your friend and his Hobby by giving
POSTAGE STAMPS
for his collection
which will be a delight for him to receive.
GRAQA & CO.
DEALERS IN
POSTAGE STAMPS, RELIGIOUS GOODS,
GARDEN SEEDS,
CHILDREN PICTURE BOOKS, TOYS.
No. 10, Wyndham Street
P. O. BOX 650 HONG KONG
for
Men
ilii I
II
Theie is a Glyn Hat awaiting you in just your correct size and
shade of colour. Whether you prefer a turn-down style as
illustrated above or a hat with a set brim, you will find one, with
or without a bound edge, in a shape that will suit you.
Prices: $12.75, $14.50, $16.50.
LESS 10% DISCOUNT FOR CASH
CALL AND TRY ONE AT THE
SOLE AGENTS:
Wm. POWELL Ltd.
10, ICE HOUSE STREET


SHOP TO THE BEST ADVANTAGE AT
THE ASIA COMPANY
(OI KWAN BUILDING)
63-65, DES VOEUX ROAD C.
Telephone
20416
Retail
Dept.
GROCERIES
BUTCHERY, FRUIT, VEGETABLES,
BREAD, CONFECTIONERY,
CIGARS, CIGARETTES and SUNDRIES.
AT MOST REASONABLE AND MONEY SAVING PRICES
Telephone
22338
Wholesale
Dept,
BUSINESS HOURS:
Daily (Sundays included) 8.30 a.m. till 9.30 p.m.
THE ASIA COMPANY
. . . . Combining' a High-Class
Tailoring
ESTABLISHMENT
with a Staff of Skilled Workmen
where the Sartorial Requirements
of fastidious gentlemen are—even
under the condition of “ Rush ”
Orders—always satisfactorily met
(supported by unsolicited testi-
| monials)
A SIMPLE DEFINITION
THAT SPEAKS VOLUMES
AH HONG CO.


■
mm
ii
...
.^ll|l
w] & * m
rSn 13 M ®
sss & fa m &
m m
A pg A A
CHINA SPORTS
ATHLETIC GOODS
16, D’Aguilar Street, Hong Kong.
Telephone:
26
Tennis & Badminton
Rackets Restrung
PROMPT SERVICE # MEASURED TENSION
CHINESE Ve'aß BOOK
Premier Issue 1935-36
Edited by Kwei Chung-shu
Special Price $20.00
List Price $30.00 after March 31, 1936
The purpose of this Year Book is to provide the
Enghsh-reading public with up-to-date information
about China. It is prepared in its entirety from
direct source materials in the Chinese original by 50
renowned Chinese Authorities in their respective fields
of endeavour and learning.
DISTRIBUTED BY
THE COMMERCIAL PRESS, LTD.
HONG KONG BRANCH


China BEdg., Queen’s Road C.
195, Des Voeux Road C.
191, Johnston Road Wanchai.
§
224, Nathan Road, Kowloon.
1, Peking Road, Kowloon.
60, Nam Cheong Street,
Shamshuipo.
THE LEADING SHOE STORE IN THE COLONY
All seasonable shoes at reasonable prices.
Gent’s brown or black calf leather shoes.
Price $7.90
Brown or black spotted leather shoes for
school wear.
Price $2.90—53.90
RUBBER SHOES FOR SPORTS 8c TENNIS
Price 80 cents. Small size 60 cents.
THREE NAMES FAMOUS FOR THE
QUALITY OF THEIR PRODUCTS
“MOUTRIE”
HIGH GRADE PIANOS AND ORGANS
(Backed by over half a century of experience)
“GARRARD”
AUTOMATIC RECORD CHANGERS AND RADIO GRAM UNITS
“PATTERSON”
ALL-WAVE RADIO RECEIVERS
(Brings Europe to your fireside)
S. MOUTRIE 8c CO., LTD.
SOLE DISTRIBUTORS FOR GARRARD AND PATTERSON


NOW !
Here is a special display that leads for
Quality, Style, Value and Economy.
SCHOOL CLOTHING
THAT WINS HIS APPROVAL
Yes, and the parents too, for these suits are specially
made to give real hard wear, and make the
purchase of this season's new outfit a
thoroughly satisfactory undertaking.
WAI HING COMPANY
54, WELLING TON S TREE T
The Wonder Pen
WRITES
DIFFERENT
WAVS
m
i
mnsHAßp#
LATEST TRIUMPH
EVERSHARP announces the new Eversharp Adjustable Fountain
Pen! A Pen that writes 9 different ways with One Point!
A pen you adjust yourself to fit your individual style of writing,
whether it s circular, angular, left handed, upside down or what not.
And you can adjust it to any kind of work, printing, drawing, signa-
tures, writing letters ;; • you can even write music with it.
It’s the little slider on top of the pen point that does the trick. This
ingenious slider moves over nine tiny notches. Each notch gives
you a different writing point. Gives you exactly the kind
of writing you want.;. for any kind of work.
Comes only in the beautiful
Doric models in the smart-
est modern colors.
Manufactured by
THE WAHL CO., CHICAGO, U. S. A.
THE SINCERE CO., LTD.
S< )LE AGENTS


ďf
tv* ifr
M*. * % f- [A] §£ ft i
■
SAFE DEPOSIT VAULT OF THE BANK OF EAST ASIA, LTD.
HONG KONG
m
r.
Pens Pencils Sets
Famous for
Renting
Quality
beautiful
and
Golourings
Conklin
ENDURAS
REPAIRS FREE
FOREVER
SOLE AGENTS:
THE WING ON CO., LTD


« *
N 9k
£
m-
-1 fii MOP oSTfes ,\Sc
TT^tattAJ,
w
P//V-J
few
1 \«\:
V*
#5
*
*3 ££
« \+“
ir - : ie
£=!
V>-
tn
r
r '
W
iiMfcJl
lv
a
ng
\n m
-5Kr
VT-
-
IAJ
""
Sift
ft
iffl ng
,
■4*
K a»
4H
-a
5S
jxi
<i!
V
(INCORPORATED IN CHINA)
CAPITAL $7,500,000.00
RESERVE $1,500,000.00
BRANCHES— ALL IMPORTANT CITIES IN CHINA
Foreign Exchange and General Banking Business transacted
Current and Saving Accounts opened and Fixed Deposits received for
one year or shorter periods at rates which will be quoted on application.
HEAD OFFICE:
HO, HANKOW ROAD —SHANGHAI
Oei Tjoe: Chairman, Board of Directors
Y. Hou: General Manager
Oei Yok Kie: Asst. General Manager
HONG KONG BRANCH:
24, DES VOEUX ROAD CENTRAL
Sou Z. Chang : Manager
Uy Teng Yiu :\n 7
Hsien M. Sub-Managers
Oei Yoe Tjing: Asst. Manager
S. C. Bunn : Accountant
C. S. Yu : Cashier
TELEGRAPHIC ADDRESS:—“ CHINASOSEA ”
Manager’s Office Tel. 33565
Foreign Exchange Dept 33566
General Office 33567
Cashier’s Office 33569


EAFFERi
tIL/ DE/K J F
SOLE DISTRIBUTORS |
THE /UN CC LTDj
HONGKONG . /
CANTON S*
SHANGHAI
hi til I-
a
P
N
] 3ealfuudoucfu
TWO-IN - ONE PCI
MEDIUM LINE U/UAL PC/I
FINE LINE TURNED C
'Pc
W PM ’ft' &t
BE Vis »! #>r M
""Sfuifi
MAKES A COOD PEN WRITE BETTER
That youngster simply refuses
to remain a boy, and you ap-
prove his manliness. But you
want to keep him as he is to-
day, too.
Photographs of the children
never grow up.
r
CHAN YING STUDIO
Designers of Stage Scenes
Commercial Artists, & Photographers


m
k
mM
IK
LACTOGEN
FOR A HEALTHY
START IN LIFE
PURE RICH FULL CREAM COWS’
MILK, MODIFIED SO THAT IT IS
JUST LIKE MOTHERS’ MILK,
PRODUCING DIGESTIBLE FLAKY
CURDS IN BABY’S STOMACH.
THE
BETTER
MILK
FOR BABIES
d
i=£3
3$
SHUN HING CYCLE CO.
BICYCLES 8c PARTS
Agents
New=lmperial,
Calthorpe and Panther
Motorcycles
25, Johnston Rd. Tel . 23924
Vi r ii W IE
Vi m n be a ¥ @ m %
ffl -X HH m « * MfeSlSi®


ď
SCHOOL BLAZERS
TIES
and
BADGES
ALWAYS IN STOCK
AH YUEN
COLLEGE TAILOR


RADIO
SALES &
SERVICE
PROMPT
ACCURATE
INEXPENSIVE
CENTRAL RADIO SERVICE
KING’S BUILDING —HONG KONG
60, NATHAN ROAD—KOWLOON
Phone 2 3 74-3
OcO A P
-m BBAUT i
*
\
V
>
V—'
O
A
<<
V
J
ffi
v**
a
<7
M v
rf(sH-
pa
V
o
V'’
DD J A
j=,t


The
Canadian Cafe
Best food charged
at the most reasonable
price.
Queen's Road C.
HONG KONG
a
pi
bSNG
fg # ##U
m
&
m
*
*
FACTORY
TOTTENHAM HALE
LONDON, ENGLAND
d. < @ed/e/rter
(eastern) ltd.
BRANCH
GLOUCESTER ARCADE
HONG KONG
fd
fakers of iije faorlfr’s
fittest duplicators
JJrhtitog (jHaterials
aot* |Japer store ISHL
ďfďf
OFFER JUBILEE CONGRATULATIONS
TO
St Joseph's College,


THE ROCK
A HONG KONG MONTHLY MAGAZINE
Published on the Ist, of each month
On Sale at the Church Doors
on Sundays and at the leading Book Shops
Price 30 Cents
ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION: $3. POSTAGE FREE
THE “ROCK” OFFICE,
P. O. BOX 28, HONG KONG
v#
Y2A
polytechnic Commercial School
52, Caine IRoab, Mong Ikong
0 English-Commercial Classes
Curriculum including English, Translation, History,
Geography, Arithmetic, Book-Keeping, Commercial
Correspondence, Business Method, Typewriting, Shorthand,
Commercial Law, Economics.
0 Typewriting
Accuracy and speed easily acquired with our up-to-date and
scientific equipment and well-graded lessons, $12.00 for com-
plete course.
9 Shorthand
Lessons given to class or individuals by expert tutors.
Extra-rapid course for individuals.
0 Languages
French and Japanese classes, conversational and written, taught
by qualified and experienced teachers.
Lectures, Visits to Firms and Factories, Picnics, Games, etc.
are all included in the year’s work.


%J*unktal
m//,
/
c liDe have
a large stock of
world known
Zeiss Cpunktal
Jdenses the best glasses for the
eye sight . hey fit your eyes
to your fullest satisfaction.
CHINESE OPTICAL COMPANY.
mv* >rZ
. mjt
f: ft
it
ijg *
* W -t
a as
SI
SII %TkiS M f.S 9£
iK«S^*JW*|3a
Compliments of
TAK CHEONG
Specialists in Laundry,
Dry=Cleaning, etc.
110-116, KENNEDY ROAD


Students
WHO WISH TO BE
WELL DRESSED
AT
SMALL COST
BE ADVISED, AND GO TO
MEE NGAI COMPANY
TAILORS
178, DES VOEUX ROAD
Telephone 24310
Artistic
Photographers
MINQ YUEN STUDIO
For All Photographic Services
6, Queen’s Road Central
3rd Floor
Satisfaction Assured
n % ffl
4 1 AN %% PR ®
!P 4*
ff £
