

lUl'icvc Shall wc (So ?
Mhat Shall we See ?


fT) /iusi- ‘Proof
Corsets^
Their Characteristics:
Tested
for Shape
* •>
Tested
for Comfort
4> *
Tested
for Wearing
Qualities
♦ «
And
The fact they are as Washable
as often as Underwear.
EVERY PAIR GUARANTEED
Obtainable all Leading
Drapers.


Photo by Lafayette
Lt.-Col. F. G. Hughes, Esq., J,P., Mayor of St. Kll da.
St. Kilda by Day and Night
This Booklet was compiled by the Progress Advertising and Press Agency Co.
Propy. Ltd., Cromwell’s Buildings, Melbourne. Tel. City 2516.
Printed by J. L. Anderson & Sons, Printers, 63 City Road, Melbourne.


i RON ISC H i
The World’s Best Piano for Australia.
49,000 Homes have RONISCH Pianos.
The RONISCH Piano has a Beautiful Tone and
Splendid Touch, and keeps in Tune for long periods.
GORS & KALLMANN
The Most Popular Piano in Victoria.
45,000 Homes have GORS & KALLMANN PIANOS
SOLE AGENTS
Carnegie & Sons
106 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne
Ronisch Pianos, Gors & Kallmann Pianos, Brinsmead
Pianos, Bell Organs, Angelas Pianos, and the
Wonderful Angelas Piano Player.
S, JDf lIIZ/UKUU IJVJ
>s, and the M
'er. M


len years ago Melbourne had practically not an open air
entertainment, or even tea garden. St. Kilda was at that time
a quiet and purely residental suburb. An occasional merry-
go-round might have emitted its enticing tunes o’ afternoons
for the benefit of the children. Even in appearance the suburb
has so altered in that time that it would hardly recognise its
younger sister.
To-day St. Kilda is the sum and summit of the summer
seeker after pleasure. Its very entrance —the St. Kilda-road —
has been led by the City Council to a degree of beauty hardly
to be equalled in the Sunny South. The splendid roadway is
surrounded and divided by green lawns, tree and shrubberies;
and, wherever a park borders on the road, fences have been
abolished and the vista of cool greenness stretches in smiling
promise.
The foreshore, under the guidance of a special Foreshore Com-
mittee, has developed apace. Apart from the beauty of the
shore, viewed from any point, the most tired and depressed
can always find here enlivenment and rest after the labours of
the day.
But such good example could not long be left unfollowed.
Other shows, of more or less the same nature, quickly made
their appearance—merry-go-rounds, Aunt Sally’s, all sorts of
“ games of skill ” and living pictures.
A large allotment of ground was made into a park of
pleasures, called “ Dreamland ” —now vanished like a dream—
and, after various vicissitudes, the site is now being prepared
for a large public garden, where various delights and novelties
are promised.
Private houses on the Esplanade have been taken over by
entertainers. One of the largest of the beach shows is the
open-air theatre of “ The Follies,” under the auspices of Messrs.
J. and N. Tait, and managed by Mr. Shaw Stanley, who has
collected a splendid troupe of first-class artists.
These shows must all obtain special permits from the Fore-
shore Committee. It is these gentlemen —Messrs. Captain Currie,
F. Wimpole, Councillor H. B. Gibbs, C. Catani, Councillor H.
P. Barnet, E. O’Donnell, Councillor G. H. Billson, and H. O.
Allan (Secretary to the Lands Department)—who are respon-
sible for the beautifying of this part of St. Kilda.


Proprietors
. Messrs. Will, and Rob. Thomas.
Musical Director .
Mr. Rob. Thomas.
Business Manager .
Mr. Will. Thomas.
Stage Manager . .
Mr. Maynard Dakin.
§§ The English Pierrots.
Some six years ago, two enterprising Englishmen, Will
and Rob. Thomas, the now famous English Pierrots, came to
Australia. Neither of them had had professional experience
of vaudeville entertainment. One is a Lieutenant in His
Majesty’s Navy; the other was a prominent business man in
Harrogate. These were the originators of al fresco entertain-
ment at St. Kilda. They commenced with a small arena and a
The English Pierrots on the St. Kilda Beach
small troupe, who very quickly made themselves more than popu-
lar with the residents, and gradually their fame spread abroad,
until, year by year, they have increased and improved their
theatre and their company. To-day the theatre comprises
four different grades of seats; a few rows are reserved at 1/6,
front seats are i/-, and the galleries at the back 6d. and 3d.
The proprietors have received letters of commendation from
the Governor-General, from Sir Gibson Carmichael, and from
the Chief Justice, Sir John Madden. The performance has
received the approval of the clergy, one reverend gentleman
going so far as to say he admired their way of entertaining the
public, as he believed their performance uplifted as well as
amused those who attended.


§ The Follies H
0 O
The theatre is most artistic; the long tiers of seats are
shaded at the back by large and historic trees, which make a
most picturesque background.
In the front seats arm-rests make a most welcome addition
to one’s comfort, and the seats are all graded, so that everyone
has a perfect view.
The show itself is brilliant and sparkling. Mr. J. M.
Campbell, of pantomime fame, takes leading role as comedian
and his quiet, restrained humour always tells. The company
consists of the following splendid artists; —
The “ Follies ” at St. Kilda Beach
in “ Barcelona ” —one of their numerous successes.
Prices; 2/- (reserved), 1/6, 1/- and 6d.
Miss Winnie Harbor, comedienne: Miss Daisy Sylvester,
comedienne and dancer; Miss Grace Darley, comedienne and
dancer; Miss Mabel Carlton, soprano; Messrs. J. M. Campbell,
comedian; Howard Hall, basso and humorist; Henry Ross,
tenor; Edwin Grainger, baritone; and a special attraction in
the person of little Donald Cameron —a miniature Harry Lauder
—a born Scotch comedian.
From time to time novel turns are introduced into the pro-
gramme, which always contains an attractive variety.


f“hrzsn
The “ Jesters.” whose popularity has become a by-word,
occupy a very large piece of ground—“ Arcadia ” —next the
Royal Elotel. right on the Esplanade front, where the tram
passes the door.
The “ Jesters,” “ Arcadia,” St, Kilda Esplanade.
Mr. Edward Branscombe’s Comedy Company. Every night.
Prices: 2/- (reserved), 1/6, i/- and 6d.
Nightly the crowds flock to this splendid show, which
gives a programme of exceptional merit, brightness and refine-
ment. Their stage is a true Arcadian setting of sylvan beauty,
and their foresters’ costumes add a touch of originality and
realism to the scene, reverting to the days of Robin Hood.
The members of this company are almost all English artists,
whose popularity is clearly evident at every appearance, and
who have been brought by Mr. Branscombe, the well-known
impressario, from London’s leading places of amusement, and
each in his or her particular firmament is a bright particular
star.


After a merry dinner at home or in town, no more pleasant
way of spending the evening can be imagined than thus to sit
at ease, where the faintest suggestion of a cooling breeze is
immediately felt, and enjoy the charming variety of entertain-
ment, with the sky as a roof and the stars for illumination.
The entertainment is on entirely original lines. The leading
lady, Miss Florrie Henderson, is from Lancashire, and specialises
in Lancashire songs. Her efforts are ably seconded by Miss
Ruby Edgar, who hails from “ God’s Own Country,’’ whose
poi ” songs are nightly in great demand.
The company consists of Messrs. Cuthbert Rose, society
entertainer; Herbert Walton, comedian; Ben Calvert, tenor;
Oliver Peacock, baritone; Horton, humorist; Scarfield, Dickens
impersonator; Chas. Lawrence, musical monologuist. Under the
direction of Mr. Edward Branscombe.
( Crcmorne Gardens )
<§>-C§><sXsxgx>—o<gxg><gxg> c$D <%>&>
Next door to “ Paradise ” is a charming al fresco tea
garden—“ The Cremorne Cardens,” sometimes called “ Elli-
matta.” Here, at all hours of the day and night, refreshments
of the daintiest kind are served in green-covered summer-houses,
under spreading and clustering trees, on a large, open lawn, or,
should the weather be inclement, in a large and well-appointed
room. Everything is of the best; attention is prompt and polite;
and, after the evening’s amusement, a long line of motors may
be seen in front, waiting for those who meet and gather there for
delightful suppers. Afternoon teas are delicious, and the weary
motorist, after a long drive, can always be sure of a delightful
meal. This was the first of this class of refreshment room, and
has always remained deservedly popular.
On summer afternoons the green lawns on the beach and
the large square on the Esplanade are crowded with the leisured
of all sexes and sizes, from the unappreciative baby, imbibing
health in the perambulator, to the old couple who, in the Indian
summer of their lives, and having experienced all that a long
life teaches to the wise, recognise here the healthiest and hap-
piest pastime of their few remaining years.


7/f fMi/A r./\frdf\ee


Admission: i/-, 6d., and 3d
Sole Lessees: Johnson and Gibson. Sole Director: W. J. Lincoln
There are for those not musically inclined, or as a change
for the many who make nightly pilgrimages to the beach, other
kinds of entertainment. Among these none is more popular
than the open-air cinematograph.
The “ Paradise ” of Living Pictures, under the direction
of Mr. Lincoln, is a large and splendidly planned garden, with
seats arranged in comfort and in plenty, and where every night
(with a free display on Sundays) the best and most interesting
pictures are shown. Scenes from all over the world, by all the
best makers, comic films of side-splitting humour, and splendid
dramatic representations by leading actors and actresses —in
Paris, London. America- —-and even Australian dramas by Aus-
tralian actors, taken not on a stage, but on the very
among the actual scenery of the author’s mind.
The tram service to St. Kilda is very good. Beach trams
from the northern suburbs run every five minutes; also from
Windsor, connecting there with the 'buses or the Malvern electric
tramway.
Trains at the busiest times of the day run at intervals of
ten minutes, and the remaining portion of the day and till
midnight every 20 minutes. The electric tram running to Brigh-
ton meets every train. On Saturdays and Sundays this trip is
specially catered for, Brighton being a popular tripper’s goal.
This electric tram route has opened up and popularised a
section of St. Kilda previously looked upon as “ out-back.” All
along the line the popular and übiquitous Queen Anne villa
raises its standard, and for some miles along in that direction
building is going on as fast as it can be done.
Indeed, the whole of St. Kilda, as is the case with many
other suburbs, has of late been subjected to this “ Queen Anne ”
craze. As a residential suburb it seems more popular year by
year. Even the “ domestic help ” question is more easily solved
here than elsewhere, Mary Ann being, seemingly, allured by
the life and gaiety surrounding her, and the fact that she
needs neither to pay tram fares nor rush unduly to be home
before “ the Missis ” locks her out.


jjJ AUSTRAL PAVILION 0
ST. HILDA PIER
At the end of the long pier there is situated the beautiful
Tea Kiosk, of which a photograph appears below. Around the
ground floor of this one may see, any morning or afternoon,
groups of ladies or young girls, with their work or their novels,
seated in groups at the tables, sipping iced beverages and enjoy-
ing the soft zephyrs.
Austral Pavilion, St. Kilda Pier.
Inside and upstairs is accommodation for those who do not
care for so much exposure, and upstairs are the romantic-looking
little balconies much favoured by young couples.
TAXI-CAB FARES.
i/- per mile; 5/- an hour detention
10/- an hour for afternoon; 6d. an hour empty.
TRAM FARES.
Cash Fares. —3d.
Tickets good on all lines and busses. —12 for 2/9.
Tickets good on certain lines. —6 for 1/-,
City Sections (within City boundaries). —Tickets,
8 for 1/-.
Trams start running between 5.26 and 6 a.m., and
cease between 11.30 and 11.55 P- m -> and run fre-
quently all day.
On Sundays, first trams start at 1.24 p.m.
Beach return tickets, on all north suburban tram
lines, are issued at gd.


OARWOOD TEAuGARDENS.
Just at the terminus of the beach tram, within a few
minutes of all these entrancing shows, is another large and beau-
tifully appointed tea garden —the “ Oakrood.” Here a band is
continuously playing, and a special attraction is the novelty of
many of the “ nooks.” In the branches of one large tree is
built a platform and table and chairs for to greet the twain
who wander up the narrow and picturesque stairway —“ Tea in
the clouds,” by electric light or moonlight!
Little summer-houses and quaint seats are everywhere, and
many picnic parties, leaving, if desired, their motor cars in the
garage attached, find their way to this delightful spot.
In connection, too, with “ Oakrood ” a large and expensively
fitted skating rink is being erected by a leading architect, with
granolithic floor and every modern improvement.
The catering is dainty and varied, and the position has the
advantage of being at the end of the tram line, where seats
are most easily obtainable on the homeward journey.


THE NEW ST. KILDA BATHS.
The new St. Kilda Baths (late Hegarty’s), specially for men,
rebuilt 1907; the most complete system of baths in Australia,
and the largest enclosed swimming area in the world. Hot and
cold sea water baths for ladies and gentlemen. Porcelain
enamel baths, passage, rooms, etc.
Hot sea water baths, a recognised cure amongst the faculty
for all nervous complaints, sciatica, rheumatism, etc.
“ Artificially made water, exhibiting approximately the same
saline composition, is not so beneficial as that derived from
natural sources.” —The Lancet.
Sea water directly pumped from the sea to the hot baths.
Electric light for night swimming, illuminating the whole
area, high dives, water chute and springboards, etc.
Bathing tickets, including return to and from Melbourne, gd.
each. Beach return tickets, on all north suburban tram lines, are
issued at gd.
CAB FARES.
By Distance —not exceeding 3 Persons. —One mile,
1/-; two miles, 2/-; per mile beyond two miles, 1/3;
if returning, the outward journey beyond two miles
to be charged at 1/6 per mile, and no back fare.
Exceeding 3 persons. —One mile, 2/-; per mile
beyond one mile, 1/6; if returning, the whole outward
journey to be charged at 2/- per mile, and no back
fare.
Detention. —Five minutes without charge; 6d. per
quarter hour afterwards.
One-half extra between midnight and 5 a.m.
By Time.—Half Hour, 2/-; one hour, 3/-. Ap-
plicable (unless by agreement) for driving within a
radius of two miles from stand. One-half extra
between midnight and 5 a.m.
Calling off stand and not further employing, 1/-.


BILLIONS OF MICROBES.
HEALTH REGULATIONS.
“In Corpore Sano ” writes:—
No one will object to the very wise regulations issued by the
Board of Public Health with regard to the control of the sea bathing
establishments. It is necessary to protect the life and limbs of
bathers and the provision for shark-proof fences, depth indicators,
and other precautions arc certainly most necessary demands.
At the same time it appears strange that the Board of Health
should have .overlooked the need of regulations for the sanitary
provision of the fresh-water baths belonging to the various munici-
palities. If the health of the bather is to be considered, then, cer-
tainly very strict regulations are required to maintain cleanliness in
the somewhat stagnant waters of these establishments.
No matter what efforts may be made as to daily duties and re-
filling, yet a certain amount of organic matter of a staying nature
.
must remain as a residuum. At a congress of the Royal Institute
of Public Health held at Liverpool, Dr. Glynn and Dr. Matthews
read a paper upon the amount of bacteria in fresh-water swimming
baths.
They found that the first-class public baths contained less bac-
teria than the second-class baths, and that the number of bacteria
rose as bathing went on throughout the day. They: further esti-
mated that a first-class bather in these municipal baths introduced
4,000,000,000 and a second-class bather 6,000.000,000 microbes into
the water.
Fully-dressed persons walking along the edge of the bath were
also responsible for a serious bacterial pollution through the dirt
on their boots. Now, in the open sea-bathing establishments, such
as those at St. Kilda, the constant sweep of ocean currents and
tides must necessarily give a clean, sandy bottom to the baths, and
the hygienic qualities of the water must therefore be, in their purest
condition.
The sanitary inspection of baths is needed both in the covered-
in fresh-water baths and in the open sea establishments; but where
in the latter it is a matter of protecting the bathers from the vora-
city of sharks and the treachery of the tides, in the latter extra
precautions will have to be taken by the Board of Health to safe-
guard the bathers from the dangerous and elusive microbes that
lurk in the much-used still waters.


‘‘Royal Middie^t
Costume Comedy Co.
tml.
T-f h r\\xT mror o -Pf /=»i- n rl Qf 1 1 n cVj/'Milrl CPPtI
If, however, after a day’s toil, St. Kilda Beach should seem
too far away, close to the city, on the St. Kilda-road, is situated
the open-air theatre of the “ Royal Middies.” This ground,
which used to be the “ Continental Picture Garden,” is arranged
to seat four thousand people. It is just past the terminus of
the city ticket tramway section, next Wirth’s Skating Rink.
Under the direction of Mr. A. L. Trueman and the mana-
gership of Mr. Walter Graham, an enthralling programme is
rendered nightly by a select company, every individual of which
is, in his or her own line, a finished artist. The costumes —the
The “ Royal Middies,” Costume Comedy Co.
most attractive nautical dress-—are cool-looking, pleasing and
becoming. The voices of all the company are splendid, and
reach all parts of the arena; whilst the enactment of little
comedy turns never fails to please the most critical audience.
Here, with a pipe and a delightful companion, within
walking distance of many suburbs, most delightful evenings can
be passed. Refreshments, too, are obtainable on the premises.
The prices are popular—i/-
extra for reserved seats, which
Original choruses, such as
unique Japanese scena, prove
“ Royal Middies;” but one can
and 6d., with a charge of 6d.
may be obtained at Glen’s.
the popular “ Harvest,” and a
special bonnes bouches at the
say without hesitation there is
not a dull minute throughout the whole of this delightful per-
formance.




From France : Choicest Vegetables in glass,
boxed Macaroni, Pate de Fois Gras, Galantines,
Financiers, Cretes de Coq, Soups (in tins
and packets), Grenouilles, Cavair, Filets Saurs,
Oeufs Harengs, Salad Harengs, M.S. Sardines,
Bordeaux Prunes, etc.
From Spain : Malaga Muscatels (the choicest
fruit ever seen in Australia), and Jordan Almonds.
We have also received a special consignment of
delicious Turkey Figs, stuffed with Cherries, Pecans,
Walnuts, and assorted stuffings.
From Switzerland : Gruyere Cheese,
specially selected at the factories.
From America : Green Corn, Little Neck
Clams, Peaches, Pears and Apricots in Syrup.
Each of these lines is the best of its kind the world
produces, and we confidently invite your early
inspection and judgment of them.
THE MUTUAL
HIGH-CLASS GROCERS
Opp. Flinders St. Station, Melbourne
Telephones—246s-6-7- 8, CITY


Grand Limerick Competition
A TYPEWRITER
FOR A SHILLING
Exercise your Skill and Ingenuity.
The rapid progress of Business affairs demands the
use of a Typewriter,
A Cheap useless Machine is an Abomination.
The “Empire” Typewriter is a first-class machine,
sold at a reasonable price.
The publishers of this Booklet have arranged with
THE EMPIRE TYPEWRITER CO. of
343 Collins Street (direct Importers of the Empire
Typewriter) to allot one of their excellent “EMPIRE
TYPEWRITERS,” equipped with all of the latest
modern appliances, and equal to any machine on sale in
Australia, to the reader of this publication, who fills in
the best missing line in the Limerick attached.
All attempts must be sent in on the Coupon,
accompanied by a Postal note for One Shilling.
Every shilling sent will entitle the Competitor to
Beautiful Three-coloured Postcard of one of Australia’s
leading singers (post free).
The contest will be adjudged by a leading citizen
of Melbourne—and will close on February 26th, 191 1,
at mid-day, and the Typewriter will be awarded to the
competitor sending in the Best Missing Line.
Remember that this Contest is one
of Skill only, and there is absolutely
no element of chance.
All Postal Notes and Competitions must be addressed
to " TYPEWRITER COMPETITION ” (St. Kilda Fore-
shore), Cromwell Buildings, Melbourne.
LIMERICK
A Maiden there was, very wise,
Who said writing hurt both her eyes —
So she said, “ 1 will try
An “EMPIRE” to buy
I agree to abide by the conditions of the above
Competition,
Name
Address...


3 1508 02236610 3
11P
, * ‘Mm
DAINTY WHITE
EMBROIDERED
BLOUSE LENGTHS.
Depicted here is a popular style Blouse, which shows
a distinct superiority over all others for
SUMMER WEAR.
We have a variety of 500 different designs, cut already
to make up.
Special Xmas. Prices:
4/lld., 5/6, and 5/lld. each.
The Charles M. Read Stores
CHAPEL STREET, PRAHRAN.
