

St. Mary's Cathedral,
OLD AND NEW,
WITH
Historic & Biographical Notices,
AND
SEVERAL ILLUSTRATIONS.
J.A F. 282.944 OCO
“QUAM DILECTA TABERNACULA TUA DOMINE, "-Psalm, LXXXIV.
Price - One Shilling.
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, 26 JAMISON STREET.
1882.


M. GOULSTOM,
(ESTABLISHED 28 YEAES.)
TRY GOULSTON’S
£3 3s. Suits. £4 4s. Suits. £4 10s. Suits.
ALL GOODS THOROUGHLY SHRUNK AND
NO MISFITS.
New Goods every Mail from First-Class Houses.
z
m
WELL-KNOWN
TAILOR,
58 MARKET STREET,
SYDNEY.
EAST END I" WAREHOUSE.
J. F. HAGERTY,
mtb
SOUTH HEAD ROAD,
NEAR TOLL BAR, PADDINGTON.
Crosse & Blackwell’s Oilman’s Stores and Table
Delicacies always on hand.
Fresh Wollongong Butter received three times a week.
N.B. Families in Town or Suburbs waited upon. Orders by post
attended to with punctuality and dispatch. Squatters, Storekeepers
and Settlers supplied WITH GOOD VALUE. A favor of your
Orders respectfully solicited.


rfhnT- C
<C%rr s£l
<y6.
\I/■ t <*~ :r f/i°-^\t*.-<„ >*->**/- j'^s/'
/ J S (/{*■-.■-. / •
':'• 7KS- <r>w fy/\- I
sjL*dL , ■; -<2^pfVX.
J 'huf. o>v
j^J/t J fh>SXjd * y
<^»*— J^" "
.
't£a- \ A-i-: 4^
/ '^L'2-4A<-«rf
» >c^~^ T>x—- Zl- </f<auZxcA.^^Ui^
- ;£z~~X
OK. fr-« ---t , —- ct-
r j’j-* /- *« “* t>o\
■»~~ J ~ <s£ctff-Mv
fr' a ' & sfr


Advertisements.
PUBLIC NOTICE.
J. TURNER ROBINSON & CO.'S
Tailoring Business,
ESTABLISHED 1864,.
LATE 482 AND 484,
REMOVED TO
478 GEORGE ST. 478
VIZ.,
NEXT DOOR RUT ONE,
OR
TWO DOORS NORTH OF OLD SHOP. -£&•’
OUR CELEBRATED SHIRTS have stood the
test of Public Opinion for THIRTY-EIGHT
YEARS, and in the face of all Opposition,,
are still unequalled for FIT or VALUE.
“We are now offering READY-MADE WHITE
SHIRTS, Fashionable Fronts and Wrist-
bands, Splendid Value, at 305., 40s, and 50s.
the Half Dozen.”
SMITH & MAM NELL,
SHIRT-MAKERS,
Hosiei% G[lovers, ai]el Mei|V jVterder^,,
298 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY.
ESTABLISHED 1844.


Advertisements.
THOSE ABOUT TO
FURNISH
OR
RENEW
THEIR
CARPETS
SHOULD INSPECT QUR STOCK OF
b u
tbu
The Designs are Perfectly New,
AND THE
Colour Blendings
Ricli and Effective*
The Price being the same
As for the
Ordinary Best Brussels*
DAVID JONES & CO.,
r>-‘


Advertisements.
£ •'£ £
£jL A A A A. i
COMMISSION
PRODUCE
MERCHANT,
168 & 170
a.
SlapJ?
ST 'fa
©
$Jr 'h'f^y
<y«


GEORGE ST. & 81 OXFORD ST.
Look out for the Big Letters and Figures in (George
Street, and 81 Oxford Street.
tbu
tbu
m
m
m
m
Order a Suit like
this for yourself,
Made Well,
Shrunk Well,
Fitted 'Well.
The price is only
£3 3s. Od.
Customers need
not take garments
unless approved
of.
I have made more
Suits than any
other Tailor in
N.S.W.
I have employed
during the past
ten years from 7o
to 100 hands.
More young men
have gone out
from my estab-
lishment and com-
menced business
successfully on
their own account
than all the other
estab ishments
put together.
tbu


St. Marg's Datherlral,
(now in course of erection).
J. G. O’CONNOR, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, 26 JAMISON STREET.
1882,


j. g. O’CONNOB, PBINTEB AND PUBLISHES.


INTRODUCTION.
The publisher of this compilation has been induced to issue it in order
that some permanent record of a great event, in a form for easy refer-
ence, should be presented to the Catholic public. The sources from
which the information has been drawn are perfectly authentic; and,
hence, the brochure will be worthy of preservation. The publisher is
indebted to the Express, and other newspapers, for a portion of the
remarks in reference to the services of the Triduum.
J. G. O'C.
26, Jamison Street, 1882,


SUMMARY OF CONTENTS
AND
ILLUSTRATIONS.
The New Cathedrae.
St. Joseph’s Chapel and Old St. Mary’s.
Portrait oe the late Archpriest O’Flinn.
Portrait of the late Archpriest Therry.
View of St. Joseph’s Chapel (on the site of the present
Cathedral).
View of St, Mary’s, as Completed by Father Tiierry.
The Dawn of a Brighter Day.
Portrait of the late Archbishop.
Portrait of the late Archdeacon McEncroe.
The Destruction of the Cathedral by Fire.
The Cathedral as it was to have been Completed.
Public Sympathy : A New Cathedral..
Associations of Old St. Mary’s..
Portrait of the late Dean McCarthy.
Portrait of Archbishop Goold.
Arrangements for Opening the New Cathedral.
Portrait of Archbishop Vaughan.
Opening and Solemn Dedication.
First Day—The Sermon.
Second Day.
Third Day.
Benefactors : Address and Presentation from Wagga
"VVagga.
Portrait of the Very Eey. Dr. Bermingham.
The Final Act.


St. Joseph's Chapel and Old St. Mary's
Cathedral.
“Quam dilecta Tabeknactjla ttia, Bomine.”—Psalm, Ixxxiv.
One of the most brilliant chapters in European history is probably that
devoted by Moore to Irish missionary zeal from the demise of St..
Patrick to the invasion of the country by the Danes. Saints Columba
“the dove of the churches”— Columbanus, Fiacre, and other holy
servants of God went forth to evangelize the fiercest races then in pos-
session of Europe. St. Gall —after whom a canton of Switzerland has
been named —is traditionally credited with having converted, in his
apostolic life-time, 50,000 mountaineers, whose descendants afterwards
(from the days of Tell to Pestalozzi) became the apostles of religion
patriotism, and civilization. It is curious to observe how the warm
and impulsive Irish temperament adapts itself to every clime to which
missionary zeal attracts it. It is—almost a solecism —at once diverse
and identical: it is always Irish, but under different conditions. Thus,
we have the Canadian Irish priest somewhat distinct in type from the
Irish bishop of one of the islands of the Caribbean Sea, and both differ
in some respect from the Archbishop of New York; still they are all
one in supreme excellence of their devotion to God and their native
land. Irish missionaries have also done good work in the East
Indies from Goa to Bernares, and about a year ago we buried one of
them in Sydney —Father Gough —who had devoted seventeen years of
his life to the best interests of the Queen’s Catholic soldiers in Hindu-
stan. The kind reader will at once anticipate the act we wish to
emphasize, namely, the manifestation of the Irish missionary spirit in
Australasia.
n


When that appalling episode of history—the Irish Rebellion of
1798- — ‘‘ plotted, planned, and contrived” by William Pitt and Vis-
count Castlereagh—-had exploded, and Ireland was robbed of her
indefeasible legislative inheritance, among “.the exiles of Erin” trans-
ported beyond the seas were three Catholic priests and one Protestant
clergymen. The former were the Reverend Fathers Dixon, Harold,
and O’Neill, and the latter the Rev. Mr. Pulton. It would be almost
impossible for the reader to realise the state of military despotism that
existed on the shores of Port Jackson, then vulgarly called the Botany
Bay Retreat, when the three Irish priests arrived towards the end of
the first year of the present century —to be exact, in the December of
1801. About a year later the British garrison in Ireland made the
remarkable discovery that they had transported—“beyond the seas”-
the wrong man, in the person of Father O’Neill. His innocence was
demonstrated beyond the possibility of doubt, long before Robert
Stewart, Viscount Castlereagh, and second Marquis of Londonderry,
operated on his jugular vein. Father O’Neill was recalled and (we
have reason to believe) ended his days in the Franciscan monastery of
Multifarnham, near Mullingar, in the county of Westmeath. In the
old abbey of this little town* according to Sir Henry Piers, the Rebel-
lion of 1641 was concocted. [See “ Irish Gazette,” part vii., p. 832.]
The said author describes the edifice as being of a frame or fabric
rather neat or compact than sumptuous or towering, having in the
midst, between the body of the church and the [chancel, a handsome,
straight, but very narrow steeple. This abbey was burned during the
'Cromwellian invasion, and is thus referred to by Archdall:—“ The
abbey, we learn from the tradition of the place, was committed to the
flames by the Rochforts, a powerful family in this country; but some
ruins which remain evince its extent and extraordinary workmanship,
the whole being built of a blackish slate; the east window, totally
devoid of ornament, is still entire.” Within site of the cool dark lake
of Derveragh, with the hill of Knockoyne towering over it, Father
O’Neill ended his days on earth.
The “colonial experiences” of Fathers Dixson and Harold were
sharp and bitter. Through, it is supposed, the interference of the
great Henry Grattan, the Imperial Government allowed the patriot
priests, under most galling restrictions, to perform the duties of their
sacred office. For seven years Father Dixon laboured in Sydney and


Parramatta, dividing his time among the chain-gangs making the
western road, or the prisoners in Hyde Park Barracks. Father Harold
was allowed to officiate at Norfolk Island till 1808, when broken health
and general debility induced him to apply for “the King’s pardon,”
which he got after some humiliating delay. Father Harold did not
remain long in Sydney. The brutal order compelling Catholic priso-
ners to attend to the services of the Church of England first, and go to
Mass afterwards, if they liked, so disgusted the somewhat timid priest
that he also applied for “ a free pardon.” He was allowed to take his
departure from New South Wales in 1809. Father Harold laboured
for some time in London, and according to one writer —the author of
“The Bronze Chalice”—died at Antwerp. “The labours of these
exiled priests,” wrote the compiler of the Catholic Almanac for the
year 1854, “whose gentleness, spirituality, and love casta gleam,
tender and consoling as the lamp of the sanctuary, upon the chaotic
darkness which overspread the land, will never he fully known. Alas!
how often through the hospital, in the barrack-room, and in the con-
demned cell came the blessed conntenances of those anointed men.”
After Father Harold left Sydney a hiatus —valde dejlendus —of seven
years occurs in the ecclesiastical history of New South Wales.
We have just put aside the tender literary shetch, with portrait,
<,f Father O’Flinn, which was issued many years ago by the champion lay
“defender of the faith,” in Australia —William Augustine Duncan,
Esquire, C.M.G., and the brightest name on the “bead-roll” of that
illustrious order of official or officious civilians. According to the un-
questionable authority of Duncan and Ullathorne —Scotsman and Eng-
lishman of the highest Catholic type—Father O’Flinn’s mission from
1817 to his enforced retirement two years later was eminently success-
ful. He had the consolation, when he reached the City of Cork, to
meet a young Catholic priest, Father John Joseph Therry, whose
name and work was for nearly half a century afterwards associated
with the brightest events in colonial history. He was appointed chap-
lain to the “ Homan Catholic prisoners ” in the year 1819, and arrived
in Sydney, accompanied by the Eev. Father Philip Conolly, who died
in Tasmania, then called Yan Diemens’ Land, in 1820. It may as well


be mentioned here that Father O’Flinn was the first Archpriest of
New Holland; Father Therry, the second; and the estimable Dr.
Austin Sheehy, happily still living, the third.
THE VEN. ARCHPRIEST O FLINT.
(From a Portrait in the possession of W. A. Duncan, Esq., C.M.G.)
As the writer of these authentic notices has elsewhere given
biographical sketches of Father Therrv, he begs to present one
written some years ago, correcting a typographical mistake in a
date. John Joseph Therry, the venerable archpriest, was born at
Cork in the year 1791. He was piously reared during childhood, and,
on attaining a proper age, was sent to Carlow College, where he studied
for the priesthood. During his academic career he acquired the affec-
tionate regard of his superiors, and formed several friendships, which
lasted for life, with men who have since become eminent for piety and
learning. Even at this early period of his career Mr. Therry’s mind
was strongly directed towards that species of ecclesiastical labor to


which his life was afterwards devoted —the propogation of the faith in
distant lands. He organised, we are told, a society of young ecclesias-
tics, who bound themselves to offer up certain prayers daily for the
spread of the Christian Doctrine among those who were in darkness.
These young men also, by prayer, offered up their lives to God for His
service in foreign countries and among the heathen, if it should please
Him, by any special sign, to manifest an acceptance of that offering.
THE YEN. ARCHPRIEST THERRY.
Father Therry was ordained to the priesthood in April 1815, by
the Most Rev. Dr. Troy, Archbishop of Dublin. His first mission was
to Cork, the city of his birth. After serving there for two years m the


church, of SS. Peter and Paul, he was transferred to the cathedral
church, where he remained for three years longer. During this time
he resided with the Bishop of the Diocese —the late Eight Eev. Dr.
Murphy—to whom he was strongly attached, and who entertained, for
his then youthful friend, an affection almost paternal.
But in the midst of this comparatively easy career, and with all
the comforts and amenities of polished society around him, the young
priest’s mind still retained its early hent. He awaited only the call to
a wider and more arduous field. That call soon came. He was intro-
duced in 1818 to Father O’Fliim, after the forcible expulsion of the
latter from New South Wales. From this gentleman he learned the
state of spiritual destitution under which the Catholics of this country
were suffering, and he burned to go to their relief. Bishop Murphy
for some time refused his consent to this step, but, at length, seeing
that his young friend was resolved upon it, and recognising in this case
the will of the Almighty, he no longer opposed it. A colleague was
found in the person of the Eev. P. Connolly. They sailed from Cork
early in January, 1820. But ships travelled slowly in those days, and
they did not arrive in Sydney until the 23rd of April.
As Father O’Flinn had been expelled, because, trusting to his
divine mission, he had brought no letters of authorisation from the
civil power, his successors had taken care to arm themselves with docu-
ments of this kind. Backed by the authority of the then Secretary of
State for the colonies, they had no difficulty in entering on their
spiritual mission among the poor Catholics who so much needed their
help. The labor was arduous. But Father Therry had just that
strong faith—that firm conviction of success—which sustains a man
under all difficulties. For a long time there was no proper building
for the service of the Most High according to the ritual of the Catholic
Church. To remedy this the erection of St. Mary’s was commenced.
When the foundation stone of that building was laid on the 29tli of
October, 1821, and people saw the designs for the future temple, many
were half inclined to think him a mere visionary. It seemed, then,
almost absurd to suppose that a church so large could ever be com-
pleted in this country; or that, if completed, there would ever be
found, in that vicinity, a congregation large enough to fill it. The


result lias shewn tliat the confidence of the Reverend founder was well
placed. The area of the Church has been extended, and yet it was
often found insufficient for the number of worshippers who thronged
to it.
After the arrival of the late Archbishop —then Bishop of Hiero-
Ceesarea and Victor-Apostolic of Australia —the Rev. Rather Therry
was sent to Van Diemen’s Land. He remained at the head of the
Catholic Church in that colony, until he was relieved from his charge
by the late Bishop of the diocese —the Right Rev. Dr. Willson.
Both in this colony and in Van Diemen’s Land Father Therry was the
unflinching Champion of his Faith. He maintained, through all
difficulties, the rights of Catholics parents and Catholic children to
a complete equality —in freedom of worship and freedom of education
—with their Protestant fellow subjects. On the part of the orphans
of Catholic parents he was particularly energetic; and although he did
not succeed in securing full justice for them until after he had petitioned
the Queen in person, he did succeed, most fully, in the end.
After his return to this colony the Venerable Archpriest continued
to labor zealously in the service of his Redeemer; and for a consider-
able time before his death he was in charge of the district of Balmain.
He died at an early hour on the morning of the 25th of May, 1864.
He had on the previous day been, apparently, in good health, and had
attended the Levee at Government House in honor of her Majesty the
Queen. In the evening he had presided at a meeting of his own
parishioners for the establishment, at Balmain, of a branch of the
Guild of St. Mary and St. Joseph. He retired to rest without signs of
ailment, but towards midnight he called his servant and complained of
cold. Getting rapidly worse, and feeling that his end was near, he
sent for his esteemed friend and colleague the Venerable Archdeacon
McEncroe, but ere the latter could respond to the call the soul of the
good old Archpriest had disembarrassed itself of its mortal and cor-
ruptible frame and stood in the presence of its Lord. The body was
removed to the Cathedral on Thursday the 26th May, and after the
most solemn services prescribed by the ritual of the Church, was con-
signed to the tomb on the following Saturday. It may as well be
mentioned here that Father Therry, while a curate in Cork, married


tli6 parents of tlie Rev. Dean O'Connell, tlie first Australian who
received the sacrament of Holy Orders.
The limits to which we are restricted in these pages compel us to
give only a mere abstract of the special labours of Father Therry in
reference to old St. Mary’s. If the Very Rev. Dean Dwyer, whose
venerable father died a few weeks ago, has kept the personal narrative
of his saintly mother, in reference to St. Joseph’s Chapel, this portion
ST. JOSEPH’S CHAPEL.
of our ecclesiastical history will be complete. In the Sydney Gazette of
6th|May, 1820, appears the following notice: —“ On Tuesday arrived
from England and Ireland the ship Janus, Captain Mowall, haying on
board 105 female prisoners and twenty-six children. She sailed from
the Cove of Cork, the sth of December; entered the harbour of Rio the
7th of February, and delayed a fortnight. Passengers —the Rev. John
Joseph Therry and the Eev. Philip Connolly.” In the following month
appeared a notice, in the same journal, that “ at a meeting of the
Roman Catholics of Sydney, held on the 15th of June, 1820, in Pitt-


street, at the premises of the late Mr. John Reddingtoß, the Rev.
Philip Connolly in the chair, it Was unanimously resolved— ‘ That
having no convenient place to celebrate the rites of our religion, and
confiding in the benevolent disposition of our fellow-colonists in the
different districts of New South Wales, to join with us in erecting a
house of worship, we earnestly request those who feel interested in so
desirable an undertaking, to assemble with us at a meeting to be held
at 12 o’clock on the 30th instant, at the Courthouse, Sydney, for the
purpose of considering and determining on the most effectual mode of
opening a subscription to build a Roman Catholic Chapel in
Sydney.”
The meeting was duly held, and although the whole of the busi-
ness transacted is highly interesting, four of the resolutions proposed
and carried will suffice for the present purpose, which is merely
intended as an abstract of the circumstances under which old St.
Mary’s, in Sydney, was built. The following are the vital resolutions
of that historic assemblage :
That our Protestant fellow-colonists who have co-operated with us at this meet-
ing, as well as those who have evinced a disposition to aid us by their contributions
merit our lasting esteem and gratitude. That the Eev. Philip Connolly and the
Rev. John Joseph Therry have merited, in an eminent degree, the gratitude of the
Catholics in New South Wales on account of the hazardous enterprise they have
undertaken, and the zeal they have manifested since their arrival in the discharge
of their sacerdotal functions. That John Piper, Robert Jenkins, and Francis
Williams, Esqs., be requested by this meeting to collect the subscriptions of the
Protestant inhabitants of Sydney, as the high respectability and extensive influence
of these gentlemen give us the most flattering anticipation of the success that must
attend their co-operation ; and in order to enable them to exert themselves with as
little trouble and as great efficiency as possible, they be authorised by this meeting
to form themselves into a select committee, having a power to add to their number
any other gentlemen in Sydney, or in the country, whose exertions they may con-
sider useful in facilitating and expediting the collection of the subscriptions in the
different districts of the colony. That being informed that, on the application of
the Rev. Mr. Connolly, Mr. Secretary Campbell has kindly consented to become a
treasurer, we feel it our duty to return him our most -sincere thanks. That Eev.
Mr. Connolly, Rev. Mr. Therry, Mr. Jas. Meehan, Mr. Davis, Mr. Dempsey, Mr.
Redmond, Mr. Moore, Mr. Hayes, Mr. Short, Mr. Dwyer, Mr. Flood, Mr. Murphv,
Mr. Byrne, Mr. Farrell Cuffe do form a committee with Mr. J. T. Campbell as
treasurer.
There is not a name here that does not deserve a separate bio-
graphical notice. The Foundation Stone of the “Roman Catholic
Chapel” was laid by his Excellency the Governor, Lachlan Mac-


(juarie, Esquire, on tlie 29tli October, and the following notice of it
appeared in the Sydney Gazette of 3rd November, 1821 : — u On Monday
last the first stone of the first Koman Catholic Church, in this part of
the world, was laid in the presence of a vast assemblage of respectable
persons, who were anxious to witness so interesting and important a
ceremony. The site chosen for the erection of this edifice, which is
intended to be spacious as well as handsome, lies to the east of Hyde
Park, the front of the chapel facing the town. The spot in every way
appears extremely eligible; and there can hardly be a doubt enter-
tained but that the structure, when completed, will join with the other
superb buildings in that attractive end of the town in affording addi-
tional and consistent beauty to the rapidly-improving Australian
capital. His Excellency the Governor performed the grateful ceremony;
for which a very handsome silver trowel had been prepared by Mr.
Clayton, which was adorned with an appropriate inscription.” Mr-
ST. MARY’S, AS COMPLETED BY PATHER THERRY.


Montgomery Martin sneered (inliis ‘‘British Colonies”) at the “auda-
cious pretensions” of Father Therry in building so large a “chapel;”
hut it was all too small, a few years later, for the immense congrega-
tion that worshipped within its sacred precincts. The Venerable
Father Therry was, in the year 1832, and afterwards assisted by one
of the brightest stars in the ecclesiastical firmament of the 19th century
—we allude to the Bight Beverend William Bernard Ullathorne, now
Bishop of Birmingham. He arrived, as the representative of the Vicar
Apostolic of the Mauritius, in Hobart Town, in the year before men-
tioned, and he reached Sydney in 1833. “ The Catholic population of
Sydney at that period,” writes the compiler of the Almanac of 1854,
“ exceeded 12,000, to whose spiritual necessities three clergymen were
now to minister. The incessant fatigue imposed by such an inequality
of provision was borne not only without complaint, but with absolute
gladness. Sick calls from distant localities, exceedingly difficult of
access, and public executions at distances of eight hundred or a
thousand miles from Sydney by sea were invariably attended to with
the most heroic self-sacrifice. The Cathedral (old St. Mary’s) was
roofless, and two churches, at Campbelltown and Parramatta, were
abandoned in the midst of erection. The Vicar-General (Dr. Ulla-
thorne) immediately after his arrival, perceiving the injustice to himself
and his flock, occasioned by the limited number of clergymen, for
whose transport and maintenance governmental provision had been
made, contrasting the numbers entrusted to his charge with those pro-
fessing the doctrines of the Church of England, and the important
establishment of the latter with his own small band of zealous
labourers, addressed an application to the Government; which was
generously received and complied with for four additional clergymen.”
THE DAWN OF A BRIGHTER DAY.
Without enlarging too profusely on the splendid services to
religion, morality, and civilization of Father Therry and Dr. Ulla-
thorne, it must be admitted that under Divine Providence the Catholic
Church of Australasia is much indebted to the spirit of toleration
evinced and acted upon by Sir Bichard Bourke, the father of Lady
Deas-Thomson. We will follow our guide of 1854 through one further
illustration of the mystery of God’s grace, vouchsafed to the infant
church of Australia, through the instrumentality of Governor Bourke.
“ The solid and extensive basis,” the writer states, “ upon which the
Church Act was founded, proves on the part of its framer (Sir Bichard)


the possession of the nobles faculty of the beneficent ruler-that of
compelling into political arrangements those eternal principles of
•justice which are too frequently considered of a merely abstract or
ethical character. The adoption of any form of religious worship, not
incompatible with the duties of citizenship, is the responsible and
unalienable privilege of every member of society. With this Divine
right, Government is only so far identified as to guard with strict
vigilance the conservation of its integrity.” ' Thus we find “ History’s
Muse” illuming the name of Sir Bichard Bourke, who, although a
political Protestant, really believed in the essential doctrines taught by
Fathers Therry and Ullathorne. But before following the rise, pro-
gress, and destruction (twice) by fire of St. Mary’s Cathedral, we must
refer to the grand apostolic career of the illustrious John Bede Polding,
first Vicar Apostolic of Australia and first Aechbishop of Sydney.
As an authentic biographical account of this distinguished prelate
appears in “ The Australian Dictionary of Dates,” we beg to reproduce
p • “ His Grace the Most Eeverend Count John Bede Polding, D.D.,
of the Order of St. Benedict —Eoman Catholic Archbishop of
Sydney, and Metropolitan of Australia and Tasmania—was born
November 18, 1794, in Liverpool, England. At the age of eleven
years he entered St. Gregory’s College, Downside. On July 16,
1810, in his sixteenth year, he received the habit of the Bene-
dictine Order. On July 18, 1811, he made his religious profession,
and after eight years’ special training for the priesthood, he was
ordained priest March 4, 1819. On tjie 21st of the same month he
celebrated his first mass. He discharged the duties of his office in such
a manner as to secure the approbation of the Church. 'When, in 1834,
it was resolved to send out a Bishop, as chief pastor of the Eoman
Catholics of Australia —who had before been under the superintendence
of the Bishop of Mauritius—Dr. Polding was selected for this impor-
tant work. He was consecrated Bishop of Hiero-Csesarea, with
instructions to act as Vicar Apostolic of New Holland and "V an
Diemen’s Land. The Bull of Pope Gregory XVI., appointing him to
this position, was dated May 2nd. He was consecrated on the Feast
of St. Peter and St. Paul, June 29th. His Lordship arrived in Sydney
in September, 1835. In 1841 he visited England, and thence pro-
ceeded to Eome. There, on April 10, 1842/he was appointed Arch-
bishop of the newly-erected See of Sydney. During his stay in Eome
he was created by His Holiness the Pope a Count of the Holy Eoman
Empire, and was also made a Bishop Assistant to the Papal Throne.


TEE LATE ARCHBISHOP POLDING.


Groat excitement was produced on his return to the colony with the title
of Archbishop. The late Bishop of the Church of England [Dr. Brough-
ton] publicly protested against the assumption of sueh a title by anyone
within the dominions of Her Majesty, without the authority of the Crown,
But, like the Ecclesiastical Titles Act in England, this protest was treated
as a dead letter, except in so far as it satisfied the consciences of those
who subscribed it. And the community in Australia has understood,
and accepted without reserve, the principle that every religious
denomination is to have perfect freedom, without molestation or inter-
ference, to carry out its own organization, with whatever titles it may
see fit to use. Archbishop Polding was remarkable throughout the
whole of his career in Australia for calm and conciliatory demeanour
towards those who differed from him in theological views and ecclesi-
astical association. In 1848 he again visited Kome, and brought out
with him on his return a number of priests and sisters of charity, for
the work: of the Boman Catholic Church in these colonies. In 1854
he made a third visit to Borne, accompanied by Dr. Gregory ; and as
before brought out priests and sisters of charity. He spent much of
his time in traversing the interior of this extensive colony, and visiting
the towns of Victoria, Tasmania, and Queensland. And as fruits of
his abundant labours and generous enterprise, no less than nine
dioceses have been successfully established within his archdiocese; these
are the Dioceses of Melbourne, of Hobart Town, of Adelaide, of Perth,
of Maitland, of Goulburn, of Bathurst, of Brisbane, and of Armidale,
In the early part of 1862, his Grace, assisted by some of the Bishops
within the See, consecrated the church of St. Benedict, in Parramatta-
street, Sydney. His Grace was always ready to acknowledge and to
honor the services of those who laboured with zeal and fidelity in the
work of the Church. And on this occasion, the sermon was preached
by one who was three .years his senior in age, and had long preceded
him as a priest in Australia, the Very Bev. J. J. Therry, Archpriest,
a man whom, on many opportunities, he delighted to honour. The
Archbishop’s concern for the training of the young in the ways of
religion and virtue, was a fitting accompaniment of his care to secure
the reverence due to the merits of the aged; and throughout the arch-
diocese young and old were found harmoniously combined to express
their reverence for his character, and their ardent affection towards his
person. On November 22, 1865, His Grace left Sydney for Europe
for the fourth time. His zeal, in encountering, when over three score


and ten years of age, the perils of the deep and the hardships of a
long voyage, for the advancement of the Church in Australia, elicited
warm expressions of admiration. He was accompanied on that occasion
hy the Eev. M. E. Athy. This, it was supposed, would be the last time
he would venture upon so arduous a journey. But five years afterwards,
when the Pope (Pius IX.) summoned the bishops of the Church from
all parts of the world to meet in the great (Ecumenical Council of the
Vatican, and pronounce the decision of the Church on the question of
Papal Infallibility, Archbishop Polding would not bo deterred by any
consideration of the ease to which his advanced 3-ears might well be
supposed to entitle him, from setting out to join in this important
worh. This was the fifth time he left Australia to visit Rome on the
business of the Church. But though his zeal was unabated, he was
not able to bear the fatigues of the journej-, and after landing at Aden,
in the Red Sea, in compliance with the advice of those who watched
with affectionate anxiety the effects of the passage and of the tropical
heat upon his physical frame, he, without going further, returned to
Sydney. After that time he repeatedly travelled over long distances
in this country. He died at the Sacred Heart Presbj'ter}-, Darling*
hurst, Sydney, March 16, 1877. After the usual ceremonials, his
remains were honoured with a public funeral, and now rest at the
cemeter}- of St. Thomas a’Becket, Petersham.'’
One of Father Therry’s most zealous fellow-labourers and co-ope-
rators in Sydney, and elsewhere on the immense mission, was the Rev.
John (afterwards the Venerable Archdeacon) McEncro'e. This truly
worthy man was born at Rathsalla, five miles from the City of Cashel,
on St. Stephen’s Da}", 1795. His parents were William McEncroe and
Mary D’Arcy. He was unfortunate (while an infant in arms) in losing
his father j but his devoted mother attended to his education with
singular care and devotedness. Brought up in the midst of pious
associations, the spirit of the priestly vocation soon filled his mind.
He entered the Royal College of Maynooth in his 20th year, and was
ordained five years later by the Most Rev. Archbishop Murray of
Dublin. After some years spent as Professor at the Diocesan Seminary
of Navan, he determined to devote his life to the American mission.
He accordingly went to Charleston with the Most Rev. Dr. England,
where he laboured with high approval for seven 3-ears. On a visit to
Ireland, in 1831, he was recommended by Archbishop Murray to accept
a chaplaincy in Australia, which he did after some little delay, and


arrived in Sydney in 1832, in the company of the Honorable J. Hubert
and Mrs. Plunkett. From that period to his demise —with the*excep-
tion of his visit to Ireland —his life is associated with the apostolic
labours of Father Therry and Archbishop Polding, of Bishops Ulla-
THE YEN. ARCHDEACON McENCROE.
tliorne and Murphy. In Yan Diemen’s Land, at Norfolk Island, in
Hyde Park Barracks, attending Busk Stations, the Bev. Jokn McEncroe
did an amount of good incalculable at the present day, more especially
among the prison population. He began bis advocacy of Teetotalism
at an early period of bis career, and continued it with unabated zeal to
the time of bis lamented death, which occurred on Saturday, 22nd
August, 1868. It is needless to say that he had endeared himself
greatly to Dr. Francis Murphy, afterwards Bishop of Adelaide, and to
the Bight Bev. Dr. Davis, Bishop of Maitland and Coadjutor to his
Grace Archbishop Polding. He had the singular spiritual consolation
of receiving the blessings of six Bishops on the afternoon of the day of
his demise. Father McEncroe was the typical bagorth at'oon of all
that was Catholic in Sydney during its dark penal times. Although it
would be a labour of love to trace the careers of other devoted Austra-


Han missionaries—of the learned Father Lovatt, the amiable Father
Brennan, the eloquent Father Coffey, the accomplished Dean Sumner,
the pious Father Corish, and many others whose names and good
Heeds will occur to the mind of the reader—we are forced to note at
this point an occurrence which filled thousands of hearts with sorrow—
THE DESTRUCTION OE ST. MARY’S CATHEDRAL
by fire. This calamitous visitation —but one that tested Catholic sub-
mission to the will of God—occurred on Thursday, the 29th of June,
1865, the feast of SS. Peter and Paul. Fathers Garavel and Woolfrey
officiated in the Church at Benediction, in the evening, which was over
at a few minutes past eight o’clock ; at ten minutes to nine the alarm
was given that the Cathedral was in flames. A Mr. Grogan was the
first to give the alarm, and he was followed by Mr. Carroll and other
gentlemen who made heroic endeavours but in vain to keep the fire
flown till firemen came to their aid. It was impossible to do so. The
combustible material of which the sacred edifice was chiefly composed,
particularly the cedar-casings of ironbark pillars, soon supplied fuel to
what soon became an immense conflagration, and both cathedral, ad-
joining chapel, and the corridors were wrapt in lurid flames. A vast
concourse of people, some weeping in bitter anguish, surrounded the
old church of their affections, while persons of all denominations
mustered to render whatever service they could. A universal sorrow
seemed to have seized Sydney ; and many individuals stopped all night
in the hope of rendering assistance. When the fire had reached its
maximum of intensity, the houses on the heights of Woolloomooloo and
Darlinghurst were luridly illuminated, while clouds of light, greyis
smoke hung like a pall over the doomed edifice. The exquisite tracery
of some of its windows was brought into sharp outline by the flames
that played within the waHs. The loss sustained by the destruction of
the cathedral has never been adequately estimated. Works of Art
were destroyed, the equivalents of which are not likely to be ever found.
The following remarks by a careful reporter of the occurrence will give
some idea of the losses then sustained by the Catholic community:
« St. Mary’s Cathedral had only lately been enlarged to a consider-
able extent, and within its walls were collected works of art on sacred
subjects, by some of the greatest masters. The magnificent organ,
erected in the south gaHery, cost originally nearly £2OOO, and of course
c


ST. MARY'S CATHEDRAL (as it was to have been completed previous to the fire).


was destroyed in the general wreck. The rapidity with which the fire
traversed the interior of the building is attributable to the mass of
polished woodwork within it. The pillars by which the roof was sup-
ported were of ironbark, cased in polished cedar, and the ceiling, which
was an imitation of the vaulted groined ceiling of the middle ages, was
also of polished cedar. The ceiling, therefore, in many places touched,
the roof, and, as a consequence, no sooner did the fire reach the former,
than it burst through the dry shingled portion of the latter. The roof
of that portion of the Cathedral lately built was slated, and dense
volumes of smoke issued from under it, and for a time enveloped the
structure. The fire was not wholly extinguished for several days.
Neither the Cathedral nor any of the church property therein, was in-
sured. It is difficult —scarcely possible indeed —to give a mere money
estimate of the loss which has been sustained. There were a great
many works of art which were priceless. The splendid Archiepiscopal
Throne of carved oak—the tabernacle and altar, statues, paintings by
the old Masters, beautiful vases and costly church, furniture of various
kinds. So far as the loss can be estimated in money it is supposed to
be over £50,000. Among the paintings destroyed in the Cathedral
was a very fine one of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, another
of the death of St. Benedict, also pictures of St. John the Evangelist,
of St. iEinilian, and many others. All these were the work of one or
other of the old Masters, and of inestimable worth, inasmuch as it is
impossible to replace them. The statues of St. Benedict and of St.
Aloysius were also destroyed, as well as many other sculptures, as was.
beautiful figure of the dead Christ in the adjacent chapel of the Blessed
Sacrament. In the store room below the church there was about £ 1000
worth of church furniture —vases, candlesticks, cushions, draperies,.
& c . —all of which was destroyed. One of the large rooms below the
church had been for a considerable time past used as a parish school,
for girls. All the furniture and books in this room were burnt. * The
Pallium, cross and chain, rings, and other jewels of His Grace the'
Archbishop, were kept in a safe below the altar. In no way was the
intensity of the fire more strongly manifested than in the fusion of the •
materials of these precious jewels. Gold, gems, and other mineral sub--
stances having been melted together in the most extraordinary way. Yet
among them was one ring which had been found scarcely injured.
Some detached gems have also been recovered, but all of them are
more or less injured.”


The relics of St. Eelician, in the chapel dedicated to his honour, were
rescued; and the stained-glass window, erected by the late Mr. D.
Eo’an, M.P., to the memory of his wife, who was drowned with two of
her children in the ill-fated “ Dunbar/’ was left almost untouched by
the fire, as was the stained-glass Saeristy window, also.
PUBLIC SYMPATHY : A HEW CATHEDRAL.
Although the Catholics—those of the metropolis especially—reeled
at the shock they had received by the destruction of the venerable pile
in which they had so long worshipped—at whose altar they had often
partaken of “ the bread of life at whose font many of them had
been baptised—before whose Sanctuary hundreds had been married —
and within whose nave the mortal remains of dearly-beloved relatives
—fathers, mothers, sisters, or wives—had received the “absolutions”
of the Church—they did not lose faith in Providence, or shrink at the
serious responsibility before them—that of building a new St. Mary’s
on the ruins of the old one. All religious denominations in Sydney
expressed sympathy for them, in their loss and bereavement, and
several leading citizens at once offered subscriptions. Accordingly, it
was almost spontaneously agreed upon to begin the erection of a new
Temple. “After the first burst of grief and terror had subsided,”
states the writer before quoted, “ all appeared to be animated by the
!S ame resolution—to build, with all possible speed, a church which
should far surpass, in extent and in architectural perfection, that
which had been destroyed. Without placards, advertisements, or
public notice of any kind, beyond friendly intimations from one to
another, a large meeting was held on Friday evening in St. Mary’s
Seminary. The Venerable Archdeacon McEncroe presided. Resolu-
tions were passed, expressive of a determination to raise the necessary
funds, and arrangements were made for the receipt and care of the
money contributed. Nearly £6OOO were subscribed that evening.
1 Other meetings were held at the Seminary, without any pre-arrange-
ment, on the evenings of Saturday and Sunday, and subscriptions
continued to pour in. By Tuesday evening the list had swelled up to
nearly £II,OOO. On Wednesday there was a meeting of citizens held
at the Sydney Exchange. It was convened by the Mayor of Sydney,
in compliance with a requisition from many sympathysing citizens
chiefly Protestants —who desired to yield practical help. The Mayor
presided in person, and the meeting was attended by a number of most


influential men, who, although not of the Catholic faith, warmly sym-
pathised with the people of that faith in their efforts Liberal
subscriptions were given by many. New lists of subscriptions were
handed in daily, until the gross amount of subscriptions reached
between £14,000 and £15,000. The promptitude and liberality wit i
which people of all classes have contributed is wonderful. As com-
plete lists have not yet been made up, we can do no more than give
the present result in these general terms. There are so many men
who have subscribed largely, but we cannot with justice particularise
any one. It may be mentioned that His Grace the Archbishop gave
£SOO, and His Excellency the Governor (who is a member of the
Church of England), 40 guineas. There are a great many subscrip-
tions of £IOO each, and some above that amount.”
The first grand general meeting took place at the Prince of Wales
Theatre on the afternoon of Thursday, July 6th. His Grace Arc -
bishop Polding presided. His Excellency the Governor. Sir John
Young,was present, as were the elite of official and social iein y nej.
The Most Reverend Chairman addressed the meeting as follows
«My friends, from the advertisement which you have heard read you
are made acquainted with the objects for which we are assembled t is
day. Alas! the greater part of you, I have reason to believe, now
the cause from having been witnesses to that dreadful calamity to
which we are called upon to submit. Our first act is to bow to the
Divine will—to believe that this calamity has been permitted for holy
and good purposes; and the next, my friends, is to bend all our ener-
gies to repair the disaster, believing that, in so doing, we are carrying
out that same Divine will. (Applause.) I was at Bathurst when is
dreadful calamity befel us. The intelligence was communicated to me
by the electric wire. I need not say that I was prostrated st ™ e
at first, by the blow. But in a very short time after the firs, intelli-
gence was received, a second communication informed me of the
promptitude with which all classes came forward to make good that
which had been so destroyed; and thus, my friends, you raised me up
at once. I was enabled to make a perfect act of resignation to the
Divine will; and, foreseeing consequences coming which would_be
for the general benefit, I will say that I was almost glad that that
has happened which has happened. It was a gladness, however,
simply arising from the good which I believe will come out of it.


(Cheers.) "Whilst the reports which reached me prepared me to meet
a very large number of those who are involved in the same calamity
with myself, I could scarcely have thought—nay, what right had I to
expect that on this occasion I should not only have you, my friends,
before me, but that I should be environed by the representatives of all
that is honorable in the country—by so many who are distinguished for
their positions in life that they should one and all leave their ordinary
duties to come and mingle their sympathies with our own. (Continued
applause.) Yet, why should I not have expected it ? (Cheers.) Have
I not known New South Wales for thirty years ? Have I not watched
those who have made to themselves a place before the public eye ?
"Whatever distinctions they might have in the social or political world,
I perceived that there was a current of life running beneath con-
cealed even as that current which diffuses health and vigour through-
out our frames—but yet having an existence which only required an
opportunity like the present to make itself manifest and acknowledged,
not by us alone, but, as it will be acknowledged, by the entire civilized
world. (Applause.) Yes, this occasion, my friends, justifies what
appeared incredible—that the noble, sympathising sentiments which
have appeared day after day in the public journals—were not cause,
lessly introduced. (Cheers.) This meeting proves that there was not
one shade of exaggeration in all they said respecting a universal
sympathy in our calamity. (Cheers.) To that Press be rendered now,
in the name of you all, our thanks. (Applause.) Honour to those
who have thus shown themselves to be really ‘ good men and true.’
(Cheers.) And now, my friends, as regards our loss. Our dear old
cathedral of St. Mary is now in ruins! About that building were
many sweet memories—sacred thoughts which may not be uttered
associations of those that are no longer amongst us mingling with
those that still are with us. These —these, my friends, of these what
shall we say ? No human work is a mere material thing. It has
associations which can never be destroyed. This is a truth, but not
the whole truth. There does exist a unity between the past and the
future. There are those still living who were present when the foun-
dations of St. Mary’s were laid. There are also those who as mere
boys preambled, so to speak, the game of hide-and-seek—which after-
wards they were to play in the political world—about the walls of St.
Mary’s. The memory of the good Father Therry—(applause)—has
not yet faded away. There are other memories also connecting the


past with the present, and which will connect them with the future.
i Resurrection ,’ my friends, is not a creation, and though St. Mary’s
HOW lies lowly, as it were, in her tomb, yet she shall rise again more
glorious and more stately than heretofore. (Continued cheering.) In
the meantime, those sweet thoughts and sacred memories shall remain
undecaying within our breasts. Though always dear to us, they aie
now more dear than ever we thought them until this calamity befel
us. (Cheers.) Those sacred thoughts and sweet memories will remain
when we shall see the new building rise; they will entwine themselves
about each stone of it, and hallow to our minds the glorious fane.
(Applause.) Not one link of the connection between the former St.
Mary’s and the future St. Mary’s will ever be broken. (Cheers.) And
now, my friends, I feel that I have detained you sufficiently long.
Much is to be done, and I shall hand over the business to those gentle-
men who have so kindly undertaken the several resolutions, and who
will address you in support of them. In the meantime, while I tiust
that they, and indeed the whole world, will know that the Cathedral
has been destroyed, and the seat of carved wood, which we here have
occupied as the symbol of ecclesiastical jurisdiction, is no more we
have a nobler throne—and a home which is imperishable—in the
hearts of the people. (Cheers.) Surrounded as we are with the sym-
pathies of the entire community of New South Wales, I trust that this
throne and this home will be preserved in the hearts of our people, not
for our own sakes, but for the sake of our Divine Master, whose
unworthy minister I am.” (Continued cheering.)
“ His Excellency Sir John Young on rising to speak was greeted
with enthusiastic applause (the audience standing while the cheering
continued). He said : <My Lord Archbishop, ladies, and gentlemen,
in the position which I hold as presiding over all classes of her
Majesty’s subjects in this colony, I have thought it a duty but a duty
which I most willingly accept—to attend on this occasion to offer sym-
pathy and to lend a helping hand towards the re-erection of the
Cathedral so calamitously destroyed. (Cheers.) Doubts have been
expressed as to the propriety of this course, and the opinion has been
given that greater stress should be laid on differences of religion. I
do not entertain those doubts—(applause) —nor should I give way to
them even if the occasion were one of less special emergency than the
present. (Cheers.) And lam happy to think that the testimony of


my conscience in this particular is borne out by the long array of names
of Protestant gentlemen—the foremost in position and intelligence in
New South Wales—who signified their intention of being present at
this meeting, and of furthering its objects by their influence and assist-
ance. (Applause.) I think their decision was right. Speaking gene-
rally, and without any wish to trench upon religious topics, I hold that
this meeting is one not merely of Roman Catholics, but that it may be
considered as consisting of representatives of the whole community,
who come forward to offer sympathy to fellow-citizens from whom they
differ on some points, but with whom ihey unite in this —that they
worship the same merciful Creator on earth, and humbly hope, when
time shall be no more and differences are done away with, in God’s
good time to enjoy together the tranquility and happiness of heaven.
(Continued applause.) Now, with your Grace’s leave, I will state, as'
briefly as may be, the grounds which influenced my attendance. First,
I have attended in order to show the respect which I entertain for your
Grace personally —(cheers) —the appreciation which is due to the
blameless yet energetic manner in which your Grace has discharged the
functions appertaining to your office for a long series of years. (Cheers.)
Next I wish to shew sympathy towards the Catholics of this colony,
who I believe to be as faithful, as intelligent, and as industrious
a class of the community as any that exists. (Cheers.) Until all
be merged in one body they must ever remain a most important
element of the population ; but besides being mostly Irishmen or of
Irish descent—(‘hurrah!’ and continued cheering) —and although
scattered over distant lands they have a common country. (Reiterated
applause.) An eloquent Protestant clergymen of my acquaintance
informed me that he passed the scene of the fire on the succeeding day
—that he saw the crowd gazing in sorrow on the smouldering embers
—that he heard the sobs which burst from some, and saw the tears in
many eyes. He added that the scene called vividly to his recollection
that description given in the Holy Scriptures where the ancient people,
gazing upon the ruins of their temple, ‘ wept with a loud voice.’ The
reference is to the time when the remnants of the once chosen race
were allowed to return from a long captivity in a foreign land. But
even then they forgot the release from bondage and the joy of re-enter-
ing the fields and homes of their forefathers in the anguish of spirit
with which they witnessed the broken stones and saw how the glory
had departed from their desolated temple. (Cheers.) Even such was


tliG scene which, met the eyes of my informant, and I verily believe
from his statement and from other statements which I have heard,
that there were many in the crowd who would sooner their own goods
had perished in the flames. (Cheers.) So great was their pride in
the building —so deep their reverence for their Cathedral that the
loss smote them to their hearts. And if the loss has been so keenly
appreciated shall not all sympathy be accorded in consequence of it,
and of the feeling it has created ? (Cheers.) If a grievous calamity
falls upon a neighbour whom I respect and esteem, and with whom I
have every wish and every anxiety to be on good terms, shall I,
because he differs from me in some political opinion or in some reli-
gious tenet, withhold from him the sympathy which is due to his other
merits —(continued cheering) —which has been earned by many
excellent qualities and many good actions ? Certainly not. (Cheers.)
And if the sympathy is so due, is it to be paid in empty phrases or in
some poor compliment ? We know what Scripture has told us of that
charity which bids the naked be clothed and the hungry fed, without
extending to them alms or the means of relief. It has been pronounced
void and of no effect —a cruelty and a mockery, and the sympathy
which would fall short in mere words in this case, would only merit to
be placed in the same category. I hope that my sympathy, and that of
Lady Young (continued cheering), will go beyond a mere phrase, as I
have shown it does, by the act of attending at this meeting, and as I
hope to show still further by a contribution which I shall offer, and
which I hope your Grace will do me the honour of accepting, more as
a token of good-will than on account of its pecuniary value. (Applause.)
Finally, I have attended here being desirous to indicate my thorough
adhesion to that milder policy of complete toleration which has
obtained in the councils of the British Empire during the last thirty-
five years —(applause) —and at the same time to express my earnest
hope that no misguided zeal on either side will import into these new
colonies those furious factions and blind animosities which, surviving the
causes in which they took rise, and the interests they were first
intended to serve, still continue to distract and disgace parts of Ireland.
(Cheers.) When Governor Macquarie laid the foundation stone of the
first cathedral in 1821, he established a happy precedent, inviting to
peace and union, which I am well pleased to follow in spirit and in
intention ; but which, as your Grace has already remarked, it will not be
possible to follow in practice, seeing that it will not be necessary to lay


anew, but merely to build upon the old foundations. (Cbeers.) I trust,
however, that these dissentions will find no place here. (Cheers.) It
is true that at the time Governor Macquarie laid the foundation
stone, things were very different. That complete toleration, which
has since obtained its place in the Legislature of England,
had not then assumed full development, and had not impressed all
classes and all sects. At that time, or but a very few years before it,
Catholic officers could not obtain high rank and distinction as they now
can in the British army. There w T as then no such thing as Catholic
colonial Governors—there are now several. (Cheers.) Catholic states-
men, of eminence and ability, had not at that time, as they have since,
entered the Eoyal Councils, and Catholic lawyers had not worn, as
they have since done, the judicial ermine without envy both in Ireland
and in England. (Cheers.) Happy would it have been for the
British Empire if this wise policy of toleration could have been ante-
dated by two centuries. (Cheers.) Many a dark page of sorrow and
misfortune would have been blotted from our annals. But it is not
good to speak of the crimes and sorrows of the past, we should rather
blot out those dark circumstances from our recollections. (Cheers.)
All we can do is to read the lessons of history, and take them to heart
in this our day and generation. The present is our inheritance. Let
us take care that we use it wisely and carefully ; and that if our fathers
sowed the wind and reaped the whilrwind, we do not leave the sad
legacy to our descendants. (Cheers.) Let us shun the false lights
that led them astray—the false lights of intolerance and persecution.
(Cheers.) In this country all Churches are equal and all men are free.
(Cheers.) Each one holding firmly the profession of his own faith
without "wavering or without compromise, may enter upon all his civil
rights and exercise all his civil duties without molestation, and without
fear of undue control. (Cheers.) There is no need, then, to import
that which wisdom and patriotism deprecate—no need to import the
passions of bygone ages, or the hatreds of another hemisphere. I
trust that the union displayed at this meeting will raise up one other
effectual barrier against their admission—(cheers) —and that as your
Cathedral rises—as rise it will—in renovated grandeur—(cheers)
the sense of the calamity which has overtaken you will be lost in the
joy of the succesful restoration, or only be recalled in association with
pleasant memories of the good-will and the active sympathies which
have been elicited by the occasion from all classes of your fellow-


citizens.’ His Excellency then resumed his seat, and the people again
stood up and expressed their approbation by continued cheering.”
The Cathedral was commenced in 1866. The foundations are
built of massive masonry, and in all the walls, except sacristies, go down
to the bed rock ; in some portions the depth is twenty-one feet, and the
lowest seventeen feet, or take an average of nineteen feet over all.
The contract for this portion of the work was completed in 1868;
other contracts were entered into for the superstructure. These works
were completed in 1880. On the completion of the last contract the
building committee were indebted to the contractor about £IO,OOO.
Here arose a great difficulty to find the amount to pay off this debt,
for the people would not give money for some two years, noticing
that no workmen were employed on the building. The Archbishop
saw the difficulty, and came to the rescue by advising that the church
should be roofed in, and made ready for service; this has been carried
out. A contract was entered into, amounting to over £20,000, to
carry out the advice of the Archbishop, and instead of owing £IO,OOO,
only about £6OOO is wanted to clear the debt off the church after
executing work to the amount of £20;000 additional. The Cathedral
when finished will be 350 feet long, and the period of architecture is
geometrical decorated Gothic; two spires will be on the south elevation,
260 feet high, while a central tower will be 127 feet high. The pre-
sent portion already erected is 200 feet 6 inches in length, inside
measured ; transept, 118 feet deep by 74 feet wide. The same width
applies to choir and nave—these dimensions include aisles. The roof
called temporary is in reality a contractor’s scaffold, and built for that
purpose, so that work can be carried on above present roof without
interfering with the services. Supposing tenders had been called for
another contract of masonry without putting the temporary roof on, the
tenderers would have placed down on the quantity sheets at least
£3OOO for scaffolding, about the cost of the present roof, showing a
great gain to the committee, and the great advantage of being their
own property.
Of the interior, the present portion ready for use comprises the
choir, sanctuary, transepts, and one bay of nave, with organ chamber
and chapel on west side. The floor of the Cathedral is laid with one-
inch Jmst cement on concrete foundation; this will remain for some


time to allow of any settlement or defects arising. When this is pro-
perly ascertained, encaustic tiles will be laid on the cement. The floor
of the sanctuary with mosaic tiles, which are now on the way from
England.
On the sanctuary at the northern end is placed the High
Altar and reredos, the material used being Irish marble columns,
alabaster caps and bases, and body of work Oamaru, a New Zealand
stone. Next to the High Altar is the Archbishop’s throne, constructed
of polished Yictorian blackwood; over this is some very ornamental
brass work. There are also railings around the sanctuary walls, of
brass, of a very chaste design. At the side of outside wall of the
sanctuary is placed the Altar of the Sacred Heart; at the back of
reredos are chapels of our Blessed Lady—St. Joseph and St. Peter
in the whole of the altars of these the material used is Oamaru stone.
The whole of these works, including reredos, are only partly completed.
At the south end of the church a baptismal font is erected, also two
holy water fonts, the latter a present from Mr. John Hughes. Enter-
ing the cloister leading to the sacristies everything is of a permanent
character, the floors being laid with tiles and all the roofs are of
massive timbers. The sacristies, including Archbishop’s, priests’, and
acolytes’, are all furnished in the best manner, and of chaste design,
without being too costly. The architect of the whole of the works is
Mr. W. W. Wardell, of this city, Mr. John Young is the contractor,
and the works have been carried out under the superintendence of Mr.
Thomas Eves, clerk of works.
ASSOCIATIONS OF ST. MARY’S CATHEDRAL.
The Very Eev. Dean Timothy McCarthy rendered splendid ser-
vices to St. Mary’s new Cathedral by his zeal and his work as a
collector. He travelled through a considerable portion of the colony
on this mission of love, and raised a large sum of money in behalf of
the sacred edifice. Unfortunately his health gave way while thus
engaged, and he was advised to seek rest and relaxation in his native
country. On his departure from Sydney, the kindliest feelings of the
community generally were expressed in his regard, and a testimonial
amounting to £BOO was subscribed in a few weeks. Dean McCarthy
rallied for some time after his arrival in Ireland; but meeting with an
unexpected relapse, he succumbed to his fatal disease and expired in
his native parish, near Cork, in 1879. He made a large circle of


THE VERY REV. DEAN TIMOTHY MCCARTHY.


friends during Lis missionary career in the northern and western dis-
tricts of New South Wales, and was instrumental in inducing some of
the bushraagers of the period to renounce their nefarious pursuits and
throw themselves on the mercy of the Gioyernment. Those who fol-
lowed this advice were restored to an honest condition of life. It is
well known that Ben Hall had promised Father McCarthy to give
himself up, but was afterwards induced by the representations of a
companion in crime, called the “ Old Man,” to hold out longer. The
consequence was that the police soon came upon him, and shot him
down like a wolf.
As associated with old St. Mary’s, a brief biographical notice of
Archbishop Goold, of Melbourne, who was miraculously preserved from
assassination a few weeks ago, cannot fail to be interesting to our
readers: —“The Most Bev. James Alipius Goold, Archbishop, was
born in the city of Cork, Ireland. At an early age he devoted himself
to the service of the Church in the priesthood, and entered the Order
of St. Augustine, to be trained by the discipline of that illustrious
body for the work to which lie was dedicated. During his conven-
tual life he spent some time on the continent of Europe, where he
became acquainted with several young men of the Order of St.
Augustine, who have since served the Church in Victoria under his
episcopal administration. Soon after his ordination to the priesthood
he came out to New South Wales. In this colony he laboured for some
years under the direction of Archbishop Polding. His self-denying
zeal and great energy and ability commended him to the approval of
the authorities ; and when it was determined by the Pope to erect
the district of Port Phillip (still part of New South Wales) into a
separate diocese, Dr. Goold was selected as the most worthy to fill the
new bishopric. In compliance with the appointment of Pope Pius IX,
he was consecrated at Sydney, Bishop of Melbourne, August 6, 1848,
by His Grace the Most Reverend Archbishop Polding, assisted by the
late Bishop Murphy, of Adelaide. Bishop Goold found the new diocese
almost destitute of all the outward appliances of the ecclesiastical
system. There was a very small band of clergymen; the places of
worship in which they fulfilled their ministrations were few in number
and of humble character ; there was neither convent nor college in the
whole diocese. But he met the difficulties of his position with great
spirit and perseverance. His zeal kindled that of the clergy and lay


members of bis Church, and in conjunction with energy and tact,
secured to him a vast influence oyer the minds of his co-religionists.
The erection into an independent colony of the territory included in
THE MOST REV. ARCHBISHOP GOOLD (Melbourne).
liis diocese, the rapid introduction of a numerous population, which
followed that event, and the discovery of gold in Victoria, afforded


most unusual scope for the efforts of a zealous bishop; and with the
help of the clergy whom he has gathered round him,, and the liberality
of the laity, who possessed great advantages for the acquisition. of
wealth, Bishop Goold has seen, as the result of the labours which
he organized and directed, magnificent churches, large convents, am
numerous educational establishments springing up in all parts of his
diocese. On the 25th anniversary of his consecration, August 6, 1873,
after the celebration, in St. Patrick’s Cathedral, of the religious cere-
monies of the day, the Peast of the Transfiguration, the Vicar-Genera!
and senior clergymen, on behalf of the clergy of the diocese, presented
to Dr. Goold, in the episcopal palace, an address, in which they spoke
of his successful episcopal career. This address was accompanied by
a magnificent gold repeater-watch and guard-chain, and a carriage and
pair of horses. The presents offered by the clergy cost about £SOO.
Since that time he has been much engaged in a sharp controversy with
a portion of the Victorian people on the subject of public education.
By the present Education Act of Victoria, the aid of the State is given
only to the State schools, conducted on principles similar to those of
our public schools, with this difference, that they are free of expense
to the parents of the scholars, whilst all children are by law required
to be sent to some school or other. Dr. Goold, in common with other
ecclesiastic rulers in the Church of Pome, holds that for ‘ Catholic
children’ education under the direction of the clergy of that Church
is indispensible, and that education in any schools not under that
direction is dangerous to their faith. In 1876 the Pope constituted him
the first Archbishop in the province of Melbourne.”
We learn that the pro-Cathedral, which for a very lengthened
period supplied the place of old St. Mary’s, will very probably be used
for school purposes, a work to which the Archbishop will devote
renewed energies now that a very great step has been effected in
having the new Cathedral advanced to such a degree that it can be
utilised. The accommodation for worshippers in the new building will
be very large. It is calculated tbat it will accommodate about 5000,
of whom about 4000 could be provided with seats. When the building
is completed the ridge of the roof will be about twice the height of the
walls at present standing.


ARRANGEMENTS FOR OPENING THE NEW CATHEDRAL.
The following correspondence explains itself :
letteb oe the abchbishop to the clebgy of the
ABCHDIOCESE, WITH CIBCULAB TO THE LAITY.
u My Dear Bey. Father,
<i The solemn opening of St. Mary’s Cathedral will tahe place on
the Bth,'9th, and 10th of September. So very exceptional an event
calls for exceptional action on our part. Ido not think any priest of
the archdiocese should be absent from these functions. You will,
therefore, be so good as to make such arrangements as will allow you
to assist at the Pontifical High Mass and Solemn Yespers each day of
the Triduum,
“You will have to be at St. Mary’s each morning by ten o*clock,
and at half-past six in the afternoon,
“ Please invite such of your people as you think could do so to be
present at the opening, and to do what they can to give generously
at the offertory, so that we may, if possible, once for all, wipe out the
debt which, sooner or later, must be met. It would, indeed, be a
splendid finish to our long labours if the building could be declared
free at the close of the Triduum.
“ Dear Rev. Father, I have purposely refrained, till now, from
making a personal appeal to you to give your own generous donation.
I do now make that appeal, and I feel sure that, under the circum-
stances, you will make a sacrifice on behalf of this great and glorious
cause.
“ And with best wishes, I am, dear Bev. Father,
“ Yours, faithfully in Christ,
“ffl BOGEB BEDE,
“ Stydney, August, 1882, “Archbishop of Sydney.
“ P.S.'—Please bring Cassock, Surplice, and Biretta,
“ N. 8.—1 enclose a circular to be read to your flock on Sunday.”
[circular,]
“ Dearly Beloved Children in Jesus Christ, —The solemn opening
of our great Cathedral will take place on the Bth, 9th, and 10th days
D


THE MOST [?] AROHBISHOP VAUGHAN.


o! September. There will be Pontifical High Mass, with a sermon by
a bishop, each morning, at 11 o’clock ; and Solemn Pontifical Yespers,
with sermon (by a prelate) and Benediction in the evening, at 7 o’clock.
The archdiocese will be formally consecrated to the Sacred Heart at -
the close of the Triduum.
“Dearly beloved people, I earnestly invite you to assist at this
<rreat ceremony. Come and join us during these three glorious days
in praising God and thanking Him for His mercy towards us. Ho
has permitted us to raise up a Temple to His Name not unworthy of
the days of old. Your faith and your generosity have done it. And 1
that faith comes from Him and that generosity in His inspiration.
Come, then, and praise and greatly glorify Him, and join in the vast
throng that will worship before His holy altar.
“The Cathedral is spacious, and there will be six separate services ■
*o t remain not at home for fear there should be no room. Let us fill
the Temple to overflowing, and joyfully sing to God our Saviour in the
secret chamber of our hearts.
“Nor should you come with mere praise upon your lips ; let the
sincerity of your words be witnessed to by the liberality of your dona-
tions at the offertory ; so that we may, on this splendid occasion, if
possible, free the House of our King from debt. If, in old days, the
Jews were so lavish on the Tabernacle, what should we not do for the
House where Christ reigns, though unseen to carnal eye, surrounded
by ten millions of His blessed spirits! Moses, far from having to
urge his people on, had absolutely to restrain their ardour. “Both
men and women”, says the Scripture, “gave bracelets and earrings,
rings and tablets and vessels of gold. If any man had violet and
purple, and scarlet twice dyed, and fine linen, and metal of silver or
brass, they offered it to the Lord. And the skilful women also gave
such things as they had spun. And the princes offered onyx stones
and precious stones. All, both men and women, with devout mind
offered gifts that the work might be done which the Lord had com-
manded by the hand of Moses.” What a great and splendid spirit
possessed these mighty-hearted Jews of old! What a lesson do not
they teach us, even at this distance of time ! Let us, in the character
of our offerings, emulate such self-forgetting enthusiasm, and do alii


that in us lies to seal our protestations of love and praise with noble
and generous deeds!
“ May God bless you and protect you, dearly beloved people, and
inspire you to accomplish the great work which has been carried with
so much success so far; so that, having raised a Palace for your King
on earth, He may, when the time comes, place you as “ living stones ”
in the heavenly city of Jerusalem, and anoint your eyes for ever with
the vision of peace !
“ffi ROGER BEDE,
“ Sydney, 23rd August, 1882.” “Archbishop of Sydney.
Opening and Solemn Dedication of the
Cathedral.
(First Day).
The glorious event—so long and so lovingly, although somewhat
anxiously, expected by the Catholics of New South Wales—those of
Sydney especially—is at length an accomplished as well as an historic
fact. After a struggle of nearly seventeen years, relieved, it is true,
by many bright episodes, the Metropolitan Church of this Province,
and the Mother Church of the Australias, has been opened for Divine
service. It is not, of course, finished —not yet the complete outward
and visible symbol of the people’s zeal and faith; but it has been ad-
vanced architecturally to a stage when it became a plain dictate of
common sense to utilise it. All the venerable associations of the
'Church’s early struggle in Australia are now for ever entwined with
memories of later self-sacrificing and earnest efforts in this superb
temple of “ worship undefiled.” From Old St. Mary’s went forth the
apostolic men, who first planted the faith round the standard of the
’Cross, in Victoria, Tasmania, South Australia, Western Australia, and
Queensland, and their trials and triumphs harmoniously accord with
those of their worthy successors. The venerated names of Therry,
Conolly, McEncroe, Ullathorne, Murphy, Brady, Willson, Goold, and
'Geoghegan not to swell the list —will ever be in their respective


spheres guiding-stars of the first magnitude for the mental direction of
the future historian of the Catholic Church in Australia. The grand
and consoling results of the Triduum form an era not only in the
country’s records of religious and moral progress, but in the life of
every individual who took a part, however humble, even as a lowly
worshipper, in that magnificent ceremonial. To those of our readers
who were unavoidably absent, a brief account of its principal details
can hardly fail to prove interesting. The only drawback is that it can-
not be as ample as it merits.
The Triduum of Dedication began on Friday, the Bth September,
being the feast of the Nativity of the Blessed Virgin Mary. The
weather was everything that could be desired —clear, bright, and
pleasantly cool—while the scene to the northwards and eastwards of
the eminence on which the new Cathedral stands seemed to be more
than usually picturesque, presenting as it did the dark-blue smooth
expanse of the waters of Port Jackson, without a movement on its
surface, save a white-winged boat in full sail for Woolloomooloo Bay,
the whole framed in by the purple shadows and sharp outline of the
North Shore. At ten o’clock the new bells of the Cathedral (the
splendid gift of Archbishop Vaughan) for the first time made their
sweet notes heard. Previously they had been muffled for the bell-
ringers’ practice. For some time before the rich sounds reverberated
over Sydney numbers of people of both sexes, old and young, could be
seen wending their way to the centre of the day’s attractions. At
eleven o’clock the church was comfortably filled by a congregation of
about 5000 persons, not including the choir and orchestra.
The interior of the Cathedral at that hour presented an impressive
scene. Although unfinished, with its clerestory closed against the
light of the sun, and its temporary roof bare and unadorned, still the
symmetrical proportions of the building, the groupings of the massive
pillars, sustaining graceful pointed arches, the fine expanse of the
sanctuary with its numerous steps, the shapely altar and throne of the
Blessed Sacrament, sculptured out of white Oamaru stone and sup-
ported in front on pillarets of Irish marble—formed a pleasing whole
—a picture not only gratifying to the eye, but very impressive because
strangely suggestive. When to the tout ensemble thus presented is
added an immense, respectable congregation, the reader can—inade-


quately it is true —form an idea of the new St. Mary’s on the morning
of its solemn dedication. It will he convenient to mention here that
the church was, at nine o’clock in the morning, blessed by the Venera-
ble Archpriest Sheehy, so long and happily connected with old St.
Mary’s, who celebrated Mass, and performed other duties preparatory
to the great events of the day.
The following prelates and priests took part in the ceremonies
during the Triduum His Grace Most Eev. Archbishop Yaughan.,
Metropolitan ; Eight Eev. Dr. Quinn, Bishop of Bathurst ; Eight Eev.
Dr. Murray, Bishop of Maitland; Eight Rev. Dr. Banigan, Bishop of
Goulburn ; Eight Eev. Dr. Torreggiani, Bishop of Armidale ; Eight
Eev. Dr. Eedwood, Bishop of Wellington, New Zealand; Eight Eev.
Dr. Cani, Bishop of Rockhampton, Queensland; Eight Eev. Dr.
Dunne, Bishop of Brisbane; Very Eev. Dean Sheridan, V.G., Sydney ;
Very Eev. Dr. Reville, V.G., Sandhurst, Victoria; Very Eev. P.
Hand, V.G., Maitland; Very Eev. Dean O’Keeffe, Yass; Very Eev.
Monsignor Lynch, Very Eev. J. Dalton, S.J., and Very Eev. Deans
O’Brien, Hallinan, D.D., Hanley, Leonard, Dwyer, (M.C.) Flanagan,
O’Connor, and Doyle (Armidale); Venerables Archpriest Sheehy and
Archdeacon Eigney ; Very Eev. Prior Butler, Melbourne ; Reverend
Fathers Luckie, C. M‘Car thy, Holohan, O.S.F. ; Dr. Dunne,
Tasmania; Scortini, Queensland; M'Grath, P. Bermingham, D.D.,
J. O’Donovan, J. J. Garvey, P. Young, P. J. Mahony, James J.
Mahony, T. W. Keating, Bonaventure Curr, J. Dunne, P. Slattery,
M. Keogan, J. Phelan, J. J. Carroll, D. F. Barry, 0.5.8., James Berry,
M. E. Athy, P. Cassidy, C. M. Joly, V. Colletti, D.D., E. Walsh, M.
Walsh, W. Eiordan, A. W. Petre, J. Collins, P. Hewitt, T. Cahill,
S. W. Kelly, S.J., J. Cleary, S.J., T. Gartlan, S.J., John Ryan, S.J.,
T. Keating, S.J., C. P. Heuze, S.M., P. Le Eennetel, S.M., A. Ginisty,
S.M., J. B. Coue, S.M., P. Piquet, S.M., P. Clarke, T. O’Rielly, J. P.
Fitzpatrick, 0.5.8., P. J. Corcoran and Kerns (Maitland), M. D’Arey,
H. M. Finegan, J. N. Quirk, LL.D., D. P. Quirk, M.A., J. Sheridan,
E. O’Donohoe, Patterson (Salford, England), M. P. Carroll (Vic-
toria), P. Ryan, J. Flemming, J. M. Garavel, and J. Pollard. Among
the laity we noticed:—His Honor Mr. Justice Faucett, Sir John
O’Shanassy, K.C.M.G., Victoria, Sir P. A. Jennings, K.C.M.G., K.S.G.,
Sir John and Lady Robertson, Sir Edward Strickland, W. A. Duncan,
C.M.G., J. Donovan, LL.D., Dr. O’Connor, P. and M. Donelly, P.


Moran, and P. J. M'Mlistcr, of Wagga Wagga, Hon. William Forster,
late Agent-Gener.il, N.S.W., G. Loughnan, M.L.A., D. O'Connor,
M.L.A., Louis F. Heydon, M.L.A., T. M. Slattery, M.L.A., J. P.
Gar van, M.L.A., and John M‘Laughlin, M.L.A.,; T. C. Mackinson,
B.A. (Cantab), J. Blanchard, J. G. O’Connor, E. F. Flanagan, L. J.
Harnett, E. J. Rubie, F. S. M'Dermott, J. Hughes, J.P., P. Mulcahy,
Dr. M'Donagh, and C. G. Heydon. There were other distinguished
Catholics present whose names escaped us. The principal officials for
the maintenance of order in the body of the church were the members
of the Holy Catholic Guild, directed by their Warden.
The general arrangements were under the direction of the Vicar-
General, the Very Rev. Dean Sheridan, and the Rev. P. J. Mahony. The
following gentlemen collected the offertories: Father Gaivey, Mr. Jus-
tice Faucett, and Sir P. A. Jennings; Father Slattery, Dr. Donovan,
and Mr. II Austin; Dr. Colletti, Dr. MTJonagh, and Mr. L. Heydon,
M.L.A.; Father Cassidy, Messrs. John Hughes and Blanchard ; Dean
O’Brien, Messrs. Oliffe and Lalor; Rev. J. J. Carroll, Messrs. William
Hughes and J. T. Toohey; Father Henze, Messrs. P. Monahan and
P. T. Riley ; Father Barry, Messrs. Williamson and Garvan, M.L.A.;
Father Reardon, Messrs. Flanagan and Spruson; Father Holohan,
Messrs. Ilourigan and Slattery, M.L.A. ; Father Petre, Messrs. Dalton
and Shalvey; Father O’Donohue, Messrs. J. J. Curran and Fleming;
Dean Leonard, Messrs. Horan and J. F. M'Cartliy ; Father Hayes,
Messrs. Cronin and McDermott; Father Dunne, Messrs. Loughnan,
M.L.A., and Coghlan; Dean Flanagan, Messrs. Farrell and Herlihy ;
Father Keating, Messrs. Hollingdale and Hogan; Father James
Mahony, Messrs. Larkin and T. J. Ryan. The masters of ceremonies
were the Very Rev. Dean Dwyer and Rev. J. Fleming. The Rev.
Placid Quirk, M.A., directed the musical part of the programme, and
Mr. M. J. Fitzpatrick acted as honorary secretary, and by his great
exertions, for the past nine weeks, succeeded in bringing to a successful
issue the grandest musical ceremonial ever witnessed in Australia.
At about a quarter-past 11 the hush of expectation was broken
by the rustling noise of the congregation rising from their seats, suc-
ceeded by the organ and orchestra bursting into the strains of Mr.
Delany’s magnificent Triduum March. The gleam of the processional
cross now shone from the western door, and an admirably marshalled


procession moved up the nave of the church. After the cross-hearer
came the acolytes, in scarlet cassocks and white surplices, with blue
sashes, several of them carrying lighted taper 3, the sameness of the
line being broken by the banner-bearers with richly-emblazoned flags
fringed with gold tissue and adorned with tassels and chords of the
same material. The clergy followed in black cassocks and white sur-
plices, and then came the bishops with chaplains, the superior clergy,
the deacons of the Mass in rich, but chaste, dalmatics, the celebrant in
magnificent vestments and mitre, the Archpriest in cope, and finally
his Grace the Archbishop, with assistants, in full episcopal costume.
The movement to the altar was solemn and dignified, everyone present
being impressed with the orderly manner in which the procession had
been conducted. It may be mentioned here, in order not to interrupt
the narrative hereafter, that an incident occurred after the Gospel,
which thrilled all present with emotion, and enabled one to realise
with almost absolute completeness the unity of the Church of Christ -
His Grace the Archbishop, mitred, and holding the crosier, ascended
the temporary pulpit, and said :—“ Some two months ago I made our
Holy Father, Leo XIII., acquainted with the fact that we were about
to open this great Cathedral on the Bth of September ; and I have just
received a telegram from his Holiness, conveying to the bishops,
priests, and laity, and generous donors of subscriptions towards this
great fane, his special Apostolic Benediction.” These simple words
produced an intensity of feeling which was with difficulty restrained,
and could hardly be conveyed in words—however eloquent. It was
something akin to a suppressed sob of gratitude.
The sanctuary at noon presented a very impressive appearance.
The full yellow light, streaming in through the great northern window,
gave a rich but toned irradiation, which helped to heighten the con -
trasts presented all round. High Mas 3 was celebrated by the Eight
Eev. Dr. Quinn, Bishop of Bathurst, the Eev. J. P. Fitzpatrick, and the
Eev. Father Ginisty, being respectively deacon and subdeacon, and
the Yen. Archpriest Sheehy acted throughout as assistant priest. The
altar was appropriately decorated with flowers, and lighted with pure
wax candles in burnished candelabra. The Archbishop occupied his
throne on the Gospel side, which added to the general effect from its
deep moreen canopy bearing the archiepiscopal arms. After the Gospel
of the day had been chaunted, the Eight Eev. Dr. Eodwood advanced


towards the steps of the Altar, and delivered the first discourse of the
series, taking for his text the words of the Apostles’ Creed—“ I
believe in Jesus Christ, the only Son of God.” He said :
All the ceremonies of the Catholic Church are admirable for their
deep significance. 'We are assembled here to-day for the solemn
opening and dedication of this noble edifice, this splendid pile, the
pride and ornament of this beautiful city, and of all Australia. But
what is it ? What is its meaning ? What great ideas does it enshrine ?
It is a substantial act of faith in the divinity of Jesus Christ. It is the
temple of Christ —immeasurably more noble than tne temple of Solo-
mon—the temple where Christ will renew daily, by the ministry of His
priests, the great sacrifice of Calvary ; where He will dwell a prisoner
of love in our tabernacles ; where He will bp adored as God by this,
and, I hope, countless other generations of faithful and devoted Catho-
lics. Such is the meaning of this magnificent structure. It is, indeed,
called “ St. Mary’s it bears the name and recalls the sweet memory
of the Immaculate Virgin mother of God ; but it is. primarily and pre-
eminently the temple of Christ, and to Him alone it is dedicated; for,
when the prelate laid its foundation stone, he solemnly declared it to
be “ a place destined to the invocation and praise of our Lord Jesus
Christ.” The great idea, then, which underlies all the impressive
ceremonies and solemn pageant of this day is the belief in the. divinity
of Jesus Christ. That belief is the central point of Christian doc-
trine, the axis round which the other dogmas revolve, the foundation
stone on which they stand —we might rather say, the. keystone of the
whole Christian arch. To profess is to profess implicitly the whole of
Christianity, even its extreme consequences, speculative and practical;
since, if Christ is God, His doctrine and his law are so imposed upon
us that it were sacrilege either to diminish or adulterate them. .1
purpose in this discourse to show some of the grounds on which this
cardinal dogma rests —some portion of the adamantine rock on which
it stands. Oh ! Divine Master, dear friend of my soul, speak now to
my heart, still more to my mind, that my words may not be unworthy
of so high a theme, and that my hearers may reap lasting fruits from
my feeble endeavours. The divinity of Christ is usually proved by a
vast array of arguments derived from prophecies, miracles, and testi-
monies. But, while leaving those demonstrations in all their force,. I
shall not resort to so extensive a method. I shall appeal, to two main
lines of argument equally simple, popular, and conclusive, viz.., the
existence of the Christian world, and the affirmation of that Christian
world. The existence of the Christian world is. a fact of unparalleled
magnitude which one must be blind not to see ; it equals the immensity
of the universe; it is everywhere. Like those marvellous nebula)
whose gigantic radiations have peopled space, it has dilated itself, and
from the plains of Judea has successively filled the earth with one vast
societv knit together by one and the same doctrine, one and the same


virtue. You are part of it, and it is your greatest honour. Cross the
mountains and waters between the great continents, visit the remotest
islands of the ocean, everywhere you will find the Cross, and round it
either multitudes or groups, saying in concert, “We believe iu Jesus
Christ our Cod ; we are Christians.” And the magnitude of this
Christian world is equalled only by its harmony. All peoples are called,
all peoples come into its bosom, civilized, barbarian, savage —a prodi-
gious variety of minds, hearts, passions, tempers, education, civil and
political lives. And in this variety what a wonderful unity! One
creed for ever}'' mind and every mouth; one legislation for all wills,
and tending to one object —Christ; one constitution, with the same
power everywhere. On those banks from which the proud Homan of
old sent forth his pro-consuls to make laws for. the world an aged man
sits enthroned. Be he quiet and persecuted, in honour or disgrace,
matters not; his august will is acknowledged by the true Christian
world. He is a father, and none can hinder his children in remotest
shores from sending him the testimony of their affection. He is a
king; sacrilegious hands have profaned his sceptre and his crown,
yet none have been able to destroy or weaken his sovereign authority
in spiritual matters. He is a high priest, and despite the efforts of
men, the highest pastors are lovingly subordinate to his government.
He is an immortal, so to speak, who passes through successive genera-
tions. Buk yesterday we wept for Pius the Great and the Good; to-
day we hail Leo the Magnanimous and the Strong. But always the
same father,, same king, same pontiff. Surely this immense and har-
monious world is one of the greatest phenomena man can
behold. Its importance is shown by the efforts of our adversaries to
lessen or suppress it. If certain unbelievers are to be credited, we
Christians are a powerless sect, a prey to the deadly disease of super-
stition, an uncompromising and closed sect, doomed shortly to disappear
before the,onward march of liberal philosophy, which flings open its
portals to all minds; but, with glaring contradiction, they use might
and policy to persecute and suppress our stubborn vitality, showing by
their animus that we are not a sect fated to rapid extinction, but a
world, a real world, of all worlds the best organized and the fittest to
live and endure. Now, this Christian world, this stupendous creation,
is the work of Jesus Christ. To doubt it would be an act, not of reason,
but of delirium. Yet men have been found, in our boastful age of
enlightenment, reckless enough to abdicate common sense and declare
that Christian faith is but a dream, Christian love a phantom of the
imagination, Christian perfection the imitation of a chimera, Christian
unity the result of obedience to nothing; that Christ is only a myth,
or that, at most, he has only a nucleus of historic reality—that he is
but the elaborate production of the Christian mind through the course
of several ages, by a long process of refinement and transformation, by
grouping in one and the same individual the legends, ideas, and
symbols of antiquity. Gratuitous assertions! Absurd system, in-
stantly exploded by the grand, worldwide historic fact of Christianity.


Why we ascend by precise dates to the time when the Gospels were
settled, and thus destroy at a blow that pretended chain of ages, in
which according to our sapient critics, the groupment of legends, ideas,
and symbols was made. Again, the attitude of the Christian mind in
all ao-es protests against the possibility of refinement and transforma-
tion,'°since it is summed up in these maxims inimical to all novelties-
“ Bear witness to what was in the beginning, keep the deposit, avoid
profane novelties of words, hold fast to the traditions. (1 dim, vi. 20.
1 Thes ii. 14.) Lastly, the Christian world is no fleeting phenomenon,
but a gigantic, living fact, ever exhibiting the same movements, per-
fection and harmony. As it speaks of Christ now, so it spoke of Him
in the middle ages, when faith gave birth to Catholic theology, when
love flew to the conquest of the tomb of Christ, when the great mon-
astic orders rose and became seminaries of saints, when the power of
the Holy See stood paramount above kings and emperors. It spoke of
Him, too, in those terrible ages of barbarian invasion, when the
Catholic Church tamed the fierce warrior, and made him a worthy citizen
of Christendom. It proclaimed Him its founder and creator m those
heroic ages when faith and love watered the Church with martyrs’ blood,
when the wilderness blossomed with countless saints, and when the
great controversies relative to heresy were settled by a word from
Peter’s successor, representing the father and supreme teacher of
Christian society. But enough. My conclusion is evident. Of aU
historical phenomena the Christian world is undoubtedly the most
remarkable. Either it has no cause, a rank absurdity, or else Christ
is its living, personal, proximate, efficient, and total cause in other
words, the Christian world is the work of Christ, and of Him alone. J
have now to show that it is not the work of man, but of God and
therefore that Christ is God. The Christian world is not the work of
a man, for no man ever did, or ever will do, such a work. No creator
of any school or religion has ever stamped his work with the super-
human character conspicuous in Christianity. There have been (1)
schools founded and taught by the elite of human minds. _ The illus-
trious Pythagorus, the melodious Plato, the grave Aristotle, and
others, ancient or modern, whose names illumine the pages of history,
have spoken of God, nature, man, the laws of thought and life. lheir
lessons, collected by reverent disciples, have grouped round then-
respective systems the mental forces of several generations But these
generations were confined to reserved and narrow precincts; school
soon overthrew school, while the din of their idle disputations passed
over the heads of people sunk in ignorance and superstition; the mas-
ter’s genius failed to preserve his thoughts from the mutilations of
private iudgment; the admiration he inspired, often challenged m his
lifetime, and unmingled with love, died out on his exit from the scene;
his doctrine, often sterile and unavailing, led to no moral perfection ;
his life, usually opposed to his teaching, regulated the life of no one
else ; and his powerless will could hardly check the germs of division
which threatened his influence during life, and inevitably conquered


after death. There have been, and there are (2) religions which pre-
vailed over vast countries, and promised to teach millions of followers
the truth in divine concerns. But some, like Heathenism, assumed
innumerable different forms, and so fell to naught; others, like
Oriental mysticism, inhumanly partitioned doctrine, reserving for the
privileged caste of priest and sage lofty speculations, refined conceits,
and secret mysteries, and flinging to the vulgar crowd gross symbols
to seduce their imagination and deceive their reason; others, again,
like Buddhism, remained fastened to the soil whence they sprang;
others, like Mahometanism, were identified with one race, and owed
their spread to the might of the sword. But none preserved their
founders from oblivion, save by insuring to them a veneration in which
fear predominated over love, and a barren admiration devoid of the
imitation of their virtues. None exceeded vulgar morality or honesty
without grandeur, even when they did not conceal, under superstitious
practices, and fanatical demonstrations, the vilest passions of the
people. None resisted the dissolvents of violence and contradiction,
except by aid of human power which designed to preserve in their
bosom the shameful unity of ignorance and corruption. Nowhere, as
in the Christian world, do we find that loving, world-wide society,
adapting itself to every climate and receiving all races into its bosom.
Nowhere, that liberal truth for all, which dilates the greater geniuses
and ennobles the popular mind. Nowhere that Master so identified
with His doctrine that He calls to His person even the movements of
minds, and cannot be put aside without a collapse of His doctrine.
Nowhere, that spiritual regenerator, whose undying remembrance
thrills every heart and calls forth, at the distance of twenty centuries,
an array of tender, trustful, generous, and devoted love, which even
the presence of the most beloved object would not always obtain.
Nowhere, those elevated morals, perfection of life, heroism of virtues,
all formed on the same type, whose authority never wanes. Nowhere,
that sovereign will, whose powerful action never changes in the ever-
changing instruments which manifest it. Nowhere, that compact
unity, which for 2000 years resists public catastrophes, persecutions of
force, and contradictions of error and passion. Nowhere, that solid
assemblage of many different elements; that body instinct with one
doctrine, one law, one virtue, which proudly rejects any morbid limb,
and continues to live, while sects severed from its unity wither and die.
No, indeed, no; nothing in the works of men like the work of Christi-
anity—contrast so evident that even the fiercest foes of Christianity are
compelled to admit that it is “ the most powerful spiritual creation ever
seen * * * the highest of all religions ” —(Strauss). Why this
difference between the work of man and the work of Christ ? Simply
because the Christian world cannot be the work of man. Man is too
limited in his influence, too thwarted by his nature, by time, by cir-
cumstances, by the failings and passions of men, to achieve the con-
quest of the world. Does he pretend to subdue it (1) by force? He
is of one nation, one race; mankind of many climates, races, and


nationalities; hence distrust and rivalry will resist his plans. Nor
will the sword break those impervious shields, and cleave a passage to
universal sway. It has invariably been shivered in the hand of the
most renowned conquerors, aiming at world-wide dominion. Does he
pretend to subdue the world by (2) idea ? It may be stronger —-
granted. But, both in speculation and practice, no idea can aim at
universal sway, unless it be rooted in the very nature of man. A sage
may indeed gain hearers and disciples far and wide by reminding the
world of those grand principles of the intellectual and moral order
which are invariably stamped on our souls; but then it is not he who
teaches, but rather God, the supreme author of his existence and the
light of his mind. Suppose, on the contrary, the case of a teaching
altogether original and personal, a system of ideas without root in our
nature; for instance, in the intellectual order, a set of mysteries; in
the practical order, a set of observances on which conscience is silent;
then the words of the sage are infallibly wrecked on human weakness
and passion and pride and prejudice. He can hardly put himself on a
level with all men, and he lacks authority to enforce his affirmations,
Grant him genius, science, eloquence unmatched, after all he is but a
man and men vastly his inferiors will set up as his judges and critics.
Humiliated reason will summon him to prove the incomprehensible ;
liberty in possession will scorn a yoke not imposed by conscience ; and
passions, impatient even of the restraints of the natural law, will
brutally repel any new ordinance. Inevitable result, a short-lived and
ultimate hopeless failure. For a man to say to the world —as Christ
did—“ Ego sum veritas ,” “I am the truth,” and to be believed by the
world, is shocking to human nature, so keenly alive to the weakness of
man. Does he pretend to subdue the world by (3) love ? Unlikely to
attract the general movements of minds, will he attract the general
movement of hearts ? No; your experience says “no.” Love is the
master sentiment of noble hearts, but love. is fed on living charms
which cannot be everlasting. To-day you are loved; you win hearts
by the comeliness of your features, the fire of your eye, the fascina-
tions of your smile, the charms of your expression, the music of your
voice, the brilliancy of your wit, the eagerness of your services, and
the generosity of your benefits; you have every attraction, and, better
than Titus, you deserve to be called the “ delight of the human race.”
But to-morrow! To-morrow, when pale death will efface your life-
colour, quench the fiery eye, hush the melodious voice, snatch away
the struggling soul, dry up the fount of natural gifts ; after to-morrow,
when the grimjworkers of the grave will devour your flesh and pulverize
your bones; later still, when nothing of you remains but an empty
name, if oblivion spares even that, what will become of love ?
nothingness. Beloved man, you will thrill hearts no more. Such is
the doom of our affections here below; to languish, when their obj ects
cease to be present, and to fade away, when absence is prolonged with-
out hope of return. I do not ask whether you love mere historic
personages, with tender, truthful, generous, devoted love —you smile


at the question. Even in families where the memories of ancestors is
most keenly cherished —what have we ? Respect for our forefathers,
grateful recollection, admiration for their deeds and virtues—but love
there is none. Will man pretend to subdue the world by (4) virtue?
Even virtue, the most durable and solid charm of man, is not proof
against time. When near, and seen in action, it has, I know, a
wonderful communicative warmth; it stirs the current of noble
thoughts and holy desires. Afar off it is cold as the distant
stars in the depths of the firmament; nay more, the foibles of
the just man, unheeded in the glare of his qualities, are keenly
criticised after his death; interested malice ransacks his life for that
clay which human frailty ever deposits in human existence. Besides,
could any fellow-man, however stainless, set himself up as the universal
type and standard of perfection? No, fallible men may mistake in
good faith about actions which prudence will warn us to avoid; man,
ever perfectible, cannot achieve in his own person the ideal of perfec-
tion. A unique pattern of all man’s perfection cannot be found in
mere man. Will he pretend to subdue the world by (5) will ? Still
less has a man power to survive in his will so as to maintain unity in
society. We may have durable authority by appealing to G-od, saying,
“Obey, God commands;” but the sole power of a strong and com-
manding will cannot be of long duration. Revolutions anticipate
death to wrest the sceptre from his ruling hand. Even in the happiest
and strongest monarchies, the day comes when an adventurer seizes
the crown, or the people set up their fickle will as the only principle of
authority ; and so the strongest nationalities are subverted. If such is
the fate of temporal affairs, how is it possible to maintain the constant
unity of a spiritual society, by the prolongations of one and the same
will, when that will imposes a doctrine startling to reason by its
mysteries, and appalling to frail nature by its injunctions? How will
a man be then able to transmit to his successors his own power and
intention, so that they forget themselves, to be identified with him ?
By what prodigy will he seize in advance a long series of generations ?
To all these questions the answer is—impossible. We now sum up
these various human impossibilities. 1. Can a man gain universal
acceptance for a teaching of his which is altogether personal, original,
mysterious, and identified with his person in the belief of nations?
Impossible. 2. Can fallible and perfectible man impose himself on
mankind as the finished pattern and acme of perfection ? Impossible.
3. Can a man cause himself to be loved with tender, truthful, generous,
devoted love when the charms and food of love are gone, and withering
death has come ? Impossible. 4. Can a man survive himself in the
constant expression and immutable influence of his own will, so as to
preserve the unity of a spiritual society ? Impossible. Four impossi-
bilities ; yet facts! Effected by a man of the people, the son of a
subdued and despised people, who died 1800 years ago on an infamous
gibbet—by Jesus Christ. Therefore Jesus is not a mere man, but God.
That Christian world whose very existence proves the Divinity of Christ,


furnishes another demonstration of that cardinal dogma, still more
simple, clear, and conclusive. It is not dumb like the physical world;
it speaks, and in most emphatic words declares that Christ is God,
And its affirmation is trustworthy, because it is universal and perpetual,
and because its affirmants are not only intelligent and honest, but
generous and heroic. 1. It is universal; not one discordant note.
Wherever Christians are they make this profession of faith, “ I believe
in Jesus Christ the only Son of God.” It is the last link holding them
to the supernatural world ; that broken, they sink into the profane
realms of mere nature—they are Christians no more. No elaborate
proof is here required—the Christian affirmation of Christ’s Divinity
is a notorious fact. But it may be said other men before now have
usurped divine honours, and have been adored by their fellow-men.
Yes, but swift justice smote their wickedness; men soon grew indig-
nant at their own degradation# and flung the would-be gods into the
mire. Not so with the God-man whom we adore. His worship has
prevailed, through weal and woe, for well nigh 2000 years—for the
Christian affirmation-is, not only universal, but (2) perpetual. There
is no question about the last 1600 years. But certain rationalists pre-
tend that the affirmation of Christ’s Divinity was the slow elaboration
of fables current in . the first two centuries of the Christian era. No
solid proof do they give of their astounding assertion; they studiously
avoid stating places, persons, dates; they produce no clear description
of that pretended process of elaboration. They indulge in mere sup-
positions and generalities; they take refuge in the supposed gloom of
the first two centuries. We will, therefore, light up that gloom for
them by the lamp of history. Will you hear the (1) testimony of the
martyrs? St. Aital exclaims, “Lord Jesus Christ, my Saviour and
my God, vouchsafe to receive my soul.” St. Ignatius calls himself
Theophorus, that is, God-bearer, because he bears Jesus Christ in his
heart. St. Symphorosa deems it the height of bliss to be buried alive
for Jesus Christ, her God. St. Bolycarp answers his judges, “ How
shall I hate Him whom I have adored—mv King and my Saviour?”
Many others could be quoted to the same effect. Will you hear (2)
the prayers of the first Christians? “O, Jesus Christ,” they say,
“ joyous fight of the Eternal Father’s glory, Son of the Holy Father,
looking towards the setting sun, we praise the Father, and the Son,
and the Holy Ghost.’-’ Will yon hear (3) the admissions of the
heathen themselves? The persecutors fiercely required the abjuration
of the divinity of the Crucified. Celsus piles up arguments to prove
the Christians to bo-fools'for adoring a man as equal to God. Alex-
ander Severus desires to erect a temple to Christ, the God of the
Christians. Pliny states, in his letter to Trajan, that the Christians
used to sing in their meetings before daylight, the praises of Christ
whom they* deemed God. The very slaves of Pome used to caricature
on the "walls of their cells the Crucified whom the Christians called
God. Will yam hear (4) the early Doctors and Apostolic Fathers ? In
Tertullian, Origon, Clement of Alexandria, St. Hensons, St. Justin, &c. r


we find such testimonies as these: “Everywhere Christ is believed,
Christ is adored. Believe, 0 men, He who is Glod and man ; believe
Him who suffered and is adored as the living God.” I might quote
the most explicit and powerful testimony of St. Clement, and so reach
up to St. Paul the Apostle, whose inspired pen never wearies in pro-
claiming the great dogma of Christ’s divinity. “In Him dwelleth,”
he says, “all the fulness of the Godhead corporally; by Him God
made the world; and He is before all, and in Him all things consist.”
This perpetuity affirming the divinity of Christ is a huge fact before
which vanish all suppositions of fraud or usurpation. Eor it is not
unchallenged, but militant; it waded through the blood of eleven per-
secutions, in which both despotism and heresy staked their existence
against that of the God-man; but soon they were utterly extinguished
in the universal affirmation, “ I believe in Jesus Christ the only Son of
God.” And now what are the qualities of the affirmants of the dogma
of Christ’s divinity ? They are intelligent that they be not deluded,
and honest that they do not delude. I fearlessly assert that the Chris-
tian world offers the greatest sum of intelligence of any society on
earth. The highest genius in every age from the Christian era has
adored the crucified J ew, Jesus Christ. That serious and permanent
adoration, which no mere man ever obtained, sciences, letters, arts,
politics have paid, either directly or indirectly, to Christ. Renowned
warriors swell the cortege, and you, perhaps, remember the celebrated
dictum of one of them: “ I know what men are,” said Napoleon 1.,
“ and I say that Jesus Christ is not a man,” — Je me connais en homm.es ,
etje dis que Jesus Christ n'est pas un homme ßut above all affirmants
in point of intelligence must be placed the men who received the
sublime mission to teach that dogma to mankind —I mean the Church
teaching. Who could enumerate all those revered luminaries whose
genius has engrossed the memory of ages; those stars in the firmament
of the Christian world, who have devoted their noble minds to the ser-
vice of the Christian affirmation ? Yes, to its ‘ ‘ service ’ for the teacher is
not satisfied with a mere assent, but he studies its motives, sources, and
object. He ascends the stream of ages, ransacks texts, verifies dates,
collates monuments, sifts evidence. He defines, he solves the diffi-
culties heaped by reason round the dogma of Christ’s divinity; in fine,
he gains a conviction both for himself and his disciples of the truth of
his faith, and boldly proclaims that he would not believe did he not see
that he is bound to believe. Non crederet nisi videret esse credendum.
(St. Thomas Aquinas.) Not that he overrates the powers of the human
mind; humble in science, he resorts to prayer to obtain a supplement
of light from the eternal sun of truth. With the combined forces of
nature and grace, he rises with a sense of enlargement, and with settled
mind and firm voice exclaims, “I believe in Jesus Christ, the only son
of God.” In the next place, the affirmants of our great dogma are (2)
honest. Eor the Christian world not only exhibits the sum or aggre-
gate of ordinary virtues, but also the choice flower of sanctity; and
moreover its virtues are the practical outcome of its affirmation. The


Christian takes the God-man as his faultless pattern, and faithflluy
copies all his virtues, so that he affirms the divinity of Christ as much
by his actions as by his words, because he obeys the practical authority
of that dogma, even unto the most perfect and arduous consequences;
which is the sublime of honesty. We have, then, intelligence and
honesty-*—the two fundamental qualities requisite’in every trustworthy
informant —but we have more —we have generosity and heroism. See
the apostle, fired with the twofold love of God and man, braves every
peril to spread abroad the belief in the divinity of Christ; perils from
his kindred, who with tears and sobs, strive to retain him in their
despairing embrace ; perils from his people, unable to understand his
devotedness, which they deem folly; perils in the sea, whose stormy
depths he must cross to reach his mission land 10,000 miles from home;
perils in rivers-—swollen, rapid rivers—or pestiferous fens and marshes;
perils from nations, barbarous or savage, obstinately rooted in their gross
superstitions and ready to shed the apostle’s blood; perils from robbers,
crowned brigands, jealous of their despotism and corruption, quickly
transformed into ruthless persecutors ; vulgar plunderers, lying in wait
to assassinate and despoil the European whose booty they covet; perils
in the city, where he must conceal his presence, hide himself like a
malefactor, for the only crime of being a Christian-; perils from false
brethren, traders in religion, more eager for fortune than for souls—
intimidated converts, suborned apostates, ready to betray their brother
into the hands of his enemies; perils in the wilderness, where wild
beasts roam, where the storm roars or the torrents rush; where the
savage, barren soil refuses the subsistence of life, where hunger and
thirst and fear must be endured; perils of isolation—no heart to
whom he can tell his sufferings or confide his hopes, no encouragement
from fellow-men —nay, sometimes a forlorn and disconsolate death.
O, preacher of the God-man, wilt thou brave this host of perils?
“ Let me go,” he says; “the ends of the earth must hear me, and
respond to the cry of my faith: 1 1 believe in Jesus Christ, the only
Son of God!’ ” Such men aie no rarity in the Christian world, but
common in every age from the origin of Christianity down to our day.
Here, then, you must confess, we have more than generosity, we have
heroism. Yet this heroism, conspicuous in the apostle, shines more
brightly still in the martyr. Unique marvel in the annals of man-
kind ! Millions of men, women, and children —millions, I say—nobles
and plebeians, rich and poor, learned and ignorant, have had to choose
between death, in the most terrific shapes, and the denial of Christ’s
divinity. One word could save them; that word they refused to utter;
death, rather, death in fiercest torments. To their last gasp they said,
“lam a Christian, Christ is my God P And when their dying lips
were hushed, then, by the ruddy mouth of their gaping wounds and
the crimson, blood-stream from their mangled frames, they still cried
•out: “I believe in Jesus Christ, the only Son of God!” What more
•do you ask ? The Christian affirmation is complete. Divine Provi-
dence, to clear the popular Christian faith from the charge of blind-
E


ness and folly, lias condensed into one vivid, startling, almost tangible
proof, within every man’s reach, the demonstrative force of the whole
cumulus of Christian evidences. You believe —against all appearances
which represent the firmament as a smooth vault, studded luminous
points —that up there are incommensurable depths, where millions of
worlds revolve, to which our planet is a tiny grain of sand. You be-
lieve that because you trust in the calculations of science and the
honesty of the men of genius who affirm it. You believe the exist-
ence of distant towns you have never seen; you believe the main facts
of history whose ancient monuments you have never examined; be-
cause on these points there is a universal and perpetual agreement
among travellers and scholars; and you will not believe the whole
Christian world affirming the divinity of Christ ? That dogma is, in-
deed, strange ; but stranger still is the affirmation which warrants it.
It is universal, and perpetual, of an immutable and yet militant per-
petuity, which resists might, reason, and passion. Are not these
exclusive characteristics of truth ? Were the Divinity of Christ a
fable, it would have long since been uprooted, instead of strengthened,
by the violent storms of 1800 years. Instead of that, it is obstinately
affirmed; affirmed by genuis, affirmed by the most sublime honesty.
Have so many noble minds, the pride of the human race, exhausted
their science only to prop up nonsense—so many saints devoted their
virtues to the service, of a lie ? Nay, more, have they made a lie the
very principle and cause of their virtues! Still more astounding
marvel! The Christian world affirms with surpassing genorisity and
heroism. Has it then the passion of God’s glory only to destroy it by
the spread of a monstrous error ? Has it the passion of the salvation
of souls only to poison them by a hateful superstition ? Does it open
its veins and pour out its life-blood only to confound the commonest
notions of reason ? In a word, are the Christian apostolate and
martyrdom only a perpetual crime, or a perpetual folly ! No, no, all
that is sheer impossibility. Good sense compels xis to reason thus :
Universally, perpetually, with intelligence, honesty, devotion, and
heroism, the Christian woidd affirms that Christ is God. That is not a
self-evident truth, like 2 and 2 are 4; therefore God Himself revealed
it; therefore God has been seen and heard ; lie has given signs of His
intervention, these signs have been ascertained, examined, and dis-
cussed ; therefore, we must believe. Such is the summary proof of
Christ’s Divinity, sufficient for the bulk of mankind, who have no time
and no means for any other. For a candid mind it is irresistible.
Either what the Christian world affirms of Jesus Christ is true, or else
God Himself deceives us, and deceives Himself, for He has permitted,
against the interest of His own glory, the most triumphant of all
seductions. Who, indeed, could resist the majestic apparition, the
marvellous cortege and procession, which the Christian affirmation
evokes ? A God-man presents Himself to us surrounded by the
most splendid throng that ever attended on truth, and if we inter-
rogate that crowd, we receive from one and all the same answci\


Generations without number, who are ye? We are the Nations;,
from sunrise to sunset, from north to south, united in the same
faith, and because we have the same faith, we have the same
profession —“ We believe in Jesus Christ, the only Son of God/’
Mighty shades, who are you? We are Ages. From one to another,
with voice which none can silence, we pass our testimony of what
was in the beginning, the faithful echo of the cry uttered by the
Apostles who saw, heard, and touched the Christ —“We believe in
Jesus Christ, the only Son of God.” Illustrious men, who are you?
We are Study, Science, Genius. We have watched and prayed, paled
on books, interrogated monuments, discussed with our reason, and we
have acknowledged that we must prostrate before Christ, our God, and
say to Him—“ We believe in Jesus Christ, the only Son of God.” Ye,
whose beauteous brow is circled with a bright halo, and whose virtue
perfumes the stream of ages, who are you ? We are Sanctity. It was
our belief that made our virtues, and it is our virtues that chant their
cause when we repeat the strange canticle of our faith—“ We believe
in Jesus Christ, the only Son of God.” Untiring pilgrims who, guided
by Providence, fly over the world like the birds of the air, who are
you ? We are Devotedness. Nothing arrests us, we dare all danger
for God’s glory and the salvation of souls, and so we sound to the ends
of the earth the great truth, —“We believe in Christ Jesus the only
Son cf God.” Men, women, children, virgins, priests, kings, sages,
warriors, artisans—immense throng of mangled and bleeding frames,
who are you? We are Heroism. The world, sunk in sense and sin,
would not believe our words, nor our virtues ; so we have spoken with
our blood, and our blood has thrown into the face of the world this
sublime confession—“ We believe in Jesus Christ the only Son of
God.” 0, my friends and fellow-men, if I have common-sense, if I
have a heart, can I say to these nations, these ages, these teachers,
these saints, these apostles, these martyrs : “ Pass on, go your way; I
understand not a word of your affirmation, and the solitary murmur of
my reason drowns your mighty voice !” No ; that is not true. I
understand perfectly well the meaning and import of the Christian
affirmation. No; that is insensate. I cannot struggle against a
whole world. The cortege of the God-man is forme the most astound-
ing marvel, and lam drawn with irresistible force into its rauks. But
if it be the cortege of an idol, 0 God, where is thy goodness, where
thy wisdom, glory, power, veracity, and providence? Thou hast left'
nothing undone to undeceive me, and lower Thyself. Must I then
deny Thy perfections, and after Thy perfections, Thy existence
Must I become an atheist? No, indeed no ; my reason recoils from sc
heinous a crime. Oil, my mind is made up ! I enter the cortege of
truth. With the nations, with the ages, with genius, with sanctity,
with devotion, and heroism, with the whole Christian w r ovld, I tot;
affirm the dogma of the God-man, and I sing with all my heart and I
voice—“l believe in Jesus Christ the only Son of God.” Yes, Josurfi
Christ is God. “We believe in Jesus Christ the only Son of God;


we will continue to believe in Him, to build temples in His honour, to
adore Him, to love Him, to serve Him, and lifting up with fearless
hand the noble standard of His divinity, we shall find under its folds
honour, civilization, glory, freedom, life, salvation, and eternity. Dr.
Eedwood then added: —‘I have now a pleasing task to perform. I
congratulate your learned, eloquent, and indefatigable Archbishop, of
whom I know you are proud, and I am sure that I interpret the senti-
jnents of all the right rev. bishops and prelates who grace this cere-
mony with their presence, when, without flattery, I call him ‘powerful
in work and word before God and the people’ —one who realises in an
eminent degree the Apostle’s ideal of a bishop, in all things showing
himself ‘an example of good works, in doctrine, in integrity, in
gravity, able to exhort in sound doctrine, and to convince the gain-
sayers ; in short, a prelate who vividly recalls those stately and holy
bishops once the glory of Catholic-England—a venerable Bede in
saintliness and learning, a Thomas a’Becket in zeal, and fearless vin-
dication of the rights of the Church. I congratulate you warmly, my
Lord Archbishop, on the achievement of the great object for which you
have worked so hard and so well. I also congratulate all the excellent
and devoted clergy of this archdiocese —secular and regular —on their
lability and generous co-operation with their great leader, which have
conducted to so prompt and complete a success. Nor are my congratu-
ilations less for the clergy of the other dioceses of this ecclesiastical
province, whose devotion deserves an equal meed of praise. But
how shall I congratulate, in adequate terms, the happy Catholics
of Sydney, and the whole of this archdiocese ? The work you
have done is great, and you may and do feel legitimate pride in its
completion, but let me tell you candidly, it does not surprise me ; it is
what I should naturally expect, when I remember the noble race to
which most of you belong. You are the children of dear old Ireland,
that always kept the faith; Ireland, the fair mother of the saints.
Yours is the land of saints, apostles, and martyrs —nay, you are a mar-
tyred nation —and amid all your titles to honour and glory, there is
one which you claim, particularly in our day, viz—that you are the
church-builders of the world. No wonder, then, that you have been
true to yourselves here in Sydney, as in New York, and all over the
continent of North America. The rich with their wealth, the poor with
their hard-earned wages, the widow with her mite, you have reared
this splendid edifice to God, for yourselves, for your children, and
many generations yet unborn. All honour to your faith and devotion !
I feel that my congratulations are poor at all points except one—they
are sincere. I congratulate and thank all those generous and liberal
persons of other denominations who have helped to erect this imposing
monument, and I assure them that God will bless them for contri-
buting to build a house of prayer, a temple where Jesus Christ will be
adored and praised, His doctrine taught, His sacraments administered,
-and the principles of his civilization preserved and inculcated. I also
Took upon your assistance as a firm protest against those detestable


anti-Christian systems now becoming so bold and rampant —systems
which profess no difference in kind but only in degree, between a man
and an ignoble quadruped —systems favoured and fostered to an
appalling extent by a tyrannical secularism in education; and systems
fit only to convert society into chaos and men into slaves or incarnate
demons. I also congratulate architects, contractors, &c., &c. I will
terminate with the expression of my thanks to his Grace for the honour
he has conferred upon me, by inviting me to preach this opening ser-
mon. I regret that I have been so far beneath my theme and the
august circumstances. On glancing back at the past I am forcibly
reminded of a scene described in the book of Esdras, when the Israel-
ites, returned from captivity, had laid the foundation of the second
temple in Jerusalem. Many of the ancients, remembering the splen-
dour of Solomon’s Temple, and despairing of ever seeing its like again,
wept aloud. Very different are my feelings at the present moment.
It is now twenty-eight years since I came to Sydney, a boy about
fifteen years of age, on my way to Europe for education. I then saw
the first Catholic Cathedral of Sydney, and spent the feast of Christmas
in it. I remember it well. But what a change now ! What a contrast!
And it is not sorrow you or I now feel, but hearty joy at the wonderful
progress of our holy faith in this hopeful land, the mother colony of Aus-
tralia. All honour to the holy founders of this flourishing Church, of this
fertile spot in the Lord’s vineyard. All honour to the noble Arch-
bishop who then ruled the comparatively small flock; all honour to
the devoted priests of those days, the untiring missioners, the men of
arduous toil and travel. They sowed the seed, you reap the plentiful
harvest. They had great love for this new Austral land, so lavishly
blessed by God, and they had great hopes in her future. She rose
before their mind’s eye as a fair queen, crowned alike with the gifts of
nature and the higher gifts of grace. You are realising their fond
vision. To this country, flowing already with milk and honey, the
millions of the old world are coming; all the intellect and material
power of our progressive age are pushing it forward to the height of
wealth and prosperity. Nor is the Catholic Church behind in the race.
To a modest chapel has succeeded a grand cathedral worthy of mediaeval
times. The Bishops here to-day present are living proofs of the spread
of our holy faith, and, despite the dark ominous cloud of secularism,
the future is rich in promise. The children of the faith are steadily
flocking to this country. The Catholic Church is respected even by
those who are not of her household, and, if her credentials are fairly
set before them, they will learn to embrace and love her, who was the
life and glory of England for over a thousand years. It is your duty
to avail yourselves of the golden opportunity to establish the Church
most piously in Australia, and by so doing you will confer upon her
incalculable blessings. Catholic truth will make her really free by
teaching respect for legitimate authority, the foundation of law and
order. The Church brings with her, and fosters with motherly care,
true civilization. She taught Goths and Vandals, Colts and Saxons


she civilized Europe. She is the salt of the earth and the light of the
world, and she alone can preserve the modern world from a relapse
into barbarism far worse than the first. I hail the Church of-Australia
-—so fitly represented by this stately pile, grand, fresh, and new from
the mason’s hand —as the earnest and warrant of these happy results ;
and I hope that, in God’s mercy, she may long enjoy the leadership of
the great prelate who now guides her destiny, and that she may go on
from victory to victory until her final triumph is consummated in the
land of the living, in the bright realms of eternal bliss. Amen.
Powerful and masterly as this discourse is, the words do not give
a sufficient idea of the impression it made. The dignified manner,
graceful gesture, and thorough earnestness of his Lordship, during its
delivery, filled the minds of nearly all who heard him with delight,
not the vain sensuous delight of hearing sweet words drop from elo-
quent lips, but that exaltation of mind which arises from conviction
confirmed, commingled with pleasure at its complete confirmation. The
Church of New Zealand, nay of all Australasia, possesses a genuine
sacred orator in the Bishop of Wellington.
The musical portion of the morning service—a very distinct one
too—consisted of the march before mentioned, and • Haydn s No. 3, or
“ Coronation” Mass, which was performed by a choir and orchestra of
about three hundred persons, with organ accompaniment. The solos
in the “ Kyrie,” were rendered by Miss Moon in a finished style, her
voice being distinctly heard above the chorus ; she evidently felt the
fullest spirit of the music. The “ Gloria,” on the whole, was a true
interpretation of the composer’s conception, the solos being admirably
sung by Messrs. Brewer and Hallewell, the “ Qui tollis of the latter
producing a deep feeling amongst the audience. In the Cum Sancto
Spiritu” and “Amen,” the syncopated passages and fugues were exe-
cuted in a faultless manner. The gradual, “ 0 Sacrum convivium,”
was unique in its completeness, the music (by Earrant) being most
appropriate to the words, and was sung almost throughout soUo voce.
After the sermon came the “ Credo,” so well known and so full of
sublime passages. Mrs. Hunt sang the “ Incarnatus” most expres-
sively, and Miss Moon the “Et Vitam” very brilliantly. Bauer’s
“ Ave Maria,” the offertory piece, was sung by Mrs. Biley with exqui-
site tenderness, reminding us forcibly of Mrs. Cordner Miles’s style of
musical interpretation. The orchestra was most effective in the sym-
phony belonging to the “ Benedict us,” and manifested exquisite skill


in manipulation. The solos were taken by Mrs. Hunt and Mr. Brewer,
and executed feelingly as well as correctly. Mrs. Biley and Miss
Moon rendered the respective solos of the “Agnus Dei” without a
flaw; but the chorus was somewhat unsteady, as well as were the
fugues in the “ Dona nobis.” Tho service came to a magnificent
close with Handel’s Hallelujah Chorus, which gave the whole musical
service of the morning a most appropriate finish.
EVENING SERVICE.
Soon after the bells had ceased to ring (seven p.m.), the sacred
edifice was again occupied by a large assemblage. The service con-
sisted of Pontifical Vespers and Benediction of the Most Holy Sacra-
ment. The Bight Bev. Dr. Torreggiani officiated, and the Archbishop,
in black cassock and train, presided. The bishops wore the rochet and
biretta. The cantors were the Bev. Dr. Quirk and the Bev. Father
Dunne. After Vespers and before Benediction the Very Bev. Prior
Butler delivered a discourse on the Patriarch Jacob’s “Vision of the
Angels.” He began by quoting the following text, taken from the
28th chapter of Genesis : —“ And when Jacob awaked out of sleep he
said : Indeed the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not; and, trem-
bling, he said : How terrible is this place ! This is no other than the
House of God and the Gate of Heaven.”
The Bev. preacher explained his text at length, dilating on the
most sacred character of a Catholic church as compared with anything
dedicated to God under the old Dispensation. This was an admirably
connected discourse, powerfully sustained. The preacher is energetic
and eloquent, his gesture forcible, and his illustrations evidently
drawn from an extensive repertory of Scriptural knowledge, ne
clearly showed that if the act of Jacob in setting up a stone for a
memorial was not a type of something higher to come afterwards, it
would be little better'than a mere idle dream.
The musical programme, independently of the “Coronation
March” and the Gregorian chants, consisted of Miss Moon’s sweet
rendering of Carmusei’s “ Salve Begina,” and Mrs. Hunt sang
Neukomn’s “0 Salutaris.” Donizetti’s “Tantum Ergo” was given
very artistically by Messrs. Hallewell and Hinchy, the voices blending
effectively, and Miss Fanny Nolan sang the “ Adoremus” excellently,


and took part with Mr. Myers in the “ 0 Sanctissima.” As the eccle-
siastical procession took its way from the sanctuary to the vestry, the
organist played the grand w r ar march of priests from Mendelssohn’s
“ Athalie.” Thus closed the first day of the Triduum, without the
least hitch occurring to mar the effects, ceremonial or musical.
(Second Day.)
Notwithstanding the fact that several circumstances concurred to
lessen the number of the congregation on Saturday, nevertheless about
four thousand persons had assembled before the joyous bells ceased to»
invite them. The procession was similar—in all important particulars
—to that of the preceding day. The principal exception being that
the “Coronation” was substituted for the “Triduum” March. The
celebrant of the Mass was the Eight Eev. Dr. Eedwood, the deacon
and subdeacon being, respectively, Fathers James Sheridan and IT. B.
Callachor. The Eight Eev. Dr. Torreggiani was the preacher on the
occasion, and took for his text this passage from the first chapter of
the Christian Doctrine : —“ God made us to know Him, to love Him,
and to serve Him in this world, and to be happy with Him for ever in
the next.”
His Lordship gave an admirable discourse. It was simple and
unaffected, but made very vivid impressions on the minds of his hearers?
more especially the exhortations to love God with their whole heart and
soul. His Lordship has a sympathetic voice, and comes up to the
poetical ideal of a tender preacher—“ calm though grave; gentle
though full of devotional feeling.”
The music was admirably selected and almost faultlessly executed.
As the long and brilliant ecclesiastical cortege entered and marched
through the Cathedral, the orchestra, under Mr. Delany’s guidance,
performed the majestic “ Coronation Mareh” from “ The Prophet/’
with splendid effect, and as soon as the chief officiating prelate had
taken his place on the sanctuary, the choir commenced the Kyrie of
Mercadante’s Mass. As the building was not quite filled, both voices
and instruments sounded better and fuller than on the previous day,
and altogether the musical performance was a highly creditable one.


The chorus singing in Mercadante’s Gloria and Credo, especially in
the finale of the former, was exceedingly grand; and in Gounod’s
Sanctus, Benedictus, and Agnus Dei —music of an entirely different
character —singers and players were equally successful. In the
“ Credo” the exquisitely devotional “ Et Unam Sanctum” was excel-
lently sung by Mr. James Hinchy, Mr. J. A. Gread, and Mr. M‘Lean.
All the other solos and concerted passages during the Mass were sung
by Mrs. Riley, and Messrs. J. Hinchy, E. Brewer, J. H. Elynn, and
M'Lean. Mr. Brewer sang remarkably well in the “Et Incarnatus,”
and at the offertory Miss Sherwin, assisted by chorus and orchestra,
was heard to advantage in Hummel’s “Alma Virgo.” The “Halle-
lujah” chorus, with the full strength of voices and instruments,
brought the proceedings to a close at half-past 1 p.m. Mr. Delany’s
conducting was faultless,, and this is saying a great deal, when
it is remembered that the large forces under his command were, on
account of the arrangements in the choir, so difficult to control with
anything like ease.
EVENING SERVICE.
The Right Rev. Dr. Redwood officiated at Vespers. The Very
Rev. Eather Vaughan, C.SS.R., preached from the text: “ Whosoever
shall glorify Me, him will I glorify, saith the Lord” (I Kings 11., 30.)
The Very Rev. Redemptorist, in a sermon that lasted an hour,
vindicated the pre-eminence of the Virgin Mother of God, and dwelt
with loving tenderness on the glories prepared for her as Queen of
Heaven and Earth —of angels and men. Eather Vaughan is an able
and self-controlled preacher. He never misses the right word in speak-
ing, and his doctrine is worthy of the language. He will be an acquisi-
tion to the preaching-staff of the Cathedral, should he remain in
Sydney.
The Vespers sung were the Gregorian, and the Litany was the
Roman. Rossi’s “ Tantum Ergo” was very nicely given by Messrs.
J. Hinchy and J. H. Elynn. At the conclusion of the Benediction ser-
vice Mr. Banks played, with vigorous effect, the grand march from
Costa’s “Eli.”
(Third Day.)
Sunday was, in every respect, the crowning glory of the Triduum.
Pontifical High Mass was celebrated by the Right Rev. Dr. Cani before


a congregation of about 7000 persons, the Eev. Fathers Collins and
Dunne being, respectively, deacon and subdeacon, and the Venerable
Archpriest Sheehy priest-assistant. After the Gospel, the Right Rev.
Dr. Murray preached from the 4th chapter of St. Luke, 18th and 19th
verses. He pointed out, as an attestation of Christ’s divinity, the
astounding miracles He wrought, and how He wished those evidences
of His power to be reported to John the Baptist. The spread of
Christ’s Kingdom on earth was dwelt on with force and fervour; and
the discourse was an eminently practical one. Few could hear Dr.
Murray and not recognise in him a true apostle of the Divine
Master.
The morning music consisted of Mozart’s No. 12 Mass, rendered
as it had never been in Sydney' 1 before. Organist, chorus, orchestra,
soloists, and conductor seemed to be on the qui vive not to make a single
mistake. The Hallelujah Chorus, given with vigour and fine musical
effect, closed the service of the morning.
EVENING SERVICE.
After Vespers, the final sermon of the series was preached by the
Very Rev. Father Cahill, S.J., from the words“ As the Father
loved me, I also have loved you.”—John xv., 9. Pie spoke for more
than an hour, and most forcibly expounded the doctrine of Divine
Tjove. He also hinted at the unbelieving tendencies of the age, which
were fraught with dangers to human society. He alluded, in scathing
terms, to bad Catholics as enemies to themselves and their fellow-men.
Father Cahill, although apparently suffering from catarrh, or some
bronchial affection, came up in vigonr and force to the expectations of
his admirers, of whom there are many in Sydney. He is self-sustained
and full of energy, but the latter quality never hurries him onward.
His discourse was replete with devotional suggestiveness.
The Vespers were again Gregorian, with the Roman Ifitanv.
Hummel’s “ Alma Virgo” was sung by Miss Sherwin and the chorus,
the solo voice being for the first few bars rather flat, but subsequently
perfectly managed. The dignified finale was a musical treat. Mr.
Brewer sang an “ 0 Salutaris,” composed by the conductor, Mr. J. A.
Delany—a chastely beautiful work, which displayed to full advantage
the range and power of the singer’s voice. Mr. Flynn, who seemed to


be suffering from cold, was ineffective in the “ Tantum Ergo.’"
(Pacini.) As the ecclesiastical procession left the sanctuary, Mr.
Hinchy and the chorus sang Ziugarelli’s “ Laudato” in capital style,
and the last service of the “ Triduum” closed, as the first had com-
menced, with Mr. Delany’s stately march. It may be noticed that
the Bishop of Maitland, in his sermon, during morning service, paid all
concerned a high compliment for the manner in which the music had
been performed during the *• Triduum.”
BENEFACTORS.
Among the many interesting circumstances connected with the
new basilica, more especially as indicative of the living faith and unity
of the Church, are the handsome contributions that have been made
not only in New South Wales, but in nearly all the Australasian colo-
nies. Of these the most interesting in point of time and other circum-
stance, is the munificent offering of £233, coupled with an eloquent
address to Archbishop Vaughan, madeby the Very Rev. Dr. Bermingham,
Dr. Morgan O’Connor, K.G.S., Messrs. J. Walsh, M. Donelly, P. Moran,
and M. Callaghan on the part of the Catholics of Wagga Wagga. This
act of thorough Catholic liberality is said to have deeply affected his
Grace. This, however, is not the only occasion on which Dr. Berming-
ham has shown his zeal “ by word and by work ” —by preaching and
contributing —to the Mother Church of the Australias. His name will
for ever be enwreathed with those of our most distinguished missionere
and teachers. As the Address referred to is a document worthy of
wide publicity, we have much pleasure in reproducing it. It runs as
follows :
To His Grace the Most Rev. Roger Bede Vaughan, 0.5.8., Archbishop
of Sydney.
Dear Lord Archbishop,
Although we have almost all of us already contributed individually to the
great work upon which you are engaged, yet we cannot allow this happy occasion
of the opening of the Mother Church of Australia, an event which is destined to
mark an epoch in our history, to pass without coming forward to contribute collect-
ively, and to lay the homage of our admiration and respect, as well as that of the
distant district we represent, at the feet of the distinguished Prelate to whose zeaj
and unwearied labours the success of the undertaking is principally due. When we
read but a short time since of your plans and the programme you proposed to
accomplish, though we admired the courage of the design-yet we could not divest


ourselves of some misgivings about the possibility of carrying them into effect. But
when we witnessed your giant efforts—your marvellous correspondence, so varied*
apropos, and telling, which penetrated like a ray of light into every nook and cor-
ner of the colonies—your speeches, your committee meetings, your Fayre and other
VERY REV. P. BERMINGHAM, D.D.
labours, we saw the foreshadowing of the success of to-day, and felt convinced that
never before had any Bishop done so much personal work to forward his cause; and
withal, ’mid the toils of the day, your cultured genius equally at home in the classical


learning of Greece, the profound philosophy of St. Thomas Aquinas, and the Polite
Literature of the present day, found time to devote the treasures of your erudition
to the sacred cause of education. Those noble efforts recalled to us the memory of
your glorious order, the Architects of the stately fanes of Christendom, the pro-
ound scholars who preserved and handed, down to us the immortal aphorism
Laborare est orare. In learning and working, you are true to the traditions of your
Order, and we may justly apply to you the words in which the immortal Pius IX.
summed up the transcendant merits of the learned and saintly Abbot of Solesmes,
“ Verus Benedicti Discipulus.”
Who would not be proud to be the follow-labourer of such a workman ? Who
would not feel honoured in contributing to such a cause ? It is to affirm this prin-
ciple that we are here to-day—to congratulate your Grace upon your deserved
success, and wish you many days to accomplish the great work you have so happily
commenced.
We are, dear Lord, Your obedient Servants, on behalf of the Congregation of
Wagga Wagga, P. Beriningham, D.D., Morgan O’Connor, Knight, J.
Walsh, M. Donnelly, P. Moran, M. Callaghan.
It is needless to say that the Archbishop’s reply was full of
thankfulness and gratitude. He strongly expressed the consolation he
felt at this welcome aid from Wagga Wagga. While referring to
benefactors, we were unable, in our notes on the burning of old St.
Mary’s, to obtain the names of the principal Catholic gentlemen who
first came forward to aid Archbishop Polding in building a new cathe-
dral. We remember, however, that Messrs. Andrew Lenehan, J.P.,
(whose first subscription was a£soo), Edward Campbell, J.P., Robert
Coveny, J.P., and several members of the legal profession contributed
handsomely.
In reference to this matter of subscriptions, we must not omit to
refer to the most signal circumstance connected with the affair; to wit,
his Grace the Archbishop’s “ begging letters,” and the liberal responses
they met with. Over a thousand of those missives were sent, and most,
if not all, of them brought satisfactory replies. A goodly representa-
tion of our Protestant fellow-colonists responded to this invitation,
among the first of whom the Hon. William Macleay, M.L.C., deserves
honorable recognition. There is another fact most creditably signifi-
cant, and that is the gratuitous aid rendered by the collectors during a
period of six or seven years. Many of these were persons in humble
circumstances 5 but still, besides giving their several “mites,” they


cheerfully devoted their time and zeal to obtain weekly subscriptions,
which kept a steady flow of money into the Cathedral Treasury. Their
good deeds have, however, already met with a reward transcending all
human eulogy.
THE FINAL ACT.
After the service was over, his Grace the Archbishop, in full
canonicals, ascended the pulpit, and asked the faithful to kneel while
he pronounced the words of the final Act of the “ Triduum” devotions
—the Consecration of the Archdiocese of the Sacred Heart of Jesus.
He then said
He suggested that in doing so they should point this consecration by some dis-
tinct determination. They were all aware that the principal reason why he as
prelate of this diocese, had been so earnest in endeavouring to roof this building
and pay for it, was that they would have to meet a verv heavy difficulty, to which
the Bishop of Maitland referred that morning in such splendid language, and which
they were determined, by God’s grace, to meet with all the courage which they
assessed. He said this in order that they might show their real earnestness ia
the consecration of the Church of the diocese to Christ, and that they should pro-
mise Him, whilst making this act of consecration, that they would do all that lay
in their power, by the influence of their words and by the influence of their lives
to assist in the great work that, the Church would engage in at the end of this
year, when they would lose the sum of £9OOO, which was at present paid to the
Catholic schools. In order- that he might show them his sincerity, he would tell
them what he had determined to do, and what he had determined to do when he
first began—with the help of the people—to roof in this great cathedral. It ought
to be the case that this great cathedral would bring in a large income. He pro-
mised them that when the place had been kept in repair—presbytery and cathedral
—and the priests had received their stipends, the whole of the income of this
cathedral, as long as they were in this difficulty, should be handed over by him to
the schools of their children, to testify to the Sacred Heart of Jesus Christ that
these were not mere words, and that he was not going to rest with the mere expres-
sion of the determination he had within him of spending himself or being spent in
doing what lay in his power to plant in the hearts of the young the blossom of
hope, and that they might be brought up to know and love and serve God in this
world, and be happy with him for ever in the next. He had not the slightest doubt
that according to their means or measure the clergy of this diocese would follow'
his example, and he believed that the laity, seeing that the bishops and priests
were in earnest, would follow their example, and thus, whether helped by the State
or not, they would prove to the world that though money was very powerful, there
was something which was higher and stronger than money, and that was principle.
The love by which they were animated w-ould animate them with still greater
earnestness in the future, w r hen they had made this consecration to the Sacred
Heart of Jesus. He begged of them to determine to use all their influence and all


the means they possessed, as far as they could do so fairly, to advance, when the
time came, the interests of Catholic education in this archdiocese.
His Grace then slowly and distinctly recited—the people follow-
ing him sub silentio —the following prayer, approved by his Holiness,
Pope Pius XL, of happy memory :
0 Jesus, my Redeemer and my God ! notwithstanding the great love Thou
bcarest towards men, for whose redemption Thou didst shed all Thy precious blood,
how little art Thou by them in turn beloved ; nay, how grievously art Thou
offended and insulted, especially by blasphemies and profanation of holydays. Oh !
that I could afford some satisfaction to Thy Divine Heart, that it could make repa-
ration for so much ingratitude and indifference from the great majority of mankind.
Would that I could give proof to Thee how much I desire to love in return and
honour Thy adorable and most loving Heart, and to do this in the sight of all men,
thereby to increase Thy glory. Would that I could effect the conversion of sinners
and arouse from their indifference so magy others who, though happily they belong
to Thy Church, do not take to heart the interests of Thy glory, and of that same
Church, Thy Spouse. Oh 1 that 1 could obtain for those Catholics who would seem
to deserve the name by their many exterior acts of charity, but who, too much
attached to their own opinions, refuse to submit to the decisions of the Holy See,
or nourish sentiments at variance with its teachings, that they should bethink
themselves, and be persuaded that he who in anything refuses to hear the Church
refuses to bear God, who is with her.
To attain these holy ends, and to implore, besides, the triumph and lasting
peace of the Church, Thy immaculate Spouse; the well-being and prosperity of
Thy Vicar here on earth, and to see the fulfilment of his holy desires : as als > that
the Clergy may increase in sanctity, and become more acceptable to Thee ; and also
for the many other intentions which Thou, O my Jesus 1 dost know to be conform-
able to Thy Divine will, and that tend in any way to the conversion of sinners and
to the sanctification of the just, so that all of us may one day obtain our eternal
salvation: and, finally, because I know, 0 my Jesus! That I am doing a thing
agreeable to Thy most tender Heart.
Prostrate at Thy feet, in the presence of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary, and of
all the Court of Heaven, I solemnly acknowledge that by every title of justice and
gratitude I belong altogether and solely to Thee, Jesus Christ, my Redeemer, only
fountain of my every good, whether of soul or of body, and, uniting myself in
intention with Thy Pontiff, I consecrate myself and everything belonging to me to
Thy Most Sacred Heart, which alone I desire to love and serve with all my soul,
with all my heart, with all my strength, making my will Thy will, and uniting all
my desires to Thine.
In public confirmation of this my con sc ration I solemnly declare to Thee, O
my God ; that I resolve, in honour of Thy Sacred Heart, to observe in future all
holydays of obligation, according to the laws of the Holy Church, and to procure


the same observance on the part of those persons over whom I may have influence
or authority.
Uniting, then, together in Thy Sacred Heart all these holy desires and resolu-
tions with which Thy grace inrpires me, I hope to afford it some compensation for
the many injuries which it receives from the ungrateful children of men, and to
obtain for my soul and the souls of all my neighbours my own and their common
happiness, in this life and the life to come. Amen.
Thus ended the grandest manifestation of Holy Church’s liturgy
that has ever been witnessed in Australia. It was. and is, historically
—a triumph in every sense.
jlti lutis J) m ssmper.
J. Gs o’cONNORj PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, 26 JAMISON-STREET, SYDNEY.


Advertisements.
THOM & CAMERON’S
“ OLD MATURED ” SCOTCH WHISKY.
THE number of blends of SCOTCH WHISKY now placed before the Colonial
Tublic are legion. This is largely brought about by small traders in Glasgow and
the adjacent towns, consigning Whisky here, and setting themselves up as distillers.
The proper management of Whisky (more particularly Scotch) largely depends
on the resources of the shippers, as it is essential to hold very large stocks to keep
up succession of well matured spirits, Messrs. THOM and CAMERON are advan-
tageous-y situated in this respect, being the largest bonders and exporters of Whisky
in” Scotland. Their bond in Glasgow requiring the supervision of no less than
thirteen Excise officers.
They now ship to this market their “ OLD MATURED ” Scotch. Whisky,
which for Mildness and Delicacy of Flavour is unsurpassed, and is pronounced by
connoisseurs as the most appreciable Whisky that has yet been placed before the
Colonial public. Each bottle bears their Trade Mark on capsule and label, and the
words “ Old Matured,”
May be had of all respectable Wine and Spirit Merchants.
BALV brothers,
SOLE AGENTS NEW SOUTH WALES AND QUEENSLAND,
309 GEORGE STREET.
W ill. JAMESON & CO.’S
GENUINE DUBLIN WHISKY.
LARGE quantities of so called “Irish Whisky’’ are now imported into this
market, principally from Belfast, where it is manufactured from raw grain, and so
<• blended ”as to imitate—but in a small degree only—the GENUINE IRISH
WHISKY. It is produced very cheaply by means of Coffey’s “ Patent ” Still,
but its being Cheap is its only recommendation.
The late Lord Derby said of such cheap Whisky, “ That he would rather have
the gout than drink it,'’ and in a recent debate, in the British House of Commons,
to which the Dublin Distillers had recourse to protect themselves, one speaker
described the sensation produced by such “ vile rubbish” as “like a torchlight
procession going down his throat.”
Under those circumstances consumers would do well to look to the character
of the articles supplied them.
Messrs. W. JAMESON & CO, BOTTLE THEIR OLD WHISKIES FOR
EXPORT ONLY, and have appointed the undersigned their Sole Agents. The
Trade Mark, letter J in diamond, is on every label, cork, and capsule, and may be
had of every respectable dealer.
DALY BROTHERS,
Importers of Irish and Scotch Whiskies and General Merchandise,
309 George Street, Sydney.
And at 2 Circus Place, Finsbury Circus, London, E.C.
AGENTS tor —Wm, Jameson & Co., Distillers, Dublin ; Thom & Cameron’s
« Old Matured” Scotch Whisky. Glasgow ; Williams, Englebach, & Humbert, Xerez
de la Frontera ; The Dublin Stout Company, London ; McLelland Bros., Birming-
ham ; The British Enamel Company, Birmingham ; Hay, Merricks & Co., Roslyn
Mills, Edinboro’ ; Wm. White & Son, Glasgow ; A. Boake & Co., Stratford, London ;
Muller, Uhlich, & Co., London ; The Greenmount Spinning Company, Dublin and
Belfast ; Marsden and Saffiey, Liverpool; Thomas Boorn & Co., London,
1


Advertisements.
W. O’CONNOR,
GEORGE STREET NORTH
346 GEORGE STREET.
YD N E Y, <sk&
STUBBS & SMITH,
Late
SEPH BULLAR
WOOLLEN DRAPERS,
346 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.


Advertisements.
PETER McKEON,
SURVEYOR,
53 ElizabctSi Street,
Estates subdivided. Surveys made for purposes of descriptions
Recissions and Reclamations, Alignments of Streets, Check Surveys,
Old Boundary Lines, &c., &c. Levels for Drainage and Engi-
neering purposes,
Plans, Tracings and Lithographs prepared.
Business in connection with Lands' Department carried out.
THE
jlttiJralasimt Jiamunit JiriH
COMPANY.
CONTRACTS will be undertaken by the above Company to bore any sized holes
vertical or horizontal, up to
£3= 3 INCHES OE LAEGEE,
! f required, to any depth, at any angle from vertical to horizontal, at a reduction
of 25 PER CENT. BELOW ANY PREVIOUS CHARGE.
The Company in all cases will find their own fuel and water for drilling purposes,
and will make no charge for loss of diamonds, or wear or tear on plant, and will
also provide workmen, engineers, &e.
The new duplex barrel introduced into the colony by Mr. J. Coghlan will be used
free of charge to persons searching for minerals.
Mr. COGHLAN has every confidence, from his practical knowledge of the Diamond
Drill, that he will be able to give general satisfaction, as well as quick despatch to
all orders addressed to the
Temporary Offices, 283 George Street.
JOHN COGHLAN,
General Manager, pro tem.


Advertisements.
RILEY BROTHERS,
THE NOTED
cm
IMPORTERS OF ALL KTNDS OF
DRAPERY
Men’s & Boys’ Clothing,
COLEMAN STREET, LONDON.
386 George Street, near the Post Office,
600 Brickfield Hill, near Bathurst Street,
167 Oxford Street, near Bourke Street,
Auburn Street, Goulburn,
Hunter Street, Newcastle.
We respectfully invite comparison. Our Goods are Sound, Useful and
'Cheap, manufactured expressly to our own order, and guaranteed for
strong hard wear.
£5
BALES OF DRAPERY
Sent Carriage Paid, and insured against loss all over the Colony, or an
allowance for Carriage, if the parcel is taken by the Customer.
RILEY BROTHERS.


Advertisements,
M. J. FITZPATRICK,
Torrens’ Act and General Land Agent.
All matters relating to Patents, Certificates of Naturalization, Registration
of Liens, fyc., attended to with promptitude.
To Squatters, Free Selectors, Miners, and Others.
All business relating to Runs, Conditional and Improvement Purchases. Pre-leases,
Reserves, Mining Allotments, &c., &e., transacted with skill and promptitude.
Neatly executed Tracings of Runs, Pre-leases, Vacant Crown Lands, &c., furnished.
Refunds of Deposits and Certificates of Selections obtained ; Deeds ot Dian ex-
pedited, aud all difficulties adjusted. Terms moderate.
9 Post Office Chambers,
m PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
JOHN WALSH,
PRACTICAL
Boot and Shoe Maker,
250 PITT STREET,
(NEAR PARK STREET).
J. W. respectfully informs the Public that Orders en-
trusted to him are executed with Promptness, Excellent
Pit, and Good Workmanship on the Shortest Notice.
A varied stock of Ladies’ and Children’s Boots
always on hand.


Advertisements.
SEt
tbu
ESTABLISHED 21 YEARS.
MOLONYBROS.,
(Late C. MOLONY),
skddle kqd jVlkke^B,
605 GEORGE STREET,
Near Goulburn Street. HITIIIiIUr,
C. BOVIS,
PRACTICAL AND
Anatomical Boot Maker,
62 MARKET STREET
FIVE DOOES FROM GEORGE STREET,
Ladies’ and Gentlemen’s First-class Boots and Shoes of every
description made to order.


Advertisements.
RICHARD M'AULEY,
153 OXFORD STREET,
(OPPOSITE PALMER STREET),
SYDNEY.
Choice Teas and Oilman's Stores always on hand.
P. GAFFNEY,
MERCHANT TAILOR,
238 GEORGE STREET,
NEAB BKIDGE STREET,
SYDNEY.
ECCLESIASTICAL GARMENTS
All of the newest patterns, to which great attention is paid.
£f- COUNTRY ORDERS IMMEDIATELY ATTENDED TO.


Advertisement s.
EURE
KA
Eureka & I.X.L. Tobaccos
The above only Genuine Brands being- the well known, popular
Heart-shaped Metal Tag,
INSCRIBED
EUREKA AND I.X.L.
Are manufactured solely by
Saywell’s Tobacco Co.,
(LIMITED,)
A T TIE EAGtE WORKS,
KENT & CLARENCE STS.,
SYDREY.
The enormous demand for these Tobaccos has produced so gigantic an increase of
business that, in order to keep pace therewith, it has been imperative to erect a New
Factory, double the Plant and Machinery, and divide the responsibility by the con-
version of the concern into a Public Company.
The facilities for production being thus increased, the delay hitherto experienced in
the fulfilment of orders will be no longer felt, and constituents may rely upon theix*
commands being executed with promptitude,
igip SMOKERS, ask for, and see that you obtain, the
EUREKA OR 1.X.L.,
THEY WILL NOT BITE THE TONGUE.
Sold Retail Everywhere, In trade parcels at the Warehouse,
6 PARK ITBBBT, SYDNEY.


Advert isements.
ESTABLISHEID 1838.
S. G. HEWETT,
(Late GEORGE HEWETT of Pitt-street),
H(ftx iirnMi fiHnufarljtijtr
AND OILMAN,
103 LIVERPOOL STREET,
(Two Doors from George Street).
Wax Sdltar handles , all sizes ; on liand ; & made to order.
OILS OF ALL KINDS, CORKS, BRUSH WARE, &c.,
Oils for Sanctuary and all other purposes;
LIBERAL TERMS.
CHARLES T. BURFITT
UNDERTAKES THE SALE OE
&ouses, dottcU*es, kqd kll f(ekl 3^stcite
ON THE FOLLOWING TERMS :
No Charge is made for haying Properties photographed or for
Advertising.
The usual rate of Commission is charged when a sale is effected.
When Properties are offered by Auction, and not sold, Vendors are
charged with Expenses only.
♦
CHARLES T. BURFITT,
LICENSED AUCTIONEER, 359 GEORGE-ST.
NO SALE NO CHARGE.


Advertisements.
J. ROARTY,
3C/
t
640 (Late 612) GEORGE STREET,
BRICKFIELD HILL,
(NEXT DOOE BUT ONE TO EILEY BEOTHEES).
CHILDREN, single or in groups, to perfection by a new instantaneous process.
Boudoir, Promenade, Cabinet, and Carte-de-Visite, enamelled, embossed, and
coloured as required. Orders for club or presentation groups. Terms on Appli-
cation.
Reproductions and Enlargements made from my own or any other Photo., finished
in oil, crayon, water colours, mezzotints.
First-class work only delivered from my establishment, and at a considerable re-
duction on the former prices.
Carte-de-Visites from 7s. 6d. per dozen.
7s. 6d. PEE DOZEN.
JAMES PEARSON,
(Successor to W. ALEXANDER,)
' (9
*
UPHOLSTERER,
GLASGOW FURNITURE WAREHOUSE,
260 & 262 PITT STREET,
Corner of Park Street, opposite Temperance Hall.
FURNITURE FORWARDED TO ALL PARTS OF THE COUNTRY.


Advertisements.
P. M9CARTHY,
WHOLESALE, RETAIL, AND
101
Corner of Glenmore & South Head Roads,
PADDINGTON.
Best Wollongong Butter received three times a week.
MARY HUGHES,
(LATE MARY HOLLAND),
& Oldest Sill Softer iq sydr\ey
Sole Proprietress of all Stations in City and Suburbs known as
HOLLAND’S BILL POSTING STATIONS,
(Established 30 Years.)
The Finest Positions in the City and Suburbs are occupied
by Mrs. Hughes’ Hoardings.
MODERATE PRICES, AND EVERY ATTENTION GIVEN TO ORDERS,
(jdr’ Ccmntry Letters Promptly Attended to.
NOTE THE ADDRESS :
141 CLARENCE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE “ EXPEESS ” OFFICE, SYDNEY.


Advertisements.
WILLIAM BRADY,
TAILOR & CLOTHIER,
COYENY’S BUILDINGS,
SYDNEY
Ail Orders Punctually attended to.
Q> S
i(d
PRACTICAL TAILOR,
770 GEORGE ST. SOUTH,
SYDNEY.
Gentlemen’s Suits Made to Order.
fcr ALL HAND WOBK. FIT GUABANTEED.


Advertisements.
J. P. BARRINGTON,
if
ride so
OF SADDLES
545 GEORGE ST. SOUTH
SYDNEY.
A large assortment of Saddles and all other Equipments; also Double
and single Harness of every description.
Orders per Post Carefully Packed and Forwai ded.
KEARY BROTHERS,
Builders and Importers of American Buggies,
d
We make a spe*
oiality of these
Buggies.
They are the
best for country
use combining
ELEGANCE,
LIGHTNESS,
Durability and
Cheapness.
They are less
liable to soil
than painted
work.
200 of these
Buggies were
sold last year.
PRIOE£36
THE TARNISHED HAMPSHIRE TURNOUT SEAT BUGGY.
asa Wff STREET, SYONEI,


0^
Qy r>\>
0 o‘\ 0
\° N -
m
gSSSP»HWISBSgSaaBBgy
The only Cure for
CONSUMPTION,
INBICESTION,
DYSPEPSIA,
EXHAUSTION,
and all forms of
Wasting
Diseases,
&c., Ac.
Call
at our
Office,
156
PHILLIP ST.
and judge for
yourselves of
the marvellous
testimony to
KOUMISS in any of
the above Complaints.
Reference is kindly permitted to leading
physicians, also to the following :-The Lady
Superintendent Children’s Hospital; Rev.G.
Macarthur, King’s School, Parramatta ; Aider-
man R. Butcher, Mayor of Woollahra ; T. Hales,
Esq., Manager S. 0. Co.; Duncan M‘Kay. Esq.,
Whittingham ; Augustus Morris. Esq.; Rev. J. J.
Carroll, St. Augustine’s, Balmain, and many others.
IS" Pamphlets and testimonials post free.


Advertisements.
J. S. ABRAHAM’S
PILLS. §|p^
K/0
7*
#
<*%
ST
Vi
"LO
£/0
\0
S/A
tW
DANDELION.
By stimulating the action of the L,iver the heavy
drowsy sensation of headache disappears. Warranted
not to contain a single Particle Of Mercury, or any
other mineral substance. For those suffering from
Dyspepsia and a thousand tortures of a stomach out of
order. Positively remove all danger from the Ufver
and Kidneys* Now good digestion wait on Appetite
and Health both. The great Liver Remedy of the
Nineteenth Century, whether the cause he Cold, Excess
of Eating, Drinking, Fatigue of Body or Mind, or too
active or sedentary life. Called solely from Dame
Nature’s Garden. Remove all obstructions in the
minute vessels, or defects in the Natural Secretions.
Facts louder than words. Are the Chosen Remedy
of thousands.
PREPARED AT THE
LABORATORY,
434 GEORGE-ST., SYDNEY.


Advertisements.
ROBERT BUTCHER & CO.,
(Successors to W. LONG,)
\ ' : . r ; • „ r .'- '. .;y:..
IMPORTERS OF—
spirits nnh Jttrs,
R. BUTCHER & Co. have always a well selected stock of Wines
and Spirits in Bond and Duty Paid, at Lowest Market Rates.
534 GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE TOWN HALL.
R. J. DUNFORD,
GENTLEMEN'S OUTFITTER,
Skt kqd JddT~iirer 9
IMPORf ER OF &c.
The Tailoring Department replete with newest patterns
in English, Scotch, Continental and Colonial Tweeds,
&c., &c. None but the best Tailors and Hatters em-
ployed. All work done on the premises, and fit and style
guaranteed.
R. J. DUNFORD,
33 OXFORD STREET,


Advertisements.
STONIER & MONK,
Q *
FAMILY DRAPERY, Silks, Mantles, Costumes j >
Hosiery, Gloves, Haberdashery, Millinery and I
Underclothing.
iit all its ]ft|aiti|l^s.
BEST VALUE guaranteed with Civility and]
Attention.
L i
OPPOSITE TRAM WAITING ROOM ,
KING AND ELIZABETH STREETS,
SYDNEY.
WILLIAM SLOUGH.


Advertisements.
fWfrl JBni&utj JUthfij,
incorporated by Act of Parliament
Mraetora §
The Hon. W. A. BRODRIBB, M.L.A., Chairman
ROBT. HUDSON, Esq.
W. H. ELDRED, Esq., J.P.
F. T. HUMPHREY, Esq.
J. Y. MILLS, Esq., J.P.
Offices s
HAYMARKET AND GEOROE STREET NORTH.
%
THE FEDERAL BANK OF AUSTRALASIA, LIMITED.
This Society having large banking facilities, offers the following special advan-
tages to borrowers :
1. Money available at all times.
2. No entrance fees or premiums.
3. Loans granted daily without delay.
4. Repayments fortnightly, monthly, quarterly, or half-yearly.
5. Tables of repayment lowest current rates of interest.
I C. Loans may be redeemed at any time without notice upon payment of actual
balance due, no prospective interest or profit being charged.
Tke Savings* Institute.
In the Savings Institute any sum of money—from one shilling up to £3oo—will
' be received on deposit, and interest allowed on the daily balances at the rate of i
,per cent, per annum on all sums over £l.
Accounts will be balanced and interest compounded half-yearly.
Sums of money may be withdrawu at any time on the following terms :
On demand, any sum not exceeding £5O.
On three days’ notice, any sum not exceeding £lOO.
On 14 days’ notice, any sum above £lOO.
F. S. MACDERMOTT, Manager.


Advertisements.
NIELSON & THOMSON,
fill &K 0
shfe
LOCKSMITHS & PLYERS MAKERS,
275 SUSSEX STREET, SYDNEY,
(Near Bathurst Street).
Weighing Machines, Scales, Sewing Machines, &c., Repaired on the
Shortest Notice, and at Moderate Prices.
VISIT
R. BURGIS’
I f//
R.BURGIS 1|
tailor; II
II
\jjt
mm
mm
R ESUR*C,i
]Sfew tailoring l<^t'abli^l\inex\t
170 PITT STREET,
For Cheapness, Fit, and Workmanship.
Diagrams for Self-Measuring forwarded to any part of the Colony.


Advertisements.
List price, £7 10s,
Ten per Cent, for Cash.
SINGER’S
SEWING MACHINE AGENCY,
The Old-established Depot for Singer’s Genuine ” Machine, 1860.
G. J. "WEIjIiS (late STANrOED & c °)
No. 1 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY.
Cash price, £6 15s.
SINGER’S SALES for the year 1880 foot up to the enormous figures of 588,600
Sewing Machines, being three-fourths of all the Sewing Machines sold throughout
the WORLD. And have obtained 160 First Frizes, with all the Latest Im-
provements adapted to every class of Sewing Material.
The public have the privilege of obtaining any of these Machines on our System of
Hire, whereby the Hirer may become the purchaser at any time, without any addi-
tion to the List Price.
ss. Deposit (five shillings). 2s. 6d. PER WEEK.
If a purchase is effected, every payment will be credited in full. No interest or ex-
pense of any kind charged.
As a further inducement to those who are prepared to pay cash, 10 (ten) per cent,
will be allowed for cash off price list. Three Months’ Grace will be allowed to those
who are prepared to pay half-cash deposit.
All information, delivery, and attention, free at purchaser’s own home if required,
by competent operators.
Repairs of all makers of Machines done on the premises, at lowest rates, with
despatch.
Singer’s Genuine Needle, Is. per dozen. Refined Sperm Oil, 6d. bottle. Fittings
and attachments greatly reduced.
Singer’s Old-established Agency will be open every SATURDAY EVENING TO
GIVE INSTRUCTION FREE TO ALL, and receive WEEKLY PAYMENTS.
THE LADY HELP KNIFE CLEANER!
All who have used it, according to the few simple instructions issued with it, are
astonished at the Rapidity with which it does its work, and the Beautiful appear-
ance Cutlery quickly acquire by its use.
This handy little machine cleans simply by the friction of 300 revolving powder-
coated indiarubber rollers upon both sides of the knife held between them. Any
Servant Girl can clean easily four knives per minute.
It Needs no Practical Repairs. Retail Price, 30s. Each.
Important Notice, Just to Hand, the Celebrated
“PARAGON" KILTER & PLAITER, Combined,
FIVE SHILLINGS ONLY.
Call and see it work. No Needle to bother with. No moving bows to get lost, or
bend, or break. To avoid Deception, be sure to go to the old authorised Agency
For Singer’s Genuine Sewing Machines.
G. J. WELLS, ( LATE STANFORD & CO.)
No. 1 HUNTER STREET,
ONE DOOR OFF GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.


Advertisements.
NEW PREMISES.
MR. J. CALLAGHAN,
doi^fe<stioijef Cktefef.
8) favourably known to the General Public, Mayors and Aldermen of various muni-
cipalities and other public bodies, has REMOVKIJ to his Elegant and Splendid Shop,
No. 607 GEORGE STREET,
One door from the corner of Goulburn-street. where he will be pleased to see his old
customers, and to whom he'renders thanks for their liberal support, and. hopes for
a continuance. There is a Private Room and Lavatory for Ladies, a requisite much
needed in Sydney, and superintended by Mrs. CALLAGHAN.
School Feasts, Aldermen’s Dinners, Wedding Breakfasts,
Ministerial Banqnets, got up in first-class style.
A Visit is Requested.
J. H. NEUMAIN,
WHOLESALE AND EETAIL
rM A
659 i GEORGE STREET SOUTH,
OPPOSITE CAMPBELL STREET,
SYDNEY,
BEST HAVANNAH & MANILA CIGARS.
Tobaccos of the Choicest Description. Meerschaum, Wood, and Clay
Pipes. Scotch, Irish, and other Snuffs.
PIPES MOUNTED AND BEPALREH


Advertisements.
W. J. HICKEY,
576 GEORGE STREET,
Near Bathurst Street*
Has the Largest, Cheapest, and Best Assorted Stock of
mk
In Sydney to select from. His Children’s Boots are
not to be excelled.
Wholesale Buyers can save money by yisiting this Cheap
Boot Warehouse.
NOTE THE ADDRESS—S 76 GEORGE ST.
just opened: new stock:
CONSISTING OF
©OI<LS, ¥OY$, SK© tf&ffClY <soo©J3.
Every department in this Establishment offers unprecedented attractions to
those looking for
Birtliday and "Wedding Presents!
CHEAP, ELEGANT, AND USEFUL ARTICLES.
Writing Cases, Travelling Bags, Port-
manteaus
Desks, mahogany or rosewood
Dressing Cases lined with silk velvet
Do. with silver fittings
Gentlemen’s Travelling Dressing Cases
Pocket Books, Letter Cases
Key Boxes, Jewel Cases, Perfumery, &c.
Portemonaies, and Tables
Card Cases in Pearl, Silver, and Tor-
toiseshell '
Albums and Scrap Books
Inkstands, in bronze, ebony, walnut,
oak, &c.
Reticules, Carriage Bags
Envelope and Stationery Cases
Ladies’ Companions, Croquet, &e.
Velvet Frames—latest styles—Toys, Games, Puzzles, and Novelties, imported
expresslv for this season.
CELLULOID COEAL JEWELLEEY. IMITATION DIAMONDS.
E. C. CREE,
54® GEORGE ST.,
OPPOSITE TOWN HALL.


Advertisements,
E. WAY,
THE CHEAPEST HOUSE IN SYDNEY.
ST.,
Sydney.
E. WAY,
PITT ST.,
Sydney.
E. WAY,
PITT ST.,
Sydney.
E. WAY,
r<>_'
rlyY c jfu
PITT ST.,
Sydney,
lif II I If MB
mr-
Regular
Fortnightly
Shipments
from
the
London
Markets.
VERY
CHOICE
GOODS
NOW
LANDING.
THE CHEAPEST HOUSE IN SYDNEY.


Advertisements.
A CARD.—We have much pleasure in inform-
ing our Customers and the Public
of New South Wales that we have
opened at
No, 11 PITT STREET , CIRCULAR QUAY,
mRf?,
A Branch of our business as Importers of every
description of
000©$.
We devote our entire attention to the above, and have
Regular Shipments arriving each month, comprising
the Latest and Most Handsome English Designs
and Patterns, together with foreign Artistic Spe-
cialities in all kinds of Useful and Ornamental Goods.
John Dynon & Son,
IMPORTERS OF
@bss,
AND
EARTHENWARE.
SYDNEY. —ll Pitt-street,
Circular Quay.
MELBOURNE. —43 and 45
Lonsdale-st., and
40 Little Lonsdale
Street.
LONDON.—Gresham House,
Old Broad Street,
E.C.


Advertisements.
Visit REGIMES Stationery Depot,
105 PITT STREET, SYDNEY,
FOR
Account Books
Alluminium Pencil Cases
Birthday Cards, Birthday Text Books
Birthday Presents, Book Markers
Blank Illuminating Cards
Blotting Books, Boys’ Color Boxes
Condolence Cards
Congratulatory Cards
Card Cases, Confessional Albums
Compendiums of Games
Chess and Draughts
Children’s Toy Boys
Drawing Materials
Easel Albums
Fancy Note Papers, Fancy Pen Holders
Go Bang and Race Games
Grotesque Papeteries
Inkstands, various
Illuminated Albums, Invitation Note
Ivory Tablets and Paper Knives
Memorial Cards
Mathematical Instruments
Music Rolls and Folios
Photo Frames. Photo Albums
Paper Weights, Portemoniaes
Purses in great variety
Scrap Albums
Scraps (a splendid assortment)
Scented Satchets
Stationery Cabinets
Tourists’ Cases
Work Boxes, Writing Desks
Writing Albums, Wallets
Wedding Cards.
Winsor & Newton’s Color Boxes, and Artists’ Materials Paine’s Prize Photos of
Australian Scenery. Visiting Cards Engraved and Printed in best style.
BEGBIE, Pitt Street., 2 doors from Hunter-st.
XMAS AND NEW YEAR CARDS, 1882-3. —Alfred C. Begbie begs to inform
his numerous friends and the public generally that he has made arrangements for
the coming season, whereby his stock of the above will be such as to suit the most
fastidious, comprising Cards from all the best makers in the world.
JACKSON & CO.,
Hajjks,
FOOT OF DRUITT STREET,
Importers of Galvanized Corrugated and Plain Iron, Zinc, Sheet Lead, Lead Pipe,
Register Grates and Mantels, Galvanized and Black Iron Pipe and Fittings.
BUILDERS’ IRONMONGERY.
English Bangor and American Slates, Cement, &c., &c. Wholesale Manufacturers
of Galvanized Corrugated Iron Water Tanks, Baths, Guttering, Ridge Capping,
Down Piping, Tubs, Buckets, &c., &c.
And all kinds of Galvanized Ironware. Tinware, Colonial Ovens, sc.
Price Lists forwarded on application. All Orders promptly attended to.


Advertisements.
B. BYRNES,
FUEL ESTABLISHMENT,
CIRCULAR QUAY.
Best Newcastle Wallsend House Coal.
Every description of Coal for Blacksmiths, Kitchen use, or Steam Engines
Contracts taken for any quantity.
Every kind of Dry Firewood, in Billets, or Cut by Steam to any length required.
The Best Ironbark, Charcoal, Coke & Breeze.
N.B. —Every Bag of Coal is weighed, and contains 112 lbs. net.
All Orders by Post or otherwise Promptly Executed.
DESPOINTES BROS.,
>9,
dOlff}Y,
ELIZABETH STREET,
stint?
Designs for Churches, Schools, Villas, &c.


Advertisements.
D
N
A
T
8
E
F
A
S
MOST PLEASANT
WANTED TO BE KNOWN,
THAT
The Best Cleansing Disinfectant and Deodo-
riser for the prevention of Small Pox and
all other Contagious Diseases can be
found by using
PANTER & PARRY’S
—NEW—
Extract of Soap
Which not only contains the purest ingredients for the greatest
cleansing properties ever yet introduced to the public, but is
composed in its manufacture of one of the best disinfectants
(Made purely from Indigenous Plants)
known, and admitted in all fever districts throughout the
globe. Combined with which, it is free from all injurious
colour, has a pleasing smell, will not injure the most delicate
hands, is the greatest time-saving of labour, rendering any
article cleansed therewith of the purest whiteness in the most
marvellous short space of time. In fact,
QT No House should be without it,
As it cannot be surpassed for the Washing and Cleansing of
Clothes, Hands, Crockery, Glass,
Paint, Floors,
AND EVERY HOUSEHOLD PURPOSE.
Directions for which will be found on each packet, which may
be obtained from all Grocers and Storekeepers throughout the
Colony, and at the
Works, 700 GEORGE ST.,
SYDNEY,
IN THE WORLD.
D
I
S
I
N
E
E
C
T
A
N
T


FUNERALS. FUNERALS.
HART & FERGUSON,
UNDERTAKERS
To the Inhabitants of Sydney and Suburban dis-
tricts, having started business on an extensive
scale at
838 GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE RAILWAY STATION,
195 DEVONSHIRE ST., SURRY HILLS,
AT
Liverpool Road, Croydon, Avenue,
And are prepared to execute Funerals in a most
respectful manner and Cheaper than any other
house in the trade.
Funerals on the Time Payment System
from £1 upwards.
& & will i\ot extort Oi\ tl\e Pufelid
Every Description of Catholic Emblems.


Years.
Per Week.
Per Month.
Per Year.
Principal
repaid.
Total interest
charged.
s.
d.
JL
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
&
£
s.
d.
B
14
11
3
4
8
38
16
0
100
16
8
0
4
11
7
2
10
4
30
4
0
100
20
16
0
5
9
8
2
1
9
25
1
0
100
25
5
0
6
8
4
I
16
1
21
13
0
100
29
18
0
7
7
4
1
12
0
19
4
0
100
34
8
0
8
6
8
1
9
0
17
8
0
100
39
4
0
9
6
2
l
6
8
16
0
0
100
44
0
0
10
5
8
1
4
8
14
16
0
100
48
0
0
11
5
4
1
3
4
14
0
0
100
54
0
0
12
5
1
1
2
l
13
5
0
100
59
0
0
13
4
10
1
1
1
12
13
0
100
64
9
0
14
4
8
1
0
3
12
2
6
100
69
15
0
15
4
6
0
19
6
11
14
0
100
75
0
0
St. Josph's Investment & Building Society.
ESTABLISHED A.D.1868.
REGISTERED UNDER THE ACTS OF PARLIAMENT OF N.S.W.
Office:—No. 85 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
The Very Rev. Dean Dwyer
Trustees:
P. R. Larkin, Esq.
Michael Tierney, Esq.
Board of Directors:
Chairman —Patrick Ryan Larkin, Esq.
The Very Rev. Dean Dwyer
Michael Tierney, Esq.
Alderman R. Butcher, Esq.
William Hughes, Esq., J.P.
Richard McAuley, Esq.
John Purcell, Esq.
Manager :—Mr. Edward Joseph Rubie
-Secretary Mr. James Joseph Rubie.
Solicitors Messrs. Ellis & Makinson
Bank :—Australian Joint Stock Bank.
TO BORROWERS.
Further Reduction in Scale of Payments.
NO BALLOTTING. NO PREMUIMS.
BORROWERS Participate in the PROFITS.
Money Lent on Mortgage of Good Freehold Securities.
BORROWERS can obtain advance if the security is approved of. Application for
f.oans may be made at any time. The Society is prepared to advance from two-
thirds to three-fourths, according to the value of the security.
TABLE showing the whole amount charged, Principal and Interest,
for each £lOO borrowed.
A person borrowing £2OO at 5 per cent, per annum in the ordinary way, would
in ten years pay £3OO, whereas he would only pay this Society £296, showing a gain
in favour of borrowing from the Society.
Any person, on looking at the above Table of Re-payments, can easily decide
how it will take him to become the owner of a house, &c., if he can afford to
pay the weekly or monthly instalments for any of the above periods.
For the convenience of working men, domestic servants, &c., deposits can be
made at the Society’s office, 85 Elizabeth-street. £ST OFFICE HOURS from 10 to
1 o’clock p.m. on Monday. Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday in each week.
JAMES JOSEPH RUBIE
Secretary.


Advertisements.
ELVYKO/S. ELVY & CO.’S
g^i^sy,
OB6AK,
HARMONIUM & MUSIC WAREHOUSE.
329 GEORGE STREET.
The Highest Class Pianofortes
Prices run from £27.
mm
vrxc*
srg>H£Y.
The Grandest Toned Organs
For Churches or Private Use.
ouk nmAunmr systom,
Any instrument can be placed under LIBERAL TERMS for
TIME AND PAYMENT.
THE NEWEST MUSIC.
Masses, Church Music, Hymns, &c.


Advertisements.
JACKSON & MORTON,
TBii<ofs &
Are determined not to be behind any other house in the Trade, either
in Material, Make, Finish, or Price, and haying on hand
A Large Assortment of Seasonable Goods
Bought under English Manufacturer’s Prices, are offering then -
celebrated
SlfcF-ADJtS'rwe fIOfiBIS
At the' low price of 16s. 6d. and upwards.
SUITS TO ORDER FROM 755.
NOTE THE ADDEESS
JACKSON AND MORTON, 102 KING STREET.
'iittu
® _ \\ «
r jl
T
26 JAMISON STREET.
J. G. O’CONNOR,
PRINTERS’ BROKER, &c.
«. .
Newspaper and Jobbing Offices completely fitted out with new or second-hand
Type, Presses, Machines, &c., &c.
EXCURSION and CONCERT CARDS printed at an hour’*
notice, from 10s per thousand.


Advertisement s,
Cheap Groceries, Cheap Groceries.
TO MEET THE TIMES, GEEAT SEDUCTION IN THE PEICE
OF GEOCEEIES.
Housekeepers buy your Groceries at
E. DALY’S
ggg GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
Hotel-keepers buy your Groceries at Edward Daly’s.
Country Eesidents buy your Groceries at Edward Daly’s.
By purchasing at the above address, you will realize a great saving.
The following is a list of the prices :
Best Kaisou Breakfast Congou, only Is. 6d. per lb.
Good Breakfast Congou, Is. 3d. per lb.
Bett Plantati n Coffee, Is. per lb.
Splendid White Crystal Sugar, 4d. per lb.
Good Yellow ditto, per lb.
Soap, Candles, Pickles, Vinegar, and every other article in the trade
at greatly reduced prices.
200 Half-chests splendid Congou Tea at £2 15s. per Half-chest.
Orders from the Country carefully packed and forwarded immediately
on receipt of P. 0. Order.
BLOMFIELD & CO.,
LIME, SLATE,
iimpl s£>
15 REGENT STREET,
AND
139 BATHURST ST., SYDNEY.
AGENTS FOR
O'
Wilson, Corben & Co., Castlemaine Paving Company.
Malmsbury & Footscray Steam Stone Cutting Company.
Estimates given for every Description of Slate or Bluestoue , Dressed, or in
the Rough.


Advertisements.
JAMES DONAHOE,
LA
U.
E :
233 WILLIAM STREET,
Importer of Millinery, Costumes, Fancy Dresses,
Hosiery, Gloves, Laces, Parasols, Ribbons, &c.
EOBXNSOFS
WILLIAM STREET
-Sr*'
JifP
AN Best Brands of ALE and PORTER Is. per
Bottle.
Best Brands of WHISKY 4s. per Bottle.
3


Advertisements.
JAMES CARROLL,
msmm
SYDNEY.
For Free Selectors, Crown Lessees, Miners and otters. All difficulties
with the Lands’ and Mines’ Departments, arising out of conflicting
claims, &c., satisfactorily adjusted.
TERMS MODERATE
HATS. HATS. HATS.
W. COCHRAN,
Importer and Manufacturer of every description of
Pi
CLERICAL HATS always in Stock and made to order. Latest styles in Hats
monthly per steamer from London and Paris.
W. COCHRAN,
68 Market Street, Sydney.


Advertisements.
PATRICK BROWN,
PRINT SELLER,
rant*
m
AT
A Choice Collection of Chromo-Lithographs,
Proof Engravings, Letter after Proof Engravings,
Lithographs and Oleographs always on hand
for sale.
ESTIMATES GIVEN
For every description of New and Re-gilt Work.
Best Material and Workmanship guaranteed. Paintings
skilfully Cleaned, Lined and Restored. Water Colour
Drawings effectively mounted. Engravings cleaned ;
Mildew Spots and Water Stains removed.
Agent for the London and Glasgow ART
UNIONS,
iVnd in correspondence with Art Unions in Paris & Rome
SYDNEY,
(Close to the Tramway).


Advertisements,
AWARDS FOR
The most
Mechanical
b7ui
SuPEBIOf£
Dentistry.
First Special Prize Medal in New South Wales, 1878, or the prize
rAll EXCELLENCE.
MR. J. J. LACHAUME,
[Pronounced LASH-OM,]
54 WYNYARD SQUARE,
Painless Extraction Skillfully
Performed.
1
4 i i iA.
*• t ❖
JL A_ A
•? J A*' *
4 Pi. GORMAN,
(Late of Telegraph Hotel, Inverell,}
n
CORNER OS'
03“ Country Visitors will find excellent accommodation and every
convenience.
Trams to Railway and all places stop at tlie door*


Advertisements.
M. J. LAMBERT & Co.
Ijjjttt ami Spirit !'lml|anf
a
23 JAMISON STREET
Sydney.
Finest Old Irish and Scotch Whiskies.
Hennessy’s and MartelVs Fine Old Brandies. Lowndes' Bum ( in bottle
or bulk'). Superior Ales and Stouts, brewed jor and bottled
by us at Bs. per dozen.
Agents for Munro’s Prize Bebeah Wines, and Schwepp’s Renowned Mineral W aters
Lager Beer supplied in Keg or Bottle.
Orders delivered daily in town and suburbs.
WILLIAM P. WELCH
Temettam mm&l Gauge Wire
!» f>
V""' t *
Has REMOVED to
315 Pitt-street, Sydney ;
Near Temperance Hall.
Every description of Window (Blinds made to order (or
repaired) in first style, and at Lowest Charges.


Advertisement s.
E. McCARTY & CO.,
** m
2101 PITT STIIEET.
>■)
HORSE REPOSITORY-161 Castlereagh St.
Every description of Vehicles, New and Second-hand,
namely, Sociables, Spring Carts, Pagnel Carts, Double
Seated Buggies, Single Seated Buggies, Sociable Carts,
Express Waggons (heavy and light); also, Single and
Double Harness, Euglish, American and Colonial make;
also Saddles and Bridles.
Horses , heavy and light , with trials. Buggies , Horses
and Harness on hire.
G. HURLEY & CO.,
AUCTIONEERS,
House, Land, Financial and Insurance
353 GEORGE STREET,
NEAR BARRACK STREET,


Advertisements.
JOHN W. FLANAGAN,
COMMISSION AGENT,
flay, Corn, & 0 ei)eral Produde Merdljkqt.
General Produce Store 5
701 GEORGE STREET SOUTH,
105 ENGINE ST. & 83 ULTIMO ST.,
lIA.YM AHKET, SYDNEY,
Account Sales Promptly Pondered. Highest Market Pates Guaranteed.
Iftttl <&£, Park Hftjr|ajtls
MILLS =“
m&m nr
f
SYDNEY
Constant supply of Colonial and Tasmanian Ground Bark
on hand.


Advertisements.
508 01457420 1
iphllp nml ijhpptof.
JOHN RUSSELL,
182 PITT STREET,
."Next to Civil Service Co-operative Store
HAS ON VIEW A WELLL-ASSOBTED STOCK OE
Brussels and Tapestry
ini'll
l
Linoleums, Floor Cloths,
Bedsteads, Bedding,
&C,, &C. ?
Of the BEST QUALITY and from the most
Reliable Makers.
Carpet© re-laid &e, at moderate cliarges


No one can or does SELL CHEAPER than
HORDERN’S.
HORDERN'S
IN
PITT STREET.
We have a large quantity of ready CASH invested in our busi-
ness, and this being judiciously used by purchasing in the cheap-
est European Markets enables us to sell at the absurdly low
prices you see marked up in our windows in Pitt-street.
Anything you like here from a Man’s Suit of
Clothes, at a Pound, to a Duck of a Bonnet
to get married in.
Country Orders, of course, well attended to.
J. L. HORDERN & Co.,
211 PITT STREET,


GEORGE F. MURPHY,
regent house,
369 GEORGE ST., Railway Bridge.
1
m
C 3
a
M
CENTRAL OIL,
COLOUR and PAPER-
HANGING AND PLATE
GLASS WARE-
HOUSE.
The most convenient stores
for town and country cus-
tomers, at the junction of the
principal tramways. Trams
pass the door every ten
minutes.
IMPORTER OF
Glass (all sizes cut to order)
Plate, Sheet, Stained, Orna-
mental, Cathedral, Ham-
mered (Flat and Rolled)
White and Red Lead
Turpentine, Raw and Boiled
Oil, Neatsfoot Oil, Black
Fish Oil, Castor Oil, Kero-
sene Oil, Varnishes
Colours for House and Coach
Painters, Plasterers, &c.
Brushware
Paperhangers’ Canvas
Gold and Silver Leaf
Paperhangings
Wood-Preserving Oil
Tar, Resin
Cement, &c., &c.
MIXED - PAINTS
Ready for use, any shade re-
quired. All Orders Promptly
Executed by Rail, Steamer,
City or Suburbs.
Pt SHOP FRONTS AND SASHES GLAZED.
AXLE GREASE for Btiggie3, Carts, Lorries, &c. SULPHUR for Yinegrowers and
Farmers. GLASS for Gardeners, &c.
WAREHOUSE-369 GEORGE STREET,
Side Entrance, Stores and Workshop, Harris-sU


FIRST FIELD MASS.
HELD IN ST. MARY’S.
SQUAD FIRES VOLLEYS.
S.M.H. - 3 aus. 1925.
Worshippers Overcome.
St. Mary’s Cathedral was crowded to the
doors yesterday morning at the solemn
Memorial Field Mass for the allied sailors
and soldiers who had fallen in the war. The
Mass was celebrated by the administrator of
the cathedral, Very Rev. Father Edmund
Bond, assisted by Military Chaplain Father
C, Murphy as deacon, Naval Chaplain Adrian
Martin as sub-deacon, and Captain-chaplain
E. O Donnell, M.C., master of ceremonies. In
the sanctuary was the Right Rev. Dr. Gerard
Vesters, Bishop of Rabaul. About 50 students
from St. Fatrick’s College, Manly, sang
Perosi’s Mass under the baton of Father
O’Flynn.
A firing squad of 10 marines from the battle-
ship West Virginia, in charge of Ensign S. T.
McAdam, occupied the front seats outside the
sanctuary, and stood at attention. The squad
presented arms at the beginning of the Mass,
at the Gospel, and again at the Agnus Dei.
As is the custom in the Military Field
Masses, the squad fired three volleys at the
elevation. Each time the sacred Host was
elevated a volley from 10 rifles was fired-
The incident created a sensation. It was the
first time in the history of St. Mary’s Cathe-
dral that the ceremony had been carried out.
It is, however, quite a common ceremony in
Europe and America. Although Chaplain-
captain Brodmann announced before the Mass
that the squad would fire a volley, the actual
discharge of firearms, which sounded in the
cathedral like three terrific explosions,
startled many of the congregation, several of
whom fainted. A war nurse, subject to shell-
shock, was among those who fainted, and as
she had not regained consciousness nearly an
hour afterwards she was taken to hospital in
a private motor car.
While the squad was firing an old lady,
who knelt two yards away, evidently overcome
by excitement, vigorously hand-clapped each
time a volley wag fired. The action created
1 a sensation among the worshippers, as the
elevation of the Host is the most solemn
part of the Mass. Evidently becoming hysteri-
cal, thp unfortunate lady danced in the vicinity
of the altar rails while the bugler from the
West Virginia was sounding the “Last Post.”
She desisted at the urgent request of Chap-
lain-captain Brodmann, and then knelt at the
altar rails.
At the end of the Mass the marine bugler
from the battleship West Virginia ascended
the sanctuary steps and sounded the “Last
Post.”
It was originally intended to hold the Mass
in the Domain, but the plan was abandoned
| owing to the possibility of rain.
Captain-chaplain Edmund Brodmann, of the
visiting United States Fleet, who preached,
said that almost two decades ago the people
of Australia flung open the portals of their
harbour and their hearts to welcome the fleet
of the United States. The lavish hospi-
tality on that occasion had since become a
household word in the United States’ navy.
The bond of friendship had become dearer in
the intervening years because it had been
sealed with the blood of our comrades on the
battlefields of Europe. As their blood com-
mingled then in the cause of humanity, so
to-day did the warm blood of Australian and
American friendship commingle to the per-
petuation of world peace, which our fallen
had bought and sanctified with their blood.
The objects of the visit of the fleet, con-
cluded Chaplain-captain Brodmann, were,
firstly, to thank Australia for its comrade-
ship, which preserved liberty to the world.
Secondly, to commingle America’s tears with
those of Australia in the price paid for that
sacred treasure —the blood of Australia’s
valiant sons; and lastly to cement a friend-
ship which they trusted would usher In the
golden age of a common brotherhood of man
based upon justice amongst the nations of the
earth.
