

ADDRESS
ON
OPENING.
ST. MARY’S PUBLIC SCHOOL
SOUTH CREEK.
BY
SIR ALFRED STEPHEN, K.C.M.G. & C.B.
A Member of the Council of Education.
SYDNEY:
FEINTED BY ROBERT BONE, “PHOENIX” OFFICE,
140 Pitt Street.
1 878.




At the suggestion of the Local Board, who thought that its publication in a
readable form, circulated there and in the neighbouring districts, would be of
service by stirring up parents and children in the important matter of school
attendance, the Address delivered by me on the 15th instant at the Opening
of St. Mary’s Public School is here presented. hope that it may in some
degree be useful, not merely in persuading parents to send their children to
school regularly, and for a sufficient number of years, but in leading them to be
more tolerant and considerate towards the Teachers —whose position is gener-
ally at present so little appreciated. It would be well if all Local Boards took
the same interest in the schools under their cafe, as that of St. Mary’s; and
some suggestions offered by me on this subject, although probably sufficiently
obvious, may not be wholly without value. The duties of School Boards
throughout the country, I regret to say, are as aru nnpardonably neglected.
On the much discussed question of compulsion , in ■Bmexion with the more
grateful efforts at persuasion, adopted by zealous members of Boards at home,
some information is afforded by reference to the latest British legislation,
and to the opinions of a thoroughly competent recent writer, which may be
new to many, and should be extensively known. f
There are portions of my address which could interest myself, or the
friends in whose presence it was delivered ; but I have thought it right, for
certain reasons, to excise or alter no portion. It may be right to add, in
reference to my the Rev. Dr. Barry s effusion, (or effusions, for his
charge of the 25th September last was repeated on the 6th October,) that the
impropriety complained of was obviously not his of errors, if any,
in the statistics so much harped on by him, but his venturing to impute to
the Council in their compilation wilfulness and intentional falsehood. To my
mind it is of little importance, whether the number of uninstructed children
be a few hundred more or less. It is enough to know, that there are very
many ; and that all, if it be possible, ought to receive instruction. The
argument in favor of or against compulsion is not affected, or is but infini-
tesimally so, by this respecting statistics —whether of Sydney or the Colony.
ALFRED STEPHEN.
Sydney:
22nd March 1878.


ADDRESS.
Ladies and Gentlemen, —My visit here to-day, in answer to
the invitation with which I have been honoured, reminds me as
it may remind others now present —of half-forgotten bygone
days; of sundry past travelling troubles then experienced, and
of the change? 3 Vought about, in these as in more important
things, by tim e - In March, 1842, I first passed through this
township, on m y way 1° Bathurst. It was near the end of a
long first dv s out of four 5 bein S turn of dut F to
the Circuit Court there. The pop” 1 ' i: " T '„was small, and of
number I that £* tof
several occasions since that date, unto of
to Penrith, at intervals of eighteen mon is,
again taken me through St. Mary's. I am, th “ ef ° r f'
to the locality : and it is pleasant to me to believe that there a
here some-although only of the olden time-by whom 1 am stiU
remembered. Thirty-six years ago, unless I muc mis a <-• J
had no school, or none except on This d for
daily Public School here for elementary education calculated fo
the reception of one hundred and ninety children; and the
official returns show a total enrolment of two an
thirteen The means of transit (since I have spoken of them),
Z observe have improved in an eqnal degree. It may amuse
those of the present generation to be told, that so recently as
March 1858, your Chief Justice, on his circuit trip, there having
been nearly three weeks of heavy rain, was seven hours going
from Penrith to the Blue Mountain ton-passing several loaded
dZ stuck in the mud ; and that, in August, 1854, he was only
aZ to reach Bathurst on the fifth morning. You have now
tolerably good roads ; and, at a short distance from youi doors,


the Western railway passes—by which the journey from the
metropolis thither is accomplished, over hills long thought inac-
cessible, in eight hours.
I have said that the school now completed, to inaugurate
which we are met together, will accommodate one hundred and
ninety children; but I find the average daily attendance at the
old building, during the past year, to have been one hundred and
twenty only. It was, to say the truth, quite as many as that
building could conveniently receive; and indeed rather more. I
trust that, in the present new and commodious structure, the
average attendance may not be less during the present year than
one hundred and fifty. I heartily congratulate the parents and
their children, and the inhabitants generally, on their improved
prospects in school matters. A great <W ha* D 'een written of
late about increased space in our schoolrooms. M feel justified
in saying that there have been most careful inqi jiry and con-
sideration on this question; and that the space i in the
f i a t.c years ’ V the Council, < tamly m ting
building, win De round ample equally cm c-tnf as for health.
No subject, except that of a well-arranged drainage, can be more
important in reference to health, than this of adequate ventila-
tion. But it seems to be forgotten by those who insist on
largely extended breathing space, that not only are the children’s
hours of attendance in these schools few, but that once (and
more generally twice) in each day during those hours the rooms
are vacated, for a time or times sufficiently long for the substitu-
tion of fresh, for the partially vitiated air. And I cannot avoid
the impression, when the Council of Education is informed l —
for the most part—of the health of some children
in a particular school being affected, that the real source of the
mischief would be found in the impure atmosphere and surround-
ings of the place in which they sleep. In one of these anony-
mous representations, published in a newspaper, and blaming, of
course, the unfortunate Council, there was the most scandalous
untruth. Instead of the children being “ slowly poisoned ”by
an alleged allowance of 25 feet only, those in average attendance
actually had above 150 feet. In England, I understard the
number of cubic feet allowed for each child to be 80. The


Council’s ordinary allowance is 100. In the case of St. Mai’y’s
new school, as I am assured, that space is much exceeded. I
have yet to mention the cost of the building. It has been a few
shillings over £1560.
There are a few points, connected with duties devolving on the
Council, on School Boards, and on the parents of children, for
whose more immediate benefit, but indirectly and ultimately for
the well being of the community at large, the Public School
system has been established, on which I shall be glad with your
permission to add some words. They will not have the attraction
of novelty, for in substance all have been said before, by myself,
as well as by others ; yet they are of sufficient value to bear
repetition. On parents I would urge the paramount duty,
because to them and their children, all who are of the educatable
age, it is a matter of vital importance, first, of making them
attend school regularly, and secondly, of keeping them at school
a sufficient number of years to enable them to appreciate and to
realise the value of education. Instruction in a school is to a
large extent useless, if received fitfully.; at intervals, just as it
suits the interests of the parents or perhaps the caprice of the
child. The broken thread cannot be picked up, so as to complete
the work of each boy or girl who may have been absent. "VVe
concede fully that the child’s assistance at home is at times
indispensable to the parent. Par be it from me to underestimate
the piety or the value of the child’s services on such occasions.
But may we not without offence ask parents, appealing to their
candour for the reply, whether in truth the absolute want has in
all these cases of removal existed ? And do they not on reflec-
tion perceive, that the removal is in any event, even where most
necessary, a benefit obtained by them at the expense of the
individual removed —irretrievable, because the time lost cannot
be regained? As to the second head of entreaty, Ido not desire
to enlarge. Much must depend here, not only on the parent’s
means, but on the child’s capacity for more than the merest
rudiments of knowledge, and on the expediency of at an early
period his entering, for his own sake, on the sterner work of life.
All men are not destined or fit for any, more intellectual in
character than that of manual labour. All women cannot be


governesses, or players on the piano, or school teachers, or even
mantua-inakers and milliners. Yet, let it be considered that, in
proportion as within reasonable limits you give food in early life
to the mind, or instil the love of reading, so do you elevate the
taste and refine the character ; substituting wholesome recreation
or its pursuit, for the coarse habits and gross enjoyments of the
illiterate and uninformed. Knowledge, if not scientific, yet of
the most valuable kind to its possessor in after life, whatever his
position, may be obtained in the Public School, if the individual
remains there a sufficient time to acquire it. All that is meant
by the exhortation on that head, which I have taken the liberty
of offering for your acceptance, is this—that our children are
generally taken from school far too soon, and that so far as
circumstances fairly viewed will allow, they should be made to
remain much longer. No one at least should be removed, until
he shall have acquired the power of reading intelligently and
with ease, and of writing grammatically and with words rightly
spelled. Books may then be a pleasure to him, and self-improve-
ment by their aid be no task. But all this, ladies and
is so trite and commonplace, that, were the topics less important,
or such as are equally familiar to all who hear me, I should feel
bound to apologise for their introduction.
There is still one other topic, though of less moment, to which
I would invite attention. The position of a school teacher, if a
highly responsible one, is not the less of a peculiarly trying and
harassing character. His work is monotonous and wearying in
a high degree. He has to deal with children of various disposi-
tions and capacities. If some are bright and docile, others are
dull and unmanageable, wayward, stubborn, and disobedient.
Some even use bad language, are insufferably insolent, or on
occasion they tell lies. We all know that there are such children.
Now the teacher’s prospects of promotion depend greatly on (what
is called) results. If the children do not reasonably advance in
learning, or are disorderly, he suffers. You may imagine, in
such a state of things, what are his anxieties. In the midst
of these, some child is found or believed by him to have been
guilty of a grievous fault; one, perhaps, if not repressed and the
culprit made an example of, fatal to all hope of discipline. So


he severely punishes the supposed offender. It is not impossible
that in one such case he may have been mistaken. The proba-
bility is, that he was wholly in the right. But there are persons
who never will, at a schoolmaster’s instance, believe their chil-
dren in the wrong ; and the teacher is fortunate if he escapes a
police-office prosecution. What I ask of parents is, that they
will not in such cases be too ready to cast blame on the pains-
taking, well-meaning teacher ; and I ask of School Boards, that
as far as may be they will support him. Iby no means advocate
corporal punishments. They should rarely be resorted to, and
never be inflicted without due reflection, or in anger. They should,
moreover, be strictly proportioned to the offence. But it is idle
to suppose, that they can with children be altogether abolished.
We know how ready parents themselves are to beat or flog a
child, and for no great fault. Such inflictions, however, like the
brutal assaults of which we hear on wives, and which are so
seldom adequately punished, degrade and harden alike the actor
and the victim. I venture to say, that one proved case of ill-
treatment of a child by its teacher will, so long as the Council
exists, subject him to severe animadversion, and probably to
removal from his school, if not dismissal.
It is most gratifying to know, that the members of your St.
Mary’s School Board have always taken a marked interest in the
school. I would respectfully assure them that much of the
success of these Public Schools depends on the extent of that
interest, and the way in which it is manifested. It is not meant
that the teacher is to be habitually interfered with, or his con-
duct in or out of school too minutely pried into and criticised.
But kindly yet firm supervision can offend no honest teacher;
while it may give confidence to parents, and not infrequently
check or prevent irregularities, which, if continued, would be
fatal to the interests of both—and therefore to the wellbeing of
the children and the character of the school. If a parent com-
plains of the teacher, an investigation not necessarily hostile
may smooth away difficulties and misunderstandings, and set
matters right. No unusual complaint by a parent is, that his
child “ does not get on ” —a fault which invariably is imputed to
the master. Now, it may not be much more easy (and un


doubtedly it will not be more pleasant) for the School Board, or
some friendly member, to suggest to a fond mother, or impatient
father, the true cause; namely, incapacity or persistent inatten-
tion in the child. But a little management, I think, even in
cases of this kind, might go a great way in preventing a breach,
and the consequent unwise removal to which parents on such
occasions hastily resort, to the injury alike of all parties and of
the school.
I do not know whether, in this district, there are many parents
backward or indifferent about the instruction of their children ;
and therefore whether, in case of compulsory attendance at
school being established by law, the unpleasant duty w r ould be
likely often to arise of enforcement. Should such a law be
passed, I may hope to be of some service, although at the expense
of trespassing perhaps too much on your time, by showing the
exertions which are made by members of School Boards in
England, and to a large extent successfully made, to induce
parents to send their children voluntarily —the gentlemen and
ladies thus engaged pointing out the advantages of education,
the duty of parents to secure them as a privilege, yet at the same
time stating the penal consequences of neglect. The same
extent of good, I trust, will, in the event contemplated, be by
the same means achieved in New South Wales. Whatever the
cause, there can be no doubt that the attendance of children in
England has largely increased, since the introduction of the
compulsory system. Nor do I think it will be doubted that
there are here as well as there, great numbers of parents, more
conspicuously in the towns, to whom the welfare of their off-
spring is matter of indifference, who care for nothing but their
own gross and drunken indulgence, and whose children, there-
fore, are untended, ignorant of everything that is good, wanderers,
tenants of the gutter, mischievous, idle, at present the pests, and
hereafter to become the terror of society. Even where these
characteristics are absent, the utter apathy and want of intelli-
gence on the part of parents as to the benefits of education,
would seem to indicate the expediency of some legislative
remedy. The Act of the Imperial Parliament, therefore, passed
in August, 187 G, in the preamble, expresses its intention to be


“ to secure the fulfilment of parental responsibility ” in respect
of the education of children; and in section 4, it emphatically
declares it to be “ the duty of every parent to cause his child to
receive efficient elementary instruction in reading, writing, and
arithmetic.” Various stringent provisions follow, for enforcing
fhe performance of this duty. If a parent, having been warned,
and showing no allowable excuse, does not satisfy the tribunal
before which he is brought that he has used all reasonable eftorts
to discharge it, he may be fined: or the child, in certain cases,
may be sent to an industrial school, and the parent be made to
pay for its custody there. Moreover, it is made illegal to employ
any child who has not received a certain degree of elementary
instruction.
Well, now as to the way in which the School Boards seek to
persuade, and failing persuasion to coerce parents, to perform
their obvious duty. It should be explained, that compulsion
had a few years previously, that is to say in 1870, been partially
introduced, by an option being given to the Boards to establish
regulations for enforcing attendance. Some Boards, therefore,
adopted the principle, and acted on it, while others ignored or
rejected it. I understand the statement which follows, taken by
me from an article in “ Macmillan’s Magazine ” for November
last, to refer to operations under the first as well as under the
later statute. In Liverpool, the Board, or certain members of
it, hold meetings three times a week, to see and converse with
defaulting parents. In Glasgow (the compulsory system having
been introduced into Scotland in 1872), frequent appeals are
made to the parents; and reports of all convictions under the
law are widely circulated by way of warning. Everything is
done to avoid prosecuting. The Board or its officers, it is said,
will occasionally occupy a whole day in seeing and reasoning
with parents. In London and some other large towns, it would
seem that a similar course is resorted to. In all, preliminary
notices (two successively in each case) are sent to defaulters
before prosecution ; which seems generally to be met by the
most wretched excuses and lies. It is, on the whole, the conclu-
sion of the writer of the article, that persuasion and remon-
strance —the power of compulsion being-in the background—


will, with energy and devotion of time on the part of School
Boards, be found efficacious ; hut that, without the existence
of that power, no reasoning will influence the class for which
alone coercion is designed.
Ladies and gentlemen, I have not yet exhausted the topics on
which I should have wished to speak, but I feel that your for-
bearance and patience must be exhausted. I shall, therefore,
not much longer detain you. A few words will, however, he
forgiven me, in reference to matters affecting myself personally.
I allude to the complaints against the Council of Education
which you will have seen from time to time made, of its
alleged various shortcomings. It is a great consolation to me to
believe, that at no distant period that body —which, nevertheless,
has done good service to the State —will cease to exist. Nothing
but a desire still to be useful induced me to accept a seat at the
Board, and nothing but a sense of duty, considering its present
moribund state, tempts me to remain on it. Our weakness will
only the more vividly illustrate the vigour and perfection of the
body, whatever it may be, by which we shall be succeeded. Tet
I cannot allow a gratuitous slander to pass unnoticed. You will
have gathered from what precedes that I am no opponent of the
compulsory attendance system, although fully alive to its diffi-
culties, and aware of the arguments which have to be met in
opposition to it. Nor, in point of fact, have I reason to suppose
that any other member of our Council, if only the measure have
certain limitations, is opposed to compulsory attendance. An
irrepressible newspaper controversialist, nevertheless, has not
thought it unbecoming to charge the Council of Education, un-
reservedly, with putting forth wilfully untrue returns of the
number of children under instruction, as compared with those
receiving none —which untruth, if intentiopal, could only have
been with the view, and for the purpose, of defeating that same
measure; to the establishment of which the reverend writer is
devoted. It would be an insult to my colleagues to answer such
a charge on their behalf: I do not stoop to answer it for myself.
I notice it, as at least one proof that ours has not altogether
been a bed of roses: and for other slanders, less serious,
they may pass unchallenged. Delays in building schools,


delays in procuring sites, delays in sending teachers, are
the most prominent among the complaints against us; the
greater number of the complainants being anonymous.
These, if answered at all, could only be answered in detail.
Happily, as I have already intimated, a new order of things is
soon to arise. In the meantime, I would in no unfriendly spirit
ask our critics in the first place to remember that it is not every
case, however important to the persons interested, which can —
without injuriously delaying perhaps a hundred others—be
immediately attended to. Of the amount of work in the depart-
ment, the public has probably no conception. There were above
56,000 letters dispatched from the office last year. More than
2500 matters were discussed and decided by the Council. In
the second place I would beg the gentlemen to accept my
assurance, that in every case of which I have knowledge (and I
have been no inattentive observer) strenuous efforts have been
made to avoid delay- At this moment there are above one
hundred applications for grants of sites for schools pending. In
eighty cases we should be prepared to build, had we land on
which to commence building. But Crown land has to be
measured; purchased or given land has to be conveyed, and
titles must be investigated. Contests as to the suitability of
sites, or the comparative eligibility of others, have to be inquired
into and settled. After all, a good deal has been done and is
being done. We have in the past year opened above a hundred
new schools. We have above one hundred and ninety buildings
at present in the course of erection, or under repair. All things
considered, therefore, I shall —come what will —have the testi-
mony of my conscience that the work entrusted to us has not
been neglected. I have, for my own part, done my best.
Ladies and gentlemen, —You will be glad to hear that my
address is concluded. I thank you for the patience with which
you have endured it. And I now declare the Public School of
St. Mary’s to be inaugurated and open. Long may it flourish!


