

p r7a
| i * / JtJ $
CITY
CHIMES
A MAGAZINE OF THE CITY CHURCHES
November, 1934
T wopence


THE INHABITANTS OF LONDON
IN 1638
Edited from Manuscript 272 in the Lambeth Palace Library
by the Revd. T. C. Dale, B A., F.5.G.
Two volumes (6|- x 10), p.p. xii-240-7 1 (Index).
Published by the Society of Genealogists, Chaucer House,
Male! Place, W.C.I.
Price Two Guineas in stiff paper covers, or the two vols.
bound in one, cloth, two pounds, six shillings.
Only Three Hundred Copies printed.
This book contains a list of the house-
holders in 93 out of the 107 parishes
in the City of London, together with the
estimated rentals of their houses, together
with the remarks made by the various
Incumbents when they sent in their
returns. The introduction contains a brief
survey of the circumstances under which
the Return was compiled in obedience
to an Order of the Privy Council made
Ist April, 1638. The names of about
13,500 householders are given.
The Guahdian says : “All good genealogists and antiquaries
will applaud the labour and enthusiasm of the Revd. T. G. Dale
in editing and reproducing ” this manuscript. HISTOEY says :
“The return is valuable, and Mr. Dale deserves the gratitude of
all interested in the history of London for making it available."
The Obsbevee says : *' The compilation has a real interest for
students of London and of the times ; and one acquires a new
s&7ise of the importance of the directory in historical research."
Mr. Chas. W. F. Goss, in his book, “The London Directories, 1677-1855,"
describes “The Inhabitants of London” as a fascinating work.
It may be added that the book is admirably produced, with very clear type,
and that there is a very full index of persons and places.
To be obtained from the
SOCIE.TY OF GENEALOGISTS, CHAUCER HOUSE,
MALET PLACE. W.C.I, or from any bookseller.


CITY CHIMES
Yol. 2, No. 11.
November, 1934
Communications for the Editor should be addressed to
7, Tower Hill, E.C.3. Contributions should be received
by the 20 th of tfye month . Business communications to be
sent to the Secretary, (( City Chimes,” 11, Pilgrim St., E.C.4.
USEFULNESS OF THE CITY CHURCHES.
An informal conference was held at St. Michael’s Retreat on October
19th to discuss this subject. It was agreed that we ought to make the most
of the Sunday services. The numbers attending might be small but (for
instance) the members of the choir could be given more attention than is
possible in a suburban church with a large congregation. Those who rally
round a City Church on Sundays and make it tjheir spiritual home are the
keenest supporters of the City Churches.
One layman remarked that he found a greater friendliness on the
part of the City clergy than elsewhere. This is not because the suburban
clergy are stand-offish, but because the City clergy have more time to deal
with individuals on Sundays. In the week it was agreed that the aim
should be to take a via media between a dull routine and stunts. The
people ought to be taught that the chief aim of public worship was to
glorify God and not to please the people. The importance of Intercession
Services was stressed—especially for the Church overseas. The good that
the prayers of three or four people meeting together could do might be
immense.
One person present said he thought we ought to bring home to
business people who are communicants that they should not think only of
what they could get from the City Churches, but should rally round them
and do one definite thing for a City Church so that more might be done in
reaching those who are at present untouched by the Christian Religion. If
we are to reach the City worker it must be done chiefly by getting hold of
one or two people who really care in each firm. It was also agreed that
greater efforts ought to be made to get CITY CHIMES into more offices. The
activities of the City Churches had increased greatly during the last few
years; many people did not know what was being done. The City Churches
needed more publicity and CITY CHIMES could help in that way.
J. R. Sankey.


THE PEOPLE’S DISPENSARY FOR SICK ANIMALS OF THE
POOR.
The year 1917 should be marked as a red letter date for all animal-
lovers, for in that year began the movement which has brought help to
millions of suffering animals and comfort to their owners.
It was Mrs. Dicken, 0.8. E., who had the inspiration—we can call
it nothing less—of starting free dispensaries for the sick and suffering
animals of those who could not afford to pay for treatment and medicine for
them.
Mrs. Dickin was nursing her two beloved dogs who were desperately
ill, sparing no trouble or expense to ease their pain, and it was then, in
spite of her own sorrow, she thought of the feelings of all those others, who,
loving their pets even as she did, had yet, owing to their poverty, to stand
by and see their animals suffer and die, with no means of easing their pain,
or even of putting a merciful end to their sufferings. Chloroform is expen-
sive, and at that time there was nothing for the unwanted animals of the
poor but a sack, a stone and the nearest canal.
Once the realisation came to Mrs. Dickin of this vast world of
animal suffering, caused mainly through poverty and ignorance, and for
which practically nothing was being done, she could not rest until she had
started the great work which has brought into being The People’s
Dispensary for Sick Animals of the Poor (Inc.).
1917 was not an easy year in which to start any new thing. The
whole world lay under the cloud of war, and it seemed as if human beings
were too taken up with their own sufferings to have any time to spare to
think of the sufferings of animals; but not so Mrs. Dickin. In the face of
all difficulties and discouragement she set to work, and before long a sign
went up at the entrance to a cellar in a squalid street —"Bring your sick
animals—all treatment free.’’
Those who obeyed that sign and brought their sick animals to that
dingy cellar found one or two devoted animal lovers, who gave skilled
treatment to the suffering animals and good advice to their owners.
Soon the good news spread and "patients’ flocked in, and from that
cellar have sprung the 70 Dispensaries, 5 Hospitals and 8 Caravan-Dispen-
saries which now minister to the animals of the poor under the letters
P.D.S.A.—letters which mean so much to the poor animal owner all over
England, and even abroad.
The enormous need for this work is shown by the rapid growth of
the P.D.S.A. In 17 short years it has become a power in the world of
animals, and every year it grows, spreading its message of love and healing
further and further afield. At the present time over one million cases of
suffering animals are being treated yearly—cases which, but for the
P.D.S.A., would of necessity be left to suffer.
The objects of the P.D.S.A. are these—
1 ■ —To provide free treatment and medicine for sick and injured
animals whose owners cannot afford to pay for treatment for them,
2.—To destroy animals painlessly when necessary.
162
CITY CHIMES


A P.D.5.A. CARAVAN-DISPE.NSARY AT WORK IN THE SLUMS.
3. Fo give advice and information to all in any difficulty about an
animal,
4.—To assist in the education of the young on the proper care of
animals.
It will be seen how important a work is being done, not only in
relieving immediate suffering among animals, but in preventing further
suffering, and the work of the P.D.S.A. is having very far reaching results
for good in the animal world. By far the greatest causes of animal suffering
are ignorance and thoughtlessness, and this is what the P.D.S.A. is counter-
acting by advice and education, and so bringing the public to the realis-
ation of the needs of animals and man’s obligations towards them.
The Bishop of London—a Patron of the P.D.S.A.—has said “Every
man ought to treat the dumb animals as younger brothers of the family of
life which are especially put under his care. We cannot be too kind or too
compassionate to the animal creation,’’ and it is on these lines that the
P.D.S.A. works and teaches.
The Prince of Wales heads the list of P.D.S.A. Patrons, and among
other distinguished Patrons who wish its work God-speed are the Arch-
bishops of Canterbury and York.
Space forbids me to give a full description of the work of the
P.D.S.A., but I should like to give some idea of its Animal Sanatorium at
Ilford, the largest of its kind in the world, standing in its green meadows,
where the tired horses and donkeys from the London streets can regain
health and strength after treatment in the comfortable and beautifully
equipped stables.
163
CITY CHIMES


The Sanatorium is fitted with all the latest appliances, including an
operating theatre with a specially constructed horse-operating table, X
Rays, apparatus for Sunlight Treatment, a special footbath for horses, and
a forge for making surgical shoes for injured hoofs. There is a ward too
for small animals, where each “bed” has its own run attached for air and
exercise.
At the Sanatorium are kept the Ambulances for large and small
animals, which stand ready to rush to the aid of any injured animal at a
moment’s notice, night or day, and from the Sanatorium start out the
P.D.S.A. Caravan-Dispensaries, specially built and equipped for the work,
and which tour needy districts where it has not yet been possible to
establish permanent dispensaries.
And all this depends on the generosity of the animal-loving public,
for the P.D.S.A. is supported entirely by voluntary contributions, and on
Mrs. Dickin, the Hon. Director as well as the Founder, devolves the task
of raising every penny to meet the heavy expenses !
It has been argued by some that the poor should not be encouraged
to keep animals, but a little reflection will show how mistaken is this idea
In the first place, many poor people have to keep animals, for on
them their living depends, as in the case of the coster, hawker or small
tradesman whose donkey or pony is essential to his livelihood. Then there
are other working animals—the watch dog, the blind man’s dog, and the
cat to keep down mice and rats, to give a few examples.
Secondly, the poor always will keep animals, and—putting aside the
question of right or wrong—can we leave these animals to suffer un-
necessarily through no fault of their own ?
Often the greatest pleasure in a dark life is the companionship of a
cat or dog, and have we, who have many other pleasures, the right to
condemn this pleasure and to try to take it away ?
Let me give an example of what the companionship of an animal
may mean, A poor old lady, living in one room, came in great distress to
a P.D.S.A. Dispensary, bringing her cat, who was very ill.
The cat was the only friend she had left, and she feared it would
die. To her joy the care and skill of the P.D.S.A. restored her cat to
health. The only thing then which troubled the old lady was that she had
not one penny in the world to give to the P.D.S.A. to show her gratitude.
In spite of all assurances that nothing was expected from her, she insisted
on giving as a thank-offering the most valuable thing she possessed—her
wedding-ring.
That is only one example among many of the gratitude of those
whom the P.D.S.A. is able to help and their pathetic efforts to make some
return. Almost everyone tries to put at least one penny in the Dispensary
box, but alas, these pennies do not nearly meet the cost of the cases
treated. It is only through the gifts of those richer animal-lovers—real
animal-lovers, loving all animals, not merely their own—that the P.D.S.A.
can carry on and meet the heavy demands made on it.
I have barely space to touch on the work of the P.D.S.A. abroad,
where the conditions are often so bad as to be almost unrepeatable, but
where ever the P.D.S.A. flag flies, there a ray of hope shines for the
animals.
164
CITY CHIMES


The P.D.S.A. has two Dispensaries in Paris, which are thronged
daily with patients. It has one in Tangier, where since its coming the
improvement in the condition of the animals has been great.
The natives compete with each other for the P.D.S.A. medal for
the best kept donkeys and mules, which are brought regularly to the
P.D.S.A. for inspection. How necessary this is can be realised when one
thinks of the donkey found working with its saddle sewn to its skin, to
quote only one of the ghastly cases found by the P.D.S.A. in Morocco.
In Roumania too the P.D.S.A. is bringing home the truth to the
peasant that his animal suffers even as he does. Before the coming of the
P.D.S.A. the animals were often looked on merely as machines, to be
worked till they dropped and then left by the roadside to die by inches.
We have the case of a man who cut out a horse s eye by way of revenge
on the animal’s master for some slight.
Still further afield the P.D.S.A. is working in the Dutch East Indies,
where the Islands are overrun by diseased and starving dogs, supposed by
the natives to be possessed of evil spirits which would otherwise attack
their owners. Great tact is needed to get permission to destroy these
wretched creatures, which are a misery to themselves and a source of
danger to others as disease carriers, but so successful are the methods
of the P.D.S.A. Superintendent working in Bali that he is often able to
shoot 800 or so of these dogs in one day— a task he says he could not carry
out if he did not love them so !
But there are plenty of cases of animal suffering nearer home such
as that of the dog found by a P.D.S.A. Caravan working in the Irish Free
State, with a broken leg, which its owner had tried to mend by driving
two large nails through the skin and bone and tying it together with a piece
of string! Ignorance, once again !
REMOVING A PIECE OF GLASS FROM A CAT’S PAW.
165
CITY CHIMES


I do not know how the P.D.S.A. workers would be able to carry on
under the weight of the terrible hidden suffering which they discover were
it not for the knowledge that they are doing something towards lifting this
awful load. Also, they have the gratitude of the animals themselves to
cheer them. Often a dog cured of its pain will return to thank the P.D.S.A.
Assistant in his own doggy way, or even to lay a cherished bone at his
feet as a thank offering. Animals have been known to return of themselves
for further treatment, or to bring other animals which have been injured,
unknown to their owners. Then too there is the lighter side, such as the
man who brought his dog to a P.D.S.A. Dispensary to be treated for
“distemper”, as it had drunk a bucket of whitewash intended for the
kitchen walls; or the monkey who insisted on munching a banana
while it was being treated, and always ended by hurling the skin in the
Assistant’s face !
The P.D.S.A. comes across a never-ending stream of true animal
stories, sad and gay—but alas, it is the sad which predominate.
%
The P.D.S.A. helps all animals and birds, but it does not forget
their owners, and many a man has been kept off the dole through the
P.D.S.A. caring for his four-footed bread-winner.
This was summed up to me recently by a rough looking, poorly-clad
man who had come right across London to help at a Fete in aid of the
P.D.S.A. In answer to my remark that he had come a long way, he said
with a smile, “That’s nothing, miss, I’d come further that that to elp the
P.D.S.A. It’s us blokes ose living depends on one orse what knows what
the P.D.S.A. really means.”
Dorothea St. Hill Bourne.
AN EXPERIMENT IN CO-OPERATION.
An experiment in co-operation is to be attempted during the coming
winter, which may be of interest to those who care for the City churches.
St. Mary Woolnoth is situated at the North end of St. Swithun s Lane, over
the Bank Underground Station : St. Swithun’s is at the South end of the
same street opposite Cannon Street Station. During the day many thou-
sands pass the doors of both churches, and their geographical position
makes them well suited for joint work. Accordingly, the two Rectors are
going to attempt what must inevitably be an experiment, to see whether
it is possible for the two churches to work in joint harness and yet retain
their distinctive types of worship and their own particular contribution to
the life of the City.
The arrangement will be made for co-operation in work and not for
an amalgamation of parishes. There will be no attempt to touch the funds
of either church for the needs of the other, no infringement of the rights
of resident parishioners, no tampering with the property or the statutory
position of either church. It will definitely involve a sharing of spiritual
responsibilities and interchange of ministrations, and by a dovetailing of
Sunday duties, the Rectors will be able to help in other parts of the diocese.
We hope for the support of all men of goodwill in this experiment.
166
CITY CHIMES


ALL HALLOWS, BERKINGECHIRCHE
Opposite Mark Lane Station
The Revd. P. B. Clayton, Vicar.
It has been remarked that since our Vicar s departure in April
for his African tour, little or nothing has been said of his whereabouts
in the CITY Chimes. It is difficult in a short page to supply the deficiency,
but I will try.
It is now nearly two years since Padre Harry Moss was with us
at All Hallows for a month before setting forth for the unusual work of
Chaplain to the gangs of men working on the seven-hundred-mile Pipe
Line from Kirkuk to the Mediterranean. Only last week news was received
that the first supply of oil from the source in Iraq had reached the coast,
and it was at the end of April, when the last stages of construction were
being reached, that our Vicar joined Harry Moss for a tour of his extensive
parish. It appears that Harry has not only won the affection of the cosmo-
politan gangs of men to whom he was sent, but that also, due to his
initiative, Toe H has been firmly planted at Haifa and in some of the
R.A.F. stations up country. After some days in Iraq Mr. Clayton and
John Graham brought Harry Moss back with them to Cairo, and there
followed an intensive week’s work, at the end of which 1 oc H Cairo was
left in a different condition from that in which they had found it. The end
of May found the travellers landing once more on African soil at Mombasa,
and after a week in Uganda they flew down South to Northern Rhodesia
and the tour of Southern Africa proper started. As I read John Graham’s
letter from the Copper Belt of Northern Rhodesia my own experience
enabled me to understand what a strain this part of the journey must have
been. Northern Rhodesia is scarcely yet opened up except in certain
places, and the communities living at the different copper mines are shut
in on all sides by the silence of the African Veld with just one road—
probably a bad one —linking them with another mine perhaps thirty miles
away. Moving south into Southern Rhodesia, the pilgrims found a really
first-rate Branch of Toe H in Bulawayo, and were met by a dozen members
when they arrived at 6.30 a.m. They were also greatly cheered by their
visit to Umtali, where Toe H thrives, having its own hall and publishing
its own journal. It was also the scene of the meeting between the Founder
Padre of Toe H and Colonel Methuen, D. 5.0., a Foundation Member, for
the first time since 1916.
Moving south into the Union of South Africa, the two travellers
made their first stay in Durban, and it was here that the Southern African
Council of Toe H held their second meeting on July 9th. The rest of July
was spent in Natal and then followed a tremendous programme in Johannes-
burg and the Transvaal, which is as far as the October Toe H Journal
carries us. Since then Mr. Clayton and John Graham have been in the
Cape Province, and at the moment of writing are on the high seas on their
way to Abadan, the big refinery of the Anglo-Persian Oil Company in the
Persian Gulf, where they expect to stay some days.
By this time everyone will have seen our Autumn Programmes and
know that the Rev. O. F. Clarke is giving a really first-class series of
Addresses on “Christianity, the Constructive Revolution,’’ each Friday, at
1.5 p.m. The Music Programme each Monday is in full swing once more.
We welcome a new addition to our staff in the person of the Revd.
G. A. Wright, whose house at 19, Tower Hill, is now ready for him. As
167
CITY CHIMES


Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday
8-30 H.C. 8 H.C.
All Hallows, 9-30 H.C. (1st Sun.) 8 H.C. 7 & 8 H.C. 12-50 Litany
Berkyngechirche, 10-30 M.P. 1 —2 Music 5-40 E. 1-5 Address
Byward Street. 11 Song Eu. 5-40 E. 5-40 E.
6-30 E.
8-K) H.C.
AH rlallows- ii & h.C, Sung 1-10 Prayers &
on-the-Wall. " Address
St - i‘; h d 5 ew - io-?o c k.p. 1:11 h.c.‘ 7 - 55 M - p - 7 - 55 M - p -
w/ A U 11 Solemn Eu. 1 jg Miss H.C. 8-15 H.C.
Wardrobe 6 _ 35 E . {SS. E. Service
Uueen Victoria at. 7 Evening S.
o 8 H - c - 10 - 30 M - 10 M ' 10 M ' 10 M ‘
L * . . ’ 11 Sung Eu & Ser. M5 Lit. Hymns
Gnpplegate. 3 Children
6-30 E. Sermon
,, , , Q HP (ktA 8 Mass 12-15 Mass 8 „
St. Magnus , n Sun L & J 1-15 Salve 1-15 Intercessions F15 Salve &
Lower Thames St. 6 30 SMemn Vespers winter- 6 Solemn Vespers Intercessions
cessions Adoration
St Martin H-H 10-15 M. l-15 Intercessions
01. martin, n gung Eu-
Ludgate Hill. g-30 E. (ex. 1st Wed.)
o. A/f , . 8-15Prayers 8-15 Prayers 8-15 Prayers
J5t. IVJary 11 M.P. <v/or H.C. g Lecture 1-15 Organ Recital 1-30 Bible Reading
Abchurch.
St. Mary 5-30 Evensong 120 Fellowship of
Woolnoth, 3rd & 6th, 5 Bible Study Address 1
, . . c . ’ followed by H.C. 5 ' 30 Adclress
Lombard Street. J
St. Michael 9 H C. (1st) 12-15 Mass 5 Mass 12-15 Sung Mass
Royal, 11 Sung Mass 1-15 Devo- j 15 Devotions 1-15 Devotions
College Hill. 6-30 E. (Solemn) tions 7 . 30 Evensong
St Mildred 1115 H-C- (Choral) 1-15 Address
St. Mildred, 6 . 30 e. 1st. Sun.)
Bread Street.
9 H.C.
St. Sepulchre, J 1 1 _ s ™| E l “- ?o ?g C H r 8 H - c - 8 H.C.
tj , , 3-15 Catechism 12-15 H.C.
riolborn V induct. g
1st, 2nd & 4th—
10-30 Matins 8 Organ 8-45 H.C. 8-10 Fellowship of
St. Swithun, 11 Sung Eu. 5-30 E. 12-30 Address, Silence
Cannon Street. “I* 8 ®- 5 ' 30E ' 5 ' 30 E ’
10-15 H.C.
11 Matins
TABLE OF DAILY
SERV


NOVEMBER, 1934.
Thursday
Friday
Saturday
Hours of Opening.
8 H.C.
5 Fellowship
of Prayer
0 E.
12-50 Litany
1 Address
5-40 E.
8 H.C.
5-40 E.
8-15 H.C.
Holy Days ;
6-45 E. & Lecture
12-50 H.C. with
Music
7- M.P.
8- H.C.
Holy Days
(i additional ) ;
7- M.P.
8- H.C.
1-15 Litany &
Intercessions
7 H.C.
12-15 Solemn Eu.
6 B.
Sats. ; 7-40 a.m. —1 p.m.
7 Evening Service
H.C. BM.
F Service :
Address or
10 M.
Holy Days :
10 a.m. —4 p.m.
Sats. : 1 p.m.
1-15 Service :
Hymns
H.C. 7-30 or 12-15
Organ
7 E. Choral
Festivals :
Week-days :
8 Mass
5 Sung Mass
Adoration
B—9, 11-30 a.m.—6.30 p.m.
Hon : 11-30 —2. Tu.\ 11-30 —8
1-15 Salve &
12-15 Sung Mass
instead of 8
1-15 Inter-
Intercessions
ith choir
cessions
Fri. and Sat. :
11-30 a.m. —9-30 p.m.
Saints Days :
8-15 H.C.
) Community
Singing
1-15 Intercessions
11 a.m.—2 p.m.
Prayers
5 H.C.
Saints Days :
9 H.C.
7-45 —10 a.m. daily.
12 —3 p.m. except Sat.
8-15 Prayers
1-20 Intercessions
8 a-m.- —-7 p.m.
Bibß Exp.
Sats : B—l 2 a.m.
Holy Days :
12-16 Mass
12-15 Sung Eu.
12-55 Sermon
1-25 Devotions
1-5 Instruction
1-16 Devotions
Lady Chapel open all day.
Devotions
12-45 Litany
1 Recital, Address
Holy Days :
8 H.C.
12-15 Sung
8 H.C.
12-15 Sung
Eucharist
Eucharist
“ Family
8-10 Prayers
Talk ”
Sats.: 7-45 a.m. —12-30 p.m
169
7 7 M ES


he comes in we lose Padre Godfrey Kircher, who has been with us prior
to his departure to serve Toe Hin South Australia. He sails for Sydney
on October 26th, and we would commend the difficult work ahead of him
to your prayers.
I cannot conclude this article without telling you how grateful I have
been for the support of the Revd. Alan Colthurst, Rector of St. Swithun s,
in our Open Air work each Friday on Tower Hill. It has fallen to my lot
to stand on the platform out there most Fridays for the last two years.
Now Padre Colthurst brings to the work a freshness and enthusiasm which
has been the greatest possible help to all of us who share in that piece of
parish work.
T. J. Savage.
ST. ANDREW-BY-THE-WARDROBE
Queen Victoria Street.
The Revd. J. R. Sankey, Vicar.
The chief event of this month is the visit of the Archbishop of
Canterbury to dedicate the Kent Corner on Tuesday, November 6th at
12.45. The Lord Mayor and the Sheriffs will attend this service in state.
The same evening at 5.45 p.m. the Church ground in Ireland Yard
will be opened for parochial purposes. This place has been useless for
years. It has now been levelled and asphalted, and a brick platform built
at one end. Thus it will now be available for the physical exercises of our
company of the Boys’ Brigade and the girls’ drill, and also for open-air
meetings and concerts. The total cost of this work has been £76, of which
£36 is still required.
On St. Andrew’s Day Canon Mallett will preach the Sermon at the
!2.45 service.
The work done among the destitute and unemployed is now under the
direction of the League of Help. Clothes and bed tickets are given and
other welfare work done in connection with a religious community in
Shoreditch. Unemployed families in the East End are being helped and
a farm colony in Essex is being supported. Seventeen men are made
physically and mentally fit for work and kept until jobs are found for them.
We feel that now the worst time of the depression is passed more useful
help is given by putting a certain number definitely on their feet than by
doling out food which leads nowhere and (as we know) tends to encourage
the recipients to rely on charity and settle down to exist on it without
making any effort to re-establish themselves.
ST. ANNE AND ST. AGNES WITH ST. JOHN ZACHARY
Gresham Street, E.C.2.
The Rt. Revd. the Bishop of Fulham, Rector.
The Church continues to be used by the Swiss Church of London
for the purpose of Sunday worship. It is open for daily prayer and medi-
tation from 12 to 2 midday every weekday excluding Saturday.
Sir George Wilkinson, the Alderman of the Ward of Aldersgate.
accompanied by Mr. Deputy Smyth, Major Vine, and others of the Common
Councilmen, paid a State visit to the Church on Wednesday the 26th of
September. The Bishop of Fulham, the Rector, delivered an excellent
address on “Civic Responsibility’’ which was much appreciated by the
numerous congregation present.
170
CITY CHIMES


The Rt. Rev. Arthur Lea, Bishop of South Japan (Kyushu), will
give an address on “Understanding Japan” on Wednesday the 7th of
November, at 1.15. This follows the reception to the three Japanese
bishops which was held at the Church by the Brotherhood of St. Andrew
on the evening of the 12th October
Other mid-week addresses during November will be as follows :
The Call of the Blind,’ by Canon C. E. Bolam, on the I 4th; “An Empire
in the Making,” by the Bishop of Athabasca, on the 21st; and “The
Furthest North-West.” by the Bishop of the Yukon,” on the 28th.
ST. GILES
Cripplegate, E.C.
Services for November.
Thursday, November Isf—All Saints’ Day. Holy Communion
12.15 p.m. Service and Address, 1.15 p.m. Friday, November 2nd —
All Souls Day. Holy Communion 7.15 a.m. Evensong and Vespers of
the Dead 7 p.m. Sunday, November II th —Armistice Day. Service of
Remembrance 10.45 a.m. Holy Eucharist in remembrance of those who
gave their lives in the Great War, 1 1 a.m.
Week, of Prayer, November 18 th —25 th. Short service each day with
brief Address (except Saturday), 1.15 p.m.
ST. MARTIN
Ludgate Hill.
The Revd. G. H. Vincent, Rector.
On All Saints Day, Thursday, November Ist, there will be a Sung
Eucharist at 12.15, and on All Souls Day, Friday, November 2nd, there
will be a Requiem at 8.15 a.m.
The Revd. W. F. Scott, Chaplain and Dean of St. Peter’s Hall,
Oxford, will give lectures on Tuesdays in November at 1.10 p.m. on “The
Epistle to the Ephesians.”
The monthly Intercessions for God’s blessing on Religious Commu-
nities will be on Wednesday, the 7th. Holy Eucharist will be at 12.15 p.m.
and a short service of Intercession at 1.15 p.m. We shall keep St. Martin’s
Day, Sunday, November 11th, as our Patronal Festival, combining with it
the observance of Armistice Day.
The Bishop of the Diocese has appointed the week beginning
November 18th and ending on the 25th as one of Prayer and Self-Denial
on behalf of the work of the Diocese. There will be Intercessions on all
the week days (with the exception of Saturday) at 1.15 p.m.
St. Andrew's Day, Friday, November 30th, will be kept as a day of
Intercession for the work of the Church overseas. There will be Holy
Communion at 8.15 a.m. and a service of Intercession at 1.15 p.m.
ST. MARY ABCHURCH
Abchurch Lane, off King William Street.
The Revd. F. G. Masters, Rector.
On Armistice Day the Sunday morning service will begin at
10.45 a.m. instead of 11, so that the Two Minutes Silence may be kept
unhurriedly in the course of the worship.
171
CITY CHIMES


On December 2nd, Advent Sunday comes in St. Andrewstide. There
will be a Missionary Service on that evening at the hour of half-past seven,
which was found so convenient for the Harvest Festival last month. At
the Missionary Service there will be a special preacher.
The Rector is giving a course of Lectures on Christianity in the Early
Centuries on Monday evenings at six. There are expositions of St. John s
Gospel on Wednesdays at 1.30 p.m.
During November the half-hour Organ Recitals will be given on
Tuesdays and Fridays at 1.13 p.m. as follows:— November 2nd : Mr.
J. E. S. Shanks; November 6th : Mr. John H. Gibbs; November 9th : Mr.
Leonard A. Carr; November 13 th : Mr. H. R. Thompson; November 16 th :
Mr. C. E. G. Beaman; November 20 th : Mr. L. R. Barrett; November 23 rd :
Mr. J. D. Grant; November 2 7th : Mr. H. L. Fairbairn; November 30th :
Mr. T. R. L. Funnell.
ST. MARY WOOLNOTH
Lombard Street.
Revd. W. E. S. Holland, M.A., Rector.
We are venturing on a new experiment to which we are looking
forward with great hope. Arrangements are being made with the neigh-
bouring church of St. Swithun (London Stone) for close co-operation
between the two churches, which will ensure a fuller provision of spiritual
opportunity to both parishes through a pooling of resources, while at the
same time effecting an actual and valuable economy in time and effort.
The two churches have each a character of their own, and their association
should mean that enrichment of life and influence for which we look in all
movements making for the more real unity of the Church of Christ. Details
of the proposed arrangements, which at present are purely tentative, will
be found in the table of services.
As Rector I have had an experience which must be unusual, and
perhaps almost unique. In inviting speakers for an important series of
addresses I have not had a single refusal from any of those included in the
original list of those I wished to invite. The course has been designed
with a view to bringing before the City the challenge presented to the
Church of Christ by the present international situation, both in the realm
of world politics and in the carrying of the Christian Gospel to the peoples
of Asia and Africa
The full list of special speakers on Wednesdays is as follows :
November 7th, “Britain’s National Defence,” Sir Norman Angel.
November 14th, “Christian lenity and World Unity, Bishop Palmer.
November 21st, “Aviation; the invention that took the wrong turning,’’
Prof. P. J. Noel-Baker. November 28th. “Christ and India’s Freedom,’
S. S. Singha.
ST. MICHAEL’S PATERNOSTER ROYAL
College Hill, Cannon Street, E.C .4.
Canon J. A. Douglas, Rector.
The Worshipful Companies of Ironholders and Needlemakers held
their annual services in St. Michael’s Royal on Monday, October Ist, at
6.45 p.m., and Wednesday, October 17th, at 1 p.m., respectively. The
172
CITY CHIMES


Bishop of Southwark pontificated and preached at High Mass on Michael-
mas Day, when the Church was well filled. Father Charles Douglas
preached to a large congregation at the Solemn Eucharist on the Sunday
in the Octave, on which day a Common Meal was shared in the Vestry
Hall after the 9 a.m. Communion. On Wednesday, October 3rd, a very
happy Social Gathering was held after Solemn Evensong.
On Thursday, October 18th, the Lord Mayor’s Boy Players sang
Harvest Carols in St. Michael’s, the Church being quite full.
On Friday, October 19th, High Mass was offered for His Orthodox
Majesty King Alexander of Jugo-Slavia, the celebrant being Father French
of the A. and E.C.A., in conjunction with the Jugo-Slav Society of Great
Britain. His Excellency the Jugo-Slav Minister and the Staff of his
Legation, with the Greek Minister, the Rumanian and Czecho-Slovak
Charges d’Affaires, Were present. After the High Mass, Archbishop
Germanus of Thyatira, assisted by the Choir of the Russian Church of St.
Philip’s, Pimlico, rendered the Orthodox Office for the Departed.
High Mass with the accustomed rites will be rendered on All Saints
Day and All Souls’ Day, November Ist and 2nd. The Ancient Society of
College Youths, which is the central society of Bell-ringers in Great Britain,
and which derives its origin from Dick Whittington, will hold its two
hundred and ninety-seventh anniversary service in St. Michael’s Royal
on Saturday, November 10th, at 6.30 p.m. The Church possessing no
bells, the College Youths will mark the service with hand bell ringing.
ST. MILDRED
Bread Street, E.C.
The Revd. J. R. Richardson-Eyre, Rector.
On October 11 th we celebrated the second annual service of
Commemoration of Admiral Arthur Phillip. There was a large and
representative gathering which crowded the little Church. It was evident
that the general interest in this annual service was on the increase. The
splendid character and the far-reaching results of his pioneer work for the
Empire are now more fully recognised in our City Area. Phillip, so long
neglected through ignorance, has now come into his own and is recognised
as a great figure in our Empire history and a conspicuous historical asset
to Bread Street Ward, which may well be proud of him.
The happy willingness of Viscount Wakefield to give the memorial
on the outside wall of the Church of St. Mildred, which pictures Arthur
Phillip and his party landing at Sydney in 1788, and his bust in bronze
gazing across the City in which he once walked as a boy, has been well
rewarded. The interest of our President in this perpetuation of Phillip’s
memory and achievement has deepened as the fine character of Phillip
has become more and more evident.
As the years go by and Australians become more and more
acquainted with this tribute to the founder of Sydney on the wall of St.
Mildred’s Church, we fully anticipate that a visit to Bread Street will become
indispensable to the Australians visiting London. All those who have
seen the Church and the memorial on it are deeply interested. The monu-
ment will become increasingly invested with historical interest as Australia
advances itself into the centuries to come. In Sydney there is a splendid
173
CITY CHIMES


monument to Admiral Arthur Phillip, and now there is a notable one in
the Ward in which he was born, and a Church as a spiritual home.
The presence at the service of the High Commissioner for the
Commonwealth of Australia, the Rt. Hon. Stanley M. Bruce, P.C.,
C.H., M.C., was specially noteworthy and a source of great encourage-
ment. His hearty interest in this annual service and memorial will be
invaluable. The High Commissioner read the Lesson—Romans VI. He
is well endowed vocally and the Lesson, very apt for the times in which
we live, came home to us very impressively. Of late, in his public utter-
ances on matters affecting Australia and ourselves, and on urgent questions
of trade and world economics and the general relations of countries, Mr.
Stanley Bruce has revealed a fine mind and judgment and a capacity to
lead and guide which makes him a great asset to Australia and to cur-
selves. We should be fortunate if we had him as a leading member of
our Government.
Everyone had looked forward to the coming of Viscount Wakefield
and to hearing his address. Twice Lord Mayor, he came now as Acting
Lord Mayor with the Sheriffs. It was a great undertaking to face the
fatigues of a week full of duties which would tax a young man’s energy
to the full. It was very touching to read of his visit to Gresford Colliery;
it was a notable act of brotherly love and sympathy.
Viscount Wakefield, as the President of the Arthur Phillip Com-
memoration Council, gave a most interesting study of Phillip, treated very
broadly and convincingly as a man of vision and foresight, of striking
humanity, great unselfishness, of firmness as a leader and Governor, a man
of deep religious feeling with a capacity for taking infinite pains, triumph-
ing over obstacles, who, in a few short years, accomplished thoroughly a
work to last and progress, with others following in his train, to the
Australia of to-day.
The Address has been printed and can be obtained from the Rector
and at Cordwainers Hall.
We are deeply indebted to Col. Botteril| Master of the Cordwainers
Company, and the Cordwainers Company for' very kindly providing an
excellent tea after the service at Cordwainers Hall. Mr. F. W. Mander
did good service at the Hall.
Viscount Wakefield, in the course of his address, announced his
intention to make provision for sufficient funds to ensure the permanency of
the Annual Service of Commemoration. This is wise and thoughtful. This
will help what we all desire, a lasting and loving bond of union between
us and Australia, and St. Mildred s a spiritual home when we meet
together in worship and fraternity.
Services for November.
November 4th.—Holy Communion (Ireland in C) with Sermon, 11.15 a.m. Evening
Prayer with Address, 6.30 p.m.
November 11th.—Armistice Service, 10.45 a.m.
November 18th.—Holy Communion (Harwood in A Flat) with Sermon, 11.15 a.m.
November 25th.—Matins and Holy Communion (sung) with Sermon, 1f.15 a.m.
Wednesdays: Lecture by the Rector at 1.15 p.m.
Recitals of Music on Fridays, at One O’Clock.
November 2nd: Organ Recital by Frank Wright; Singer, Donald Lamb.
November 9th : No recital. November 16th : violoncello Recital by Dora Gilson.
November 23 rd: Organ Recital by Christina Chalmers (St. Mildreds); Singer, Freda
Rogers. November 30tk : St. Mildred’s Trio Players. Trios by Haydn and John
Ireland.
174
CITY CHIMES


ST. SWITHUN’S (LONDON STONE)
Opposite Cannon Street Station.
The Revd. A. St. G. Colthurst, Rector.
“God Almighty first planted a garden” said Sir Francis Bacon, but
St. Swithun’s first planted a garden in Cannon Street. That is to say that
ifor the last three weeks the “General,” of All Hallows’ fame, has filled
our churchyard with three hundred bulbs, with a view to making it a
pleasant centre of rest and beauty in the lunch hour next Spring. The
new tenants of the old Chamber of Commerce in Oxford Court, whoever
they may be, will be more fortunate in their outlook than their prede-
cessors. Who can tell whether Oxford Court under the shadow of St.
Swithun’s steeple and with the beauty of her newly cared-for churchyard
may not some day have the charm of an Oxford quadrangle ?
So much for the back of the church. On the front door can now be
seen the notice of the Faculty which proclaims to all and sundry, who have
a liking for deciphering legal documents, that the Rector and Church-
wardens have applied for permission to renew the lighting and heating
apparatus, and also to erect the long-hoped-for partition between the
Gallery and the church.
On Tuesday, October 9th, Bishop Paget addressed a well-filled
church with an introduction to the series of speakers that we are having
on successive Tuesdays. On the 16th the Rector spoke on the application
of Toe H in the business world, and on October 23rd the Revd. W. E. S.
Holland spoke in this church for the first time since we have gone into
partnership with St. Mary Woolnoth, of which church he is Rector. The
Winter programme of the two churches is now obtainable at either, and
is printed on a single card. There are more details of this co-operation
given in the St. Mary Woolnoth column.
We would also draw the attention of all those interested to a prayer
card for the work of this church now obtainable on the bookstall.
In conclusion, we would advertise the fact that Brother Douglas, of
the St. Francis Homes, is to speak in this church on Monday, November
12th, at 12.30, on the “Wayfaring Man,” a subject which must appeal to
all, now that Winter is almost upon us.
ST. MAGNUS THE MARTYR
By London Bridge. Monument Station
The Revd. H. J. Fynes-Clynton, Rector.
This month, in which the Church specially remembers her departed
members, has for us, as usual, many Requiems to be celebrated. We
welcome several guilds for the solemn duty of their Annual Requiems, the
Society of Mary, St. Dominic’s Living Rosary, the Catholic League, and
our own for the Fraternity of Our Lady and for all departed parishioners,
on a Sunday.
The children and Miss May, with her generous friends from Car-
shalton, will hold sl Scilo in the Crypt cind present n plciy on November
17th in aid of the Church Funds. All our friends are asked to come and
support this. Collecting Cards for small, but none the less welcome sums
in aid of the Advowson Funds are ready, and every member of the congre-
gation is asked to help by taking one.
The King’s Messengers. We have now changed our children’s
branch of the Accra Association into the S.P.G. King’s Messengers, an
175
CITY CHIMES


organisation which gives a wider interest and variety of method and an
excellent magazine. The monthly services and classes will be on the first
Wednesdays and the social and working meetings will continue on
Saturdays. On the 27th October we shall have an outing to Windsor.
The Tower Clock.. We have again the misfortune of having to meet
the expense of external repair. In the last few years the Cupola and stone-
work of the walls, cracked by the rusting of the original iron ties, and the
clerestory windows have required restoration. Now some of the wood of
the case of the clock has perished. The clock has an interesting story.
Charles Duncombe, as a boy apprentice, had to meet his master on Old
London Bridge, and, being late, was discharged from his service. The
boy vowed that if he became rich and Lord Mayor he would erect a clock
on the Bridge. Becoming Alderman of Bridge and Knight he fulfilled his
vow and gave the clock in I 709. Originally it had figures of St. Magnus
and St. Margaret, Hercules and Atlas and cupids. He became Lord Mayor
and founded the family of the Earls of Feversham.
Services for November.
November Ist, Thursday: All Saints. High Mass, 12.15 p.m. Solemn Vespers of
All Souls, 6.5 p.m.
November 2nd, Friday: All Souls. Solemn Requiem and Absolution, 12.15 p.m.
Address, 1.20 p.m.
November 7th, Wednesday: Patronal Feast of Priests’ Sodality. Solemn Votive
Mass of St. Charles Borromeo. Preacher, the Revd. Dom Dunstan Bailey, 0.5.8.,
12.15 p.m.
November 11th, Sunday: Armistice Day. Prayers, the Silence and Sung Mass,
10.50 a.m. Preacher, the Revd. J. Mills, 6.30 p.m.
November 13th, Tuesday: Annual Chantry Mass of Catholic League for members
slain in the War, 12.15 p.m. Solemn Vespers, 6 p.m. Meeting in Crypt of Society
of Mary, all welcome. Discussion 6 p.m.
November 14 th, Wednesday: Office of the Dead. Fraternity Obit, 6 p.m.
November 1 5th, Thursday: Solemn Anniversary Requiem of Fraternity de Salve
Regina, 12.15 p.m.
November 18th-25th : Diocesan Week of Prayer and Self Denial.
November 22nd, Thursday: Solemn Anniversary Requiem of Society of Mary,
12.15 p.m.
November 25th, Sunday: Anniversary Requiem for all departed Rectors and
Parishioners, 11 a.m.
November 27th, Tuesday: Solemn Anniversary Requiem of Guild of St. Dominic
L.R., 12.15 p.m.,
December Ist, Saturday: Day of Perpetual Prayer and Watch before the Blessed
Sacrament for the conversion of England to the Catholic Faith and in preparation
for Advent. Diocesan service and offering of the Parish gifts to Diocesan fund,
6 p.m.
“SOCIETY FOR THE REFORMATION OF MANNERS.”
Can any of your readers give particulars of a “Society for the Refor-
mation of Manners in London and Westminster,” which existed in the
18th century? All that I have been able to find about it is that sermons
on the subject were preached in S. Mary le Bow as follows ;—Jan. 1, 1700,
by John Mapletoft, D.D.; Mar. 27, 1704, by William Bissett; Jan. 10, 1733,
by Arthur Bedford, M.A. Weis S. Mary le Bow the headquarters of the
Society, and were these preachers rectors there or visitors ?
A little while ago, Miss E. Prince, whose passing on was recorded
last month, and who /?neu) more almost than anyone else in the Way of
City Lore, sent in this note and question. Possibly some of our readers
may be able to throw further light on the subject.
Printed by THE RELIANCE PRESS, 6, Broadway, Ludgate Hill, E.C.4.


Telephone No.s CITY 35 15.
White Hart Hotel
& RESTAURANT ,
7, GILTSPUR STREET, E.G.I.
Luncheons, Dinners and Banquets.
Special Dinners for Parties from 3/6 per head.
ALSO Telephone No.; WHITEHALL 8866.
Duncannon Restaurant
FOLLY LICENSED
3, DUNCANNON ST., CHARING CROSS,
ENGLISH AND SCOTCH MEAT. W.C.2.
Four and Five Course Dinner from 6 to 9.30 p.m. : 2/-, 2/6.
Special 1/9 Luncheon and a la Carte Menu.
Proprietors H. J. WHITE.
Proprietor : Joseph Webb
Established : London 1892
The Reliance Press
® High-Class and General Printers
Account Book Manufacturers
and Stationers
6 BROADWAY, LUDGATE HILL
E.C.4.
Telephone : CITY 2115


