

ST. SA VIO UR'S, GOULB URN.
F 3 cm
Bishopthorpe, Goulburn, July 1886.
To Messrs. Monkley, Hollis, Barber, Conolly, and
' others.
In answer to your letter, I beg to state that, for
the past ten years continuously, I have appointed
one of the trustees as a churchwai den of St.
Saviour’s church, Goulburn, called by you a school-
room.
Though the building was originally intended to be
used for a Church of England day-school, it was
never so employed, that design having been aban-
doned. The intention was given up in consequence
of a change of circumstances connected with the
Education Act and the presumed impossibility of
maintaining such a school in Goulburn without
adequate parliamentary aid.
In 1875, during my absence in Englaud, the build-
ing was fitted up as a church, all the fittings of the
old church having been transferred into it, and the
proceeds of the sale of the old fabric expended upon
it. The trustees, as required by the Church
Temporalities Act, assessed the annual rent for each
pew or sitting, except such as were declared free ;
and thus completed its character, as St. Saviour’s
church, a character which it has maintained from
that time to this.
On my return from England, in the year following
these proceedings, I appointed the present minister
as incumbent of St. Saviour’s church. And he
was inducted into possession of it in the usual man-
ner, by reading the XXXIX Articles therein, as
being the "church in which he was licensed to serve
and by " publicly and openly making the declaration
of assent to the same in the presence of the congre-
gation there assembled and at the time of divine
service.” The churchwardens, who were present on
the occasion, certified in the customary official docu-
ment that " the declaration was publicly and openly
made on the 20th of August 1876 by the said Alfred
Teed Puddicombe” (who had also signed the declara-
tion) "in the church of St. Saviour, Goulburn ,” as
the building was designated in the handwriting of
the incumbent himself. And this is the only build-
ing, be it remarked, in which as incumbent he has
ever been authorised to officiate in Goulburn.
Notwithstanding the above facts, of which perhaps
you may not all be aware, an offer was made to the
, incumbent, before the consecration of the cathedral,
and the offer was openly renewed in the synod after-
wards, that he might "have the privilege reserved to
him of preaching once a Sunday in the cathedral
and be allowed to perform such surplice duties within
the cathedral as he might be requested so to perform
by auy parishioner or parishioners ; ” and further
that he should have an income from various sources
of £5OO a year, together with the parsonage and a
certain portion of the glebe. But the incumbent,
openly in the synod, rejected the offer; on the plea,
no doubt, which he had previously urged, that he
"must have full right to enter the building,” i.e.,the
cathedral, " and every part thereof (the bishop’s
vestry excluded) for the full performance of all his
functions in accordance with the Book of Common
Prayer, without let or hindrance from any person
whatsoever; provided always that this right must
be held in abeyance whenever the bishop shall
require the building for the exercise of auy peculiarly
episcopal functions.” According to this very mar-
vellous proposal the bishop would have had the
privilege conceded to him, by one of his clergy, of
doing in his own cathedral that which he has a com-
plete right to do in every church in his diocese, i.e.,
to hold visitations, confirmations, and ordinations,
without requiring permission from anyone! And
according to this modest demand, the bishop would
not have been allowed to officiate at any other time
in his cathedral, unless permitted by one claiming
an unheard-of authority, and reversing the true
order of government in the Church of Englaud !
May I remind you of the suggestion made some
time ago by the incumbent, that a sum of money
should be provided by the trustees for the purpose of
building on a portion of the glebe, around which a
considerable population has of late been springing
up, a church for St. Saviour’s parishioners in lieu
of the one above referred to. To this propositiwn
the trustees were not unfavourable.
With regard to the cathedral, it would appear from
your statement not to be properly understood, that
it is perfectly free and open to all members of the
Church of England, poor and rich alike, in the city
of Goulburn and in the diocese at large, at all times
of divine service, and for all the offices of the
church, without let or hindrance from any person
whatsoever.
I have the honor to be,
Your obedient servant,
M. GOULBURN.
