

ST. SAVIOUR’S, GOULBURN.
The Cathedral Difficulty
CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN
THE LORD BISHOP OF GOULBDRN
THE INCUMBENT OF ST. SAVIOUR'S
IN REFERENCE TO
A PROPOSED SETTLEMENT
A FRIENDLY APPLICATION
THE SUPREME COURT.
GOULBURN:
FEINTED BY W. E. EILEY AND CO. LIMITED, AUBURN-STREET.
f / flj Of




ST. SAVIOUR'S CATHEDRAL DIFFICULTY.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE GOULBURN HERALD.
gi K) _ Will you favour roe by publishing the annexed
correspondence, which will show the present position
of the above difficulty and where the obstacle to a
settlement lies ? Yours,, &c.,
A. T. PUDDICOMBE.
St. Saviour’s Parsonage, Goulburn,
February 6th 1889.
To the Eight Eev. The Lord Bishop of Goulburn,
President of " the Cathedral Council,” &c., &c.
My Lord,—This day is the 44th anniversary of
the consecration of the original church of St. Saviour
in Goulburn the church to which the land in
Bourke-street whereon it stood, the 40 acres of glebe
around this parsonage, and the burying-ground at
North Goulburn, are by crown grants annexed ; in
which the parishioners and the incumbent have cer-
tain rights by act of parliament, and towards which
the trustees are by the same act bound to perform
certain duties—the church which, in the year 1863,
fourteen years after its consecration, was declared by
letters patent to be your lordship’s Cathedral, but
which nevertheless retained to the full its parochial
character until the hour of its demolition, no act of
parliament having ever been sought for to alter or
affect its status.
This 44th anniversary of the consecration of that
original church of St. Saviour (occurring as it does
concurrently with your lordship’s happy conval-
escence and with the expectation of the immediate
visit of the Primate) appears to many of us a most
fitting time earnestly to appeal to your lordship,
both as our bishop and as " President of the Cathe-
dral Council, ” to unite in taking such steps as will
once and for ever set at rest the painful and dis-


creditable differences which have now for nearly five
years distracted those in whose midst and for whose
benefit the church of St. Satviour was erected, and
which are felt by the whole community to be a
reproach to our church and a stumbling-block to
those outside.
The only question at issue—and without the final
decision of which peace and order never can be
restored—is this : What building now legally repre-
sents the original church of St. Saviour to which the
land and rights before spoken of are by law annexed,
and which is also by letters patent your lordship’s
cathedral? Is it the larger building erected upon
the site of the original church, " to be the parochial
church of the city and the cathedral church of the
diocese of Goulburn ?” or is it the smaller building
greeted about sixty yards av?ay,to be a “ school-room ”
and "to be used for the double purpose of school
and church until the new cathedral is ready for
occupation ?”
As long as one party asserts that the smaller
building represents the original church of St.
Saviour, while the other party maintains that the
larger building does so; as long as the bishop and
one section of the parishioners are worshipping in
the larger building, but denying its parochial
character, while the incumbent and the other sec-
tion of the parishioners are worshipping (under
protest) in the smaller building, but claiming the
larger as their parish church, so long must the
whole of our ecclesiastical arrangements in Goulburn
remain in a state of weakness and confusion ; so long
will it continue to be impracticable to obtain the
sanction of the legislature to any cathedral con-
stitution ; and so long (to use the forcible words of a
distinguished clerical visitor to Goulburn) will there
continue to be exhibited “ a weekly illustration of,
and most forcible instruction in, schism and all un-
charitableness, wrath, malice, envy, and hatred.”
But if this question be once settled by the com-
petent authority our path will be made plain. If on
the one hand the smaller building be declared the
representative of the original church, and the


larger building to have been mistakenly erected on
its site, equitable arrangements can be made for the
legal adjustment of the error. If on the other
hand, the larger building be declared the representa-
tive of the original church of St. Saviour, and the
smaller building a mere appendage thereto, there
ought to be no difficulty iD drawing up aD equitable
constitution for its government in the dual capacity
of the cathedral and parish church, a constitution
such as has been adopted by other dioceses under
very similar circumstances. The obtaining of a
private act of parliament legalising either one
arrangement or the other, as the case may be,
would set the whole question at rest for ever, and
restore peace and harmony to our now disorganised
and perplexed community.
That a matter involving so grave a question of
right and wrong, in the solution of which the hap-
piness of so many is deeply concerned, should be
allowed to remain unsettled is surely neither credit-
able to our Christianity nor consistent with our
professions of a desire for truth and peace.
The one motive which induces me to write this
letter is the profound sorrow felt by many, that ill-
advised counsels should have prevailed to estrange
your lordship and certain members of our church
from the incumbent of the chief parish in your
lordship’s diocese and certain other members, and
an intensely earnest desire for the restoration, upon
the basis of'truth and equity, of that cordiality and
co-operation which for so mauy years existed between
us. ,
In this spirit and with this desire I now ask if
your lordship will advocate and join in a frieudly
application to the supreme court for a declaration of
the trusts upon which the two buildings in dispute
are held, or will suggest any better means whereby
the question at issue can be decided with equal
justice and legal finality ?
Begging your lordship’s early reply, with all due
respect, I am, my lord,
Yours most faithfully,
Alfred T. Puddicombe.


Bishopthorpe, Goulburn, 4th March 1889.
Rev. and Dear Sir,—Owing to illness I was not
allowed as you are aware to peruse the letter which
you addressed to me some weeks ago ; for I was
strictly inhibited by the doctors at the time from
giving attention to any business which might seem
to involve much thought or care.
The proposal which you therein suggest for con-
sideration is not one which, after so many others
put forth and then withdrawn by yourself, I can now
be expected to eutertain. I therefore decline to be
led into the discussion of it,
And remain, faithfully yours,
M. Goulburn.
The propositions which occupied the attention of
the chancellor and yourself might I trust be re-
considered.
The Rev. A. T. Puddicombe.
St. Saviour’s Parsonage,
Goulburn, 9th March 1889.
My Lord,—l have received with much regret your
lordship’s note of the 4th instaut, in which you de-
cline to unite in a friendly application to the
supreme court for a declaration of the trusts on
which the buildings known respectively as St.
Saviour’s cathedral and St. Saviour’s schoolroom are
held. As however the grounds upon which your
lordship declines do not exist in fact, I hope I need
not regard your lordship’s refusal as final.
Your lordship says, " the proposal which you
suggest for consideration is not one which, after so
many others put forth and then withdrawn by your-
self, I can now be expected to entertain.”
In order to refresh your lordship’s memory I have
taken the trouble to draw up and append to this
letter a complete list of all the proposals hitherto
made for the avoidance of litigation, showing also
at what dates they were made, by whom, and by
whom withdrawn or refused. By this list it will be
seen that four proposals only can be said to have
been put forth by me, and that I have not withdrawn
any of them.


That your lordship, above all, should desire to re-
open the propositions formulated by the chancellor
in regard to the erection of another parish church, is
very difficult to understand. Your lordship in the
first place solemnly dedicated the new St. Saviour’s
cathedral church to be, as the old church was, " the
parochial church of the city.” You then (after an-
nouncing your intention that that building should
be " a cathedral pure and simple ”) solemnly swore
in a court of justice that the building known as the
schoolroom was the parish church ; and now your
lordship actually desires that we should erect a third
parish church of St. Saviour !
But, my lord, the question now before us is not a
re-opening of any of the old propositions—fruitless
attempts at a compromise. Those have all failed,
and it has now become requisite to go to the root of
the matter and to obtain a decision upon that legal
point which is at the bottom of all the controversy —
What building now represents the original church of
St. Saviour, to which certain lands and rights are
annexed by crown grants and act of parliament, and
which is also, by subsequent letters patent, your
lordship’s cathedral?
The re-building and building anew which has
taken place cannot possibly have destroyed the
identity of the parish church (nothing less than an
act of parliament could do that), and all that needs
to be decided is which of the two buildings now
existing is the parish church ? Your lordship avers
that it is the building commonly known as the
school-room ; and that assertion having been
temporarily accepted, under protest, that edifice is
occupied as such ; the result being—a divided con-
gregation, a disorganised state of affairs having no
legal sanction, much bitterness of spirit, and an un-
seemly public scandal. Others, with myself,
maintain that the building commonly known as the
cathedral is the parish church, arid desire to see the
bishop, clergy, and congregation re-united there in
peace, under a cathedral ordinance which shall
recognise the rights of all parties and reduce every-
thing to legalised order.


The supreme court only can now settle this ques-
tion for us, and, unless I greatly misjudge your
lordship in presuming that you simply desire to
kuow the truth, I cannot imagine any possible
reason which can withhold you from seeking this
settlement without delay. Any amount of trouble
and any amount of money will be well spent in
securing such a decision. Whatever that decision
may be, we shall have very grt at reason to be thank-
ful for it. If, in the view of tne court, the school-
room be held to be the parish church, we shall know
how to act; and if on the other hand the cathedral
be declared to be such, there ought to be no difficulty
in an amicable arrangement of matters.
I earnestly beg of your lordship to re-consider
my proposal for a united friendly application to the
supreme court, and to be kind enough to let ms
kuow your decision by the end of the coming week.
I am, my lord,
With ail due respect,
Most faithfully yours,
Alfred T. Puddicombe.
St. Saviour’s Parsonage, Goulburn,
March 27th 1889.
My Lord, —I am unwilling to publish our recent
correspondence—as it is my intention to do next
week—without again asking your lordship for a
reply to my letter of the 9th instant.
With all due respect,
I am, my lord,
Most faithfully yours,
Alfred T. Puddicombe.
The Eight Eev. the Lord Bishop of Goulburn.
