

ST. SAVIOUR’S CATHEDRAL,
GOULBURN.
Much misapprehension appears to exist in the minds of many on
the subject of St. Saviour’s Cathedral Church, Goulburn. The
Bishop and the Synod of the Diocese have, from the commence-
ment, made the same consistent and uniform statement regarding
the design of the building.
The following extracts from letters, appeals, speeches, and
resolutions, extending from November 1870 to August 1884, will
enable all unprejudiced persons to obtain correct information upon
the facts of the case, and to disabuse the minds of others of all
erroneous and unjust conclusions respecting the action of the
authorities of the Diocese.
It must be borne in mind that six years prior to tlie first date
mentioned above, the city of Goulburn had been divided between the
two parochial districts of St. Saviour and St. Nicholas. The Eev.
B. Leigh became Incumbent of St. Nicholas on the 19th of August
1864, twelve years before the Yen. A. T. Puddicombe was appointed
to the Incumbency of St. Saviour’s on the 15th of August 1876.
The city of Goulburn included portions of both those districts in
1870; and therefore cannot possibly "be held to mean St.
Saviour’s Parish ” only.
It will be seen below that in 1870 the original idea was that
of building " a Cathedral ” : that in 1871 it was to be " a Cathedral
for the Diocese and at the same time that it would be available ”
(which in truth it now is) " as a parochial church for the city of
Goulburn ” —" a great Diocesan design that in 1872 the Synod
" recognised the Diocesan nature of the proposed new Cathedral
Church for Goulburn that in 1874 the corner-stone declared it
to be " the Cathedral Church of the Diocese and the parochial
Church of the city of Goulburn —that in 1879 it was spoken of as
" the Cathedral,” and a prayer was uttered that it might become
" a blessing to the whole Diocese —that in 1882 it was declared
that a " Cathedral belonged equally to all members of the Church
in the Diocese ” —" the mother Church of the whole Diocese ”
and that " the Cathedral Church of St. Saviour would stand as a
symbol of the unity of the Church in the Diocese of Goulburn
that in 1884 the Synod ordained that it should be (as the Bishop
in 1871 announced it would be) " used as the Parish Church of the
city of Goulburn and of the whole Diocese.”


The idea of limiting the building to the use of one Incumbent,
and of virtually divesting it of its Diocesan character, is entirely
negatived by the continuous enunciations of the authorities of the
Church in the Diocese, and by the definite intentions and express
language of the great mass of contributors to the building fund—
who never heard a syllable of the attempt to curtail and circum-
scribe the use of the building, until the time or the near approach
of its completion.
The members of the Church, resident in the city of Goulburn
and in the Diocese at large, are and have been, since the Cathedral
was dedicated on the 29th of April 1884, in the full possession
therein of all their rights and privileges, in respect of public
worship and instruction and of the ministrations of religion
according to the rites of the Church of England.
EXTRACTS OF LETTERS, APPEALS, SPEECHES, AND
RESOLUTIONS, &c.
1. On the 3rd of iSovemler 1870 the Bishop sent a printed appeal
to friends in England, stating that he was " Most anxious at once
to luild a Cathedral Church of moderate dimensions at a probable cost
of £15,000 to £20,000 : and he earnestly implored the hearty
support of British Churchmen at home.”
A similar appeal was made to friends in the Diocese, and on
the 26th of Decemler an English friend, G. L. Houstoun Esq.,
who subscribed £lO5 to the building fund, who had visited
Goulburn, wrote —" With reyard to the Cathedral I wish you
every success in your endeavour to raise one.”
2. On the 2Jfh of January 1871 the late George Campbell Esq.
of Duntroon responded as follows —" I have received your note and
circular respecting the Cathedral for Goullurn, which I am aware is
much needed. You can place my name on the list for £IOO.
Were I able I would most gladly put down my name for £1000.”
3. On the 28th of January 1871 the late John Boucher Esq. of
Bukalong replied : —" lam deeply gratified at the prospect of the
erection of a Cathedral Church at Goullurn, so long and so greatly
needed. For years past it has been a real desire and warm purpose
of my heart to aid so noble and pious an object by a contribution
of £IOOO. It is beyond my power at present to offer more than
£IOO. This does not represent my wishes ; but I pray God to bless
it to the honour of His great work.” Mr. Boucher’s name will
ever be held in honor. He gave £446 to the building fund.
4. On the 12th of January 1871, a preliminary conference was
held at the Diocese Depot. The Bishop explained that a scheme
for building a Cathedral in Goullurn had been contemplated ten
years previously (before the formation of the Diocese) ; that in


1868, at a meeting of tlie Synod, it had been announced that the
scheme for a Cathedral would be at once resumed ; that in 1869
(on occasion of the laying of the first stone of Bishopthorpe) a
similar statement was made; and that it was hoped self-denying
efforts would be made in Goulburn and neighbourhood and through
the Diocese, and that very material aid would be obtained in the
colony generally and ’in the mother-country. Those who attended
the Conference formed themselves into a committee to carry the
design of building a Cathedral into effect.
5. On the 19th of January 1871, at a second meeting, the Bishop
further explained that "the building would be a Cathedral for the
Diocese, and at the same time would be available as a Parochial Church
for the City of Goulburn." It was further explained that "the
building of other Churches would not in the least interfere with this
great Diocesan project."
6. On the 9th of March 1871, in his address to the Synod, The
Bishop used these words :—" I sometimes venture to hope that the
time is not distant when the Synod may render esssential service
in some schemes which I have much at heart. One is the erection
of a Suitable Cathedral Church in the City of Goulburn
The designs for building the Cathedral will be submitted at a Public
Meeting on Monday, the 13th of March, when the members of the
Synod will I trust give it their unanimous support.”
7. On the 13th of March 1871, at a Public Meeting held in
connexion with the first session of the Second Synod of the
Diocese, the Bishop said :—" The new building was designed to be
a Parochial Church for Goulburn, with Morning and Evening
Services, and it was also intended to be a Cathedral Church for
the Diocese. The Cathedral arrangements would be determined
by the Chapter, of which the laity would form a part.”
The Treasurer of the Cathedral Building Fund, B. C. Joplin
Esq., on the same occasion said : —" The present movement was
not confined to Goulburn; it was really a Diocesan movement,
inaugurated in Goulburn. They required a place where the
functions of the Bishop could be performed ; and in no other
Cathedral city that he knew was there an absence of a Cathedral.”
Resolutions were also proposed and carried of the same tenor,
viz., that while the building was to be a Parochial Church for the
city, it was also to be " a Cathedral Church for the Diocese,” and
therefore that it was the duty of all members of the Church of
England in the Diocese liberally to aid the undertaking.”
8. On the 7th September 1872 in the Bishop’s Address
to the Synod appears the following sentence :—" Plans for
a Cathedral have been obtained from E. T. Blackett Esq. of
Sydney. These have been generally approved ; and the building
Committee has resolved that the present unsightly building is to
be removed and the foundations of the new building laid without


unnecessary delay. As this is a Diocesan undertaking, it may be
necessary to remind the Synod that it is desirable for them to
commend this object to the support of the friends of the Church in the
Diocese at large.”
" At the same time the Synod passed the following resolution,
moved by the Rev. A. D. Soares, seconded by J. Boucher Esq. :
That this Synod recognising the Diocesan nature of the proposed new
Cathedral Church for Goulburn, earnestly commends the undertaking
to the support of the various parishes throughout the Diocese, and
respectfully calls upon the representatives of each district, both
Clerical and Lay to promote its advancement by all the means in
their power.”
9. On the 15th of January 1874 the corner-stone of the
" Building, which is the Cathedral Church of the Diocese and the
Parochial Church of the city of Goulburn and will bear the name of St.
Saviour's Cathedral,” was laid by the Bishop of Goulburn, aided by
the Hon. John Campbell M.L.C. and the Bishops of Newcastle and
Bathurst.
[ln the interval between sections 9 and 10, the Yen. A. T.
Puddicombe (who had been Curate to the Incumbent of St.
Saviour’s from the Ist of September 1871 to the death of Very
Reverend Dean Sowerby in November 1875) was appointed
Incumbent as stated above on the 15th of August 1876, and on
the 15th January 1877 the Rev. A. D. Soares became Incumbent
of a third Parochial district, which also includes a portion of the
city of Goulburn.]
10. On the 2nd of September 1879, the Bishop, in his opening
address to the Synod, said—” I must not omit to refer to St.
Saviour's Cathedral which is gradually rising in Goulburn. It is
generally acknowledged that the building will be an ornament to
the city ; let us pray that it may also be a blessing to the whole
Diocese .”
11. On the Jf.th of October 1881, the Bishop, in his address to the
Synod, said :—" This beautiful edifice has made great progress of
late, and is now approaching the last stage of the contract for the
stone walls The funds for this nolle huilding, designed as it is
for the whole Diocese, should now le vigorously encouraged ly all
the Parishes.”
12. On the 29th of March 1882 the corner-stone was placed in
the Gable above the Chancel Arch, when the Bishop at considerable
length explained the origin of Cathedrals, and said—" The Cathedral
Church is the Parish Church of the whole Diocese In
pursuance of the ancient plan, Her Majesty the Queen raised the
town of Goulburn to the rank of a City in March 1863, and
ordained that the Church called St. Saviour’s in the said city of
Goulburn shall henceforth be the Cathedral church and See of the
said Mebac Thomas and his Successors Bishops op Goulburn.”


"A Cathedral differs from a Parish Church in this respect, that,
whereas the Church of a Parish belongs to the members of the
Church resident within the limits of that parish, a Cathedral Church
belongs equally to all members of the Church resident within the limits of
the Diocese." " The origin and design of a Cathedral are the
symbol of the unity of the Church in the Diocese, all parts of the
Diocese being united in community of interests under one
ecclesiastical head.”
13. On the 13th of June 1882 the Bishop in his address to the
Synod said, " It is absolutely necessary that the true position of the
Cathedral and its building fund should be thoroughly understood.
Let it be borne in mind then that the Cathedral is the Mother ' Church of
the ivhole Diocese, and that to every member of the Church within its
entire boundaries it is in a sense his parish Church The
principle of universal Diocesan co-operation should be definitely
fostered for all works of a Diocesan character.”
14. At the same time (on the 14th of June 1882) the Synod
carried unanimously the following resolution. " The Rev. Canon
Druitt, in the absence of the Yen. Archdeacon Puddicombe B.D.
(who had given notice of the motion) moved the resolution standing
in his (Mr. Puddicombe’s) name, and the Rev. A. D. Acocks
seconded it—" That having in view the remarks of the Right
Reverend the President in his opening address (and the fact that
the cathedral church of St. Saviour's will stand as a symbol of the unity
of the church in the Diocese of Goulburn ) this Synod earnestly requests
every Clergyman to bring the subject of the Cathedral Building
Fund prominently before his people, urging every member of the
Church of England to aid in completing the cathedral, and that [certain
gentlemen] be requested to form a deputation to canvass the Diocese
in co-operation with the Clergy, so that it may (if possible) be
opened for Divine worship on the 25th of March next, the twentieth
anniversary of the consecration of the Bishop of the Diocese.”
15. On the 6th of August 1884 the bishop in his address to the
Synod, recapitulated many of the particulars of the history and
progress of St. Saviour’s Cathedral, and invited attention to the
Cathedral system in general. He cited Lord Coke, who said,
" Parochial Churches were to the Cathedrals as the Synagogues
were to the Temple at Jerusalem Every Cathedral in its
first Institution was as the Temple of the whole Diocese ; ” also
Bishop Gibson’s Codex " The Cathedral Church is the Parish
Church of the whole Diocese.”
16. On the Bth of August 1884 the Synod passed " an Ordinance
for establishing and regulating the Constitution of the Cathedral
Church of St. Saviour, Goulburn,” and ordained that " The
Cathedral shall he called or known by the name of the Cathedral
Church of St. Saviour, and shall be used as the Parish Church of the
City of Goulburn and of the whole Diocese" They also rejected by


31 to 7 a motion proposed by W. CoNOLLyEsq. that the words
Parish Church of the City of Goulburn in the first clause of this
Ordinance, and the words Parochial Church of the city of Goulburn
in the preamble, shall be held to mean the Parish Church of St.
Saviour's Parish.”
If ever a truth was established upon conclusive evidence,
the above facts prove that St. Saviour’s Cathedral was always
designed by the Bishop and the Synod to be the Cathedral
Church of the whole Diocese and of the Metropolitan city, and was
never intended to be the mere Parish Church of one Incumbent, or to
be reduced to the limitations implied in the idea of a Parish Church
for a single parochial district.
W. li. Eiley and Co. Limited, Printers, Goulburn.


*
■


