

Hi ||p|
,J*to. 8 5'-% I M V
?*i&- m a % . JL ■ ■:
isu ° ) ,^ sr % .(«r s^
c&’’ %# jcc JLi jtcj. jt ■
«lH#PE:ftgy
»*"•• .1''/Heft'. MMMQMMMMMi 9V*M.«I




Major-General L. C. Dunsterville, C. 8., C.S.I.




STALKY’S FORLORN HOPE




STALKY’S FORLORN
HOPE
S. G. SAVIGE, D. 5.0., M.C.
ILLUSTRATED
PUBLISHER :
ALEXANDER McCUBBIN
MELBOURNE


cf mj s
# \
Z. 15 SEP 1920 T
*•* Of the


DEDICATION.
This Book is Dedicated
MRS. SHED
The American Missionary Society
of Persia,
Whose Devotion to her Cause
and
Unrivalled Valor
during those terrible days
July-August, 1918
Inspired each of us to greater efforts
in the rescue of
60,000 Armenians and Assyrians
from
Turks and Kurds.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by
Taylor & Son, Russell Place, Melbourne.




FOREWORD.
In presenting this story, I have been faced not only
with the problem of the elimination of my own person-
ality, but what was still more difficult, the portrayal, when
one was only in close touch with his own party of ap-
proximately thirty men, of the whole scheme of opera-
tions which covered a field so large as North-West Persia.
My desire has been to place on record a plain un-
varnished story of our exploits in that far-away theatre
of the Great War. X have carefully avoided placing my-
self as the centre of interest to the reader, and, only
when forced, have spoken of myself in the weaving of
this story.
It is quite obvious to the reader that I would not have
the facilities nor the opportunity of knowing the details
of the whole campaign. Others on the same stunt will
notice that part of their show has not been mentioned.
To them I point out that this is by no means a history
or a full account of the doings of the whole force, but
chiefly the experience of that portion under the command
of Major Staines, D.S.O. In quoting figures of the
various detachments I have been guided entirely by my
own observations and general reports, and, as far as I
know, are correct in every respect.
As will be seen. I did not figure in the operation at
Baku, but have as my informants, General Dunsterville,
who told me the whole story at Agra, India, in December,
1918, and several other officers who took part in that
sphere of operations.
Therefore, with these remarks I launch this story as
the truthful narrative of my experiences in North-West
Persia during 1918.
THE AUTHOR.




INDEX.
Chapter I.—Stalky 15
Chapter ll.—The Genesis 17
Chapter lll.—Eastward Bound 25
Chapter IV.—The Land of the Arab 28
Chapter V.—Upstream to Baghdad 32
Chapter Vl.—The City of the Caliphs 35
Chapter Vll.—Off to the Unknown 38
Chapter Vlll.—Through the Mountains 42
Chapter IX.—Kirmanshah 47
Chapter X.—Modern Persian Hosts and Ancient
Persian Glory 50
Chapter Xl.—Kurds and Nomads 54
Chapter Xll.—Hamadan 56
Chapter XIII.—A Day with the Roadmakers .... 60
Chapter XlV.—The Highway to Kasvin 63
Chapter XV.—Kasvin 67
Chapter XVl.—Pioneering 68
Chapter XVII.—An Awkward Predicament 70
Chapter XVIII.—The City of Zenjan 72
Chapter XIX.—A Perilous Journey 77
Chapter XX.—The Lone Outpost 84
Chapter XXI.—A Narow Escape 87
Chapter XXII.—The Daily Task 91
Chapter XXIII.—We Go Into Billets 93
Chapter XXIV.—We Give a Dinner 96
Chapter XXV.—The Outstations 100
Chapter XXVl.—Trade Flourishes 105
Chapter XXVII.—A Murmur from the North .. .. 108
Chapter XXVIII.—New Arrivals no
Chapter XXlX.—Northward Bound 112
Chapter XXX.—Disappointment 116
Chapter XXXl.—Levy Raising 118
Chapter XXXII.—New Developments 123
Chapter XXXIII.—Agha Petros 127
Chapter XXXIV.—The First of the Refugees .. .. 129
Chapter XXXV.—The Moving Multitude of Refugees 130
Chapter XXXVI. —The Rearguard Moves Out .. .. 133
Chapter XXXVll.—Against Big Odds 139
Chapter XXXVIII.—A Terrible Eight Hours . . .. 145
Chapter XXXIX.—An Uneasy Night 150
Chapter XL.—We Shake off the Turks 152
Chapter XLl.—Days of Trial 155
Chapter XLll.—Saving the Helpless.— 159
Chapter XLIII.—The Last of the Refugees 164
Chapter XLIV.—The Hand of Sickness 167
Chapter XLV.—The Rush to Baku 170
Chapter XLVl.—Stalky’s Farewell 175




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS.
Major-General L. C. Dunsterville, C. 8., C.S.I.
(Frontispiece)
Ezra’s Tomb.
Kurds.
Looking Back From a Pass.
Arid Country.
Christian Refugees.
Shipping on the Tigris
How We Did 600 Miles Through Persia.
Kirmanshah.
Ashar Creek.
Persian Levees.
Pia Tak Pass.




STALKY’S FORLORN HOPE
CHAPTER I.—STALKY.
ASSEMBLED in a courtyard, surrounded by
high mud walls, were gathered some sixty
British officers and N.C.O’s drawn up in a
hollow square awaiting the arrival of their chief,
whose name was so familiar, but who had as yet
not been seen by any of the group. Down in the
valley lay Hamadan, one of the chief cities of Per-
sia, and from the slope of the hill where these men
were assembled, a commanding view of the city
could be obtained, and of the whole valley which
at that time of the year is cloaked with beautiful
grass and wild flowers.
The sun by now was extremely hot, and standing
at attention tried the spirits of most. There was
a cry from the orderly at the gate, and immediately
the officer in command called the party to attention,
for General Dunsterville, the original “Stalky” of
Kipling’s famous novel, walked on to the parade
ground, and as he passed to the front, all eyes were
fixed upon him, the man of their hopes.
He glanced round the ranks, and then in a quiet,
but commanding voice said, “I think it would be
better if we sat under the shade of one of these
trees.” Leading the way he selected one giving
the most shade, sat down and gathered the com-
pany round about him.
“Well, men,” he commenced, “I suppose you
want to know why you are here; but to begin with,
I might as well tell you the truth, and that is the
good Shah has just informed me that I must leave


Persia with my force immediately. This I do not
propose to do, and I have notified his Majesty ac-
cordingly, and in addition, told him that I find this
country most agreeable to my health and also to
my officers and men. I take it that you will find
it the same, and anticipated that such would be
your opinion when I replied for myself and on your
behalf. I might say that I also added that, if he
desired that we should go, the only thing left for
him to do was simply to come and put us out. I
admit that there are less than a hundred of us here
even now, but we have an old Russian armoured
car, together with a driver, a few machine guns, one
or two Ford cars, and each of you have a rifle with
a few hundred rounds of ammunition. On the
other hand, there is such a thing in existence as a
Persian army. Still we are of the right stuff, even
though we hail from the four corners of the earth.
“Now, about your job! I want you to be pre-
pared for anything that you may be called upon to
do. I want the sergeants to do, if necessary, pri-
vates’ jobs, and the officers, lance corporals.’ The
job is big, but you all have big hearts and I feel
sure will overcome every obstacle. Some, I hope,
will go to the Caucasus; others will have to remain
behind in Persia. I went to Enzeli myself before
the roads were blocked by the snows, and had
rather a pleasant trip, even though my friends, the
Bolsheviks, did not like me at first. I had no
sooner arrived in that fine town when the local com-
mittee ordered me to present myself at once to
their presence. I hardly felt disposed to answer
this summons, so rested. Some little time later,
they came round to my house in a body, and de-
manded that I should come forward at once, asking
by what right I was in Russia. Seeing that their
attitude was an ugly one, I suggested that it would
be much nicer if we all came inside and discussed
the question while sitting in easy chairs. Having
got them all seated and puffing away at Russian
cigarettes, which I provided, we got to business.


A
u
b/3
H
v
X
o
73
X
C
PS
rQ
o
X
a
o
X
E
o
H
X/i
u
N
w
03
T 3
w


Looking Back From a Pass.


“ ‘I am here,’ I said, ‘as head of a British Mission
to see conditions for myself and help you, if pos-
sible, where able,’ and then proceeded to applaud
the results of the Revolution. This pleased my
guests immensely, who at once considered that I
was second only to themselves and, after more
friendly exchanges, they left thinking that I was
a very fine fellow indeed. I deemed it time to leave
as soon as possible, seeing that I only had a few
men with me, and that fortune cannot be played
with too long. So while they went out the front
door and down the main street, I packed my gear
and cleared out by the back entrance as it were,
and, after a certain amount of bargaining, got clear
of those regions. Eventually I found myself back
here once more with a mere handful of men, and
decided to wait until you chaps came along.
“This is the first party from the other fronts, and
more are on their way, so I purpose to commence
work immediately and push on with the job, know-
ing that I can rely on your hearty co-operation in
whatever we undertake. I therefore wish you good
luck in the ventures ahead and in all that we under-
take.”
That was enough for us. We knew that we had
a man of rare quality and stern determination to
lead us, and whatever he would ask of us would be
more than attempted.
CHAPTER lI.—THE GENESIS.
JANUARY, 1918, found the war dragging on
much the same as during the last three and a
half years with a credit balance in favour, if
anything, of Brother Boche. The Russians had
advanced and retired, pushed forward again in
places to be again bumped back. The French had
stopped the rush at Verdun, and the British, to-


gether with their French Allies, had been pound-
ing the Germans on the Somme, pushing him back
to the famous Hindenburg line and again bumped
him up north, driving him back to the Paeschan-
daele Ridge, but still there was no sign of any
weakening in the enemy’s line. The world was
then flabbergasted by the Russian Revolution and
that nation’s withdrawal as a fighting force.
Those in high places saw the great danger of
India after this debacle, when the roads leading
from Persia and the Caucasus to India were left
open to the Brother Boche and his Ally, the gentle
Turk; and probably a general survey of operations
in the near east is advisable at this stage to under-
stand the objects of the Dunsterville force sent to
Northern Persia and the Caucasus.
As soon as possible after war had been declared
by Great Britain on the Central Powers, the first
Mesopotamian Division was sent out from India.
After severe fighting and long marches under the
glare of the Mesopotamian sun. General Towns-
hend, hampered by the lack of adequate supplies,
and the enormous length of his lines of communica-
tion, eventually reached Ctesiphon. After defeating
the Turks there, he was compelled to fall back on
Kut-el-Amara, and after putting up the well-known
heroic fight, he was surrounded by the enemy and
forced to capitulate.
No sooner had this force ceased to exist as a
fighting unit in the field than another, much
stronger and better equipped, replaced it. Al-
though they failed in the earlier stages to relieve
Townshend, they eventually carried Baghdad and
the foothills beyond.
During this fighting, the Russians under the
Grand Duke Nicholas, had steadily pushed ahead,
driving the Turks out of Armenia and holding a
fine from Trebizond to Kirmanshah. When the
British troops established their line beyond the
Dialia River, touch was maintained with the Rus-


sians by mounted patrols. Thus the roads leading
from the Caucasus and Turkey to India were
denied to the enemy.
The Palestine force had steadily pushed ahead
until a line had been established along the Jordan
Valley, whence it will be seen that the Turk was
more or less hemmed in.
When the Russians pulled out, a glance at the
map of the Near East will show that the three main
roads running from Turkey to India were left un-
guarded. Bearing in mind that at this time the
Persians and Afghans were allied by religion to
the Turk and never over friendly towards the Brit-
ish, a great danger, therefore, menaced British rule
in India. If, since the Mutiny, Great Britain was
ever in danger of losing India, it was at this time,
as hundreds of Turkish-German envoys could be
poured into these countries bordering on Northern
India, and, with supplies of German gold, could
easily create a rising amongst the wild Northern
tribes.
Luckily for Great Britain, these regions are one
mass of mountains, and so wc were sure of at least
six months’ delay, owing to the passes becoming
snow-bound during the winter months. If we
worked quickly, a force could be got up through
Mesopotamia to the Persian foothills on the
frontier at about the time when the snow began to
clear, giving us an equal chance with the Turks in
the race through Persia to gain dominion there.
One of Germany’s pet plans was to gain control
of the Near East, so that, in the event of war, she
would be close enough to India to create sufficient
trouble to make our position extremely uncomfort-
able in our great dominion out East. Years before
the war, the Kaiser and his followers saw this, and
the be-laureled trip of the Kaiser throughout the
Near East is well remembered by all. The out-
come was his precious Beriin-Baghdad railway
scheme, which was intended to run from Berlin




through Constantinople, along the Tigris Valley to
Baghdad, thence across the Euphrates Valley to
the head of the Persian Gulf. Mr. Winston
Churchill must be given immense credit for his far-
sighted policy at this time, in that he bought up,
on behalf of Great Britain, the oil fields at the head
of the Persian Gulf. This was the first spoke in
the German wheel of fortune out East, since Great
Britain, holding the land near Basra and the
Persian Gulf, prevented the German line from pass-
ing that important city and finding for its terminus
the still waters of the Tigris River as it enters the
Persian Gulf. This, however, did not daunt the
Hun who swung the line from the Tigris River
down south to Koweit Harbour.
With the capture of Baghdad, the progress of
this line was severely hampered, and for a time
his dream of creating trouble in India was at a
standstill. But with the open roads of Persia, the
great project was once more revived, and the op-
portunity of creating a diversion in India, which
would mean the withdrawal of British troops from
France, at a time when every man was required,
was an opportunity that the Boche would not let
slip. And so the spring of 1918 would see the great
race between Great Britain and Germany, one in
the endeavour to block the roads, the other in at-
tempting to get through to Afghanistan in order to
carry out his cherished plan.
It should be remembered that, at this stage of the
war, few men could be spared from the other
theatres of war by Great Britain, and that our only
way into Persia was by Mesopotamia. Seeing that
the Western Frontier of Persia is barred by great
barriers of mountains, the idea of getting an army
through was impracticable. Even though a force
might be marched through these mountains into
the heart of Persia, it would be impossible to main-
tain them in the field as all supplies would have
to come, first by river to Baghdad, then on to the
Persian border, and from there onwards all food,


ammunition and guns would have to be packed
through on mules and camels. Thus the idea of
getting a force there was well nigh impossible, and
the hope of maintaining them in the field was al-
together out of the question.
The danger to India was seen at the very outset
by those in authority in the War Office, and, as the
Russian army collapsed and melted away, so Brit-
ish agents bought up all their guns, rifles, ammu-
nition and war-like stores, concentrating them in
various places throughout the Caucasus.
At this time little was known of the fighting
qualities of the Armenians and the kindred
Christian tribes throughout the Caucasus, or of the
fidelity of the Russians and Cossacks of Southern
Russia to the Allied cause.
On this gamble all hopes were centred, and ap-
proximately one hundred and twenty officers and
two hundred and fifty sergeants were to be sent
forward through Persia to the Caucasus with or-
ders to raise an army to be equipped with the
Russian material which had been bought by our
agents. Knowing nothing of this great project.
Divisional Commanders in France, Salonica, Pales-
tine and Mesopotamia received instructions to nom-
inate certain men whose qualities as leaders of men,
and whose adaptability to war, under the most ad-
verse circumstances had been proved.
Early in January some twenty Australian officers
were gathered at Corps Headquarters in response
to their volunteering to undertake a desperate ven-
ture which would probably cost them their lives.
They were ushered into a large room of the old
Chateau where Corps Headquarters was situated,
and there General Byron of South Africa, who had
been sent out by the War Office, put the same
question to them; namely, “Gentlemen, are you
prepared to undertake a desperate venture which
will probably cost you your lives, but, if successful,
will mean everything at this stage of the war to


the British Empire?” Naturally the first question
asked by each was, “Well, what’s the job?” which
elicited the reply, “I am sorry, but I cannot tell
you.” “Well, where is the job?” which again was
answered in the same manner.
After so many years of war, on Gallipoli and in
France, especially through the fighting of the
Somme and Flanders, nothing could possibly be
worse than that of the past, so nineteen of us ac-
cepted the proposition and were told to go back
to our units and there await further orders.
On January 12th, each of us received our march-
ing orders with instructions to report at once to
A.I.F. Headquarters, London. There were three
of us from the 2nd Australian Division: Lieut.
Turner, M.C., 27th Battalion, Lieut. Hitchcock,
D.C.M., 6th Machine Gun Company, and myself,
and on informing General Smythe, V.C., who com-
manded our Division, that we had to leave next
morning, he at once ordered a car to be placed at
our disposal. In the early hours of January 13th,
we three left Flanders for one of the Channel ports.
The day was indeed in keeping with our stay of
two years in France. The snow lay on the ground
about one foot thick and to add to the discomfort of
this, combined with the slush on the road, snow
fell without ceasing during the four hours’ journey
to Boulogne, and it was indeed a weary, frozen,
mud-bespattered trio that reported at Horseferry
Road at 4 p.m. on that day. We were then told
to go home and report at 10 a.m. next morning at
the Tower of London.
In due course we all assembled at the Tower, and
there had to undergo the strictest of strict medical
examinations. It was indeed gratifying to know
that after so much war, one could pass without a
blemish. Later in the afternoon, we were dis-
missed for the day with orders to report at 10 a.m.
next morning. This we did, and received lists of
clothing to buy which included a tropical outfit,


together with an arctic, such as fur coats, caps,
mittens, and boots. We were instructed to buy
not only this, but sufficient to last for at least two
years! What hope had we of even guessing where
we were bound for, when given orders to buy out-
fits of such complete contrast, together with a
supply of medicine, all of which had to last us for
two years? Seeing that we were not prophets or
seers, we simply read through the list, looked at
each other and said, “Well, how about a spot?” and
then booked seats for the theatre that night, de-
termined at all events to make the most of the few
days we were likely to have in London.
After accumulating all this gear (which cost
about £So; the Government allowance v/as some-
where near £25, the remainder coming from our
own pockets), we were told to parade to be re-
viewed by Sir William Robertson, Chief of the Im-
perial General Staff. This in due course we did,
and we were drawn up according to Dominions,
Imperials in front, behind which in order were the
Australians, Canadians, New Zealanders, and South
Africans. While waiting, about a dozen Russian
officers marched on to the parade ground, whose
presence created a busy five minutes in laying odds
as to what part of Russia we were bound for.
Shortly afterwards. General Sir William Robert-
son walked on to the parade ground, and, after pass-
ing throughout the ranks, drew us up in a hollow
square facing the steps leading to the Barracks,
from the top of which he addressed us. After say-
ing many nice things, he concluded by saying,
“Gentlemen, I am indeed pleased to see you, for I
recognise that before me I see gathered from the
Imperial Army and the troops of the various
Dominions, the cream of the British Army, and in
whatever you undertake, I wish you good luck and
God speed.”
We were then given leave until the 28th, with
instructions to leave our addresses with the officials
at the Tower. On reporting once more, we were


assembled in a large room of the barracks and be-
hind closed doors, a Colonel from the War Office
unfolded to us the proposed plan of operations,
which did not leave much wanting in the way of
adventure.
The next day, January 29th, we were ordered to
have our bag and baggage at the station ready to
leave England.
CHAPTER lII—EASTWARD BOUND.
A T 11.30 a.m., on January 29th, 1918, we were
all assembled on Victoria Station, and, after
a busy half hour loading the baggage on to
the train, we moved out with the good wishes of
those who came to see us off, v/hich not only in-
cluded friends and relatives, but representatives
from the War Office and the various Dominion
Headquarters.
Southampton was reached in due course, and at
7.30 p.m. all were aboard, and the boat lifted anchor
and moved out of the harbour for France. We dis-
embarked at Cherbourg at 6 a.m. next morning, and
immediately went into camp, and there for the first
time came in contact one with the other. One
looks back on those few days when each found the
true value of the other fellow, and it was with high
spirits that we all settled down, determined to do
the best, one towards the other. Of all the ming-
ling of men that this world has seen there was
never a finer gathering of real men than the party
one was privileged to belong. There one rubbed
shoulders with a Canadian from out West, the
South African from the lone veldts, and the New
Zealander from good old Pig Island, and I suppose
they thought as much of the Australians as the
Australians thought of them.
Orders were received to entrain on the afternoon
of the 31st, and after much hard work in loading
heavy boxes and baggage, we set off for Taranto.


The weather in Northern France was at this time
of the year extremely cold, but, as we journeyed
further south, we experienced more congenial
days. After every couple of days, we would be
taken off the train and put into a rest camp for
twenty-four hours. This indeed was a welcome
change from being crowded four together in about
a fifth-class railway carriage in which we at-
tempted to live, eat and sleep. The opportunity of
a hot bath and the purchase of tin food was not
missed on arrival at one of these camps.
By stages we went further south through Mar-
seilles, Nice, across Northern Italy, until we even-
tually reached Taranto, and after waiting a couple
of days, the outfit embarked on the “Malwa” on the
nth February. The three days’ trip across the
Mediterranean was delightful and, to while away
the time, Russian classes were commenced, bridge
parties gathered, and together with the company of
some forty nurses, life was worth living. Should
anyone want to grow out of their hats in a remark-
ably short space of time, there is one little hobby
I should advise them to take up, and that is learn-
ing Russian. Still, knowing that this language
would be of immense value to us, we put up with
the headache—the result of those few hours’ study
each day.
On February 16th, we disembarked and en-
trained at Alexandria, where we left at nightfall,
arriving at Suez about 6 a.m. next morning.
For me a strange coincidence occurred here. We
got off the train and marched down to the quay,
and there saw at a distance the ship on which we
had to embark. There was something strangely
familiar about the old tub that at once attracted
my attention. She was no other than the old
“Nile,” the boat that saved the 24th Battalion from
the submarine on the way to Gallipoli, when the
“Southland” was torpedoed. At that time the
whole 6th Brigade were bound for the Peninsula,
the 24th Battalion being in the leading boat, the


“Nile,” with the 21st Battalion on the “Southland”
a few miles in the rear. Suddenly the old tub put
on full speed ahead and continued until well on in
the night, during which time she circled round one
of the small islands three times. The reason of this
was unknown at first, but on arrival at Lemnos the
skipper informed us that he had sighted the sub-
marine and, in order to baffle the enemy, had
adopted these tactics. The “Southland,” not being
so fast, had unfortunately stopped the tin fish.
The heroic conduct of the men on board that vessel
is known to all.
With these thoughts, and the knowledge that she
had saved us in my first venture, I took it to be a
good omen that she should be the vessel that would
carry me on my last and greatest venture.
On February 17th, we up-anchored and moved
out from the land of Sun, Sand, Sin and Sorrow,
and after an uneventful voyage, in which we only
stopped once (at a place called Henjan in order to
coal), we eventually reached the head of the
Persian Gulf, and there remained outside the bar.
We waited until a smaller steamer, the “Erin
Pura,” came alongside, to which boat we trans-
ferred, awaiting the favourable turn of the tide in
order to cross the bar over which we had to pass
to reach the Shat-el-Arab. This was accomplished
safely during the night, and at daybreak we all
turned out to get a view of the magnificent river
of Mesopotamia.
For miles it is about a mile and a half across, and
as we moved slowly up the stream, place after place
of interest came into view. The banks are lined
with date palms which grow in great abundance.
Numerous vessels of every description moved either
up or down the river—transports of troops, cargo
vessels with Army Service Stores, and the hospital
ship, laden with the sick and wounded. Hugging
the banks were huge Arab dhows, laden with the
merchandise of the country, being towed by natives
who hauled these primitive barques with great


ropes attached either round the head or to the waist.
Nov/ and then a smaller canoe, propelled by poles,
would be passed. All of this was indeed a restful
change to the eye after being a couple of weeks at
SC2..
About noon we arrived at a point where the
Mahamarah joined the great stream, and it was
here that the Turks, in their endeavour to frustrate
the British in their earlier operations, sank two
steamers. The attempt to block the stream failed
since, as the boats sank, the force of the water
swung them round out of the main channel and be-
yond the necessity of a little extra caution on the
part of the pilot, this did no damage. Eventually
we reached Bazra, where we were to disembark.
After a great deal of hurry and bustle all stores and
personal kit were got ashore, and small parties
were told off to the various camps.
CHAPTER IV.—THE LAND OF THE ARAB.
MESOPOTAMIA, the land of the “Arabian
Nights Entertainment” which we had read
so much about, the place of so many visions,
was here stretching for hundreds of miles before us.
When one is camped under canvas at that time of
the year, a great many of its charms pass away. It
rained continuously for three or four days. The
land, being baked and dry, and the roads pounded
to dust by the thousands of wagons that passed
over them during the summer months, were natur-
ally turned into quagmires after a few days’ steady
rain. The tents, which had been pitched in the
open plain where inadequate arrangements for
drainage had been made during the summer
months, were soon about three or four inches deep
in mud and water, but on active service, comfort
and contentment are generally found after the
scraping away of such trifles. Drains were dug
and sleeping places banked up to such a pitch of


perfection that the heavens could do their worst
without any fear of the tents being swamped out.
Near by was an Officers’ Club, which never did
such a booming trade in all its history as when the
members of this “Hush-hush” party, as we were
called, sojourned nearby. If ever a piano required
attention it was after this party left as, night after
night until well on into the early hours of morning,
its soul was worked out of it by some pianist who
reckoned he knew all about the make-up of such
instruments in the production of sufficient noise to
enable some other fellow who reckoned he knew
all about singing to inflict pain and punishment
upon the hearers. Anyhow it was all a change,
and meant good fellowship, and that means every-
thing.
The days, however, were not passed in such an
easy manner, as at once swords were issued, and all
had to turn to to learn the uses and misuses of that
very excellent weapon. It can be said that at that
time most of us knew as much about a sword as a
sword knew about us. Anyhow, after pointing and
parrying, right, left, high and low, and enduring
hours of trying to work with painful wrists, we
learnt a good deal. Russian classes were con-
tinued and, as a relief to the sore-wrist business,
the work that developed very thick heads was sub-
stituted.
The news of our arrival soon spread and every
General within fifty miles signified his intention of
coming along to see us. This meant that every-
body had to turn out, spick and span, on the parade
ground to be reviewed by the All-Highest, when
many very nice things were said to each of us, but
the unspoken desire of all was that there were fewer
Generals on earth to “butt in” upon our time which
was so urgently needed for training for the great
work ahead. Now and then we were allowed an
afternoon off in order to see the sights of the city,
and each of us took the advantage of going to the


Bazra, one of the chief cities of Mesopotamia, and
destined, I believe, to be one of the biggest in that
land on account of its suitability as a port. Miles
of wharves and shipping facilities have been
erected in order to land stores at this place which
served as the Base Depot.
Here one sees the Arab in his native land. In
build he is about medium height, dark com-
plexioned, with clear piercing eyes, set in an in-
telligent face. His dress is strikingly picturesque,
consisting of flowing white robes, with a head dress
composed of a cloth fastened to the head with bands
of fancy cord. The town itself is typically eastern.
One walks along its narrow, winding streets which
are roofed from one side to the other, and, here and
there, holes are pierced, throwing a dim light on to
the goods and chattels exposed for sale. The
streets themselves are hardly wider than a footpath,
yet strings of mules, horse-drawn carriages and
horsemen move rapidly along, the drivers and
riders clearing a passage by shouting at the top of
their voices. As in all eastern cities the shops are
small and crammed with tawdry ware. Here one
sees cheap Manchester goods and cheapjack Bir-
mingham ware exhibited in great profusion. The
women in most cases are heavily veiled, but, like
other parts of the world, with the advent of
Western civilisation, the superstition of the East
is being thrown off, and gradually the women are
doing away with their face coverings.
Among the most interesting sights of the city
are the canals. Hundreds of years ago these were
cut out from the main river and were run far inland
in order to irrigate the surrounding country, and to
be used also as a means of bringing to the city,
goods from elsewhere, and sending out the pro-
ducts of the country. These canals teem with
small native boats, propelled by poles, one man,
working from the boat’s nose, pushes the pole into
the muddy bottom and walks along the narrow


gunwale facing the stern, for three parts of the
boat’s length. The native in the rear, poles from
the stern and is responsible for the steering of this
twelve-foot narrow canoe. Owing to the cramped,
crowded condition of the stream, it has become an
art in which only the native, reared from childhood
to his job, is the only proficient handler of such
craft.
Though a thousand years behind the times in
customs and conditions, here and there a flash of
Western civilisation gleams forth, and of all the
surprises of an Eastern city, a cinema show pro-
vides the best. Standing a little way back from
one of the main streets there stood a big hall on
which was placarded the usual picture show ad-
vertisements. Not having seen such a show for
months, we decided to have a look. The main part
of the hall was filled with rough, unfinished forms,
the better ones having a pole or two rigged up as
a back. A balcony ran around three sides, the
back one, being bigger and fitted with seats made
from the boards of packing cases, was considered
to be the best, and the portion which the European
population patronised. The show itself suited our
tastes admirably, as one could smoke throughout
the performance and order coffee at frequent in-
tervals. At the conclusion of each picture, the
audience cheered itself to a standstill, particluarly
when one, depicting British troops in training, was
preceded by throwing on to the screen a portrait
of King George. He was immediately recognised,
and a more enthusiastic reception could not be
given by any John Bull audience.
Our time was more than fully occupied during
our few weeks’ stay here, though our souls chafed
to be up and doing. Drill and preparation, no mat-
ter how irksome, has its place and is essential as
a beginning to any great enterprise. Knowing
from past experience that such preparatory work
was necessary, each vied with the other to “do or
burst.”


CHAPTER V.—UPSTREAM TO BAGHDAD.
ORDERS were issued on March Bth, for the
first party to move on to Amara, a large town
on the Tigris, midway between Bazra and
Baghdad, and next day this detachment moved out.
Those of us who remained behind cursed our luck at
being amongst, as we termed them, “the unfortu-
nates,” but our turn came on the 17th, when we
boarded one of the river paddle-boats, not unlike
those used for pleasure trips in various parts of the
world.
After an immense amount of energy and pers-
piration had been expended on yelling to the Arabs,
placing aboard our personal kit and stores, we were
ready to move. Lashed to either side of the
steamer was a big barge, on one of which was
placed all the baggage. The N.C.O’s found ac-
commodation in the other, while the officers occu-
pied the steamer. No such luxuries as beds were
aboard, each person having so many feet of deck
space allotted, and in this hd slept, worked and had
his being.
The saloon (spare the name) was a partitioned-
off, roofed-in portion of the deck on which there
were a couple of tables and some chairs. If lucky
or early one was present at the first seating, if not,
then it was a case of waiting your turn.
Such was our home to be for about two weeks,
and, though the deck space prevented us from
carrying on with sword exercises, there was room
enough to continue the Russian classes.
The winding nature of the river provided an ever-
changing view of scenery, though the banks them-
selves were lined with the inevitable Mesopotamian
date palm.
Next day we entered the Tigris proper, leaving
the Euphrates on our left. What old scenes and


recollections of Sunday School days these ancient
rivers bring back to one’s mind, the conquest of
Palestine by Cyrus and the deportation of the Jews
to the banks of the noble Euphrates. As one
looked across the wide waters and winding turns,
the cries of the Jews in the days of that bondage
seemed to be echoed by the swirl of the passing
waters. Thoughts pass through the brain in rapid
succession, and one wonders if it was here that
Ezra or his fellow-patriots thought out the scheme
of re-building Jerusalem. Next day we pass this
grand old man’s tomb, revered by Christian and
Mohommadan alike. It stands on the right bank
of the Tigris and from a mile off it can be seen
flashing forth its blue shimmer of light from be-
tween the ring of palms that surround it. The
dome and as much of the structure as can be seen
over the high square mud walls is covered with
blue porcelain tiles and is in a wonderful state of
preservation, no doubt due to the fact that Ezra
is reckoned among the great men of the Mohomma-
dan religion which solicits the caring eye and hand
of the Arab.
Day after day we followed the winding course of
the stream along the wide stretches of water and
through the Narrows, so called on account of the
nearness of the banks through which the rushing
waters swirl like a mountain torrent.
Occasionally we pulled into one of the banks in
order to give the engines a spell. Sports were or-
ganised, and from the Colonel to the youngest ser-
geant all competed in the various events. Though
our worthy Colonel was elderly, he at all events
provided a certain amount of amusement when
stripped for the fray. Coatless, hatless, and with
collar and leggings thrown aside, he looked the
personification of determination. After a couple
of hours of such strenuous pastime we were glad
to be aboard again and once more on the move.
A few hours were spent at Amara, renowned for


its copper and brass workers. The secret of this
craft is handed down from father to son, generation
after generation, and though Japan places tons of
such work on the market, it bears no comparison
with the work of the Amara Arab.
A few days later we reached Kut-el-Amara, the
town of Townshend’s last stand. The village it-
self crowns a small knoll on the left bank, and can
be seen from miles off. The river takes a big
bend here, and in one sense proves an excellent
barricade, though if crossed and the ground held,
it becomes a trap to the beleaguered.
We went ashore at this place for a few hours and
rambled over the battlefield and through the Brit-
ish and Turkish trenches. The Turks, to com-
memorate for all time their victory, commenced
building a giant obelisk on a big rock foundation,
and at each of the four corners was placed a cap-
tured British gun. Unfortunately for themselves,
they were not granted sufficient time to complete
their emblem of triumph, as the relieving force un-
der General Maude soon turned our gloom into
sunshine and re-captured Kut.
A few days later Ctesiphon was reached, or
rather, the ruins of that ancient capital where
Townshend defeated the Turks before falling back
to Kut. Only the ruins of the King’s Palace
stands, and the huge arch towers up to a height of
some 200 feet, with a breadth of approximately 150
feet. Its magnitude creates a great impression as,
though so big, it is composed almost entirely of
small baked bricks girded together with huge slabs
of timber. Like the great Pyramid, its present
occupants are the sparrow and his kind —once the
abode of the mighty, now the resting place of the
humble.


CHAPTER VI.—THE CITY OF THE CALIPHS
DURING the morning of 28th March, we pushed
slowly up stream, passing through most un-
interesting country as there is nothing on the
banks of the river to break the monotony of the
great stretches of dull desert landscape. However,
as the day wore on we passed here and there small
clumps of palms, until we reached the fringe
of those trees lining the banks leading to
Baghdad. Afar off, one could see the domes
and minarets of the city, rising above the
forest of date palms. About four miles
south of Baghdad we pulled into the bank and were
there met by the first party, who had already ar-
rived at the place and erected tents. Naturally,
our first excursion was to Baghdad, the city of Sin-
bad the Sailor and his exploits. The roads leading
to this ancient palm-encircled capital are dusty and
tiring to the sight seer, but where the motor car
runs, so does the soldier’s luck, and ours was well
in within five hundred yards of the camp, being in
the shape of a lurching, bumping motor lorry which
conveyed us without mishap to the city.
One is struck by the cosmopolitan population of
the city: Arabs, Jews, Armenians, Chaldeans, and
Persians throng the bazaars. Though the Arab
predominates in numbers, the Jew, as elsewhere,
is master of the wealth. One enters into New
Street, a fine wide street running through the city,
constructed by the Turks ostensibly in com-
memoration of the fall of Kut, but really as a
means of easy transport. Houses and shops were
not spared by the Turkish Commander who drove
the thoroughfare from one end of the city to the
other. The rage of the inhabitants was intense,
but its utility was very soon appreciated and the
popular resentment abated.
Like Bazra, the bazaars are covered in, but in


this city there is a far greater supply of goods,
necessitating bigger places of business. The
quaintness of Baghdad is that if one wants brass
it is sought in the brass bazaar, if boots or cotton
goods, then to the section of the bazaar in which
these goods are sold. A place for everything- and
everything in its place seems to be the idea carried
out. Everywhere is noise. The fair price is never
asked; it is always about 100 per cent, higher than
expected, and the satisfaction to both buyer and
seller in their heated bargaining transactions is
very evident.
The dresses of the women are much more gaudy
than those seen elsewhere in Mesopotamia. One
of the sights of the country is to walk along New
Street about an hour before sunset and see the hun-
dreds of Jewesses taking the air. Here one sees
dresses, or, to be more correct, loose gowns made
of silk, vying with the rainbow for richness of col-
our. The great ambition of the Jewess is to pos-
sess a black lace veil, some of which are wonder-
fully fine in texture, to cover the face. At first
they took great care to hide their faces from the
eye of man, but in October of the same year this
custom was beginning to die out. 'The signs of the
times were that the women were beginning to real-
ise that the face of woman was good for the eye of
man.
On the river front is a very pretty garden, and
here on Sunday afternoons the Indian Regimental
band rendered selections, drawing crowds of ad-
mirers of music, to say nothing of the Jewesses
themselves. These beautiful gardens of Baghdad,
the rich colours of the women’s dresses, the light
tussore suits of the men, tipped with a red fez, are
sights to be remembered.
The river is the main waterway or highway of
traffic, and here are seen boats of every make and
shape—the huge hospital paddle-steamers, paddle-
transports, motor launches, dhows, canoes and row-
ing boats, but strangest of all is a round structure.


made of goats’ skin stretched over a bamboo foun-
dation, capable of holding ten or twelve people.
How this is propelled by paddle and directed, with-
out any steering gear, across such a wide and swift
river as the Tigris, gives plenty of food for thought.
There are many places of interest in the city,
such as the old Turkish barracks covering acres of
ground, the blue-domed mosques and the high
minarets of the various buildings of the city.
There seems to have been no plan adopted in the
laying out of the streets. It seems rather as if the
first builders ran up their houses alongside the par-
ticular track that they took across the desert. The
houses themselves are built much like those we see
in the pictures of the time of Queen Elizabeth. All
are two-storied, with the upper storey jutting out
four or five feet further than the lower one, and it
would be an easy matter in many places to shake
hands with the person in the building across the
road. Sanitation is unknown, and to see the city
proper one has to endure the vilest smells imagin-
able and be chased by myriads of flies.
One thing must not be overlooked, and that is
the so-called Dancing Theatre. One enters the big
hall and procures a seat well forward, in front of
the raised stage, in the place where the orchestra
in a modern theatre would be seated. After mak-
ing oneself as comfortable as possible, having lit
a cigarette to counteract the other perfumes of the
hall, one sits and waits fcr the opening show. The
babble and gestures of the audience provide plenty
of entertainment to while away the waiting
minutes. Then the musicians enter, and the weird-
est of noises and wails is created by drums of all
makes, strange string instruments and cracked
voices. Then enter the dancing girls, each taking
a seat on the platform which is so arranged as to
form a semicircle. The first performer is a child
of ten years of age, who wriggled her body into all
sorts of contortions, keeping time by beating first
one foot, then the other, on the heavy boarded plat-


form, the ankles being encircled with brass bangles,
a most terrific din is created. The place is
stifling and the perspiration streams in small rivu-
lets down the face and arms of the dancer. The
clothes are thick and corsets are not worn. The
first dancer was followed by the others in order of
age, the first dancer being about ten and the last
being about sixty years of age.
Life in camp was more than strenuous. Our
time was filled in by sword exercises, machine-gun
courses, pack-animal work, riding classes, and the
continuance of Russian and Persian, the latter be-
ing added to our list of studies as it appeared that
a certain number of us would have to remain be-
hind in Persia, while the main party went on to the
Caucasus.
CHAPTER VII.—OFF TO THE UNKNOWN.
ON 17th April, orders were issued to a certain
number of us to push on with the first party
under Colonel Keyworth, D. 5.0., of the Sal-
onica Forces. We were organised into sec-
tions, and the one in which I found myself
was in charge of Captain Kay, M.C., of the
Imperial Army. The other officers of
that group were Captain Hooper, M.C.,
Captain Scott-Olsen, M.C., of the Australian
Forces, Captain Fisher, M.C., of the Canadian
Forces, and Captain Carpenter, who hailed from
China.
About 9 p.m. next day, we entrained at Baghdad,
and at about 2 a.m. next morning, were transferred
to open goods wagons. As it rained continuously
during the whole of that night, we had rather a
miserable trip to Ruz, which was at that time the
advanced rail head. We left the train at about 8
a.m., and ran up our tents on the open plain at the
foot of the foothills of Persia. We scouted out for


firewood in order to cook a little food. As there
were no trees in the vicinity, a great deal of strat-
egy was required by a couple of officers who paid
a visit to the A.S.C. stores. They engaged the
officer in charge in such vivid conversation as en-
abled a couple of men to get round the back and
collar several packing cases. It was by these
means that we kept up a sufficient supply of fuel
to produce a drink of warm tea three times a day.
The rain continued without ceasing for three or
four days which put a stop to all our training, but
developed our engineering skill to such an extent
that any canal or drainage system would not be too
big for any of us to take on, and the drains dug
around our tents were really works of art.
On April 22nd, orders were issued to the effect
that we were to push on to the Persian border by
Ford cars, and next day we started off over that
rocky stretch of country leading to Kasr-i-sherin,
the Persian city just over the border. This place
is built near the ruins of a city of ancient days.
Considering their age the ruins of this place are in
excellent state of preservation, the two outstanding
features being the castles, one of which covers about
two acres of ground. Though the top portion is
a heap of ruins, the stables which are built below
are almost as good as the day they were erected.
This speaks volumes for the durability of the stone
which abounds throughout Persia. The other
castle is much smaller, but most of its walls and
arches remain intact, and one wonders what exca-
vation amongst these masses of ruins would reveal.
Some day the antiquarian will come with his pick
and shovel and find relics of that ancient civilisa-
tion which swayed the East, having its origin and
home in the old kingdom of Persia.
The surrounding country is of a rolling nature,
rising to very steep mountains in the distance.
Through the gorges run two swift rivers, one to the
south-east, the other to the south-west, and just
beyond the old city they are separated by only a


few hundred yards. The fertile brains of these
ancients devised a scheme for creating a huge lake
just outside the city walls. For miles the remains
of a tremendously strong and high wall encircles
the lower foothills into which were gathered the
waters of the rivers, with the hill tops forming
little islands here and there. In imagination one
can see this beautiful, island-studded, inland sea
crowded with the boats of the nobility and the wide
walls thronged with gay pedestrians. All this has
passed, conquests have shattered the walls, freed
the waters and destroyed the city. All that re-
mains are the heaps of masonry.
We camped here for six days, passing the time
by playing football and organising shooting expe-
ditions amongst the hills and along the two rivers.
One never-to-be-forgotten day was April 25th,
which was ushered into being by bright sunshine.
A little after noon heavy black clouds swept over
the mountain tops and rolled down into the valleys,
and we had a downpour of the greatest violence.
The hailstones were as big as marbles and the wind
blew in hurricane force. Tents were blown down
and the few that remained standing were flooded
out, despite the fact that the usual tent trenches
had been well excavated. For two or three days
each of us had a very busy time in drying, cleaning,
and repairing the damage of that hour’s storm.
On the 29th we received orders to push off into
the Unknown. Letters were written, and many,
before going to sleep that night, thought of the
dangers of the last few years and wondered what
the future had in store. Next morning we were
roused out at dawn, and after a hurried breakfast,
tents were pulled down and all the gear packed.
By the time this was done, the muleteers had all
their mules lined up in the open and, after endless
upsetting of loads and the chasing of stray beasts,
these two hundred and fifty animals were eventu-
ally loaded up, and were ready for the track.
About eight of us were detailed to form the ad-


vance guard, with instructions to push on to a town
about twenty-two miles up amongst the hills, keep-
ing in touch with the main body the whole time.
That tramp amongst those rocky slopes knocked
the best man out, and it was a very tired party that
crawled under canvas that night.
Next morning we were out again at 4 a.m. and,
after about an hour’s hard work in sorting the ani-
mals into groups and loading up, we set off to Seri-
pul, a town at the foot of the pass some eighteen
miles distant. The road wound over the hills and
through the long valleys, with the mountains in
places rising like veritable walls. While trudg-
ing along through these passes the heat was unbear-
able, since not a breath of air relieved the close at-
mosphere.
One had an opportunity of studying the Persian
in his native land, and for filth, laziness and lying,
they have no equal in the world. The dress of the
middle class along those mountain tracks is gener-
ally composed of a thick felt shawl, a sort of coat
with two holes let in for the arms, and numerous
others for ventilation. They wear loose trousers
and canvas shoes with the soles composed of cord
or straight pieces of cloth tightly bound together.
Amongst the poorer class a well-dressed person is
he who has over his body an ordinary sack with
openings for the arms and head. The women in
these districts are dressed much the same as the
men, with the exception that they generally have
in addition some yards of black cloth which is robed
about their bodies. From all appearances the
clothes are never removed, and as needles and cot-
ton are unknown, the rents are generally tied up
with a piece of string, and after years of wear are
knotted to such an extent that it would be impos-
sible for any of them to disrobe without the aid of
a pair of scissors.
The road we traversed that day was much better
than the track of the previous one as it ran for a
long distance through a well-grassed and watered


valley. Our luck was in in finding a very clear
stream near the camp, and, after pitching our tents,
we all made off for a swim.
CHAPTER VIII.—THROUGH THE
MOUNTAINS.
NEXT morning we had to face one of the great-
est passes of Persia, the Pia-tak Pass, the
gateway of south-western Persia. This day
was extremely trying as the heat seemed to con-
centrate in the deep valley along which we marched,
and one could not wish for a worse stretch of coun-
try. The mountain ahead was a veritable wall, and
up it side we zig-zagged until we eventually reached
the top. On the left, cliffs towered up to the very
heavens and, on the right, deep gorges yawned.
We pitched camp on the plateau and, after resting
for an hour or two, were refreshed sufficiently to
gaze at the wondrous beauties of unconquered
nature. For miles the ranges extended, broken
with tumbled and jagged peaks and perpendicular
cliffs. The wind and rain of centuries had twisted
and carved them into wonderful shapes, and to
stand on that plateau and gaze for miles across the
country was a most wonderful and inspiring sight.
Next day, as usual, we were up at dawn and,
without much waste of time, for we were becoming
more practised in the use of our transport animals,
we were soon ready for the road. After getting
over the great barrier, the road extended along
through a more or less open valley, and it was here
for the first time that we saw the wild flowers of
Persia in all their beauty. Along the valley and up
the slopes they grew in great profusion of colour
and variety. One could, without any difficulty
gather twenty varieties of the most beautiful flow-
ers in any patch of twenty square yards.
The music and jangle of the bells tied round the
mules’ necks was something never to be forgotten.


We had, as stated, about two hundred and fifty of
these sure-footed beasts loaded to the eyebrows.
Each muleteer had his own group of about twenty
beasts, which was generally led by one of the old-
est mules, or a persian pony, and to this one’s neck
was attached a bell of a different tone. At each
halt the whole of this mob would wander off the
road and graze on the lower slopes of the moun-
tains, and during the ten minutes rest would be-
come a hopeless mass of bumping, laden beasts.
At first we reckoned that we had a very small
chance of finding the particular animal which car-
ried our kit on arrival at the camp. This, however,
did not disturb the muleteers, each of whom hung
on to his leader, and when word was given to
move off once more, they would simply lead the way
on to the road and move on, the others finding
their place by following the sound of the bell.
The way in which these animals are trained to fall
into place by sound is indeed creditable to the Per-
sian muleteer.
At intervals we would pass through what was
considered to be dangerous country, and some of
the party would be ordered to scale the heights
overlooking the various passes in order to prevent
the tribesmen from ambushing the party as it
wended its way through the narrow gorge.
At this time we had reliable information to the
effect that certain tribesmen were extermely hos-
tile. It would be an easy matter for them, if they
held these heights as we passed through, to shoot
down the leading mules and those at the end of the
column, producing such confusion that it would be
impossible for the few troops to take up any sort
of opposition. The party would be soon wiped out,
and it can be readily seen that it was of the utmost
importance that these heights should be secured,
before any of the main party attempted to get
through.
From dawn until late in the afternoon we would
be swinging along the road, some of us climbing


the heights which towered almost perpendicularly
from the road, and then arrive at a camping place
at any time between 2 p.m. and 4 p.m., without hav-
ing anything to eat since starting off that morning.
These camping grounds would be generally selected
in an open space near a spring, and the camp itself
would be laid out four square, and each of the four
groups were responsible for protecting their corner
frontages. At night fall, any high prominence
overlooking the camp would be picketted and, with
the sentries placed round the camp, we were more
or less secure.
At one stage, we picked up a telegraph line-
repairing outfit, who were waiting to be escorted
through some particularly dangerous country. At
4 a.m. next morning, we set off across a wide open
fiat and, as it had rained continuously for a couple
of days, we sank at each step into a couple of inches
of pure clay. My particular group was that day
detailed as rear guard, whose duty it was to remain
behind the last of the teams. The horses pulled
and strained in their tracer, through about eight or
ten miles of this country, when at midday we rested
at the foot of the hills over which we had to cross
that night. By that time the animals were in a
state of utter exhaustion and, in order to get the
wagons over the rocky slopes, each of us had to
turn to and lend a hand at man-handling them over
the steepest pinches.
To make matters infinitely worse, it began to rain
about four o’clock, and as the road turned to the
left one got the full blast of the bitter evening wind.
While the sun shone brilliantly the heat was terrific,
yet when it began to rain up amongst those heights
the reverse of climatic conditions would be experi-
enced. Away ahead along the road lay a heap of
mud structures, similar to ant hills, which we knew
to be the village beyond which we were to camp
that night. Two or three of these Army Transport
carts soon out-distanced the others, and, on reach-
ing the more level road, these were sent on ahead


while we waited for the others to come up. The
evening shadows darkened and the wind became
more bitter, so we at once sought shelter, finding
a haven in a nullah which ran across the road.
One of the lads had some tea in his haversack, and
before long a fire was made with grass, and the
billy filled from a stream running near by.
As we sat and drank the warm beverage, two
men from a nomad tribe encamped on the hillside,
put in an appearance, and, with voice and gesture,
we made them understand that we wanted some
eggs. Hardly had they returned with these when
when some old men and women came down, dis-
playing for sale both fowls and eggs. We bought
up the latter, but discarded the former. The re-
mainder of the party was still some two miles in
rear, so a couple of us decided to view at close
range this tribal camp. We set off and within
fifty yards of these rough shelters were surrounded
by a crowd of the usual howling camp dogs, and
naked curious children. The camp was composed
of about twenty-four huge, black, tarry canvas
shelters, filled not only with men, women and child-
ren, but goats, sheep, dogs and fowls, with a floor
about two inches deep in mud and filth. The men
and women greeted us with black looks and scowls,
as if our presence polluted the sanctity of the vil-
lage. Five minutes sufficed for a view of the
nomad village type, and one carried the odours of
that place in his nostrils for many days.
On reaching the road we saw that the other
transports were only a few hundred yards behind.
After another hour’s pulling and swearing, we
reached camp and drew our rations, which in a re-
markably short space of time were eaten without
the aid of knives, forks or table-napkins, but with.
I am sure, more relish than one would enjoy a din-
ner in any fashionable restaurant. No bed was
more acceptable than the one we had that night.
Although it is admitted that stones are somewhat
rough and hard as a palliasse, an exhausted man,


hardened by such tramps as we had done, would
find rest anywhere, especially after having covered
eighteen miles through clay flats and over steep
ridges with the added exertion of the pulling and
pushing of laden telegraph wagons. That day we
were kept going from about 4 a.m. until somewhere
near 7 p.m., with nothing to eat between breakfast
and supper except a hard army biscuit and the
eggs we managed to buy.
Before retiring that night, we bought more eggs,
which were boiled hard for next day’s lunch, and,
although it was another march of sixteen miles, the
road was much better as it led over harder ground.
We were all much fresher on reaching camp that
night than the previous day. No doubt it was due
to the fact that our spirits were buoyed up with
the knowledge that Kirmanshah was to-morrow’s
goal. Kirmanshah conjured up the first sight of
a real Persian city, and the next morning, 9th May,
found us going strongly on the good road that led
to it. A ridge lay ahead and with swinging strides
the little column surmounted the top. It halted for
about ten minutes, drinking in the view of the min-
aretted and domed city, surrounded with a wealth
of green trees and shrubs so restful to the eye after
so many days’ tramp through a treeless and rocky
country, with nothing to relieve the monotony of
the cliffs and broken, bare mountains.
Leading to the city were ploughed fields, and
others with wheat and rice crops, two or three feet
high. Beyond the city ran an immense barrier of
snow-capped mountains which seemed to be the
strong arm of protection almost encircling the city
itself. After the rest, the column moved ahead
with renewed vigour and, on gaining the edge of
the city, swung round to the outskirts and pitched
camp on a knoll which commanded the whole place.
Near by was a camp of a section of Australian
Wireless people, who, with the usual insistence of
the race, soon made themselves known, and it was
with great pleasure that Australian singled out


Australian, and after the usual, “Where do you
come from, cobber?” soon settled down to debate
the merits of “our ’arbour,” or the well laid-out
and beautifully-gardened Melbourne, then on to the
Cup winners.
CHAPTER IX.—KIRMANSHAH.
THE most excellent orders yet issued on the
march were received that night, wherein was
contained the glad instructions that we were
to rest for three days.
These days were devoted to sight-seeing, and the
report of a famine were soon turned to a melan-
choly fact. On going to the city, knots of starving
inhabitants were seen scattered across the valley
actually eating grass, and every step in the city
brought one face to face with a living skeleton.
Those strong enough begged or watched their op-
portunity to steal. Those too weak to stand, lay
dying in the streets. The dead were passed at fre-
quent intervals. Mothers, with maternal instinct,
clung to their dying, and in many cases,
dead children; children crowded round the dead
body of a parent, while many were so weak that a
touch would fell them to the ground, from which
they could not rise without assistance.
The bazaars, even in spite of so much poverty
and death, were alive with merchants, producers
and buyers, bartering and selling. Here one missed
the haggling of the bargain hunter and avaricious
merchant of other Eastern cities, and it w T as soon
seen that the Persian merchant preferred the quieter
methods of business from the strenuous bargain-
ing of Baghdad. In most cases the merchant sat,
cross-legged, in his little rabbit-hutch of a shop,
and awaited the pleasure of a customer, either dis-
playing for sale softgoods in the shape of bright
materials with the brand “Made in Manchester”


stamped on the outside, or such groceries as tea,
rice, sugar, dried fruits and native tobacco. Here
and there was a brass worker banging away at his
wares, or a hatter making those strange, black felt
“beehive” hats of the Persian.
The most interesting worker was the baker, who,
covered in flour, was hard at work kneading dough,
while his huge round oven was heating. Taking a
piece of dough in his hands, he soon moulded it into
the desired shape, first by pressing it out flat, and
then extending its dimensions by throwing it from
the palm of one hand to the other. V/hen a num-
ber of these had been shaped, the hot coals were
scraped out of the oven and the dough placed in-
side to bake, after which they were exhibited for
sale like so many hams hanging on hooks, or rags
on a clothes line.
The market square was fringed with the usual
rabbit-hutch shops. The centre was filled with
donkeys and camels, around which farm produce
was displayed for sale in the shape of mars (sour
milk), dirty white-coloured butter and cheese con-
taining enough cholera germs to kill half the city’s
population. The most pathetic of all were the
women endeavouring to sell their tawdry orna-
ments and odd house furnishings in order to pro-
cure sufficient money to ward off the evils of the
famine for a few more weeks. Others had done
this before and their fate was known. Bit by bit,
the householder’s fillings and furnishings go; a
little more food is procured: then, when the last is
sold, the only food is the grass of the fields. Cer-
tainly a life not too full of roses.
Sickened by the appalling sights of the famine-
stricken city, though refreshed after three days’
rest, we moved onward once more, this time with
Hamadad as our goal.
The valley ahead was the widest yet seen, being
some ten to twelve miles across, covered with a
beautiful carpet of green grass and crops, relieved


at intervals by clumps of trees showing the position
of a village. Fertile though the country appeared,
all crops during the last two or three seasons had
failed and the hopes of the inhabitants were centred
on those green fields of corn and rice. Would they
mature? Or would they, when the dry season set
in, frizzle and dry as those of previous years?
Up to this period we had been living chiefly on
Government rations, such as bully beef, biscuits
and cheese, jam, tea and sugar, varied by the eggs
and dried fruits bought on the road. From now
on we were to live on the country, and in order to
do this, officers were allowed one pound and the
sergeants ten shillings a day. The officers and
sergeants formed themselves into little groups for
feeding purposes, and got hold of native servants
to do the odd slushy work. On our departure from
Baghdad the officers were allowed one batman to
every three officers. As these lads had recently
been discharged from hospital and were awaiting
their draft at the concentration camp, their powers
of endurance were most limited. Early on the
march, it was seen that these boys had to be helped
to a greater extent than they could help, and were
given a lift on the odd mules over the rougher
stages of the march. To lessen their burden, most
of us procured a native servant, and not only were
they useful for the odd jobs, but of immense value
in buying, as well as an aid to learn the language.
The necessary precaution of fumigating these ur-
chins was taken, and after they were scrubbed and
clothed in odd bits of uniform and singlets, they
presented quite a respectable appearance, while
they themselves were in the seventh heaven of de-
light and the envy of the other kids of the country
Their authority, as being servants of the “sahibs”
would break down any barrier and procure food
that we ourselves could not get.
Their powers of endurance were marvellous.
We men would be exhausted after the daily march
of from fifteen to twenty-five miles, yet these


youths would reach camp as fresh as paint and
immediately set to lighting a fire or drawing water
in the preparation of the evening meal.
Their honesty at the age of ten to fourteen was
about equal to that of white youngsters of the same
age, and if anything was taken, it was generally
some fancy article that caught their curious eye.
CHAPTER X.—MODERN PERSIAN HOSTS
AND ANCIENT PERSIAN GLORY.
THE first stage out from Kirmanshah was over
a first-class road that led through the wide
valley, bounded on either side with the never-
ending rocky barrier of mountains.
Looking across from the road to these ridges the
distance appeared to be only five or six miles,
whereas in reality it was nearer fifteen. The clear
light of Persian springtime is most deceptive, and
objects which are twelve and fifteen miles distant
appear to be quite near.
Early next morning, the column was swinging
along in splendid style, averaging three miles an
hour, which is excellent going, seeing that the pace
was regulated by that of the mules, and that only
fifty minutes in each hour was devoted to actual
marching the remaining ten being spent in resting.
Presently a cloud of dust appeared in the distance,
and within a couple of hours its cause was mani-
fested in the shape of a long convoy of mules and
camels. As we approached, its composition was
clearly seen to be a body of troops with their bag-
gage animals.
I happened to be in charge of six men who formed
the advance guard, with our main body about three
quarters of a mile in the rear. One man was sent
back to inform our commanding officer of the fact
that Persian troops were ahead. So far we had not
seen any of the Shah’s army, but knew that it was


trained by Swedish officers, the outcome of an
agreement between England and Russia when ar-
riving at an understanding concerning the position
of each in Persia. At that time we were quite
ignorant of the Shah’s displeasure with our move-
ments within his borders.
It was soon apparent that this force was com-
posed of at least two battalions and, if they cared
to be nasty, we six individuals would have a most
unpleasant time. Even the fifty odd, back along
the road, would not appear to have much chance.
The position was nicely put by a young Canadian
sergeant who said, “Say, Sir, I guess well have
about as much chance as a snowflake in hell if these
here guys cut up.” Well, we had to chance that,
and as we closed on one another the whole outfit
could be sized up as nothing but a rabble. Ahead
of them were a string of about twenty camels, with
huge box-like contrivances slung on either side, one
balancing the other, and on closer investigation, re-
vealed their occupants to be richly dressed but
veiled women, holding frightened youngsters, the
wives and families of the officers. Such a thing as
an advance guard was apparently not considered
necessary but, judging from the number of colours
carried and the blare of trumpets, military glory
was reckoned rather by picturesque display than
fighting utility.
The commanding officer, ablaze with gold tassels
and coloured trimmings, rode ahead, surrounded by
his staff. A little in the rear came the first batch
of standard bearers, carrying the national colours
of Persia wrought in gold braid on white satin.
Behind these marched the drummers and trum-
peters, creating an inferno by banging the drums
and blaring the trumpets without time or reason.
If they contemplated trouble the only manner in
which to meet it was by bluff, so, ordering my men
to march strictly to attention with arms at the cor-
rect slope, we stepped out briskly. Within the dis-


tance laid down in “Infantry Training,” I bellowed
out “Eyes Left,” and the boys swung their heads
towards the required direction like clockwork.
The old Persian Commander was so thunderstruck
at being greeted by such a salute that he bowed and
saluted like the movements of a jumping-jack.
Each officer was greeted similarly, much to their
edification, and, if their first thoughts were evilly
disposed towards us, it was certain that they were
well in our favour before wc reached the end of the
column.
Later we heard that the force was moved from
another town south of Kirmanshah, with orders to
stop the advance of the “miserable” British force
that was marching through Persia, and what might
have been an uncomfortable experience for us, was
turned into an amusing episode by playing on the
vanity of the Eastern mind.
That night we pitched camp under the shadow of
a giant precipice which, forming the side of a sec-
tion of the mountain spur, reared its craggy head
some 400 feet into the heavens.
At the base gushed forth the purest of pure water
from about a dozen springs, bubbling and swirling
until they intermingled and formed a wide stream,
which ran through the grassy flats of the valley.
Nearby was heaped the ruins of an ancient capital
of Darius. Heaps of jagged stones, broken
masonry and smashed columns were the only relics
of the one time centre of ancient civilization and
glory. The hand of the conqueror had been heavy
and in no place was one stone left standing upon
the other. Devastation had been complete; yet the
glory of the king of that capital would live for ever,
for the busy and cunning hands of these citizens
had left records of that city’s military power in carv-
ing, in ancient letterings, that people’s history for
a considerable distance upon the face of the cliff.
After the evening meal, I sat on a piece of broken
column, filled my pipe and was soon lost in thought.


picturing the old city in its days of power. Here
there were scattered dozens of broken columns. I
wondered if this was the site of the King’s Palace
or his Audience Chamber. What stories could
those old stones tell, if only gifted with speech!
Stories of great councils where the brain and wit of
the councillors conceived and worked out some
brilliant military expedition! Was it there, along
the terraced stream, that the mighty walked and
chatted light-heartedly with their women folk? I
wondered if yonder heap of debris were the remains
of another palace where brave men danced with the
dazzling beauties of that age. I supposed that
open square was were the king reviewed his troops
with critical eye and besought them to greater
deeds and extolled the splendour of his dominions.
Yet to-night all was silent. The stars peeped out,
first one, and then in pairs and groups until the
heavens were a mass of glistening pin-pricks of
silver. The cliff stood silhouetted in all its gran-
deur, unconquered by man, symbolic of Nature’s
stability and triumph over the passing history of
mankind. Though demolished, how mighty was
this city, symbolic of ancient Persian power over
the Persia of to-day! This morning, about fifteen
hundred of the Shah’s troops allowed sixty Brit-
ishers to pass them by without the slightest at-
tempt to molest them. What would that ancient
king, who founded this city have done to a force of
sixteen hundred and sixty aliens who dared to pass
into his realms in contravention of his royal decree
to the contrary? Surely degeneration has sapped
the vitals of the once all-powerful Persia.


CHAPTER XI.—KURDS AND NOMADS.
EARLY next morning the party was roused out
and, after cooking a hurried breakfast and
loading the mules within a remarkably short
space of time, we were on the road once more.
Away ahead, a cloud of dust denoted the existence
of a party of nomads moving slowly along the road.
These people, as I have already described, live in
their encampments on the hillside and graze their
flocks on the rich pastures of the valley, which,
when depleted, are deserted in favour of the next
valley ahead. Moving day, to these people, is a
Red Letter one, for all and sundry dismantle the
shelters, roll up the bag and baggage, and collect
the flocks.
This group was moving slowly along, and this
is the Kurd’s golden opportunity. Like the vul-
tures of the mountains he sweeps down in a body of
twenty or thirty strong on the inoffensive wander-
ers and, before the alarm is properly given, half the
flock is cut off and driven up a by-valley. Then
develops a general stampede of the nomads who, in
their flight to safety, leave their all to the tender
mercy of the Kurds, who, racing backwards and for-
wards on magnificent horses, add to the pandemon-
ium by firing their rifles and looking the part of the
dreaded desperado.
So, on that sunny morning, ahead of our little
column, this group of nomads move slowly on, graz-
ing their flocks on the roadside. Suddenly wild
yells and the noise of discharged firearms rent the
air, and in a twinkling, about fifty gaily-dressed,
well-mounted Kurds dashed out from the cover of
the mountains. The women and children shrieked
and ran aimlessly off the road, while their gallant
protectors, the men folk, squeezed themselves into
the smallest places imaginable between the rocks


on the mountain side or small nullahs that ran
across the road.
Such an opportunity for a friendly scrap was not
to be missed, especially in view of the fact that we
had not had a fight for many months, so the order
was passed to the advance guard to get busy and
move ahead, while a group of the main body moved
on to replace them, and another detachment of
about half a dozen sergeants under an officer were
ordered to move along under cover of the banks of
a neighbouring stream. On seeing our approach,
the Kurds wheeled their horses, halted, then en-
deavoured to frighten our fellows by firing a few
shots at long range which were immediately replied
to. Seeing we were in earnest most of the Kurds
galloped back to the shelter of the mountains, while
a few of the more daring spirits among them dis-
mounted at a turn of the road and waited to see us
pass, apparently in the friendliest of terms even
though we had spoiled their morning’s work.
We very soon caught up to the nomads, who had
collected their stock and were once again moving
slowly on. A few of our men were ordered to re-
main with them to protect them from further
trouble, and no men had the blessings of Allah
called down upon their heads more persistently
than those men of ours.
The outfit was most amusing, for besides a flock
of sheep all branded with red ochre, they had with
them about a half-a-dozen cattle on whose backs
were lashed the poles and canvas of their shelters.
To the others were tied young lambs and small
children, while here and there the quiet old ewe had
tied to her back one or two pairs of fowls. The
men themselves rode the small jack donkeys stand-
ing about three feet high, and to see a few of these
wild, whiskered nomads astride such an insignifi-
cant mount, with their feet dragging along the road,
was ludicrous in the extreme. The women, as is
customary in the East, trudged along in the rear.


and those not carrying infants tied to their backs
were laden with the various pots and paraphernalia
of the camp.
The next two days were without incident. The
road was fairly good and the valley wide and
straight. Away ahead the outlines of the great
barrier of mountains, over which we had to cross
in order to reach Hamadan, stood clearly out.
Food so far was plentiful in the shape of chupatties,
mutton, eggs, honey and dried fruits.
On May 17th, we faced the great pass through
which the Russians had constructed a most ex-
cellent road, though in many places from the off-
side one had an excellent chance of rolling hundreds
of feet down the steep slopes.
Of all our marches* up to the present, this for all
concerned was the most severe. That day we
tramped eighteen miles and ascended 8,000 feet
above sea level to where the snow still lay in great
drifts in the mountain crevasses, and it was indeed
a weary party that pitched camp that evening and
cooked their meal. Nevertheless all were cheerful,
as to-morrow would bring us to Hamadan where we
would see our leader. General Dunsterville.
CHAPTER XII.—HAMADAN.
NEXT day, after a seventeen-mile tramp, we
reached the outskirts of the city where we
were met by guides sent out by the General,
and they led us to our camping ground situated in
the European quarter of the city. After we had
pitched camp on a vacant allotment surrounded by
trees, we stretched out on our beds to rest. A little
later, all the officers were invited to lunch with
those already stationed there, and to sit at a table
eating chicken, salad, bread and tea was more than
fully appreciated. In the afternoon we all as-


sembled to be addressed by old “Stalky” as Dun-
sterville was termed.
We stayed at Ramadan until 26th May and those
days of rest were most acceptable to all. Break-
fast at 8 a.m. was indeed a welcome change from
the usual 3.30 a.m. breakfast of the past few weeks.
Naturally we were bent on seeing the city, with
the result that early next morning most of us were
nosing about the bazaar. The devastating famine
was as much in evidence here as at Kirmanshah.
Hamadan is a much better city in many ways
than Kirmanshah. Here one comes in contact with
more Jews, Armenians, and Chaldeans, who, being
better business men, have more up-to-date shops,
with a more lavish display of goods, while the Jew-
ish quarter was more European in style than any
yet seen out East. One derived a great deal of
comfort from the fact that there was also a Euro-
pean quarter, situated on a beautiful rise overlook-
ing the city, with the impassable barrier of moun-
tains rising in the rear which served as a back-
ground to the settlement. Here were the houses
of the American missionaries, the Manager of the
Imperial Bank of Persia, the manager of a carpet
factory and others. Each was constructed on
European lines and surrounded by a large allot-
ment of ground which in every case was well culti-
vated and planted with fruit trees. Dr. and Mrs.
Funk, of the American Missionary Society, were
extremely kind to us. Small tea parties and picnics
were arranged, and one can never forget the kind-
ness of these people, especially some months later
when so many were sick. Dr. Funk’s private lib-
rary was thrown open to all, and to choose a book
and sit down in a comfortable room, reading and
smoking did much to help many along the road to
recovery. No trouble was too much for these kind-
hearted folk, anything that was thought to be of
help or pleasure to us was done, and Mrs. Funk
admirably carried out the part of Mother to both


officers and sergeants. Should their eyes ever scan
these pages may it remind them that the writer re-
members with pleasure and gratitude all they did
for him while so ill after the awful months of July
and August spent in endeavouring to save the refu-
gees from Urmiah.
One never-to-be-forgotten day was Empire Day.
Sports were organised, which consisted of tugs-of-
war and foot races, such as 120 yards and 440 yards
and one mile races. Then Dominion representa-
tives grouped themselves into teams and competed
in the Relay race and Tug-of-war, which were won
by the New Zealand team, with the Australians as
runners-up.
All the European, Armenian and Jewish inhabi-
tants turned up in great strength to witness what
Ramadan had never beheld before—the British
soldier at play. Officers and men mingled together,
and took their places on the rope for the tug-of-war,
full of the spirit of “pride of race,’’ straining every
nerve and sinew in the endeavour to nail their col-
ours to the top of the mast. When New Zealand
won, long and loud were the lusty cheers that
greeted the victors, given whole-heartedly by the
comrades from the other quarters of the globe.
This cheering of the victors by the vanquished was
beyond the understanding of the Eastern folk and
was witnessed with wide-eyed amazement. One
does not hesitate to say, “Thank God for such a
spirit!” because it is that spirit of fair play and un-
stinted acknowledgment of the better team who
have won their laurels in a fair game, which goes
so far to make the Britisher the noble and independ-
ent fellow he is. Once more, hats off to the clean,
fair game.!
The staff, during this time, were by no means
idle. A big job lay ahead, and to carry it out to
its proper extent much had to be done. The small
force was isolated and hemmed in by the mountain
barriers, inhabitated by lawless bandits and cut-


throat Kurds, which made up the country whose
Government had given us orders to quit.
Roads had. to be constructed in order to maintain
communication with the Mesopotamian Force and
be the means of hurrying up relieving troops if we
got into difficulties. A Police Force was necessary
to maintain law and order in the country adminis-
tered by the Force. Maps of the occupied country
had to be compiled, as none were available beyond
those issued which were in most cases newspaper
reproductions, such as the map showing the “Near
East Fronts.”
Irregulars were necessary to form a garrison to
hold the occupied places and repel Turkish raiders.
In order to do all this, officers and sergeants were
detailed to undertake the various duties. Road
gangs were easily procurable since recruits, both
men and women, presented themselves in hundreds.
Here was work which brought a remuneration in
the shape of food and money, and thousands owed
their lives to the fact that the British force was able
to give them work.
An officer was told off as Chief Engineer, whose
duty was to survey the roads and raise the neces-
sary labour. Others took charge of the gangs and
saw that as much work as possible was done by the
labourers. Owing to their awful condition it was
necessarily slow, as a fully matured man was un-
able to do as much as an average British boy of six.
Patience and perseverance were rewarded, for in
a very short space of time metalled roads appeared
here, there and everywhere.
It was at this time that General Dunsterville
showed the humane side of his manliness for, at the
commencement of this work, he issued orders that,
in view of the weak state of the labourers, every
officer and sergeant in charge of labourers was to
use his judgment, that only as much work was to
be done by the worker as could be reasonably ex-
pected, and on no account were natives to be


harshly treated by those in charge. Patience must
be exercised until the workers had regained some
degree of strength from the food to be issued.
Odd officers and sergeants were told off to estab-
lish soup kitchens and prepare the food for the
workers which was issued at the end of each day’s
work.
CHAPTER XIII—A DAY WITH THE
ROADMAKER.
8 A.M.
“Hurry up! You don’t need a coat. Yes,
it’s chilly yet, but within two hours the sun
will simply be a blaze of heat, so hurry along!”
That huddled line of men and women are the
labourers, and those peculiar wicker baskets are
what the stones are carried in from the slopes there
to the road. That tall chap there is the officer in
charge; he is giving instructions to his two ser-
geants. They will control this crowd of 300 odd.
The people are a bit lean to be sure. They have
just finished their breakfast of grass. Yes, grass.
Don’t look so horror-stricken. We’ll see them have
the same for lunch at midday. They’ve com-
menced now; see, they are off to collect the stones.
Slowfully and painfully these living skeletons
drag one foot after the other, and in about a quarter
of an hour return to the job with a basket of stones
which were gathered within two hundred yards of
the road. Slowly this is tipped out, then the “dress-
ers” place one after the other in position by hand,
inch by inch, yard by yard.
“Slow! Yes, it is, but look at the other gangs
along the track. Do you notice they are only sep-
arated by a few hundred yards? Well! That is
continued for miles, so in time a road will grow and
appear complete all at once like the waving of a
magician’s rod.”


“Come along and see the next crowd.’’
12 o’clock.
“Now come along and see them feed. Yes, they
are off to grass like cattle. See that little bunch
over there, come and watch them closely. This
woman, for instance. Oh! the awful look in her
face! Why man she is simply a walking skeleton!
The skin is drawn over the skull and face bones,
and those eyes have sunk right back into her head.
See, she pulls the grass up by the roots, knocks the
earth off and eats away as if she had never seen
food before. Why does she search and examine
the grass so? Why, I declare, she is evidently look-
ing for a special brand. Come away, it’s too bad.
Let us go along to the kitchens! Here is the ser-
geant in charge. How are things, sergeant?”
“Good, sir. The old contractor has just brought
along a couple of sheep and dried peas and greens.
The kitchen hands (Persians) are just killing and
dressing the sheep.”
We go out and look on. When the sun is hot,
these valleys are worse than India. We stay an
hour or so. The meat is cut into small hunks and
thrown into the copper, together with the dried peas
and greens, and all soon gives off a savoury odour.
“Let us go to the Engineer’s office, and then come
back and watch the feeding.”
We find him hard at work, drafting sketches, or-
dering timber for alterations to the billets and offi-
ces, engaging men, etc.
“We won’t interrupt this chap, he is going full
steam ahead. So let us go back to the soup kit-
chen.”
“See! Here they come. My word! They’re
getting a wriggle on this time. Yes, no doubt, for
who wouldn’t when it means food to one who is
starving.”
“What’s wrong with their stomach? Oh, that’s
due to living chiefly on grass. You see the human
being has a spleen like a cow, and when it is sub-


jected to grass for a means of sustenance, the spleen
is affected and causes that horrible swelling.”
One sergeant hurries to the end of the race and
holds them in check, while another clears the front
and keeps the opening in the wall clear. “Righto,
Bill, let ’em come,” yells the sergeant in charge of
the kitchen, and one after the other they pass along
and hold out their brass vessels for a scoop of the
stew. Then hands ply freely, and, before the other
end is reached, all is vanished, and only the licking
of pots and hands remain. To ensure them getting
a “fair go,” you notice the flank sergeant watches
the queue pretty closely, and if one dares to turn
and rob the one behind, or rushes ahead to the one
in front, he feels the full weight of that stick.
“But what is this crowd of unfortunate women
and children on the side? Oh, they are waiting for
the overflow. When the workers have had their
share, each of these groups go through the “race”
and get just half that issued to the workers until all
is finished. Yes, we do save a few. Thousands
owe their lives to the British for what is supplied
as you have seen. They ought to be thankful, you
say! Well, the people you have seen to-day are,
but there is a big party in this country who have
got hold of the European word “democrat,” which
they call themselves. These are the better class
and they overthrew the previous Shah. They are
chiefly tradesmen or the “upper” class. They don’t
appreciate our work, but rather are out against us,
for their pet theory is to allow this “scum” (for so
they class the people you have seen to-day) die off,
and have a new Persia arise from amongst the sur-
vivors Horrible, you say. Well, yes, but I ven-
ture to say that, if you pick out any hundred you
like from amongst the workers on this job, you will
discover in them every known disease. Perhaps
from that point of view it might be better, but we
won’t discuss that, so let us get back to camp.”
There is no “eyewash” about the conditions of


Persia as described in that little pen-picture. In-
credible as it may appear, the people were so re-
duced by famine that grass became the principal
food of thousands. Later, on the trip from Zenjan
to Bijah, havoc of a more devastating nature had
swept the countryside clean of inhabitants. Whole
villages were without inhabitants, all of whom had
died, due to the result of the famine.
Its causes were apparent. Two or three years
had been devoid of crops. First the Turk, then the
Russians had swept the country bare of what it
nourished. To make matters worse, the Govern-
ment, represented by the Shah and thieving minis-
ters, had cornered all the grain. The products of
the South, untouched by war and free from famine,
were controlled by the royal ring with special care
that only a limited quantity at a time was released to
the public in order to maintain the high prices.
Thus, when one is conversant with the conditions of
that time—famine and the devastating work of war,
capped by the avarice of the Shah and politicians—
one feels but little doubt as to the ultimate outcome.
CHAPTER XIV.—THE HIGHWAY
TO KASVIN
MAY 26th saw a party of thirty-five upon the
road once more, with orders to push on to
Kasvin, a large town near the Caspian Sea.
A troop of cavalry had already been sent ahead to
clear the road if necessity arose, and it was also
hoped that, if events worked smoothly, our party
would be able to push ahead to Baku as the repre-
sentatives of the first British force in that arena.
Major Starnes, D. 5.0., of the New Zealand Ex-
peditionary Force was in command. He stood
about sft. 7in. and though thin, he was all sinew
and muscle, and the square jaw set off a lean but
determined face. One always felt safe with


Starnes as he never minced matters and, if the op-
portunity arose, the enemy would never be able to
complain of his want of enterprise. As he himself
always said, “I’m not much to look at, but I’m
always there when the whips crack.”
The party was subdivided into two groups. Nos.
i and 2 —No. i being the Imperial men and No. 2
the Dominion troops, and I was fortunate enough
to be given command of the latter.
Camels and mules were brought along to convey
our baggage, and this was our first experience of
the camel. They were brought along in groups of
four to six, the leading rope of one tied on to the
harness of the one in front, the leader being led by
a Persian. Groups were given their required num-
ber by a quartermaster. Captain R. Hooper, M.C.,
of King Island, and one by one they were brought
to their knees, despite the disapproval on their part
demonstrated by prolonged fits of bellowing. Like
our first experience of loading mules, the camel
loading was not of the best, and throughout that
day more than one group of three or four men
cursed the humped-backed camel in their en-
deavours to reload the baggage that had fallen off.
The information given on leaving Haraadan was
that water would be found sixteen miles along the
road where it was proposed to camp. The heat, as
the season advanced, was becoming more intense,
and after three winters in France, one’s blood had
thickened, and all naturally felt the climate con-
siderably.
The road ahead had been constructed by the
Russians and was extremely good, though the metal
played up with the boots and feet.
After skirting the city, the straight road ahead
led to the mountains and to the sixteen-mile water
point. This was reached at about 4 p.m. when,
much to the disappointment of all, it was soon dis-
covered that the water had dried up. As there was
no Moses with the rod amongst us, the only thing


left to do was to push on until water could be found.
Over the ridge marched that small, tired and hard-
swearing column in search of water and a place to
camp. Captain Hooper, who, being mounted,
pushed ahead to reconnoitre, after awhile sent
word by the interpreter that he had found a stream
near a village six miles ahead. The sigh of “Thank
God for that!” ran through the groups, and a spurt
was put on to get there before nightfall.
Just before dusk we were led off the road by
Captain Hooper to a camping ground on the up-
stream side of the village. Tents soon took shape
and almost immediately food was distributed by the
quartermaster.
On May 31st we arrived at a roadside village
called Abba Garm, the native name for boiling
water. The preceding days were much of a much-
ness, the road being good and, though the country
was stated to be in a dangerous condition, we ar-
rived without mishap. The reports of Russian par-
ties being massacred were verified, as at intervals
we passed overturned Russian motor transports de-
noting where some luckless party had come into
conflict with the tribesmen and had been murdered
on the wayside. Yet, whether it was the fear of the
British name or that exaggerated reports had been
spread, we were spared to pass through this hostile
stretch of country without mishap.
Before the war, the Russians, as it is known, had
virtually the entire control of Northern Persia
which was regarded as their sphere, according to an
agreement between the British and Russian Govern-
ments. In order to develop trade, the Russians had
opened up the country by constructing first-class
roads, and at various intervals had erected block-
houses or posts, where a small Russian detachment
was stationed. The real object of these posts was
to collect toll from the passing caravans in order to
pay for the construction and repair of the roads.
Abba Garm, the place of boiling water, was a


village on the roadside near one of these Russian
posts, and here is seen one of the oddities of Nature.
The town itself is straggling, the houses being built
entirely of mud bricks, the villagers grazing their
flocks on the rich pasture lands of the valley,
through which flowed a beautiful creek. The road
beyond the village rose over a spur which jutted
out to the bank of the stream, and stood out as
clearly as the Sphinx on the Egyptian desert. Ris-
ing from this rock was a cloud of steam, and it was
here that we were told the boiling springs gushed
forth amid numerous icy cold springs. After pitch-
ing camp and receiving our issue of rations, small
parties wended their way down to take the oppor-
tunity of bathing in the hot sulphur waters.
Turning off from the road, a track led to the
rocky spur and, sure enough, we passed numerous
icy cold springs. On reaching the end, we saw
gushing from the rocks the boiling sulphur waters.
Beside one of these cold icy springs, within three
feet bubbled the water from a boiling spring. It
was an easy matter to place the right hand in the
cold water of one and the left in the boiling spring
alongside. At the end of this large rock, the Rus-
sians had built a small stone hut over the largest
of the boiling springs, and inside had excavated a
huge bath in the solid stone. At one corner, the
boiling water gushed forth, and, on filling this bath,
overflowed and tumbled down in a small waterfall
into the cold waters of the stream that flowed along-
side. Not much time was wasted in throwing off
the few clothes we wore on the march, and there for
an hour we revelled in the beautiful hot waters of
this bath of Nature.


CHAPTER XV.—KASVIN.
ON June 3rd we arrived at a small village just
outside Kasvin and there pitched camp,
awaiting orders as to our future movements.
Feeling somewhat leg-weary after so much continu-
ous marching we were quite content to spend the
next day as Sunday, making it a day of complete
rest, but on the following day most of the party
were bargain hunting in the bazaar. Kasvin being
comparatively close to the Caspian Sea was more
European in appearance than any of the Southern
cities. Here there are many fine Russian shops and
hotels. One street is really fine, having an avenue
of trees planted for about a mile through the city,
a splendid shelter being afforded by these overlapp-
ing trees, the branches of those on one side of the
road intermingling with those of the other. After
exploring this portion of the city for a considerable
time we decided to lunch at one of the hotels. The
food set before us was of the best, being soup, poul-
try, mutton, vegetables and sweets. To sit on a
chair, drawn up to a table, covered with a white
cloth, with table-napkins thrown in, was indeed a
welcome change from the camp meal!
After lunch we made for the bazaars which ap-
peared to be stocked to overflowing with all classes
of goods, especially Persian cigarettes. These are
much like Virginians in appearance, but far re-
moved in taste. What weed they are made from
is a mystery. Still, when one is “on his uppers” for
a smoke, anything pertaining to the shape or colour
of a cigarette will do. So large supplies were
bought and, when next we moved, many a camel
carried a bulkier load in the shape of a couple of
months’ supply of cigarettes. Other purchases
were made in the shape of tea, sugar, curry, and
dried fruits, to act as a standby in the event of any


scarcity of food on the track, which we hoped would
lead to the Caspian Sea.
Next day our hopes of reaching the Caucasus
were dashed to the ground as we received informa-
tion that a chief, named Kuchik Khan, was in the
pay of the enemy. As he had 5,000 troops at his
disposal this barred the way to the Caspian. Seeing
our force was about thirty strong, our chances of
moving forward were somewhat meagre.
CHAPTER XVI.—PIONEERING.
A GLANCE at the general situation at this
stage is necessary in order to understand the
value of our future movements. General
Dunsterville had established his headquarters
at Hamadan, as the most central place, and
our force held the main Baghdad-Caspian
Road from Baghdad to Kasvin, a position
most favourable for our enterprise, since, by
holding this highway we also controlled the
roads which lead from Turkey to India. Posts
were being established at intervals, and the road
gangs were hard at work in constructing new roads
and reconstructing those out of repair. In order to
secure our position is was essential to push out
posts along the roads leading from the North, the
reason being to hold the Turks in the passes
through which these roads ran and, if any raids
were attempted, to delay them sufficiently to enable
the General to reinforce any portion of the line be-
fore the enemy reached the main highway.
With this move in mind, a group of about our
own strength was sent from Hamadan to Zenjan,
another from Kirmanshah to Senna, while we were
ordered to march to Bijah, via Zengan, picking up
a Wireless Section at the latter place. The other
parties were to be equipped with wireless also, in
order to keep in touch with headquarters and with
each other. Kasvin was to be held by two troops


of cavalry, another one having moved in to reinforce
the first troop, and another party, similar to our
own, was also on its way.
On June 6th, we were on the move once more,
feeling rather “fed-up” at the thought of being
barred the honour of pushing on to Baku, but this
feeling was counteracted by the fact that we had to
undertake the most venturesome task of any of the
parties in pushing across the unknown and un-
mapped country between Zengan and Bijah. Be-
fore leaving Kasvin we were assembled and any
man who did not relish the trip was given the
chance to remain behind and join the next party
that was moving up. Even though the chances of
the march ahead, through enemy controlled coun-
try was full of dangers, not one man demurred, and
once again we were all volunteers on a perilous
undertaking.
That night we encamped near an old Caravan-
serai, one of the havens of refuge to the convoys on
the great highways of Persia. Built four-square, it
covered about a quarter of an acre while the outer
walls, standing some twenty feet high, were com-
posed entirely of mud bricks. At each wall was
built a gate of burnt bricks, through which the con-
voys entered. Inside were dozens of small rooms,
erected close to the walls. Here the muleteers
store their goods and find rest for themselves.
The open courtyard was paved and even in winter
it was comparatively dry for the animals. On one
corner was erected the inevitable Persian teashop,
where the passer-by halts to obtain a glass of the
beverage of the country, and swops yarns by the
hour with those assembled therein. These places
are most popular, as they provide protection for the
passing caravan from the raiding Kurds and tribes-
men, who would soon make short work of animals
and goods if the muleteers were so foolish as to
camp overnight in the open. That night we met
the party moving up to Kasvin and, as they pitched
camp nearby, it seemed like old times once more.


Many a pleasant hour was spent in yarning over
past work and guessing at future operations.
Next morning we moved on once more, saying
goodbye to the other fellows. Swinging off to the
Zenjan Road, we were once more alone in our un-
dertaking.
The country through which we passed for the
first few days was well cultivated and rich in vine-
yards. The hills, being more open, gave larger
grazing grounds for the stock and richer soil for
the husbandman. Here one had most excellent op-
portunities of examining the wonderful, though
primitive, methods of irrigation. The system has
survived for centuries, and was imported to North-
ern India by the Great Moguls.
Springs are located in the distant hills and then,
from the low flats, holes are sunk some twenty
yards apart in a line to the subterranean spring.
These are then linked up by driving a tunnel from
one to the other, during which operation levels are
considered. When the spring is tapped, the waters
flow along these subterranean courses to the village
flats, There the holes are sunk shallower and
shallower until the water is brought to the surface.
Then open canals are cut out, following the line of
the contours overlooking the cultivated plots.
From the main canal smaller ones are cut, which
run through the plots. By these the water is
directed in sufficient quantities to irrigate the crops
regulated by banking up the junction with mud,
when sufficient has flowed through.
CHAPTER XVII.—AN AWKWARD
PREDICAMENT.
A FEW days later we were pushing along in the
usual style, with the advance guard well
ahead, and the main body, with the mules
and camels, moving steadily in compact formation.
The advance guard, at this stage, could not see


more than half a mile of the road ahead, the remain-
der of the track being obscured from view by a
ridge over which it ran. The men were in the best
of spirits, and taking things very easily during the
cooler hours of the march. This quietness was
turned into a scene of inward, if not outward excite-
ment, for suddenly over the ridge galloped a band
of well-armed horsemen. On seeing our approach,
they immediately halted and, after scanning our out-
fit for a few minutes, wheeled and galloped back
along the road over which they had come.
Such a thing as halting could not be entertained
by us until that ridge had been occupied by the ad-
vance party, who pushed off as hard as they could
go to gain that position. As the remainder of us
came up, we saw ahead of us a column of mules
and camels, preceded by armed troops with fixed
bayonets. Again there was no chance of our retire-
ment for, with our long strings of mules and camels,
it would be the height of foolishness to show our
backs to this force ahead of us. After passing
the word for our detachment to be prepared for
eventualities and strengthening the advance guard,
we moved on once more, determined to put on a
bold front and accept whatever was coming our
way.
The show ahead of us, though much stronger,
was apparently every bit as much disturbed as we
ourselves were. On the approach of the mounted
men, who were doubtless the advance guard, the
Commander rode up to them and, after much ges-
ticulating, one or two mounted orderlies were sent
riding back along the column giving instructions to
groups here and there. We marched steadily on
and, within five hundred yards of this force, we
were met by the commanding officer who, in a very
excited manner, began plying us right and left with
such questions as, “Who are you?” “Where do you
come from?” and “Where are you going?” The
answers were apparently to his satisfaction and,
after much bowing and scraping and shaking of


hands, we moved on once more, the Commander
himself insisting upon accompanying us to the
other end of his column. As we moved along we
had a good opportunity of sizing the show up and
seeing what was tied to the backs of the mules and
camels. These animals were strung together in
groups of about fifteen to twenty, and were bur-
dened with chests, containing rifles and boxes of
ammunition. Every here and there marched a
small group of armed Persians, each carrying a
rifle with fixed bayonet. On passing us, they
gripped the butts of their rifles tighter, showing on
their faces their own apprehension, for doubtless
they expected to be rushed and butchered at any
moment by our party. Now and then a Russian
officer was passed and the usual military compli-
ments exchanged. The native troops, on seeing
that their own Russian officers were cordially re-
ceived by us, cordially returned our salutes and
were to some extent relieved of their anxiety. The
column was so long that it took about half an hour
to pass from the advance guard to the rear guard.
We afterwards heard it was a convoy of Russian
rifles and ammunition, purchased from the Russians
by the Shah, on the way from Tabriz to Teheran.
On passing the end of that column and arriving at
a hill which overlooked the whole of the road for
miles, we halted. We felt much freer than when
we ascended the first ridge and came in full view of
this unknown party.
CHAPTER XVIII.—THE CITY OF ZENJAN.
A FEW days later, without further mishap, we
arrived at Zenjan, the capital of one of the
northern provinces. Within a couple of miles
of this city we were met by a British officer, who had
been sent out by the commanding officer of the
small party sent from Hamadan to hold this city.
After a rest of an hour, during which time we ate


a couple of chapatties and three or four eggs for our
lunch, and smoked a couple of the vile Persian cig-
arettes, we moved on once more and were guided
to our camping ground, situated on the slopes of a
hill overlooking the city itself. We were all unani-
mous in voting that this party knew a camping
ground, for the one selected for us was situated in
an orchard through which ran a beautiful stream of
fresh water. After unloading the animals we soon
erected our tents under the shade of the large fruit
trees, and there rested for the remainder of the day.
As we were to be here for a few days, before un-
dertaking the march to Bijah across unknown coun-
try, we determined to put in the time in buying as
much provisions in the shape of dried fruits, tea,
sugar and flour, as could conveniently be carried.
During the last few days of the march, some little
difficulty had been experienced in obtaining suf-
ficient rations. From reports to hand, the trip of
one hundred and twenty miles which lay ahead of
us, was to be made through a country stricken bare
by famine and war. As no risks could be taken, the
precaution of having at least quarter rations was
necessary before we undertook the journey.
Early next morning small groups of the party
were distributed through Zenjan in their endeavour
to buy the required rations. It was at this time
that Captain Hooper, our worthy quartermaster,
displayed so much foresight in buying up a large
supply of the necessary provisions. The trades-
people of the town were soon found to be anything
but well disposed towards us, and their attitude was
seen to be that of passive resistance. It must be
remembered that this portion of Persia is very close
to the Turkish border, and the language spoken is
more Turkish than Persian in character. Doubt-
less their sympathies would be with the Turks
rather than with the Britishers. Not much diffi-
culty was experienced in buying the stuff, but the
shopkeepers themselves showed no interest in try-
ing to conduct business with us. Nothing could be


bought beyond that which was outwardly displayed
in the small shops of the bazaar, and more often
than not the merchant had to be asked two or three
times the price of his goods. In nearly every case,
the first question met with no response, as he in-
variably pretended not to hear.
It was while in camp here that a brother officer
and myself had a remarkable experience. After
having enjoyed our evening meal, we decided to fill
our pipes and go for a little stroll across the open
paddocks beyond the orchard. As the camp was a
good mile from the city, little danger was enter-
tained by either of us, so we decided to go out with-
out taking the usual precaution of strapping our re-
volvers to our sides, and as the evening was mild,
we also left our tunics behind. As we strolled aim-
lessly across the fields, engaged in pleasant conver-
sation and enjoying the pleasure of a quiet pipe after
the evening meal, we were quite unaware of any
lurking dangers until a couple of straggling Turks
rose from out of the nullah about twenty yards
ahead. Which party was the most surprised it is
hard to say, but I can give you my word that
neither my pal nor myself felt too happy. As in
other cases, we decided to take the bull by the
horns and hurry matters to a climax by rushing our
pair of Turks before they had an opportunity to re-
cover from their surprise. In a twinkling we were
up to them and by signs ordered them to put their
hands up. This they did without demur, and after
satisfying ourselves that they were without revol-
vers or knives, we walked them across to the camp,
feeling quite proud of being the possessors of the
first captured Turks.
We took them along to our commanding officer,
and after he had handed them to the interpreter, we
discovered that they were Turkish deserters who
had recently come down from the northern districts.
They also informed us that there were many more
of their comrades wandering about the country in
search of the British troops, whom they heard were


moving up their way, hoping to be able to surren-
der themselves and escape the hard work and star-
vation rations of their own forces. This was good
news to us, knowing that we had to undertake a
dangerous march through country where Turks
were stationed, and we felt more happy at knowing
that the opposing forces were in this demoralised
condition.
Next morning we received information that there
were more Turks lurking about the city, so a few of
us decided on capturing these birds, but this time
we made sure of having our revolvers, and a good
supply of ammunition. We spent a couple of hours
in exploring the bazaars without success, but were
rewarded as we were about to leave the city when
we ran into about twenty-five grey-coated Turks.
It was soon apparent that they were not as eager
to surrender as their comrades whom we captured
the night before, for, on seeing us, they scattered
in all directions, and we were only able to collar
three of this bunch. As we stood guarding these
while others of our party chased the remainder
through narrow alleys, the citizens of the town
gathered round about in great force, and we were
subjected to their black scowls and howling threats
for some five to ten minutes until the remainder of
our fellows came back. The sight of their co-relig-
ionists being captured by the hated infidel British
incensed the crowd to the height of their wrath, and
many attempts were made to release our prisoners.
However, we kept the threatening mob at a safe
distance by drawing our revolvers, and managed to
get our prisoners safely out of the town.
This city, as in others of Persia, had its large per-
centage of starving inhabitants, and on hearing of
the Turks being taken prisoner by us, and of their
good treatment, many of the inhabitants deter-
mined to present themselves to our camp in the
guise of Turkish deserters. For the remaining few
days the busiest man in our outfit was the unfortun-
ate interpreter, who was kept fully engaged in try-


ing to sort out the Persian from the Turk, for the
former came along and swore by Allah and the
Prophet that he was a Turkish soldier in Persian
disguise who had tramped miles to surrender him-
self to the British. One can hardly blame the
deceit of these people when one knew that hundreds
were dying from starvation alone.
Not only were we pestered by these pretenders,
but had crowds of women hanging around the
camp, squatting on the outskirts like crows on a
rail waiting either for a stray morsel or for a job
of work at washing clothes. Most of us availed
ourselves of the opportunity of hiring their services,
not that we had neglected this job, but the oppor-
tunity of having someone else to do it for us was
much more acceptable than doing our own. So for
a few days the good ladies were kept rather busy,
and an amusing hour was spent in watching them
at work.
They gathered their share of work in bundles and
then made a bee line for the stream, and were soon
busy with a large round tray and a piece of soap,
or to be more correct, fat. The articles were first
well soaked in the stream, and then soaped on the
tray. A large stone was then rolled to the edge of
the water and a shirt or singlet well soaped, rolled
into a knot, and placed on top of the stone. A
smaller one was then secured and the unfortunate
piece of clothing subjected to a vigorous pounding
for a few minutes. It was then soaked again and
re-soaped, then again another dose of pulverisation.
While the ladies are thus employed they have but
little chance of keeping the covering hood over
their faces, and it is here that one has an oppor-
tunity of ascertaining their beauty. The younger
women, as a rule, have pleasant, though plump
faces. The dark eyes and long eyelashes doubtless
being a great asset to any claim of beauty, but as
they advance in years, they coarsen and are by no
means attractive.


CHAPTER XIX.—A PERILOUS JOURNEY.
JUNE 14th was the day upon which we were due
to leave Zenjan with orders to push across to
Bijah, the capital of a neighbouring province.
No maps were available and nothing was known of
any roads or tracks leading across the mountains to
our destination, but Hadja Baba, our muleteer,
swore by Allah and all the prophets that the road
was as well known to him and his men as the
sacred Koran itself, so we left the task of providing
guides to his gentle care.
To make our path smoother, we hired the ser-
vices of a well-known citizen of Zenjan who pro-
fessed friendship to the British, to act as political
agent in conjunction with Major Chaldecott, the
British political officer attached to our party as In-
telligence officer.
Fresh mules and camels were brought along, as
our late muleteers, on learning that we were to push
on to a hostile country, gave us the slip. The
chance of bumping into a strong force of Turks did
not appeal to their fancy so they cleared out under
cover of darkness without collecting the balance of
their wages, but being Easterners, this apparently
did not trouble them in the least, for their attitude
was—“ls it not better to leave a little money and
praise Allah in the orthodox fashion than for our
bodies to provide a repast for the vultures of the
mountains? What is money? Surely Allah is
good and will protect the faithful.”
Fortunately we were able to obtain other mules
and camels which came along to the camp at the
appointed hour, and after a lot of trouble with fresh
animals, we eventually loaded up. Of all the ob-
streperous beasts of burden the camel takes the bun,
especially when he has only been handled by natives.
Whether it is that we smell differently from the


native or the native in his filth provides the only-
known perfume to the camel’s nostrils, it is hard
to say, but it was noticeable that, on every occasion
that we took over new beasts, we had a very bad
time for at least three or four days in trying to load
them. It took one all his time to keep clear of some
of these vicious animals. So it will be seen that,
after loading up fresh animals with their attendant
troubles, the party were not in the best of tempers
when they got on the high road leading out from
Zenjan.
A few alterations had been made in the command
of our group, as the 0.C., Major Starnes, D. 5.0.,
had received orders to sketch a map of the country
through which we were to pass. This meant that
the whole of his time, together with the assistance
of his Adjutant, would be devoted to this work, and
I was lucky enough to be given command of the
party as we moved across the unknown. My
duties were to see that the column was on the road
at the earliest possible moment after dawn, that the
advance guard was well placed ahead of the column,
and the rear guard in readiness to fall in behind.
Besides this, the mules had to be got out in their
respective groups, with the required number of men
told off as convoy escort.
Before we left Zenjan we took over a section of
the Wireless Corps in order to maintain communi-
cations with the other posts. On arrival at camp
each night this wireless apparatus was erected, and
we informed our comrades of the neighbouring
posts that so far we were all right. The second day
out we swung off what, with the greater stretch of
imagination, might be called the main road, and
travelled across country, picking up caravan tracks
here and there. We were soon faced with the fact
that the country was destitute of any means of pro-
viding food, for, of all the villages we passed during
this march, it was a rare thing to discover one in-
habitant. The nature of the country became
rougher, though the view one obtained from the


ridges was beyond description. On gaining these
heights one could obtain a view of from twenty to
twenty-five miles of country that seemed to have
been the playground of some evil genii, who had
pulled great handfuls from the earth and tossed
them holus-bolus in all directions, forming moun-
tains of most fantastic formation. Not a tree could
be seen, but on the lower foothills there was a plen-
tiful supply of grass which appeared to be the back-
ground for thousands of wild flowers, growing in
great profusion and vying with the rainbow for
richness of colour.
Water was becoming scarcer and scarcer, for the
small streams, fed with the melting snows, had long
since disappeared with the advance of summer.
The track zig-zagged in and out between the hun-
dreds of small mountains, sometimes taking us
down to the depths of a great valley, then over the
top of an almost impassable ridge. The constant
jostling and foot-propping of the mules over these
rough tracks loosened the surcingles which strap
the loads on the animals’ backs, and before going
many miles our baggage would be tumbling off in
all directions. No richer flow of dinkum language
could be heard elsewhere than was given expression
to by the fed-up little groups in trying to re-load the
gear. The muleteers we had at this stage were not
the most intelligent that one could wish for, and
instead of lending a hand would invariably sneak
off, pretending not to see the load that had fallen off.
One of the most sterling sergeants of the party,
Sergeant Murphy of Western Australia, was placed
in charge of the convoy because of the large experi-
ence he had had in peaceful days, trekking with
camels across the great stretches of North-Western
Australia. Murphy was one of these easy-going
fellows that would take a lot to put out, but on one
occasion while crossing a difficult nullah, when load
after load fell off as the camels attempted to climb
the steep further bank after coming down an in-
cline., tried his temper to the utmost. He stood on


the further bank and there shouted directions to the
muleteers as they negotiated the bad pinch. By
this time most of them had felt the weight of his
boot, but one hulking Persian deigned it beneath
his dignity as a cameleer to take directions from
a British soldier, and tried to climb up the bank
according to his own way of thinking. The result
was obvious before the attempt was made, and
hardly before his camels had got half way up when
the first stumbled and fell back on to those behind.
The result was an awful mix-up of overturned
loads, and a general stampede of the free camels
took place.
Nothing daunted, the native in charge, who had
caused the whole trouble, adopted the usual tactics
of trying to sneak away, but the watchful eye of
Murphy was too quick to allow this, so collaring
the fellow by the scruff of the neck, he hauled him
out and told him to get busy in trying to extricate
the unfortunate camels. This he did, but while
Murphy was directing /those coming on, he again
sneaked off, but had not gone more than twenty
yards when he was pounced on. He wore the
national hat of Persia, which is shaped like a large
beehive and stands about eighteen inches high,
being made of hard, black felt. This appealed to
Murphy’s eye, and after shaking the life out of him,
he gave the hat a tremendous bang, forcing it down
over his head to the shoulders, then wheeling him
about, kicked him yard by yard back to his team.
There our worthy native put in some five minutes
endeavouring, with the assistance of a fellow coun-
tryman, to extricate his head from his hat. We all
voted that this guy’s neck was at least two inches
longer after so much tugging at the obstinate head
gear.
The third day was over much easier country, as
the track followed the course of a fairly wide river,
but though it ran through flatter country, and this
meant easier walking, it proved itself to be rather
a formidable obstacle, when we had to ford it. In


Arid Country.
Christian Refugees.


Shipping on the Tigris, near Bazea.
How We Did 600 Miles Through Persia.


order to do this the mules and camels came in very
handy, and one after the other we scrambled on to
their backs and made the crossing safely, though
one or two less fortunate pals were not able to sit
on top of the lurching, unwieldly mounts and took
a sixer into the stream below. Though most un-
comfortable to themselves, their plight at least pro-
vided great amusement to those who managed to
cross without mishap.
The next day’s journey led over the roughest
country we had yet crossed, the track zig-zagged
over spur after spur and, after doing some eighteen
miles, we were faced with about a three thousand
feet climb. After so much experience with our
mules and camels we had discovered that the loads
fall off more frequently during the first couple of
stages of the march than later on when the animals
seemed to be more their normal size. After gorg-
ing all night on the rich grasses of the valley, they
came in the morning shaped more like balloons set
on four pegs than the animals they were supposed
to be and when once on the roads lessen in size,
which means the loosening of surcingles and tumbl-
ing down of the loads. After sizing up the obstacle
before us, we decided it would be far better for all
concerned to climb that three thousand feet with
the animals in their present state than when blown
out, as they would surely be in the morning. Tired
and dusty as we were, we set off after a spell of
half an hour, and spent about two hours in toiling
up to the top of the rise. Our efforts were re-
warded, in that the top of the hill was perfectly
flat, forming a great tableland, and not far from the
camp site a spring bubbled up from between the
rocks. Water was becoming scarcer every day,
and Nature, not satisfied with inflicting this upon
us, went a good deal further in filling the streams
with alkali which provides the fiercest thirst imag-
inable. If one wishes to go in for training for
some function a month ahead where unlimited
thirst is essential, then I would recommend a trip


to the hills of North-west Persia and partake of the
water of the streams thereof.
At this time we had our first sample of sickness,
as several of the fellows were down with dysentery.
Fortunately, on leaving Kasvin, we had attached to
us an assistant-surgeon who proved to be a verit-
able godsend from this time onwards. The coun-
try, being deserted of inhabitants, was naturally
without food. Our worthy quartermaster was at
his wits’ end, trying to buy up an odd sheep here
and there, which very often meant him riding to
some village miles off the beaten track. Owing to
his foresight before leaving Zenjan, we had at least
a fair supply of rice, flour, dried fruits, tea and
sugar, and during this five days’ trek, we would
generally boil a little rice for breakfast, another lot
for supper, and would consider ourselves very lucky
if we were able to have meat for the evening meal.
For lunch, we generally had a big drink of water
and would then tighten the belt and consider that
we had a fair meal. This was all bad enough, but
fortunately we were in the best of spirits and, when
not always feeling satisfied in the inner man, would
pass it off with a joke.
So far we had gleaned no intelligence of the
whereabouts of the Turks, but on the fourth day we
arrived at a village on the banks of a fairly wide
stream, and there were told that a Turkish convoy
with ammunition, for Kuchik Khan had camped
there only a few days previously, and had somehow
managed to pass us without being detected. The
knowledge of this by no means improved our tem-
pers, as such a chance of bagging a catch of this
description was hard to let pass. Anyhow, Fortune
did not favour us, and, even had we wished, there
was no hope of catching them in the rough country
over which we had passed, where they would be
sheltered by so many valleys running in between
the hills. Disappointed at letting the Turks pass
through our fingers, but encouraged by the fact that
there was only one more day’s march to complete.


we set off on the final stage for Bijah, and within
an hour arrived at the high road leading to that city.
We had travelled by this time a good one hundred
miles during the five days, the whole of which time
was done on short rations across roadless regions.
Our only guide was a prismatic compass which, use-
ful as it might be, is not the easiest thing to travel
on through country of that description. Fortun-
ately we struck this main road only twenty miles
north of the city, and later in the afternoon we ar-
rived on the outskirts of the town itself, pitched
camp near an outlying orchard, and prepared our-
selves for a tremendous meal, for the quartermaster
had obtained a good supply of mutton and rice.
The people of Bijah, from the Governor down to
the meanest inhabitant, were at a loss to account
for our appearance in their domains. They cer-
tainly knew that a British force was around about
Hamadan about a hundred miles further south, but
how on earth this party of some thirty men arrived
at the town from the north was a puzzle beyond
their solution. The camp had no sooner taken
shape when the Governor and his wise men rode
along and, after a deal of salaaming, were persuaded
to dismount and have a cup of tea with the Com-
manding Officer. Any illusions which they might
have had as to our poisoning them were soon dis-
pelled when our worthy agent put in an appearance
and made himself known as one of the reputable
citizens of Zenjan, producing his credentials to
prove the fact.
While this pow-wowing was going on, the wire-
less people were erecting their apparatus, and were
soon flashing forth the message that we had arrived
at our destination without mishap. Overlooking
the camp was a high spur of mountains which com-
manded a full view of the city and the roads lead-
ing thereto, and after a short reconaissance, a piquet
was posted upon this height.
Thus on June 18th we arrived at our destination,
after having marched a distance of about six hun-


dred miles, through a country in parts practically,
and in most parts, absolutely unknown. After
leaving Kasvin no maps were available, and we had
to trust our guides to lead us through a semi—and
in parts wholly—hostile country in which there
were known to be Turkish outposts. Up to Kasvin
we did not have a man who understood even the
rudiments of medicine and, even after that, the man
attached was only an assistant-surgeon. Certainly
we carried our own medicines, but it is hard to
guess correctly what ails one, or again what medi-
cines to take. The gods were indeed kind as we
were all comparatively well on reaching Bijah and
only two or three had dropped out at Ramadan.
CHAPTER XX.—THE LONE OUTPOST.
AT last we were in the field of our operations
and in touch with the surrounding posts and
headquarters at Hamadan with wireless. In
order to understand exactly the whole sphere of
operations and our own little efforts in regard to
the whole, it is as well at this stage again to review
the general situation.
At Hamadan, General Dunsterville had estab-
lished his headquarters with posts here and there
to the Mesopotamian force, and up as far as Kasvin.
Thus the whole road, from this important town
back as far as Baghdad, was in the hands of the
British and, so long as we held this stretch of coun-
try, the Turks and Germans were blocked in any
attempt they might make in sending convoys of am-
munition or money to the dissatisfied tribes of the
North-west frontier of India. In order to hold this
road, it was necessary to throw out posts to the
north-west, holding those which led down from
Turkey to India at the most suitable places. We
had established a post at Miana, a town north of
Zenjan, which held the main eastern road. Ours,
at Bijah, commanded the centre while another post


had been thrown out from Kirmanshah to a town
called Senna which commanded the western of the
three roads. Thus, if the Turk moved down either
of these approaches, Hamadan would be immedi-
ately notified by wireless, and the group
established at the particular place would take up
their position in such a manner as to be able to
keep back any force, though they themselves were
few in number. To do this, great judgment had to
be displayed in selecting the most commanding
position where a small force could keep at bay a
larger and better equipped force. This would give
General Dunsterville time to move any reserve of
troops or native levies to the threatened point.
Thus we were able with these small posts and our
wireless sections to hold the whole country, with-
out the employment of large bodies of men.
The first thing essential to obtain a footing in
any of these posts in outlying districts was to se-
cure the goodwill of the Governor of the Province.
Early nest day the C. 0., with the Intelligence Offi-
cer and native agent, paid a call on our worthy
Governor of Bijah, while we had a look over the
town.
At first we were ill-received by the inhabitants,
who had had their full share of war and its attend-
ant miseries. The Turks had been there and the
Russians had driven them out, to be themselves dis-
lodged by the Turks a little later, but the town
eventually was occupied by the Russians, who held
it up to the time of the Revolution. Both the Turk
and the Russian had done their best to destroy or
carry off all the moveable goods and the household
furniture of the inhabitants, so it can be readily
imagined that a fresh batch of troops of a strange
nationality would not be made welcome. The baz-
aars in many places had been burnt out, and the un-
fortunate tradesmen were still endeavouring to
make some sort of a living by selling small quanti-
ties of the produce of the country. The better class
of people had been entirely ruined by the war, their


houses in nearly every case being destroyed by
either the Turk or the Russian.
To add to the miseries wrought by war, thous-
ands of the inhabitants had died from the effects
of that dread disease, cholera, or from starvation
due to the famine, and on our arrival, hundreds of
the survivors were on the verge of starvation.
In order to hold the place, a knowledge of the
surrounding country was essential, not only for our
own use, but for our Commander back at Hamadan,
so after a couple of days’ rest, many of us were told
off to make road surveys and maps of the surround-
ing country. It was known that a road led back to
Hamadan, but as to what condition it was in no one
knew. As it was most important that this should
be ascertained, in order to send up troops if necess-
ary, a party was detailed to make a thorough rec-
onnaissance of the road between Bijah and Hama-
dan. A Canadian officer. Captain Fisher, M.C.,
with a couple of N.C.O’s were told off for this job,
and Hamadan was accordingly notified.
It was known that the surrounding tribesmen
were anything but friendly and though this dash
through to Hamadan was a very precarious under-
taking, the chance of being scuppered by the wild
tribesmen did not daunt these men. They started
off a few days later and rode, with only one halt,
over the hundred miles stretch of road. It was wel-
come news to the remainder of us when our wire-
less station picked up the message that they had
arrived safely at Hamadan.
In these reconnaissances it was not sufficient to
mark down on paper the direction of the roads, but
it was also essential to take note of any position
that might adapt itself as a defensive position for
our own use, or offensive for the use of the enemy.
It was also necessary to note the quantity of grain
and produce under cultivation, for the simple rea-
son that we never knew at what time we might be
cut off from our comrades further south at Hama-


dan and, should we remain here for the winter, it
was certain that no convoys could be brought to
the town owing to the snow-bound nature of the
roads through the passes. So day after day small
groups would be detailed to ride out through the
neighbouring country in order to ascertain this in-
formation.
CHAPTER XXI.—A NARROW ESCAPE.
AS at Zenjan, the women of the city flocked to
the camp in search of washing, and to see
these poor creatures waiting all day in the
hope of being able to earn a few coins was most
pitiful. One morning I went out in search of some-
one to do my washing and came across a little girl
of about twelve or thirteen years of age who, seeing
that there was an opportunity of earning something,
came along offering to do the job. I gave her the
clothes and made her understand to bring them
along after they were finished, which she did.
Being struck by the cleanliness of the child, for
the few clothes she wore were spick and span, her
face and hands clean and her hair combed, a strange
contrast indeed to the condition of most of the
ladies who hung round the camp. I took her to the
interpreter and got him to ask her where she came
from and what she was doing, and why it was
necessary that she was in search of work. She im-
mediately burst into tears and informed us that the
day before she had walked in from a village seven-
teen miles away as the last of her family had died
of cholera. She assured us that she had no rela-
tives or friends in the world and, on hearing that
there were British soldiers in the neighbourhood,
she decided to come down hoping that she might be
able to earn some money to buy sufficient food for
herself. Feeling sure that her story was true, I
decided at all events to do a little for one, who, with-


out assistance, would die in the course of a few
weeks.
I asked the interpreter if it was possible to get
her into some Persian’s home and by the payment
of a little money obtain for her a home and food.
He assured me that this could be done, so after tell-
ing him to get busy, I told the child to wait near by
for a little while. Later on, the interpreter came
back and informed me he was able to place her in a
home, and after interviewing the lord and master
paid him something in adveance to take her in at
once. Everything went well for a few days and I
was consoling myself with the fact that she was
being well cared for, when she came to the camp,
and I discovered that the good people in whose
charge she was, were making a good thing out of
the money I was giving them and starving her into
the bargain. Feeling very much annoyed at this, I
took the interpreter along to this household, and by
theatening all sorts of calamities to these people,
obtained from them the promise that the offence
would not be repeated.
I then took the youngster into the bazaar in order
to buy her a pair of shoes as she was barefooted,
and as the lady of the house promised to make her
some clothes if I produced the material, I resolved
to purchase some cheap cloth as well. Going from
one merchant to another in the bazaar I eventually
procured both boots and material, and also a few
bright coloured beads which took the eye of my
little lady. Being absolutely unaware of doing any
wrong, I was quite naturally not displeased at the
Persians as they edged closer and sized me up while
completing the purchase. Feeling quite pleased
with the efforts of the< last couple of hours, and the
little girl in high spirits at the thought of new
dresses, boots and bright bead necklaces, we wended
our way out once more.
Suddenly a howling mob came tearing along the
bazaar in full chase as I thought of some robber or
murderer. At the head of them came the Com-


missioner of Police, a tail fellow in the gaudiest of
Russian uniforms, full of his own importance.
Standing to one side to allow him to pass, I was
quite surprised when he drew alongside and the
whole mob surrounded us, and then the worthy
Commissioner commenced talking in Persian as
fast as he could let his tongue go, accompanied by
the working of his arms and legs like a jack-in-the-
box being operated by very fast strings. Not making
head or tail out of the whole business. I made him
understand that I would go with him to the Police
Station and then we would send for the interpreter.
This we did, and shortly afterwards the interpreter
put in an appearance, and after a lot of parleying,
informed me that I had committed a breach of one
of their laws which was considered to be of the
utmost importance, both from a religious and civil
standpoint, in that I had taken a woman of the
Mahommedan faith through the bazaar of her own
city in broad daylight and purchased for her cloth-
ing and ornaments!
Their idea of a woman very much appealed to my
sense of humour, as I could hardly class a child of
some twelve years of age as being a full-grown
woman of the world. This I asked the interpreter
to inform the worthy Commissioner of Police. His
reply was that I could consider myself the most
fortunate of men as he, while walking down the
bazaar, had come across the mob who had gathered
themselves together in order to scupper me, but he
had persuaded them to lead him to the infidel in
order that he might inflict just punishment for such
a crime. I thanked him very much for his kind in-
terference and for the fact that he had probably
saved my life, but pointed out at the same time that
I understood the rudiments of his religion and ours
of the Western nations were much of a sameness,
in that it was our duty to do what good that lay in
our power. He agreed with this and assured me
that he realised that my intentions were anything
but what they supposed them to be, and he would


thus notify the people who remained outside to hear
the verdict of his decision.
I then asked him if I could send the youngster
home to the people where I had arranged that she
should stay. He said this was absolutely impos-
sible, but that he as chief commissioner would take
her under his care. This was all that I wanted,
and I again thanked him for his courtesy, and asked
him if he would give the child the goods I had pur-
chased for her. He informed me this was impos-
sible, as even though he could realise the spirit of
the gift, yet he could not make the people believe
that it was right for a lady of the Mahommedan
faith to accept a gift from an infidel, but promised
me if I gave him the goods he would distribute
them to needy cases. So, there being no other op-
tion, things were left at that.
I saw this child on several occasions during our
stay at Bijah, and ascertained that the Commis-
sioner had not even attempted to do anything for
her. Knowing it was quite useless attempting to
do more myself than giving her the washing and
pay her a great deal above the average wage. I had
to let the affair stand at that. How she got on
after we left is better not thought of. Doubtless
she would share the fate of thousands of others, and
after exhausting every method of obtaining food,
would eventually have to go out and live on grass
for a few weeks until she would die. Such was the
case with thousands that we ourselves saw, so
worrying about her fate as compared with that of
others would be like trying to fill the ocean by
throwing a glass of water overboard from a
steamer.


CHAPTER XXII.—THE DAILY TASK.
SOON after our arrival we were working in dead
earnest, my particular job being road recon-
naissance and map making. The road that
led south to Hamadan had been hurriedly examined
by Captain Fisher and his men on their risky trip,
but it was essential that we should compile a more
accurate and thorough map of the road for a dis-
tance of at least twenty miles from Bijah. Up till
now we were without horses, but still retained our
mules, the camels having been dispensed with.
The mule was then employed as a mount, and hav-
ing fixed rope-stirrups to the huge straw-stuffed
pack-saddles, proved to be most useful, especially
when crossing the rough, loose, stoney hillsides.
The map-making party usually consisted of an offi-
cer and a couple of sergeants who would move out
early in the morning and return to camp late in the
afternoon. The work was rather slow, as one was
forced to dismount when taking a “shot” with the
compass while the roads, being all turns and twists,
the dismounting and mounting was pretty continu-
ous.
After much patient work, a fairly comprehensive
map of the surrounding country was completed.
The state of the roads and number of men required
for repairing work was noted, together with a tabu-
lated statement of the product of the country, such
as stock and grain under cultivation. Creeks and
rivers were marked down, offensive and defensive
positions selected and noted for future use. A
rough census of (the inhabitants of the outlying vill-
ages was also taken and outlined in the general
report.
While this work was progressing the others were
working at their various tasks. One officer, as-
sisted by a sergeant, was told off for famine relief
work. A soup kitchen was established and a native


buyer appointed, who purchased the required num-
ber of sheep and the quantity of greens to make a
substantial stew. The members of the most deserv-
ing families were then issued with tickets by the
Chief Commissioner of Police. On presenting
these, they would be served with a basin of stew.
Altogether about seven hundred persons received
one full meal daily, free of charge, and thus we were
able to save about a thousand of the inhabitants
from starvation. The men were enlisted in the
road gangs and set to work on road making, for
which they received both food and money.
On our arrival, the Kurds had been carrying out
a series of raids upon the towns of the district, and
in order to prevent this, and maintain law and order
in the city itself and outlying districts, a police
force was raised. This took up the time of an offi-
cer and two sergeants who enlisted and drilled the
men.
The candidates eligible were those of good repute,
who owned a rifle and had a supply of fifty rounds
of ammunition. Altogether about fifty were chosen
who were given white arm-bands, with D.P. (Dis-
trict Police) in black cloth sewn on them. The
people, not knowing what characters these were,
treated the members of the force with respect and
fear. When they were knocked into some sort of
shape, they were told off to patrol the bazaars and
guard our quarters, thus releasing the sergeants for
other more important duties.
By this time we had sized the Persians up as be-
ing useless material for troops, and as it was most
essential that we should raise a force of sufficient
strength to maintain our positions in these outback
posts, to be prepared to move North towards the
Caucasus, more suitable material had to be sought
for our army. As the Kurds were always scrap-
ping for loot, we turned our attention to this source
of supply. The Sirdar, who rules these tribesmen,
resided in Bijah but unfortunately he and the Gov-
ernor, being a Persian, were not by any means


friendly. The Kurd looks upon the Persian as a
degenerate race, lacking the stamina of manhood,
while the Persian looks upon the Kurds as an illiter-
ate and lawless crowd who live by plunder alone.
As to which was the better type of the two we very
soon decided. Negotiations were commenced with
the Sirdar to enrol a force under our flag, but the
Governor, at the time of our arrival, who was at his
wits’ end as to how he should cope with the raids
of the Kurds on his villages, and was expecting a
raid in force upon his capital itself, applied for our
assistance in putting down this lawlessness and
terror.
We were anxious to protect the citizens, but at
the same time were desirous of raising a Kurdish
force for operations further North. So, in order to
assist the people and still keep the Kurds on our
side, a great deal of tact was necessary. All credit
is due to Major Starnes and Major Chaildecott for
their tactful negotiations with both parties. Law-
lessness was suppressed within the city and pro-
tection afforded to- the near villages by the policing
of these areas by our District Police, relief to the
starving inhabitants being afforded by our famine
work.
CHAPTER XXIII.—WE GO INTO BILLETS.
WE spent about a fortnight under canvas in
the camp near the orchard on the outskirts
of the city. By this time we felt pretty sure
that conditions were much safer, and that our grip
upon the Governor and the head men of the city
was secure enough to warrant our taking over a
house in the city, thus living in more comfort than
the camp could afford. At this time of the year,
with the advance of summer, the roads becoming
dry, the dust accumulating in the valleys, meant
that when the slightest winds blew, the dust would


be whirled throughout the camp and life made any-
thing but pleasing.
One morning I received orders from the C.O. to
look round the city and obtain, if possible, a house
on the further side of the city, in order that we could
obtain water for cooking purposes before it flowed
through any of the houses. So in company with a
sergeant I set off on the job. We spent about an
hour or so riding around the outskirts, and decided
to have a look at a house which we thought would
suit our requirements. All the better class of
houses in any Persian city are surrounded by high
mud walls, the only entrance being through the
heavy doors which are always locked.. After knock-
ing for some time at the gate of this particular
courtyard we were greeted by the voice of a woman
from within, who inquired our business. We did
our best to explain, but this apparently only added
to her fright, for she rushed back to the house,
screaming at the top of her voice. After a lot of
yabbering, she brought her worthy master to in-
terrogate us. He asked for explanations.. We tried
to tell him that we were seeking a house and wished
to negotiate with him for the rental of this particu-
lar place. Doubtless this man had previous ex-
perience of other strangers requisitioning what they
required, and thinking, if he refused us admittance,
he would be treated in the same manner by us as
the Russian and Turkish officers had treated the
inhabitants during their occupation of the city. So
with much fear and trembling he unbolted the gate
and invited us inside, and after shouting commands
to his woman folk to make themselves scarce, he
commenced showing us round the building.
After making a thorough survey of the place, he
invited us to have tea, and to all appearances was
on the verge of a nervous collapse, but, after drink-
ing tea and sharing our cigarettes, he was appar-
ently satisfied that the English fellows were not so
bad after all. We then hastened back to camp and
made our report to Major Starnes, but in the mean-


time the Sirdar had offered us the use of one of his
houses near the one we had inspected. This was
much larger and more adaptable to our use on ac-
count of its higher walls round the courtyard, which
overlooked the open spaces on that side of the city,
also commanded the Governor’s residence —a point
not to be despised in the event of his treachery.
Next day the C.O. and a few officers inspected the
place and resolved that this should be our home
during our stay in Bijah, although it required a
great deal of work before it would become habitable.
Captain Scott-Olsen, an Australian officer, was
told to collect the required number of workmen and
the necessary material, and within a fortnight had
cleared all the refuse from the yard and buildings,
blocked up the holes in the roof and walls, white,
washed the place throughout and made it ready for
our occupation.
On the ist July we shifted from the camp to our
new quarters and after a bath felt much more com-
fortable in the spacious rooms than in the cramped
40-pounder tents of the camp. The house itself
contained seventeen rooms, nine of which were on
the ground floor, and eight above, with a large Per-
sian bathroom built on one wing. Close to the mud
walls of the courtyard were erected spacious stables.
A smaller building at the back was converted into a
cook house, and in another building within the yard
we built an oven to bake our bread.
One of the fellows, a Scottish sergeant, was a
baker in more peaceful times, and he superintended
the erection of the oven, and after many experi-
ments made some sour dough which was to take
the place of yeast. The Quartermaster during this
time was buying up large supplies of wheat, and had
made arrangements with a native miller to grind the
grain into a coarse flour. The wheat was brought
in from the outlying districts on mules and donkeys
and placed in one of the store rooms of our new
home. Several women were employed in cleaning
the grain.


The Persian has no scruples about how he pro-
duces his goods, such a thing as a “Pure Foods
Act” being unheard of. A common practice was to
mix six to eight pounds of small stones with the
wheat in order to add to its weight, for all goods
are sold according to weight, not quantity. Thus
when a large stock of grain is purchased, the dealer
obtains a certain amount of payment for pebbles.
The good ladies would commence work about 7
o’clock in the morning, bringing with them their
trays, and, after sifting the grain, would then gather
it into the trays and by deft movements throw it
into the air, allowing the breeze to blow away the
dust and chaff. They would then wash the grain,
re-bag it ready for the miller, who a few days later
would return with a couple of bags of rough flour
in which the bran and pollard still remained. Al-
though it turned out brownish bread, it was never-
theless wholesome, and much more acceptable than
the vile chupatties of the East. We then hired the
services of a cook, and after going through a dozen
applicants, engaged a native who claimed to have
been at one time in the Shah’s household, but before
starting, this chap laid before us his demands, which
not only included cooking utensils, etc., but a sup-
ply of clothing to make him respectable enough to
be a worthy cook of the English Sahibs.
CHAPTER XXIV.—WE GIVE A DINNER.
NEGOTIATIONS were still proceeding with
the Governor of the Province and the Sirdar
who controlled the Kurds, who were the
leaders of distinct parties, opposed one to the other.
In order to overcome this bad feeling that existed
between the two factions we resolved to give a din-
ner, to which the leading men of both would be in-
vited. The Sirdar lived in a house near by, and the
Governor’s residence was close at hand. After the


invitations had been sent out, the Sirdar came along
and promised to help us in placing the dishes of the
country on the table. This offer we gladly ac-
cepted, for, except for Major Chaildecott, most of
us were quite ignorant of the customs of the better
class of natives.
The fashion is to commence dinner about 10
o’clock in the evening and feast, with intervals be-
tween until about 4 a.m. the following morning.
On the night appointed all came dressed in their
best to partake of our hospitality and to listen to
our speeches, and make their various responses.
The Sirdar informed us that, on account of English-
men eating from tables, he thought the guests
would prefer to adopt our custom instead of squat-
ting on the floor as was their usual custom. We
had a large table and two forms in our mess which
was laden with the good things, and that evening,
many of the leading notables put in five or six hours
in the uncomfortable position of sitting on a form
and eating from a table. Nevertheless they deemed
it an honour and thought it an opportunity to show
Britishers that they were as much at home with our
customs as with their own.
Everything went on smoothly until about 1 a.m.,
when Major Chaildecott, who spoke the Persian
tongue fluently, delivered a speech in which he out-
lined our policy, informing them that we were al-
ways prepared to pay for anything we required, also
mentioning the wages we were prepared to pay the
men who would form the police force and the small
army that we contemplated raising. He asked for
their co-operation and pointed out that if this was
given, the result would be the prevention of the
Kurdish raids, the opening up of roads, the uplift-
ing of trade and commerce in the surrounding dis-
trict due to the safety which we would secure for
the inhabitants.
The Governor was the first to respond and he was
most emphatic in his statements that he would help
us to the best of his ability, because he saw that we


would protect the whole country and that the re-
sult ~>t such a policy would be a revival of trade
throughout the land. He assured us that all griev-
ances between him and the Sirdar, so far as he was
concerned, would be forgotten in their efforts to
work together for the common good of the people.
The Sirdar was next to respond and in eloquent
language stated that nothing would give him more
pleasure than to throw in his lot with us and work
side by side “with his brother the Governor.’’ The
Commissioner of the Police, the Director of the tele-
graph service, Director of the postal service, and
others spoke in the same strain,, and apparently the
efforts of the evening were full of good promises for
our future work.
The Persian, particularly the better class, have
appetites second only to the lion, and from all ap-
pearances have but one meal a day, which is par-
taken in the evening, when at least six hours are de-
voted to eating. After the speeches they had ap-
parently recovered from their exertions of the first
attack on the food and were ready for more. The
table by this time was becoming empty; further sup-
plies were ordered, but we were informed by the
Sirdar that the stock was almost exhausted. In
order to keep things going, a Canadian officer, re-
membering that he had received a supply of Vir-
ginian cigarettes in the last mail, suggested that
these might be produced. His suggestion was
readily carried out, though he bitterly regretted the
move next morning, for our worthy visitors ap-
peared to relish the cigarettes beyond anything else
that could be offered, and smoked one after the
other at such a furious rate that before long his
priceless stock had gone in smoke.
We afterwards discovered that the Sirdar was not
so ready to help us in procuring the food for the
feast as he was willing to take advantage of an
opportunity to give his opponents a rebuff and pur-
posely cut out many articles on the menu in order
to carry out his designs. A few days later, we also


noticed that each party was arranging little meet-
ings on their own. The Governor, who paid fre-
quent visits to us, was always keen on telling us to
beware of the Sirdar, and the Sirdar’s spies, noting
that the Governor was continually visiting us, in-
formed their master who made a point of stealing
round a few minutes after the Governor’s departure
and, in a very confidential manner, would tell us to
beware of the Governor and his gang. Each of
them, in running down the other, would point out
the advantages of throwing the other fellow over
and accepting their own services in preference.
Knowing what money will do in Persia, we deter-
mined to get at the bottom of the two parties, who,
when brought together in our presence would be as
sweet as honey to each other, yet would go without
sleep in order to meet us during the small hours of
the morning in their zeal to point out the traitorous
nature of the other side.
Eventually we got hold of the Director of the
Telegraphs, who was on the Governor’s side, and
gave him a good present of money, one of the Sir-
dar’s followers being treated in a similar manner.
The Governor’s man would visit us during the early
hours of certain days of the week and then lay be-
fore us copies of the telegrams he had received, and
the originals of those despatched during the day,
and place before us his report of the doings at the
Governor’s secret meetings. The Sirdar’s man for
his part would lay before us his reports of the Sir-
dar’s secret doings. We soon saw that both parties
were out to obtain all the money they could get,
and were quite willing to turn traitors to our cause
if better offers were forthcoming.
We were still striving to get the Sirdar on our
side to raise forces from the wild tribesmen whom
he controlled, and he told us he thought a certain
sum sufficient to induce them to join our colours.
A few days later he stated that it would have to be
doubled, and proposed that the C.O. and Major
Chaildecott should pay a visit to the high priest,


who lived in a village some miles away. This was
done and the priest informed us if he received a
present he could induce the tribesmen to join our
cause. After testing the promises of both the Gov-
ernor and the Sirdar, we soon realised that they
would join us, but when face to face with the Turks
would probably massacre the officers and men who
led them, and join their fellow-religionists. There-
fore, we determined to work more or less on our own
and raise a police force in the city, and strengthen
and extend our powers by establishing posts in the
village throughout the district.
CHAPTER XXV—THE OUTSTATIONS.
CAPTAIN KAY, of the Imperial Army, with
the assistance of two sergeants, knocked into
shape some fifty police for duty in and around
the city. After about four or five weeks of patient
work he infused some sort of discipline and know-
ledge into the better class of men whom he had
gathered into his force.
Captain Wilson, who went by the nickname of
“Diddler,” was despatched to an outlying village,
and, with the help of a New Zealand sergeant, com-
menced work in trying to raise a smaller force.
Wilson was a man who had spent a number of
years in Central Africa and was at that time about
fifty years of age and, though a mere handful to
look at, had the heart of a lion. On the outbreak
of war, he had been given three years’ leave of ab-
sence from Central Africa in order to re-establish
his health but, being an old soldier, decided to spend
the time in fighting the Hun rather than in taking
things easy in England. During the years he had
spent in Africa he had suffered from every known
form of fever, and had once been attacked by “black
water fever.” After many attempts to join the
Army he was eventually accepted for service and


fought for some time with our forces in Palestine,
distinguishing himself to such an extent to be
chosen for this expedition.
After negotiating with the Governor of the place
(for every village in Persia sports a Governor), he
obtained the use of a house for himself, which was
large enough to accomodate the twenty-five police
that he hoped to raise. After more negotiations, he
obtained the required number of men, and both he
and the sergeant were working long hours each day,
in knocking their little army into some sort of shape.
They were given white arm bands with the black
letters “D.P.” sewn on, and obtained the same re-
spect and fear from the inhabitants of the village as
the police of Bijah received from the citizens of the
capital.
The Kurds had gone further afield to carry out
their raids and so far had not molested any of the
villages near the city. Having carried all the stock
and goods from the bazaars of the towns and vil-
lages further away, they resolved upon coming back
to their favourite hunting ground of Bijah and the
surrounding district. They obtained information
that there were only two British soldiers in this out-
station and knowing full well the worthlessness of
the Persians as fighters they decided upon attack-
ing this village, the object no doubt being to see how
far the British would go in stopping their maraud-
ings. A note was sent by the Kurdish chief to the
Governor of this village, notifying him that at a
certain time on a certain day he would raid the
place.
The Governor immediately rushed to Wilson’s
quarters and for about five minutes nothing could
be got out of him on account of his nervous excite-
ment. After being calmed, he informed Wilson of
the contents of the letter. Wilson asked him if he
thought the Kurds were in earnest and really in-
tended attacking the village. The Governor stated
that he had no doubt whatever of the genuineness
of the note, and that they fully intended to attack


as they had stated. Wilson then asked him what
he proposed doing. The Governor replied “I can-
not do anything. lam helpless, but I rely upon
you to protect me and the people of the village.”
Wilson then asked him if he thought the district
police would fight. The Governor stated that in
his opinion they would fight if led by their British
leader. So Wilson comforted him with the fact that
he would lead them against the Kurds and give
them more than they were looking for, if they at-
tempted any of their raiding in his little domain.
That night Wilson rode into Bijah and informed
the C.O. of the events that were likely to happen
out his way, and asked if Bijah could spare any re-
inforcements to aid him in his little fight. Major
Starnes at that time had all his small forces em-
ployed on various jobs and if anybody was taken
away, it would mean the easing up of the work in
one particular direction and the hampering of the
others in their various tasks, as each part of the
work dovetailed into the other. One sergeant was
all that could be spared at this time, and he was
handed over to “Diddler” to reinforce the remain-
der of his white army—which consisted of one other
sergeant! Wilson stated that he was entirely sat-
isfied with this addition to his force and was quite
confident that he would give the Kurds a little bit
of “hurry up.” So after the sergeant had collected
his gear and saddled his horse, they started for their
sphere of operations .
The eventful morning arrived and the entire vil-
lage was perched upon the flat roofs of their houses
on the look out for the expected Kurds. A little
before the stated hour of their attack, they were
seen riding along through the valley towards the
village. “Diddler” had all his men ready for the
attack and, on sighting the enemy, got them into the
most favourable positions, where he might inter-
cept and attack them to the greatest advantage.
The Kurds came riding along and when within
range were greeted with a volley from the district


police. They immediately scattered and closed in
on the village from the heights. “Diddler” ad-
vanced his troops, and the main body of the Kurds
commenced to retire with our forces on their heels.
Now and then the Kurds would put up a stand and
open fire from a long range, but as our fellows ad-
vanced they galloped back to other positions.
As the fight progressed, one by one our worthy
police bolted, taking advantage of any broken coun-
try to scurry away out of danger. After fighting
for six or eight hours, and chasing the Kurds some
twenty miles, “Diddler” discovered that the only
forces he commanded were the two sergeants and
about four native police, one of whom was killed.
The only loss on the Kurdish side that he was sure
of was a magnificent white Arab charger, ridden by
their leader. The men themselves, as far as he
could see, were without any serious casualities ow-
ing to the fact that they took care to keep a good
distance between themselves and “Diddler.” Feel-
ing sure that he chastised the Kurds to the fullest
extent and had given them a lesson, which would
prevent any recurrence of raiding on their part, he
decided to come back to the village. On arrival
there he discovered that the Kurd was the shrewd-
est of all fighters, and the force that had first at-
tacked him, though the larger, was merely a decoy
to trick his men further away from the village, while
the smaller force swung round through one of the
outer valleys and during his absence had carried off
all the stock. The Governor, with a crowd of his
followers rode along to break the news to Wilson,
who was in high spirits, believing that he had de-
feated the Kurds and wondering how he would word
his report to emphasise the fact that he had pushed
the enemy well back into Kurdistan.
Next morning the Governor received a communi-
cation from the Kurds, being nothing more than a
bill, stating the amount claimed for their leader’s
horse, which was killed in action! This was
brought round to Wilson, who asked the Governor


what he intended doing about the matter, and was
informed that the villagers would pay the amount.
Wilson remonstrated with him and told him that
instead of paying for the dead nag he ought to go
out with his men and kill all their bally horses.
This the Governor could not understand. He ex-
plained that such a debt was a debt of honor, and
that it was the unwritten law to pay for any ani-
mals killed in action on either side, and, before
Allah, it must be done.
Rave as he would, Wilson could not alter the old
man’s decision, and sure enough the money was col-
lected and despatched to the Kurds. Wilson
wanted to know how much would be paid to the
widow of the man who was killed in the fight? He
was informed that such was war, there being no
payments in the event of a man being killed or
wounded! Later on, arrangements were made
through Major Starnes to buy this good woman a
little plot of ground and sufficient stock to ensure
her a livelihood in the future.
Even though nothing came in the way of help
from the village chiefs, we showed the people that
the British looked after those who proved faithful
to their cause. Evidently the Kurds had received
their lesson, though their cunning had proved too
much for us in this our first fight. From that day
no other attempt to raid any of the villages or
towns occupied by us was made until just before
we left some months later, when we prepared our-
selves for any ruses and gave the Kurds such a bad
time that it had the effect of stopping their little
game.


CHAPTER XXVI.—TRADE FLOURISHES.
BEFORE leaving England, we had taken from
London drafts for the money we required
for our operations in Persia and the
Caucasus, to be drawn on the Imperial Bank of
Persia. At that time we had no conception of the
dreadful ravages of the famine, nor did we know
of the immense amount of work required in making
new roads and repairing the older ones. Before
very long it could be plainly seen that our resources
would soon come to an end if something was not
done to replenish our supply. To raise funds, we
decided upon a blockade system, charging a small
duty on all goods that were imported to and ex-
ported from any of the cities that we held. Captain
O’Brien, an Australian, was detailed at Hamadan
by General Dunsterville to act as Blockade Officer.
He selected for his headquarters a caravanserai near
a large vacant allotment, admirably suited for a
loading and inspecting place, where all goods would
be checked. Examining posts, manned with Pers-
ian recruits, under British officers and N.C.O’s were
established at intervals along the main roads. The
Imperial Bank of Persia was asked to assist in rep-
resenting the Persians. Records were kept of all
goods received and forwarded, one copy being sent
to Headquarters and another to the Bank. Posts
had already been established throughout the most
dangerous parts of the country in order to protect
the lines of communication. Then the roads were
repaired and made safe, and the merchants eager
and willing to conduct business.
Permits were issued by the various posts permit-
ting the merchant to export his goods. One copy
was kept by the officer or N.C.O. in charge, while
the other was forwarded by despatch rider to the
destination of the convoy, generally reaching there
long before the goods arrived, where they were


checked by the Commander of the post or by the
British Consul residing in the town. It was not
necessary that the merchant should be known at
the Bank, but, before a permit was issued, some
merchant, whose name appeared on the Bank’s
books, signed as a guarantor of the goods. This
was done to prevent any leakage to the enemy.
During our occupation, trade increased by leaps and
bounds, the second month showing an increase of
fifty per cent, over the first. There was only one
case where the merchant endeavoured to trick us.
Besides collecting the small duty, we inserted in
the agreement a clause which gave us the right to
purchase a tenth part of any convoy at cost price.
Thus we were in a position to keep down prices in
the purchase of our own goods. Owing to the great
revival of trade, prices immediately dropped, and
the poorer inhabitants had a chance of buying the
necessaries of life at a reasonable price.
In replenishing our treasury, we were enabled to
relieve the distress of the Persians themselves by
reducing the prices and helping the merchant in his
endeavours to build up his business which had been
so badly hit during the war. At no other time in
their memory of trading had they had such good
roads over which to bring their caravans, or did
they know at any time in the past what it was to
travel through the country without the fear of be-
ing raided. The whole populace were loud in their
cries in our favor.
I have mentioned before that one particular class,
the democrats, were not at all keen on our methods,
and were riled because we provided the starving
poor with free food. Now that relief was being ex-
tended, owing to the effects of our blockade system,
these democrats, generally the leading citizens of
the place who obtained their appointment from the
Government at Teheran, actively worked against
us, both in an open and in an underhand manner
whenever they got an opportunity. They com-
menced a crusade amongst themselves, hoping to


extend it to the lower classes, by stating that we
were simply there endeavouring to get in the thin
edge of the wedge in order that we might take over
the country as a province of the British Empire.
The most notorious leaders against us were put
under arrest and, in some cases, sent back to Meso-
potamia as prisoners of war, with a view of giving
a lesson and warning to the other members of their
fraternity. This had the desired effect, and little
trouble was experienced in the future. In conclu-
sion, it might be worth while quoting the opinion
of the merchants themselves as stated by their rep-
resentative in a report, who said: “Our merchants
are very keen on getting their consignments of
goods from Baghdad before the winter months, and
now that we know the road is safe, we can go
straight ahead with our consignments. Before the
British came here we lost heavily from the brigands
looting our convoys on the route, but, thanks to the
British methods, this is now a thing of the past.”
As soon as the road from Baghdad was con-
structed and improved, General Dunsterville
brought up a Ghurkii Battalion, who, assisted by
two armoured cars, completely defeated the Mhut-
chik Khan forces, who blocked the road between
Kasvin and the Caspian.
The Ghurkis never had such a day in all their
lives. The cars drove the tribesmen from out of
the towns into the open where the Ghurkis quickly
got to work with their long knives.
Khutchik Khan was captured and brought to
Dunsterville, who saw in him a possible ally if
properly approached. Inviting him to his quarters,
they lunched together. Before the meal was com-
pleted, Kutchik was much impressed with General
Dunsterville, and the latter, when he had obtained
the confidence of Khutchik, said: “Now look here,
Khutchik, don’t you think that we would make
better friends than enemies?” Khutchik agreed,
with the result that he was, appointed Chief Supply
Officer in the District.


From then onwards, Khutchik was the most loyal
of all our allies and owing to his position was of
great service in obtaining supplies for the troops
and horses.
This is but another example of Dunsterville’s far-
sightedness. Had he sent Khutchik Khan back to
India as a prisoner of war, little would have been
gained, but, by winning him to our side, much was
accomplished in that supplies were at hand for the
force about to embark for Baku.
CHAPTER XXVII.—A MURMUR FROM
THE NORTH.
FOR some time past Headquarters had an idea
that there was a large body of Assyrians
and Armenians cut off somewhere up north,
who were still fighting the Turks. Later on this
was confirmed, and we were told that a large
body of Assyrians were hemmed in round the
city of Urmiah on the edge of the lake of the
same name. A great number of Armenians
from the vicinity of Lake Van, together
with the Christian mountaineers from the sur-
rounding countries, had fallen back, and with
the Assyrians had been fighting the Turks round
Urmiah for the last six months. On receipt of this
news. General Dunsterville got an aeroplane up
from Baghdad to Miana, a post north of Zenjan,
the most northern post held by our forces. After
overhauling the machine and obtaining a plentiful
supply of oil, the airman flew across to Urmiah
with “Stalky’s” message to these people.
The plane encircled the city in search of a fav-
ourable landing ground, and on deciding on a spot,
descended. The people, not having seen one of our
machines before, mistook it for an enemy plane, and
immediately opened up a heavy rifle fire. On see-
ing the plane descending, they thought that they
had captured their first Turkish plane. The air-


man, on reaching ground, alighted from his
machine, and was immediately surrounded by Ar-
menian and Assyrian troops. He asked if anyone
spoke English and there being one present who
could, he told these people that he was not an
enemy, but a friend sent to ascertain their position
and requirements. He was then taken to the house
of the Commander-in-chief, Agha Petros, who spoke
English fluently. Our man then handed over his
despatches wherein the General stated to what ex-
tent he was prepared to help, and requiring from
the Chief the number and disposition of his troops
and exactly what were his requirements.
The news of his arrival soon spread, and for a
couple of days all the bigger people rushed him with
invitations to the various entertainments held in
his honor. In these countries the British soldier
wears the lightest of clothing, his trousers being
replaced by “shorts,” which showed bare knees and
much of the leg. The people, not having seen a
man wearing trousers with legs only about six
inches long, thought that the poor fellow was in
a frightful plight and had completely run out of all
his clothing and was endeavouring to make both
ends meet by cutting off the ragged ends of his
trousers. The day before he was to leave a depu-
tation of the women folk called on the Commander-
in-Chief and craved permission to present to the
hero a pair of trousers as a mark of their apprecia-
tion for his gallant flight, which brought them the
glad tidings that the British would help. It took
a great deal of persuasion before they could be made
to believe that his shorts were the full regulation
size, according to that laid down for the uniform
of British troops in tropical countries. After sooth-
ing these good ladies’ feelings and thanking them
for their kind considerations, he received the Com-
mander-in-Chief’s reply, examined his machine, and
once more took to the air, flying direct to Hamadan,
where he placed the reports in the hands of General
Dunsterville.


CHAPTER XXVIII.—NEW ARRIVALS.
THE General’s offer of officers and N.C.O’s, to-
gether with a supply of machine guns, am-
munition and money being accepted by the
Christians, machinery to carry out the job was at
once got moving, and gradually new arrivals put in
their appearance at Bijah, the first being Major
Moore and Captain Reid, both of the General Staff
at Baghdad. They had been touring throughout
the north of Persia for the last six months, gather-
ing what information they could in order to help
our forces in that far off field. Major Moore spoke
several languages fluently, one of which was Per-
sian. Knowing too, the manners and customs of
the country he was able to gather a vast amount of
information. Captain Reid had, in pre-war days,
spent a number of years with the Assyrians, having
been sent out their as the political adviser on a
missionary staff. When the move forward was
contemplated, he was ordered to Bijah in order to
take over the political side of the work. Major
Moore, thinking it would be an opportunity of gain-
ing more knowledge among the hostile tribes of
North-West Persia, took advantage of the chance
to continue his labours under the protection of our
escort.
Two troops of cavalry were then ordered to move
forward to Bijah and in due course they put in an
appearance, camping in the open paddocks near our
billet. Supplies of grain for the horses were at
once gathered, and very shortly all was in readiness
for the move forward.. The nature of the expedition
was kept an entire secret, not one of us knowing
exactly what was in the wind, nor what was the
strength of the party that would move ahead. Later
on I got an inkling that I would be in charge of this
expedition on account of being second in command
of our post. As we were on the main road that leads


to Lake Urmiah it was considered probable that the
party would be from our post. This was realised,
for on the 17th July the following order was given
me with instructions that more would be issued
later on.
Capt. S. G. Savige, M.C.
You will be in charge of the party detailed hereunder
proceeding with Major Moore.
Capt. S. G. Savige, M.C., 24th Battalion, A.I.F.
„ L. Crawley-Boevey, Yorkshire Regiment
„ R. L. Kay, M.C., 12th Cheshires
„ E. G. Scott-Olsen, 55th Battalion, A.I.F.
„ R. K. Nichol, M.C., Wellington Regiment,
N.Z.E.F.
D. Wilson, 2nd Royal Irish Fusiliers
11/971 Sgt. L. Barrell, M.M., Wellington Regiment,
N.Z.E.F.
12/3449 „ F. Brophy, Auckland Regiment, N.Z.E.F.
33/58 „ H. G. Tollan, Canterbury Regiment, N.Z.E.F.
1764 „ B. F. Murphy, D.C.M., 28th Battalion, A.I.F.
5446 „ A. G. France, 6th Lancers
C 26851 „ J. Abrahams, R.W. Kents
26824 „ W. G. Beevis, 2/ Norfolk Regiment
265279 „ A. H. N. Todman, 1/9 Middlesex
75341 „ R. Casey, 29th Canadian Bn.
642141 „ W. T. Brophy, 75th Canadian Battalion
265159 „ A. W. H. Place, i/g Middlesex
225091 „ D. Cameron, 10th Lovat Scouts Btn. (Cam-
eron High.)
417 „ C. T. Wallace, 38th Battalion, A.I.F.
165665 Pte. H. C. Southgate, R.E. Sigs. (Batman Capt.
Scott-Olsen)
30500 „ B. N. Lake, 4th S.W.B. (Batman Capt.
Savige)
31118 „ A. Smithson, 2nd Norfolks (Batman Capt.
Kay)
2. Instructions as to time of departure, transport, etc.
will be notified later.
3. You will draw from the Q.M. sufficient ammunition
to make up to 200 (two hundred) rounds per N.C.O. and
O/R.
J. Seddon, Capt.
A/Adjt.
Included in above:
34906 Sgt. A. Nimmo, Otago Regiment, N.Z.E.F.
2416 „ H. G. Smith, 40th Battalion, A.I.F.
J. Seddon, Capt.
A/Adjt.


The order itself appeared to be most meagre, and
naturally I wanted fuller particulars as to where
we had to go, and what we were expected to do,
but was again told that special instructions had
been received from Hamadan that no details were
to be given until well out on the march. On the
evening before departing, I was asked to check
over the boxes containing £45,000 in Persian sil-
ver, 12 Lewis machine guns and 100,000 rounds of
ammunition, for which I gave receipts. Each offi-
cer was given a horse which cost about £4O, in
reality only worth £8 in any civilised country.
The N.C.O’s were to ride mules which were still
retained on the hire system, which were to be
handed over to the Cavalry for return to Bijah on
our joining forces and proceeding further north
with the Christians.
CHAPTER XXIX.—NORTHWARD BOUND.
WE were timed to leave Bijah at five o’clock
on the morning of July 19th and at the first
streak of dawn, the compound presented a
sight of great activity. Gear was being collected
and tied into bundles, the money in the boxes car-
ried to the gateway, together with the cases con-
taining the machine guns and ammunition- Horses
and mules were being saddled and fed while others
were assembled and loaded with our baggage,
money, guns and ammunition.
After a busy couple of hours everything was in
readiness to move. After many handshakes and
best wishes from those remaining, the column
swung out on to the roadway. Only one troop of
cavalry was to proceed with us, and these troops
at once took over the protection of the column by
throwing out an advance guard, placing a baggage
guard and leaving a rear guard to follow on.
This was about the longest column we had yet


Kirmanshah.
Ashar Creek. Prehistoric Canal.


Pia Tak Pass (Typical Persian Country).


seen, as it required one animal to every two boxes
of ammunition and money, and others required to
carry the grain, baggage and rations for the cavalry
and ourselves. The first few miles out was fairly
easy country but at midday we were once again in
the heart of the mountains where the track which
led north was hardly distinguishable from the hun-
dreds of other caravan tracks that branched off in
every direction. Having a good guide, not much
difficulty was experienced in keeping on the right
track which led up and down over almost im-
passable ridges, dropping in one place into a valley
through which a wide and swift stream flowed,
luckily for us was fordable. A fair amount of diffi-
culty was experienced in negotiating the stream, on
account of the rocky nature of its bottom, and on
gaining the further bank we halted for an hour,
during which time we partook of our midday meal.
That night we camped on a plateau on the top of
a small hill, overlooking the village of Ponja, ruled
by a chief whom we had met on the roads some
hours before. This was considered to be a hostile
locality, but fortunately the chieftain was ex-
tremely friendly to us, on account of our assistant-
surgeon looking after him when he damaged his
hand a few weeks before. He assured us that no
danger would befall any of our party while passing
through his territory. Nevertheless the usual pre-
cautions were taken, as we had learnt by this time
that a Persian’s word goes for naught.
We set off shortly after dawn next morning and
on passing another village a young Persian, the
son of the priest with whom we were negotiating
for troops, joined the column and informed us that
his greatest friend was Capt. McLean, a member
of our Bijah party, who had ridden into a portion
of his father’s country during which time he had
acted as McLean’s guide. Mac was a typical Can-
adian, and besides teaching this young hopeful a
few words such as roads, creek, house, horse, etc.,
had added to his vocabulary some choice Canadian


swear words. The youth, being quite proud of the
fact that he understood English, would rattle off
a string of words, both fair and foul, much to our
amusement. He was quite emphatic on the point
that he was a friend of the great English and of-
fered to ride with us that day, in case any robber
bands attacked the column, which he could over-
come on account of being the son of the High
Priest. This proffered help we accepted, as we did
not want to get into any fights and waste our ammu-
nition unnecessarily. That night we camped on the
high ground overlooking the village of Kizil-
Bulahk, and on that evening the objects of the ex-
pedition were unfolded to me. Agha Petros, the
Leader of the people whom we were going to help,
had accepted General Dunsterville’s offer to send
a few officers and N.C.O’s to organise, train and
lead his army, a political officer to help him in his
government, together with £45,000, twelve
machine guns, and one hundred thousand rounds of
ammunition to carry on for the time being. Our
contract was to reach a town named Sain Kala,
while his was to break through the Turkish forces
south of the Lake and join us at the same town on
a certain date. The cavalry were to escort my party
to Sain Kala and, after our junction with the other
forces, their orders were to return to Bijah. Our
duty on arrival at Urmiah was to organise im-
mediately this irregular army and endeavour, if
possible, to keep the southern road open in order
that we could be reinforced later on. Such a pro-
position for adventure was altogether to our liking,
and the others on being told of the proposition were
full of spirits at the prospects ahead.
Realising that at last we were on a big job, and
seeing that the irregular forces were fifteen thous-
and strong, all of whom were armed and that also
they had a few field pieces and some armed boats
on the Lake, the hope of doing big things ran high.
Captain Reid and I immediately set to work in
drafting plans for our first dispositions. An officer


and a couple of sergeants were to hold a town on
the western road at a point where others joined it
before running through the passes. By doing this
it was hoped that they, with one hundred Assyrians
and Armenians, could fortify these passes to such
an extent that they would be able to hold up any
enemy reinforcements from Turkey.
The junction of several other roads with the
main highway to Tabriz on the east was to be held
in a similar fashion. The town of Suj-Bulahk on
the main road itself was to be held as an intermedi-
ate post where Captain Kingscote, our Intelligence
Officer, was to be installed in order to be in touch
with the flank posts, the city of Urmiah, and our
headquarters at Bijah. This town was the central
place from which the telegraph lines ran out and
was specially adapted, under the circumstances, for
its proposed use. Captain Scott-Olsen, an Aus-
tralian, was to move ahead and, being a sea-faring
man, was to take over the fleet on the Lake. Cap-
tain Kay and Captain D. Wilson, Imperial Officers,
were to move forward and assist me in Urmiah
while Captain Crawley-Bovey and Captain Nicol
were to take charge, the former of the Western post,
the latter of the Eastern.
The next town of importance was Takan-Tepe,
which is the best laid out town in North-West Per-
sia. Some Governor of the past had evidently
visited Europe, and being impressed with the
beauty of avenues of trees placed along the road,
had beautified his town by planting along the roads
leading thereto, avenues of poplars. We were
timed to be in Sain Kala on the 23rd, and as this
town was about fifty miles from Takan-Tepe, the
journey of the next couple of days had to be by
forced marches. The first was to San Jud, a dis-
tance of twenty-eight miles over extremely rough
country, and on July 23rd we arrived at Sain Kala,
our destination.


CHAPTER XXX.—DISAPPOINTMENT.
ON arrival at our rendezvous there was no sign
of the people whom we were to meet, even
although we were a day late. It was decided
to wait a few days in the hope that they might come
along. As in other places, the first thing necessary
was the bribing of the telegraph operator, who, on
receipt of a gift of money, was instructed to bring
along to us, each day, copies of all the telegrams
received and the originals of those sent by him.
Thus we soon ascertained that nothing was known
of our movements, nor had any word been men-
tioned of a move on the part of our friends from
the north. The people of the town were extremely
hostile, and in many instances closed up their places
of business in the bazaars. In order to obtain sup-
plies of grain and food, the threat of commandeer-
ing our requirements was necessary before we could
buy anything at all. Seeing that we were quite in
earnest in what we said, the inhabitants considered
it was much more profitable to bring along the
goods we ordered, and obtain the prices they them-
selves would fix, rather than have their goods com-
mandeered and be paid the prevalent prices of the
more southern cities.
The Governor paid us a visit early next morning
and assured us of his friendship and hospitality, but
on going through the telegrams that night we dis-
covered that he had informed the Turks that there
was a force of about seven hundred British troops,
whereas there were not more than one hundred at
the outside. In reporting, the Governor was prone
to the usual exaggerations of his countrymen and,
posing as a strong man able to keep in hand such
a big force, exaggerated his report by six hundred
per cent. The Turkish Commander’s reply,
couched in the usual glowing and fantastic
language of the East, was to the effect that if the


Governor would keep an eye on us for a few days,
he would advance with his gallant troops, and show
the world how the troops of Allah could smash the
infidel troops of England.
On the 35th there was still no sign, nor any word
of the movements of the, Assyrians and Armenians.
As the grain for the horses was running short and
there was little chance of replenishing our stock,
the Colonel in charge of the cavalry, being the senior
officer, decided to return to Bijah on the following
day. Such a decision was keenly disappointing to
those of us who were to move' forward to Lake Ur-
miah, and after consulting one another, we put up
a proposal that we would supply a patrol who
would volunteer to push ahead and obtain some
news of the people whom we were to meet. The
hostility of the country and its lack of supplies
was considered to be sufficient reason for knocking
out this proposition. We showed both the Colonel
and the Major that the idea could be carried out by
travelling along the banks of the stream, which
passed Sain Kala and flowed into the Lake, and by
travelling all night with the stream as a guide there
would be little risk of being caught, and as for sup-
plies, we had the men who were prepared to do the
job, if need be, on dry rice and water. This was
considered to be impracticable and, being soldiers,
we had to obey orders, and leave next day with
hearts full of disappointment, and trek back again
over the road to Bijah. Although foiled for the
time we reckoned there must be some way out of
the difficulty. In the upward journey as we passed
through Takan Tepe, we noticed that the people,
who belonged to a particular tribe named the Af-
sharis, were the finest stamp of men we had yet
seen in Persia.
Major Chaildecott, the Intelligence Officer, of
Bijah, had joined the party at this place, cutting
across to the town after doing an out-back job
amongst the hills. From there he rode on with us
to Sain Kala as a passenger in order to see the start


of our show and gauge with what success we com-
menced the job. The idea of still being able to
reach the Christians had not by any means left us,
and after consulting with the commander of the
party, we ascertained that he was quite willing for
us to remain at Takan Tepe, in order to establish
a post, with the hope that we would raise a force
strong enough to work through to Urmiah should
the Assyrians and Armenians fail in their break-
through. I obtained from Major Chaildecott orders
in the name of the commanding officer of Bijah to
carry out our project. The Colonel in command of
the cavalry allowed portion of his command to re-
main behind with us in order to protect us, until
such time as we raised a force strong enough for our
own safety, while he with his staff, together with
Major Moore, Major Chaildecott and Captain Reid
rode back to Bijah.
CHAPTER XXXI.—LEVY RAISING.
WE immediately set to work in our endeavour
to raise the force necessary to carry out our
cherished plan. The first thing necessary
was to obtain the goodwill of the Governor. After
making our camp as comfortable as possible for a
long stay, I set out to interview “his Highness the
Governor.”
After spending so many months together in a
far-off land and being such a small party, a deep
friendship existed between the officers and men, a
friendship, which people living the humdrum life of
the cities of civilised lands, have no conception of.
Under our conditions, friendship was full of
thoughts of how one could best help the other.
Little gifts in the shape of a few eggs, choice dried
fruits, and odds and ends, were constantly being be-
stowed upon one. When an arduous job had to be
done, one after another would come forward, stat-


ing that he was better fitted in health to do it than
the other chap. Such little things have a wealth of
meaning under such circumstances. All the best
in a fellow comes to the top, and one sees the true
value of a man shorn of all the conventionalities of
civilisation. In paying a state visit, in the ortho-
dox fashion of the East, it was necessary that I,
as leader, should ride ahead, with two officers a
certain distance behind, in rear of whom were four
sergeants, fully armed, who brought up the rear of
my escort. To keep a straight face under these’ cir-
cumstances was an extremely hard job.
On arrival at the Governor’s house we drew rein
and waited until the attendants had rushed to our
horses’ heads and would not think of dismounting
until one stood by and held the stirrup to allow one
to dismount in royal fashion. We officers would
then look very severe, and give a few short orders
to our N.C.O’s, who would double all over the place
on imaginary errands as if we instilled the fear of
the devil into their hearts at the very suggestion of
opening our mouths. It must be said that they car-
ried out their part of the job in a most thorough
though amusing manner.
After inquiring as to each other’s health, we were
asked to be seated in the Governor’s audience cham-
ber. This particular one was a gaily-coloured tent
lined and floored with some beautiful carpets.
After getting through the preliminaries, tea would
be ordered and served in small glasses about three
inches high and two inches in diameter at the top
and bottom, narrowing in to about one inch and a
half in the centre. Sugar is always served in small
lumps, and after a piece has been chosen it is placed
in the mouth and the tea sweetened by sucking it
through the sugar. When the tea is served it is
necessary that, out of courtesy, it should be offered
to the host. He then insists that it is yours. For
a couple of minutes this offering and re-offering
goes on, until you consider that it is time for you


to give in and accept the tea with a great show of
reluctance.
Later on other drinks are produced, such as sour
milk, (and as every animal, including camels, don-
keys, sheep and cows, are milked it is not considered
to be first favourite), sherbert, a sweet sticky sort
of concoction, and arak, the only alcoholic beverage.
I have met men in my time, who were very fond of
their glass of stimulants, but never yet met a man
who acquired the taste for arak. In color it is like
water; in taste it resembles methylated spirits with
a burn that catches one’s breath. It is made, so I
am informed, from the sap of date palm or pepper-
mint plants and owing to its strength it does not re-
quire much to make one very inebriated. After a
night’s sleep one feels quite sober, though suffering
from a bad head, but after partaking of a drink of
tea or water one is as tight as on the night before,
the effects being felt even on the third day. The
action of this vile drink evidently causes some sort
of fermentation within, and re-acts once more on
the approach of any liquid. The old saying “once
bitten, twice shy,” is fully carried out as regards
this particular concoction.
Other drinks were fruit juice concoctions in
which rose petals were strewn as a flavouring, and
many the time, in order to dodge arak, we have
drunk a large basin of sour milk, assuring our host
that we relished it beyond any other known drink,
and dodging the rose petals would wade through
this vile muck with great gusto. We always made
a point of staying until such time as our worthy host
would be forced to cry out for his food and invite
us to his repast. The object was to test the man
by seeing whether he was willing or not to give us
his salt. Such meals are always served; on the car-
pet, and, after marking out a square with chupatties,
the meat dishes would then be brought along, in
nearly every case flavoured with cinnamon, or vari-
ous fruits.
When it was time to commence operations we


would turn to the Governor and tell him how we
Englishmen enjoyed Persian food, but in a careful
way would point out to him that we always liked
more salt with our meals than they usually put in
their dishes, at the same time working our hands
round close to the butt of our revolvers. If he gave
us more salt, we knew that he was bound by his
religion to protect us, but, if he contemplated any
treachery he would try and side-step our little bait.
Seeing that we were sometimes in an uustairs room,
in a high house situated in the centre of an enor-
mous courtyard, it might be necessary to get the
first shot in if we hoped to get out. So far as our
party were concerned we received the salt and thus
knew that, as far as the Governor was concerned,
we were quite safe.
On the word “Go,” a piece of chupatties would be
torn off and with both hands we would dive into
the dish that took our fancy for the moment. Eat-
ing seems to be an accomplishment with the Per-
sians and the amount they can stow away in such a
short time is a mystery to a Britisher. The harder
one goes and the quicker one eats, the better you
please your host, who would be extremely dis-
pleased if you did not belch to show him that you
were eating as much as possible. At the conclusion
of the meal belch would follow belch to show him
that we had enjoyed his hospitality. After this we
would take our departure and in the hearing of the
Governor would bully our N.C.O’s who would jump
about in all directions. On arrival at our own camp
we would hardly be able to stand for laughing at
the absurdity of such tactics-
A return visit is always made by the Governor
or his representative, so next afternoon we were
busily engaged in preparing for the reception.
Small glasses and saucers were purchased. One of
the lads who was looking after our cooking was
brought along to rehearse the whole show. Another
officer and myself sat on the ground and went
through the preliminaries necessary before receiving


tea, and the pre-arranged signal of the acceptance of
the drink was to be a wink from me. Later on in the
cool of the evening, the Governor’s brother, the Sir-
dar, came along followed by the retinue as escort.
Hadji Baba, our worthy muleteer and loyal fol-
lower, loaned us his tent for the reception.
The Sirdar was invited in and, after the usual ex-
change of compliments, tea was mentioned, and on
his acceptance our worthy Lake was called. This
lad was about as gentle as an elephant in all his
movements, but one of the best in a campaign. He
came in, balancing two of those small glasses on
miniature saucers held in trembling hands, with his
eyes glued on me, and the usual offering and re-
offering was gone through. On the Sirdar’s friendly
accepting I threw Lake an enormous wink. He
then shoved out one of the drinks for the Sirdar,
and, in his hurry, tipped the whole lot of scalding
tea over the soft white hands of our worthy guest.
Under my breath I damned Lake up hill and down
dale, but, to the Sirdar was full of apologies, and
he, on his part, full of assurances that he understood
it was quite an accident. I felt sure he cursed the
carelessness of the worthy Lake, but he appeared
to be rather a decent fellow and showed no ani-
mosity. Knowing that he would not accept our
camp meals, we had no qualms about offering him
portion of our board which he declined and shortly
afterwards left. This visiting and re-visiting we
knew must continue until the Governor obtained
from his spies the reason of our stay in his town.
To make matters worse, business is the last thing
to enter the Persian’s mind; it was necessary we
proceeded gently or the whole work would be
doomed to failure.
In order to get on as quickly as possible we were
out to help his spies in collecting information, and
it was here that our worthy Hadji was of such valu-
able assistance. Hadji was a man of about forty-
five or fifty years of age, with a stomach which
showed that he partook of and enjoyed the good


things of life. Though in reality there was no need
for him to come with this convoy, yet on account of
his taking a liking to us, he came along on all our
trips, thinking he could be of some assistance on
the road, and he was useful on more than one oc-
casion. His little stunt would generally be to go
along to the village teashop where the old cronies
congregated and spent hours over a glass of tea.
He would there inform all and sundry of the reason
of our being there, that we were trying to raise
troops, stating also how well we would pay, feed
and treat our levies. He assured them that we
were the very essence of generosity and the personi-
fication of all the noble traits of English character.
This would soon be repeated to the Governor,
and he, on a special visit, in a casual sort of fashion,
would ask if it was true that the nature of our busi-
ness was to raise troops. We would inform him
that this was correct, and the matter for the time
being would drop. But next visit more would come
out, and within a couple of days we were lucky
enough to get him to give us about a dozen guides
to visit the outlying villages to collect material for
our force.
CHAPTER XXXII.—NEW DEVELOPMENTS.
WORK was now in full swing, the officers and
N.C.O’s being detailed for levee raising,
while others were hard at work compiling
a map of the surrounding country, others again
were selecting defensive positions in such localities
where a small party could hold up a much larger
force. About five miles north of Takan Tepe, the
country is of a most broken nature. After climbing
the lower foothills, the ground slopes down to a
great valley through which runs a wide river, pass-
able only by one stone bridge. This was con-
sidered to be the key of the whole position for, to


the right, the river ran through precipitous hills
through which no force could manoeuvre nor con-
duct its convoy. The left flank was quite secure,
in that the river ram through a deep gorge and bro-
ken country. The forward slopes, rising on the other
side from the river, were extremely steep, though
strangely open for this part of Persia. By holding
the various hillocks on either side with a series of
disconnected posts and a few machine guns, it
would be quite possible to hold up a vastly superior
force.
Sergeant Place, of the Imperial Force, being
handy at map work, was told off to draw a com-
plete map of this position, a copy of which was sent
to our headquarters at Bijah for their information.
The other work was continuing smoothly, and there
was no doubt that we were welcome in this part of
Persia, probably on account of the Kurds ceasing
their raiding expeditions in the near vicinity. The
protection afforded by our party was deeply ap-
preciated by the inhabitants.
This goodwill was amply verified in a conversa-
tion I had with a Khan. Over a glass of tea he
said that he heard the English were in the district
and were endeavouring to raise troops, so he
thought he would come in and get the full strength
of it. On being informed of our requirements, he
readily promised to raise fifty horsemen on his own
account, and bring them across to us. He asked me
if we intended occupying this district permanently.
I informed him that the British had no desire to
interfere with the Persians but, owing to difficulties
of the war, it was necessary for us to encounter the
Turks in Persia in order to prevent them from over-
running the country and striking at India. This
information apparently did not tend to cheer him,
as he replied, “Oh, we have had enough of our shop-
keeper king and his profiteering ministry and the
country would welcome the advent of British rule.
We know if the Englishman says he will do a thing,
he will do it, but if he says ‘I will not do it’ all the


money in the world will not break his word, for the
Englishman speaks the truth.”
This statement-jn itself may not appear to be of
great moment to the casual reader, but it is a strik-
ing illustration of British prestige in the East,2niilt
up by the good faith of great Englishmen from the
time of Clive. No doubt, the story Edwin Pottin-
ger at Herat in the “thirties” when he stood alone
and proved to the natives that the Englishman is a
true and generous soul, when all thought of present
comfort and gain is forgotten when the common
weal of the people is at stake. On the other hand
the Germans had agents scattered throughout
Northern Persia, even during the time of our being
there, who paved their way with gold, and adopting
the costume of the country and pretending to be
followers of Mohammed, yet they failed miserably.
What a contrast their methods were to ours! We
professed to be British soldiers, wore the uniform
of our country, professing to have no other religion
than Christianity, none the less the predominant
thought that swayed the people was that the word
of the Englishman is true. On each and every oc-
casion we won through and the Germans failed.
On August ist we were told by a native who had
ridden down from the north that he had heard that
the Assyrians and Armenians were fighting the
Turks in a great battle south of Lake Urmiah- We
pretended to be quite ignorant of the existence of
any such people, but knew that this was the first
move on the part of our friends. On visiting the
Governor, he told me the same news and, being con-
firmed by him, I immediately sent back for Captain
Reid in the hope of reaching him before his arrival
at Bijah. Luckily they were taking things easy and
a despatch rider caught them up. Captain Reid,
with Major Moore, set off immediately on the re-
turn trip to Takan-Tepe. On the night of 2nd Sep-
tember, we received the first message in writing
from the Christians in which it was stated that they


had fought a great battle, had defeated and broken
through the Turks and were at present on their way
to meet us.
At dawn next morning the whole camp was dis-
mantled, gear was packed and the whole party, in
high spirits in the knowledge that the show had not
fallen through, were on the road once more. That
day we travelled until late in the afternoon. On
arrival at a stream we pitched our camp, with the
idea of moving forward with the first streak of
dawn. The tents had hardly been erected when
away ahead, through the long valley, a cloud of
dust could be seen, which grew in proportion as it
neared us. Within a mile or so of our tented camp,
a group of horsemen rode ahead, one of whom car-
ried a large red banner with a white cross worked
on its face. On reaching the rise over our camp
they dismounted and scanned us for some little
time through their field glasses. We signalled to
them that we were friends, and although not ap-
parently sure, they rode towards the camp. Their
fears were soon set at rest when we shouted to them
that we were the English. One galloped back to
the main party, while the others rode into camp.
As some of them could speak English they ex-
pressed their delight at joining us in no half-hearted
manner.
Shortly after this their leader, Agha Petros, rode
into the camp, and there we awaited the arrival of
his forces. Of all the sights that one was privileged
to see, these horsemen winding along the valley
was one never to be forgotten. They came along
in an orderly, soldierly fashion, split up into groups
of about equal size to our own troop of cavalry.
Ahead of each group rode the leader, and behind
him, came his standard bearer, who carried a large
red flag across which was worked a white cross,
the flag of Agha Petros, the Commander-in-Chief,
being the gaudiest of all. It was made of silk,
fringed with gold with the usual white cross in the


centre, over which was worked the Assyrian words,
“Trust God and Follow the Cross.”
The horsemen, on nearing the camp, swung off
alternately to the right and left, and in a remark-
ably short space of time had picketed their horses
and were preparing their evening meal.
All the chiefs were summoned to attend a confer-
ence at our camp, which continued until the early
hours of the morning, and re-assembled again after
an interval of three or four hours, during which
time we discussed the whole situation and worked
out our plans for future operations.
CHAPTER XXXIII.—AGHA PETROS.
THE strong man of the Christian forces was
their leader Agha Petros, a man with a won-
derful career, though from hearsay he was
what was termed a “bit of a doer.” While in Can-
ada and England—but as the story is only hearsay,
it is hardly fair to the man to relate it here. This
much we know to be a fact—in years gone by he
was the Turkish representative in the districts in
the vicinity of Lake Urmiah. While things were
peaceful he honestly served his Turkish masters,
but on the outbreak of war, when his people, on
account of their being Christians, were hard
pressed, he threw in his lot with the Russians, and
was appointed commander of the forces in the Rus-
sian service. After the revolution he was forced to
retire to Lake Urmiah, and for the past eight
months had been fighting the Turks.
He was elected as leader by both the Assyrian
and Armenian communities, and as Commander-in-
Chief of the Christian forces, led them in person in
their endeavour to break through to our forces.
Never trained as a soldier, he proved to be a genius
in war, while his people were, as we say, “up against
it,” he was able to lead them on many victorious


fields. The greatest of all his exploits was the one
in which he broke through to us. After carefully
mapping out his route and drafting his plans, he
decided that he would move south in three columns,
each separated by some miles of rough country. On
encountering the Turkish force his troops were
swung into line, each column gaining touch with
the flanks of the others. It was then decided to
take up the best position available, and delay the
battle to allow a strong mounted force to sweep
down through the hills to a town called Suldaz, the
Turkish headquarters.
It was then decided to attack during the night,
and force the enemy to fall back on his base, and
into the hands of the mounted force. The whole
plan worked without a hitch. The column moving
without mishap, got into touch with the Turks and
formed a line, and in the dead of night, the whole
line moved forward to the accompaniment of in-
tense rifle fire and shouts of victory. The Turks
were bewildered at this unexpected attack at such
an unexpected time. Their stand was feeble and
they were forced to retire in a disordered state to
Suldaz, to find waiting for them a mounted force
in such positions that the Turks were completely
annihilated. Without any loss of time Agha
Petros rode on with his victorious troops to effect
a junction with our party, and on reaching us had
but little food and no money. Food, in sufficient
quantities for their requirements we did not have,
but handed over enough money to buy sufficient for
them on the march back to Urmiah.
In order to impress the Governor and inhabitants
of Sain Kala, Agha Petros asked if the British Cav-
alry might ride ahead of his forces through that
particular town, knowing full well that the news of
the British and Christians fighting together would
be soon spread throughout the country. Luckily
for the whole show, as after events will prove, this
was agreed to.


CHAPTER XXXIV.—THE FIRST OF
THE REFUGEES.
AFTER settling all preliminaries at the confer-
ence which continued until about 10 a-m., we
moved forward once again, with the Christian
cavalry acting as escort to the convoy. The Ar-
menians and Assyrians were delighted with the
fact that help had at last come to them, and the
British jubilant in the knowledge that they were
going forward to a big task which required big
hearts and steady nerves, but confident nevertheless
in the ultimate success of our cause.
Thus, we rode on and, towards dusk, negotiated
the last of the hills on our side of Sain Kala, then
swung off the road to the poplar groves and orch-
ards near the river where we had decided to camp.
I happened to be riding with Major Moore and
Captain Reid at the head of the column. On ar-
rival at the camping ground we saw a crowd of
people dressed differently from those we had seen
in the town before. Amongst them were a number
of women clothed in bright print dresses, without
face coverings—an unheard of thing in Moham-
medan lands. We were at a loss to explain their
existence in that part of the country. Shortly after-
wards Agha Petros rode up. On seeing these
people his face blanched. For a moment or two he
was unable to speak. Then turning in his saddle,
he said, ‘.My God! Here are my people! What
calamity has happened during my absence?”
On questioning he was told that the Turkish com-
mander had attacked the outposts and had broken
through to the city, which meant that they had to
fly for their lives, and beyond this, nothing further
could be ascertained.


CHAPTER XXXV.—THE MOVING
MULTITUDE OF REFUGEES.
SEEING that nothing could be done that night,
as it was quite apparent that the people were
coming down in large numbers, we decided to
camp in the large valley of the river to the south
and west of Sain Kala, and then after receiving
more particulars of what was happening up north,
decide on the plan on the morrow. At dawn next
morning, it was seen that there were thousands in
the valley, and along the road they were still stream-
ing in thousands more. In order to subdue their
panic Agha Petros, Captain Reid and myself rode
out some miles along the road over which they
were coming. Terror and despair was deeply
written on their faces. Agha Petros was greeted
as their father, and we, being in British uniform, as
their deliverers. It was an extremely hard job to
make a headway through the crowds that con-
stantly surrounded us, calling down the blessings
of God on our heads. After all our inquiries as to
the reason of their evacuation and what was hap-
pening further north, nothing could be gained from
the people, who apparently did not know why they
were here, beyond the fact that the Turks had at-
tacked them and they had immediately fled.
The men under Agha Petros, on ascertaining the
state of affairs, scattered on the first night, each
man rushing back to endeavour to look after his
family or personal belongings.
The idea of united co-operation apparently did not
appeal to their martial instincts. On the morning
after our arrival, on endeavouring to raise a force,
we soon discovered this fact, and not knowing fully
the state of affairs, it was impossible to use the
cavalry on what might be a wild goose chase, when
they would be infinitely more useful in protecting
the people on their arrival at Sain Kala. That night


the whole thing was cleared up, when an Assyrian
doctor rode in and told us the whole story of the
evacuation.
It appeared that there were fifty or so Russians
who had remained behind after the Russian evacua-
tion. These were chiefly officers and men who
knew that if they returned to Russia with its new
government, they would have a very short shrift-
The Armenians had been driven back to Lake Ur-
miah from Lake Van and thousands of Christians
had flocked into the town from the surrounding
mountains- Thus three classes, the Russians, Ar-
menians and mountaineers, not having any interest
in Urmiah, had conspired together. They sent for-
ward mounted messengers with orders to ride back
when it was ascertained that Agha Petros and his
forces, who were chiefly Assyrians, had broken
through the Turkish army and opened up the road
that led to the British. This news was sent back
to the conspirators, who immediately took steps to
evacuate the town.
Dr. Shed, the American Missionary, had been left
behind to conduct affairs in the absence of Agha
Petros. He noticed that the Armenians were
evacuating their line north of the city. When
questioned as to the reason of their strange be-
haviour, they stated they were simply moving from
their camp to a more healthy position. This did
not seem at all feasible to Dr. Shed, who told them
that he thought they were lying and that their in-
tentions were to desert the Assyrians. They as-
sured him that this was not the case, and after his
asking them if they contemplated such an act, to
remain for at least four days, he rode back to the
city, on their giving him their promises. They
apparently waited till nightfall and then continued
their march southwards, with both the Russians
and mountaineers. The Turks very soon received
intelligence of the fact that the northern portion of
the line, held by the Armenians, was unoccupied,


and, together with the Kurds, moved down on the
city.
Small parties of Assyrians moved out to inter-
cept them and delay their advance until the inhabi-
tants had sufficient time to load their wagons with
supplies of food for the journey together with what
valuables they had. Dr. Shed and some of the mis-
sionaries led these isolated parties and held up the
Turks until most of the people were clear of the
city. Dr. Shed with his wife followed on with the
people, Dr. Shed himself forming a rearguard to
protect the column while other missionaries re-
mained to look after the wounded Turkish prisoners
and the Christians unable to get away. Of about
100,000 inhabitants about 70,000 got clear of the
city and were on the road before the Turks captured
the place, and the fate of the others who were un-
able to get clear we never heard. Their only hope
lay in what success the missionaries might have in
preventing a massacre.
The Assyrian doctor also informed us that large
bodies of Turkish troops and Kurdish irregulars
were raiding the column murdering the people and
carrying off young girls to their harems, together
with what loot they could lay their hands on. On
receipt of this information my party volunteered to
go out and act as a rearguard, while the cavalry re-
mained behind to protect the people as they
swarmed into the valley. We put our proposals to
Agha Petros, which were as follows: I would take
out with me two officers, six sergeants, three Lewis
machine guns and sufficient food for six days. He
was to collect and hand over to me one hundred
men under the command of one of his chiefs, a man
who was on the spot. On the assurance that he
would have the men ready at dawn, we returned to
our camp in order to select the best horses to ride,
and the strongest and fastest mules to carry our
ammunition, food and blankets.


CHAPTER XXXVI.—THE REARGUARD
MOVES OUT.
LONG before dawn on the morning of August
sth, the camp was astir preparing breakfast,
loading up provisions and gear on the mules,
and feeding and saddling the horses prior to moving
out. The two officers and six sergeants I selected
for this enterprise were Captain E. G. Scott-Olsen,
55th Battalion, A.1.F.; Captain R. K. Nicol, M.C.,
Wellington Regiment, N.Z.E.F.; Sergeant B. F.
Murphy, D.C.M., 28th Battalion, A.1.F.; Sergeant
W. T. Brophy, 75th Canadian Battalion; Sergeant
R. C. Casey, 29th Canadian Battalion; Sergeant A.
Nimmo, Otago Regiment, N.Z.E.F.; Sergeant A.
W. H. Place, 1/9 Middlesex Regiment; and Ser-
geant D. Cameron, 10th Lovat Scouts Battalion
(Cameron Highlanders).
About half an hour after dawn we moved out of
camp to Agha Petros’ headquarters, in order to
pick up the chief with his band of irregulars, but on
arrival there we were informed that they would join
the party along the road on the further side of the
town. We, however, secured one of Agha Petros’
followers, who was to act as interpreter, and
another as guide to the mules, who were to follow
on behind. We then moved out on to the high
road, along which the people were still streaming
on to Sain Kala. The first village we reached was
a picture of chaos, owing to the streets being so
narrow, and the crowd of refugees so great that pro-
gress was almost impossible. All the places of
business in the town were closed and the Persian
people, having escaped to the top storeys of their
buildings, were looking out of the windows, fearful
of their own lives, for the Armenians and the
Assyrians were carrying out a systematic raid on the
bazaars and streets. Seeing that this would lead to
more trouble, we endeavoured to put a stop to the


thieving on the part of the refugees. While we
were doing this the Governor of the Village, who
heard of our presence in the place, came along and,
in a great state of excitement, related to us
the ill-treatment meted out to his people by the refu-
gees. We obtained from him a messenger to re-
turn to the camp with a message stating the situa-
tion and asking for some of the cavalry to be sent
out along the road to act as police and protect the
Persians and their property- This calmed his fears
and, on returning to his house, we rode on once
more.
As we got out into the more open spaces of the
valley, the road could be seen for some miles ahead.
The people were streaming along in thousands, and
hailed us on our approach as their deliverers. The
men would shout in tones of great joy, “The
English! The English!” and fired their rifles in the
air and shouted loud hurrahs. The unfortunate
women folk were so overcome at the sight of the
first party of British that they wept aloud. Strik-
ing their breasts they would call, down upon us the
blessings of God and rush across and kiss our hands
and boots in very joy at the sight of their first de-
liverance from the cruel raids of the Turks.
We had ridden some eight miles, and there were
still no signs of our promised escort, though the
chief assured us every time we inquired that they
would be along presently. Feeling rather appre-
hensive, we asked him to make some specific en-
deavour to obtain the men, as the information we
were receiving from the people was to the effect that
the Turks were close upon their heels. They also
informed us that Doctor Shed was behind the last
of the refugees and, with a small party, was en-
deavouring to protect them along the march.
We knew that the main body of Turks, to the
south of the lake, had a force of two hundred and
fifty Turks and an irregular force of two hundred
and fifty Kurds at a town called Miandab to the
north of our road, who had not been engaged in the


fight between the Christians and Turks, when the
former broke through to us. Thus we were par-
ticularly anxious to get behind the people, before
this strong force received news of their plight, and
came down in force upon the unfortunate column.
Seeing that there was no likelihood of obtaining
the promised hundred men, owing to the fact that
the whole force had disbanded on seeing the people
coming down, we resolved to push on without any
loss of time and do what we could with whatever
forces Doctor Shed commanded in his endeavour
to form the rearguard. The havoc wrought by the
raiders on the column was becoming more evident
the further we travelled, as time and time again one
of us dismounted in order to bind up the wounds of
some unfortunate woman, who was struggling along
as best she could.
Another thing was most noticeable, and that was
the destruction of property and crops in the towns
along the route, caused by the Armenians and the
Assyrians. We passed villages in which there was
not a single living Persian, but lying in the streets
were the bodies of the murdered inhabitants.
Houses and household utensils were wantonly de-
stroyed, and the crops, which had been harvested
and stacked on the outskirts, were all set afire by
the Christians, in retaliation for what they had en-
dured at the hands of the Turks. It was hard for
the Persian villages to be thus treated, simply be-
cause they happened to be Mohammedans. One
very soon saw that the Mohammedan is not the
only fanatic in the world, for the acts of these
Christians were the outcome of pure fanaticism.
Bad as the conduct of these Christians was, one has
to bear in mind their awful treatment at the hands
of the Turks and Germans during the war- Still
two wrongs do not make a right, and later on we
had to adopt very strict measures to put a stop to
this destruction.
About four o’clock, after riding somewhere near
thirty miles, we were informed that Doctor Shed,


with his wife, was only a mile further on, and very
shortly we reached a little group of vehicles in one
of which was Mrs. Shed and some of the workers of
the Amercian mission station of Urmiah. What a
relief the sight of us was to these good women, is
left to the reader’s imagination. They had been
five days on the road endeavouring to encourage the
people and urge them forward, while Mrs. Shed’s
husband was putting up a gallant fight with a few
followers about half a mile further back. After
shaking hands and telling her that she would reach
our camps before twelve o’clock next day we pushed
on to where Doctor Shed and his party were.
He had with him twenty-four men who he had
persuaded to form his rear guard. On reaching
them they were resting on top of a ridge on the look-
out for the next rush on the part of the raiders. He
told us that he had been fighting continuously for
the last five days in his endeavour to save the
people. We asked him how it was that so few of
the Christians rallied around him, as it appeared to
us that, if he had a strong force, the raiders could
no doubt be kept at a safe distance. He answered
with a shrug of his shoulders, saying, “What can
one do, seeing that self-preservation seems to be
the motto of most of the men.” We had seen this
on the road, as in nearly every instance the men
rode their horses, carrying at least one rifle over
their shoulders, with a plentiful supply of ammuni-
tion around their waists, while the unfortunate
women folk tramped on as best they could. Every
endeavour on our part to get the men to return with
us to the rear of the column met with no response
on their part. We informed Doctor Shed that we
would take over his command, if he would push on
to our camp in order to assist the people as they
came in. Agha Petros particularly requested this,
knowing that the Doctor’s influence over the people
was greater than that of any other man.
Before leaving he told us that the last skirmish
he was engaged in was near a village about six


miles back. These raiders were chiefly groups of
wandering Kurds, or small bands of Turks, who
would rush in on the column and, after a sharp fight,
would carry off as much loot as they could pack on
their horses, and the prettier girls whom, no doubt,
they would sell to the lords of the Turkish harems.
From this rise we could see that the country fur-
ther ahead was much more broken than that we had
passed, so decided to push on and get in contact
with some of the raiders. By hiding our forces in
the rough country and opening fire with our
machine guns, we might lead them to believe that
a strong force of British troops were now pro-
tecting the people, hoping that we would impress
them that the raiding would immediately cease.
About a mile further on we passed through a vil-
lage, wrecked by the refugees, without seeing a
single inhabitant, beyond the bodies of those who
had been butchered in the streets. We noticed that
this place was situated on a hill that overlooked
the country on all sides, and nearby there was a
spring bubbling forth clean water.
About six miles further on we came to another
village, round about which were tethered horses.
This village was situated in a narrow valley, and to
the right was a gap in the hills, forming a semi-
circular valley, which joined the main one some four
miles further ahead. We halted here in order to
form some plan of action and decided that, if we
attacked these people in this place, without pro-
tecting our flank by sending a force round to the
right, the chances were that if we drove them out
they would probably get in contact with a stronger
force which could easily sweep round this dangerous
valley, command the positions in the rear and thus
surround us.
In order to overcome this. Captain Nicol, with two
sergeants and twelve of our refugees with one
machine gun, were ordered to ride round to the right
and prevent any encircling movement on the part of
the enemy. With Captain Scott-Olsen, four ser-


geants, and the twelve refugees, we rode on to this
force in the village. Two men were sent ahead to
act as a screen and draw the enemy’s fire, while the
remainder of us followed under cover some dis-
tance behind. We had not gone very far when the
enemy opened fire on our two men riding ahead.
The remainder of us, with a machine gun on either
flank at once extended on the outskirts of a poplar
grove on our side of the village, and immediately
opened fire on the enemy who mounted and gal-
loped out of the place as fast as their horse could
go.
About a mile further on the road wound over a
ridge along which the enemy had ridden. The
ridge on the right rose to a height of some four or
five hundred feet. A couple of Assyrians were told
off to climb the most commanding height and there
keep a look-out for any movements on the part of
the enemy. Two sergeants with a Lewis gun, to-
gether with four Armenians, were ordered to ride
along to the ridge ahead and endeavour to obtain
any information concerning the people we had
driven out of the place. The remainder of us halted
until reports were obtained from our scouts. About
ten minutes later the machine gun could be heard
firing from the ridge along the road, so in a twink-
ling we rode out to their assistance with the other
gun. On reaching this) rise we could obtain a view
of a couple of miles along the flats ahead, and saw
about a hundred tribesmen, racing backwards and
forwards, keeping up a steady fire on our chaps
holding the ridge, who were answering them with
their machine gun and rifles. The other gun was
promptly got into action and, after bowling a few of
the tribesmen over, the remainder of them scurried
across country over the ridge to the left of the road-
It only wanted about an hour before darkness
would overtake us. Seeing that the position we
held was covered by ridges on either side of the
road, over which we could easily be attacked and
surrounded, we decided to fall back on the village,


overlooking the country, some six miles further
back, and there camp for the night. We sent word
to Captain Nicol and his party, informing him of
our movements, in order that he would make his
way back to the village, where we arrived about ten
p.m. A large house on the outskirts was selected
for our camp, where the stream flowed quite close
to its high mud walls. The place evidently be-
longed to one of the richer inhabitants and, luckily
for us, had a large store of fodder for horses stored
in one of the out dwellings within the courtyard, into
which there was only one entrance which could
easily be guarded by one sentry enabling the re-
mainder of the party to get at least a few hours’
sleep.
CHAPTER XXXVII.—AGAINST BIG ODDS.
WE waited for a little while in order to see if
there were any signs of the mules carrying
our blankets and food, each man pulling his
belt in an extra hole in the attempt to satisfy the
gnawing of the inner man, for since dawn we had
not partaken of any food but a piece of chupattie at
about eleven o’clock. One of the men set out to
make inquiries concerning the mules, returned a
little later with the report that they were not in
sight. Nothing daunted, a couple of the fellows
went out and picked up a stray sheep, which was
soon despatched with the aid of a bayonet. A strip
of skin was ripped off from the fleshiest portion of
the animal and pieces of flesh about two inches
square were then sliced off. Bits of wire were then
brought to bear in the operation, acting as skewers
for the meat, which was soon grilling over a large
fire we had alight in the centre of the courtyard.
On the meal being cooked, it was quickly devoured
and washed down with the clear water of the spring.
One by one the lads rolled themselves into their
coats and huddled together on beds of straw under
the cover of a roof.


We officers were not by any means easy in our
minds, for one great danger was ever present be-
fore us at this particular stage. Away to the north
lay the town of Miandab, with the Turkish chief
and his five hundred followers, and the query in our
minds was “Has that beggar got any news? If so,
what action is he adopting?” The hope was that he
would keep clear of our tracks until we got the last
of the refugees down to the cavalry at Sain Kala.
A sentry was posted, and soon the remainder of us
were peacefully slumbering after an exhausting day.
At about 2 a.m. the tinkle of the mule bells could
be heard on the road outside, and all were awakened
by the muleteers, and the guide in their endeavours
to lead the mules through the narrow doorway, and
unload their burdnes in the courtyard. After a
little while all the gear had been sorted out, and a
few of us commenced cooking a little rice and boil-
ing the billy in order to brew tea. This was suc-
cessfully accomplished and, feeling much better
after this rough but much appreciated meal, we soon
sought our couches of straw once more, under cover
of the much desired blankets, as the cold, during the
earlier hours of the morning, is acute in that coun-
try, even in the summer time.
Before the first streak of dawn had flashed across
the grey skies some of us were astir, in order to
place a sentry on the top of the flat roof, with in-
structions to keep a sharp look-out over the sur-
rounding country. One by one the others sat up,
and, after stretching and much yawning, crawled
out of the blankets and were soon busy in rebuild-
ing the fire to cook a little breakfast. Our spirits
were high in the knowledge that we had defeated
the enemy the night before and at the good supply
of mutton, rice and tea, with the rosy outlook of a
good breakfast, unhindered by any surprises on the
part of our foes.
The fires were burning brightly and the breakfast
well on its way, when the sergeant on the look-out
called out for us to come up on the roof and have a


look at what was going on. Seizing the glasses, I
saw coming over the hills, and from the direction
we had driven the raiders of the night before, a
party of about one hundred and fifty horsemen. As
we watched we saw them dismount in a valley, and
halt there, for what reason we did not at that time
know. Thinking that these were the demoralised
tribesmen, whom we had hustled with our machine
guns, little attention was paid to them beyond giv-
ing orders to the sergeant to keep a sharp eye on
their movements. We concentrated our attention
on our morning meal for which we were feeling
more than ready. Again the sentry called to come
and have a look, and by the tone of his voice we
gathered that something must be doing on the hills
out yonder.
It did not take long to realise that something in-
deed was doing, for parties of men were seen, rid-
ing over the hills, on both sides of the valley to our
rear. The Turkish commander was on our tracks!
If we wished to extricate ourselves from the village,
immediate action was imperative. Looking at the
breakfast which would be ready in five minutes, one
felt like staying to have his fill before clearing out,
but casting a glance over the other houses to the
high road that led to Sain Kala, one saw the refu-
gees putting the last touches to their wagons, and
in an instant we made up our minds breakfast must
be abandoned and positions sought for the guns on
the flanks of the village if we hoped to save the mov-
ing multitude on the road ahead.
The swearing on the part of the lads was terrific
at the thought of “Boot and Saddle” once more and
hopping into a scrap without a meal, but the danger
of the situation was realised by all who accompanied
the swearing with rapid movements in saddling
their mounts and in seeing that the guns were work-
ing smoothly.
Two sergeants, with four refugees, were de-
tailed to load up the gear, one Lewis gun being left
with the sergeant on the post, which was placed


under cover on the sloping roof. A few of us took
one gun to the right flank of the village, and the
others took the remaining one to the other flank, in
order to hold the enemy back until the mules had
got clear. I happened to be with the gun on the
right flank and had with me a Canadian sergeant,
named Brophy, and the native chief whom Agha
Petros had sent out with us. We crept through
the poplar grove and took up our position behind
a low mud wall near the edge of the wood. There
we waited until the enemy on our side came within
killing range, though at this time they were well
over a mile distant.
The chief was frantic in his efforts to get us to
open fire immediately, believing in the doctrine of
his country, that moral effect, that is, a jolly good
fright, is the best way in which to open a battle.
We pointed out to him that according to our rules
of warfare, the best way to frighten any enemy is
to kill as many as possible at the outset, and then
trust to the demoralising stunt. With this idea we
waited until this particular party of about two hun-
dred strong had reached the outskirts of the poplar
grove some six hundred yards away. We guessed
that they had but little information as to our exact
whereabouts and that they would be very wary in
any of their movements beyond, or close to the vil-
lage where we had camped during the night. On
arrival at the poplars they dismounted and congre-
gated in small groups, lit up their cigarettes and
prepared to enjoy a quiet smoke while their scouts
were obtaining information as to our exact where-
abouts.
Young Brophy said, “I guess sir, it’s about time
to give them a little bit of hurry up,” and he stood
by with another loaded magazine, ready to slip on
the gun immediately the one in position had run
out. Laying the sights on to the thickest group in
the centre of the crowd, I pressed the trigger until
the whole magazine had been expended. In a twink-
ling young Brophy replaced the empty one with an-


other fully loaded drum, which burst into the now
panic-stricken enemy. Men and horses were roll-
ing and kicking on the ground amongst the others,
and those of the enemy who were fortunate enough
to be holding their horses, quickly mounted and gal-
loped back to the protection of the hills.
We kept up our fire until they got out of range,
and hearing the other gun, on the opposite flank,
rat-tat-ting for dear life, we knew that our fellows
were making things busy in that quarter. On the
retreat of our foes we pulled back to the rear of this
town and there took up positions on the high
ground which covered to greater advantage the open
country, and would thus be in a position to cover
the withdrawal of the mules. Sergeant Murphy
was then sent back to lend a hand in loading, with
instructions to urge them to get clear of the place
with the least possible delay, for it meant they
would be cut to pieces if caught in the narrow,
winding streets of the village.
As we watched, we heard the machine gun within
the village open up with short rapid bursts.
Hardly daring to think of what was happening in
that quarter, we waited with nerves strained to the
utmost pitch for the first signs of their coming out.
Most of the enemy were galloping round on the
hills on either fi'ank evidently with the idea of cut-
ting off our retreat. So our guns were sighted to
extreme range, and we poured a stream of bullets
amongst the leading horsemen, who we forced to
fall back to the higher ground-
Eventually the leading mules got out of the vil-
lage, yet the gun continued firing in the streets fur-
ther back. Our position was about seven hundred
yards away and from there we saw that things were
anything but pleasant with the lads as they en-
deavoured to get the animals clear of the streets.
We stood by in order to give them a hand, but de-
voted most of our energies in preventing the horse-
men riding down from the hills on our flanks, and
thus cutting us off completely.


We knew each other’s work throroughly by this
time and were confident that if anybody was able
to get our convoy clear it was the sergeants who
had been left behind to carry out the job. We
trusted to their ability in extricating themselves in
this delicate job, though we watched their move-
ments carefully in order to assist should the neces-
sity arise.
As the leading mules raced across the open, we
heard the wild yells of the tribesmen close on their
heels, and when the last got clear, we saw Murphy
gallop out with the gun on his saddle, casting
anxious eyes behind. He raced to a rise some two
hundred yards clear of the village, keeping his
horse under cover, dismounted and crept up the
slope, placing his gun in position to obtain a good
field of fire. This was hardly completed when some
hundred horsemen dashed into the open to be
knocked back with the deadly fire that Murphy
opened up with his machine gun. The survivors
immediately galloped back to the protection of the
mud walls of the village, but in a few minutes re-
peated the performance, with the same results.
Captain Nicol, who was in charge of the gun on the
left, had moved forward on foot, evidently with the
idea of giving the boys with the mules a hand.
The enemy, seeing that by shooting the mules it
would considerably hamper our immediate move-
ments, shot down one after another. The loads had
to be abandoned, as it was quite impossible under
such a fire to unload them and carry off the gear,
the most valuable of which were two boxes of am-
munition.
On the boys gaining our sheltered postion under
cover of nullahs, it was seen that Nicol was still
out in the danger zone, and before he had time to
gain cover, he was hit, and fell without a move.
Murphy, who was nearest Nicol’s horse, ordered
one of the lads to gallop out and bring him in, while
he kept the enemy back with the fire of his machine
gun. The lad had not traversed fifty yards, when


down crashed his horse, though in some miraculous
way, not a bullet touched the rider, who luckily was
near cover, under which he crawled back once more.
Murphy then turned to another lad and asked him
to take his own horse and attempt Nicol’s rescue.
The lad made a rush for it, but again the horse was
brought to the ground, while the rider again es-
caped.
By this time Murphy had run out of his supply
of ammunition for his machine gun, and was forced
to double back to where we were in order to re-
plenish his stock. We looked round for some of
the twenty-four Armenians and Assyrians, who
were carrying the loaded magazines for the guns, to
find that at least half of them had pulled back along
the road to a place of more safety. Nicol could be
still seen lying out in front in the same position as
when he had fallen. One of the lads made another
attempt to get him out by making a detour along a
narrow creek bed to the left flank, but before riding
very far, it was seen that the enemy held such a
position as to block any movement. So, with great
reluctance, we abandoned any further attempts to
rescue Nicol because it was seen that in all proba-
bility the would-be rescuers would be shot down one
after the other in their futile attempts. Feeling
sure that he was beyond help, we decided to pre-
serve the lives of the remainder to the last minute,
in order to hold up the enemy’s advance.
CHAPTER XXXVIII.—A TERRIBLE
EIGHT HOURS.
THE noise of the continuous firing had spread
panic through the ranks of the refugees who,
in a great number of instances, were abandon-
ing their wagons in their haste to flee from danger.
We immediately despatched a message to the com-
mander of the cavalry, informing him of our pre-
dicament, urging him to send all available reinforce-


ments at once, and telling him that we intended to
hold the enemy in the open, by falling back from
one place to another, until he had time to bring his
troops up. We endeavoured to collect our native
allies, who were carrying panniers containing the
loaded magazines for our machine guns, but found
them to be missing. As the Turks and Kurds
pressed our front and extended further along round
our flanks, we decided to gallop back to the next
position, which was done under fire from three
sides.. Again and again this was repeated, until
we got on the heels of the refugees who were mov-
ing through the valley, in two columns about seven
or eight hundreds yards apart. Seeing that our
small forces, which at this time consisted of only
eight Europeans, one Armenian and one Assyrian,
were unable to protect both columns, we decided
on working along the column on our left.
We knew that, so long as we continued fighting,
the Turkish Commander would concentrate his ef-
forts on wiping us out, before turning the energies
of his men on looting the unfortunate people. Thus
from position to position we retired, pulling out on
each occasion before they had completely sur-
rounded us.
At one siage we were in dire straits, for the next
position was at least one thousand yards behind,
and in order to reach it, we had to gallop over a
stretch of country devoid of any cover. Seeing the
well-nigh hopeless position, and fearing that the
guns would be lost we realised that something
nearer madness than sanity had to be done im-
mediately. With the Armenian chief we bailed up
twelve to fourteen men at the points of our rifles,
and offered them the choice of riding forward in a
charge, or being shot there and then. They chose
the former, so we rode forward at full gallop, firing
our rifles in the air and yelling at the top of our
voices, hoping that the confusion we wrought
amongst the people would mislead the Turks, and
make them think that, instead of fourteen people


charging them, there were about three times the
number. This little bit of bluff had the desired
effect of halting the oncoming Turks and Kurds,
who galloped back to the ridge some few hundred
yards to their rear. As we were falling back we
saw hundreds of men amongst the refugees who, in
every case, were armed, many with two rifles and
supplies of ammunition in two or three belts round
their waists, but, despite all our endeavours to in-
duce them to join our ranks to stop the enemy’s
rush, we met with no response, and in many cases
after a blank refusal, the worthy Christian drove his
spurs into his mount and galloped along the road
towards safety, leaving his women folk to the ten-
der mercies of the Mohammedans or our ability to
protect them. Those that rode forward in the
charge made themselves scarce at the first oppor-
tunity, leaving us once more to our own resources.
Still hoping that the cavalry would be up, we con-
tinued our running fight.
The refugees, particularly the women, were in
the last degrees of panic, which meant that we had
to take our lives in our hands, and at times ride
back, single-handed, amongst the people in order to
show them the colour of our khaki uniforms. This
appeared to be the only thing to quell the panic, for
so long as a Britisher stayed with them or rode
through their ranks, their fears, for the time being,
would be dispelled and a little order maintained in
extricating their wagons containing their feed and
earthly goods. The preservation of these was of
the most vital importance, as we knew full well that
it would be many days before their supplies could
be replenished.
After fighting for over seven hours we heard a
welcome English shout from a ridge behind. Look-
ing round we saw about a dozen cavalrymen lining
the heights. We got back to them in a state of
collapse and utter exhaustion, due to the continuous
fighting and hard riding of so many hours, without
food or drink. Before leaving the village in the


morning we did not even have time enough to fill
our water bottles, let alone eat, and the heat of the
sun smote us most cruelly in the deep valley.
In command of the section was a sergeant who
told us that he happened to be on police duty along
the road, when he intercepted the message carried
to Major Moore. Without loss of time he collected
his men and rode out to our assistance, and never
were men more welcome. These men were all
British Regulars, thoroughly disciplined in the use
of their rifles, and it was a good sight to see the way
in which the sergeant directed their fire first to one
flank, then the other, and then to the immediate
front, with great success.
Hearing the increased fire from our side, the
enemy halted and came on more warily. Under
cover of the cavalrymen’s fire, we managed to get
about ten minutes rest, before falling back to the
next position. After that, touch was lost between
us, owing to the fact that the people were dispersed,
through panic, across the whole of the valley. It
was with the utmost difficulty that we managed to
get into such positions so as to be able to fire on
the enemy with something like effect. We still
continued to use our rifles, though the machine
guns were out of action owing to our ammunition
being exhausted.
Throughout the fight we were forced not only to
carry our machine guns but also our supply of am-
munition. With rifles slung and a machine gun on
the right shoulder, with four magazines in the left
hand, we guided our horses in the mad gallop
from position to position, fired at each time from
the front and both flanks yet, strange as it may ap-
pear, we did not sustain a casualty and only three
horses were lost. Fortunately for us, stray ani-
mals were passed at times, which were utilised in
the cases where the men lost their mounts. Mur-
phy, on giving up his horse in the attempt to rescue
Captain Nicol, yielded the only apparent chance he
had of saving his own life, but here at the very be-


ginning, our luck was in, for one of the stray ani-
mals was caught by another sergeant. Though it
only had a halter as its equipment, Murphy rode it
bareback, guiding it with the one rope and carrying
a Lewis gun during the eight hours of the fight. It
seems an impossible task, but such men as Murphy
have grit enough to overcome any obstacles.
Within six miles of our camp one of Agha Petros’
men rode out at the head of about fifty mounted
troops. The enemy on seeing these reinforcements
did not wait to continue any more fighting, but gal-
loped back, helter-skelter to the shelter of the hills
overlooking the valley. At this stage we were just
about at our last gasp, and separated one from the
other, with not more than half-a-dozen rounds
apiece, riding horses that stumbled along in a state
of utter exhaustion. As to what had happened to
the cavalry, we were at a loss to understand.
I still had with me young Brophy, who, throug-
out the day, was always nipping up when danger
seemed to be most prevalent and he, on more than
one occasion, saved my life. The pair of us rode,
or rather clung to our saddles, towards the camp,
and within a quarter of a mile we met the cavalry
moving out under the command of a lieutenant,
who informed me that Major Moore had ordered
him out to our assistance. We told him it was
rather late in the day to think of helping us, but
pointed out to him the direction which the Turks
had taken in their retirement. We suggested that
he might hurry them along with his fresh men and
much fresher horses than the enemy were riding.
He accepted this advice while we rode back to the
camp.


CHAPTER XXXIX.—AN UNEASY NIGHT.
FORDING the river, we climbed to the small
plateau on which our camp was pitched, and
were there met by our comrades of the party,
who, judging by the long hand-shakes and the
glisten in their eyes, were more than pleased to see
us again. Reports as to our plight during the early
hours of the morning had reached camp some fiVe
hours earlier. For some reason the cavalry was
withheld. Hence the delay.
A meal was soon ready in the shape of boiled mut-
ton, tea and the eternal rice, but, owing to the
parched condition of our throats, most of us were
unable to eat, but drank to our heart’s content, even
though it was a source of danger to our stomach.
Dr. Shed was extremely busy handling the mass
of refugees, hurrying a group here and a family
there in his endeavour to get them on to the main
road that led to safety. It was hoped to be able
to send them on in groups of eight hundred or a
thousand strong, under the charge of two or three
British soldiers. The proximity of the enemy and
our knowledge of the existence of a deep gorge
about twelve miles to the rear, formed by a river
running through the mountains, the tops of the
ridges on either side being only a matter of four or
five hundred yards apart, forced us to hurry mat-
ters. It was our endeavour to get the people clear
of this dangerous piece of country before the enemy
or wild tribesmen had time to seize the heights.
It would be an easy matter to ambush the column
in this dark defile, which would prove a veritable
death trap to thousands of unfortunate refugees.
Throughout that afternoon Dr. Shed and Agha
Petros, together with some of our officers and men,
strained every nerve in order to get the refugees,
numbering approximately 70,000, on the road which
led through this pass. The confusion was chaotic.


Mothers sought their children, brothers hunted for
sisters, while the husbands loaded their animals and
wagons with the meagre store of flour and grain,
which had to last them for several days.
By nightfall, as our camp was in the open, it was
deemed advisable to fall back in the direction of
some hills about a mile to the rear and there camp
under cover for the night. Tents were struck and
the baggage was soon loaded on the mules. Dr-
Shed, who had been complaining of feeling ill dur-
ing the afternoon, moved ahead with his wife in
their wagon, in order to reach the camp before night
had set in, but unfortunately missed the turning in
the road that led to the camping ground.
After a couple of hours work the tents were
pitched, sentries posted, and the evening meal was
ready, and by this time we began to feel uneasy at
the doctor’s long absence. Two sergeants were
sent out to search for him and his wife. About
midnight one rode back to the camp with the news
that they had found the doctor who was very ill.
The medico attached to the cavalry got up at once
and rode out to attend to the Doctor. Unfortu-
nately, on his arrival he saw that it was too late to
render any assistance, as the missionary’s life was
fast ebbing out, as he was in the deadly grip of
cholera. After doing what good he could, he
waited there with Mrs. Shed for the end, which
came quickly. Then next morning, with the as-
sistance of the two sergeants, he dug a shallow
grave and left the mortal remains of this great mis-
sionary in the wild hills of Northern Persia.
The loss of Dr. Shed at this stage is almost in-
conceivable. He was the man who had inspired the
Christians during their long weary months of siege
warfare. It was he who conceived the idea to work
hand in hand with the British forces operating in
Northern Persia, in the hope that relief would come
to the people whom he so dearly loved. Though
beset with traitors and defeated by men whose only
ambition was self preservation, he still carried on.


When forced to evacuate the city, he, by the force
of his strong personality, gathered round about him
a few brave men in his endeavour to form a rear
guard to protect the people from the raiding tribes-
men. It was chiefly due to his efforts that the
people were moving once more, giving us a big
chance of saving a large number of them. Such is
war. Even when one expects to find things work-
ing smoothly after a trying and difficult period,
something generally intervenes that dashes one’s
hopes to the ground. Like the Persian, let us call
it “Kismet.”
Beyond a few shots fired across the valley, the
night passed without any further disturbance, but
with the first streak of dawn came the attack on our
position. The sentries had been carefully posted
the night before and, with the aid of their machine
guns, drove back the raiding bands that rode across
the valley, who, being subjected to the machine gun
fire, galloped back to the shelter of the hills beyond
Sain Kala.
CHAPTER XL.—WE SHAKE OFF
THE TURKS.
THOUGH we felt sure that Nicol had lost his
life the day before, there was still the hope
that, finding himself badly wounded, he had
feigned death until nightfall, when he would creep
to the shelter of the river in the valley. Even
though he was dead, the idea of leaving him in the
open to the Kurds was abhorred. The Major
agreed to send a section of cavalry, guided by Cap-
tain Scott-Olsen, in order to bring him in. After
breakfast this party moved out, but, on reaching
the heights over which the enemy had fled, were
attacked by a force of great superiority and forced
to abandon the project. Major Moore was unable
to carry on, owing to an acute attack of malaria.


with the result that I found myself once more in
command at an extremely critical period.
A large band of the enemy was bearing down
upon us from another direction, which necessitated
the changing of our dispositions to meet this
threatened attack. We decided that it was im-
perative to hold on to this position until at least
midday, in order to give the refugees a fair start,
and also to enable us to get our convoy of mules
and camels well ahead on the road before we re-
tired. At this stage not one single soldier of the
refugees remained with us. Agha Petros himself
had failed in his attempts the night before to rally
a force around his standard, but had ridden on to
Takan Tepe, three marches further on, in order to
raise if possible at least fifty followers, who would
wait for us at that place.
Nothing developed for a couple of hours and, see-
ing that our position was well posted with machine
guns, and particularly strong, it was decided to at-
tempt some sort of a ruse in order to deceive the
enemy to draw him on and inflict heavy casualties.
The order was passed along the line of detached
posts that, at a certain time, everybody was to rise
and make the pretence of dismantling the guns in
full view of the enemy, who had not come closer
than about 1,500 yards. At the appointed hour this
was done and with great show the lads apparently
dismantling the guns strolled down over the top of
the hills, again to crawl back to the crest where
look-out men were posted to watch for any move-
ments on the part of the enemy. Even this did not
induce them to come any nearer, so, after waiting
for a couple of hours, we decided to fall back,
knowing that the convoy and people were at least
four miles further ahead. The cavalry were then
ordered to ride ahead to protect our own valuable
convoy of money, machine guns and ammunition,
while we of the Dunsterforce Party were to follow
on behind as a rear guard party.
At this time sickness was beginning to make it-


self felt in the party, and on moving, we found it
necessary to lash a couple of our boys to their
mounts to prevent them from falling off. On reach-
ing the highway the first sign of the horrors of the
march were seen. The refugees, in their wild flight
had made it a race of the survival of the fittest and
along that road we came across small parties of
old men, weak and wounded women, deserted in-
fants and crippled children at frequent intervals.
The heat of the sun was simply cruel and water was
only found at stages from ten to twenty miles apart.
These unfortunates had been without water for
about fifteen hours and, as we neared them, piti-
fully called for something to drink.
We dismounted, and placed two or three women
or children upon our horses, abandoning hundreds
to their fate. Cruel as this was it was absolutely
essential, as our idea was to save the greatest num-
ber of lives possible. Knowing that the first help
was at Bijah, six marches off, it would have been
absolute folly for a mere handful of us to remain
behind in the attempt to save a few. These,
through their weaknesses, would surely succumb
before reaching that haven of safety. So, with
heavy hearts and big lumps in our throats, we were
forced to turn a deaf ear to the pleadings of these
poor unfortunates, who called upon us to save
them. To have drawn our revolvers and shot them
would have been humane, knowing full well how
cruelly they would be treated by the foe behind,
but to shoot the old, the cripples and the infants in
cold blood was a little beyond any Britisher. Thus,
with aching hearts, we were forced to leave them to
their fate.
After toiling throughout that day we eventually
got the people and convoy clear of the dreaded pass
and on to the open country further ahead, selecting
for ourselves a camping ground on a commanding
position overlooking the rough country.


CHAPTER XLL—DAYS OF TRIAL.
NEXT morning it was seen that the horses were
absolutely incapable of going further with-
out rest, and the pangs of fever were grip-
ping us, one and all. It was decided to spend that
day in camp and move off during the cooler hours
of the late afternoon. A party was told off to ride
across to a neighbouring village in order to procure
food for ourselves and grain for the horses. It met
with a nasty reception at the hands of the inhabi-
tants, who opened up a lively fire on these few men.
After a lot of trouble, we were successful in getting
a small supply of our requirements. The Russians,
who had with them four mountain guns, failed to
give us any assistance, and on the first attack on
our position at Sain Kala, hurried on as quickly as
their jaded beasts could move, offering as their ex-
cuse their duty in protecting some half-a-dozen Rus-
sian women who were with them.
Mrs. Shed still remained with us and one can
never forget the fortitude of that brave woman, who
only a few hours before had buried her husband and
was now alone, with three servants, in the hostile
crags of Northern Persia.
As soon as it was cool enough we were on the
move once more, enduring hardship, as on the pre-
vious day. Ahead of us lay a large village in the
centre of a fertile, cultivated country which we
hoped to reach that night and replenish our dim-
inished stock of provisions. On our arrival at about
midnight, we discovered the place to be a shambles
and a heap of ruins. On the arrival of the refugees,
the people were butchered, their houses burnt and
the crops destroyed. There was nothing for it but
to move again next morning in the hope of reach-
ing Takan Tepe, whose population was big enough
to put down any barbarous acts on the part of the
refugees. So once more we were on the road, lead-


ing our horses, which carried some of the people
whom we had rescued.
About a mile out we came across a group of
young girls in great distress, gathered round the
dead body of their father. We endeavoured to per-
suade them to move on, but they refused to leave
the body of their parent to the vultures by day and
the jackals by night. After promising to bury their
father, we ultimately persuaded them to climb on
top of the loads on the mules and move on to safety.
About six miles from Takan Tepe we came to
the wide river. Here were halted hundreds of the
refugees who were bathing their swollen feet and
watering their buffaloes. We decided to wait here
until they were on the move once again. After an
hour’s wait we moved on, reaching Takan Tepe
about six o’clock, finding to our joy that the place
was unmolested.
On our meeting the refugees some time before,
Major Starnes had despatched Captain MacTean,
with a couple of sergeants from Bijah to take up the
work of levy raising commenced by us. Before
leaving Sain Kala we sent an urgent message to
Starnes, asking him to send a few of the cavalry to
that place in order to buy grain to be distributed
on our arrival. It was due to the effort of these
fellows that the people of Takan Tepe owed the
safety of their lives and property.
Next day the people continued their march to
safety while the exhausted and sick were concen-
trated in a camp under the shade of the trees
which grew about the village. Odd officers and
sergeants were sent to the outlying villages in or-
der to protect the inhabitants on the one hand, and
the refugees on the other. Where khaki was, there
safety dwelt for both parties. One or two cases of
murder were reported and, where the offender was
caught, he was handed over to Agha Petros, who
had gathered round about him about fifty followers,
chiefly relatives. He lost no time in trying the cul-
prit who was generally hanged on a tree on the


roadside, as a warning to prospective offenders.
The second day in Takan Tepe a messenger rode in
from Captain Wilson who was on duty at one of the
villages with the following message:—
Doorbash, 18/8/18.
To O.C. Troops,
Takan Tepe.
From information to hand there has been a raid on the
village of ARABSHAH, about nine miles from here or
eighteen miles in all from Takan Tepe. So far the main
body of refugees have not been attacked, but are certain
to be after the tribesmen finish with the villages.
These Kurds are foraging for horses and grain, I am
led to believe, for the use of the Turkish troops.
The two villages X am at present looking after are
quiet, and no looting is taking place. I have one Armenian
under arrest for murder and looting. Will I shoot him or
send him to you for disposal?”
D. WILSON, Captain,
and Royal Fusiliers.
Something had to be done to protect the people
from this new danger. A note to this effect was
scribbled to Wilson, telling him at the same time
to forward the offender to our camp and hand him
over to Agha Petros.
Next day he adorned the landscape, as a sign of
warning to any others of his kind. The cavalry
were out on patrol duty amongst the hills round
Takan Tepe, so we at once approached Agha Petros
who promised to come out with his fifty men, while
I was detailed to command, assisted by six ser-
geant and two Lewis guns, with orders to disperse
these four hundred tribesmen.
In about an hour’s time we were ready to move.
Agha Petros, after a lot of delay, brought his men
out on to the roadway in pairs, the white flag, on
which was written above the red cross the words
“Trust the Lord and Follow the Cross” at the head
of his command. The standard bearer led the way
with the party following, throwing up a huge
column of dust, that completely hid from view
the rear files, making it hard for an enemy to dis-


cern whether there were fifty or five hundred horse-
men behind that silk flag.
On riding some twenty miles, we saw on the hill
slopes, some four miles to our left, a group of about
four hundred horsemen who immediately galloped
to the top of the hills overlooking the road. As it
was now getting late and darkness would soon be
upon us, we deemed it advisable to try and bluff the
enemy rather than endeavour to engage them in a
conflict amongst those rough hills, where the
chances were that we would lose ourselves at the
approach of darkness, which would be upon us be-
fore we developed the battle. So riding off through
a valley to the right of the road, under cover of the
dust cloud that we raised, we were soon hidden from
their view, to reappear again in groups along the
crest’s top in such a manner as to make them be-
lieve that we were a very strong force.
We watched the people passing on the road be-
tween us and our foes, until darkness set in.
Gathering heaps of dry grass, we lit small fires
along the top of the crest, as if we were preparing
our evening meal. Our followers were told to sing
and pass from one fire to the other, knowing that
sound travels for miles in those valleys and hills
during the silent hours of darkness. After keeping
this up for a couple of hours, the fires were allowed
to die out, we then mounted our horses and rode
back to camp. This little bit of bluff worked. No
other raid was attempted on the column by the
tribesmen along that part of the road, they no doubt
believing that a strong force was now protecting
the column.
We had to march a distance of nearly twenty
miles without water and, on reaching the road on
our homeward track, the cries of the people were
most heart rending. Most of them, on leaving
Takan Tepe, filled small jars and even cups with
water, but this stock had been exhausted during that
twenty miles’ tramp, or spilt in the dark on the
rough road. The physical endurance of these un-


fortunates was remarkable. Day and night they
tramped on, resting only when they dropped from
sheer exhaustion. On recovering sufficient
strength, after a couple of hours’ sleep, the crowd
would trudge on once more.
We reached camp about 2 a.m., tired, cold and
hungry, as we had had nothing to eat since break-
fast the preceding day. Fires were soon lit, and
while water was being boiled for the tea, some
stew that had been left over from the evening meal
in the camp was warmed up and literally devoured,
so great was our hunger after the strenuous exer-
tions of the day.
CHAPTER XLIL—SAVING THE HELPLESS.
AS soon as possible after our arrival at Takan
Tepe, we set to work in buying up all the
available mules, com and flour in the dis-
trict, with the object of bringing the helpless and
most exhausted refugees to Bijah. We had urged
Major Starnes to buy up all the grain and flour that
could be secured in Bijah, and also to send for doc-
tors from Hamadan to treat the sick we hoped
to bring down on the mules and camels.
The first camping ground of the refugees was
littered with filth and refuse, and thus became a
deadly menace at that time of the year in a cholera-
stricken country. So early next morning accord-
ingly, we moved camp to the banks of a fresh
stream that ran near the house of the Governor,
with whom we were negotiating for the animals and
grain.
Sickness was showing itself among all ranks.
Captain Kingscote was stricken down with pleurisy
the first day out from Sain Kala, and by the time he
reached Takan Tepe, he was in a state of collapse.
His life was hanging in the balance for several days,
but, thanks to the skilful energy of the cavalry’s doc-


tor, he regained sufficient strength to undertake
later on the three days’ trip to Bijah on a stretcher
slung between two horses.
For days, odd stragglers in a starving condition
were coming in, and in nearly every case were
stripped of their clothing. These people we fed
and drafted to the concentration camp to be carried
to Bijah.
One morning two unfortunate girls, stripped of
almost every shred of clothing—one with a bullet
wound through her shoulder, the other wounded in
the back—dragged their way into our camp and,
after hanging back for some time, due to their
modesty, were at last forced to come forward to
seek food. A couple of shirts were procured which
served as some sort of covering in the shape of
dress. The one who was wounded through the
shoulder had been struck with a soft-nosed bullet,
which made an opening about two inches across, at
the point where it went out. Being without medi-
cal attention for five or six days, the wound was
in a dreadful condition, as the flies had got to it.
When she first came to us there were maggots of
about half an inch long inside the wound. One
hardly knew what to do. Remembering that I had
some Condy’s Crystals in my medicine chest, we
mixed a solution of this stuff and poured it through
the wounds, which kept them clean and killed the
vermin. For bandages we relied on the tails of our
shirts.
Our fame as doctors soon spread, and regularly
every morning a crowd of women and children hung
about our tents for medical treatment. Not being
able to speak their language, and unacquainted with
medicine, we hardly knew what on earth to do with
these folk. Practising the old stunts of the regi-
mental doctor, we got them to put out their tongues,
felt their pulses, turned down their eyelids, looked
wise, and gave them one or two rhubarb pills, ac-
cording to their size. Whether it was that the
stunt or the pills worked, it is extremely difficult


to say, but, if any people ever swore by doctors,
these people swore by us, and even though we did
not cure all of them, belief in us resulted in a con-
tented mind.
One of the blackest days of our little show was
13th August, when word was sent in by Captain
Wilson that Sergeant Francis was very ill. The
doctor had his hands full with Captain Kingscote
and the cavalry men, so nothing could be done but
to send mules for Francis to convey him to the
camp. Unfortunately, on their arrival, he was be-
yond help, as he had contracted the dreaded cholera
about midday, and was dead a few hours later.
His body was brought into camp, and that night,
with the light from a lantern, we took it in turns
to dig his grave into which we placed him, and,
after reading the burial service, fired three volleys
over the place where his body rested.
People in civilised countries have no idea of the
dread of cholera in the East. This pestilence grips
one person in a camp, and the result is generally
that within a few days, the whole party is wiped out
by this dread scourge. Looking into the faces of
the boys one could see the dreadful fear that was
uppermost in all their hearts, but when it came for
volunteers to bury our friend Francis, every man
that could stand stepped forward, knowing full well
that in doing the job the chances were he would
contract that disease and pay the penalty with his
life, but those boys were heroes. Fortunately for
the rest of us there was no further outbreak in the
camp, and the remarkable results of inoculation
were clearly demonstrated, seeing that Francis was
only inoculated once, whereas the other members
of the party received two injections which, without
the shadow of a doubt, saved their lives.
Next day, 14th August, we were ready for the
road once more. The people were issued with
three days’ rations, mounted on the camels and
mules; Agha Petros, with his force of fifty irregu-
lars, were to move on with us in order to assist in


protecting the people, as the first two days’ march
led through an extremely hostile country. At least
half of our own party were ill, some having to be
tied on to their horses, while the remainder of us
were suffering from fever and in a state of more
or less exhaustion. Captain Kay took over twenty
of Agha Petros’ men and formed the rear guard;
with two other sergeants and the remainder of the
irregulars, I formed the advance guard. The rest
of the fit officers and N.C.O’s looked after our con-
voy of money, machine guns and ammunition, and
the refugees. Mrs. Shed also accompanied us, at-
tending to the needs and requirements of the sick
people. The cavalry were to remain behind at
Takan Tepe, in order to prevent the advance of the
Turks and Kurds from the direction of Sain Kala.
As we moved out we soon saw that more of our
fellows would have to remain behind with the refu-
gees in the column. These we had mounted in
twos and threes according to the carrying capacity
of the animals, but soon noticed that if a strict eye
was not kept on them at least a third would never
see camp or safety at the end of each day’s trek, for
the simple reason that the strongest person would
—when not seen—throw the weaker ones off the
animals in order to have a more comfortable ride.
Thus we had to detach men from other important
duties, to the task of looking after the helpless and
weaker of the people and prevent the selfishness on
the part of the stronger, or, in plainer words, to put
a stop to the murder of a section of Christians at
the hands of their fellow countrymen.
The first day’s trek was about twenty-two miles
to a place called Kizal-Bulahk, the native name for
a spring. On arrival at camp the worst cases of
sickness were attended to and those who were
wounded had their wounds re-dressed. Amongst
the people was a preacher from the American Mis-
sion Station whose wife was very ill, but the family
decided taking her with us when we moved out.
Next morning, after a great amount of trouble.


we were ready for the road, to find, unfortunately,
that the preacher’s wife was slowly dying, the ex-
ertions of the previous day proving too much for
her weak and delicate constitution. Captain Kay
and two sergeants remained behind with her and
the husband on our moving once more. They re-
joined the party, about an hour later, with the news
that she had died.
That day’s journey was extremely hard and try-
ing, leading as it did through a desolate and broken
country. Hundreds of bodies of the refugees in a
state of decomposition were passed, particularly at
the springs and small streams along the route. In
every case these bodies had been stripped by the
wild tribesmen who came down from the hills at
night in search of plunder.
The exertions of the road began to tell terribly
on the members of our own party, and on arrival
at Bijah three days after leaving Takan Tepe, we
were in a complete and utterly exhausted condition.
The members of our Bijah party did all they could
for us. Food was ready and rooms prepared for
our reception, yet within twenty four hours of ar-
rival every man but one collapsed. The doctors
had arrived from Hamadan and were hard at work
in the two hospitals established for the refugees.
It was soon seen that another one would have to
be got ready for the treatment of the members of
my party. The month’s continuous toil, every day
of which was spent in the saddle—very often six-
teen to eighteen hours at a stretch —lack of food,
drinking water polluted with the bodies of those
who had died, together with hard fighting, had
proved too much for the human frame. The last
two days on the road I, for one, have little recol-
lection of, beyond the fact that I hung to the saddle
and endeavoured to direct the work of the advance
guard.


CHAPTER XLIII.—THE LAST OF
THE REFUGEES.
AFTER a week in the hands of the doctors I
recovered sufficient strength once again to
resume my duties. One of the first things I
did was to seek the two wounded girls whom I had
taken care of at Takan Tepe and on the track, find-
ing them in one of the refugee hospitals- On open-
ing the gate of the courtyard one of them saw me
and both, rushing to the gate, with strange words
and anxious looks, seemed to be sizing up my con-
dition, stroking my face and making me understand
that my cheeks were very hollow. As to their joy
on seeing me still in the land of the living, there
was little question of it, as it took me a good hour
to get out of the place once more, owing to their
sympathetic tenderness.
My job was to take over the concentration camp
of the refugees into which they were drafted after
discharge from the hospital. The place selected for
this purpose was a poplar grove in the banks of a
clear, swiftly-running stream. The scarcity of
grain and flour for the couple of thousand people we
were still looking after necessitated the strictest
rationing. By this time we had quite sufficient ex-
perience of their gentle ways not even to trust a
sick girl’s rations to the tender care of a loving
brother who would, without any compunction, eat
at least half of it before delivery. To obviate this,
each person was given a ticket which, on presenta-
tion, entitled the bearer to his or her share of
rations. A large stockade was built, leading to
which was erected a sort of run so that the people
would travel a distance of about twenty yards in
which they would receive their food, passing on to
the stockade in which they were kept until the last
person had received his respective share. The
reason for doing this was that we very soon dis-


covered that, even with tickets, we could not keep
a proper check on the food, or guarantee that every
person received his share. Some of the stronger
members of the refugees very often would steal the
ticket from some of the older and weaker ones,
simply to double their own stock of provisions.
Owing to the huge consumption of food by this
big crowd of people, and the limited quantity avail-
able in the district, it was imperative that those able
to walk should be pushed on to Hamadan. In the
first place the people were told of this, and those fit
to move were asked to leave the town as soon as
possible for the sake of those who were still too
weak to walk. This appeal met with no response.
An example of the selfishness of the Armenians and
the Assyrians was brought to light on the very day
of our appeal. Two able-bodied Armenians went
to our paymaster and asked him to take over their
money, amounting to nearly two thousand pounds,
and give them a draft, payable by the paymaster at
Hamadan. On hearing this I asked these people
when they intended to get a move on, and to cease
drawing the rations so urgently required for others.
They apparently did not see the force of my argu-
ment, and one, who spoke English fluently, turned
to me with a smile and in the oiliest manner im-
aginable assured me he was without the means of
moving on. When asked whgt he intended doing,
he replied, “Oh well, sir, we can do nothing until
you provide us with camels or mules to undertake
the journey!”
I then asked him if he would like a motor car and,
without seeing the irony of my question, he said,
“That would do splendidly! People always say
that the English are the best people on earth, and
this kind of offer on your part, sir, proves them to
be no idle words.”
By this time I had had enough of these people,
and quietly informed him that if he, with his family
and whole outfit were not on the road before dawn
next morning, I would cut off their supply of


rations. He said, “Surely you are joking, sir, for
are not the English Christians like we ourselves
are? And by forcing me to walk you would be imi-
tating the Turks-”
In as few words as possible I told him that I
knew all about his little transaction with our pay-
master and if he walked or starved on the track, it
would be no concern of mine. I should not be
troubled in the slightest as, in my opinion, a man
who had as much money as he had and malingered
on British generosity at the cost of his poorer
countrymen, deserved to die the most horrible death
imaginable. If I saw him or his friend on my next
visit to the camp, I would have much pleasure in
kicking them both out. Next morning he was still
there, and came up to me, as large as life, inquiring
after my health. I assured him that I was just
strong enough to kick him every step of the fifty
yards that led to the road, and quickly proved the
statement by performing the act. If ever a man
got a full dose of kicking, this fellow got his, with
a margin to spare!
The example I made of this particular sample of
Near East Christianity worked wonders with the
others. Very quickly all those who could walk,
loaded their mules or oxen with three days’ rations
and set out on the road that led to Hamadan. A
large number of mules and camels had been hired,
on which we sent numbers of these people on. The
people at headquarters, on being informed of the
lack of supplies in the district of Bijah, promptly
sent up convoys of food and, on the homeward jour-
ney, carried our refugees.
The havoc wrought by the Christians along the
route which we had taken was simply devastating
and, there being so few of us, we had no chance of
disarming the men. Hamadan was informed of
their playful tricks and advised to disarm them be-
fore they reached that city. A detachment with a
couple of machine guns occupied a pass a few miles
north of Hamadan and, as the refugees came down.


disarmed them one and all, much to their indigna-
tion, before leading them to the camping ground
prepared for them on the outskirts of the city.
CHAPTER XLIV.—THE HAND
OF SICKNESS.
GRADUALLY the refugees were being passed
from the camp to the road, and then in
batches to Hamadan. Work was still being
zealously carried on in gathering supples, and from
aeroplane reconnaissance it was ascertained that
the Turks were concentrating about Sain Kala, evi-
dently with the view of attacking Bijah. By this
time the roads leading from Baghdad were in a
good state and seeing the uselessness of trying to
raise troops in Persia, it was soon agreed that if
we wished to hold the country, British troops would
have to be sent up, which resulted in a force being
concentrated in Hamadan for immediate use in
Persia.
In view of the great danger of Bijah, two com-
panies of British troops were despatched to hold
the town, and some little time after the arrival of
the refugees, these troops were got into motion, ar-
riving towards the end of August. At the time of
their arrival a large number of our fellows were
down with sickness, some of whom had died. On
the 26th August I was once again stricken down
with fever and after another spell in the hospital,
was discharged for duty. On taking up the reins
I discovered that my heart was severely affected,
and easily caught a local disease by the name of
“berri-berri,” a swelling of the ankles and knees.
On being examined by the doctors I was ordered
to be removed to Hamadan.
I was due to leave on the 26th August and at six
a.m. I crawled into the front seat of a Ford van,
running a temperature of 102 degress, with over
one hundred miles’ ride in view. One does not wish


to dwell on the memories of such a journey. The
road was terrible, being nothing more than a cara-
van route, and along this bumpy highway we
moved, reaching Hamadan at about 6 p.m., three
parts of which journey I have very little recollec-
tion of, being delirious at the time of reaching the
Hamadan hospital.
Dr. Funk, the American missionary stationed at
Hamadan, had handed over the use of his hospital
to our force. On arrival at this place kind hands
lifted me from the van and placed me on a bed
in a tent within the hospital grounds. I was or-
dered to remain on my back for about eight days,
after which I was allowed to walk as far as the
missionary’s house within the same grounds. The
doctor’s house and library were thrown open for
our use, and Mrs. Funk acted as matron-in-chief to
those in the convalescent stage. One can never for-
get the kindness of these people during those days.
Nothing was too much trouble, as long as it would
mean pleasure or bring contentment to the invalid.
The library itself was a large, airy room, lined with
book cases filled with all manners of reading. Sit-
ting in an easy chair, smoking real cigarettes and
reading an interesting book, interrupted only by
the arrival of morning and afternoon tea, helped
more than one sufferer along the road to recovery.
Many of the fellows were so far gone by the time
they reached this haven of refuge that, despite all
the skill and attention of Dr. Funk and the British
Medical Officers they succumbed to sickness or
disease. During my stay there I don’t think one
night passed without at least three patients dying.
The food available for the invalids was only that
which was procured locally. A bakery had been
established, and there being no time to clean the
wheat properly, the flour was full of grit, which,
owing to our weak condition, afflicted the invalids
terribly. After getting off milk diet, one was
forced to eat this gritty discoloured bread and mut-
ton stews.


The Turks, seeing that very little could be gained
by striking at Bijah, turned their attention to Zen-
gan on the eastern road where very soon the garri-
son was engaged in heavy fighting. As every man
who was able to fight was wanted in this district,
the colonel in command at Hamadan visited the
hospital daily, to see if there were any of us fit to
take the saddle. I was asked if I would go up
and take charge of certain operations in that area,
but on going for a walk to see how strong I really
was, I fainted when I had walked but a bare five
hundred yards, which was sufficient proof to show
that I was of no use for any further service iri
Persia. Owing to the altitude, some six thousand
feet above sea level, I discovered that my heart was
daily becoming worse instead of better, so I asked
permission to undertake the trip to Baghdad where
proper medical attention could be procured. Owing
to the tremendous distance and terrible conditions
for any sick person on the road, there was much
reluctance on the part of the doctors to grant this
request. Eventually they acceded, and on the
14th September I once more boarded a Ford
machine and took the road that led to Baghdad.
We left Hamadan about seven o’clock that morn-
ing and continued running, with only sufficient
stops to cool the engine, until nightfall, by which
time I was again running a high temperature. Be-
ing in the open wilds, 1 was forced to look after
myself, but fortunately, not feeling inclined to eat,
was not compelled to light a fire in order to cook
my own meal. That night the wind blew at hurri-
cane rate, and being camped at the entrance of a
pass, we got the full force of the elements, which
did not tend to make one feel fresher on moving
shortly after dawn next morning.
We continued the rim throughout the day, still
passing groups of refugees streaming towards the
plains of Mesopotamia, and reached Kirmanshah,
where a hospital was established. A little before
dark I was put into bed, remaining there for several


days, until I gained sufficient strength to move on
once more.
The next stage was one ot two days, the first of
which brought us through the Pia Tak Pass, where
we rested in a camp until morning, arriving the next
night at Kezel Robahk.
Resting there for one day, I arrived at the clear-
ing station at Ruz late that afternoon in a state of
complete exhaustion. After receiving decent medi-
cal attention and Christian food for the first time,
I was able to proceed by train to Baghdad on the
third night, arriving at that splendidly equipped
Military Hospital about seven a.m. on the morning
of the 28th September and was there treated for
some weeks. Then I passed on through the hospi-
tals of Amara and Batounamah, after which I was
placed on a hospital ship and brought to Bombay,
being finally discharged about the middle of
December.
CHAPTER XLV.-THE RUSH TO BAKU.
WHILE we were arranging preliminaries at
Bijah prior to moving up towards Lake
Urmiah, General Dunsterville was concen-
trating his force at the seaport town of Enzeli, on
the south-eastern coast of the Caspian Sea. Dur-
ing the time we were fighting about Sain Kala en-
deavouring to draw the Turks from the Caucasus
down on our party, Dunsterville embarked with his
troops. Without molestation, he landed at Baku,
but owing to the evacuation of the refugees from
Urmiah, we failed to draw the large numbers of the
enemy anticipated to that area, and Dunsterville
found himself forced to dig in a few miles outside
the city, and there for some weeks put up a gallant
fight with his small force.
One of the first things that he did on arrival at
Baku was to call together a conference of the Ar-


menian and other leaders, where he asked for their
co-operation in driving the Turks inland. They
assured him that they would help to the utmost of
their abilities, and commenced gathering a force of
their fellow countrymen. It was also hoped that
a General in command of a Russian force would
be able to effect a junction with our troops in the
near future.
The Armenians and Russians gathered their
forces, and a portion of line was allotted to them,
with patrols established well ahead by members of
the famous Locker-Lamson armoured car force,
which was now attached to the Dunsterforce party.
The Turks attacked in overwhelming numbers
at frequent intervals, and were defeated on every
occasion by the Britishers in the trenches. The
anticipated help on the part of the Armenians soon
resolved itself into a delusion for, early in the fight-
ing, it was seen that these worthy allies of ours
would desert their trenches on every occasion when
the Turks attacked.
General Dunsterville pointed out to their leaders
this lack of co-operation, also the fact that he was
receiving heavy casualties among his own forces
without the remotest hope of obtaining reinforce-
ments, and in very plain language, told them that
if they refused to fight, he would be compelled to
evacuate the town. This met with the audacious
reply that if he attempted to leave the place the in-
habitants would open fire on him and his gallant
band, as they considered he was there to protect
them.
After urging upon them the necessity of their
co-operation in fighting the Turks and meeting with
a refusal on every occasion, Dunsterville decided in
favour of withdrawing his forces, who were becom-
ing fearfully reduced through the continuous heavy
fighting. Taking advantage of a favourable night,
he skilfully withdrew his troops and guns in the
very face of the enemy, embarking the men on one
vessel, and the guns and ammunition on another.


Fortunately, the skipper in command of the boat
carrying the troops was loyal to the British, but
the master of the other vessel on which the guns
were placed had to be forced to follow the leading
boat by an officer with the persuasion of a revolver.
On passing the fort near the town, the sentries
caught sight of the moving vessels and signalled to
stop immediately. Dunsterville replied that he
would anchor a few hundred yards out and there
wait until the morning, but this did not satisfy
“Our Allies,” who instantly opened fire upon the
two vessels. Thanks to their erratic aim they al-
together missed the boat containing the troops,
though they landed a few light shells in the other
vessel which was carrying the guns, without caus-
ing much damage.
Steam was increased, and before very long both
boats were well out of range, eventually reaching
Enzeli once more, after an entirely fruitless cam-
paign in the Caucasus.
Had the Armenians and townspeople in any way
helped this force, there is little doubt that the town
would have been held, but owing to their faithless-
ness, evacuation was a necessity, and a few days
after our force left, the Turks entered Baku, cele-
brating their victory by putting to death some
thousands of the inhabitants.
Operations now came more or less to a standstill,
and seeing that it was utterly futile with such a
limited force at our disposal (the brigade which
fought at Baku being reduced to about a battalion’s
strength), to again attempt any operations in the
Caucasus, our attention was directed to the holding
of the highway from Baghdad to the Caspian, thus
blocking the roads to India to the German and
Turkish propagandists.
In reviewing the whole operations, with its two
phases, first that of holding these highways, second-
ly that of entering the Caucasus and raising a force
to re-establish the old Russian line, it can be said
that we failed in the latter, but succeeded in the


former task, for we successfully raced the Turks for
possession of the Baghdad-Caspian Road and
effectually established outposts to the north at
points along those roads leading southwards to
India.
We opened up the country by constructing roads,
over which it is possible to drive motor cars and
lorries, put down raiding on the part of the wild
tribesmen and Kurds, thus making the country safe
for the merchant in importing goods and exporting
the products of the country, which increased trade
by at least one hundred per cent., besides saving the
lives of thousands of the inhabitants during the
worst months of the famine.
Of the seventy thousand refugees that left
Urmiah, we were successful in saving about 60,000
to 65,000, conveying them in stages to the fertile
flats of the Diala River, north of Baghdad, by pro-
viding trains of mules and camels for those too
weak to walk, and supplying food for them during
their long journey to this place of safety.
A huge tented settlement was erected for their
reception with an enormous supply of army rations
for their maintenance. A fully equipped Military
Hospital was sent forward from Baghdad in order
to attend the wants and requirements of the sick on
their arrival.
A glance at the map will show the extensive
stretch of country over which we operated. One
has to bear in mind that we were in an unfriendly
country, overrun by our enemies and German
agents. A fearful famine devastated the land and
to accomplish the job the force known as “Dunster-
force” was only about three hundred and fifty
strong, assisted by one squadron of cavalry.




CHAPTER XLVI.—STALKY’S FAREWELL.
ON the cessation of hostilities, the survivors of
Dunsterforce were recalled to Baghdad. A
force of Indian troops replaced them in
Persia, until the results of peace were finally cleared
up. During October General Dunsterville bade
farewell to those who had been the members of his
force, by issuing the following Order of the Day:
TO THE BRITISH OFFICERS AND NON-COMMIS-
SIONED OFFICERS OF DUNSTERFORCE.
It is with great regret that I sever my connection with
the gallant members of the force I have commanded under
very peculiar circumstances for the past nine months.
The original destination, of course, was the Southern
Caucasus, but, owing to various causes, that destination
was never reached. The force remained in Persia until
August, 1918, when a portion reached Baku and took part
in operations there, which came to an end with the evacua-
tion of September 14th, 1918. The remainder of the force
was employed in various parts of Persia and Kurdistan,
where they had the honour of being the first British
troops to operate in these regions.
The work carried out by the members of the force
was varied from valuable administrative tasks to daring
achievements in thei battlefield, and all have striven to do
their utmost, even in spheres of work for which they were
never prepared and they would never have chosen for
themselves. Officers and N.C.O’s have been called upon
to superintend famine relief work, to assist in road con-
struction, to police towns, to drill and instruct levies and
Armenian troops, and to lend a ready hand in many tasks
that were not, in themselves, congenial.
Apart from any military results achieved, the mem-
bers of the force have had the proud privilege of show-
ing the various races in the lands hrough which they
passed, the pattern of the finest army of present times.
The effect of their demeanour and their behaviour has
been such as to enhance the reputation of the British race
in the eyes of all with whom they had dealings.
Mirza Kuchik Khan, the leader of the Gilinas, with
whom we fought at Resht in July, has stated that he fears
the British more than any other European race because
their methods are such as to call forth the admiration even


of their enemies. Against other foes he can rely upon
stirring up some desire for vengeance or retaliation, but
against the British he fails to rouse any feeling at all.
I am prouder of my command of the gallant officers
and N.C.O’s of Dunsterforce than of any other command
I have ever held, or am likely to hold. Brought together
from every corner of the Empire, all have vied with one
another to show the absolute unity of our national aspira-
tions, and our determination to win in this great war of
the representatives of freedom against the powers of
autocracy and militarism.
I wish each individual member of Dunsterforce every-
thing good in the future and happy memories of this far
away theatre of the great war.
To General Dunsterville, the soldier and the man,
we say “Goodbye and Good Luck,” and never will
we forget those days that gave us the pleasure of
following your gallant leadership-
FINIS.


