

Standing Orders
FOR
A.I.F Camp,
Kiama.
CAPT. K. RYAN, V.D.,
Camp Commandant.




STANDING ORDERS
FOR
A.I.F. CAMP, KIAMA.
KIAMA, 16th March, 1916.
1. the event of the “Alarm” being sounded
Regiments and Corps will form up under arms on their
respective parade grounds as expeditiously and noise-
lessly as poSiSible, and await orders.
An Officer from each Corps will be detailed to* pro-
ceed to Camp Headquarters for orders immediately op
troops turning out.
2. --The following Duties-, Details, ets., will he ar-
ranged for in readiness for arrival in Camp :
(a) Orderlies: One man from each Corps
to be detailed to report to Camp Sergeant-Major half
an hour after Arrival in Camp to act as Camp Office
Orderlies throughout. Smart and reliable men only to
be detailed.
(b) Police: Three privates, specially qualified for the
duty, to act as Gamp Police, will be detailed by each
Corps, to report to Camp Sergeant-Major half an hour
after arrival in Camp. (See also S.O. 23).
(c) Commanding Officers will, immediately after Ar-
rival in Camp, report to Camp Headquarters the number
of Officers, H.C.O’s, Men, and Horses, with their re-
spective units to be supported by “Marching-in” States (in


duplicate), showing each Squadron, Battery, Company, or
Troop in detail, ias soon as practicable.
(d) Immediately on Arrival in Camp, Commanding
Officers of Corps will make such arrangements as will
ensure their men being settled in their tents, and sup-
plied with the necessary camp issues as expeditiously as
possible.
3. —Officers commanding will make arrangements
with respect to cartage of personal baggage of Officers
to local Hallway Stations.
4. —Where straw is provided for bedding, N.C.O’s
and Men must be provided with bed ticks, as by this
means tents can b© kept tidijer, greater comfort ensured,
and much fatigue in cleaning up Camp lines avoided.
Straw is not to be issued to men unprovided with bed
ticks. (See also S.O. 29 (b).
5. —The Camp Buglers, under the Senior Bugler,
will muster 15 minutes before “Reveille,” “Retreat,” and
Tattoo, and after same will play Bugle Marches round
the Camp.
6. —(a) Bathing on Surf Beach in proxmity to; Camp
and in Municipal Baths will be permitted only between
the hours of 5.30 a.m. and 8 a.m., and 4.30 and 6.C0
p.m., also on Saturday afternoons and all day Sunday.
(b) Bathing must be confined within the limits
marked by two red flags.
(c) No troops will be allowed to bathe unless clad in
a suitable neck to knee costumie, and all dressing and
undressing must be don©' under cover of the dressing
shelters provided.
(d) The Captain of the Day will detail a Regimental


Orderly Officer to be in attendance during the hours set
apart for bathing. The Officer detailed will be respons-
ible for the orderly conduct of the troops bathing, and
he will ensure that troops do not enter the water
until the Bathing Picquet has reported to him.
(e) Non-swimmers are to be cautioned against bath-
ing, and all troops are to be distinctly in-
formed that in bathing they do so entirely
at their own risk.
(f) This order is to be read to all ranks immediately
on Arrival in Camp, and on the three successive parades
following.
7. Corporal and six men will be detailed by
the Infantry .Unit for duty, reporting to the Camp Ser-
geant-Major at Camp Headquarters at 5.15 a.m. and
4.15 p.m. daily, and the members of the Picquet should
if possible, have special qualifications for the duties re-
quired.
This Picquet will be exempt from Eearly Morning
parade only.
8. —Visitors are to be courteously informed that
it is against orders for them to enter the Camp I/me|S
unless provided with passes, or on loccasions where the
lines are “thrown open as promulgated in Camp Orders,
(See also S.O. 23 (f) and (h).
9. Each Infantry Corps will provide for duty daily—
Captain of ,the Day
Subaltern of the Day
Regimental Orderly Sergeant
Regimental Orderly Corporal
Regimental Orderly Bugler


10.—The following hours will be observed-
Reveille 6 a.m.
~ Sunday ... 6.30 a.m.
Parade 6.15 a.m.
Guard Mounting ... 7.45 a.m.
Breakfast 8 a.m.
Parade 9.30 a.m!
Dinner 1 p. m .
Parade 2.30 p.m.
Tea ... ... 5.45 p.m.
Retreat ... ... 6 p.m.
First Post 9.30 p.m.
Second Post ...10 p.m.
Lights Out ...10.15 p.m.
11—(a) Officers Commanding Corps will ensure that
all returns are promptly rendered: Morning States, Sick
States, men and horses, together with Diaries (showing
the previous day’s work), to reach the Gamp Office by
8.30 a.m. daily. The Duaries referred to herein will show
briefly the work upon which the respective Units were
engaged; they are not intended to record the various
phases, etc., in connection with Schemes and Manoeuvres.
All States are to be rendered in duplicate.
(b) Officers, Warrant and N.C.O.’s, and Men, at-
tached to Regiments or Corps, are to be shown under
heading “attached.”
(c) Officers, N.C.O.’s and Men, borne on Clamp es-
tablishment, but detached from Regiments or Corps for
special duty, are to be included in Company and Regi-
mental States, and the nature of employment indicated
by footnote. ;
12. —Prisoners: Where prisoners are handed over
from the Camp Guard to be dealt with by their respect-
ive O.’s C. Regiments or Corps, Commanding Officers
concerned will forward to Camp Headquarters a report
showing the manner in which the crimes have been dis-
posed of. . ■


13—The Camp Commandant is particularly anxious
that his Command should not suffer ismy discredit by want
ot attention to this important maltter.
(b) F.S. Caps are to be worn at night.
(c) Unless otherwise ordered, “Drill Order” will be
worn on all Parades.
A Fatigue Party, consisting of 1 Corporal and
6 Privates, will be furnished by the Infantry Unit for
duty, reporting to the Camp Quartermaster Sergeant,
at Camp Headquarters, at 6.15 a.m. daily.
I his party will be exempt from Early Mornin°'
Parade only.
15. (a) The Infantry Unit for duty will furnish
the Camp Guards, which will parade at Camp Headquart-
ers at 7.45 a.m. daily.
(b) Guards will parade in “Marching Order.”
(c) Guards when dismounted will be exempt from
forenoon parade only.
16. Instructions for Commander: (a)—The Command-
er of the Camp Guard will forward to Gamp Headquarters,
at 6.30 a.m. daily, a return of all prisoners then in
custody.
_ This return will show in respect of each prisoner his
i egimental number, rank and name, regiment or corps
crime, and time and date received into custody.
(b) No prisoners are to be handed over to- escorts
by the Commander of the Guard without the orders
of the Camp- Commandant.
(c) No orders are to be attended to be the Com-
manders of Guards unless coming through the Camp
Adjutant, or directly given by the Camp Commandant


or Captain of the Day.
. ( d ) All soldiers coming into Camp sober after tattoo
without passes, are to be to proceed to their
tents as prisoners at large, and their names forwarded to
Camp Headquarters with the return referred to in (a).
, (?) hen t^? r ? are several drunken men confined
together, they will be visited constantly during the night
by a non-commissioned officer of the (guard and an escort.
(f) Should any suspicion arise that a prisoner is
suffering from disease, the Camp Medical Officer is forth-
with to be sent for.
(g) The men composing the Guard, when off sentry,
are not to smoke outside the Guard Hoorn or talk to
passers by.
(h) All prisoners’ in the Guard Hoorn more than 48
hours are to have two hours’ exercise daily. In summer
from 6.45 to 7.45 a.m. and from' 5 tfc 6 p.m. In winter
from' / 'tq 8 a .an. and 4 bo 5 p.m, J
, (*) The crimes of non-commi'ssiioned officers are not to
be entered in the guard report, except where non-com -
missioned officers are placed under charge of the guard,
(j) The Commander of the guard is to use his
discretion as to the necessity for the sentries to have
their great coats on. Coats should be worn in cold
blowing, or jvet weather. < * J
(k) The Commander of the guard will personally
examine all prisoners confined in the guard tent on tak-
ing over pharge of them. He will parade the prisoners
ip. receive their meals, inspect everything brought by
the orderlies for their use, and see to the return of all
utensils, etc.
(l) The Commander of the guard will, before the
guard is dismounted, be careful to hand over the amnumh


tion to tlie Commander of the relieving guard.
(m) When a prisoner is handed over for being,
drunk, if there is any doubt as to hijS condition, the
Commander of the guard, will at once report the cir-
cumstances to the Gamp Sergeant-Major, who will pro-
cure such additional evidence as may be conclusive'
and report ,to the Camp Adjutant for information of the
Camp Commandant,
(n) The Commander of the guard will see that
all prisoners are clean prior to being handed over to
escorts.
(o) Soldiers confined for drunkenness are not to
be handed over to escorts until perfectly sober.
(p) Whenever a man of a strange Corps is con-
fined in the guard room, the Commander icxß the guard
will at once send a written report of the case to the
Camp Adjutant.
17. -No hawker’s or itinerant carts will be jper-
mitted into camp unless in possession of an order signed
by the Camp Commandant, which must be produced
whenever demanded.
18. —(a) “Marching-out” States, are to be compiled
in duplicate on Forms as for “Marching-in,” and must
with the following returns, reach Headquarters one hour
prior to marching out,
(b) Names of Officers absent and without leave,
(c) Return of men absent after assembly.
(d) Return of men in arrest, and how disposed of,
19. —Hours of admission to Field Hospital (ex-
cept in cases of emergency), 8 a.m. to


5.30 p.m. The “Daily Sick” will parade at
7.15 a.m. and 5 p.m. daily (5.30 on Saturdays) at the
Medical Officer’s Orderly Tent. All “Daily Sick” wiljl
be accompanied by a sick report in duplicate. The
Non-Commissioned Officer doing duty as “Marching Sick”
will be responsible that this is duly carried out. Sick
Reports must be forwarded with Non-Commissioned Offic-
ers and Men, who may be sent on by Medical Officers,
for admission to Field Hospital. Their arms, accoutre-
ments, and kits will accompany them.; for these a
receipt will be given by the Non-Commissioned Officer
in charge of the Field Hospital to the Non-Commiissiioned
Officer “Marching Sick.” Non-Commissioned Officers and
Men admitted to the Field Hospital will be rationed for
the day of their admission by their respective Corps, un-
less a special order to the contrary be given by the
Medical Officer in charge of the Field Hospital.
20. (a) Rigid economy must be exercised in the
Messing arrangements for Officers and Non-Commissioned
Officers. Extravagance and costly forms of living are out
of place in Camps of Training, and will not be per-
mitted.
(b) Sergeants’ Messes are for the exclusive use of
those entitled to the privilege of using same. Any dis-
regard of this order will be seriously viewed' and
dealt with.
21. Officers’ Servants other than those of Mounted
Officers, will be exempted from Earlv Morning Parade
only.
22. Parade Grounds (Regimental and Corps) will be
pointed out by the Camp Adjutant.


23—The following orders for Military Police are
published for information and guidance.
(a) The Sergeant in charge of Military Police will
parade them at 7 a.m. daily at Camp Headquarters,
inspect them and report to Camp Adjutant.
(b) They will parade with Side Arms and Cane,
and will wear on the right arm a badge (white) with
the word “POLICE” printed thereon.
(c) They will be told off, each man being given a
particular portion of the camp to look after.
(d) They will prevent undesirable persons entering
the lines.
(e) They will allow no one but those authorised to
sell or hawk in the Camp. Hawkers (authorised) must
have in their possession a permit signed by the Camp
Commandant.
(f) The general public are not to be allowed within
the Camp lines except at such times as are notified in
orders that they will be open to the public. Written
permits issued under Camp authority, held by families
and friends of soldiers in Camp, and persons having busi-
ness to perform, will admit holders at times specified
in such permits.
At all times civilians a,re to enter and leave Camp
Lines by the authorised main entrances only.
Civilians are to be prevented from loitering in the
vicinity of Parade Grounds or around the tents.
(g) They will be courteous in their bearing towards
civilians, and in any case where a person refuses to leave
the lines when directed to do so, or otherwise offends,
they will at once call the Civil Police to' take necessary
action and report to the Camp Adjutant as soon as
possible.


(h) After “Retreat” all civilians (other than those
having work to perform) without written permits are to
be directed to leave Camp Lines. Report to be at once
made to Camp Adjutant in case of anyone refusing to
leave.
(i) The Police will parade at Tattoo ("Last Post”) at
Camp Headquarters.
24. —To facilitate the prompt delivery of letters,
Officers Commanding will instruct those under their com-
mand to arrange that all correspondence addressed to
Camp must indicate the Company and Regiment to which
the, addressee belongs.
25. —(a) Rations will be issued in accordance with
the following scale: —
Presh bread, Iflbs., or biscuits 1 lb., fresh meat,
lbs., or lib preserved meat or salt fish; coffee, Joz;
tea, Joz.,; sugar, 3ozs.; salt, |oz.; pepper, 1-32 oz.;
potatoes, 11b.; vegetables, |lb., or 2ozs. cheese, Jib jam
'per man per diem.
(b) For each horse: —Oats, 121b5.; chaff, 121bs. daily;
bran, 61bs weekly.
(c) Six lbs. of wood per man per diem will be
allowed for fuel.
(d) One candle per battery tejit, and two per mar-
quee per diem will be allowed.
(e) Issues will be conducted in accordance with
Standing Orders and Regulations of the Army Service
Corps.
(f) The Camp Quartermaster and Medical Officer
will inspect all rations and supplies prior to issue.
(g) Officers Commanding Corps will report to Camp


Headquarters any instance of Inferior Supplies Immedi-
ately on game being brought to their notice.
26. —Each Corps should provide a Notice Board for
> the display of Corps Orders, as also any notices affecting
the men. All Orders are to be read to men daily. Copies
of Corps Orders or Circular Memoranda are to be for-
warded to reach Camp Headquarters at 8.30 a.m. daily.
27. —Officers commanding Corps will be responsible
for the cleanliness of the area of occupied by their
.Commands. ,
28. —The Medical Officer will act as Carqp Sanitary
Officer and will personally inspect every portion of the
camp and its immediate surroundings. He will report
to the Camp Adjutant anything he may consider to be
prejudicial to the health of the Troops or the sanitation
of the Camp. In addition, Regimental Officers will re-
port immediately to the Medical Officer anything of an
insanitary nature which may come under their notice in
Regimental Lines. Disinfectants will be freely supplied
by the Camp Supply Officer, and must be freely used in
latrines and urinals. Regimental Quartermasters are re-
sponsible that the greatest care is observed in connectijon
with the Sanitation and cleanliness of All Kitchens, Lat-
rines and Urinals.
29. —(a) Special care must be exercised in seeing that
tents are properly trenched, aligned, and pegs uniform.
The door pegs of each tent to be whitened.
(b) Between Reveille and early morning parade
blankets will be taken out of the tents and folded with
waterproof sheets above and below, and placed on the
left of the tent door on entering. In fine weather the


curtains of the tents will be rolled up by the breakfast
hour. The mess tins will be piled on the left of the tent
door and on the right of the blankets.
(c) A tent Orderly will be detailed for each tent,
ana he, will be responsible for the general cleanliness of
of the tent, utensils, etc., and will act as Mes:s Orderly.
(d) Rifles will be neatly arranged around tent poles.
(e) Each tent must be provided with an “Inventory”
Board, showing articles on charge.
(f) Tent Valises, or Peg Bags are on no account to
be used for carrying, or storage [of, bread or other food,
(g) The branding of tents with the name of the!
Company or Regiment is strictly prohibited. 1
t 30. —(a) Regularity: The entrainment and detrain-
ment of Troops must be carried put smoothly and rapid-
ly and with an entire absence of confusion, talking 1 , or
noise of 'any kind. The manner [n which this duty is
performed is always regarded as an unmistakeable indica-
tion of the degree of discipline obtaining.
(b) The Senior Officer on board a train is responsible
for the discipline of the troops travelling, and will pay
special attention to securing silence and order when at,
or in the vicinity of, railway stations. He will have
prepared a state', showing total numbers of all Ranks
travelling, ready to hand to Detraining Officer on arrival
at destination.
(jo) Horses are to be at Railway Stations sixty min-
utes, and entraining at least thirty minutes before trains
are due to leave v


, 31. —Vehicles and Horses are to be confined to the
Camp Streets, and not allowed in Regimental Lines.
HAROLD WHEELER, Capt.
Camp' Adjutant,
A.I.F. Camp, Kiama.
Regulations and Orders that are contained in the Com-
monwealth Military Regulations and Standing Orders,
and in the King’s Regulations (with which all Officers
should be conversant), are not necessarily included in
this book, which merely contains, as the title implies,
“Camp Standing Orders of the A.I.E. Camp,” issued by
the Camp Commandant.
J. Weston & Co., Printers, Kiama.
