

AUSTRALIAN MILITARY FORCES
AND SENIOR CADETS
STANDING ORDERS
FOR
CLOTHING
Part III.
Description, Orders
of Dress, &c.
1922
(Racked to 30.9.1922 )
By Authority:
Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
C. 16460.


MILITARY BOARD.
Army Head-Quarters,
Melbourne, 30th September, 1922.
The enclosed Standing Order* for Clothing,
Part III., Description, Orders of Dress. &c.,
have been approved by the Military Board.
Amendments will be published in Military
Orders.
By command,
Secretary to the Board.


AUSTRALIAN MILITARY FORCES
AND SENIOR CADETS
STANDING ORDERS
FOR
CLOTHING
Part 111
Description, Orders
of Dress, &lc.
1922
{Revised lo 30.9.1922)
/
By Authority :
Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.
C. 18460.




Serial No.
Military Orciei
Amendment.
/
ol
!+■
5
h
7
S’
70/7-3
///
509
i9^
uuq
efyif
$Lf .
hi j
tPeCac Hf rccat. 1 7.
96 . S"
140 ,
f7 7 . ,
uo
/Z-y
AMENDMENTS.




ABBREVIATIONS.
A.A.M.C. .. Australian Army Medical Corps.
A A.N.S. .. Australian Army Nursing Service.
A.A.O.C. .. Australian Army Ordnance Corps.
A.A.V.C. .. Australian Army Veterinary Corps.
A.A. & Q.M.G. .. Assistant Adjutant and Quarterma
General
A.G. .. Adjutant-General.
A.I.C. .. Australian Instructional Corps.
A.I.F. .. Australian Imperial Force.
A. Staff ~ Adjutant-General’s Staff.
A.P. .. Australian Pattern.
C. .. Commonwealth Pattern.
D. i .. Dismounted Service.
G. Staff .. General Staff.
I.G. .. Inspector-General.
M. .. Mounted Service.
N. .. Non-commissioned Officer.
Q-M.G. .. Quartermaster-General.
Q. Staff .. Quartermaster-General’s Staff.
S.D. ~ Service Dress.
W.O. .. Warrant Officer.


CONTENTS.
PARA.
Part I. General Instructions ••• ••• 1-10
Part 11. Description of articles of Clothing,
Badges, &c. ... ••• ••• 11
Part 111. Uniform of Corps —
Staff Corps ... ••• •••
Australian Instructional Corps ... 64
Permanent Force Units ... ... 65-66
Citizen Forces ... ••• ••• 67
Unattached List—Officers ... 68-69
Reserve of Officers ... ••• 70
Retired Officers ... ••• ••• 71
Australian Army Nursing Service ... 72
Senior Cadets ... ■ ••• 73-76
Part IV. Armlets ... ••• ••• 77-78
Part V. Badges—
Distinguishing rank badges and
chevrons, W. and N.C.O.’s ... 79
Badges for skill at arms, etc. ... 80
Regimental Colour Patches ... 81-85
Part VI. Medals and Decorations ... ••• 86-95
Part VII. — Orders of Dress —
■Marching Order
Review Order
Drill Order
Undress Uniform
Evening Dress on ceremonial occasions


PART I.-GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.
1. Service Dress has been adopted, as a temporary
measure, as the uniform of the Australian Military Forces for
wear on all occasions when military uniform is authorized to be
worn.
2. Commanding Officers are forbidden to introduce or to
sanction any deviation from the Sealed Patterns of dress, clothing,
equipment and badges. They will be responsible for the cost
of replacing or restoring to the approved pattern any articles
worn in their Units which may be found not .to be in conformity
therewith.
3. When obtaining articles of uniform officers should make
by personal comparison if possible, that articles according
to Sealed Pattern are being supplied. Sealed Patterns of
garments, badges of rank, special badges, &c., are held on charge
at the Ordnance Store in each District Base for reference and
guidance.
4. No unauthorized ornament or emblem is to be worn when
in uniform.
5. Officers while in foreign countries are not to wear uniform
without having obtained the permission of His Majesty’s repre-
sentative, which will only be granted when they are employed
on duty, or attending Courts, or at State ceremonies to which
they have been invited. Permission to wear uniform at foreign
manoeuvres can only be obtained from the War Office.
6. Regulation uniform must not be worn at fancy-dress balls,
but there is no objection to military uniform of obsolete pattern
being worn on such occasions.
7. Uniform will be worn when on duty with troops and on
other occasions when on duty unless permission of the Commanding
Officer has been obtained to wear plain clothes.
8. Officers attending manoeuvres, field training, camps of
exercise and schools of instruction are to wear uniform, unless
otherwise ordered.


9. Military uniform may not be worn at meetings of a political
nature.
10. Officers of the Unattached List and Reserve of Officers,
and ’retired officers and discharged soldiers who have been
permitted to retain their rank and wear the prescribed uniform,
are permitted to wear such uniform only on special occasions
when attending ceremonials and entertainments of a military
nature and on occasions when the wearing of military uniform
would appear appropriate ; but see para. 9. '
PART II.—DESCRIPTION OF ARTICLES OF
CLOTHING, ETC.
11. All articles not herein described in detail will be made in
accordance with the Sealed Patterns, which are kept in the
Ordnance Store of each Military District.
12, Aiguillettes. —Personal Staff of the Governor-General and
State Governors. —A gold aiguillette worn on the right shoulder,
of 4-inch wire cord, gilt metal tags at end of plaits, the plaits
and cords front and back are joined together by a short gold
braid strap, in which is worked a button hole.
aiguillotto io> worn by the Personal Staff -of—■■
Governor 1 General and State Governors.
14. Armlets.— Armlets are of varying colours for the differe
Formations and District Bases. They are 3| inches wide, with
distinctions in black embroidery except where otherwise stated.
Distinctive lettering or badges to be placed on the armlet so as
to-show away from the body. See Part IV.
15. Badges of Rank.— The rank of officers is shown by badges
as under: —
General .. - - Crossed sword and baton, with crown
and star above.
Lieutenant-General Crossed sword and baton, with crown
above.


9. Military uniform may not be worn at meetings of a political
nature.
10 Officers of tbe Unattached List and Reserve of Officers,
and 'retired officers and discharged soldiers who have been
permitted to retain their rank and wear the prescribed uniform,
are permitted to wear such uniform only on special occasions
when attending ceremonials and entertainments of a military
nature and on occasions when the wearing of military uniform
would appear appropriate ; but see para. 9. '
PART lI— DESCRIPTION OF ARTICLES OF
CLOTHING, ETC.
11. All articles not herein described in detail will be made in
accordance with the Sealed Patterns, which are kept in the
Ordnance Store of each Military District.
12. Aiguillettes.—Personal Staff of the Governor-General and
State Governors. —A gold aiguillette worn on the right shoulder,
of i-inch wire cord, gilt metal tags at end of plaits, the plaits
and cords front and back are joined together by a short gold
braid --
Gener fc they on occasions
when uniform ls * uniform, in the capacity of Aides-
(“> aSiSM SBSj or (if). .
iUimaulul is ana Uistnct Rases. They are 3| inches wide, with
distinctions in black embroidery except where otherwise stated.
Distinctive lettering or badges to be placed on the armlet so as
to. show away from the body. See Part IV.
15. Badges of Rank. —The rank of officers is shown by badges
as under: —
General .. .. Crossed sword and baton, with crown
and star above.
Lieutenant-General Crossed sword and baton, with crown
above.


Major-General .. Crossed sword and baton, with star
above.
Hon. Brig^General.. .Crossed sword and baton.
Colonels
and Colonels on the i A , crown ® bo ™ tbree , s ‘ ars - the two
| lower stars side by side.
Colonel and two stars below.
Lieutenant-ColonehTCrown and one star below.
Major .. ~ Crown.
Captain .. .. Three stars.
Lieutenant .. Two stars.
Second Lieutenant One star.
16. Officers’ badges of rank will be worn on shoulder straps of
jacket and greatcoat. They will be in gilt or gilding metal.
The crowns are 1 inch broad and 1 inch in height; the stars are
1 inch between opposite points.
17. General officers’ badges are worn in pairs, point of sword
to the front and edge of blade outwards or towards the arm.
The sword is 2 inches long and the baton | inch shorter.
18. Officers having brevet, local, temporary or honorary rank *
General officer! .. Crosself sword and baton within a,
laurel wreath, surmounted by a
crown in gold embroidery.
Substantive Colonels The Royal Crest in gold embroidery.
Other ranks ~ Commonwealth badge (small).
20. Badge—Hat (large) and Collar (small), also Cap Badge,
except as above. —Universal pattern, brass, gilding metal or
gilt for all officers, and for all members of the permanent Forces ;
copper oxidized for “ other ranks ” of Citizen Forces.
21. Badge — Chaplains’. —Copper oxidized. A cross patee sur-
mounted by a crown.
22. Regimental Colour Patches. —See Part Y. (paras. 81 to 85).


23. Badges—Warrant and Non-commissioned Officers and
Special. —See Part y. (paras. 79 and 80.)
24. Bands, Hat. — Cloth bands, If inches wide, of following
colours will be worn by all ranks on the felt hat: —
Light Horse .. Khaki.
Artillery .. .. Scarlet.
Engineers.. .. Dark blue.
Signal Service .. Royal purple.
Infantry .. .. Green.
Army Service Corps White with | inch blue centre stripe.
Army Medical Corps Chocolate.
Army Veterinary Maroon
Corps
Army Ordnance Corps Blue with inch red centre stripe.
Army Legal Dept. .. French gray.
Senior Cadets .. Green.
25. Belts, “Sam Browne.” —Universal pattern, with two
shoulder belts, sword frog, ammunition pouch and pistol case.
26. Boots, ankle, brown.— Universal pattern.
27. Boots, ankle, brown, light.— Officers and special services.
28. Boots, brown, field. —Optional for officers.
29. Breeches, khaki, cord.— There are two patterns, mounted
and dismounted.
30. Buttons, General Officers’.— Gilt, embossed with crossed
swords and baton within a laurel wreath. For all general officers,
including honorary brigadier-generals.
31. Buttons, A.P.— Embossed with the Imperial crown, outline
map of Australia, and lettering “ Australian Military Forces.”
Brass for officers and for members of the Permanent Forces,
white metal for A.A.N.S., and black for chaplains.
32. Buttons, Vegetable Ivory.— With inscription “ Australian
Military Forces ” for “ other ranks ” of Citizen Forces and
Senior Cadets.


33. Buttons are made in four sizes, as under :
Large .. .. 39 lines j
Medium .. .. 32 „ I
Small .. .. 26 „ J
Cap and gorget .. 18 „ J
40 “ lines ” equals 1 inch.
34. Cap, Forage.—General officers and substantive Colonels.—
Universal pattern, blue cloth, with three cloth welts, 3f inches
total depth ; diameter across the top, 9f inches for a cap fitting
21f inches in circumference, the top to be | inch larger or smaller
in diameter for every f inch the cap may vary in size of head
above or below thq above-mentioned standard, e.g., a cap 22f
inches in circumference, diameter across the top, 9| inches ; cap
21 inches in circumference, diameter 8| inches. The sides to be
made in four pieces, and to be l£ inches deep between the welts,
cloth bands If inches wide, colour of gorget patch, placed between
the two lower welts. Eyelet holes in each side. The cap is set
up on a band of stiff leather, or other material, If inches deep,
stiffened up in front.
Chin strap of black patent leather | inch wide, buttoned on to
two buttons (18 lines) placed immediately behind the corners of
the peak.
The peak to drop at an angle of 45 degrees, and to be 2 inches
deep in the middle. Caps to be worn straight on the head.
A drab cover is worn in all orders of dress fitted so as to show
band, peak and badge.
Peaks will be embroidered as under :—•
General officers *.. Two rows of gold oakleaf embroidery.
.Substantive Colonels One row of gold oaklpaf prYifirmrlpry.
— Add —“General Officers and substantive Colonels may,
except on ceremonial occasions, wear a khaki cap of service dress pattern
without embroidered peak.” ip,
but of drab mixture cloth to match the Service Dress. Drown
leather chin strap, buttons of brass or brown composition.
36. Cap, Chaplains’, —Universal pattern, khaki cloth, black
peak, 2 inches deep in the middle when embroidered and If inches
when plain, black chin strap, and black buttons. Badge, in
oxidized copper, a cross patee on a plain metal tablet, surmounted
by a crown.


The following distinctions will be worn to denote the various
classes of chaplains :
Ist Class .. One row of gold oakleaf embroidery on lower
edge of peak.
2nd Class .. One row of plain gold embroidery, f inch wide
on lower edge of peak.
3rd Class .. One row of gold braid J inch wide on lower
edge of peak.
4th Class .. Plain peak.
37. Collars. —Drab, of similar shade to shirt fastened with a
plain gold safety pin. Chaplains’ (optional) white collar and
black clerical stock.
38. Decorations and Medals. —See Part VI.
39. Gloves. —Brown leather, but for evening entertainments
white gloves may be worn.
40. Gorget Patches. —To be worn on jackets as under :
General Officers. —Scarlet cloth, except the Director-
General, Medical Services (if holding the rank of General
Officer) chocolate. In each case the gorget patch has a
line of gold oakleaf embroidery down the centre and a small
gorget •
Colonels iirOwnmand, Colonels on the Staff and Substantive
Colonels.—Scarlet cloth with line of crimson gimp and small
gorget button, except—
A.A.M.C.—Chocolate 1
A.A.O.C.—Blue cloth
A.A.V.C.—Maroon cloth |
with line of silk gimp of the colour
of the cloth and a small gorget
button.
41. Greatcoat. —Of two shapes, mounted and dismounted.
Khaki waterproof cloth of universal patterns for all ranks.
42. Hat. —Khaki felt, with leather chin strap, and coloured
band. To be worn by the Military Forces looped up on left side
with hook and eye; Commonwealth badge on side of brim
when looped up, crown indented.
Captains and lieutenants of cadets, senior cadets, including
cadet lieutenants and cadet 2nd lieutenants, wear the brim
down, crown indented.


The following distinctions will be worn to denote the various
classes of chaplains :
Ist Class .. One row of gold oakleaf embroidery on lower
edge of peak.
2nd Class .. One row of plain gold embroidery, | inch wide
on lower edge of peak.
3rd Class .. One row of gold braid J inch wide on lower
edge of peak.
4th Class .. Plain peak.
37. Collars.— Drab, of similar shade to shirt fastened with a
plain gold safety pin. Chaplains’ (optional) white collar and
black clerical stock.
38. Decorations and Medals. -See Part VI.
39. Gloves. —Brown leather, but for evening entertainments
white gloves may be worn.
40. Gorget Patches. — To be worn on jackets as under :
General Officers. —Scarlet cloth, except the Director-
General, Medical Services (if holding the rank of General
Officer) chocolate. In each case the gorget patch has a
line of gold oakleaf embroidery down the centre and a small
gorget *
Colonels iffWHSeftanaTColonels on the Staff and Substantive
Colonels. —Scarlet cloth with line of crimson gimp and small
gorget button, except—
A. A.M.C.—Chocolate ] with line of silk gimp of the colour
A.A.O.C.—Blue cloth - of the cloth and a small gorget
A. A. V.C. —Maroon cloth j button.
41. Greatcoat. — Of two shapes, mounted and dismounted.
Khaki waterproof cloth of universal patterns for all ranks.
42. Hat.— Khaki felt, with leather chin strap, and coloured
band. To be worn by the Military Forces looped up on left side
with hook and eye Commonwealth badge on side of brim
when looped up, crown indented.
Cantains and lieutenants of cadets, senior cadets, including
42a. “Helmets, khaki, universal (‘Wolseley’ pattern),— Cork,
covered with khaki drill material made with six seams, edges bound
with khaki drill material; projecting brim all round, 3 inches in front.
4 inches at back, 2 inches at sides, ventilated at top with zinc button
covered with khaki drill material, side hooks. At top of helmet a
collet riveted on to a collar |-inch wide to receive the button. Brown
leather chin strap, |-inch wide. Puggaree as described in para. 50.”


43. Jacket, Officer’s (also W.O.’s, Class I.).— Khaki cloth
or khaki drill, single breasted, cut as a lounge coat to the waist
with back seam, very loose at the chest and shoulders, but
fitted at the waist; military skirt to bottom edge; length
of skirt 13 inches for a man 5 ft. 9 ins., varying in proportion to
height, step collar, depth of opening about 3 inches, two cross-
patch breast pockets above, inches wide and 7\ inches deep
from the top of the flap, box pleat in centre 2J inches wide, three-
pointed flap inches wide and 2f inches deep, two expanding
pockets below the waist pleats at the sides, 9f inches wide at the
top and 10| inches at the bottom, 8 inches deep to the top of the
pocket and fastened at the top with a line 26 button, flap with
button hole to cover pockets 3| inches deep, 10| inches wide.
The top of the pleats of the pocket should be sewn down at the
corners in such a manner that on service the pockets can be
expanded at the top also. Four line 32 buttons down the front.
To be lined or not as required, with lining of similar colour to
the jacket. Pointed cuffs. Shoulder straps of same material
as the jacket, fastened with line 26 buttons.
44. Jackets, C.P.— Khaki cloth of same design as officer’s
jacket but with five buttons down front and with stand and
fall collar to fasten with two hooks and eyes, 2 inches fall, collar
edges to run showing button between.
45. Jacket, S.D. —Universal pattern, khaki cloth.
46. Jacket, Khaki Drill, Permanent Forces (Rank and File).—
Patrol back ; slits at sides 4f inches deep ; stand and fall collar,
to fasten with two hooks and eyes, If inches fall in the front and
If inches at back, collar edges to run showing top button
between; two small darts to be cut out at neck; two cross-
patch outside breast pockets, 6 inches wide and 6f inches deep
to the top of the flap, l|-in. pleat in centre, with expanding pleat
on outer side; flap to be rounded with button hole, 2f inches
deep at the centre, 6£ inches wide ; top of pocket to be in line
with second button. Five large detachable buttons down front,
small detachable button to fasten flap of each breast pocket.
Shoulder straps to be sewn in sleeve head 2 inches wide at base
by inches at top, rounded and must reach to top
edge of collar, to be fastened by a small detachable button ;
cuffs pointed 5£ inches deep at the point, and 2 inches deep at


the back. Pocket to be fastened by a small bone button. Badge
to be worn on collar, inner edge to be 1| inches from front.
White linen or celluloid collar slip to be worn, buttoned on the
collar of the jacket so as to show J inch above.
47. Jerseys, Senior Cadets. —Khaki, roll collar, fastened in
front at neck with three buttons.
48. Leggings. —Brown leather, universal pattern.
49. Mourning Bands. —Officers and warrant officers in uniform _ oa. .
when in mourning or attending funerals^wilFwear affilack bandT^^J^
inches wide round the left arm, midway between the elbow'
and shoulder. This is the only mourning to be worn in uniform
unless other orders are specially issued, and will not be worn at
levees or drawing-rooms, except when the Court is in mourning.
A N.C.O. or soldier may wear a similar mourning band should he
wish to do so.
50. Puggaree. Plain drab, seven folds, 2-J inches at sides and
1-| inches at front and back.
51. Puttees. —Woollen, khaki, 3 yards long.
52. Shoes, Senior Cadets. —Brown canvas uppers and leather
soles.
53. Shorts, khaki, serge, Senior Cadets. —Universal pattern,
fitted with strap and buckle at either side.
54. Shirts, Officer’s. Drab material.
55. Spurs. —Universal pattern Jack
and shield.
Spurs will not be worn when travelling on board ship or
officers inspecting armaments or magazines. *
56. Stockings, Senior Cadets.— Khaki, wool, turn-over top.
57. Straps, shoulder. —Plain for all arms except—
Australian Instructional Corps. —Two scarlet stripes, each
i inch in width on each shoulder strap and showing
£ inch khaki cloth between.
Chaplains.— As for Instructional Corps but stripes are of
black cloth.


58. Swords and Scabbards.—
Officers.— lnfantry pattern with brown leather scabbard.
59. Sword Knots. —Brown leather, and worn with all swords.
When mounted, to be worn at full length, at other times rolled
round basket of hilt.
60. Tie.— Drab material, of similar shade to shirt, to be fastened
with a sailor’s knot.
81. Titles, Shoulder.— For officers of the Staff Corps of and
below the rank of lieutenant-colonel. The words “ Staff Corps ”
in gilt in the form of a semi-circle.
62. Trousers.— Khaki cloth or drill; cuff bottomed for officers,
plain for other ranks.
PART III.—UNIFORM OF CORPS.
STAFF CORPS.
63. The following uniform is prescribed for the Staff Corps :
Cap.—Forage or service dress according to rank as described
in paras. 34 and 35.
Hat, khaki, felt, with brown leather chin strap and plain
dr teW'|, U LWt UV A
Jacket. —Officers pattern as described in para. 43.
Buttons. —Gilt, Commonwealth pattern. General officers,
special pattern.
Titles. —Gilt, ” Staff Corps,” worn on shoulder straps (worn bv
lieutenant-colonels and under).
Badges—
Hat.—Commonwealth pattern, gilt, large.
Cap.—Commonwealth pattern, gilt, small, except for general
officers and substantive colonels wearing special badges,
see para. 19.
Collar.—As for cap, except for officers wearing gorget patches.
Colour patches.—As for unit to which attached. See Part Y.
Breeches.— Mounted service pattern.


Trousers.—Universal officers’ pattern.
Shirt.
Collar.
Tie.
officers’ pattern.
Boots. —Ankle, brown, universal pattern or field boots
for camps and manoeuvres. Ankle, brown, light, for other occa-
sions.
Spurs.—As described in para. 55.
Greatcoat. —Universal mounted service pattern.
Gloves. —Brown,
Leggings.—Brown leather.
AUSTRALIAN INSTRUCTIONAL CORPS.
Officers and Warrant Officers, Class I.
64. As for Staff Corps, except —
Shoulder straps of jacket to have two stripes of scarlet cloth,
each \ inch wide, showing £ inch of khaki cloth between,
on each shoulder strap. Shoulder straps on khaki drill
jacket may be detachable. No shoulder titles.
Spurs for mounted officers and warrant officers only.
Trousers (or shorts) and shoes may be worn when instructing
in physical and recreational training.
Warrant Officers, Class 11., and N.C.Os.
64a. As for officers and W.Os, Class 1., except—
Jacket will be either of pattern described in para. 44,
or the universal service dress pattern (para. 45). Shoulder straps
as described for officers above. Spurs for mounted personnel
only.
Puttees may be worn-leggings b)> members of the
A-rUC., ?mdm embers serving witfrdrsTTiUTmted rtmts- may wear'
Trousers (or shorts) and shoes may be worn when instructing
in physical and recreational training.


Trousers. —Universal officers’ pattern.
Shirt.
Collar.
Tie.
■Universal officers’ pattern.
Boots. —Ankle, brown, universal pattern or field boots
for camps and manoeuvres. Ankle, brown, light, for other occa-
sions.
Spurs. —As described in para. 55.
Greatcoat. —Universal mounted service pattern.
Gloves. —Brown.
Leggings. —Brown leather. (
AUSTRALIAN INSTRUCTIONAL CORPS.
Officers and Warrant Officers, Class I.
64. As for Staff Corps, except—
Shoulder straps of jacket to have two stripes of scarlet cloth,
each \ inch wide, showing inch of khaki cloth between,
on each shoulder strap. Shoulder straps on khaki drill
jacket may be detachable. No shoulder titles.
Spurs for mounted officers and warrant officers only.
Trousers (or shorts) and shoes may be worn when instructing
in physical and recreational training.
Warrant Officers, Class 11., and N.C.Os.
64a. As for officers and W.Os, Class 1., except—
Jacket will be either of pattern described in para. 44,
or the universal service dress pattern (para. 45). Shoulder straps
as described for officers above. Spurs for mounted personnel
only.
“ Puttees and D.S. Breeches may be worn by members of the MO 53
A.I.C. when attached to units for which corresponding articles * °
of uniform are prescribed." 1924
Trousers (or shorts) and shoes may be worn when instructing
in physical and recreational training.


UNITS OF THE PERMANENT FORCES OTHER THAN
INSTRUCTIONAL CORPS.
65. Officers and W.Os, Class 1.-As for Australian Instruc-
tional Corps, but with plain shoulder straps on jackets. Hat
bands as in para. 24.
66. N.C.Os and Men.— As for Instructional Corps, except—
Jacket .. Service dress, as in para. 45, or khaki drill
(para. 46) (plain shoulder straps).
Greatcoat.. D.S. or M.S., according to unit.
Boots .. Ankle, brown, universal.
Hat bands As in para. 24.
Leggings .. Universal pattern. '
CITIZEN FORCES. 1
67. The following uniform is prescribed for the Citizen
T orces;—
Officers.
Cap, forage, or service dress, according to rank as described
in paras. 34 and 35, except chaplains, as described in para. 36.
Hat, khaki, felt, with brown leather chin strap and coloured
band, as in para. 24.
Jackets.— Officers’ pattern as described in para. 43, except—
Chaplains will wear two stripes of black cloth 1 inch in
width, on shoulder straps, showing inch of cloth between.
No rank badges on shoulder straps of chaplains’ jackets.
Buttons. Brass, Australian pattern. General officers, special
pattern. r
Badges, hat, cap and collar. Universal Commonwealth
pattern, except general officers and substantive colonels, who
wear special pattern cap badges, and gorget patches in lieu of
collar badges.
Patches, Regimental Colour. —Unit colour patch, as in Part
V. (paras. 81-85).
Shirt ]
Collar f>
Tie J
Drab, universal officers’ pattern.
C. 16460.—2


Breeches. —Dismounted or mounted pattern, according to
unit or nature of duties.
Puttees. —Khaki cloth.
Trousers. —Universal officers’ pattern, see para. 62.
Boots.— As for officers of Staff Corps.
Greatcoat. —Dismounted or mounted pattern according to
unit or nature of duties. y? j .
***££ .
Hat.—Khaki, felt, with brown leather chin strap and band
as for officers.
Jacket. —Universal service dress pattern.
Buttons. —Vegetable ivory. See para. 32.
Badges. —Hat and collar badges and regimental colour
patches—As for officers, but metal badges are copper oxidized.
Breeches. —Dismounted or mounted pattern according to
unit or nature of duties.
Boots.—Ankle, brown, universal pattern.
Greatcoat. —Dismounted or mounted pattern, according to
N o t e , lirlight horse and field-artillery units of the Citizen
Forces-aniin the case of mounted personnel of other umts-putte* 10
will—bo-rolled forward front tho inside-of the leg and-barkwa.
on the outside commencing at the top of the calf, the point;.,
finish on the outside at the ankle pointing totho rear, and fastem
off with the tap" All ntTlor pervfmnel \n the Citizen Forces will
commence the r»fi thp„ajikle and finish at the top nf the calf.
UNATTACHED LIST OFFICERS.
68. Officers on the Unattached List will wear the uniform,
&c.,* of the unit with which they last served on the Active List.
Area officers who did not hold commissions in the Military Forces
at the date of temporary appointment as area officers will wear
the uniform prescribed for infantry officers, with Commonwealth
badges.


«
Breeches. —Dismounted or mounted pattern, according to
unit or nature of duties.
Puttees. —Khaki cloth.
Trousers. —Universal officers’ pattern, see para. 62.
Boots. —As for officers of Staff Corps.
Greatcoat. —Dismounted or mounted pattern according to
unit or nature of duties. y J j
Ctf Other Ranks. -
Hat. —Khaki, felt, with brown leather chin strap and band
as for officers.
Jacket. —Universal service dress pattern.
Buttons. —Vegetable ivory. See para. 32.
Badges. —Hat and collar badges and regimental colour
patches —As for officers, but metal badges are copper oxidized.
Breeches. —Dismounted or mounted pattern according to
unit or nature of duties.
Boots. —Ankle, brown, universal pattern.
Greatcoat. —Dismounted or mounted pattern, according to
Note. —lir light horse field artillery units of the Citizen
ffnTppa anB in f.hp. case of mount**!- nersonnfl of nthirr iimta-oiittees
" Note.— Puttees will be rolled forward from the inside of the jyj.Q 53
leg and backward on the outside commencing at the ankle and
finishing at the top of the calf.” 1924.
off with the tape,— All »th»r i" th* riirisftn FW.P fl will
comment the r n b a t tho--a-nklg.-n.nd finish- at the top of the calf.
UNATTACHED LIST OFFICERS.
68. Officers on the Unattached List will wear the uniform,
&c,, of the unit with which they last served on the Active List.
Area officers who did not hold commissions in the Military Forces
at the date of temporary appointment as area officers will wear
the uniform prescribed for infantry officers, with Commonwealth
badges.


69. Officers who did not hold commissions in the A.M.F. at
the time of joining the A.I.F. should wear the uniform of the
branch of the service to which they belonged in the A.1.F., with
Commonwealth badges.
RESERVE OF OFFICERS.
70. Officers of the Reserve of Officers will wear the uniform,
&c., of the unit with which they last served.
RETIRED OFFICERS.
71. Officers who have been retired, and are permitted to
retain their rank, may, on special occasions, when attending
ceremonials and entertainments of a military nature,' and on
occasions when the wearing of military uniform would appear
appropriate, wear the uniform of the unit with which they last
served, with the letter “ R ” below the badges of rank in similar
material to those badges.
Note. —Whenever officers of the Unattached, Reserve, or
Retired Lists require to renew their uniforms, the latest approved
patterns will be followed.
AUSTRALIAN ARMY NURSING SERVICE.
72. The following uniform is prescribed for members of the
A.A.N.S.:—
Norfolk Coat. —Tailor-made bands coming over shoulder back
and front, stitched belt round waist under shoulder bands,
chocolate shoulder straps.
Shoulder Cape. —Scarlet cloth, with shoulder straps same
colour as cape.
Hat. —Grey felt, with chocolate puggaree (winter). Panama,
4-in. brim, with chocolate puggaree (summer).
Waterproof Cloak. —Grey, similar to colour of dress.
Dress. —Material, grey serge; plain walking skirt and shirt
blouse, and stand-up collar (grey silk shirt blouse may be worn
in hot weather). Blouse to be fastened with five Commonwealth
buttons (26 lines) in front. Two Commonwealth buttons (18 lines)
on sleeve. White collar and plain white under culls. Collar
fastened with Commonwealth brooch, belt of similar material to
dress, 2 inches wide, with one large Commonwealth button.


Detail of Indoor and Outdoor Uniform.
(a) Outdoor —
Grey Serge Norfolk Coat, Skirt and Blouse.
Grey Waterproof Cloak.
Grey Felt Hat (Winter), Panama Hat (Summer).
Grey Gloves.
Grey Stockings.
Boots, Ankle, Tan.
iff) Indoor—
Matron-in-Chief.
Grey Serge Skirt and Blouse.
Grey Stockings.
Shoes, plain, black, lace.
Other Grades.
To he worn on Duty in Hospital.
Grey Zephyr Dress.
Scarlet Shoulder Cape.
White Apron.
Muslin Cap, Army, 1 yard square, hemstitched by
machine.
Grey Stockings.
Shoes, plain, black, lace.
Collar, straight, to be worn outside collar of dress.
Cuffs, straight, to be worn outside dress sleeve.
When off Duty.
Grey Serge Blouse and Skirt.
Scarlet Shoulder Cape.
Muslin Cap, Army.
Grey Stockings.
Shoes, plain, black, lace.
Collar and Cuffs.
No to be worn in uniform.


The following distinctions will be observed in the grades of
the Service ;
Matron-in-Chief.
Badge. —Australian Army Nursing Service on the right arm,
gold embroidered.
Principal Matron.
Dress. —Coat, skirt and blouse with chocolate collar, pointed
cuffs and shoulder straps, with two strips of chocolate cloth
1 inch wide down front of blouse. Badge as for Matron-in-Chief.
Matrons.
Dress. —Coat, skirt and blouse, chocolate collar and pointed
cuffs and chocolate shoulder straps.
Badge. —Australian Army Nursing Service on right arm, silver
embroidered.
Sisters and Staff Nurses.
Dress. —Coat, skirt and blouse, chocolate shoulder strap on
Norfolk coat.
Badge. —Australian Army Nursing Service on right arm, silk
embroidered.
Grade Badges.
Grade badges are worn on shoulder straps as under :
Matron-in-Chief .. .. .. Crown.
Principal Matron or Matron .. .. 3 stars.
Sister .. . . .. .. 2 stars.
Staff Nurse .. .. 1 star.
SENIOR CADETS.
73. Officers of the Citizen Forces, Unattached List and Reserve
of Officers. —As for officers of dismounted units of the Citizen
Forces.
74. Captains and Lieutenants of Cadets. —As for dismounted
officers of the Citizen Forces, except that colour patches will be
worn at side of hat or cap.
75. Cadet Lieutenants and Cadet 2nd Lieutenants.—-As for
senior cadets in second year of training, with the addition of
service dress cap, with colour patch at left side. Badges of
rank and cap and collar badges of universal pattern.


76. Other Ranks.—Athletic kit, worn during the first year
of training—*
Hat, khaki, cotton, with colour patch on left side above the
band of hat.
Jersey, khaki, woollen.
Shorts, khaki, serge.
Stockings, khaki, woollen.
Shoes, brown, canvas.
Military uniform, worn during second year of training—
Hat, khaki, felt, with green band and chin strap and unit
colour patch worn on left side of hat above the band.
Brim not looped up at side.
Jacket, universal service dress pattern as for Citizen Forces.
Breeches, dismounted pattern.
Puttees, universal pattern, worn with tape finished off at
the top.
Boots, ankle, brown, as for Citizen Forces.
Greatcoat, dismounted pattern.
* On and after 1.7.23 Senior Cadets will be supplied with military
uniform in their first year of training, and issues of athletic kit will cease
PART IV. —ARMLETS (See Para. 14).
77. Armlets are worn on the right arm of jackets,* above the
elbow, and as hereunder described :
OFFICERS.
Worn on all Occasions when in Uniform.
(a) Head-Quarters. —Red, black and red, with the following
distinctions in |-inch scarlet embroidery, according to the
appointment or employment of the Officers concerned:—
I. .. I.Gr.’s Officers')
G. .. G. Staff
A. .. A. Staff f
Q. .. Q. Staff j
Except as below for officers con-
nected with certain services.


A guo .. Artillery.
E. .. Engineers.
S.T. .. Supply and Transport Services.
M. .. Medical Services.
O. .. Ordnance Services.
V. .. Veterinary Services.
R. .. Remount Services.
P. .. Provost Marshal’s Officers.
A.D.C. .. Aides-de-camp.
(6) Divisional Head-Quarters.— Red, with the following distinc-
tions in |-inch embroidery :
G. .. G. Stafi.
A. .. A. Stafi.
Q. .. Q. Stafi. J
Except as below for officers con-
nected with certain sendees.
A. &Q. . . Officers combining A.G.’s and Q.M.G. s duties?
e.g., A.A. and Q.M.G.’s.
A gun .. Artillery.
E. .. Engineers.
S.T. .. Supply and Transport Services.
M. .. Medical Services.
O. .. Ordnance Services.
V, .. Veterinary Services.
P. .. Provost Marshal’s Officers.
A. .. Aides-de-camp.
(c) Brigade Head-Quarters. —A blue armlet, with the letters :
B. .. Brigade Major and Assistant Brigade Major.
S.C. .. Stafi Captain and Assistant Staff Captain.
{d) District Base Head-Quarters.— A green armlet, with dis-
tinctive lettering as under :
D.B.C. .. District Base Commandant.
Other Staff)
Officers J
As laid down for corresponding appointments
on Divisional Head-Quarters.


(e) Officers Engaged in Special Duties.— -Officers employed in
connexion with the embarkation movements and transportation
of troops—A white linen armlet.
Army Signal Service—Blue and white armlet (white upper-
most) with letter “ S ” for officers of Army and Divisional Head-
Quarters, and without lettering for all other officers.
Other specially employed officers —As may be ordered.
(/) Educational Establishments. —Armlet of green, yellow,
green, with badge or lettering as under :
R.M.C. .. Royal Military College
A gun .. Artillery School of Instruction.
C.T.D. .. Central Training Depot.
Crossed
Rifles .. Small Arms School.
Honorary brigadier-generals on the staff and colonels holding
appointments for which armlets are authorized, will wear armlets
with appropriate lettering. Honorary brigadier-generals and
colonels commanding formations will wear the formation
armlet without distinctive lettering.
OTHER RANKS.
78. The armlets to be worn by warrant officers, non-com-
missioned officers, and men are as under (only worn when actually
bn duty);—
(a) Those employed on embarkation
and sea transport duties .. White (linen).
(b) Provost Staff and Military Police Black,* with the letters
M.P., &c., as may be
required, in red.
(c) Signal Services .. .. Blue and white (white
uppermost).
( d ) Sanitary Services .. .. Yellow.
• Blue armlets with authorized lettering to be worn until stocks are exhausted.


Rank.
Chev-
rons.
Distinguishing Badges.
No. of
Bars.
Worn on
Jackets.
i
• Worn on
Gieatcoats.
Warrant Officers — Class I. —
Staff Sergt.-Major, 1st Class..
Royal Arms
within a
wreath
Royal Arms
within a
wreath
Master Gunner, 1st Class
Royal Arms
within a
wreath over
Royal Arms
within a
wreath over
Master Gunner, 2nd Class ..
gun
Royal Arms
over gun
gun
Royal Arms
over gun
Bandmaster
Lyre (large) ..
Lyre (large)
Warrant Officers, Class I. (not
specified above)
Warrant Officers — Class 11. —
Royal Arms ..
Royal Arms
Master Gunner, 3rd Class ..
Staff Sergt.-Major, 3rd Class
Brigade or Regimental
Quartermaster-Sergeant
'i
Crown within a
wreath over
gun
Crown within a
wreath over
gun
Armament Quartermaster-
Sergeant
Mechanist Quartermaster-
Sergeant
► Crown within
a wreath
Crown within a
wreath
All other Warrant Officers,
Class II.
Non-commissioned Officers and
Men —
Crown
Crown
Provisional Staff Sergeant-Major
4
Crown
Crown
Sergt.-Bugler
4
Bugle
Bugle
Sergt.-Trumpeter
4
Crossed Trum-
pets
Crossed Trum-
pets
Farrier, Wheeler, Saddler, or
Smith, Staff-Sergt.
3
Crown
Crown
Squadron, Battery, Troop, or
Coy. Qtr.mstr.-Sergt.
3
Ci’own
Crown
PART V.—BADGES.
79.—DISTINGUISHING RANK BADGES AND CHEVRONS,
WARRANT AND N.C.O.’s.


Chev-
rons.
Distinguishing Badges.
Rank.
No. of
Worn on
Worn on
Bars.
Jackets.
Greatcoats.
Non-Commissioned Officers and
Men —continued.
Crown
Armament Staff-Sergt.
3
Crown
Staff - Sergt., A.A.S.C.,
3
Crown
Crown
A.A.M.C., A.A.O.C.
Crown and
1
Crown
Armourer Staff-Sergt.
3
Hammer and
Pincers
Band Sergt. ..
3
Lyre (small) ..
Lyre (small)
Sergt. and Lance Sergt.
3
Corporal
2
2nd Corpl., Lance-Corpl., Bdr.,
1
and Acting Bdr.
Lyre (small)
Bandsmen
Lyre (small)
Gunner
Crossed hat-
Pioneer
chets
Trumpeter or Bugler
Crossed trum-
pets or bugle
Private ..
Notes; —
(a) Warrant officers of the Australian Instructional Corps on
the staff of the Small Arms School will wear, above rank
badges, crossed rifles.
( b ) Warrant officers, non-commissioned and privates
who are employed as artificers wear the following trade badges
on jackets: —
Saddlers —a bit.
Farriers and shoeing-smiths—a horseshoe.
Wheelers and carpenters —a wheel.
Armourers, fitters, machinery artificers, armament artificers,
and smiths —hammer and pincers.
(c) A Geneva cross badge will be worn on jackets and great-
coats of A.A.M.C. on the right arm. Warrant officers below
rank badge, non-commissioned officers above chevrons.


{d) All non-commissioned officers of artillery above rank of
corporal wear a gun on jacket above chevrons; N.C.Os of
Engineers above the rank of corporal wear a grenade.
(e) Chevrons and badges of rank and Geneva crosses will be
worn on the right arm of jackets and greatcoats. Badgearand
chevrons will be worn above the elbow in all cases except the
following, when they will be worn below the elbow :
All badges for warrant officers and badges and chevrons for
non-commissioned officers wearing 4-bar chevrons (Pro-
visional staff sergeants-major excepted).
(f) Four-bar chevrons worn below the elbow will be worn with
the point upwards ; good conduct badges- will-be worn bolow
the elbow on the loft arm-with the point upwards. -
( g) The chevrons will be of drab worsted on khaki. Badges
of rank, except chevrons, will be of brass or gilding metal in
the Permanent Forces, and of oxidized metal in the Citizen
Forces and Senior Cadets.
(h) The position of badges of men of normal dimensions will
be as follows:—The point of 1-bar chevrons will be 9 inches;
2-bar, 9| inches; 3-bar, 10£ inches; and the 4-bar, 11 inches
from the top of sleeve.
(i) The centre of the grmrhmrnrlnH~- bndge, the 4-bar chevron,
and the warrant officers’ or skill at arms badges worn on jackets
will be about half an inch above the point of the cuff ; on service
dress and other jackets with plain cuffs, the lower edge or points
of the warrant officers’ or skill at arms badges will be 6| inches ;
the point of the 4-bar chevron, 9 inches; of the 1-bar good
conduct badge, 7| inches ; the 2-bar, 8 inches ; 3-bar, 8| inches
from bottom of the sleeve.
(j) The lower edge or point of the trade badge, Geneva cross,
or badge of appointment, when worn by privates on jackets,
will be 9 inches from the top of the sleeve.
( Jc ) Trade badges worn by non-commissioned officers should
be affixed with the lower edge three-quarters of an inch above
the point of the “ V ” of chevron, and the artillery gun, or gun
and crown when worn, about the same distance above the trade
badge. The grenade of engineers will be worn immediately
above the trade badge.'
(I) Whw) a filfill at ,arms badge and bader
are worn, the former will ba placed a have, the, latter.


(m) On greatcoats, the point of the 1-bar chevron will be
9 inches, the 2-bar, 9|- inches, the 3-bar, 10| inches, and the 4-bar,
11 inches from the top of the sleeve, and of the 4-bar, when
worn below the elbow, 11 inches from the bottom of the cuff.
80. Badges for Skill at Anns, &c. —
(a) Gunnery Badges— Artillery.
Crown, and “ G
in wreath (Ist
prize)
Star, and “ G ” in ►
wreath (2nd prize)
“G ” in wreath
(3rd prize)
One of each for each battery of field
artillery, anti-aircraft artillery, and
battery of garrison artillery.
( b ) Artillery.
Crossed guns .. For warrant officers and N.C.O.’s who
qualify at the gunnery staff course,
(c) Musketry Badges.
Crown and crossed Best shot among sergeants and lance-
rifles in wreath sergeants in a regiment or battalion.
Star and crossed Best shot among corporals and privates
rifles in wreath in a regiment or battalion.
Crown and crossed
rifles
Star and crossed
"Troop sergeants and troop N.C.O.’s
in the best shooting squadron of a
light horse regiment.
■< Commanders of sections and platoon
sergeants in the best shooting
company of divisional engineers or
battalion of infantry.
Best marksman of a squadron or
rifles company.
Crossed rifles .. Marksmen in cavalry, engineers, and
infantry.
( d ) Machine Gun Badge.
" M.G.” in wreath First class machine gunners.
(e) Light Gun Badge.
“ L.G.” in wreath First class Lewis and Hotchkiss
gunners.


Prepared at Work Office 3rd B.


(/) Light Mortar Badge.
“ L.M.” in wreath N.C.O.’s who obtain a “ distinguished ”
certificate in the light mortar course
at a small arms schools
} £
( g ) Signallers.
Crossed flags .. Qualified signallers of all arms.
Musketry badges will be worn on the left forearm, with the
exception of the crossed rifles and crown issued to sergeants
of the best shooting squadron or company, which will be worn
on the right forearm.
All other badges will be worn on the left arm below the elbow.
REGIMENTAL COLOUR PATCHES.
81. The regimental colour patches worn by units of the A.M.F.
and Senior Cadets are illustrated in plate opposite. They are
worn by all ranks of the Citizen Forces and Senior Cadets except
area officers. Officers of the Staff Corps and members of the
Instructional Corps wear the colour patch of the unit to which
attached. The patches are worn at sleeve head on both arms of
the jacket in the Permanent and Citizen Fbrces, and at the left
side of hat and cap by captains and lieutenants of cadets and by
senior cadets, including cadet lieutenants and cadet 2nd lieu-
tenants.
82. Members of the A.M.F. who served abroad in the A.I.F.
may wear, above their unit colour patches, a half-size colour
patch of the A.I.F. unit in which they last served.
83. When worn on sleeve head unit colour patches will be
attached to the jacket sleeve 1 inch clear from the top except
when miniature patches are worn in addition, when the top of
the miniature will be inch from top of sleeve with \ inch space
between miniature and unit colours. Colour patches will be worn
so as to present exactly the same appearance on both arms when
viewed from the front. With this end in view all patches
divided obliquely are made in pairs. The illustrations in the
coloured plate are left arm patches. When worn on hats by
senior cadets the colour patch will be placed immediately above
the hat band. When worn on caps, the colour patch will be
superimposed on the cap band.


84. Dimensions of colour patches are as shown below :
85. Miniature colour patches worn by members of the Military Forces who served abroad in the A.I.F. are of half above dimensions


PART VI.-MEDALS AND DECORATIONS.
Note. —These instructions are mainly extracts from War Office
Publications, and will apply to the A.M.F. as far as practicable.
86. Method of Wearing.— Worn on the left breast in Full
Dress. They are to be worn in a horizontal line, suspended
from a single bar or buckle, which is not to be seen, or stitched
to the garment, and placed | inch above the top of the pocket.
War Medals are worn in the order of the dates of the campaigns
for which they have been conferred, the first obtained being
placed farthest from the left shoulder.
Medals awarded by the Royal Humane Society or other
recognised institution for bravery in saving life will, when
authorized, be worn in a position corresponding with war medals,
on the right breast.
When the decorations and medals cannot, on account of
cheir number, be suspended from the bar so as to be fully seen,
they are to overlap.
Medals are to be worn so as to show the Sovereign’s head.
The first earned clasp should be worn nearest the medal.
87. Miniature Decorations and Medals.— Worn with Evening
Dress (plain clothes), as directed in para. 95 (c) and ( d ). To-be
rorn on the lapel in one horizontal line.
Miniature decorations will be of the same size as miniature
ledals. A Knight Grand Cross, Knight Grand Commander,
Lnight Commander, or Commander, will wear the miniature of
the Companionship or Membership of the Order. When the
miniature of the Order of the Bath or of St. Michael and St.
George is worn by a Knight Grand Cross or a Knight Com-
mander, the buckle will be omitted.
The miniature of Companionship or Membership of an Order
will not be removed when in Evening Dress (plain clothes), the
broad riband, star, or badge is worn by a Knight Grand Cross,
Knight Commander, &c.


PART VI.-MEDALS AND DECORATIONS.
Note. —These instructions are mainly extracts from War Office
Publications, and will apply to the A.M.F. as far as practicable.
86. Method of Wearing.— Worn on the left breast in Pull
Dress. They are to be worn in a horizontal line, suspended
from a single bar or buckle, which is not to be seen, or stitched
to the garment, and placed J inch above the top of the pocket.
War Medals are worn in the order of the dates of the campaigns
for which they have been conferred, the first obtained being
placed farthest from the left shoulder.
Medals awarded by the Royal Humane Society or other
recognised institution for bravery in saving life will, when
authorized, be worn in a position corresponding with war medals,
on the right breast.
When the decorations and medals cannot, on account of
cheir number, be suspended from the bar so as to be fully seen,
they are to overlap.
Medals are to be worn so as to show the Sovereign’s head.
The first earned clasp should be worn nearest the medal.
87. Miniature Decorations and Medals.— Worn with Evening
Drpss rnlain p.lothesb as directed in para. 95 (c) and (d). To-be
nom°a bar'of 'T h inch be,ow
U r* to be seen. The length nt V * rom a bar of which no Dart Is
Jaws -
the Companionship or Membership ot tne uruoi..
miniature of the Order of the Bath or of St. Michael and St.
George is worn by a Knight Grand Cross or a Knight Com-
mander, the buckle will be omitted.
The miniature of Companionship or Membership of an Order
will not be removed when in Evening Dress (plain clothes), the
broad riband, star, or badge is worn by a Knight Grand Cross,
Knight Commander, &c.


88. Ribands of Decorations and Medals.—
Full Dress. —When medals and decorations are worn on the
breast the riband will be 1 inch in length, unless the possession
of clasps necessitates its being longer, the uppermost clasp to be
1 inch below the top of the riband j when two or more medals and
decorations are worn they will be so arranged that the lower
edges (or lowest point of a star) are in line. The lengths of all
ribands will be regulated by that of the decoration or medal
which, including any clasps, is the longest. These instructions
will apply equally to miniature medals and decorations.
Undress and Service Dress.—Ribands will be half an inch in
length, and will be sewn on to the cloth of the coat or jacket, or
with white or khaki drill uniform, worn on a bar without intervals,
in the same position as prescribed for decorations and medals!
They should not overlap, and as many as possible should be
placed in one row. When there is not sufficient room to wear
the ribands in one row they should be worn in two or more rows
at convenient intervals not more than half an inch apart. The
right edge of the first riband should be inches from the edge
of the garment, except that in the case of the officer’s jacket
no riband should be hidden by the lapel of the collar.
Members of the Nursing Service in possession of the Royal
Red Cross will, when in uniform, wear the riband on the left
breast on occasions when the decoration itself is not worn.
Ribands are not to be worn on the greatcoat or other over
garment.
The ribands of medals awarded by the Royal Humane Society
or other recognised institution for bravery in saving life will,
when authorized, be worn in a corresponding position on the
right breast.
89. Stars of Orders will be worn—
In Review Order.
In Review Order (staff in blue).
In Evening Dress (plain clothes) as directed in para. 95 (c).
In morning dress as directed in para. 95 (e).
The Stars of Foreign Orders will be worn on the right or left
breast according to the regulations laid down bv the Sovereign
by whom they are conferred.


The foregoing regulations apply to the wearing, by members
and honorary associates, of the badge of the Order of the Hospital
of St. John of Jerusalem in England.
In Foreign countries officers will wear their stars when Foreign
officers wear theirs.
90. Ribands and Badges of Orders.— On State occasions
Knights Grand Cross and Knights Grand Commanders of any
British Orders, except the Order of the Garter and the Order
of the Thistle, will, when in Review Order or Evening Dress
(plain clothes), wear the broad ribands of the Orders over
the right shoulder and under the sash or belt. The ribands
of the Orders of the Garter and the Thistle are worn over
the left shoulder. Knights Commanders and Commanders will,
when in Review Order or in Evening Dress (plain clothes), wear
the ribands of the Orders inside the collar of the tunic or coat,
the badge being suspended 2 inches below the lower edge of the
collar.
Commanders of the Royal Victorian Order will wear the badge
around the neck when in Review Order.
Badges of Orders are not to be worn except as above.
In Review Order Knights Commanders of two or more Orders
will wear round the neck the riband and badge of the senior
Order, and may also wear the ribands and badges of one or rqore
of the other Orders. In Evening Dress (plain clothes) only the
ribbon and badge of the senior Order will be worn.
On collar days the Knights Grand Cross and Knights Grand
Commanders of the several Orders wear the collar and badge and
the star. The collar is worn under the shoulder cords and over
the aiguillette. It is fastened to the shoulder cords by bows of
white satin riband, inches wide, and arranged so as to hang
equally at back and front. When the collar is worn, the ribands
and badges of the same order will not be worn. The collar is
never worn after sunset. In the case of a Knight possessing two
or more collars only one collar is worn at a time.
In Undress the broad ribands of a Knight Grand Cross, Knight
Grand Commander, Knight Commander, or Commander of an
Order, are not worn. The small riband of the Companionship
or Membership of the Order is worn on the left breast.


91. State, Official, or Public Occasions. —lt will be considered
a State occasion when the Sovereign, or the representative
of the Sovereign, is present; the parade in celebration of the
birthday of the Sovereign; or when specially ordered on the
occasion of any parade, ceremony, or entertainment at which a
member of the Royal Family is present.
A function or entertainment given or arranged by any Govern-
ment Department or Government Institution will be regarded as
an official occasion.
When invitations are issued in the name of any Municipal
Corporation, Institution, Society, or Livery Company, it will be
regarded as a public occasion.
92, Order in which Decorations and Medals are to be Worn,
(As published by the Central Chancery of the Orders of Knight-
hood, St. James’ Palace, 22.4.21.)
The following list shows the order in which Orders, Decorations-
and Medals should be worn, but it in no way affects the precedence
conferred by the Statutes of certain Orders upon the Members
thereof :—
Victoria Cross.
British Orders of knighthood, &c.~
, Order of the Garter.
Order of the Thistle.
Order of St. Patrick.
Order of the Bath.
Order of Merit (immediately after Knights Grand Cross of
the Order of the Bath).
Order of the Star of India.
Order of St. Michael and St. George.
Order of the Indian Empire.
Order of the Crown of India.
Royal Victorian Order (Classes 1., 11., and III.).
Order of the British Empire (Classes 1., 11., and III.).
Order of the Companions of Honour (immediately after
Knights and Dames Grand Cross of the Order of British
Empire).
Distinguished Service Order.
Royal Victorian Order (Class IV.).


British Orders of Knighthood, &c.— continued,
Order of the British Empire (Class IV,).
Imperial Service Order.
Royal Victorian Order (Class V.).
Order of the British Empire (Class V.).
* Note. The above applies to those Orders of similar
grades. When-the miniature or riband of a higher grade
of a junior Order is worn with that of a lower grade of a
senior Order, the higher grade miniature or riband should
come first, e.g., the miniature or riband of a K.C.I.E. will
come before a C.B. and a G.C.M.G. before a K.C.B.
Decorations—
Royal Red Cross (Class I.).
Distinguished Service Cross.
Military Cross.
Distinguished Flying Cross.
Air Force Cross.
Royal Red Cross (Class II.).
Orders given only in India—
Order of British India.
*lndian Order of Merit (Military).
Kaisar-i-Hind Medal.
Order of St. John of Jerusalem in England.
Albert Medal.
Medals for Distinguished Conduct, i.e., for Gallantry-
Medal for Distinguished Conduct in the Field.
Conspicuous Gallantry Medal.
Distinguished Service Medal.
Military Medal,
Distinguished Flying Medal.
Air Force Medal.
Indian Distinguished Service Medal.
War Medals (in Order of Date).
Instituted’in 1902. rder °* Merit (Milltary and Civil ) 18 distinct from the Order of Merit


Polar Medals—
Arctic Medal, 1815-1855.
Arctic Medal, 1876.
Antarctic Medal, 1901-1903.
Medals for Saving Life —
Constabulary Medal (Ireland).
Board of Trade Medal for Saving Life at Sea.
♦lndian Order of Merit (Civil).
Edward Medal.
Indian Distinguished Service Medal.
King’s Police Medal.
Jubilee, Coronation, and Durbar Medals—
Queen Victoria’s Jubilee Medal, 1887 (gold, silver, and bronze).
Queen Victoria’s Police Jubilee Medal, 1887.
Queen Victoria’s Jubilee Medal, 1897 (gold, silver, and bronze).
Queen Victoria’s Police Jubilee Medal, 1897.
Queen Victoria’s Commemoration Medal, 1900 (Ireland).
King Edward’s Coronation Medal.
King Edward’s Police Coronation Medal.
King Edward’s Durbar Medal (gold, silver, and bronze).
King Edward’s Police Medal, 1903 (Scotland).
King’s Visit Commemoration Medal, 1903 (Ireland).
King George’s Coronation Medal.
King George’s Police Coronation Medal.
King’s Visit Police Commemoration Medal, 1911 (Ireland).
King George’s Durbar Medal (gold,f silver, and bronze).
Efficiency and Long Service Medals —
Long Service and Good Conduct Medal.
Naval Long Service and Good Conduct Medal.
Medal for Meritorious Service.
Indian Long Service and Good Conduct Medal (for Europeans
of Indian Army).
Indian Meritorious Service Medal (for Europeans of Indian
Army).
Royal Marine Meritorious Service Medal.
• The Indian Order of Merit (Military and Civil) Is distinct from the Order of Merit
Durbar Medal in gold can be worn in the United Kingdom by ruling
Chiefs of India only.


Efficiency and Long Service Medals - continued.
Indian Long Service and Good Conduct Medal (for Native
Army). _ _ _ JwiOw
Indian Meritorious Service Medal (for Native Army).
Volunteer Officers’ Decoration.
Volunteer Long Service Medal.
Volunteer Officers’ Decoration (for India and the Colonies).
Volunteer Long Service Medal (for India and the Colonies).
Colonial Auxiliary Forces Officers’ Decoration.
Colonial Auxiliary Forces Long Service Medal.
Medal for Good Shooting (Naval).
Militia Long Service Medal.
Imperial Yeomanry Long Service Medal.
Berritorial Decoration.
erritorial Force Efficiency Medal.
pecial Reserve Long Service and Good Conduct Medal.
ecoration for Officers of the Royal Naval Reserve.
ecoration for Officers of the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve.
oyal Naval Reserve Long Service and Good Conduct Medal.
oyal Naval Volunteer Reserve Long Service Medal.
pecial Constabulary Long Service Medal. / ,
of South Africa Commemoration Medal. Af *o*
Medals belonging to Orders—
Royal Victorian Medal (gold and silver).
Imperial Service Medal.
Medal of the Order of the British Empire.
Medal of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem in England.
Badge of the Order of the League of Mercy.
Royal Victorian Medal (bronze).
Foreign Orders (in order of date of award).
Foreign Decorations (in order of date of award).
Foreign Medals (in order of date of award).
Notes. —The insignia of the Orders of the Garter, the Thistle,
and St. Patrick are not worn in miniature, neither are ribands
to represent them worn in undress and service dress.
The Orders of Merit and of Companions of Honour are worn
in uniform on all occasions, except Service Dress, and in Evening
Dress on all occasions when decorations are worn; with Service
Dress the ribands of these Orders will be worn on the left breast.


The following emblems are worn on the riband in undress and
service dress:—
Decoration. • Emblem worn on riband in undress
and service dress.
Victoria Cross ~ I. A miniature replica of the
cross in bronze worn by all
recipients of this decoration.
11. An additional miniature cross
will be added for each bar
awarded.
Distinguished Service
Order
Royal Red Cross, 1st
Class
Military Cross
Distinguished Conduct
Medal
Military Medal
Medal for Meritorious
Services
A small silver rose will be worn to
denote the possession of a bar
to these decorations, and an
additional rose for each additional
bar awarded.
These emblems do not form part of the decoration or medal,
and are not to be worn on the riband when the decoration or
medal is worn in original, or in miniature in evening dress.
An emblem in the form of an oak leaf in bronze is authorized
for wear on the riband of the Victory Medal by personnel who
have been “ mentioned ” one or more times in military despatches
by a commander of Expeditionary Forces in the Field, The
oak leaf emblem is issued in two sizes. The larger, to be worn
with the Victory Medal, will be affixed to the centre of the riband
at an angle of 60 degrees from the inside edge of the riband,
stem to the right. The smaller will be worn on the Victory
Medal riband, when the medal is not worn, transversely across
the riband, stem to the right.
93. Foreign Decorations and Foreign Medals.— The rules
governing the wearing of British decorations also apply to
Foreign decorations for which full permission has been given.
Foreign decorations for which private permission has been given
will be worn in Review Order, in Mess Dress, and in Evening and
Morning Dress (plain clothes), on the occasions specified in the


letter of authority only, on the left of all decorations and medals.
The ribands of such decorations will not be worn on the breast in
Review order (staff in blue) nor in Undress or Service Dress.
The star of such a decoration will only be worn in Review Order
(staff in blue) when specially directed. Miniatures of such
decorations will only be worn on the occasion mentioned in the
letter of authority when Mess Dress or Evening Dress (plain
clothes) is worn.
Foreign medals, other than war medals, are governed by the
same rules as foreign decorations.
A foreign war medal, the wearing of which has been sanctioned
by His Majesty, or its riband, or miniature, will be worn in all
Orders of dress in the same way as British medals.
94. Ribands of Foreign Orders, Decorations, and Medals. —
The ribands of foreign Orders, decorations, and medals worn
on Service Dress and Undress uniforms will be the plain riband
of the Order, decoration, or medal, as the case may be, with the
exception of that of the Legion of Honour.
The riband of the Legion of Honour will be plain in the case
of the grade of Chevalier. The classes above Chevalier will wear
the riband with a small rosette.
95. Decorations and medals are worn in the several Orders
of Dress and in Evening Dress (plain clothes) as follows :
(a) Review Order —Broad riband and badge of a grand cross.
All stars of Orders.
*Knights Commanders, Companions, and Commanders
of one Order will wear the riband and badge of that
Order round the neck with the riband between the folds
of the collar of the shirt and the badge over the tie,
hanging just below the knot. Knights Commanders,
Companions, and Commanders of two or more Orders
will wear the remaining badges in order of seniority,
one below the other so that the riband of the first emerges
about 1 inch from the top buttonhole of the jacket.
* Only Companions of the following Orders will wear the riband and badge of those
Orders round the neck—
The Order of the Bath ;
The Star of India ;
St. Michael and St. George.
The Indian Empire.


The additional badges are to be worn so that there is
no interval between the bottom of thefirst badge and the
riband of the next.
(6) Undress and Service Dress. —Small ribands of the width
of the companionship or membership of Orders and of
medals | inch in length on the breast.
(c) Evening Dress (plain clothes)—
Knights Grand Cross. —Broad riband and badge, as a
rule that of the senior Order, all stars; all badges of
Orders, decorations and medals in miniature on left
lapel of the evening dress coat.
badge round the neck-—The senior*-badge should be
a7f>rn nnlpgg a jnninr KarlgP Dr-rlpr appaa.rn
appropriate to the, occasion The riband is worn under
x the-white. tie, the Hrl[r bringing nbnuh nn inch b°Vw the
x l>ow, - All badges of- Orders-und-decoratinns and medals
in miniature -on the left lapel- of the evening dress coat.
Companions and Commanders. —The riband and badge
JJo&H'oi the senior Order round the neck, all badges of Orders
and decorations and medals in minhiture on the left
i of the evening dress coatf^°
and Members of Orders and all Officers. —Insignia
Orders, decorations, and medals in on the.
evening dress coat^l/®
((/) The follwing are the occasions upon which Orders,
miniature decorations, and medals are to be worn with
evening dress: —
(i) At all parties and dinners when the members of the
Royal Family mentioned below are present—
Their Majesties—
The King and Queen.
Queen Alexandra.
• In the case of a K.C.M.G. who is also a C 8., the senior badge Is that of aK.0.M.0.:
similarly in the case of a K.8.E., who is also a C.M.G., the badge of the K.B.E. would take
precedence.


The additional badges are to be worn so that there is
no interval between the bottom of thefirst badge and the
riband of the next.
(6 ) Undress and Service Dress.— Small ribands of the width
of the companionship or membership of Orders and of
medals % inch in length on the breast.
(c) Evening Dress (plain clothes)—
Knights Grand Cross. —Broad riband and badge, as a
rule that of the senior Order, all stars; all badges of
Orders, decorations and medals in miniature on left
lapel of the evening dress coat.
“ Knights Commander.—AU stars, and only one riband (preferably
of miniature width) and badge is worn round the neck, and as a rule
the senior badge is thus worn unless a junior badge Order should
appear to be more appropriate to the occasion. The riband should
be worn under the white tie and arranged in such a manner that only
about an inch shows below the bow of the tie. All badges of Orders
and decorations and medals in miniature on the left lapel of the evening
dress coat.”
lU mim.l,turn nn -hkfl Jafh. la-pal. ,tl>a a-iraulng /Irogq eAot
Companions and Commanders.— The riband and badge
the senior Order round the neck, all badges of Orders
ar) d decorations and medals in minhiture on the left
/nv/Wd'i the evening dress coat
and Members of Orders and all Officers. —Insignia
r(^ers J decorations, and medals in miniature on the.
leftWoTgie evening dress coat/L*
(d) The following are the occasions upon which Orders,
miniature decorations, and medals are to be worn with
evening dress:—
(i) At all parties and dinners when the members of the
Royal Family mentioned below are present—
Their Majesties—
The King and Queen.
Queen Alexandra.
* In the case of a K.O.M.G. who is also a C 8., the senior badge Is that of a K.0.M.G.:
similarly in the case of a K.8.E., who is also a C.M.G., the badge of the K. 8.8. would take
precedence.


Their Royal Highnesses—
The Prince of Wales.
The Duke of York.
Prince Albert.
Princess Mary.
Princess Royal.
Princess Victoria.
The Duke of Connaught.
Princess Christian.
Princess Louise, Duchess of Argyll.
The Duchess of Albany.
Prince and Princess Arthur of Connaught.
Princess Alice, Countess of Athlone.
(The host should notify his guests if any of these
members of the Royal Family will be present.)
(ii) On all occasions when H.E. the Governot-General
or a State Governor is present.
(iii) At all parties and dinners given in the houses of
Ambassadors and Ministers accredited to the
Court of St. James, unless otherwise notified by
the Ambassador or Minister concerned.
(A decoration of the country concerned should
be worn in preference to a British one, and if
both are worn, the former should take pre-
cedence of the latter.)
(iv) At all official dinners and receptions, including
Naval and Military dinners, dinners of City
Livery Companies, and public dinners.
(The word “ Decorations ” on the invitation
card to be the intimation from the host that
the entertainment is an official one.)
(v) On Official occasions when entertained by—
The Lord Lieutenant of a County within his
County.
Cabinet Ministers.
Ex-Cabinet Ministers.
Knights of the Order of the Garter.


Knights of the Order of the Thistle.
Knights of the Order of St. Patrick.
Great Officers of State and of the King’s House-
hold.
Lord Mayors and Mayors.
Lord Provosts and Provosts.
(The word “ Decorations ” on the invitation
card to be the intimation from the host that the
entertainment is an official one.)
Nothing in the above shall affect in any
way the practice of the Knights of the Orders
of the Garter, Thistle, and St. Patrick with
regard to wearing their insignia in accordance
with ancient custom.
The foregoing instructions apply to retired officers as regards the
wearing of decorations and medals in full dress.
(e) Morning Dress (Plain Clothes).
All members of the various Orders of Knighthood, &c., and all
persons who have been awarded decorations and medals may,
should they wish to do so, wear their insignia, decorations and
medals with morning dress on official occasions and at public
functions.
The ribands of the orders, decorations and medals may be worn
on all occasions at the discretion of the holder.
The method of wearing the insignia or orders, also decorations
and medals, on official occasions and at public functions with
morning dress is as follows :
Knights Grand Cross
Knights Grand Commanders
Dames Grand Cross
Knights Commanders
Dames Commanders ..
Should wear the star
only on the left breast
of the coat, or in a
corresponding place
on the dress, as the
case may be.


Members of the Order of Merit ..
Men who are members of the
Order of the Companions of
Honour
Companions of the several orders
of Knighthood
Commanders of the Royal Victor-
ian Order
Men who are Commanders of the
Order of the British Empire
Should wear the riband
to which the badge is
suspended under the
tie, which should be a
bow, the badge hang-
ing about f inch below
the bow.
Women who are members of the
Order of the Companions of
Honour
Companions of the Distinguished
Service Order
Offices of the Order of the British
Empire
Companions of the Imperial
Service Order
Members of the 4th and 5th
Classes of the Royal Victorian
Order
Members of the Order of the
British Empire
Should wear the-badges,
decorations, and
medals on the left
breast of the coat, or in
a corresponding place
on the dress, as the
case may be.
Persons who have been decorated
with—
The Victoria Cross
The Royal Red Cross
The Distinguished Service
Cross
The Military Cross
The Distinguished Flying
Cross
The Air Force Cross ,
Persons who have been
awarded medals
Should wear the badges,
decorations, and
medals on the left
breast of the coat, or in
a corresponding place
on the dress, as the
case may be.


The method of wearing the ribands or orders, decorations, and
medals, which will be the same in all cases, both for men and
women, is as follows :
A piece of the riband 1|- inches wide, or the width of the
medal riband, and \ inch in depth, mounted on a bar of
metal in the form of a brooch, to be worn on the left
breast of the coat, or in a corresponding place on the
dress, as the case may be.
Note. —The above only refers to morning dress, and does not
alter the regulations with regard to wearing orders, decorations,
and medals with uniform or with evening dress.


Occasions when to be worn.
Articles to be worn.
No. 1.— MARC
HING ORDER — SERVICE DRESS.
Officers and W.O.’s, Class 1.
' Hat or camas ordered ; jacket; drab shirt 5
collar ami tie; breeches ; puttees (or
leggings in the Permanent Forces) and
(a) Active Service
brown boots ; “ Sam Browne ” belt;
brown gloves ; swords for officers of
Units armed with the sword.
Revolver, case, and pouch; field glasses
or telescope ; note book ; compass ; and
whistle. Spurs for mounted officers and
W.O.’s.
} General and Staff Officers will wear caps
unless otherwise specially ordered.
(6) Manoeuvres
Other Warrant and Non-commissioned
(c) Field days
Officers and Men.
\d) Marches
1 Hat; jacket; breeches ; puttees (or leggings
(e) Reviews and Inspec-
1 in the Permanent Forces) and brown
tions*
boots. Whistles for W. and JM.G.O.’s to
(/) Guards of Honour and
whom issued. Spurs for mounted
Escorts*
(g) Fort manning
personnel.
\h) When ordered
All Troops.
Bandolier or web equipment as issued, with
i
haversack, water-bottle, and mess tin.f
Mounted Troops.
Saddle and bridle complete with head rope,
picketing peg, shoe case, heel rope, nose
bag, and greatcoat (rolled), jack spurs.
Swords for Units armed with the sword.
Dismounted Troops.
| Greatcoat, in pack or carrier.
Intrenching tool (Infantry).
PART VII—ORDERS OF DRESS.
A.—ALL RANKS.
♦ If ordered in lieu of full.dress.
t All Warrant Officers of the A.I.C. will wear the Sam Browne belt.


Occasions when to be worn.
Articles to be worn.
No. 2.—RE1
/IEW ORDER-FULL DRESS.
Officers and W.O.’s, Class 1.
I *Hat; jacket C.P. (officer’s), khaki shirt,
j collar and tie, breeches, puttees (or
leggings in the Permanent Forces), brown
boots, “ Sam Browne ” belt, spurs
(mounted officers), brown gloves. Orders
decorations, and medals (see Part VI.) ’
Swords-will bo h) uffice-ia uf the rank
of Colonek and—.higher, by nffioom 0 f
Glia ! of Honour;—Bseorts,—eeiour
parties anrl -fijilnn- — n.- .
(a) Ceremonial Parades
( b) Guards of Honour
(c) Escorts
(d) General Court Martials
(e) Church Parades (except
in camps of training)
{/) Funerals
(g) Official occasions, such
as levees and inves-
titures
(A) When specially ordered
war-shins, p ° i(||
units armed with the cword.
*Staff officers will wear caps unless otherwise
specially ordered.
Other Warrant and Non-commissioned
Officers and Men.
Hat; breeches; jacket; puttees (or leggings
in the Permanent Forces), brown boots.
W.O.’s will wear “ Sam Browne ” belt.
Whistles for W. and N.C.O.’s to whomissuod.
Medals and decorations {vide Part VI.)
Saddlery and accoutrements as in No. 1
(Marching Order), except as under—
Haversack
Water bottle
Mess tin
Intrenching tool
Greatcoat
Shoe case . only when ordered.
Nose bag
Heel rope
Picketing peg
Pack (web) {


Occasions when to be worn.
Articles to be worn.
No. 2.—REV
1
IEW ORDER—FULL DRESS.
' Officers and W.O.’s, Class 1.
*Hat; jacket C.P. (officer’s), khaki shirt,
collar and tie, breeches, puttees (or
leggings in the Permanent Forces), brown
boots, “ Sam Browne ” belt, spurs
(mounted officers), brown gloves. Orders,
decorations, and medals (see Part VI. )
That portion relating to the wearing of swords is cancelled, and
following is substituted thereior : —
of the rank of Colonel
•* Swords will be worn by officers
higher : bv Aides-de-Camp to His Excellency the Governor-Gene
State Governor when aiguillettes are worn (see para, _,
nffiners of Guards of Honour : Escorts; color Parties ana r ir
Parties : when calling on war ships,;
and by officers parading w
(a)
fleremnnial Par units armed with the sword.
ceremomax ±ar >uivj , 10 „ lu „ D o,i ea.ua unless otherwise
(t>)
(c)
Guards of Honour
Escorts
specially ordered.
(d)
General Court Martials
Other Warrant and Non-commissioned
Officers and Men.
(«)
Church Parades (except
in camps of training)
(/)
Funerals
Hat; breeches; jacket; puttees (or leggings
(g)
Official occasions, such
in the Permanent Forces), brown boots.
as leyees and inves-
titures
When specially ordered
W.O.’s will wear “ Sam Browne ” belt.
(*)
Whistles for W. and N.C.O.’s to whomissued.
Medals and decorations ( vide Part VI.)
Saddlery and accoutrements as in No. 1
(Marching Order), except as under —
Haversack
Water bottle
Mess tin
Intrenching tool
Greatcoat
Shoe case
only when ordered.
Nose bag
Heel rope
Picketing peg
Pack (web)
.


Occasions when to be worn.
Articles to be worn.
No. 3. —DF
ILL ORDER—SERVICE DRESS.
(a) Parades not included
in above
f Officers.
Hat; jacket; drab shirt; collar and tie ;
breeches; puttees (or leggings in the
Permanent Forces) and brown boots ;
“ Sam Browne ” belt; whistle.
Officers may wear cap, S.D., in lieu of hat,
and trousers in lieu of breeches and
leggings, at night drill.
(6) Regimental Courts
Martial, Boards and
Courts of Inquiry
(c) When ordered
Warrant and Non-commissioned Officers
and Men.
Hat; jacket; breeches; puttees (or
leggings in the Permanent Forces) and
brown boots ; whistle when issued. Cap
may be ordered for night drills.
“ Sam Browne ” belts for W.O. (I.)
Saddlery and accoutrements as in No. 2.
Whistles for W. and N.C.O.’s to whom issued.
V
B.—OFFICERS.
No. 4.—UNDRESS UNIFORM—SERVICE DRESS.
When not on parades with troops, the following uniform will be worn :
Hat, or cap if" drab shirt; collar and tie ; trousers* ; brown
boots ; “ Sam Browne ” belt. (“ Sam Browne ” belts will not be
worn at mess, except by officers on duty.)
At balls, dinners, or other evening entertainments at which uniform
is ordered, cap, jacket, trousers, boots, “ Sam Browne ” belt (without
sword or frog) will be worn.
No. 5. EVENING DRESS ON CEREMONIAL OCCASIONS.
On evening occasions of an official or public character, or when theii
Excellencies the Governor-General or the Governor of a State are present,
evening dress with Orders, decorations, and medals will be worn unless
uniform is ordered. For wearing of Orders, &c., see Part VI.
By Authority : Albert J. Mxjllett, Government Printer, Melbourne,
* Or breeches with puttees (or leggings in the Permanent Forces). .






