

POLICE DISTRICT of BERRIIA
NEW SOUTH WALES,
1879.


t./ <3 • ’ “ '
• -'ivV a'- ‘ ’*■' -


TLI
STATISTICAL REPOET,
(POLICE PISTPICT OF PEPPIMA,
?Eew Wales, 1879.
following information relating to this district
■V has been compiled by a sub-committee (of
which R. P. Richardson, Esq., J.P., is secretary),
with the view of publishing in pamphlet form for free
distribution at the Exhibition :
The district contains an area of about 900 square
miles, or 576,000 acres. It embraces the south-west-
ern portion of the County of Camden, and is bounded
on the north by portion of the police district of Na-
rellan and Picton ; on the east by the Wollongong and
Kiama police districts; on the south by the Shoal-
haven and Kangaroo Rivers ; and on the west by the
Wollondilly River. The Great Southern Railway
from Sydney to the Colony of Victoria passes through
it.
By the last census, in 1871, the district contained
a population of 4529 inhabitants, and may now be
estimated at upwards of 6000, of which there are on
the Camden Electoral List about 1400 electors.
Holders of land exceeding one acre number 738,
occupying an area of 202,412 acres, of which 5468
acres are in cultivation, and 170,535 acres enclosed
but not in cultivation. The main crops are wheat,
maize, oats, and potatoes, and the acreage under crop
for the year ending March, 1879, is estimated as fol-
lows : —Wheat, 146 acres; maize, 591 acres; oats,
1210 acres; potatoes, 807 acres. A large proportion


of the cereals were cut for hay and green food for
stock. Only 132 acres of wheat were utilised for
grain, yielding a return of 2311 bushels; 171 acres
maize, yielding 4005 bushels; 330 acres oats, 7141
bushels; 807 acres potatoes gave a return of 2642
tons; 1744 acres were in sown grasses for hay and
green fodder, 81 acres of which were cut for hay;
1098 tons of hay altogether were raised in the district
from wheat, barley, oats, and sown grasses. The
gardens and orchards cover 491 acres, the yield from
which we have no means of ascertaining.
A considerable portion of the district being better
adapted—from climate, the nature of the soil,
natural grasses, and proximity to the metropolitan
market —for fattening stock and dairying, these occu-
pations form the main industries of the landholders.
The stockholders number 678, owning the follow-
ing:—Horses, 3511; horned cattle, 35,356; sheep,
17,826 ; pigs, 3992 ; making the total number of live
stock in the district, 60,685 head.
The Berrima Police District abounds in minerals.
Iron of the richest quality and in almost unlimited
quantities is found in contiguity to vast coal-beds, and
within a few miles by railway of abundant limestone.
The peculiar and unusual richness of the ore, the dif-
ficulty of discovering a satisfactory flux, also the
scarcity and dearness of labour, have retarded as yet
any gratifying developement of this valuable product,
and prevented the attempted manufacture in the dis-
trict competing successfully with the imported article.
The Fitzroy Iron Mine, situated at Nattai, is the only
deposit that has been worked. A very large amount
of capital has been expended there, but from the diffi-
culties above enumerated, the iron-making did not
prove financially a success, and the works have been
temporarily closed. A large quantity of iron of very
superior quality was produced, but at a cost that left
no margin to the company, and did not encourage
the continuance of the manufacture. There is no
doubt, however, that when the initial difficulties are


surmounted, and the cost of smelting materially
reduced, the iron in this and the western district will
supply the immense present and prospective demand
in the colonies for railway and other jpurposes, and
form one of the most important industries of New
South Wales.
The whole of the Police District of Berrima, as far
as can at present be ascertained, is underlaid by coal
seams, except along its western and south-western
boundaries, where the outcrop of limestone and
granite occurs, and in which numerous indications of
the presence of copper has been 'found. The coal
exposed to view in gullies and ravines differs materi-
ally both in quality, thickness of seam, and number of
There are four distinct main seams, all lying
immediately beneath the Hawkesbury rock, as well as
several minor ones. The three upper are bituminous,
and the lower splint. The coal seams are nearer the
surface at the southern end of the district, which is
accounted for by the rise of the strata in that direction,
and considerable denudation having taken place.
They are there very thin, full of bands, and of inferior
quality. Occasionally pockets are found of consider-
able thickness, but of small area. The dip of the
coal-beds are from south-west to north-east. In
the greater part they have been considerably disturbed
by volcanic action, and no doubt burnt and destroyed
in the extensive trap dykes which often occur in their
vicinity. The most horizontal beds lie to the west
and south-west of the town of Berrima, where the
seams are found undisturbed and are the thickest and
of the best quality. The bands are also there farthest
apart, from floor to first band being four feet six
inches. The total thickness of seam in that locality is
24 feet, while at the southern outcrop it is only from
one to six feet, although containing nearly the whole
of the bands existing in the 24 feet seam. At the
northern end of the district great disturbances and
vast upheavals have taken place ; the seams frequently
lying at an angle of 45 degrees, and are almost pure


anthracite. Several pits and adits have been sunk
and driven to the west of Nattai, but unfortunately
with little success. The only coal that has hitherto
proved workable is to the west of Berrima. From the
Cataract Mine in that locality some thousands of tons
have been carted to the Fitzroy Iron Works for smelt-
ing purposes, but the haulage (by horse and bullock
traction) proved too costly. Coal from the Berrima
Coal Mine, recently opened, near the town, has been
tested for railway purposes, also for the manufacture
of gas, with very satisfactory results, and a company is
in course of formation for working the mine. This
coal will probably supply what is required to enable
the Fitzroy Iron Company to work their immense bed
of hematite ore in the vicinity, and the Government
will obtain for use of the Great Southern Railway to
Victoria coal at about half the price it at present
costs, besides a saving in haulage of 169 miles.
A new and most promising field of industry and
extensive manufacture has recently been initiated in
the district, and will soon be in full work. The
operations consist of kerosene shale and coal mining,
including the manufacture of kerosene oil. The mine
is situated in a wild sequestered valley, through which
winds a beautiful stream of water known as Joadja
Creek. The valley is almost surrounded by lofty
mountains, and the kerosene shale seam (2 feet thick)
is located near the summit of one of the highest, run-
ning completely through a large plateau on the top
and occupying an area of about 1500 acres. The
shale is very rich and yields from 100 to 150 gallons
of oil per ton. In the immediate vicinity of the mine
coal has been discovered, which is only at present
worked for local purposes. The position is about 12
miles from the Moss Vale Railway Station, and about
15 miles from the Mittagong Station. To the latter
a tramway from the mine is in course of formation.
This valuable property belongs to an influential com-
pany, who propose expending a capital of ;^50,000
in developing its resources; and as there is an


almost unlimited demand for the shale, which is ex-
ported largely for gas-making purposes, and a very
large and increasing consumption both ot shale and
oil in the colonies, the company will find they have
made a very profitable investment, and will secure a
substantial return irom their spirited enterprise.
About 400, including miners, mechanics, and other
workmen, with their families, obtain support from the
company.
A large factory for the manufacture of oat, corn,
and wheat meal has been for some time in operation
at Burrawang. This is a most promising industry.
The articles produced are equal, if not superior, to
the imported, and as the demand for them is rapidly
increasing, they will eventually entirely stop all fur-
ther shipments of similar goods from the neighbour-
ing colonies.
The other manufactories are not numerous, and
with one or two exceptions are very limited in their
operations. They include boot and shoe, agricultural
implements, coach and waggon, saddle and harness
manufactories, steam saw mills, tanneries, &c.
The general surface of the Police District of Ber-
rima is about 2000 feet above the sea level, and of an
undulating nature. The geological formation is prin-
cipally sandstone, overlaid in considerable patches
with clay slate, forming with numerous outcrops of
Basaltic rock (trap dykes) many of those delightful
rounded eminences and picturesque sloping meadows
to be seen at Sutton Forest, Bong Bong, and Mitta-
gong, rendering these portions of the district so
attractive to visitors. As Sanatoriums, these hilly,
beautiful localities are yearly becoming more popular;
already the heights are dotted here and there with
handsome, copiously shaded villas, in which the weary
business man, in a delightfully bracing climate, can
renew his jaded health, can secure serene quietude,
repose without care, surrounded by hill and dale
clothed with luxuriant verdure, commanding views of


rare loveliness, combining all the most beautiful
features of English and Colonial scenery. In con-
nection with the scenery of the district may be men-
tioned several important waterfalls j the principal are
the Fitzroy, Belmore, Cranky, and Cataract Falls.
The Fitzroy are the most interesting. They are
situated about 12 miles east of Moss Vale Railway
Station, and are second to none in the colony for the
wild grandeur of the surrounding scenery, or for depth
of fall ; the latter, according to the government map,
being 680 feet over a sheer precipice. The ravine
below is upwards of 2000 feet lower than the surround-
ing country, with an entirely different climate and
temperature, and conspicuously distinct flora. On
looking down the valley, standing at the brink of the
precipice, the view is startling and grand in the
extreme. On either side of the immense gorge are
bold imposing cliffs hundreds of feet in height, clothed
here and there with clumps of ferns and huge trees —■
masses of greenery. These majestic cliffs form head-
lands and clear outlines against the dark blue distant
background. At their base are obtained glimpses of
green glades bordered by palms and ferns, cedar, and
other semi-tropical trees, and through which the wild
Cataract stream winds its tortuous course for many
miles, the whole forming an impressive picture of
strange beauty and unique sublime grandeur. Some
of the other falls are equally attractive, though not so
accessible to visitors, except perhaps the Cataract Fall
near the town of Berrima. Though only 80 feet in
depth it is in the midst of bold rugged scenery, and
possesses interest of exposing to view one
of the finest coal seams in the district. A trap dyke
passes through this seam and the Hawkesbury Rock
overlying.
Although there are considerable areas of barren
waste in this large district it contains nevertheless
more than the usual average proportion of the richest
agricultural and grazing land, including in its area the
celebrated Wingecarribbee lands; also the famed rich


lands in the parishes of Yarrawa, Burrawang, Yarrunga,
Kangaloon, Bong Bong, and Sutton Forest
There are extensive tracts of timber country in the
district, which give employment to a numerous band
of workers. The woods for building purposes are
noted in the colony. They consist principally of
Box; Red, White, and Brown Stringy Bark; Blue,
Red, White, and Spotted Gum ; Forest and Swamp
Oak ; Red and White Water Gum. Among the more
ornamental and cabinet woods are Cedar, Sassafras,
Sally, Beech, Kurrajong, Woollybut, Peppermint,
Turpentine, Honeysuckle, Bloodwood, Beefwood, &c.
Among the other building materials which are
abundant are immense quarries of the finest freestone
and whinstone, or basalt; ranges of limestone, fire
and ordinary brick clay, &c.
There are deposits of alum and sulphate of mag-
nesia in several localities.
The general elevation of the district above the
sea level ensures a cool bracing temperature during
the greater part of the year. The summer heats are
rarely severe, the thermometer during the night in
that season reading on an average fully ten degrees
lower than in Sydney. The house musquito is un-
known. English fruits, including cherries, gooseberries,
raspberries, currants, blackberries, flourish luxuriantly;
also walnuts, chesnuts, filberts, &c.
The sportsman will find in the district a wide field
for indulging his proclivity. Among the marsupials,
the hunting and shooting of which afford fine sport,
are the large grey forester kangaroo, the paddy melon,
black and grey brush, and rock wallaby, the bandicoot,
the opossum, &c. There are also in the season
abundance of wonga wonga, bronzewing, and flock
pigeons, ducks, snipe, quail, brown dove, brush
turkey, pheasant (the lyre bird), teale, widgeon, swans,
plover, curlew, landrail, platypus, &c.
The population are, as a rule, a prosperous, well-
conducted, law-abiding community, mostly freeholders,
the smaller holders increasing the income derivable


from their farms by laboring for others. A few small
towns, of no great importance at present, are in the
district. The inhabitants being scattered over a very
large area, the greatest requirements are centres of
population, in whieh the social virtues could be more
cultivated; libraries, lecture and assembly rooms
established, and the general intellectual tone of the
people improved. Schools and Churches abound
wherever needed, and are well supported and attended.
Centrically situated, and within easy distance by
rail or road from the Metropolitan Port, enjoying a
beautiful climate, having a large area of well-watered
agricultural and grazing land, and forests of valuable
timber, also unlimited coal, iron, and other minerals,
this portion of the colony has within its boundaries
immense resources, and possesses in an eminent degree
extraordinary advantages. It requires but additional
population, with increased capital, combined with
enterprise, to make it the richest and most prosperous
district in New South Wales.
W. Me Court, Printer, Scrutineer Office Moss Yale.
10


4.
i'1^


