

Anniversary of the Jutland Battle
STATEMENT
OF THE
NAVAL SITUATION
OFFICIAL
ISSUED BY THE NAVY LEAGUE, LONDON
PUBLISHED BY THE NAVY LEAGUE
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH
Price 6d.
ADELAIDE: G. HASSELL & SON
1917


17
Lgue will
BER 19,
the War
cers and
cers and
ng Aus-
obtained
J. EDWIN THOMAS,
Cavendish Chambers, Grenfell Street,
President.
H. P. MOORE,
South Australian Coy., North Terrace,
Hon. Treasurer.
G. L. S. TYLER,
Davenport Chambers, Currie Street,
Secretary.


STATEMENT
OF THE
NAVAL SITUATION
'Y'HE following notes on the naval situation are circu-
lated by the Navy League for the information of
the members of its Overseas Branches:
The first anniversary of the battle of Jutland seems
an appropriate occasion for a brief survey of the naval
position as it stands to-day, twelve months after the
tremendous —and as subsequent events have proved—
decisive battle. When the battered remnants of Admiral
Scheer’s fleet returned to Wilhelmshaven, the crews were
lined up to hear a flamboyant oration by the Kaiser, who
assured them that they had forever shattered the legend
of British naval supremacy. After this Imperial gasco-
nade the onlookers of the neutral world naturally expected
to see the German Fleet cruising about in the North
Sea, rolling up the British patrols who had hitherto iso-
lated Germany from the sea, and convoying into German
ports many argosies laden with the precious foodstuffs and
raw material of which she stood in such dire need. But
all such anticipations proved chimerical. Month after
month went by without witnessing any serious symptoms
of German naval activity. In the summer and autumn
of last year the High Sea Fleet on two occasions was
said to have been sighted in the North Sea, but its com-
manders showed no inclination to fight, and made off at
top speed as soon our scouts appeared on the scene.
Apart from these futile excursions, the enemy’s Fleet
does not appear to have stirred from its ports.


There have been some destroyer raids against
undefended towns on our south-east coast, but the Ger-
man battleships and battle cruisers have kept discreetly
at home, and for all the influence they have had on the
war during the past twelve months they might as well
have been at the bottom of the sea. That has been the
result of our victory at Jutland, a victory which historians
will rank but little below Trafalgar in decisiveness.
Other great naval actions may be fought before the war
is over. In a last despairing attempt to stave off the day
of retribution the Kaiser may order his fleet to sacrifice
itself, but even in Germany there is no enthusiasm at the
prospect. So far as action at sea is concerned, the Ger-
man game is up, and none know it better than the
Kaiser and his fellow-gamblers.
The Admiralty Reorganization.
Since the battle of Jutland a number of important
changes have occurred in our naval administration. Sir
Edward Carson has succeeded Mr. Balfour as First Lord
of the Admiralty, while the victor of Jutland, Admiral
Sir John Jellicoe is First Sea Lord. The reconstruction
of the Board, which took place a few weeks ago, has had
the effect of concentrating the direction of the Fleet in
the hands of naval officers, all of whom have had pro-
longed experience afloat during the war. At the same
time it relieves them from many onerous and distracting
departmental duties which, indispensable as they are to
the general efficiency of the Fleet, often call for business
acumen and knowledge of industrial conditions rather
than for the peculiar attributes of the naval officer. In
short, the sailors are left free to devote all their time to
plans for crippling the enemy, while they have the
assurance that everything possible is being done to keep
the Navy fully supplied with men, ships, guns, shells,
torpedoes, mines, and every other human and material
resource. This vitally important task has been under-
taken by Vice-Admiral Sir Eric Geddes, whose work
with the Army has stamped him as a most talented


organizer and a man who invariably “delivers the goods”.
Both in the strategical and administrative spheres the
Admiralty is now organized on a thoroughly efficient
basis, and the country, knowing the Navy to be in such
good hands, can await with confidence whatever the future
may bring.
The Grand Fleet.
At the Battle of Jutland the Grand Fleet was stronger
by far than the whole German Navy, though unfortu-
nately the runaway tactics of the Germans prevented
a close engagement in which our superior numbers would
probably have told with annihilating effect. Since that
battle the Fleet has been greatly increased and it is now
more powerful than ever. It lost no battleships at Jut-
lang, whereas the Huns lost three at the least, and
doubtless several more. We were, it is true, deprived
of three battle cruisers, but according to statements by
Lord Beresford and others our Fleet has been reinforced
in this type by several mighty ships of a new class with
incredible speed and tremendous gun-power. In other
types as well there has been a large increase. Under
stress of the national emergency the shipyards have per-
formed what will seem to be miracles when the whole
truth can be revealed. But it is after all men that fight,
not ships, and it is in our fighting seamen that we place
our highest confidence of victory.
Our Commanders Afloat.
In supreme command of the Grand Fleet we have
Admiral Sir David Beatty, an officer whose deeds have
already become household words, and in whom we
recognize that unique blend of audacious courage, pene-
trating intellect, and high scientific attainments which
has been characteristic of our great naval captains of
the past. The Battle Cruiser Fleet, which won such
glorious laurels at Jutland, is now commanded by
Vice-Admiral Sir William Pakenham, a splendid seaman
of the modern school with unrivalled experience in the


handling of this type of ship. Every other squadron,
both heavy and light, is commanded by an officer of
whole war experience. In some quarters there is still an
impression that the Grand Fleet spends most of the time
at its bases in the northern mists. This is quite wrong.
The Fleet makes periodical sweeps through the North
Sea, and is not deterred by fear of submarines and mines
from frequently penetrating right up and into “the wet
triangle”. But the Germans steadily resist these pressing
invitations. Since Jutland they have had no stomach for
open and above-board fighting. And perhaps they are wise.
The men of the Grand Fleet do not boast. But they are
eager to finish the job which German discretion com-
pelled them to leave half-done at Jutland. It rests with
the Kaiser to name “the Day”.
The Patrol Service.
The most pungent commentary on the German claim
to victory at Jutland was the fact that within a fortnight
of that battle a whole fleet of British merchantmen which
previously had been imprisoned in Scandinavian ports
left their shelter, crossed the North Sea, and arrived
safely in England without the least molestation from the
enemy. Some of these ships came from the Baltic,
which the Berlin press declares to be a German lake!
In truth, for weeks after the battle the German naval
system seems to have been utterly demoralized —a curious
result of victory!
On the other hand, our blockade line has never been
drawn so tightly as within the last year. At very rare
intervals some German raider, elaborately disguised as
a neutral, contrives to wriggle through into the Atlantic,
but there is reason to believe that for every one that
succeeds, three are detected, driven back, or sunk.
Germany is isolated from the oversea world as completely
as if a concrete wall girdled her coasts. At all seasons
and in all weathers our patrolling cruisers keep watch
and ward. Never for an instant is their grip relaxed,
and it is that grip which is slowly but surely strangling


the Hun. We hear very little of their work, but its
effect may be traced in the food riots, labour troubles,
and general domestic unrest which have been a feature
of the last few months in Germany. There have been
many blockades, but never one so complete and so effective
as that which our cruisers are enforcing against Germany
to-day.
The Naval Entente.
Meanwhile she is making a superhuman effort to wear
us down by ruthless submarine piracy. Hundreds of
U-boats are constantly at sea, and the German yards
have been building little else for more than a year. The
“big push” in piracy began last February. At first
it resulted in heavy shipping losses. Then the counter-
attack began, and for several weeks now our losses have
been less than half the previous average. This is a fact
of enormous significance in view of the hopes which
Germany reposed in the new submarine effort. It was
officially stated to be “the only means of ensuring a speedy
and certain victory”. Well, we can see now that it has
broken down, and it will not be long before the wretched
German people find that they have been duped again.
The remarkable success of our anti-submarine campaign
is due in great measure to the co-operation of our Allies.
We are indebted to the exponents of “frightfulness” for
the intervention of the United States, which more than
balances the shipping losses we have already had or are
likely to incur. The American flag is now flying in our
waters on a flotilla of powerful destroyers, and more are
to come. Japan also is strongly represented among the
anti-submarine forces, and from Port Said to the North
of Scotland some of the best ships of five navies are
fighting the pirates. History records no precedent of
this wonderful spectacle. The seamen of Britain, France,
America, Italy, and Japan are working and fighting side
by side against a common foe and to a common end —the
true freedom of the sea. And this vast accumulation of
naval power is wielded by men who know their cause to


be just. Let us continually bear in mind these inspiring
facts, and doubts and apprehensions will vanish.
The Mine-Sweepers.
Germany’s submarines no longer depend entirely on
the torpedo to accomplish their deadly purpose. Many,
if not most of them, now carry a cargo of mines, which
they are sowing by the thousand, not only in the narrow
home seas, but far out on the ocean shipping routes.
This new form of devilry is, however, being met and
overcome by our indomitable mine-sweepers, the bravest
of the brave. In the present war naval service of any
description calls for courage of a high order; but few of the
duties which our seamen have to perform are so fraught
with constant and imminent peril as this endless quest
for “the devil’s eggs”. The men in the mine-sweepers
are literally playing with death from the time they leave
port to the time they return. They go out in their little
trawlers, through waters teeming with these infernal
engines and make their catch with the same imper-
turbable coolness they would display if they were out after
herrings instead of the deadly mines. It is largely owing
to the mine-sweeping service that our shipping losses are
daily becoming less. The service has been much
strengthened of late, and is now organized on a thoroughly
efficient system which is proving quite equal to the addi-
tional strain thrown upon it by the enemy’s lavish use of
submarine mine-layers.
Our Submarines.
For obvious reasons little can be said of the war ser-
vices of our submarine flotilla. It is known that we had
many fine boats in commission on the outbreak of war,
and since then we have built many others of a more
efficient type. The nature of their work and how they
perform it cannot yet be revealed, but this much may be
said: Our submarines are performing duties of the very
highest importance in a manner that leaves no doubt as
to their all-round superiority over the German boats. The


enemy’s ports are kept under continuous surveillance, and
one reason why his big ships are so reluctant to come out
is the presence of our submarines. Targets are few and
far between, but on those rare occasions when they get
a chance our underwater boats are never found wanting.
Since last summer they have torpedoed three big German
dreadnoughts, to say nothing of lesser craft. They are at
work in many seas, and they go about their business
with none of the bombastic advertisement which the
enemy’s U-boats enjoy. When in due course the veil is
lifted, the public at large will be better able to appreciate
the superb achievements of our submarine flotilla.
How We Stand.
Since Jutland the German flag has disappeared from
the face of the waters. Her fleet lies idly at its anchors
unable to strike a blow or take any useful part in the
war. It has been the most monumental fiasco in history.
The world’s second greatest Naval Power has now
become a common pirate, against whom the forces of
civilization are arrayed in irresistible strength. With the
backbone of the submarine campaign already broken,
Germany’s only remaining card has been trumped. The
Battle of Jutland, indecisive as it seemed, was in reality
the turning point of the whole war, for the tide has ever
since flowed steadily in our favour. The cause of the
Allies is assured of victory, if only because, in a war of
such world-wide dimensions as this, success in the long
run must inevitably fall to the side which controls the
highways of the world. It is for this reason that we
attch so much significance tolthe great sea-fight of a year
ago, which set the seal to the naval supremacy of the
Allies, and swept away the Huns’ last chance of victory.
Our Sea Power is still the faithful guardian of our
liberties, and every patriotic subject of the King can look
to the Fleet with the fullness of confidence and hope.


PRINTED AT THE HOUSE OF
G. HASSELL & SON
CURRIE STREET, ADELAIDE


Reasons why Australians should
Join the Navy League
1. To learn the vital importance to Australia of the maintenance
of British Naval Supremacy, upon which depends Australian
trade and communication with the world; and also to learn
what the British Navy has done for Australia ever since 1770.
2. To combat the apathy with which many Australians regard all
naval matters by bringing the objects of the League under
their notice.
3. To encourage the teaching of Naval History in all schools —as
is done in New Zealand —in order to show the part which
the Navy has played in preserving the unity and upholding
the prestige of the Empire.
4. To cement the unity of the Empire and promote trade within
the Empire, and to encourage lads to join the Navy and
provide them with adequate training.
5. To resist all efforts to weaken National enthusiasm in order
to bring about a premature and ill-advised peace, and to
continue to exhort the Governments of the Empire that
NOTHING LESS than the destruction of German sea
power can secure the future peace of the world.
Membership
Fellows (ladies and gentlemen) - - £l 1/- annually.
Members (with publications post free), not less than 5/- annually.
Membership may be secured by applying to any one of the
undernoted, viz.:
J. Edwin Thomas (President), Cavendish Chambers,
Grenfell Street.
H. P. Moore (Hon. Treasurer), Gawler Chambers,
North Terrace.;
G. L. S. Tyler (Secretary), Davenport Chambers,
Currie Street.
Adelaide,
August, 1917.
