

STATEMENT
THE
GOLD COAST GOVERNMENT
ON THE
REPORT OF THE COMMISSION
OF ENQUIRY INTO THE HEALTH
NEEDS OF THE GOLD COAST
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTING DEPARTMENT
ACCRA, GOLD COAST
PRICE—TWO SHILLINGS


STATEMENT
THE
GOLD COAST GOVERNMENT
ON THE
REPORT OF THE COMMISSION
OF ENQUIRY INTO THE HEALTH
NEEDS OF THE GOLD COAST
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE GOVERNMENT PRINTING DEPARTMENT
ACCRA, GOLD COAST


STATEMENT BY THE GOLD COAST GOVERNMENT ON THE REPORT OF THE
COMMISSION OF ENQUIRY INTO THE HEALTH NEEDS OF THE GOLD COAST
After some months in office under the new constitution the Government decided that there was need
for a declaration of policy in detail on the development of the health services. It was considered that this
could best be done by calling on persons qualified for the task to conduct an examination of the present system
and projected plans and to submit their recommendations. Accordingly, the services were obtained of a
former Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Health in the United Kingdom, a serving principal medical
officer of that Ministry who is a member of the General Medical Council in the United Kingdom, a medical
officer with experience as a Director of Medical Services in the Sudan and as an adviser elsewhere in the tropics,
and a local lay member. These persons were appointed a Commission of Enquiry and began their work in
the Gold Coast on the 11th February, 1952 ; their report was completed on the 17th July, 1952.
2. The Government are deeply appreciative of the work of the Commission. The report analyses the
problems which have come to their notice and embodies recommendations which are realistic in relation to
the economic circumstances of the Gold Coast at the time of the enquiry and which, with but few exceptions,
are accepted by the Government as the basis of the policy on which the health services of the Gold Coast should
within the next few years be developed. The Commission point out (e.g. in paragraphs 114 and 122 of their
report) that their recommendations do not represent a final and rigid pattern and that in the changing circum-
stances of present development in all fields a further review should be undertaken in a few years’ time ; their
recommendations cover the immediate task which lies ahead and which, when translated into fact, will enable
a complete plan for a rational health organisation to be drawn up. The Government accept this view.
3. In particular the Government welcome the emphasis placed on the urgent need for expansion of
medical auxiliary services and on the development of preventive medicine, especially in the rural areas, by
the early and rapid extension of the medical field units which have been operating in the Northern Territories
and northern Ashanti. In regard to medical auxiliary services, it appears not to be generally appreciated
that until a far greater number of medical auxiliary staff is available, especially nurses the number of whom
is little more than two-thirds of the authorised establishment, it is useless and impracticable to consider any
increase in the number of hospitals beyond those already established and the few additional ones contemplated
in the Development Plan. Nurses, dispensers, laboratory assistants and other auxiliary staff are too few to
maintain an adequate service in these hospitals at present, and the primary consideration must be to increase
their numbers by suitable training facilities, so that a proper standard of attention may be established. As
regards the value of developing preventive medicine, it is an obvious truism that by raising standards of
sanitation and healthy living throughout the country and eliminating much of the endemic communicable
diseases and sickness, fewer people will be in need of curative medicine. Curative medicine is extremely costly
to the State and much of it would be unnecessary if effective preventive measures could be applied through
the agencies of the Central Government and the local authorities. The work of the medical field units consists
in survey, treatment and education by mobile teams, and their work would be supplemented by sanitary
measures undertaken by local authorities, by mass education teams suitably briefed and by other methods
set out in the recommendations contained in the Commission’s report, such as the provision of health centres
from which preventive as well as curative work can be organised.
4. The Government believe that the enthusiasm of the people of the Gold Coast can be enlisted to make
rapid progress in achieving higher standards in health throughout the country ; it is the duty of every citizen
to forward this aim by his personal endeavour in his own surroundings and by supporting measures to achieve
this aim which are adopted by the local authorities. Healthier living cannot be achieved by legislation and
coercion ; it requires a conscious endeavour and co-operation on the part of every one. As is stated in the
report, healthier living leads to greater happiness and greater productive capacity ; the rewards for the people
of the Gold Coast are rich if the task is willingly undertaken.
5. The Government accept the recommendations of the Commission in regard to the administrative
re-organisation required under present circumstances to ensure the maintenance and development of the
health services. A Ministry of Health, from which the subject of Labour will be separated, will be established,
absorbing the Medical Department and the health functions of the Central Government throughout the country.
The Permanent Secretary will be a lay administrator, and a Chief Medical Officer in the Ministry, of equal
rank and status with the Permanent Secretary and having direct access to the Minister, will take the place of
the Director of Medical Services. The head office of the Ministry will be staffed by other lay and professional
medical officers working in collaboration, and will be housed as soon as possible in a single building. Regional
medical officers will be stationed at Tamale, Kumasi and as soon as possible at Takoradi, and senior medical
officers will be stationed at Koforidua and Ho in due course, as the representatives of the Ministry of Health.
Regional matrons will be stationed at Kumasi and probably at Accra ; the exact location of this second officer
and any other Regional Matrons who may be required will be determined in the light of experience. The
Chief Medical Officer will be the medical adviser to all other Ministries needing professional medical advice.
6. The Government accept the recommendation that medical field units, central and district hospitals
and health centres should be under the control of the Central Government and that dressing stations and such
maternity homes as they are able to establish should be the responsibility of local authorities. The health
centres, of which it is proposed that there shall wdthin the next few years be between 40 and 50 situated at
suitable places throughout the country, arc intended to serve as the source from which enlightenment in
preventive health measures may be spread and to provide supervision of neighbouring local authority dressing
stations, in addition to providing limited curative facilities and serving as feeders to district hospitals. While
the control of health centres will for some years to come remain in the hands of the Central Government in
order that the health policy of the Government may be projected into the areas which they are designed to
serve, the Government will consider methods by which a local authority may make contributions towards the
capital or recurrent cost of a health centre whose establishment or extension would be in accordance with the
policy of Government, if a local authority wishes to do so and if the finances or building capacity of the Central
Government preclude such establishment or extension—subject to the over-riding condition of availability
of trained staff of the standard required by the Central Government.


7. The Government consider that sanitation is a proper responsibility of local authorities in
municipalities and elsewhere and that the Central Government should be relieved as soon as possible of such
commitments. The Central Government would provide advice and guidance to local authorities and would,
through various media of health education, promote among the people of the country a new outlook on the
necessity for improved standards of sanitation. It is accepted in principle that the councils of municipalities
should, in addition to other health functions, have responsibility for a school health service, maternity and
child welfare clinics and a health visitor service.
8. On the question whether the health functions conferred on a local authority should be permissive or
mandatory, the suggested formula will be kept in mind so that it may be applied if it is found to be necessary.
The practical aspect of the matter has not yet arisen ; the list of functions set out in paragraphs (36) to (48)
of section 58 of the Local Government Ordinance is intended to represent those which may in the future be
exercised by local authorities ; any important functions would in fact be included in the Instrument of a Council
as mandatory. The further suggestions that the Minister of Health should have the power to consent to health
proposals of, or to direct action by, local authorities and that a requirement of consultation between the
Minister of Health and the Minister of Local Government in such matters should be written into
formal instruments will be considered in the light of the development of local authorities ; local authorities
set up under the Local Government Ordinance this year have initially taken over existing functions, and the
extension of the functions of each individual local authority according to its capacity will follow. The Govern-
ment are aware of the anxiety already felt by a number of local authorities lest their commitments in education
and welfare exceed their capacity, and have no intention of forcing on them expenditure on health services
beyond their means.
9. The observations of the Commission regarding the need to avoid a two-tier system of local
government with double supervision and control are accepted and represent the intentions of Government.
10. It has been accepted in principle, both by the municipal councils and by the Central Government,
that the former should each employ its own Medical Officer of Health. These officers are scarce and, until a
municipal council has been able to recruit one, it will be necessary for the Central Government to second one
of its officers ; so far as possible his duties will be limited to those which concern the municipality and airports
or seaports as the case may be.
11. The whole question of the future relationship of the Central Government and the municipalities
is at present under review by the Adviser on Local Government who is also reviewing the basis of their financial
relationship. In these circumstances the Government reserve comment on the recommendation of the
Commission in regard to increased borrowing powers.
12. The Government accept the recommendation that the immediate and most urgent health needs
are as in the following order of priority, with the primary emphasis on preventive medicine :
{a) expansion of the medical held units ;
(i b) improvement of hospital facilities ;
(c) establishment of health centres at nodal points in a network which embraces hospital and
dressing stations ;
(d) increase in number of dressing stations.
13. The practical suggestions for expansion of the medical held units are pvima facie acceptable ; the
Government recognise the great value of the held units which have been operating in the north and the
suggestions in regard to organisation and staff will be carefully examined.
14. The Government accept the recommendation that it is not practicable to consider at the present
time the provision of new hospitals beyond the central and district hospitals already established and those
included in the Development Plan, but that this should be re-considered at the end of five years. As has been
pointed out in paragraph 3 above, severe limitations are imposed by the inadequate numbers of auxiliary
staff, especially nurses, and before additional hospitals can be contemplated a far greater output of trained
nurses and other auxiliary staff is necessary. Apart from these considerations, it is unlikely that the country
could afford for some years to come the capital cost of additional new hospitals ; indeed it is evident that
financial limitations and increased costs will impose a re-consideration of those included in the Development
Plan.
15. The recommendations in regard to the appointment of hospital management committees for the
group of hospitals in Accra, Kumasi and Sekondi-Takoradi are accepted and a start will be made as soon as
possible in the case of Accra.
16. Cubicles for one or two beds each for paying patients will be introduced progressively in all hospitals
as funds permit. As regards the dieting of patients in hospitals, medical advice has for many years been in
favour of the universal application of such a system ; it is in operation in twelve hospitals including all the
larger ones and it is purely due to financial considerations —the cost of food, equipment and additional staff—
that it has not yet been extended to every one. The Government propose to seek the approval of the Legis-
lature for the additional funds required to carry out this recommendation. The other observations of the
Commission in regard to hospital services, nurses hostels and ambulances are accepted.
17. The Government accept the principles stated by the Commission in regard to the establishment
and operation of health centres under the control of the Ministry of Health ; it may not be possible to build
more than ten in a yea T , but if the funds are provided an early start will be made, as the Government attach
much importance to the provision of these centres as a source of enlightenment in healthier and better ways
of living. The exact location of the health centres will be carefully examined in the light of all relevant factors ;
suitable designs are being prepared. The Government accept the essential requirement that the health centres
must be effectively supervised by regular and frequent visits of a medical officer and that they must be
adequately staffed by persons of integrity and character including the clinic superintendent in charge of each
health centre.


18. The observations of the Commission in regard to mobile medical clinics are accepted ; they are
not an effective substitute for static units, but as stated in the Commission’s report the same objections do
not apply to mobile dental clinics. The mobile maternity and child welfare clinics of the Red Cross Society
have served a very useful purpose, but as local authorities assume greater responsibilities in the provision of
dressing stations they will gradually be superseded.
19. The Government accept the recommendation that the provision and maintenance of dressing
stations, including the 18 which are at present the responsibility of Government, shall be the responsibility
of local authorities which may also provide maternity homes, ambulances and other facilities in addition to
their primary responsibility to their peoples in the field of sanitation and preventive medicine. The Govern-
ment consider that the facilities for training staff for local authority dressing stations are far from adequate
to meet present and future needs ; this will be further examined.
20. The recommendations in regard to the requisite staff of qualified medical officers are accepted but
an increase in establishment during the next five years from 122 to 150 will, in addition to the extra cost of
salaries, travelling, et cetera, impose a severe additional burden on the house-building programme. The
approval of the Legislature will be sought in due course for an increase in the establishment, but there should
be no delay in providing the necessary accommodation in advaxrce of the arrival of the additional staff.
21. The recommendations for development of pathological services are accepted and will be put into
effect when the material facilities can be provided.
22. The proposals for a West African Council for Medical Research have been accepted by the
Government. It is agreed that research by individual officers should be given every encouragement and that
the Medical Research Institute should as soon as possible resume its original function.
23. The Government accept the recommendations of the Commission in regard to a school health
service as being the most realistic approach to a long-felt need ; in the first instance discussions will be held
with the councils of the four municipalities to ensure that firm foundations are laid for a service that will be of
continuing and lasting benefit, as a responsibility of the councils. The development of a school health service,
which should include dental care, will be integrated with the active propagation of health education. The
Government appreciate that the staffing difficulties will constitute a problem which must be faced.
24. The Government attach much importance to the stimulation of health education through all
suitable media and particularly on the part of health officers such as health visitors, midwives, sanitary
inspectors and others. It is hoped that an appointment will shortly be made of a specialist in health problems
and particularly in health education. Plans will be laid in conjunction with the Ministry of Education and
Social Welfare for carrying this education not only to the towns but also to remote rural areas.
25. The Government will proceed with the internal re-organisation of the Stores Branch on lines
endorsed by the Commission ; it is confidently expected that this will lead to a radical improvement in supply
and supervision and the eliminating of undue waste.
26. The Government propose to introduce at the next session of the Legislative Assembly a Bill to
provide for the registration and inspection of nursing homes on the lines suggested.
27. The Government accept the recommendation of the Commission that a Medical and Dental Board
of the Gold Coast should be established which should have responsibility for registration, for issue of licences
and for disciplinary purposes. Appropriate amending legislation will be prepared for introduction into the
Legislative Assembly as soon as practicable.
28. The Government accept the view that it is in the best interests of the Gold Coast that, until a medical
school is established locally as part of the University College, medical practitioners in the Gold Coast should
by preference and so far as possible have had their medical education and training in the United Kingdom or
at Grade A medical schools in the United States of America. This view is based primarily on ethics and
principles and the maintenance of standards of practice and conduct. As the Commission point out, the Gold
Coast medical service (both Government and private) has been built up on the system taught and practised
in English-speaking countries and, other things apart, it is obviously preferable that a student should acquire
his learning in a language that is familiar. Every endeavour will be made to find places at medical schools
in the United Kingdom for all students (whether Government scholars or private students) who are qualified
to enter and are likely to be successful. There are some who would wish to open the Gold Coast medical
register to all who have obtained qualifications whatever their origin. It is difficult to imagine any greater
disservice to the Gold Coast than such a suggestion. Of course, if doctors trained in the United Kingdom or
in the leading medical schools of the United States of America are not forthcoming in sufficient numbers, it
is recognised that doctors with foreign qualifications of a reputable standard should be licensed for a temporary
period. But if the doors were opened to permit practice in the Gold Coast by persons whose qualifications
were of an inadequate standard, the international reputation of the Gold Coast would be impaired and the
recruitment of well qualified doctors might cease altogether; this is a very real danger. The Government
propose therefore to maintain the system of two registers for medical practitioners and two for dentists, which
will be administered by the Medical and Dental Board, one for those with qualifications which are automatically
registrable, and one- for those with foreign qualifications which in the opinion of the Board are of sufficient
standard for admission to the register.
29. After most careful consideration the Government have decided to accept the recommendation of
the Commission that the Government should not at the present time establish a Medical Faculty of
the University College. The Government recognise the arguments adduced in regard to the clamant needs
of the country for better organised preventive and curative services, which must have priority over the provision
of an expensive medical school. The present financial circumstances substantially reinforce the arguments
of the Commission. As stated in the preceding paragraph the Government will make every endeavour to
find places at medical schools in the United Kingdom for all suitable students, and the Government consider
that in present circumstances this is the most realistic way of training medical practitioners for some time to
come. The Government will accordingly postpone for the next few years further consideration of the proposal
for a Medical Faculty for which the sum of £1,200,000 appears in the present Development Plan.


30. The recommended disposition of dentists is accepted and will be put into effect when scholars who
have qualified in dentistry return from the United Kingdom. The recommendation as regards dental surveys
is also accepted and will be put into effect when a suitable officer can be spared. A mobile dental clinic is
already being operated experimentally and its usefulness will be closely studied.
31. The Commission’s observations on the fundamental importance of a carefully thought out policy
for recruiting and training nurses, as being the greatest contributory factor to improvement of the health
services in the Gold Coast, are fully endorsed by the Government. It cannot be said too often that until the
number of nurses is adequate the extension of facilities in the curative field and to some extent in the preventive
field will be of little or no value. The Government recognised this by creating an establishment several years
ago of 851 Second Division Nurses as a target for immediate and foreseeable requirements ; on account of
difficulties in obtaining the requisite number of tutorial training staff and the requisite training facilities,
and on account of considerable wastage, it has never yet been possible to attain the full establishment of nurses
having the minimum standards of qualification. Until recently the number of Sister Tutors in the service
of the Government was less than half of the establishment, but the position has shown an improvement within
the last few months ; additional Tutors are an urgent necessity to ensure the training of nurses in modern
methods.
32. The Government accept the recommendation that training for both the S.R.N. and the Q.R.N.
qualification must continue in parallel for some years to come ; the higher educational standard of the S.R.N.
qualification is essential to those who would go on to the higher nursing posts, not only on the grounds of
providing a more advanced equipment and background but also on the grounds of preserving international
reciprocity. The ideal at which the Government will aim is that all nurses should be trained for the S.R.N.
qualification, but the output from secondary schools of those who wish to take up the profession of nursing is
still too small and, even with the construction of the new college at Kumasi in a few years’ time in conjunction
with the new hospital, the number of State Registered Nurses will be insufficient to meet all requirements.
An illustrated booklet has been prepared and is now in print which it is hoped will attract suitable girls with a
sense of vocation to take up the profession ; the terms of service have recently been improved, and the Govern-
ment intend to make other improvements, e.g. by the provision of hostels for female student and pupil nurses.
33. It is accepted that Pupil Nurses should not be “ gazetted ” (Student Nurses at the Nurses Training
College are not) ; appropriate arrangements will be made for payment of allowances under the Other Charges
sub-heads of the Estimates and deletion from the Personal Emoluments sub-head.
34. It is agreed that admission to the Q.R.N. register should as soon as possible be confined to those
who have received the normal training and who take the examination.
35. The Government accept the recommendation that men should be recruited in greater numbers
for training as nurses as soon as facilities can be made available ; this may require the recruitment of male
nursing tutors. Eventually almost all the nurses may be expected to be women, but it is clear that present
circumstances of immediate needs and of high wastage demand an increased intake of men compared with
recent years.
36. The recommendations made in regard to staffing of training hospitals, the number of pupils in
each and the recognition of additional training hospitals are being examined.
37. The Government are unable to accept the recommendation that Government should sponsor the
sending of girls from the Gold Coast for training in the United Kingdom as State Registered Nurses. On the
other hand, it is the Government’s policy to send girls at Government expense who would benefit from attending
post-registration courses, e.g. in ward administration or in nurse tutoring, which are not available locally.
Girls who go to the United Kingdom of their own volition for training as State Registered Nurses will be
accepted on their return on the same terms as are accorded to State Registered Nurses who have qualified
in the Gold Coast ; the qualification enjoys full reciprocity.
38. The recommendations for training Mental Nurses are accepted ; provision has been made in the
Estimates for the last two years for two tutors in mental nursing but it has been impossible to recruit any.
39. The recommendations made in regard to Nurses will receive the detailed consideration of the Nurses
Board.
40. Regulations concerning the training of Health Visitors have recently been published, and steps
will be taken to attract suitably qualified women to take up this most valuable and important form of social
service. The recommendations of the Commission are accepted.
41. The implications of the recommendation to establish a new class of partly trained midwives who
could practise outside scheduled areas are being examined ; there would appear to Ire considerable merit in
the proposal. As opportunity offers, the facilities for training qualified midwives and supervisors will be
extended and improved ; it is hoped at no distant date to achieve reciprocity with the Central Midwives Board
of England and Wales.
42. The observations of the Commission in regard to training of sanitary staff have been noted, and the
question whether there is justification for the introduction of a junior grade of Sanitary Inspector in the service
of the Central Government as distinct from local authorities is being re-examined.
43. The Government have taken note of the observations of the Commission on the short-comings
in the administration of the Pharmacy and Poisons Ordinance, and steps are being taken to rectify the situation.
A complete revision of the Pharmacy and Poisons Ordinance has been undertaken and will be considered
shortly by the Government; if approved, it will be introduced into the Assembly in the course of the next
session.


43
Health centres at say £12,000 each (say 10 per annum)
£520,000
4
Hostels for pupil nurses at £40,000 each (less £32,000 provided)
130,000
2
Regional medical stores at £30,000 each (Kumasi and Tamale)
60,000
Additional hospital beds, say
100,000
44. The Government accept the recommendations in regard to Clinic Superintendents who will have
charge of health centres and be responsible for supervision of neighbouring local authority dressing stations,
and w'ho will also be competent to undertake appointed duties in the out-patient departments of the larger
hospitals. The Government emphasise that these officers do not take the place of doctors who of course must
be qualified by the long and arduous training required of a medical student in a recognised faculty. The
Government propose to invite the Standing Finance Committee to give approval in detail to the qualifications,
etc., required, so that selection of candidates for training may be put in hand. The location of the permanent
training school is not yet finally decided.
45. As stated in paragraph 19, further examination will be given to the facilities available for training
staff for local authority dressing stations, among whom there is often considerable wastage.
46. The recommendations of the Commission in regard to water supples are generally acceptable but
their application in detail will require further examination.
47. The Government welcome the Commission’s endorsement of the policy of enlisting the aid
of missionary societies and other voluntary agencies in the provision of health facilities. Greater flexibility
is being introduced into the arrangements by which financial assistance from the Central Government will be
supervised for the safeguard of public funds.
48. Prima facie there is much to commend in the proposal that, since local authorities should assume
the relevant responsibilities, mining health areas could be abolished. There may however be areas being
developed for mining where there is no effective local authority ;in these circumstances it may be considered
desirable that such an area should be appointed a Labour Health Area under section 114 of the Labour
Ordinance, until such time as an effective local authority has been established. This question is being further
examined.
49. The Government accept the recommendation that a senior medical officer should be posted for
special duty in mining districts.
50. As regard hospital facilities for the general public in mining districts, the Government will propose
to the mining companies a resumption of negotiations on the lines suggested by the Commission.
51. While the Government recognise that unofficial disbursements in medical institutions are alleged
to exist on a considerable scale and that this may be a deterrent to some who are in need of medical attention,
the Government are not convinced that the abolition of all charges for treatment and maintenance in hospitals.
health centres, clinics and dressing stations run by or subsidised by the Government is justified in itself or
will achieve the object of eliminating such disbursements. Large numbers of patients are not charged at all
and there is no doubt room for improvement in the methods of assessing capacity of patients to pay. The
Government consider that the additional financial commitment if charges were abolished would be substantial,
and they feel that in present financial circumstances it would be dangerous to foster an attitude of mind in
the general public that social services can be provided free of charge whether or not the beneficiary has the
capacity to pay. It is considered that social services are better appreciated if they are paid for, and that the
proper remedy to any hardships which may at present arise is a better administration of the Hospital Fees
Regulations or their revision. In fact these regulations have not been revised since 1942 and the Government
consider that there is need for a review of their scale and incidence. The Government propose to have the
position examined in greater detail.
52. The Government accept the policy that private practice by Government medical officers should
be discontinued. The recommendations of the Commission in this regard will be examined in detail and the
policy will be given effect as soon as the full implications can be determined and the necessary arrangements
made.
53. The recent all-round increase in costs makes it difficult to assess what would be the actual financial
commitment of the Government in putting into effect the Commission’s recommendations. It is very roughly
estimated that the implementation of the recommendations of the Commission would require inter alia the
following new commitments on capital expenditure over the next five years :
Medical field units, equipment and buildings, say (in addition to present commit-
ments) ... ... ... ... ... ... ■■■ ••• ••• ••• 100,000
Pathological laboratory, radiology department and out-patients departments at
Korle Bu, say £200,000 (less £60,000 provided) 140,000
Total £1,050,000
As against these additional commitments there will be savings on certain items included in the Development
Plan which are not recommended by the Commission, the most notable of which is the sum of £1,200,000
allocated for the Medical Faculty of the University which it is not proposed to establish at the present time.
54. In the circumstances it is proposed not to ask for additional funds for putting into effect
the recommendations of the Commission in regard to capital expenditure but to ask that, within the total of
£5,340,000 provided in the Development Plan for health services, the existing plan should be reorientated to
enable those recommendations which have been made for new projects to be introduced as soon as practicable.
55. In regard to recurrent expenditure, the Commission have listed certain items of additional cost ;
the suggested total of £440,000 is being examined and it may be found to be on the low side. It is considered
that an annual sum of up to £500,000 additional recurrent expenditure within the next few years is a legitimate
charge on the revenue of the Gold Coast.
GPD/W4431/1.120/9-52
