

STATEMENT
RELATIVE TO
“COLE’S WHARF.”




STATEMENT
RELATIVE TO
“C OLE’S WHARF,”
The following statement is submitted to the favorable consideration of
the Government and Legislature, with a view of bringing under their
notice how Mr. Cole’s interests have suffered by the abolition of the
Wharfage rate, and also as a guide in apportioning the wharfage rates
proposed by the Honorable the Treasurer.
Cole’s Wharf, Bth February, 1864.
On the 4th August, 1841, G. W. Cole purchased at a Govern-
ment land sale, by public auction, a water-side frontage to the
River Yarra Yarra, being 132 feet by 332, at the rate of £lOOO
per acre. At that time the Act 3 William 4 No. 6 and 4 Vic-
toria No. 4 were in force, under which wharfage rates were levi-
able upon all goods landed at public wharves. The land was
purchased at this high price with the view of converting it into
a Sufferance Wharf. At that time there were no such wharves in
Melbourne. All the accommodation given to the public in the
shape of a wharf was a piling of about 150 feet in length, on the
bank of the River Yarra facing William-street. The whole bank
of the river went by the name of the Queen’s Wharf, but this small
part only was available for wharfage purposes, the remainder of
the bank was overgrown with tea-scrub, and was at high tides
covered with water.
The formation of an additional wharf by private enterprise was
then looked upon as a very great boon by the public, and Mr.
Cole was induced to construct the wharf that now goes by his
name, upon being granted a “sufferance” for so doing under the
w MSs/f 8455
16-S-T7


authority of the Act above-mentioned, and which sufferance
enabled him to receive to his own use the wharfage rates specified
in Schedule Aof the second-mentioned Act. There was a clause
in the grant from the Crown authorising the Crown to resume
possession on certain conditions, which are still attached to the
occupation of the ground under the grant in question.
The sufferance granted contained certain very stringent condi-
tions, one of which was the erection of a wall nine feet in height
all round the allotment; all of these conditions Mr. Cole com-
plied with, and in so doing incurred a very heavy outlay. For
some time he received the wharfage dues, and they proved to him
a considerable source of income.
In the year 1843 an Act was passed, 7 Victoria Mo 12, which
materially injured Mr. Cole’s property. By the 14th clause the
owners of private sufferance wharves were required to pay over
to the Government one-third of the rates chargeable on goods
landed at the public wharves. This Act was passed in New South
Wales, but Port Phillip being then a district attached to it, it was
included in its provisions. The privileges of the owners of suf-
ferance wharves were still further affected by a subsequent Act,
being 8 Victoria No. 16.
Against this Act Mr. Cole protested by letter, which is
appended hereto, pointing out the injury inflicted upon him by
the withdrawal of privileges, on the security of which he had
invested his capital in a work of great public benefit, but his
protest was of no avail.
The advantages attaching to the possession of sufferance
wharves were not further interfered with until the year 1852,
when Victoria being constituted a separate colony, it legislated
independently of New South Wales. Up to the time of the
separation of the two colonies all the wharfage rates received for
the use of public wharves went to the New South Wales Govern-
ment, and no portion of those rates was applied by that Govern-
ment to the improvement of the wharf in Melbourne. The wharf,
however, after separation, had very little public money expended
upon it. Cole’s Wharf and .Raleigh’s Wharf were kept in good
repair at the expense of their proprietors, and were generally
resorted to, while the Queen’s Wharf was left very much to take
care of itself.
In the year 1852 a measure was passed by the Victorian
Government for abolishing wharfage rates altogether. The
principle of freeing the shipping and merchandise of the port
from charges and imposts of every description was propounded,
and a sufficient majority of the then very limited number
of persons forming the Colonial Legislature carried the
measure, t though not without remonstrances and op-
position, Several persons voted for the abolition of the


rate, not because they believed wharfage rates to be objectionable,
but because no public money was expended upon the Queen’s
Wharf, and the public really received no value for their money.
The goods were at this time thrown upon the river bank, the
so-called Queen’s Wharf, without being protected in any way, or
receiving any wharf accommodation, and were often totally
destroyed by or lost in the mud in which they were deposited.
Mr. Strachan, a member of the present Legislative Council, was
then a member of the Legislature, and spoke and voted against
the above-mentioned Bill. A copy of the report of his speech on
the occasion is appended hereto.
Before the total abolition of wharfage rates, tbe wharfage rates
claimable upon goods landed on the Queen’s Wharf had been
leased yearly by auction, and Mr. Cole was the lessee when the
total abolition took place. He applied for and received compen-
sation for the loss of these rates during the unexpired time of the
lease when the total abolition came into operation.
The total abolition of wharfage rates Mr. Cole felt would inflict
a very serious injury upon his wharf property, and so strongly did
he feel this that he presented a petition to the Legislature, and
counsel w r as heard at the bar on his behalf against the abolition
of the wharfage rates, and asking for compensation in the event of
the Act being passed. The Bill was hurried through its several stages
with great rapidity, and the opportunity of substantiating a claim for
compensation was not given. Just about the time of the passing
the Bill the steamer City of Melbourne,” of which Mr. Cole was
the builder and owner, and which was the first screw-steamer built
in the colonies, was missing, and his mind was so deeply engrossed in
speculations as to her fate, and in inducing the Government to
institute a search for her, that his attention was withdrawn, for a
time, from the wharfage question. After the Bill was passed he
persuaded himself that a wharfage rate would soon be re-imposed,
and his claim for compensation fell into abeyance.
For some time after the abolition of wharfage rates the business
of this port was greatly in excess of the accommodation afforded
for its transaction, and the private wharves of Messrs. Cole and
Raleigh were availed of to the fullest extent of their capacity, for
landing and storing goods discharged from their lighters, at
very remunerative charges; a state of things which still further
contributed to the non-enforcement by Mr. Cole of a claim for
compensation. The Queen’s Wharf in the mean time was left
altogether uncared for, and was only resorted to from sheer
necessity, to the great injury of the trading community. At
length an outcry was raised against its condition, and so loud had
it become in the year 1854, that the Government of the day was
forced into the expenditure of a large amount of public money
in the construction of the present Australian Wharf and in


giving wharfage accommodation between “ Cole’s Wharf” and the
“Falls.” At this time there can be no whatever that a
wharfage rate might properly have been imposed, and would most
cheerfully have been paid, but “ responsible government ” did
not then exist, and a very large amount of public money was
expended in giving accommodation to a particular class who
would willingly have paid for it, but for which no charge whatever
was made.
At this time a Mr. Hughes proposed to do what Mr. Cole had
previously done, viz ; —to construct a wharf on the bank of the
Yarra, he being allowed to charge certain rates for wharfage. It
was thought by the Government so desirable to encourage Mr.
Hughes to construct a work precisely of a similar character to
that which Mr. Cole had constructed years before, that they were
prepared, as an inducement, to give Mr. Hughes the privilege
which had induced Mr. Cole to construct his wharf, but which
privilege, after he had constructed his wharf, the Legislature had
destroyed. Mr. Hughes was promised a lease at Is. per annum,
and constructed his wharf, when it appeared that, without a
special act, which the Legislature refused to pass, he could not be
allowed to charge wharfage rates, and the consequence was that
the lease was cancelled, and Mr. Hughes received compensation
to the amount of about £25,000 for being disappointed in
obtaining the privilege which Mr. Cole had been deprived of
without receiving any compensation whatever.
Since the construction of the Australian Wharf and the Wharf
between Cole’s Wharf and the Falls, at the public expense, and
the giving up these wharves to the shipping, to be used free of
expense, Cole’s Wharf has gradually fallen into disuse, and a
property that was at one time a source of income to the proprie-
tor, has now, by the expenditure of public money upon a free
Wharf, brought into direct competition with it, been rendered
almost valueless.
Mr. Cole has upon several occasions expressed his willingness
to sell to the Government his Wharf property, which the Govern-
ment could in pursuance of the terms of the Crown Grant
legally purchase, but the offer has not been entertained.
The two wharves, Cole’s and Raleigh’s, if in the hands
of the Government, would enable it to construct an unin-
terrupted line of wharf along the river bank from the Falls to the
Gas Works, and would no doubt be a great public advantage,
even though the wharfage rates were re-imposed. There are
great conveniences provided in Cole’s Wharf, which in the hands
of the Government could be made of considerable value in con-
nection with the public wharf, but which the proprietor can
turn to but little account, when struggling against the competi-
tion of free wharves on each side of him.


The foregoing facts show—
1. That Mr. Cole constructed a wharf for the public con-
venience at a time when such a convenience was urgently
required, and when the Government of the day was not prepared
to afford it.
2. That advantages were given to him by the Legislature,
under the Act before mentioned, that encouraged him in the
expenditure of his capital on the work in question, and that such
advantages were afterwards withdrawn, without any compensation
being afforded him, and notwithstanding his protests and remon-
strances.
3. That after he was deprived of these advantages, another
person was promised advantages of a like nature, in consideration
of his constructing a similar work, within a few feet of the site
of Mr. Cole’s Wharf, and that when it was found that the pro-
mise made to the individual could not be performed, a very large
compensation was granted to him.
4, That in addition to the withdrawal of the advantages from
Mr. Cole, the public money has been expended profusely in
affording gratuitously the accommodation provided by his private
capital under the inducements above referred to, and that thereby
the property in which this private capital has been expended has
been rendered almost valueless as a source of income.
Under the above circumstances, Mr. Cole submits that he is
justly entitled to be compensated for losses brought about by the
state of things above described, and that such compensation
should be made either by a sum of money in gross, or by the
purchase, on liberal terms, of the Wharf, which the action of the
Legislature has made almost valueless in the hands of a private
individual.


MR. STRACHAN’S SPEECH.
[August 12, 1852.]
Mr. Steachan said that, as he should have several amendments
to move in Committee, he would trouble the House with a few re-
marks on the second reading of the Bill. The Bill was framed with
the view of raising the revenue to meet the expenditure of the
colony, and to abolish all differential and intercolonial duties. So
far he approved of it, for he thought no such absurdity existed
as the foreign portion of our present Tariff; but the Bill would
also abolish the Wharfage, Police, Light, and Tonnage Dues, and
to this he was opposed, as he thought those items were fair
sources of revenue; as, however, the Bills for repealing those
dues would be so shortly before the House, he would refrain for
the present from remarks on that subject, further than to draw
the attention of the House to the fact that the Wharfage Dues
did not amount to more than seven-eighths per cent, on the
imports of the colony; he arrived at that result from a return
of the Wharfage paid at Geelong between the sth of January
and the sth of April; he could not support his calculation by any
return from Melbourne, as the Wharfs were in the hands of
Messrs. Cole and Raleigh, but the Imports of Geelong during
that period were <£40,972 4s. lid., and the Wharfage was
<£3B3 15s. 3d., or 17s. o|d. per cent. This duty could be easily
collected by one officer; and in Melbourne a collector had
informed him that he could collect the whole of the wharfage
dues, if not burdened with other duty. At Geelong it was
collected by the Customs, and he was not aware that any addi-
tion to the staff was required in consequence. The Imports at
Melbourne might be taken to be at least five times that of Gee-
long, and this duty would, this year therefore, yield a large
revenue. Why then abolish such a duty, and place a tax of 25
per cent, on those necessaries of life—“ Sugar, Tea and Coffee V ’
He calculated that the Wharfage Dues for the year 1853 would
be not less than <£17,000. The “Tonnage and Light Dues” did
not amount to more than five-eighths per cent, on the freights of
arriving ships. He would, in proof, quote two instances—one,
of a ship of 800 tons, on which those dues were £l6 13s. 4d.,
the gross freight being £3200 ; and the other, of a ship of 560
tons, on which they were £ll 13s. 4d., the gross freight being
£2OOO. While protection and lights were afforded in our harbors.


it would be an injustice to other interests to abolish this duty ;
and, in the face of a petition from the masters of vessels in Hob-
son’s Bay, praying for protection, which petition was now lying
at the Colonial Secretary’s office, and which stated the willing-
ness of masters to pay 3d. or even 6d. per ton if that protection
were afforded them, it would be a gross injustice to
oppose the duty. The collection of these dues was
equally simple with that of the Wharfage, and at
present rates they might be estimated to yield <£lo,ooo.
The tariff which he proposed should be adopted, as based on calcu-
lations made from a return of the imports from Ist October to
Ist June last, which being the period of only the commencement
of our gold discoveries, would not be taken as the standard for
1853. But taking the average of these eight months as the basis
of his calculation, adding 50 per cent, increase (and he thought
there was not much speculation in saying the increase would be
as much as that, if not double), he arrived at the following con-
clusion for the year 1853 : —ln that year there would be imported
256,610 gallons of brandy, which, at a duty of Bs., the rate he
should propose a gallon, would produce £102,644. On gin, rum,
hollands, cordials, and other spirits, he would impose a duty of
ss. per gallon, which, with an estimated import of 470,326
gallons, would yield <£117,581 10s.; of wine he calculated there
would be imported 395,473 gallons, which, at a rate of Is. would
give £19,773 13s. Tobacco, at 2s. per lb., on 724,959 lb., would
give £72,495 18s. The tonnage dues would be £1939; wharfage,
£17,000 ; and lighthouse dues, £3051. The sums would give a
total of nearly £335,000 as the revenue of the year 1853. He
had thus shown that a large revenue might be collected without
private rights being invaded, and without any increase in the
expense of collection. On the other hand, tea, coffee, and sugar
were articles which must be treated as bonded goods, which
would cause a large increase in expenditure. He thought it
would produce a most favorable impression on intending immi-
grants, if they knew that they were going to a country where no
articles of necessary consumption were taxed. A higher duty on
brandy than on other spirits he proposed for the sake of revenue
solely. If a differential duty could be tolerated at all, brandy
was the most legitimate article on which it could be imposed.
Brandy was a spirit which could not be imitated, and therefore
there was less danger of smuggling or illicit distillation of it
owing to any temptation offered by the higher duty. He could
not shut his eyes to the fact that, before the discovery of the
gold-fields, for one hogshead of brandy we imported three of rum,
and that now it would be more likely to be three of brandy to one
of rum. If an equal duty only were placed on brandy with that
on other spirits, the importation of rum would be stopped, for as


long as brandy would be brought in it would be consumed at any
price by the same persons who were the chief consumers of it at
present, and the colony would be thus rendered dependant on a
foreign country for its supply of spirits, and for a larger portion of
its revenue—if the importation of rum were stopped, they would
have to rely on brandy only ; and in the event of any disturbance
between Great Britain and foreign powers the supply would
cease. It was a strange argument, to refuse to put a high duty
on foreign spirits, and at the same time to put a tax on the sober
man’s beverage of 25 per cent. He submitted to the House that
the tariff he now proposed would be simple and less costly in the
collection than that proposed by the Government, with so large a
duty as that proposed on tea, coffee and sugar. Those articles
must become bonded goods, which would entail on the colony the
expense of a large additional staff of officers. And as to the question
of free trade, he believed his amendment would be more in
accordance with the spirit of that principle than would the
measure proposed by the Government.


[Copy.]
Melbourne, 30th November, 1844.
Sir. —Presuming your Honor will have to report on the Bill now
before the Legislative Council —to make further 'provisions for
payment of Wharfage Rates —l take the liberty of representing
to you the ruinous effects the reduction of the wharfage charges
at private wharves will have on my interests, having gone to great
expense in the high rate paid for the land, and in rendering it fit for
the use of the public. I respectfully suggest the rates should be
the same as at present, for the following reasons, viz.:—
Ist. The Circular Quay at Sydney, and public Wharf here
being more central, would necessarily cause vessels to go there in
preference to those at a distance.
2nd. That paying half of the wharfage on goods landed at
private wharves ought to be sufficient remuneration for which the
Queen gives an equivalent.
3rd. It makes the Government enter into competition with
private enterprise, which is at all times best to be avoided.
4th. The Government would not collect more at the public
wharves, as private individuals would be obliged to make bargains
to compete with the more favorable situations of those wharves;
thus rendering the remuneration to private individuals less for the
great outlay they have been at, without any adequate benefit to
the Crown.—l have the honor to be, &c., &c.,
G. W. COLE.
To His Honor
C. J. La Trobe, Esq.,
Superintendent.
MASON AND FIRTH, PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.


1508
02236119
