

Statutes
OF THE
MOST ANOTENT AND MOST NOBLE
Order of the Thistlc.
t:KViVh:h nr
11TS MAJESTY KING JAMES II OF ENGLAND
AND SEVENTH OK SCOTLAND,
VM«
AG AFX REVIVED h Y
HER MAJESTY QUEEN ANNE
c**
LONDON.
lIAKKISON cV srOX.S
/'• i </»/> «/• t hdiuortj to !!•■* SlujtM i.
I»*>.




CONTENTS.
r.viii;,
Warrant liy .Fames VII of Scot!ami for a Patent reviving the
Order ' 29 May, 1087 3
Latin text of the preceding 5
Statutes of James for regulating the Proceedings and Solemnities of the
Order 29 May, 1087 G
Form of the Oath taken I>y the Knights of the Order 8
Statute of James for the wearing of the Collar of the Order... 29 May, ICB7 9
Warrant hy James concerning the Uihand of the Order ... 31 Mil}', 1087 10
Warrant hy Queen Anne for a Patent reviving the Order 31 December, 1703 11
Latin text of the preceding 12
Statutes of Queen Anne for regulating the Proceedings and Solemnities of
the Order ... ... ... ... ... 31 Dceetnlicr, 1703 II
Form of the Oath taken !>y the Knights of the Order 1G
List of Fees jwid hv the Knights on their admission into the
Order ... ... ... ... ... 29 October, 1705 17
Additional Statutes of George I ... 17 1 ehruary, 1711-15 18
Additional Statutes of George I regulating the Ceremonial at the Chapters
of Lie* lion ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 < July lili 19
New List of Fees paid hy the Knights on their admission into the Order ... 21
Additional Statutes of George 1 revising the List of Fees paid hy the
Knights 11 February, 1720-21 22
Warrant h\- George 111, for the Apiiointmenl of I>r. John Jardinc as
Dean of the Order, and providing for a Fee to the Dean of the
Order ... ... ... ... ... 7 January, 1703 21


i-v«;k.
Statute of George IV creating four extra Knights on the oeeasion of his
Coronation ... ... ... ... ... 17 .Inly, 18-1 26
Warrant by George IV for permanently increasing the number of Knights
to sixteen .. ... ... ... ... ... ... 8 May, 1827 27
Statute of William IV fixing the Ceremonial to be observed at the Chapters
of the Order ... ... ... ... ... I t August, 182.3 27
Statute of Queen Victoria creating the Prince Consort an extra Knight of
the Order 17 January, 1842 2‘J
Statute of Queen Victoria creating the Duke of Edinburgh an extia Knight
of the Order ... ... ... ... ... 15 October, 1804 20
Statute of Queen Victoria for the abolition of the Oath 20 June, 1865 21
Statute of Queen Victoria creating the Prince of Wales an extra Knight of
the Order 24 May, 1867 22
Statute of Queen Victoria creating the Duke of Connaught an extra Knight
of the Order 24 May, 1860 23
Statute of Queen Victoria creating the Marquess of Lome an extra Knight
of the Order 21 March, 1871 21
Statute of Queen Victoria creating the Prince Leopold, the first Duke of
Albany, an extra Knight of the Order ... ... ...24 May, 1871 35
Statute of Queen Victoria creating the Duke of Cambridge an extra Knight
of the Order ... ... ... ... ... 17 Septemlter, 1881 36
Statute of Queen Victoria regulating the habit and insignia to lie worn by
the Dean of the Order ... ... ... ... ...10 July, I>B6 27
Statute of Queen Victoria creating the Duke of York an extra Knight of
the Order ... ... ... ... ... 5 July, 18'.*2 2'J
Statute of Edward VII creating the Duke of Koxburghe and the
Earl of Haddington as extra Knights (on the occasion of the
Coronation)... ... •• 8 August, PJO2 10
Statute of Edward VII alioli bing the Table of Fees and substituting a
Fee of X r >o ... ... 16 Mats h. 1605 II


ORDER OF THE THISTLE.
Warrant by KING JAMES THE SEVENTII of Scotland for a Patent Reviving
the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle.
James IR.
Sovereign Lord ordains a Letter Patent to lie made and past
1 " IK^ev t, *‘° Lircat Seal of His Ancient Kingdom of Scotland, making
mention that. Whereas His Majesty’s Loyal Predecessor, Achaius
King of Scots (of glorious memory) did Institute the Most Ancient
and Most Notde Order of the Thistle, consisting of the Sovereign and twelve
Knights Brethren, in allusion to our Blessed Saviour and His Twelve Apostles,
and that under the protection of our Blessed Lady and the holy Apostle,
Saint Andrew, Patron of Scotland, the said Order lieing instituted for defence
of the Christian Leligion, and in commemoration of a signal victory obtained
hv the foresaid Achaius, King of Scots, over Alhelstan, King of the Saxons,
after a bloody battle, in the time of which there appeared in the Heavens, a
White Cross, in form of that upon which the Apostle Saint Andrew suffered
martyrdom, by which apparition the Scots I icing encouraged, put their enemies
t'i flight, killing the said Alhelstan with most of his followers. And it lieing
most certain, by the general consent of ancient and modern historians, and by
several other authentic proofs, and documents, and records of that Kingdom,
that the said Most Ancient and Xohle Order of the Thistle continued in great
glory and splendoui for many hundreds of years, and that several Foreign
Prim es and Kings have liecn Knights of the said Order, and that the same was
ahvavs had in great resjiect and honour, in all places wherever Christian
Valour advanced the glory of the Cross, until the unfortunate lieliellion against
His Majesty's Loyal Great-grandmother Mary Queen of Scots (of most pious
and blessed memory), at which lime the splendour Imth of Church and
Monarchy fell together in eomtempt, and this Most Xohle Order, with all its
(ST'S*) A -


Ornaments, Rites and Ceremonies, was extinguished, some of the Brethren of
that Order laving the Ensigns thereof aside, out of a reliellious con tern |>t. of
their then Sovereign Lady, His Majesty’s said Royal Great-grandmot her, and
others of them being forced to fly into foreign countries for safety of their lives.
And Whereas the succeeding dismal disorders and reliellious, in the reigns of
His Majesty’s Royal Predecessors since that lime, have hindered and diverted
them from restoring the said Order to its ancient lustre, His Majesty has now
thought tit, as a mark of His Royal favour and esteem of that his ancient
Kingdom, and of the desire he hath to restore it to its ancient splendour and
reputation, considering the many and seasonable instances of duty and affection
it has shown to His Royal jarrson, both since His Accession to the Crown, and
in thi' lime of Ids greatest diliiculties, hath, as a lasting mark of His Royal
favour, and in remembrance of the nation’s duty and affection unto him, to till
succeeding ages, thought lit at this time to Revive the said Order, of winch
His Majesty is undoubted and rightful Sovereign; and doth hereby revive and
restore the same to its full lustre, glory and magnificence, its it heretofore was,
with such changes and additions as are already made, or shall hereafter be
declared by His Majesty; hereby giving to Twelve Knights, with His Majesty
the Sovereign, of which the Order aliove named is to consist in all lime coming,
all honours, dignities, titles, privileges, additions, and others, which either have
in time past In-longed to the Most Noble Order of the Thistle, or which
His Majesty shall declare to belong thereunto in time coming, as an evident
proof that no dutiful or faithful service done by bis jteoplc shall pass over
without suitable returns of bounty, honour, and favour from him. And
His Majesty ordains the said Letter Patent !■> 1h; past under the Great Seal
aforesaid ;»•/• -utltitin, without passing any other Register or Seal; in order
whereuiuo these presents shall In- to the Ilirectors of His Majesty’s Chancellory,
and their Deputies for writing the same, and to the Lord High Chancellor, for
causing the Great Sea! to be apjieuded thereunto, a sufficient Warrant.
Given at the Court at Windsor, the tlOth day of May 10.57, and of
His Majesty's reign the third year.
May it ci.eask Yon: Majesty,
The- main Your Majesty’s Warrant for a Letter Patent to lie made and
jstst under the Great Seal of Your Ancient Kingdom of Scotland
(for the causes aLive sjiecilied), Reviving and Restoring the Most Ancient and
Most Noble Order of the Thistle in manner above mentioned.
MELFORT.


The following Latin copy of the preceding Warrant is Printed by Nicolas
(Orders of Knighthood, Vol. III.), from the Register of the Great
Seal of Scotland, Ixxi, 128:-
LITERA PRO RESTITUTIONE NOBILSSMI ET ANTIQUISSIMI ORDINIS CARDUI.
ACORUS Dei gratia Scotia; Anglia; Francite et Hiliemia 1 Rex
CjSL&I IE Fideique Defensor Omnilms probis hominilms nostris presentos
jWjl pT) intelleeturis Quinn serenissinnis noster predecessor Scotorum Ilex
Acliaius memorial gloriosa- et sempiternal Ordinein Cardni Antiipnuu
ct longe Nobilissimuiu ex sunmio Principe et duodeeini Equilibus fratrilms
Constantem ad lieatissimi nostri Salvatoris et Apostolorum snoruin numcrum
allndens sub protectione beata; nostra 1 Dominae et Divi Andrea 1 Aposloli Scotia;
Patroni instituissct; idipio ad Christiana 1 religionis tutelam et in memorial!!
iusignis victoria ejusdem Scotorum Regis Acliaij adversus Athelstanum
Saxonum Regem post pradium cmenteni parte übi dum pugnaretur in Codis
ell’iilcit Crux alba decussata ad formani illius qua Sancti Andrea Aposloli
Martvrio est sacra : quo fausto poitenio animati Scoti, iiostes in fngam dederc
ipso Athelstano cum suis copiis ferine omnilms ca-sis. Quumque historieorum
omnium reeentium el antiquorum generali constat consensu et quam plurimis
aliis lestimoniis autlieuticis documentis cert is et publicis Regni nostri Scotia
Archivis pra-dictum Antiquum et Nobilissimuiu Cardni Ordinein per mulla
secula in summo splendore et gloria 'fuleisse, multosque principcs et Reges
cxteros ejusdem Ordinis equiles fuisse : euudemque in maximo honore et
a'stimatioiie übicunque Christiana virtus crucis gloriam promoveral lloruisse
usque quoad immanem illam adversus proaviam noslram sanctissima et
beatissima 1 memoria l serenissimam Mariam Scotorum Reginam Reladlionem.
£p euim tempoiv Ecclesia simul et Monarcliia contemplui iiabila jiessundata.-
sunt, et Xobilissimus hie Oiilo cum omnibus suis ornamentis ritibus et
ceremoniis penitus eral exlinctus ; aliis euim ejusdem Ordinis eqiiililms et
fratrilms ex contumaci domime sine serenissiime i«r.edicta- proavia- nostra-
pientissima 1 desj>eetu, ornamenta et insignia omnia luijus l Irdiuis rejicieul ilms, aliis
vein fuga in gemes exteras vita-el saluti sine eonsillere coaetis. El <]iimu nefaiia 1
eonfusioiies et coiispiratiolies seipientes sub ImjH-riis majorem iiostrorum Regiis
ex eo temjiore iis inqiedimeiito fuerunl vel i‘os ad alia diverleranl lie auliqui
illius Ordinis spleudorem resliluerent, eoiigruum nos nunc putamus tauquain
favoris et atfeetus nostri regii erga Regiium illud nostrum antiquum atipie etiam
desiilerii nostri idem ail prisliuum suum s](leudorum Resliluendi notam
illustiem. apprime lauqieiideiido mulla ilia et oppnluua otlicii et anmris gent is


illiiiH Indicia orga personam nostrani rogiani nsipio ijnoad Impcrium access! mus
ot in dilliciliniis nostris tciii]>i>rihus signitieala aspmm (implant) Indicamus
taininain Ilegii nostri favoris tesseram, oh nationis illius in Xus ullicia et
nniureni ]H*r omnia stccula cuinmeinorandnni hoe tempue jirtedietnni Cardni
Ordinem revivisei deheri el reslitulinn iri ejns Nos sn,aus indnhitalus et
legitimus Princops sitpremns noverilis igitur Xos l.'edintegrasse Rcnovasse et
Rest itaiisse sienti jier prosentes has I koras nostras patenles Rodinlegramns
Rest itnimns ot Renovamns onndoni Ordinem ad plenum stunn nitorem gloriam
et magnilieenliam pront hactenns nhtinnit cum ejusmodi mntationilms et
addil ionihus omnihus a iioliis faetis vel fae.iendis in jmsternm et. pnmmlgandis ;
Atipte per prosentes has lit eras palentes dniHlecim Eipiitilms Xohisenm Snpremn
I’rincipe ex unilms predietus Ordu omni tempiro fntnro const.,shit Danins et
Concedinnts in posternm nmnes In mores diguilates titnlus privilegia addil iones et
alia iju:»‘ vel lempirilms jam elapsis ad XnliilisMnm Cardni Ordinem jierlinehant
vel iiine inpusternm ad enndeni ]iertinere declarallimns, Hue ijnmpte doctt-
mentum illnstre esse vulnnnis Xos nulla ullicia et lidelia a I’ujmlo nostro jireslita
miuisteria pneteritnros ipiin eungniis mnniticenthc hunnris et, favuris nustri
testimoniis remuneratnros. Jn cujns I.’ei testimonium prasentihns Magnum
Sigi 11 uni nostrum appuidi mandavimns. A].ml mlam nustram do Windsorc
vigesimu nono die mensis Maij Anno Domini Millesinio se.xei-ntesiniu nctoge into
septimoet anno Regni nostri tertio.
S TATUTES AND ORDERS of the Most [?] and Most [?] of the [?]
[?] and [?] by His M[?] JAMES THE SEVENTH by the [?] of
[?] Scotland, England, F[?], and [?]
[?] of the [?] Most Noble Order, for the [?]
[?] and [?]
[?]
James *IR.
I* 1 '! We iliink lii In continue iht* .■ ncifisi minder uf
vjSt* Knights, i" "it- Twelve Rrethien with ( htrself, thu Sivereien ni the
'J AyS> said Must Xuhle Order, in nil time coining.
That the Hahits uf the Sovereign and llrctlncn he a Doublet and Trunk-
hose uf ;i cloth iif silver, Stockings uf jiearl-coluiired silk, with while leather
Slim's, Garters and Shoestrings of Mne and silver, the 1 recches and sleeves of


i lir Doublet decently garnished with silver and I due ribbands. A Surcoat of
purple velvet, lined with while taffeta, i»irt almut the middle with a purple
sword-belt edged with gold, and a Ruckle of gold, at which a sword with a
gilled Hill, whereof the Shell is to Iks in form of the Radge of the Order,
and the Pommel in the form of a Thistle, in a Scablsard of purple velvet; over
all which a Mantle or Rohe of green velvet, lined with white taffeta, with
Tassels of gold and green, the whole Rohe pnr*nnfc or powdered over with
Thistles of gold embroidered : upon the left shoulder of which, on a field of blue,
Saint Andrew the Apostle his Image, I tearing la-fore him the Cross of his
martyrdom of silver embroidery. About the shoulders is to be worn the Collar
of I lie Order, consist ing of Thistles and Sprigs 1 of Hue going lietwixl, at the
middle of which, before, is to hang the Saint Andrew of gold, enamelled with
his Gown green, and the Surcoat purple, liearing lieforc him the Cross of his
martyrdom enamelled while, or if of diamonds, consisting of the, number of
thirteen just : the Cross and Feet of Saint. Andrew, resting uiKin a ground of
green: the Collar to l>e tied to the shoulders of the Rolic with white Ribband
n ion their heads, on days of solemn Procession or Feasting, where, the
Sovereign himself is present, or has his Commissioner for t hat effect, the.y are
to wear at the times of permission a Cap of black velvet faced up with a border
of the same, a little divided lieforc, wide and loose in the crown, having a
large plume of white feathers, with a black, egret or heron's top in the middle
of it, the borders of the Cap adorned with jewels.
The Sovereign s Cap, for difference, to have two rows of diamonds cross
I lie crown thereof, in form of a royal crown. The Sovereign’s Holies (o fie of a
length proportionable to his Hoval Dignity, and the Radge on the shoulder to l>e
adorned with pearl, liesides what other distinction he shall think fit to appoint.
And We, having considered that it was the ancient custom for the Sovereign
and Knights P.ivthren, on their daily apparel, to wear the Jewels of (he Order
in chains of gold or precious stones, and that the use of Ribbands has been
b;..ugbt in since the Mo-i Noble Order of the Thistle was left off, and that
chains are not now in use, We have, therefore, thought fit to ap}ioint, the Jewel
>.t the said Order to In* worn at a purple-lilue Ribband, watered or tallied,
flic Jewel to hive mi the one side the Image of St. Andrew, with the cross of
hi' .a iriyrdom lieforc him, i namelled a> is above said, or enriched with precious
stones on t he cross and round alwuii ;on the back of which shall lie enamelled
a Thistle gold and green, the Mower reddish, with a motto written round i'.
Nkuo ME lUft'XE I.A' Ess|t. The ground upon which the Thistle is to be done
shall lie enamelled blue.


Upon the left. bretist of the eoat and cloak shall lie emluoiderod a Ibulge of
proportionable bigness, lieing a Saint Andrews Cross of silver embroidery, on
the middle of which a circle of gold, having the motto of the Order in letters of
blue, in the middle whereof a Thistle of gold njsm a field, blue.
The Order is to have a Great Seal in the custody of the Chancellor thereof,
having on the dexter side Saint Andrew’s Cross, and on the sinister the Arms
of Groat Britain, as they are carried by us in Scotland, enriched [sfc] with the
collar of the Order, with the Image of Saint Andrew hanging at it, with the
motto of the Order going round the Seal; on the other side, the Image of Saint
Andrew, bearing the cross before him, with a Glory round his head, written
round, “magnum sigillum kt xobimssimi guiunis caudui.”
The Secretary shall have a mantle of I due satin, lined with white, on the
left shoulder of which the Badge, a Saint Andrew's Cross, ujsm days id'
Solemnity ; his ordinary Badge is to Ik; hung in a chain of gold, I sting a Thistle
of gold and green ii|»on two pens cross saltier-way, with the motto round about,
and an Impel ial Crown upon the top.
The Lyon shall have Hoists and Badges upon the shoulder conform to the
Si-rotary ;in his hand his stall'of office, and about his neck his Badge, with the
Saint Andrew turned outward.
The Usher conform to the Secretary in all things, except his Badge, which
i> to be two Sprigs of Hue, ia form of Saint Andrew’s Cross, vert, upon a fund
white, upon which a Thistle of gold, and round the motto u)kiii which an
Imperial Crown, and in his hand the Baton of his Office.
Before any can lie admitted to the Most Noble Order of the Thistle In-
most lie a Knight-Bachelor.
Here follows the form of the Oath, to he taken by all such as shall U-
admitted into this Order as Brethren.
I', I shall fortify and defend the Christian Religion and Christ’s most
holv Kvangel to the utmost of my power.
'_ >r , I shall Is- loyal and true to my Sovereign Lord the King and the
Brethren of ibis < fide;.
o', I shall maintain the Honour and Dignity of the .Most Nohle Ordei of
the Thistle to my !»-st jniwer, if God let.
4\ I shall nevet bear treason about in my heart, against, mv lord tic-
Kiu.. but shall discover the suite to him ;
So defend me God and the Holy Church.


This Oath 1 icing taken hy the Elect Knights, Ik; for*! any whom the
Sovereign shall apjioint, they may actually wear the Badgesand other ornaments
for the first time ; and We icier it to three or more of the Knights first made to
draw the Forms, Olliecs, and Ranks of the Officers, their Fees, and all other
tidies that may any way concern the said Order, and hnmhly to oiler the same
to Our Royal consideration, to the end We may signify Our pleasure therein ,
and in regard that We have not as yet named a jierson to lie Chancellor of
the said Order, and that there is no Great Seal or Signet thereunto lielonging.
We do therefore ordain that Our Signet, now in the custody of Our Secretaries of
Slat*! for our ancient Kingdom of Scotland, shall serve for any Warrants or
Orders that Wo shall think tit to grant or emit, for the nominating any of the
Knights-llrethrcn or Officers, or any other thing relating to the said Order,
until it shall lie fully settled. The Royal Chajiel of Our I’alaee of Holyrood
House to Is! the chajiel of the Order in time coming; and the Su]ierior, or Dean
or Prior there, to lie recorders of our Orders, whose Badge and Ornaments shall
lie hereafter appointed.
Given under Our Royal Hand and Signet, at Onr Court of Windsor
the 29th day of May, 1657, ami of Our reign the third year.
By His Majesty’s Command,
MELFORT.
S TATUTE of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Th[?]
James IR.
is Staluted and Ordained hy the Kind’s Most Excellent Majesl>
Sovereign of the Most Ancient and Most Nohle Order of |he
> Ttiislle, tlial Ills Majesty and His Koval Successors Sovereigns
thereof, shall in all time coniine wear the said Order on the
Kihhand of the Order of the darter, or other ways in any manner His Majest*
shall think lit. That in honour to the Holy A|»islle Saint Andrew, Protector
of th<- Most Noble Order of the Thistle, His Majesty'hall weai the Collar ot


that Order on the day of the Feast of Saint Andrew, being the Thirtieth of
Sovomlter yearly; that the Knights Brethren shall wear their Collars on all
Collar days, wherever the Sovereign is, and within Scotland by obligation,
whether the Sovereign lie there or not; that the Collar days be the same
ordinary Collar days now observed by His Majesty; that there be a Secretary
nf the Order, to transmit the Sovereign’s Orders to the Knights Brethren, and
that, lie attend his Royal Person for that ©fleet.
Given under His Majesty’s Royal Hand and Signet, at the Court at
Windsor, the 29th day of May, 1687, and of His Majesty’s Reign
the third year.
By His Majesty’s Command,
MELFORT.
The [?] WARRANT [?] the Ribband, in which is to be [?] the
[?] of the Most [?] and Noble Order of the Th[?]
James IR.
is Onr will and pleasure that I lie Ribband, in which is to l«e hung
w Ihe Medal of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the
■yyj Thistle, Ik* of tlic Colour and Watering of the pattern hereunto
annexed, as well when the same shall lie carried by Us (the
sovereigni as it i* to 1»* daily by the Knights Brethren of the said Order.
Given under Our Royal Hand and Signet, at Our Court at Windsor,
the Mist day of May, 16K7, and of < hir Reign the third Year.
By Hi-- Majesty’s Command,
MELFORT.


WARRANT by QUEEN ANNE for a Potent Heaving and Restoring the Most
Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle.
Bnnc 1R.
al'it .Sovereign Lady ordains a Letter Patent to le made and p.u>t
under the Great .Seal of Her Majesty’s Ancient Kingdom of
Scotland, making mention that, Whereas Her Majesty’s Loyal
Predecessor, Admins King of Scots (of glorious memory) did
Institute the Most Ancient and Most Node Order of the Thistle, consisting of
the Sovereign ami Twelve Knights Brethren, for the defence of the Christian
Ileligion, and in commemoration of a signal victory obtained by him over
Alhelstan, King of the Saxons, in the time of which battle a White Cross
(in form of that upon which the Apostle Saint Andrew suffered) did appear in
the Heavens. Of which Most Ancient and Most Noble Order mention is
frequently made, not only by our own Records and History, but also by many
foreign writers, which are authentic documents of the honourable esteem
generally had of t his Most Noble Order. But by the continued wars and
intestine troubles after King James the First,* his death, and two long
successive minorities, the Splendour of the Crown was in many things, and by
several ways, clouded; and, amongst others, the notice due to this Noble
Institution, and which continued so till the third year of the Reign of Her
Majesty’s Royal Father King James the Seventh, who, in consideration of the
many instances of duty and affection shewn to His Royal Person by that
Ourf Ancient Kingdom, did revive and restore the said Most Noble
Order. And for restoration whereof Her Majesty, amongst many other
evidences of Her princely care of this Ancient Kingdom as well in its honour
as in other its concerns, and for raising the said Most Noble Order to its just
splendour and esteem, and in design thereby to move and instigate the present
and future generations to a nobler emulation in meriting such distinguishing
marks of Royal Favour, in imitation of their noble progenitors, has thought lit
at this lime to exercise Her undoubted Royal Right as Sovereign of the said
Most Noble Order, and, therefore, doth revive and restore the said Most Noble
Order to all its Honours, Dignities, Titles, and Privileges which formerly, or
• The Copy of the Statutes among the Thistle Paper? (ToL labelled “ Statutes, 1 ” Papier
So. 4) reads the “Fifth.”
t Hid, reads “ Her Majesty’s ” in place of “ Our.”


now, do belong thereto, with such other additions as Her Majesty 01 Her Royal
Successors Sovereigns of tilt* said Most Noble Order shall hereafter declare or
confer n|H»n them. Giving to Twelve Knights of which, with the Sovereign.
lj„. said Most Nolde Order did always and is hereafter to consist, and to their
Successors in the Order, all the Honours, Dignities, Titles, and Privileges in the
KUiiie lustre, glory, and magnificence which in any former time it did enjoy, or
which Her Majesty shall hereafter declare to Itelong thereunto. And Her
Majesty ordains the said Letter Patent to lie* passed under Her Great Seal of
that Her Ancient Kingdom />cr snllmu, without passing any other Seal or
Register, for doing whereof these Presents shall Is* full and sutlieient Warrant
|,olh to the Directors of Her Majesty's Chancellary and their deputies, for
writing the same, and to the Lord High Chancellor for causing apis-nd the
Great Seal thereunto.
Given at Our Court at St. James’s the 31st day of December 1703,
and of Our Reign the Second year.
May it i-lkase You it Majesty,
These contain Your Majesty’s Warrant for a Letter Patent to he made and
past /«/• milium under Your Majesty’s Great Seal of Your Ancient Kingdom
Scotland for Reviving and Restoring the Most Ancient and Most Nolde Ordei of
the Thistle in manner and for the causes above sj»ecilied.
CROMERTY.
The foll[?] the copy of the [?]ding Warrant is printed by Nicolas [?]
of Kinght[?] Vol. III., P. 27) from the [?] of the G[?] of
Scotland, [?] 43.
pmrfNNA. Dei Gratia, Magme Britannia-, Francia-, et Hibernia- Retina,
AA \qs Kidehjuc Itefensor, oniniliiis probis liomin jlxis ail ijuos presenles
litene jiervenerinl. l^iianrl*h}iii<lt*ni Serenissimus nosier progenitor
Scotorum Rex Achaius incliUe inenioria-, Ordinein Cardui antiijinnn,
ae lonjjjo nobilissimum, ex siiiiimo prinei|s- et duodecim crpiilibus constantem
ali(|Unl retro soculis in.stituit; idipie ad Christiana- religionis tiitamen, et in
• The'Copy of the Statutes among the Thistle Papers (Vol. labelled “Statutes/* Paper No, 4)
has the followin'* words added, “ further extended in the most ample form and to the Great Seal.”


memorial!) insignia victoria? per eumlciu adversus Athelstannm Saxonum regent,
jh >.-t pnelium ementem parta? nbi dura pngnareiur, in letlierc apparnit Crux alba
<leen.ss.-iui ad formani illius qua Dims Andreas Apostolus martyrium passus eat.
yui qiiidem Antiquissimus ct Nobilissimus Onlo, non solum in archivis nostris.et
hujus regni nostri Scotia? historiis, sed etiam alt exteris historiarum scriptoribns,
hoiioriticc commemoratin' ; qiuc sunt authentica documcnta pradustris exislima-
tioiiis Imjus Nobilissimi Onlinis generatim suscepta*, set! ob continnata bolla ot
civile* tumiiltus ]»>st obitum Jaeobi (jiiiuti Kegis et binas indo successivas
ilegum minoritates corona sjtlendor multis in rebus diversisque mod is obumbratua
fuil ct inter alia Imnos linic Nobilissinia? Institutioni debitus, quique it a delituil,
usque ad lertium annum regni regii nostri patris Jacobi Septimi, pirn memoriae
qiii consideralione multiplieium otllcii et aH'ectionis indiciorum ipsi oxhibilorum,
p'i line antiquum regnum nostrum,eundem Nobilissimum 111111110111 nslintegravit
et restituil, < juamobrem nos inter multa alia testimonia cimc nostra* regia
nntiqui Imjus regni nostri, tain pm ejusdem honore qiinm aliiseodem spectantibua
Et nt dictus Ordo ad justum splcndorem denuo erigatur utquo inde presens hoc
nostrum scculum alipio a-latcs futune ad emulationem noliilem (alia gratia,'
regia; signa discriminantia pnemerendi, in suuruni nobilium anlceessoruin
imitaiionem exciientur ac moveantur, eongruum itaque nos nunc statuenlcs
tanqiiam prineeps supreme dicti Nobilissimi Onlinis indubiuitum regime
nostrum jus exeqiii. Noveritis igitnr nos redintegrassc et restiluissc, sicuti
per presenles has litents nostras patenles redintegramus et rcstiluimus
eundem dictum ordinem, ad omnes honores, dignitates, titulos ct ]trivilegia, qme
dim aut mine ad eundem pertinent, cum omnibus aliis addilamentis, qua; nos
ant ivgii nostri suecessores supremi principes dicti Nobilissimi Onlinis pcrlincro
imposteruni dcclaravimus, vel in cos conforimns, atque per presenles has literas
nostras j>aienU?s duodccim cquilibus nobiscum suprema principe ex quibus
pr. 1 sliel us Nobilissimus Onlo tempore elapso constctit, atque iiipostcrum
coustaliit, et successoribus suis in <licto online damns et concedimus omnes
bonoivs, dignitates, titulos, et privilegia ad jdenum suum nitorem, gloriam, et
magniticentiam, pnml bactenus obtinuit, vel qua: in fiitnruni ml eundem
pertinent declarabimns. In cujns rei testinioniinu prcscntibiis magnum sigillum
nostrum apisnidi mandavimus. Apud aulam nostram de Saint Jamess, trigesinio
prime die Decembris, Anno Domino millesimo septingentesimo lertio, annoque
regni nost ri sec undo,
ANNE R.
Per signaturam S.D.N. Ilcgina? snprasciipt.


STATUTES AND O RDERS of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle
Revived by HER MAESTY ANNE by the Grace of God Queen of Scotland,
England, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, Sovereign of the
said Most Noble Order, for the better Regulating the Proceedings and
Solemnities thereof in all the circumstances thereunto belonging.
Bnne IR.
the lirst place, We think (it to continue the ancient
number of Knights, to wit, Twelve Brethren, with Ourself,
fedflg the Sovereign of the sairl Most Noble Order, to lie tlio
precise number of that Order in all time coining.
2. That the Sovereign's Habit lie such as they shall think fit at any
time hereafter to appoint. That the Habit of the Brethren in this Order
be a Doublet and Trunk Hose of Cloth of Silver; Stockings of Pearl-
coloured Silk, with White Leather Shoes, Garters, and Shoe-strings of Green
and Silver ; the Breeches and Sleeves of the Doublet decently garnished
with Silver and Green Bibbands, a Surcoat of Purple Velvet, lined with
While Taffeta, girt about the middle with a Purple Sword-belt, edged with
Gold, and a Buckle of Gold, at which a sword with a Gilded Hilt, whereof
the shell is to be in form of the Badge of the Order, and the Pummel in
the form of a Thistle, in a scabbard of Purple Velvet, over all which a Mantle
or Kobe, of Green Velvet, lined with White Taffeta, with Tassels of Gold and
Green, upon the left shoulder of which, on a Field of Green, Saint Andrew the
Apostle, his Image, bearing Itefore him the Cross of his Martyrdom, of Silver
Embroidery, with a circle of Gold round it, upon which the motto “ Nemo me
impime laee-ssff,” in letter’s of Green, and at the lower part of it a Thistle
of Gold and Green, the Flower Eeddish. About the Shoulders is to I>e worn
the Collar of the Order, consisting of Thistles, and Sprigs of Hue going betwixt,
at the middle of which, Itefore, is to hang the Saint Andrew of Gold, enamelled,
with his Gown Green, and the Surcoat Purple, bearing liefore him the Cross,
enamelled While, or, if of Diamonds, consisting of the number of Thirteen just;
the Cross and Feet of Saint Andrew resting upon a ground of Green, the Collar
to be tied to the shoulders of the Kobe with White Ribband; upon their heads,
on days of solemn procession or feasting, where the Sovereign is present, or has
a Commissioner for that effect, they are to wear, at the times of permission,


a Cup of Black Velvet, faced up with a border of the same, a little divided
liefore, wide and loose in the Crown, having a large plume of White Feathers,
with a Black Egret, or Heron’s Top, in the middle of it, the Borders of the Cap
adorned with Jewels.
3. That the Jewel of the said Order is to lie worn at a Green Bihhand over
the left shoulder, cross the body, and tied under the right arm; the Jewel to
have on the one side the Image of Saint Andrew, with the Cross liefore,
enamelled, as is above said, or cut on stone, enriched with precious stones round
it, on the back of which shall lie enamelled a Thistle, Gold and Green, the
Flower Beddish, with the licforc-nientioned motto round it; the Ground 141011
which the Thistle is to be done shall lie enamelled Green.
4. That the Medal of the Order lie all of Gold, being the Saint Andrew,
(tearing before him the Cross of his Martyrdom, with a Circle round, on which
to lie the motto of the Order, and at the lower part of the Circle, between the
|ilining of the words, a Thistle, and to lie worn in a Green llibband, as the
Jewel, at times when the Jewel is not worn.
5. That upon the left breast of the Coat and Cloak shall lie embroidered
a badge of a projiortionable bigness, lieing a Saint Andrew’s Cross, of Silver
Embroidery, with Kays going out between the points of the Cross, on the middle
of which, a Thistle of Gold and Green, upon a Field of Green, and round the
Thistle and Field a Circle of Gold, having on it the motto of the Order in letters
of Green.
(!, That Her Majesty, and Her Royal Successors, Sovereigns of the said
Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, shall, in all time coining,
wear the said Order on the Ribband of the Order of the Garter, or otherwise, in
any manner th it Her Mijesty shall think lit, and shall wear the Collar of the
said Order on the Day of the Feast of Saint Andrew, lieing the Thirtieth
of Noveuilier yearly.
7. That the Knights Brethren of the said Order shall wear their Collars on
all Collar Days, wherever the Sovereign is, and within Scotland, by obligation,
ujion all days of public solemnities, whether the Sovereign Is; there or not,
8. That the Collar Days lie the same ordinary Collar Days now observed by
Her Majesty.
9. That the Collar, with the Saint Andrew belonging to it, and the Medal
of the Order given by Her Majesty and Successors, Sovereigns of the said Most
Noble Order, to the Knights Brethren thereof at their admission, Ik; returned, at
their deaths, to the Sovereign.


10. The Order is to have a Great Seal in the custody of the Chancellor
t hereof, having on the Dexter side Saint Andrew’s Cross, and on the Sinister,
the Anns of Great Britain, as they are carried hy Us in Scotland, encircled with
the Collar of the Order, with the linage of St. Andrew hanging at it, with the
motto of the Order going round the seal: on the other side, the Image of Saint
Andrew, (tearing the cross Itefore him, with a Glory round his head, written
round " macni m sicim.um antiquissimi kt nobimssimi ohiunis cardui.”
11. That there 1m a Secretary of the Order, l«» transmit the Sovereigns
Orders to the Knights Brethren, and that he attend Her Royal Person for that.
eU'eet.. Hit shall have, on days of solemnity, a Mantle of Green Satin lined with
White. on the left shoulder of whieh the Badge of Saint. Andrew’s Cross ; his
Ordinary Ridge is to lie hung in a Chain of (Sold, Iwing a Thistle, Gold and
Green, upon Two Pens crossed saltier ways with the motto round about, and an
Imjierial Crown n]ion the Top.
12. The Lyon shall have Holies and Ridges u|mhi the shoulder conform to
the Secretary, in his hand, his Stall'of Office, and nlsnit his neck, his Badge,
with the Saint Andrew turned outward.
13. The Usher eonl'orm to the Secretary in all things except his Badge,
whieh is to lie Two Sprigs of Hue in form of Saint Andrew’s Cross, Vert ijjxin
a Fund White, upon whieh a Thistle of Gold, and round the motto, upon which
an Im|ierial Crown, and in his hand the Baton of In's Otlice.
14. Before any can Is: admitted to the Mast Noble Order of the Thistle lie
must Is: a Knight. Bachelor.
Here follows the Form of the Oath to lie taken hy all such as shall he
admitted into this Order as Brethren.
I°, I shall fortify and defend the true reformed Protestant, Religion, and
Christ’s mast Holy Evangel, to the utmost of my power.
2", I shall Is* loyal and true to my Sovereign Duly the Queen. Sovereign
of this Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle.
:U, 1 shall maintain and defend the Statutes, Privileges, and Honours of
tin* said Order.
4°, I shall never liear Treason almut in my heart against our Sovereign
Ijuly the Queen, hut I shall discover tlie same to her:
So help me God.


said Order, on their admission thereto.
To the Secretary of the Order ... ... ... ...
To the Commissioners’Servants ... ... ... ... S
To the Churcli Fees, viz., Sextons, Kinders of I5ells, &c. ... ■>
To the Usher of the Order ... ... ... ... X
To the Queen’s Ushers ... ... ... ... ... 5
To the Lyon’s Office, Heralds, Trumpeters, &c. ... ... 'll
X.
II
<;
ii
g
n
15
d.
1J
7!
li
«!
£111
•)
2
(8/83)
a
15. The Oatli lacing taken by the Elect Knights, Udine any whom the
Sovereign shall appoint, they may actually wear the Badges and other Orna-
ments belonging to the Order; and in regard We have not as yet named a
person to he Chancellor of the said Order, and that then: is no (heat Seal
Udonging thereto, We do therefore ordain, that, our Signet of the said Older,
which is to he in the custody of Our Secretary to the said Order, shall servo
for any Warrant or Order that We shall think lit to grant or emit, for the
nominating any of the Knights Brethren or Ollicers, or any other thing relating
to the said Order.
IG. The Boyal Chajsd of Our Palace of Holy rood House (is) to Ito ('lmpel
of t he Order in time coming.
17. That no alteration of the Habit, Jewel, Collar, Badge, or other Orna-
ments belonging to the said Order, or of the using or wearing of them, hi:
offered to Her Majesty by any of the Brethren, without a concurrence of the
major part of them.
Given under Our Boyal Hand and Signet, at. Our Court, at St, .lames’s,
the 3lst day of Ucccnilicr 1703, and of Our Beign the Second
year. A. li.
By Her Majesty’s Command,
CROMARTIE.
LIST OF FEES appointed by HER MAJESTY to be [?] by t hose who shall [?] Invested
with the Most Ancient and Must Noble. Order of the Thistle.
H nne IR.
SIEShK Fees apjtoinled liv Her Sacred M ajesty (jueen Anne, Sovereign
of the Most Ancient ami Most, Xohlc Order <<f tin; Thistle, to las
ey ffar-A'l paid lay those who sliall In: admitted as Knights Brethren of the


We do hereby order and require all who are or shall be admitted as
Knights Brethren of the most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle to
pay the Fees according to the almve distribution upon their being admitted to
the said Order.
Given under Our Boyal Hand and Signet of the said Order at Our
Court at St. James’s the 20th day of October 1703, and of Our
Reign the Fourth year. A. R.
A DDITIONAL STATUTES of the Most Ancient owl Most Noble Order of the Thistle,
mode and appointed by GEORGE, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland. Defender of the Faith &c.. Sovereign of the said Mont
Noble Order.
scovoc IR.
HAT the words of the Oath contained in the Statutes, signed by Our
Royal Sister and Cousin, the hit©; Queen Anne of Blessed Memory,
upon the Mist day of Deccmlicr 1703, and appointed to be taken
by the Knights Brethren and Officers of the said Order, l>e Lord Georoe. in
place of Lady Anne,
That the form of the Oath to lie taken by the I-slier of the said Order lie
the same that was appointed to lie taken by the Secretary.
That the Thistle, in the middle of the Star to lie worn on Ihe Coat or Cloak,
lie Green, heightened with Gold, upon a field of Gold, and that the Circle round
the Thistle and Field lie Green, and the motto in letters of Gold.
That upon the left shoulder of the Mantle or Rolie of Green Velvet there
Ik) the Star, as is hereby app anted to lie wore on the Coat or Cloak, in place of
what was directed to l>e wore hy the aforesaid Statutes.
That the Image of St. Andrew, which, by the foresaid Statutes, is appointed
to be wore at the Collar of the Order, he made larger than it now is, and have
round it Bays of Gold going out from it, making the form of a Glory.


That all Orders, Hides, and Statutes, relating to the said Most Noble Order,
which have lieen heretofore made and apjiointed by Her said late Majesty Queen
Avne, and not altered by the above Statutes, are hereby confirmed.
(.liven under Our Royal Hand and Signet of Our Order, at Our Court
at St. James’s, the 17th day of February 1714-15, in the First
Year of Our Reign.
By the Sovereign's command,
DAVID NAIRN.
*><•. Not. Ortl. Caff.
ADDITIONAL STATUTE of the Most Ancient owl Most Noble Order of the Thistle,
made and appointed by GEORGE, by the Groce of God, King of Greet Britain,
France, and Ireland. Defender of the Faith, &c., So[?] of the said Mast
Noble Order (vi:)
(Bcoroc IR.
SHEREAS We have appointed Holies for Our Knights Brethren of Our
Most Ancient ami Most Noble Order of the Thistle, for the more
solemn ami decent manner of holding Chapters of Election; We
have likewise thought tit to apjioinl the following ceremonial and
met hint to be observed, as followelh;
That upon the death of any Knight Brother of the Order, the Sovereign, or
His Commissioner, after having notice thereof, shall forthwith give directions
for summoning as many of the Knights as ean then conveniently l>e had, to meet
within six weeks, for the electing a new Brother into the Society.
That there lie three Knights at least, lies ides the Sovereign, or His
Commissioner, to constitute a Chapter; hut under this numlier no Election to
be made, unless, in case of exigency, I lie Sovereign being present, be pleased to
grant a dispensation for want of full number.
That neither the Sovereign nor any Knight Brother enter the Chapter
without wearing l«.»th their Mantles and Collars, nor any Officers of the Order
1 (*785) n 2


attend without his Mantle and Chain. That none have power to nominate, hut
only such who arc present at the Chapter, and no Proxy he admitted to vote:
that each of the Knights Brethren that are present at the Kleetiou shall
nominate for himself six sufficient Persons, free from all reproach and scandal,
whether they Is* Subjects or Foreigners, provided they are known not to favour
or abet any party at enmity with the Sovereign; that is to say, Two Karls, or
of higher degree, Two Barons, and Two Knights.
That tin* Scrutiny Is* collected by the Secretary, there lieing as yet no
Chancellor: and in absence of the Secretary, the collection Is* made by Lyon
King of Arms; hut in absence of both these Officers, the Scrutiny may lie
gathered by the Usher.
That whoever collects the Scrutiny, they must liegin with the youngest
Knight, and so proceed upward from one side to another, ending at the eldest;
and after the Scrutiny is taken, he must humbly declare to the Sovereign the
Person on whom the choice is fallen. The Sovereign approving of the Flection,
the Green Bod must Is* sent out attending the Two Junior Knights, to introduce
the Elect Knight, who enters the Chapter snppirled on his right and left hands
by the Two Knights, Given Bod walking liefore them, who, as soon as they
enter the room, must make their low reverences to the Sovereign, or His
Commissioner, and. about half-way, another; and lieing advanced up to the
Sovereign, a third low reverence; after which the Green Bod shall draw the
Sword of Stale, and, kneeling, present the same to the Sovereign, n|s>n which
the Elect Knight, lieing presented, and kneeling down, shall receive the Honour
of a Knight Bachelor ; which done, and the Sword of State returned to the
Green Rod, the Elect Knight, rising up, the Chancellor, or Secretary, shall
administer the Oath to him ; which lieing perfonned, the Chancellor, or
Secretary shall (kneeling) present the Bihhand to the Sovereign, who will
immediately put it over the Elect Knight’s left shoulder, he kneeling again;
after which the Elect Knight rises, and makes a low reverence to the Sovereign,
and then kneels again to kiss the Sovereign’s Hand, which living ended, he
rises, and makes another low reverence, and then the Knights Brethren rise
from their seats, and stand at their several Chairs, turning their faces towards
the Sovereign, till the Sovereign liegins to withdraw, uj«m which they all make
him a low reverence, still keeping their faces towards him as he passes, which
concludes the Chapter of Election.
The Ceremony lieing thus ended, and the Sovereign withdrawn to His own
apartment, ushered by the Green Bod, and followed by the Knights Brethren as


£
S.
Tit lilt* Secretary <>l’ tlie Order ...
... ... 55
11
i
Tn l.ymi Kin" < if Arms...
...
27
15
7
T«> lilt' I’slier of the < tnler
...
27
15
0
In all, £111
2
2
far its His Bed-Cham I ter, the Elect Knight then receives the Compliments of the
Society, and returns them thanks for the honour of electing him into their Most
Ancient and Most Noble Order.
And seeing, by the former Statutes, Our Secretary and Usher of the said
Order, as also Lyon King of Arms, did wear their Madges upon a Chain of Gold,
it is hereby allowed that the said Officers may wear their Badges on a Green
liibband of a moderate Breadth, except upon Collar Days, Instalments, and
Chapters of Election, or any other Public Solemnities, at which time they are to
wear them niton their Gold Chains.
And whereas the Table of Fees established by Our Most Dear Sister, the
late ( 4 >ueen Anne, Itefore the Union of our Two Kingdoms, did consist of divers
articles due to several Offices, some of which, by virtue of the said Union, does
not now exist, amounting in the whole to One Hundred ami Eleven Pounds
Two Shillings and Two Pence: and whereas, likewise;, the Fee of Our Usher of
the saiil Order lining in that Table but Eight Pounds Six Shillings ami Six|tence,
a sum that bears no proportion to his Office, We have therefore thought lit, by
the advice of the Knights Brethren of Our said Most Ancient and Most Noble
Order, and for the I teller encouragement of the said Officer, to ap|toint his Fee,
in all lime coming, to lie Twenty-seven Pounds Fifteen Shillings and Si.\|ience,
according to the under-written Table, viz.;
Whirh sum <>f One Hundred and Eleven Pounds Two Shilling's and
Two IVneo, We do hereby order and refpiire all who shall Is; admitted as
Knights Brethren of Our said Most Ancient .and Most Noble Order, to j>ay
according to the alove distribiition, njsni their 1 icing admitted into the
Slid • haler.
Given under Our I loyal Hand and Signet of Our Order aforesaid,
at Our Court at St. James’s, the 17th day of July 1717, in the
Third Year of Our lleign.
P.y the Sovereign’s Command.
DAVID NAIRN
Stc.


ADDITIONAL STATUTES of the Most Ancient and Mod Noble Order of flu Thistle,
made and appointed by GRORGE, by the Grace of God, King of Great Britain,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the faith, Sovereign of the said Most.
Noble Order ( vi :)
(Bcovoc IR.
iTvJjwIIEIiEAS We haxe .iji[«>iuLeil Holies I'm' (*UI Knights Brethren <*f
Our Most Ancient .m<l Most Xoblo Order of tins Thistle, for
the more solemn and ilceeut manner of holding' Chapters of Election;
We have likewise thought lit to apjioint the following ceremonial
mid method to lie observed, as followeth ;
That upon the death of any Knight Brother of the Order, the Sovereign, or
His Commissioner, after having notice thereof, shall forthwith give directions for
summonin': as many of the Knights as can then convenient!v lie had. to meet
O • o •
within six weeks, for the electing a new Brother into the Society,
That there lie three Knights at least, Itcsidcs the Sovereign, or His
Commissioner, to constitute a Chapter; hut under this numlier no Election to
he made, unless, in case of exigency, the Sovereign lieing present, lie.pleased to
grant a dispensation for want of full number.
That neither the Sovereign nor any Knight Brother enter the Chaptci
without wearing both their Mantles and Collars, nor any (Uhcers of the Order
attend without his Mantle and Chain. That none have power to nominate, but
only such who arc present at the Chapter, and no I’roxy lie admitted to vote ;
that each of the Knights Brethren that are present at the Election shall
nominate for himself six sutticieut Persons, free from all reproach and scandal,
whether thev lie Subjects or Foreigners, provided they are known not to favour
or .diet anv party a! enmity with the Sovereign ; that is to say. Two Earls, or of
higher degree. Two Barons, and Two Knights.
That the Scrutiny lie eollis-ted by Hu* Stvretary, there being as yet no
Chancellor; and in absence of the Seen*' ary, the collect ion !<e made i<j
Lym King of Arms; but in absence of Kith these ((Hirers, the Scrutiny may U»
gathered by the Usher.
That whoever collects the S rutiny, they must liegin with the youngest
Knight, and so proceed upward from one side to another, ending at the eldest ;
. nd ..tier the Scrutiny is taken, he must hitmldv declare to the Sovereign the


person on whom tin* choice is fallen. The Sovereign approving of the Election,
the Green Hoi must lie sent out attending tin* Two Junior Knights, to
introduce the Elect Knight, who enters the Chapter snpiwrted on his right and
left hands hy the Two Knights, Green Hod walking before them, who, as soon ns
they enter the room, must make their low reverences to the Sovereign, or His
Commissioner, and, about half-way, another ; and lieing advanced up to the
.Sovereign, a third low reverence; after which the Green Hod shall draw the
Sword of State, and, kneeling, present the same to the Sovereign, upon which
the Elect Knight, being presented, and kneeling down, shall receive the Honour
of a Knight Bachelor; which done, and the Sword of State returned to the
Green Hod, the Elect Knight, rising up, the Chancellor, or Secretary, shall
administer the Oath to him; which lasing performed, the Chancellor, or Secretary
shall (kneeling) present * the Hihhnnd to the Sovereign, who will immediately
put it over the Elect Knight’s left shoulder, he kneeling again ; after which the
Eleel Knight rises, and makes a low reverence to the Sovereign, and then
kneels again to kiss the Sovereign’s Hand, which being ended, he lises, and
makes another low reverence, and then the Knights Brethren tise from their
scats, and stand at. their several Chairs, turning their faces towards the
Sovereign, till the Sovereign liegins to withdraw, upon which they all make him
a low reverence, still keeping their faces towards him as he passes, which
concludes the Chapter of Election.
The Ceremony lieing thus ended, and the Sovereign withdrawn to His own
apartment, ushered by the Green Hod, and followed by Ihe Knights Brethren as
far as His Ited-Chamlier, the Ebs-t Knight then receives the Compliments of
the Society, and returns them thanks for the honour of electing him into their
Most Ancient and Most Noble Order.
And seeing, by the former Statutes, our Secretary and Usher of the said
Oilier, as also Lyon King of Arms, did wear their Badges n |«>n a Chain of
Gold, it is hereby allowed that the said OHicers may wear their Badges on
a Green Hibliand of a moderate Breadth, except u]kih Collar Days, Instalments,
and Chapters of Election, or any other Public Solemnities, at which time they
are to wear them upon their Gold Chains.
And whereas the Tabic of Fees established by Our Most Dear Sister, tlie
late Queen Anne, liefore tlie Union of the Two Kingdoms, did consist of divers
articles due to several OlVicers, some of which, by virtue of the said Union, docs
not now exist, amounting in the whole to One Hundred and Eleven Pounds
Two Shillings and Two Pence ; and whereas, likewise, it leing humbly
• The fojy of tlie Statutes aiming Iht* Thirtlf Papers (Vo). labelled *■ Slatuto*.** \o, 8)
n ** upon a eu*hi> n. T *


£
Ti> I In* Secretary of tlie Order ...
100
To Lyon Kino ,if Anns...
70
To tin* Gentleman Usher of tin* Green l!<«l ...
70
To tin* six Heralds
ISO
To the six Pursuivants ...
18
To the six State Trumpeters
9
In all, £297
represented unto Us, by the Knights Brethren of Our Most Noble Order
aforesaid, that the F'ees formerly appointed were too mean, and not suitable to
the dignity of the Order, and in which there was not sufficient provision made
for the six Heralds, six Pursuivants, and six Trumpeters, in that part of onr
United Kingdom of Great Britain formerly called Scotland, therefore We will
and ordain, that the Table of Fees, in all lime coming, !«• as followetb, viz.:
Which sum of Two Hundred and Ninety-seven Pounds Sterling aforesaid,
We do appoint to he paid to (he resjtective Officers above mentioned, or to (heir
Attorney, by each succeeding Knight, upon their admittance into the said Most
Ancient and Most Noble Order.
Given under Onr Royal Hand and Signet of Onr Order aforesaid, at
Onr Court at St. James’s, the 14th day of February 1720-1. in
the Seventh Year of Onr Reign.
By the Sovereign’s Command,
DAVID NAIRN, Sce.
Warrant by George III. for the Appointment of DOCTOR JOHN J ARDINE as D[?]
of the Order, who is to receive the Fce of Fifty Pounds for each succeeding
Knight rewired info the said Order.
(seoroe IR.
SKOROE THE THIRD, l<y tlie Omr of <tod. King of Great Britain,
France, ami Ireland, Defender <>f the Faith, Sovereign of the Most
X,,1.1c Order of the Tliistle. &<. To Our trusty and well-heloved
Doctor -lolm Jardine. growing. Whereas several Officers are
necessary for attending the Service of the Most Noble and Ancient Order of the
Thistle, especially a Dean to he Reader of Onr Onlers to the Knights Brethren.


to administer the Oaths an<l read t !io Admonitions to the Elect Knights of
the saiil Order. And whereas it formerly jierlaiued to the Dean of Our Chapel
Royal in that part of Our Kingdom of (treat Rritain, called Scot laud, to perform
the said olliee, ami it appearing to Us projier that, flit' said oflico of Doan of the
said Order of the Thistle, lie conjoined with the olliee of Dean of Our said
Cha|H>l Royal, We therefore, conjoining the said olliees in all time coming, do
hereby nominate, constitute, anti ap|toint you, the said Doctor John Jardine, to
he Dean of the said Most. Xohle and Ancient. Ofiler of the Thistle, and likewise
(lean of Our said Chajiel Royal in that jtart of Our said Kingdom of Great.
I’.ritain, called Scotland, comprehending therein the Ahlieys (Vosregal nrnl
Dnndrenan, during all the days of your natural life, giving and granting as We
do hereby give ami grant unto you, during tin 1 span* aforesaid, the said Olliee of
Dean of the Thistle, with all the emoluments and privileges thereunto belonging,
«u that hereafter shall l»o declared, by Us, to ]iertaiii and lielong thereto, with
full jsiwer to do, execute, and perform all things Itelonging to the said olliee,
and more esjfoeially giving and granting unto you, tin! said Doctor John
Jardine, as Dean of the said Order, full jsiwer to receive from each Knight, or
R: other «>f the said Order, at the time of his admission, the following Fee, viz,,
the sum of Fifty Pounds sterling, hereby requiring and ordering each Knight,
who shall he admitted from and after the dale hereof, to pay you the said fee,
ami authorizing you, after you shall have taken your Oath ih fuhh mlmin 't-
'•hiitioni, which you are hereby required to do liefore the Secretary of the said
Order, to carry a Radge, and to wear it upon all Habits and distinctions, and
others, which to the Dean of the said Order doth lielong, or shall hereafter
declared hr Us rightly to lielong. And We hereby specially declare that you,
the said Doctor John Jardine, as Dean of Our said <Ti:i|m-I Royal, shall Is;
entitled to the same emoluments as yon presently enjoy, equally with
Mr. William Onsthart and Doctor Rolicrl Wallace, as one of Our Chaplains,
by gift under Our Privy Seal, dated the seventeenth day of July, 1701, in which
• •Hi'-** of Our Chaplain Wc will ami declare you shall remain and continue. For
all which this shall 1«* your Warrant.
Oiven umlei our Royal Ham) [and] Signet of Our Older aforesaid,
at Our Court at St. James's, this 7th day of January 170 S. in
the third year of Our reign.
P.y Hi- Maj. •sly s Command,
[?]NK HALIFAX.


ADDITIONAL STATUTE of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle,
made an d appointed by GEORGE the FOURTH, by the [?] of God, of the
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Inland, King Defender of the Faith,
Sovereign of the said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order.
(3cococ IR.
BHEKGAS, 1»y tlio Slatulfs of the said < Irder, made l>y her late
Majesty Queen Amu*, it is mining other things provided that the
numtier of the Knights of the said Order should Is* Twelve
Brethren, Itesides the Sovereign of the Order, and the said
number of Twelve is now full. Now, we lieing minded in conlemplalion of the
approaching ceremony of our Boyal Coronation to mark with our I loyal Favour
Four noble persons of that part of our United Kingdom called Scotland, do
ordain and declare that it shall lie lawful, notwithstanding the said number of
Twelve Knights is now full, to elect not more than Four noble portions of that
part of our United Kingdom called Scotland to tie Brethren of the said Order,
and that every of them ticing so elected shall enjoy all Bights, Titles, Privileges,
and Advantages whatsoever which to the Twelve Knights Brethren of the said
Order lawfully api>ertain.
Provided nevertheless that the said Order shall not Is- hereby permanently
extended, but that the numlier of Knights Brethren of the said Order shall in
all time coming remain limited to Twelve, and that as vacancies shall occur in
the numlier of Knights Brethren now existing, the Senior of the Knights to is*
elected under this Statute shall succeed to each such vacancy, and that no new
election shall lake place until tin* total iiuiiiUt of Knights Brethren shall Ik*
reduced below Twelve.
Given under Our Boyai Ham l and Signet of Our Order aforesaid, at
Our Court at Carlton House this I7tb [another copy of the
Statute has “Kith”] day of July, IS2I, ami of Our Beign the
Second Year.


WARRANT augmenting the number of Knight s of the Most Ancient and Most Norble
Order of the Thistle to Sixteen.
<scorge IR.
aHEREAS, l>y the Statutes of the .Moat Ancient ami Most Noble
Order of the Thistle, made and appointed by Her late Majesty
Queen Anne, it is, amongst other things, provided, that the
mnnlier of Knights of the said Order should lie Twelve Brethren,
besides the Sovereign of the Order. Now, We lieing minded to mark with Our
Koval favour a greater numlier of Noble Persons, do ordain and declare that
the numlier of Brethren of the said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order shall
henceforth, and in all limes coming, be Sixteen.
Given under Our Royal Hand and Signet of our Order aforesaid, at
Our Court at St. James, this Bth day of May 1827, in the Eighth
Year of Our Reign.
By the Sovereign’s Command,
ROBT. QUARME.
Uuht'.r,
Th /hr absence of (he Secretary.
STATUTE fixing the Geremonial to be obeserved at Chapters of the Order of the
Thistle.
William IR.
SHEREAS, by a Statute of out Most Ancient and Most Noble Ordei
of the Thistle, made by Our Royal Predecessor King George the
First, Ifcariug date the 17th day of July 1717,certain Regulations
were Ordained regarding the more Solemn manner of holding
Chapters of Election within the said Order; and whereas it hath lieen humbly
represented unto Us, that the said Regulations have for many Years past lieen
dispensed with or disused. We, taking the Premises into Our Royal considera-
tion, are graciously pleased to ordain and declare that the following Ceremonial
shall, henceforward, Ik* observed at all Chapters of Our said Order, viz.;
That, whenever the Sovereign shall lie pleases! to Command a Chapter of
the said Order to be hidden, the Secretary (there being ms yet no Chancellor of
the Order) shall issue Letters of Summons to the Knights Brethren of the
Order, re< paring them to attend at the time ami place appointed, habited in
their Mantles, and wearing their Collars of the Order. That there shall In;
three Knights at least, besides the Sovereign, to constitute a Chapter, unless,
under especial circumstances, the Sovereign Is; pleased to grant a dispensation
therewith, under the Seal of the Order.


Tlio Knights Brethren having assembled, and attended by tin' Officers
of tlio Order (wearing their Mantles anil the Chains and Badges of their
respective Otliccs), shall lie eulleil over hy the Secretary of the Onlor, and
proceed into the presence of the Sovereign in the Chapter Boom.
The Sovereign having lieen pleased to command the Knights Brethren to
take their fesjiectivo seats at the Table, and having signifiisl His Boyal pleasure,
touching the Election of a Knight into the said Order, each of the Knights
Brethren shall nominate, in writing, six sufficient Persons lieing subjects of the
Sovereign, and five from all reproach, that is to say, two Dukes, Man puses, or
Earls, two Viscounts or Barons, and two Knights. The Suffrages shall (hen bo
collected by the Secretary (or his Deputy), and in their absence by the Lord
Lyon, and in his absence by the Usher of the (liven Bod. The Officer who
collects the Suffrages shall ls>giii with the Junior Knight, and proceed regularly
upwards to the Senior Knight, and shall then, kneeling, present the same to the
Sovereign.
The Sovereign having lieeu graciously pleased to declare the name of the
Person Elivled into the Order, the Knight Elect shall Is; received at the Door of
the Chapter-Boom by the two Junior Knights Brethren present, and conducted
lie tween them, with the accustomed reverences, to the Sovereign, preceded by
the Secretary, I tearing the Ensigns of the Order on a Cushion, and by the Usher
of the Green Bod. The Sword of State, lieing theicii|Kiii delivered to the
Sovereign by the Senior Knight present, the Knight Elect shall kneel down, and
recS'C the honour of Knighthood, after which he shall Kiss the Sovereign’s
hand. The Knight then rising, the Chancellor or Secretary shall administer the
Oath to him. The Knight again kneeling near the Sovereign, the Secretary on
his knee, will present to the Sovereign, the Bibliand and Jewel of the Order,
which the Sovereign will place over the Knight’s left shoulder. The Knight
having again kissed the Sovereign’s hand, will rise, and having received the
congratulations of the Knights Brethren, will retire.
The Chapter lieing ended, the Knights Brethren will, by command of the
Sovereign, U* again called over by the Secretary, and will withdraw from the
presence of the Siveieign with the usual reverences, attended by the Officers of
the Order.
Given under Our Boyal Hand and the Signet of (inr Order aforesaid,
this 14th day of August 183 J, in the Fourth Year of Our Bcign.
By command of the Sovereign,
WM. WOODS, D[?]P, Sce.
Inthe Absence of the Sec,


ADDITIONAL STATUTE of the Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle,
made and appointed by VICTORIA, by the Grace of God, Queen of Great
Britain and Ireland , Defender of the Faith, and Soçrcign of the said Most
Noble Order.
Dictoda *R.
■HKIIKAS, l>y tin* Statutes of Our Most Ancient and Most Noble
Order of the Thistle, the numl«*r of Knights Brethren is limited
to Sixteen; and We, the Sovereign of the said Order, lieing
desirous of evincing in an e«|»ecial manner Our Jloyal regard for
Our dearly lieloved Consort., His I loyal Highness FItANUIs AutKliT AIiiICSTUH
CiiAttl.Gs Kmaniki,, Duke of Saxony, 1 Vince of Saxe Colmrg and Gotha, Knight
Coni]Kinion of Our Most Noble Order of the Carter, and Kniglit Grand Cross
of Our Most Honourable Military Order of the Hath, We do hereby, in virtue
of the | tower inherent in Us, as Sovereign, dis|ien«e with the Statute whereby
the numlter of Knights Brethren thereof is limited jis aforesaid, in as far as
may lie reiptired for the esjsvial j>ur|>ose of admitting Our said dearly beloved
Consort a Knight of Our said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order; and We
do hereby accordingly Ordain and Declare Our said dearly Iteloved Consort a
Knight of Our said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle; and
We do hereby also declare Our Soya I Will and Pleasure, that except for the
express |>urj>ose and occasion liefore-mentioned, and during the Life of His
lloval Highness, it is not Our lloyal intention that the immlier of Knights
P.ivthivn should extend lieyoiid the numls-r of Sixteen; and We do further
Ordain and Declare by this Statute, that Our said dearly lieloved Consort, His
lloyal Highness Fit.vscis Alkekt Augustus Ciiaki.es Kmanlei., Duke of
Saxony, Prince of Saxe Coburg and Gotha, shall take jdace and precedence of
all other Knights Brethren of Our said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order,
anv Statute, Iteeree, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.
Given at Our Court, at Our Castle at Windsor, under the Seal of Our
said Order, litis 17th day of January IM2, in the Fifth Year of
• )ur lleign.
By the Sovereigns esjiecial Command,
Rr. KERR
fir. K„h. Or,/. Cord.]
[Tht‘ c«*j»y of flu-* Statute a* among tlu* Tbislle Papers (Knighthood I’ajtcri, Vo!. III.,
PajH'r No. S|) b not 5t'ai»*i!. nor L* it by fixe Swrrtary,!


SPECIAL STATUTE of the Order of the Thistle the purpose herein d[?]
Victoria H
*HEKEAS l>y the Statutes of Our Must Ancient am) Most Noble Order
uf the Thistle tlie numlier of Knights Brethren is limited to
sixteen, anil We the Sovereign of the said Order lieing desirous of
evincing in an especial manner Our I loyal regard for Our Must
Dear Sun His Koval Highness the Prince Alfred Ernest Alliert Duke of Saxony
and Prince of Saxe Culmrg and Gotha, Knight. Companion of Our Most Noble
Order of the Garter, We do hereby by virtue of the jsurer inherent in Us as
Sovereign dispense with the Statute whereby the number of Knights Brethren
thereof is limited as aforesaid in as far as may lie required for the especial
pur|««se of admitting Our said Most Dear Son a Knight of Our said Most
Ancient and Most Noble Order, and We do hereby accordingly declare and
ordain Our said Most Dear Son a Knight of Our said Most Ancient and Most
Noble Order of the Thistle and We do hereby also declare Our 1 loyal Will and
Pleasure that except for the express purpose and occasion liefore mentioned and
during the life of His lloyal Highness it. is not Onr lloyal intention that the
numbei of Knights Brethren should extend lieyoml the number of sixteen, and
We do further onlain and declare by tin's Statute that Our said Alost Dear Son
His Koval Highness The Prince Alfred Ernest Alliert Duke of Saxony and
Prim e of Saxe Coburg and Gut ha shall take place and precedence of all other
Knights Brethren of Onr said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order, any Statute,
Decree or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.
Given at Our Court at Balmoral, under Our Sign Manual ami lire
Seal of Our siid Order this loth day of October, lSti4, in the
Twenty-eighth year <>f Om llcign.
Bv the Sovereign’s sjiecial ciuiuaml,
JOHN S. RICHARDSON
>'<<. Act. Onl. Cunt.


STATUTE S of the Order of the Thistle, for the Ab[?] of the [?]
by Knights of that Most Acnciet and Most Noble Order.
Victoria IR.
»HEI?EAf>, iii and hy the Statutes of Our Most Ancient and Mont
Notilc Order of (lie Thistle, made and appointed hy Our Royal
Predecessor Queen Anne, it is amongst other things provided
that an Oath as therein set forth is to lie, taken hy all such as
shall lie admitted into the same; and Whereas, hy a Statute for regulating the
Ceremonial to he observed in Chapters of our said Order, made hy Our late
Royal Uncle King William the Fourth, it is directed that the Chancellor or
Secretary of the Order shall administer the same; and Whereas, We deem it
exjiedient that such Oath for the future should not Is- taken : We, therefore, for
these and divers other reasons and considerations, us thereunto esjieciallv
moving, are graciously pleased hy virtue of the power inherent in Us as
Sovereign of the said Order, to abrogate such part and parts of the Statutes of
Our said Order of the Thistle as concerns the Oath so directed to Ik- taken by
and administered to Knights on admission into the same; and We do by these
I’re souls abrogate the same, and hereby declare the said Oath abolished
accordingly, any Statute, Decree, or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.
(liven at Our Court at Windsor, under Our Sign Manual and the
Signet of Our aforesaid Order, this ifOth day of June, 1860, in the
Twenty-ninth Year of Onr Reign.
U.y the Sovereign's Command,
JOHN S. RICHARDSON
.< ,VoA. 0,--!. r


SPECIAL. STATUTE of the Order of the Thistle for the purpose hercin dcelured.
Dictona IR.
*HEKEAS liy the Statutes of Our Most Ancient and Most Noble
Order of tin- Thistle the numlier of Knights Brethren is limited
to Sixteen, and Wo the Sovereign of the said Order lieing desirous
of evincing in an especial manner Our Uoyal regard for Our
Most Dear Son His Koval Highness AHsu t Edward Prince of Wales, Duke of
Saxony, and Prince of Saxe Colmrg and (lotha, Knight Companion of Our Most.
Noble Order of the (tarter. We do hereby hy virtue of the power inherent in
Us as Sovereign dispense with the Statute whereby the numlier of Knights
I tret hren thereof is limited as afoieiid in so far as may lie required for the
es]n'eial purpose of admitting Our said Most Dear Sou a Knight of Our said
Most Ancient and Most Noble Order, and We do hereby accordingly declare
and ordain Our said Most Dear Son a Knight of Our said Most Ancient and
Most Noble Order of the Thistle, and We do hereby also declare Our Uoyal
Will and Pleasure that except for the express purpose and occasion before
mentioned and during the life of His Koval Highness i' is not Our Uoyal
intention that the numlier of Knights Brethren should extend lieyoiid the
number of Sixteen, and We do further ordain and declare by this Statute that
Our said Most Dear Son His Koval Highness Alliert El ward Prince of Wales
shall take pi aw and precedence of Our Most Dear Son Alfred Ernest Albert
Duke of Edinburgh and of all other Knights Brethren of Our said Most Ancient
ami Most Noble Order, any Statute, Decree or Usage to the contrary notwith-
standing.
Given at Our Court at Balmoral, under Our Sign Manual and the Seal
of Our said Order, this 24th day of May, 1807, in the Thirtieth
year of (>ur Keign.
Bv the Sovereign's Command,
JOHN S. RICHARDSON
.Sc. AV>. O/vf. C""l.


SPECIAL. STATUTE of the Order of the Thistle for the purpose hercin dcelured.
IDlctoda IR.
«fW»IIEI!KAS I.y tin* Statutes of Our Most. Ancient and Most Noble
Order of tlit* Thistle the numlier of Knights I’rotdirt*ii is
"'(j limited to sixteen, and We the Sovereign of the said Order being
desirous of evincing in an esjiecial manner Our lloyal regard tor
Om Most Dear Son His lloyal Highness I’rince Arthur William I’atrick Alhert
Duke of Saxony, I’rince of Saxe Coburg and Gotha, Knight Companion oi Our
Most Nohle Onler of the Garter, We do herehy hy virtue of the ]«nver inherent
in Us as Sovereign dispense with the said Statute whereby the number of
Knights r.rethren thereof is limited as aforesaid in so far as may be required
for the especial purpose of admittin<_; Our said Most Dear Son a Knight of Our
said Most Ancient and Most Noble Onler, and We do hereby accordingly
declare and ordain Our said Most Dear Son a Knight of our said Most Ancient
and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, and We do hereby also declare Our lloyal
Will and Tie- me that except for the express purpose and occasion before
mentioned and during the life of His lloyal Highness it is not our lloyal
intention that the nundicr of Knights brethren should extend lieyond the
numlier of sixteen, and We do further ordain and declare by this Statute that
Our said Most Dear Sou His Koval Highness ITinee Arthur William I’atrick
AH-erl shall take place and precedence among the Knights of Our said Order
next to and immediately after Our Most Dear Son Alfred Ernest Alls’ll Duke
of Edinburgh, and before all other Knights Brethren of Onr said Most Ancient
and Most, Noble Order, except Our Most Dear Son His Royal Highness The
Prince of Wales, any Statute, Decree or Usage to the contrary notwithstanding.
Given at Our Court at Balmoral, under Our Sign Manual and l Jo-
Sea! of Our said Order this 241 h day of May, 1809, in the
Thirty-second year of Our Keign.
By the Sovereign’s command,
JOHN S. RICHARDSON
.S'. - . Xuh. O.-fl. Co,:!
(STS.'.) c


SPECIAL. STATUTE of the Order of the Thistle for the purpose hercin dcelured.
Victoria IR.
l.y tin* Statutes of Our Most Ancient ami Most Noble Order
<Vv-i 1,1 the Thistle the nnml>er uf Knights brethren is limited in manner
therein set forth. We the Sivereign thereof hy virtue of the jsiwer
inlterenl in Ts do for divers reasons and considerations lierehy
disjH'nse with all such Statutes of the said Order whereby the nundier is limited
in a- far as may la* required for the jmijioso of manifesting in an especial manner
Our Royal regard for Our trusty and well-lieloved John Douglas Sutherland
CampMl, commonly called Marquess of Lane, and do hereby decree and
declare him a Knight of this Most Ancient ami Most Noble t hder ol the 'ihistlc
any rule or usage to the contrary notwithstanding. It is nevertheless Our intent
and meaning and We do hereby declare that no further Klectioii of any of
Our subjects shall take place until a vacancy of a Knight Subject shall have
happened subsequently to the reduction of the number of Knights brethren to
the ordinary manlier of sixteen Knights.
Oiven at. our Court at Windsor, under Our Sign Manual and the
Si* met of Our Most Ancient and Most Noble Order this 21st
day of March, 1871, in the thirty-fourth year of Our Reign.
By the especial command of the Sovereign,
JOHN S. RICHARDSON
SVt, Ac?*. Ord, Cord,


SPECIAL. STATUTE of the Order of the Thistle for the purpose hercin dcelured.
Ufctona H
l»y (lie Statutes of our Most Ancient and Most Noble Order
of the Thistle the imiiiltcr of Knights Rrethren is limited to sixteen,
and We the Sovereign of the said Order lieing desirons of evincing
in an esjiecial manner Our Royal regard for Our Most, Dear Son His
Royal Highness Prince Lcojtold George Duncan Alliert Duke of Saxony,
1 Vince of Saxe Coburg and Gotha, Knight Comjianion of Our Most Nohle Order
of the Garter, We do hereby hy virtue of the ] sever inherent in Us as Sovereign
disjiense with the said Statute whereby the nnmls*r of Knights Rrethren thereof
is limited as aforesaid in so far as may lie required for the esjiecial jmrjiose of
admitting Our said Most! Dear Son a Knight of Our said Most Ancient and Most
Noble Order, and We do hereby accordingly declare and ordain Our said Most
Dear Son a Knight of Our said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the
Thistle, and We do hereby also declare Our Royal Will and Pleasure that except
for the express jmrjiose and occasion before mentioned and during the life of
His Royal 11 ighness it is not Our Royal intention that the numlier of Knights
Rrethren should extend licyond the number of sixteen, and We do further
ordain and declare by this Statute that Our said Most Dear Son His Royal
Highness Prince Leojiold George Duncan Alliert shall lake place and jnecedence
among the Knights of Our said Order next to and immediately after Our Most
Dear Son His Royal Highness I’rince Arthur William Patrick Albert, and
before all other Knights Rrethren of Our said Most Ancient and Most Noble
Order, except our Most Dear Sons their Royal Highnesses the Prince of Wales,
the Duke of Edinburgh and Prince Arthur, any Statute, Decree or Usage to the
contrary notwithstanding.
Given at 0111 Court at Ralmoral, under Our Sign Manual and I lie Seal
of ( fill SDl* I Order this 24th day of May, IS7I, in the Thirty-
fourth year of Our Reign.
Ry the Sovereign’s command.
JOHN S. RICHARDSON
S' f'm {th, 0/ <L (Jf <1


SPECIAL. STATUTE of the Order of the Thistle for the purpose hercin dcelured.
Dictoina IR.
■HKRKAS by the Statutes of Onr Most Ancient and Most, Noble
Order of t!i»‘ Thistle lli« nnmlier of the Knights Brethren is
limited to sixteen, and We tin* Sovereign of the said Order being
desirous of evincing in an esjieeial manner Onr regard for Our
Dear Cousin and Councillor His Koval Highness Oeorge William Frederick
Charles Duke of Cambridge, Knight of Our Most Noble Order of the Carter,
Knight Crand Cross of Our Most Honourable Order of the Hath, Knight of
Onr Most Illustrious Order of St. Patrick, Knight (band Commander of Our
Most, Exalted Order of the Star of India, First and Principal Knight (band
Cross and (band Master of Our Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and
Saint Oeorge, Field Marshal Commanding in Chief of our Army, We do hereby
in virtue of the power inherent in Fs as Sovereign disjiense with the said
Statute in so far as may In' required for the purpose of admitting Our
said Dear Cousin a Knight of Our said Order of the Thistle, and We do hereby
ordain and declare Our Dear Cousin tin* s;>i<l Oeorge William Frederick ( Italics
Duke of Cambridge a Knight of Our said Most Ancient and Most Xohh; Order
of the Thistle and We do hereby declare Our Will and Pleasure that for the
express purpise and occ;ision Itelore mentioned and during the lile oi His
Koval Highness, it is not. Our Koya! intention that the number of Ordinary
Knights brethren should extend beyond the atoresiid number'of sixteen, and
We do further ordain and declare that Our said Dear Cousin Oeorge William
Frederick Charles Duke of Cambridge shall take place and precedence next to
and immediarelv after Our Mo-t 1 tear Son Hi' Koyal Highness la-opild Oeorge
Duncan AIU-rt Duke of Albany, and liefore all oilier Knights Brethren of Our
said Older, except Our Most Dear Sons Their Koyal Highnesses the Prince of
Wales, the Duke of Edinburgh, and the Duke of Connaught ami Strathearn, any
Statute Deem' or Usage to the contiary notwithstanding.
fitven at Our Court at P.almoral, under Out Sign Manual and the Seal
of Onr slid (haler this 17’h dav of S*ptemliT, IHBI. in the
F"!ty-lifth year of Onr Keign.
By the Sovereign's command.
J. T. STEWART- RICHARDSON
, s */ r, Sob. Ord. Co id.


SPECIAL. STATUTE of the Order of the Thistle for the purpose hercin dcelured.
Victoria IR.
■ IIKItKAS Oar l.’oval Grandfather King George the Third did, on
the 7tli day of January, 170:’, sift or reciting that several Ollicers
were necessary for attending I lie Service of (lie Most. Ancient
and Most Xolile Order of the Thistle, especially a Doan, did
ajijmiut John Jardine, Doctor in Divinity, to the Otlice of Dean of the said
Order of the Thistle. And whereas We have recently appointed Our trusty and
well-lieloved Janies Cameron Lees, Doctor in Divinity, to Ik- Dean of Our said
Order, And whereas it has been represented unto I's that the Insignia of the
Otlice of Dean of Our said Most Ancient, and Most Nolde Order of the Thistle
have not lieen authorised or defined in or hy the Statutes of Our said Order,
And whereas we deem it expedient to make provision for the same. We there-
fore, for these and other considerations I's thereunto especially moving, are
graciously pleased, hy virtue of the power inherent in Us as Sovereign of the
said Order, to direct and declare that the Dean of Our said Order for the time
lieing shall in all Ceremonials of the Order lie habited in a Mantle similar to
that assigned to the Secretary of Our said Order, and shall also wear around
his neck, jiendant to a Chain of (lold, a Gold enamelled lladge, consisting of a
representation of a Book Inmnd Gules, the Mounts and Clasps Gold, surmounted
hv two Tens saltirewise Or, surrounded hy the Circle ami Motto of the Order,
with a Thistle at the Inittom proper, the whole surmounted hy an Imperial
Crown : And We hereby authorise him and his successors in that Ollice to wear
the said Ridge jiendant to a Green Bihand of a moderate breadth, except on
“ Collar days,” Investitures of the Order, and other public solemnities, when it
shall !•<• worn from a Gold Chain as aforesaid.
We are further jdeased to declare that the said Mantle, Chain, and Badge
shall l.e prepared at the charge of the Sovereign, and Is* furnished by the
Chamlierlain of * >lll Household ujhiii the receipt of a Warrant under the
Sovereign’s Sign Manual and Signet of the Order, provided nevertheless and
We are jdeased to declare and command that on the delivery of such Insignia
to the said John Cameron I.ccs, or to his successors in the Office of Dean of
i sTS.” i <-• 2


Our said Xfo.it Ancient and Mo.it No Me Order of the Tlii.ille, he and they slinll
he called upon to enter into a covenant for the due return thereof in the words
following—“ I hereby covenant and promise that incase I shall cease to hold
“ the Office of Dean of the Order of the Thistle, I will forthwith restore to the
“ Secretary of the Order, or to the Chamlierlam of tin* Sovereign’s Household,
“ the Chain and Kadoe of Ollicc which I have received from (he Sovereign, and
“ I further promise that 1 will without delay make provision for the due
“restoration of the said Insignia in case I shall continue an Officer of the said
“Order until the period of my decease," any Statute, Decree or usaj'e to the
contrary notwithstanding.
And it is Our Will and Pleasure that this Statute lie taken and received
as part and parcel of the Statutes of Our slid Order.
Given at Our Court at Si. James's, under Our Royal Manual and
the Signet of Our said Order this 10th day of July, 1886, in the
Fiftieth year of Our Reign.
l»y the Severe ion’s command,
J. T. STEWART- RICHARDSON
Xoh. Or it. Coni.


SPECIAL. STATUTE of the Order of the Thistle for the purpose hercin dcelured.
Uictoda IR. & 3.
JRKfISIIKKKA* by the Statutes of Our Most Ancient and Most Noble
Order of the Thistle, tin; numlier of Knights Brethren is limiuxl
to si xtivn, ami We tin* Sovereign of the said Order being
desirous of evincin'; iu an esjieeial niaiiiier Our Koyal regard for
Our Most Dear Grandson His Koyal Highness George Frederick Ernest
Allhul. Duke of York, Duke of Saxony, Prince of Saxe Coburg and (lotlia,
Knii;lit of Our said Most Noble Order of tlie Garter, We do liereliy I>y virtue
of ilie jMiwer iulieivnt in l T s as Sovereign disjsuisc with the said Statute
whereby the numlier of Knights Brethren thereof is limited as aforesaid in so
far as may lie reijuired for the especial purpose of admitting Our said Most
Dear Orandson a Knight of Our said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order, and
W’e do hereby accordingly declare and ordain Our said Most Dear Grandson
a Knight of Our said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle, and
W’e do hereby also declare Our Koyal Will and Pleasure that except for the
express pur|K>se and occasion liefore mentioned and during the life of His
Koval Highness it is not Our Koyal intention that the number of Knights
llrethren should extend lieyond the numlier of sixteen, and War do further
ordain and declare by this Statute that Our said Most Dear Grandson His
Koyal Highness George Frederick Ernest Allnu't Duke of York shall take
place and precedence muon; the Knights of the Order next to and immediately
alter Onr Most I tearSm His Koyal Highness Arthur William Patrick Duke of
Connaught and Strathearn and 1 adore Our I tear Cousin His Koyal Highness
George William Frederick Charles Duke of Cambridge ami all other Knights
brethren of Our said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order, except Onr Most
Dear Sons their Koval Highnesses the Prince of Whiles, I lie Duke of Edinburgh,
and the Duke of Connaught and Strathearn, an}' Statute, Decree or Csage to
the contrary notwithstanding.
Given at < >iu Court at Buckingham Palace, under Onr Sign Manual
and the Seal of Onr -aid Order, this ,>th day oi July, lS9d, in
the Fifty-seventh Year of Onr Keign.
By the Sivercign s Command,
JAS. T. STEWART- RICHARDSON
» s < r. (//•(/, Curd.


SPECIAL. STATUTE of the Order of the Thistle for the purpose hercin dcelured.
Efcwarb IR. & J.
by tlic Si:ititles of Our Most Ancient and Most Noble
Oilier of tlie Thistle it is enjoined tliat the said Order shall consist
” of the Sovereign and sixteen Knights, We the Sovereign thereof by
virtue of the power and authority inherent in Us do for divers
reasons and considerations Us thereunto especially moving hereby disjiense with
all such Statutes and do hereby declare Our Right Trusty and Right entirely
beloved Cousin Henry John Duke of Roxbuighe and <bn Right Trusty and Right
well-beloved Cousin George Earl of Haddington to lie Knights of Our said Order,
hereby increasing the nunilierof Knights to eighteen. It is nevertheless Our
intent and meaning and we do hereby declare that no further Election of any
of Our Subjects into Our said Order shall take place until a vacancy in Our
said Order shall have happened subsequently to the reduction of the imndier of
Knights to the original number of sixteen as aforesaid.
Given at Our Court at Buckingham Palace, under Our Sign Manual
and the Seal of Our said Order this Bth day of August, Ifo2,
in the Second year of Our Reign.
By the especial command of the Sovereign,
DUNCAN CAMPBELL.
•S - . AV>. Orel. Corel.


£
Tip tlir Secretary < »f I lie Order
...
100
To l.ymi K of Anns
...
To
To tin* dciitlcinaii I'sher of tin* Green H<xl...
...
70
To the 1 Van of tin* <filler .. ...
... ...
50
To tin* Six Heralds
... ...
30
To the Six Pursuivants
...
18
To tin* Six State Trumpeters
0
Iii all,
£347
SPECIAL. STATUTE of the Order of the Thistle for the purpose hercin dcelured.
formerly to be paid to the Officers of the Order and others.
Ebwavb IR. £ 3.
\ 1:1 » TIIK SEVENTH by the Crace of God of the United
Kingdom of (treat Kriiain and Ireland and of the llritish Dominions
V 9 <Xf 54n bevond the Seas King Defender of the Faith, Sovereign of the Most
~ Ancient and Most Noble Order of the Thistle To all to whom
these Presents shall come
(ireeling!
Whereas by the Statutes of Our Most Ancient and Most Noble Order of
the Thistle it is amongst other things ordained that each succeeding Knight
upon admission into the said Order shall pay to the several Oliiccrs of the said
Older Fees amounting in the aggregate to the Sum of Three Hundred and
Forty-seven Vonnds Sterling according to the following Table;—
An<l whereas the fees piyablc to the Lyon King of Anns and to the
heralds and pursuivants aforesaid arc now paid into Our Exchequer.
And whereas it has been hnnihly represented unto Us and We deem it
expedient that the Fees set forth in the Table of Fees hereinljeforc recited
should not lie exacted for the future.


Xmv kimw vi ■ that BV for these ami other considerations Us thereunto
especially moving. art* graciously pleased. by virtue of the j«»wror inherent in Us
a« the Sovereign of tin* said Most Ancient am! Most Noble Order, to abolish,
ami l>y these Presents «1<» alwdish, the Fn- of Three hundred ami forty-seven
pounds sterling hitherto existing. ami iio lierehy substitute therefor the single
Fee of Fifty pounds sterling: which Fee of Fifty pounds sterling We will
ordain am! apjioint to lie paid hy each succeeding Knight upon his admission to
(lie said Most Ancient and Most Noble Order and to be accounted for by the
Secretary of the said Order, to the lords Commissioners of Our Treasury.
Nevertheless it. is Our Will and Pleasure and We hereby declare and
ordain that this Statute shall in no wise affect the rights of the existing
holders of the Otiices of Secretary, Usher and Mean of the said Order and of the
six State Trumpeters holding otlice at the dale hereof to receive the Fees
appointed to be ]>aid to them on the admission of each Knight to the said Most
Ancient and Most Noble Order.
And it is Our Will and Pleasure that this Statute Ite taken and received as
part and parcel of the Statutes of Our said Order.
Given at Our Court at Buckingham Palace under Our Sign Manual
and the Seal of Our said Order, this 10th day of March, 1905,
in the fifth year of Our Heign.
By Command of the Sovereign,
DUNCAN CAMPBELL.
Sc. Koh. Ord. Cord.
