

STATEMENT
ON
WIRELESS DIRECTION FINDING
TO THE
“KYEEMA” ENQUIRY
BY
T. H. LABY, F.R.S.
MELBOURNE, 1938
Printed by The Herald and Weekly Times Ltd.




WIRELESS DIRECTION FINDING AND ITS
RELATION TO THE LOSS OF THE “KYEEMA.”
By T. H. LABY, F.R.S.
STATEMENT MADE TO THE AIR ACCIDENTS
INVESTIGATION COMMITTEE, ON NOVEMBER
14th, 1938.
I base my statement on the experience which has been
gained, and the conclusions which have been reached during
the last ten years in the investigation of wireless direction
finding by myself and other physicists working in the Natural
Philosophy Laboratory of the University of Melbourne.
It is to be explained that in 1928 the Radio Research
Board of Australia was established, and that its researches are
carried out in the Universities of Sydney and Melbourne.
The investigations in Melbourne have been concerned with
atmospherics, and the methods used in the investigations
have involved throughout the use of wireless direction find-
ing. The direction finders used have been:
(1) The cathode ray direction finder;
(2) A recording direction finder;
(3) A cathode ray oscillograph, which determines the
distance of lightning flashes.
These investigations have occupied the whole attention of
several physicists. There have been two physicists and a
mechanic giving full time, and from two to three physicists
giving part of their time to the investigation.
OBSERVATION STATIONS.—The observations have
been made at:
Melbourne; Toowoomba, Queensland;
Mt. Stromlo Observatory, Carnegie Magnetic Observa-
F.C.T.; tory, Wa'theroo, West Aus-
Hobart, Tasmania; tralia.
R.A.F. Aerodrome, Laverton;


Thousands of observations have been taken visually and
recorded, and hundreds of thousands of them have been auto-
matically recorded. Here is a sheet of 24 hours. The obser-
vations have extended during 24 hours over half the world’s
surface, as is shown in this map. I mention these facts in
Bearings observed from Canberra of regular sources of atmospheres.
Thunderstorm areas shown shaded. [After Munro. Huxley and Higgs.]
order that it may not be thought, as is otherwise likely, that
the following statement is that of a theorist with no know-
ledge or experience of the facts of wireless.
PUBLICATIONS.—The conclusions reached in these in-
vestigations have been published in Bulletins of the Radio
Research Board and in English scientific journals. It is con-
ceded by distinguished scientific authorities abroad that
the Melbourne University researches have a leading position


in the investigation of atmospherics. The French Govern-
ment invited us last year to exhibit at the Paris Exhibition the
direction finding equipment which is used in these researches.
PROPOSITIONS FOR THE CONSIDERATION OF THE
COURT OF ENQUIRY. —I submit for the consideration of
the Court the following propositions;
(1) In view of the progress which has been made in
wireless direction finding, the type of direction finder in
use at Essendon and at other aerodromes in Australia is
obsolete for finding the bearing of high-speed aeroplanes;
(2) That the D.F. at an aerodrome is all important to
aerial navigation, particularly when the aerodrome is
obscured by cloud.
I state these propositions, not in any official capacity, but
as a scientist, and one who has specialised in wireless direc-
tion finding.
ERRORS OF DIRECTION FINDING.—There has been
a good deal of evidence given on direction finding to this
enquiry. Certain statements in the evidence relating to the
Bellini-Tosi and to the Adcock direction finders are not cor-
rect. A correct understanding of these matters may be most
relevant to the findings of this enquiry, and I presume the
Court of Enquiry will desire such errors to be pointed out.
Wireless direction finding (and its errors) is a branch of
radio in which very few wireless engineers specialise, and
there has been a tendency by all concerned to minimise these
errors and ignore them. I will admit that has been done to
some extent in the investigations of which I have charge. We
have realised that the errors cannot be ignored. Similarly
these errors are being ignored or minimised by those respon-
sible for direction finding for aviation and with serious prac-
tical consequences.
It has been stated in evidence that no direction finding
system has been devised which is not subject to error at sun-
set, at night, and at sunrise. That is not correct. The Adcock
method is free from night error as is any other method which
uses as it does only vertically polarised *waves in obtaining a
bearing. The Bellini-Tosi and other loop aerial direction
finders are subject to night error, but the Adcock is not.
* There is an exception to this statement. The direction of the source of a sky
wave, which has been “laterally deflected” is not the true direction of the
source. If all sources of error are to be eliminated in direction finding, only
ground waves can be used in D.F. observations,


The time taken to obtain a bearing with a Bellini-Tosi
direction finder has been stated by various witnesses to be
from a few seconds to 10 minutes. There are conditions
under which it is impossible to obtain for considerable inter-
vals of time any bearing with this D.F., as there is no mini-
mum on the telephones. If there is serious interference due
to atmospherics, or to a signal such as that caused by another
aeroplane on the same wavelength or to the Police Station,
or to 3AR, the operator at Essendon may have to wait till this
interference ceases before he can get a minimum. There
cannot be said, then, to be any definite time required to take
a bearing with the Bellini-Tosi D.F. The minimum time is
required when there is a well-defined minimum in the signal.
I am aware that the Bellini-Tosi D.F. is still widely used,
and I have read a newspaper report of the opinion of
my distinguished friend, Dr. A. L. Green, that the criticisms
of that direction finder which have been made at this enquiry
are, in his opinion, not justified.
Now I believe all the direction finding specialists who
have taken part in the Melbourne University investigations
are of the opinion that the use of a coil aerial at a MINIMUM
setting as determined by a telephone (and that is done with
both the Bellini-Tosi and Adcock type of D.F.’s) is an obso-
lete practice technically which should not be continued.
In view of these differences in expert opinion, and the im-
portance of the questions at issue, I desire to state very care-
fully and in detail the reasons which can be given in support
of the conclusions I have stated.
REQUIREMENTS OF WIRELESS DIRECTION FIND-
ING FOR AVIATION.—The requirements of a wireless
direction finder, which is to be used to find the bearing of an
aeroplane with a speed of up to 200 miles per hour are:
(1) that the time required to obtain a bearing should
not exceed a few seconds;
(2) the direction finder must be capable of being used
at all times of the day or night;
(3) it should be subject to a minimum of interference
by atmospherics and by wireless signals;
(4) the bearings found with it should be subject to a
minimum error in angle.
The actual performance of the Bellini-Tosi D.F. may be
compared with these ideal requirements.


DEFECTS OF THE BELLINI-TOSI D.F. Bellini and
Tosi in 1908 made two important advances in directional
wireless. The direction finder known by their name uses a
coil aerial, and its errors have become known and understood
since about 1920. Its defects for aviation direction finding
are:
1. Delay in Obtaining a Bearing. As we have seen, a
delay of more than some seconds is the most which is per-
missible for aviation, whereas actually there is a delay of
varying duration. The pilot is not certain of obtaining his
bearing immediately after he asks for it.
2. Interference by Atmospherics and Signals. The D.F.
officer at Essendon has described in evidence (P. 184) the
interference with his observations which the Police Station,
3AR, and planes calling on the 900 m wavelength cause.
That due to the Police Station and 3AR could be reduced.
Interference by another plane cannot, and it becomes much
worse as the D.F. is turned to give a minimum signal. In-
terference by atmospherics makes this minimum setting
difficult or impossible. This is discussed later. Interfer-
ence by snow and ice is mentioned by a pilot; it requires
investigation.
3. Errors of Bearing. Evidence to this Enquiry states
that these errors are in all plus or minus 1 degree at 50 miles,
and sometimes are 4to 5 degrees. Other evidence puts the
error as much larger. A witness has stated that aero-
planes have been given a bearing 180 degrees in error,
that is, it was given one with the wrong sense. Pilots have
stated how important it is to have correct bearings.
The loss in October, 1936, of the “Monospar Croydon”
when it was proceeding from Darwin to Koepang, and when
it relied upon a bearing given from a Bellini-Tosi direction
finder located at Darwin has been alleged to have been
due to a large D.F. error. It is very important then that it
should be understood what are the errors of bearing of this
direction finder.


AUTHORITY
ASPECT TREATED
Admiralty Hand Book of
Bellini-Tosi and other aerials
Wireless Telegraphy, 1931.
for use in sea and air. Prac-
tical and authoritative.
H u n d, “High Frequency
Mathematical theory of di-
Systems.”
rective aerials and their
errors.
Smith, Rose and Barfield
Cause and elimination of night
(Journ. Institute of Elec-
errors. Observations of the
trical Engineers, 1926).
errors of coil aerials.
Munro, Webster and Higgs.
Errors of the Cathode Ray
(Radio Research Board of
Direction Finder Using Coil
Australia Report No. 8,
Aerials.
1935.)
Busignies (“Electrical Com-
Night error of a Bellini-Tosi
munication, Jan., 1938.”)
and an Adcock Direction
Finder are compared.
As to some of the bearing errors of a coil aerial, all
authorities are in agreement. The following authorities may
be mentioned:
(An important general reference is Watson Watt, Herd,
Bainbridge, Bell: the Cathode Ray Oscillograph in Radio
Research.)
Bellini-Tosi bearing errors include:
(1) Faulty adjustment of instrument.
(2) Site error due to large metal structures, contour
of ground, etc.
(3) Error of sense, i.e., of 180 degrees in the bearing.
(4) Aeroplane error.
(5) Night error.
It is necessary to explain the errors (3), (4), and (5)
above.
ERROR OF SENSE.—The bearings of a coil aerial do not
distinguish N from S, E from W. All bearings obtained with
a coil are subject to an “error of sense” (i.e., of 180 degrees).
If the bearing is given as N, when it is actually S, this is


euphoniously called “giving the reciprocal.” To remove this
defect a vertical aerial is combined with the coil aerial and
the combination can be adjusted to have no error of sense.
There is a practice of providing an electrical key which
disconnects the vertical aerial and puts it out of use. As the
adjustment of the “sense device” requires considerable care
and skill, its adjustment should be made as permanent as
possible and every precaution should be taken to prevent
bearings with the wrong sense being given. An aeroplane
receiving such a bearing would not be informed that it had
passed the aerodrome to which it was flying.
AEROPLANE ERROR. This error arises when the
trailing aerial of the aeroplane is deflected from the vertical
plane, which passes through the aeroplane and the direction
finder. The Bellini-Tosi D.F. is subject to this error, but the
Adcock D. F. is not subject to it. The bearing of an aeroplane,
which sends signals from a trailing aerial while circling round
a coil aerial D.F. is at all times in error. This fact is import-
ant, for it is usually overlooked when direction finders are
tested for error by means of an aeroplane, which circles round
the D.F.
NIGHT ERROR.—At sunset, at night, and at sunrise, the
Bellini-Tosi and other coil aerial direction finders are subject
to night error. The D.F. may at times be unworkable.
Busignies (see paper quoted) found between 7 p.m. and 8
p.m. (after sunset) three times in one hour that a coil D.F.
was unworkable, and he found errors of 10 degrees or more
on five occasions in the hour. (His results are shown in Fig.
15, P. 228 of his paper). He took simultaneous bearings dur-
ing this hour with an Adcock aerial, and none of them were
in error by more than plus or minus 1 degree. For an IN-
COMING AEROPLANE an error of even 16 degrees possibly
may not be serious (I should like to know the opinion of pilots),
for in spite of such an error, if the incoming plane is given
bearings at frequent intervals, it will certainly come to the
aerodrome.
The case of an OUTGOING AEROPLANE is entirely dif-
ferent. The actual instance of the “Monospar Croydon,” lost
in October, 1936, when outward bound from Darwin, is worth
considering. I have been unable to obtain in the Melbourne
Public Library the official report on this accident. I shall
give an account from memory which can be corrected as to
the facts when the official report can be examined.


Time
Time
from
leaving
Darwin
Changes of Course, etc.
5.12 a.m.
25 min.
2 degrees to south.
5.32 a.m.
45 min.
5 degrees to south.
5.52 a.m.
65 min.
5 degrees to south.
6.20 a.m.
93 min.
last D.F. bearing given just be-
fore sunrise, interference by at-
mospherics.
7.13 a.m.
9.15 a.m.
146 min.
Monospar last heard at Darwin
D.F. station.
Monospar lands on reef.
[The Report of the Air Accidents Investigation Committee,
dated 15/12/1936, states:
The “Monospar Croydon” departed from Darwin at 4.47
a.m. on 7th October, 1936, for Koepang. The navigator of
the Monospar was aware that the aeroplane’s magnetic compass
was in error (but he did not know by what amount) and he
asked for bearings from the Bellini-Tosi direction finder
located at Darwin. The following table gives the changes of
course which the pilot made to conform to these D.F. bearings:
The Bellini-Tosi bearings were given at night and just
before sunrise, when they are subject to error. The bearing
relative to Darwin of Koepang is 284 degrees, but the bearing
of the reef upon which the Monospar landed (and was lost) is
not stated in the Report.
The error of the final position of the Monospar was appar-
ently about 20 degrees. The Air Accidents Investigation
Committee found that the pilot of the Monospar should not
have relied for navigation at sunrise upon the D.F. at Darwin,
and that the personnel of the D.F. station should not have
consented to give bearings.
The comment is to be made that a direction finder which
is set by listening for a minimum sound in a telephone
is rendered unusable by atmospheric interference. Such in-
tereference is very frequent and intense at Darwin, as the sea
and islands to the north and the land to west and south is a
region of severe and frequent thunderstorm.
The above, written after the writer had given evidence, is in
essentials the same as his evidence.]


SUGGESTIONS FOR THE IMPROVEMENT OF DIREC-
TION FINDING FOR AVIATION.—These suggestions are:
(1) Reduce the time required to give a bearing.
(2) Eliminate night error (and “aeroplane” error) in
bearings.
(3) Reduce signal and atmospheric interference.
(4) Improve the sense device on direction finders.
How it would be possible to effect these improvements is
briefly indicated below.
(1) and (3) DELAY IN GIVING BEARINGS; INTER-
FERENCE BY SIGNALS AND ATMOSPHERICS.—The use
of a cathode ray direction finder would reduce the delay in
giving a bearing and enable the operator to distinguish be-
tween the direction of the signal from the aeroplane whose
direction he wishes to determine, and interference.
If a C.R.D.F. existed which could use the 900 metre wave-
length now used by aeroplanes, and use at the same time an
Adcock aerial, then it would be a great improvement on any
existing direction finder. There are two difficulties in doing
this. The first is an Adcock aerial for 900 metres is a large
and expensive structure, nevertheless it is in commercial use
in Europe (see the paper by Busignies mentioned above).
(The Adcock aerial is used for aviation in South Africa, but
Ido not know with what wavelength). The second difficulty
is to combine the cathode ray direction finder with an Adcock
aerial. While it has been tried by the investigators of the
British Radio Research Board, it is not a commercial direc-
tion finder, and possibly cannot be made one. (This matter
is discussed further later).
The first of these difficulties is discussed later.
Even though the C.R.D.F. is not commercially available,
there is every reason to believe that a cathode ray tube could
replace the telephone now used in setting the direction finder,
and then it could be set at a maximum instead of a minimum.
The time required to take a reading of the D.F. could be re-
duced in this way to a few seconds. (An experiment with a
cathode ray tube was demonstrated to the committee to show
that (1) reading the direction is like reading the hand of a
clock. It can be read at any instant. (2) the distance of the
signalling aeroplane can be roughly estimated. (3) whether


the aeroplane is approaching or receding determined. Using
a cathode ray tube as indicator and the signal at a maximum
would mean not only less delay in taking bearings, but also
the possibility of—
(1) Discriminating between the desired signal, and in-
terfering signals (provided they are of different wave-
length) , and atmospherics;
(2) Roughly estimating the distance of an aeroplane
from the direction finder.
NIGHT ERROR USE OF ADCOCK AERIAL. —-The use
of the Adcock aerial seems unavoidable if night error (and
aeroplane error) is to be eliminated. As already stated the
objection to this aerial is its high cost. Mr Wiggins has men-
tioned that Pan-American Airways use a wavelength of 200
metres in the tropics for direction finding. The use of such a
wavelength has two advantages, namely, it reduces interfer-
ence by atmospherics which is serious in northern Australia,
and it reduces the cost of the Adcock aerial. (An Adcock
aerial for 900 metres not including anything but the aerial
would cost, I would estimate, possibly ten times one for a 200
metre wave). The elimination of night error would enable
bearings correct to a few degrees of angle to be given at any
time during the day or night, and it would increase the con-
fidence in reliability of direction finders in all those using
them, including both pilots and wireless and other officers at
the aerodrome.
ERROR OF SENSE. How this uncertainty could be
eliminated need not be discussed. The problem is not one
without technical difficulties, but for aviation bearings with
an error of 180 degrees should not be tolerated. Such an
error may involve great risk in aerial navigation,
[When an aerodrome is obscured by low cloud or fog it is
most important, as the loss of the Kyeema shows, for a pilot
making for that aerodrome to know at once if he overshoots it.
28/11/38.]
OTHER PROBLEMS.—I have not discussed.
(1) The use of two D.F.’s to locate aeroplanes.
(2) Thunderstorm warnings.
(3) Relation of radio research to civil and military
aviation.


IS THE ADCOCK AERIAL C.R.D.F. A COMMERCIAL
INSTRUMENT?
The writer was recalled by Dr. Coppel, counsel for the Civil
Aviation Board. His questions were directed to show that the
Adcock aerial cathode ray direction finder is a commercial
direction finder, which the writer would have known if he
had made adequate enquiries. I replied that I had made full
enquiries in 1936 at the British Radio Research Board in
London as to their investigations including those relating to
direction finding.
Mr Watson Watt, who was directing these investigations,
had shown me their research station at Slough, and he, and
others discussed their investigations with me.
As a result of these discussions I was invited by the Royal
Meteorological Society to open before it a discussion on
“Atmospherics.” Investigators of the British R.R.B. (Mr
Watson Watt and Mr Lutkin) contributed to it, and although
Sir George Simpson, F.R.S., criticised, as I did, errors of direc-
tion finding in atmospheric investigations, no mention of an
Adcock aerial C.R.D.F. was made in this discussion.
Further, I said in answer to Dr. Coppel, those associated
with me in the Australian Radio Research Board investigations
did not know of an Adcock aerial C.R.D.F. These included
Mr R. W. Boswell, M.Sc., who recently returned from Eng-
land, where he had been engaged on radio-research and had
been in touch with the British R.R.B.
[We knew of the medium wave length coil aerial C.R.D.F.
designed by the investigators of the British Board. It is
a development of their atmospheric C.R.D.F., the one used
in the Australian atmospheric investigations.
Enquiries relating to atmospherics and direction finding,
which I made in 1936 at the New York Office of the U.S.
Weather Bureau, and at Pan American Airways, and letters
from scientists and officials in France, the United States, Can-
ada, and South Africa, mentioned only the original coil aerial
C.R.D.F. I felt justified on this evidence in questioning that
an Adcock aerial C.R.D.F. was in commercial use. —28/11/38.]
The writer, in a written statement to the Air Accidents
Committee pointed out that Dr. Green, who is a leading
authority on directional aerials evidently did not know when
he gave evidence of the existence of an effective Adcock aerial
C.R.D.F. Further, Squadron-Leader Wiggins could not have


known of it, as will be seen from his reply to a question by Mr.
Gamble (see evidence, p. 236): Mr Gamble: “What was the
position in Pan American Airways system at the hours of
sunrise and sunset, at night time; were they subject to inter-
ference or not?”—Squadron-Leader Wiggins; “I prefer to
answer that in another way—that no D.F. system has yet been
devised which is not subject to error during the hours of
sunset, sunrise and the period of darkness.” As the only
reason which justifies the use of the Adcock aerial (which is
much more complicated and expensive than a coil aerial) is its
freedom from night error, the writer inferred that this witness
did not know of the existence of an Adcock C.R.D.F.
Barfield and Ross (Journ. Inst. Elec., Eng., Nov., 1937)
describe an Adcock D.F., but it is not a cathode ray one.
Now Barfield is one of the most experienced users of the
C.R.D.F., and one of the investigators of the British R.R.B.
Why did he not use a cathode ray indicator? The writer
stated that there was a 1938 paper by the British R.R.B. work-
ers.
The writer stated that it was his considered opinion, based
on 10 years’ knowledge of the coil aerial C.R.D.F., that before
it is concluded that an Adcock aerial C.R.D.F. is suitable for
commercial use and before 17 of these direction finders are
purchased for use in aerial navigation, the direction finder in
question should be subject to careful scientific examination.
A short-wave Adcock C.R.D.F. should be subject to specially
complete tests as to its reliability and freedom from error.
The writer then explained in as non-technical a manner as he
was able the reasons for his scepticism.
[These reasons are not given here, for the questions at
issue, namely, the reliability, the difficulties of operating, and
the errors of an Adcock aerial D.F. are in part brought out by
some very recently published papers.
The staff of British Radio Research Station describe a
short-wave cathode ray direction finding receiver in the “Wire-
less Engineer” of August, 1938. This is for use over the
range of wave lengths 30 to 70 metre. Under “performance”
the paper says “the receiver has been tried out on the short-
wave Adcock aerial system in use at Slough, and on a some-
what smaller ‘elevated H’ type of Adcock. On the latter
system, satisfactory bearings were obtained with pulse trans-
missions on a 50 metre wavelength from an aircraft flying
between Cologne and London.”


No doubt this is the D.F. which is to be purchased by the
Civil Aviation Board. I claim that the above extract is fur-
ther evidence that its reliability when used under adverse
climatic conditions, and the skill and experience required of
those operating it has not been tested. Thus the further in-
formation contained in this paper strengthens the evidence
that the short-wave Adcock C.R.D.F. is not an instrument
which has yet passed the test of successful commercial oper-
ation. Nor has it been proved to possess that degree of
continuous reliability and freedom from error necessary if it is
to be safe for use in aerial navigation.
Our experience with the long-wave coil aerial C.R.D.F.
shows that considerable wireless experience and knowledge
is required to operate it.
A question of great importance is: What wave length
should be used in direction finding for aerial navigation? At
present aeroplanes in Australia communicate on a 900 metre
wave length. A change in wave length for direction finding
will mean either scrapping this equipment or adding a short-
wave transmitter to it. The advantage of the 900 metre wave
length is that the ground wave is transmitted over consider-
able distances, and when received on an Adcock aerial is
free from night error of direction. The disadvantage is that
the aerial is very large and costly.
A medium wave length (e.g. 200 metre) is more attenuated
along the ground, and so it will be accurate for D.F. over
shorter distances. Ultra short waves (e.g., 6to 10 metre)
have large D.F. errors, even at 20 miles.—24/11/38.]


