

r 1 3 I 9 S' i ■ '
1
*. % . , ' . . . • w . V
STATEMENT
EXPLANATORY OF
THE SYSTEM OF EDUCATION
ADMI SriSTERED"BY
v THE NATIONAL BOAED
NEW SOUTH WALES.
PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF TEE COMMISSIONERS.
SECOND EDITION.
• *•* -V J
SYDNEY.
PRINTED BY HENRY BANCROFT, YORK STREET NEXT THE LYCEUM.
1861.
* ' . • . % *
4 * A
-gL ' * *
j * ' *' » * /
% ’x. . • 0 ,x a • h%, - T‘ , M-MI


‘ ?: ♦ ♦


n x ~\
STATEMENT
EXPLANATORY OP THE SYSTEM OP EDUCATION
ADMINISTERED BY THE NATIONAL BOARD OP
NEW SOUTH WALES.
PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF TEE COMMISSIONERS.
1. The object of the National System is, to afford facilities
to persons of every denomination for the efficient education of
their children in the same School, without prejudice to the
conscientious convictions of any. National Schools, therefore,
are open upon equal terms to all; and adequate provision is
made for supplying the two parts, secular and religious, of
which a complete education consists. In reference to the y
former, it may suffice to state, that all the ordinary branches of
an English Education are taught in every National School.
The religious instruction is divided into general and special. The
instruction is given by the Teacher to all the
children whose parents do not object, and is of such a character
that all Christians may receive it without offence. It is
intended that the special religious instruction should be given
by clergymen, or other approved religious teachers, to the
children of their respective persuasions, and every necessary
arrangement is made for that purpose.


2. The principal advantages of the National System are,
that through its instrumentality the means of obtaining a
sound education are extended to all parts of the Colony;
that, by softening or removing prejudice, it promotes
toleration and harmony among persons of conflicting religious
opinions; that it trains them to think and act as fellow-citizens
and friends, and not as rivals or enemies; and that it oilers
equal rights and privileges to all classes of the community.
3. The following obseryations are intended to explain the
proper mode of procedure in establishing a National School,
and the practical working of the system when the school is in
actual operation. The Schools supported by the Commis-
sioners are of two kinds —Vested and Non-Yested. In the case
of the former description of Schools, the whole property is vest-
ed in the Commissioners; but in the latter, this ownership is not
claimed. The Regulations applying to these twm classes of
Schools, differ in certain particulars, which may be observed
in the sequel.
I.—ESTABLISHMENT OE SCHOOLS.
4. As a general rule, the Commissioners will not grant aid
towards the erection of a National School, unless a minimum
attendance of thirty pupils can be guaranteed ; but in cases
where that number cannot be secured, the Board will contri-
bute towards the support of the School, by paying the teacher
such a proportion of his classification salary, as the actual
attendance forms of the required minimum. Before aid can be
granted towards the establishment or support of a School, the
Commissioners must be satisfied, through the Report of their
Inspector, that the existing means of education do not meet
the requirements of the locality, and that the case is so far
deserving of assistance; and that there is reason to expect that
the School will be efficiently and permanently supported. In


Non-Vested Schools, a schoolhouse, sufficient for the purpose
and suitably furnished, must be provided, and a competent
Teacher appointed, by the Local Patrons. To entitle a Non-
Yested School to a continuance of aid, the House and
Furniture must be kept in good repair by means of local
contributions; the School conducted in all respects in a
satisfactory manner, and in accordance with the Regulations oi
the Commissioners, and the instructions of their Inspectors;
and there must be an average daily attendance of at least
thirty Children.
5. The extent of the aid afforded by the Board in the
establishment of Vested Schools, is two-thirds of the total cost
of the School buildings, furniture, and apparatus the remain-
ing portion being provided for locally. The aid to Non-
Yested Schools will be limited to salary and books.
6. When it is proposed to establish a Vested National School
in any locality, it is desirable that a public meeting should be
held, in order that the inhabitants may receive information on
the subject, and have an opportunity of expressing their
opinions. At this meeting, a Provisional Committee may be
chosen, to initiate proceedings and make a preliminary applica-
tion to the Board for aid, and to collect subscriptions. The
Board will furnish printed forms of application, which must be
filled up, under the various headings, and transmitted to the
office, before a definite promise of assistance can be made.
When a sufficient building fund has been secured, the sub-
scribers should meet and elect Local Patrons, and the
educational and moral qualifications of the parties so selected
should be of the kind hereafter described. It is desirable
that each of the leading religious denominations be represented
in the person of at least one Patron. Although the Patrons,
being for many important purposes the organs of the Board,
necessarily hold their appointments subject to its pleasure, the
Board will at all times pay to the wishes of the local contributors


the utmost deference, consistent with the selection of fit and
impartial persons.
7. The Local Patrons should choose one of their number to
act as Secretary, and conduct the correspondence with the
Board. Another should be chosen as Treasurer, to take charge
of the funds locally subscribed.
8. When the formal application has been submitted to the
Commissioners, and their approval has been notified to the
Patrons, the local contributions should be collected and paid
into the “ Union Bank of Australia,” to the credit of the
“Board of National Education Building Fund,” before the
contribution of the Board can be made available. This
payment should be reported to the Board, and must be made
to the extent of one-third, at least, of the estimated cost of the
fencing, building, furniture, and apparatus.
9. It will next be necessary to select a suitable site for the
erection of the School buildings. A School site should be
central and convenient to the majority of the subscribers, easily
accessible in all seasons, removed from noisy thoroughfares,
healthy and pleasant, and, in country places, within a
reasonable distance of wood and water. If there be any land
answering to this description in the neighbourhood belonging
to the Government, the Local Patrons should furnish a
technical description of a sufficient area thereof, —to the
extent of two acres, —to the Board, who will make application
for its appropriation. But, if there be no land belonging
to the Government suitable for the purpose, a site must be
obtained from a private individual, and a conveyance of the
fee simple (or lease where specially agreed on) made to the
Board. With the view of enabling their Solicitor to prepare
the conveyance, tub particulars as to the size and position of
the land, and as to the title thereto, should be furnished to the
Board. The Commissioners will effect (he conveyance without
cost to the donor. When it is necessary to purchase a site, the


Commissioners will contribute the usual proportion of the
cost.
10. The Local Patrons should then submit a suitable plan
and specification of the proposed School buildings for the
approval of the Board; or, they may apply to the Board for such
a plan, if there be difficulty in preparing one locally. A
pecuniary pledge made by the Board in any year will hold
good for that year only; and if not taken up within that time,
a fresh application will be necessary.
11. As a general rule, the Board will not consider any
plan as suitable in which a less width is assigned to the School-
room than sixteen feet wffien the School is small, eighteen feet,
when the attendance is expected to exceed fifty, and twenty
feet in a larger School. In calculating the size of the room,
an allowance of at least eight square feet must be made for
each child in average attendance. Every School building
should admit of a separate room being set apart for the recep-
tion of children while under special religious instruction.
12. The Teacher’s residence must contain not less than three
decent rooms and a kitchen. Provision must also be made for
the necessary out-buildings, and for supplying water.
13. Forms should be provided, so as to furnish seats for all
the children expected to attend the School, allowing eighteen
inches for each child ; and desks for at least one-half of the
pupils. A black board and easel are also necessary.
14. The Commissioners having approved of the plan and
specification, will instruct the Local Patrons to call for tenders
and to lay before the Board that which they deem the most
eligible. The parties to the contract for building the School will
be the person whose tender is acc> ptcd and the Local Patrons.
The Commissioners simply intimate their consent to the terms
of the contract; but Local Patrons are never to accept tenders
for works, to the cost of which the Board are expected to con-
tribute, unless the approval of the Commissioners has previously
been requested and obtained.


15. The usual arrangements for paying contractors is as
follows: —
One-third of the contract price when the walls are erected.
One-third when the building is roofed in; and
One-third when the whole is completed.
The first payment will be made hy the Board from the local
contributions. Forms of certificate that money asked for on
account of contract is due, will be supplied by the Board.
16. The Board will supply a first stock of school books and
maps; but the stock must afterwards be kept up by the means
indicated in the published Rules and Circulars.*
17. The Teachers are expressly enjoined to use, for the
ordinary school business, such works only as are supplied or
sanctioned by the Commissioners.
LIST OP BOOKS SANCTIONED BY THE
COMMISSIONERS.
First Book of Lessons.
Second ditto.
Sequel to the Second Book, No. 1.
Sequel to the Second Book, No. 2.
Third Book of Lessons.
Fourth ditto.
Supplement to the Fourth Book,
Fifth Book.
Reading Book for Girls’ School.
Introduction to the Art of Reading.
English Grammar.
Key to ditto.
Arithmetic.
Key to ditto.
Arithmetic in Theory and Practice.
Book Keeping.
Key to ditto.
Epitome of Geographical Knowledge.
A Compendium of ditto.
Elements of Geometry.
Mensuration.
Appendix to ditto.
* Those portions of the following Statement which are printed in small type are for the
most part extracts from the Rules and Circulars already published, and of which the whole
Statement may be regarded as an abstract.


Scripture Lessons (0. T.) No. 1,
Ditto ~ No. 2.
Ditto (N. T.) No. 1.
Ditto „ No. 2,
Sacred Poetry.
Lessons on the Truth of Christianity.
Set Tablet Lessons, Arithmetic, 60 sheets.
Ditto Spelling and Reading, 33 sheets.
Ditto Copy Lines, 6 sheets.
Professor Sullivan’s English Dictionary.
Spelling Book Superseded.
English Grammar.
Introduction to Geography & History.
Geography Generalized.
Together with such other works published by the National Board of
Education in Ireland, as may be found useful. No other books
are to be used in the ordinary school business, unless the
approval of the Board be specially obtained.
lI.—TEACHERS.
18. In Vested Schools, the appointment and dismissal of
Teachers rests solely with the Commissioners, who will, however,
pay regard to the recommendation of candidates by Local
Patrons. While the appointment and removal of Teachers in
Non-Yested Schools will rest with the Local Patrons and
Managers, the Commissioners will require to be satisfied with
the character and competency of the Teacher so appointed,
as a condition to the payment and continuance of salary.
A Teacher should be a person of Christian sentiment, of calm
temper and discretion, imbued with a spirit of peace, of
obedience to the law and loyalty to the Sovereign ; and should
not only possess the art of communicating knowledge, but be
capable of moulding the minds of youth, and of giving a
useful direction to the power which education confers. These
are the qualities for which Patrons of Schools, on their recom-
mendation of Teachers, should anxiously look. They are those
which the Commissioners are anxious to find, to encourage, and
to reward.
19. Persons desirous of obtaining the appointment of Teacher
in a National School, should apply to the Secretary, 'who will


Married Couples
Single Men
Single Women
famish Printed Forms, to be filled in under the respective'
headings, and then submitted for the consideration of the
Commissioners. Candidates must produce a certificate, signed
by two responsible persons, who have known them long enough
to testify as to their sobriety and general moral conduct. They
are further required to undergo a preliminary examination
before an Inspector: and, if found possessed of the requisite
qualifications, they must attend a Model School for a month
at least, to acquaint themselves with the details of the system.
At the expiration of this period, they are again examined by
the Board of Examiners, who report upon their qualifications to
the Commissioners. If classified and appointed to a School, —
but not otherwise, —an allowance at the following? rate is made
to them for the time spent in training : viz.,
20. Candidates for appointment as Teachers must possess
at least a fair knowledge of the subjects usually taught in
National Schools, that is, reading, writing, arithmetic,
grammar, and geography. They must also possess a fair
acquaintance with the principles of School Management, and
with the contents of the National School Books. This know-
ledge will be tested by an examination before an Inspector or
the Head Master of a Model School. As a general rule, no
Teacher will be appointed to a Vested National School who
has not undergone a course of training and examination
at a Model School, and whose competency has not been
thoroughly tested.
21. Teachers are classified according to their attainments
O
and skill in teaching. The ranks and emoluments in Country
Schools are according following scale:—


Married couples.
Per Month,
Special First Class ...*» £l4
class i. I SeM ll
class n. { ;; “
f }> A 8
CLASS 111. \ „ B 7
I„ C 6
Probationers 5
The above scale of remuneration is a joint salary for husband
and wife. To single men and single women, the salary allotted
will be £1 per month less.
In the Model Schools, the salaries paid to Teachers are attached to
their respective offices, for each of which a certain classification
is required.
There is no superanuation fund.
2. The attainments of Teachers will be tested by a written exam-
ination ; and their skill in teaching by an Inspection of their
several Schools.
3. The Commissioners have constituted a Board of Examiners,
for the purpose of setting examination questions and revising
the papers of answers. The undermentioned gentlemen
have consented to act as Examiners in the subjects specified
against their names :
Dr. Woolley Logic and Mental Philosophy.
Professor Pell Mathematics and Natural Philosophy.
W. J. Stephens, M.A...Classics and English Literature.
Rev. Henry J. Hose Modern Languages.
Professor Smith Experimental Sciences.
S. R. Pittard, Esq Natural Sciences.
W. J. Cordner, Esq. ...Music.
J. Fowles, Esq Drawing.
In addition to these gentlemen, tbe names of the Inspectors and
of the Head Master of the Model School, must be included in
the list of Examiners. They will be specially charged with
the examination on the Ordinary Subjects, and with the
estimate of the Teacher’s practical skill.
4. Examinations will be conducted in the same manner as
hitherto. The questions being written, are to be answered on
paper by the Candidate in the presence of an Inspector, who,
at the close of the examination, will forward the replies to the
Examiners for revision. Each Examiner will set questions
on the subjects belonging to his own department, and will
also assign a value to the papers of answers, in accordance
with his estimate of their merits. The value of the
different papers will then be collated by the Inspectors and
the Head Master, who will report the result to the
Commissioners.


5. The subjects on which Teachers may be examined are
divided into two classes: —Ordinary and Alternative The
former Class embraces those elementary branches with which
it is necessary for every Teacher to be acquainted, inasmuch
as they form the staple of daily instruction in School.
Reading, Writing, Arithmetic, Grammar, Geography, and the
Knowledge of the School Books are of this kind, to which
must be added, as being equally requisite, acquaintance with
the principles of School Management. All other subjects are
styled Alternative, because it is optional with the Teacher to
undergo an examination in any of them with which he may
be familiar.
6. In order t-o obtain a First or Second Class Certificate,
Teachers must submit to examination in one or more
Alternative Subjects; and it is recommended that they
should confine their attention to one group of subjects.
7* Teachers who undergo examination for a higher certificate
will be- expected, at every successive grade, to show increased
acquaintance with the ordinary branches. In Alternative
subjects, should one branch only be taken, higher proficiency
will be required than where two or more subjects are selected.
For example, less extensive knowledge in each branch would
be required from a Teacher who chose Latin and Greek, than
from another who was examined in Latin only.
8 All Teachers holding a lower classification than Class 11,
Section A, will be required to undergo examination annually,
as stated in Circular 27. Success in the examination will not
necessarily entitle a Teacher to a higher classification, but
failure will lead to a loss of classification unless a very satis-
factory reason could be assigned for the decrease of attain-
ments. The precise date of the annual examination cannot be
fixed, as it will depend much upon the engagements of the
various Inspectors; bat in general, it will take place about
the time of the Secondary Inspection of the School. Teachers
who desire to be examined with a view to obtain a higher
Certificate must apprise the Inspector of the District of their
wish ; and, at the same time, furnish to him a list of the
Alternative Subjects upon which they are prepared for
examination.
9. No higher classification will be awarded, even if an exami-
nation be passed successfully by a Teacher, unless the
Inspector’s Reports upon his School speak in favourable terms
of his ability, industry, and efficiency. Attainments, there-
fore, without practical skill, will not entitle a Teacher to
promotion ; while on the other hand, success in the actual
work of the School will always be recognized and rewarded.
It will be seen from the foregoing statements, that a Teacher’s
classification depends, first upon his attainments, and secondly
upon his practical skill.


10. Teachers who are desirous of being promoted to larger or
more important Schools, are to intimate their wishes in this
respect to the Inspector of the District in writing. A list of
such Teachers will be kept in the Board’s office, and all pro-
motions will be made in accordance with the principle of
classification and seniority, except in special cases.
LIST OF SUBJECTS IN WHICH TEACHERS WILL BE
EXAMINED FOR EACH CLASSIFICATION.
To obtain a Third Class Certificate Teachers must be examined in—
GRAMMAR: including punctuation, paraphrasing, parsing, and
analysis of Simple and Combined Sentences. TEXT BOOKS :
National School Grammar, M'Leod’s Grammar, Morell’s Analysis
of Sentences.
GEOGRAPHY : general and descriptive. TEXT BOOKS ; Sullivan’s
Introduction to Geography, Hughes’ (W.) General Geography.
(Gleig’s Series).
ARITHMETIC, as far as Decimal Fractions. TEXT BOOKS:
National School Arithmetic, Colenso’s Arithmetic.
SCHOOL MANAGEMENT: includingthe organization,discipline, and
instruction of Schools. TEXT BOOKS : The Board’s Statement,
National School Books, Dawes’ Suggestive Hints.
NATIONAL SCHOOL BOOKS: the reading books from the First to
the Third, inclusive.
READING : Prose and Poetry from the Lesson Books.
WRITING: specimens of Copy-Setting in text, round, and small
hands.
For Second Class Certificate.
GRAMMAR ; including punctuation, paraphrasing, composition, pars-
ing, derivation, and analysis of sentences. TEXT BOOKS:
Latham’s English Grammar, Morell’s Analysis of Sentences,
Sullivan’s Dictionary of Derivations.
GEOGRAPHY: physical and descriptive. TEXT BOOKS: Hughes’
(B.) Physical Geography, Hughes’ (W.) Manual of Geography.
ARITHMETIC: as far as Cube Root and Duodecimals, and Ele-
mentary Mensuration. TEXT BOOKS : De Morgan’s Arithmetic,
Colenso’s Arithmetic, Tate’s Mensuration, Book-keeping and Key
in the National School Series.
ART OF TEACHING: the organization, discipline, and instruction of
Schools in greater detail. Dunn’s Principles of Teaching, Young’s
Infant School Manual.


NATIONAL SCHOOL BOOKS : the series of Reading Books, includ-
ing the Girls’ Reading Book.
READING : Prose and Poetry from the Literary Class Book, or
Biographical Sketches.
WRITING: specimens of copy-setting in three hands, and of letter
writing.
ALGEBRA: as far as, and inclusive of, Quadratic Equations, hut
omitting Surds. TEXT BOOK : Colenso’s Algebra Part I.
GEOMETRY : The First Book of Euclid’s Elements. TEXT BOOK :
Potts’ Euclid.
LATIN : Cassar (De Bello Gallico), Grammar.
Note.— lf Latin be chosen, Algebra and Geometry will not be
required, and vice versa .
For First Class Certificate.
GRAMMAR ; punctuation, paraphrasing, parsing, analysis of sentences,
composition, style, derivation, and prosody. TEXT BOOKS :
Latham’s Grammar, Hunter’s Grammar, Morell’s Analysis of
Sentences.
GEOGRAPHY: physical, political, and commercial, with popular
astronomy, and mathematical geography. TEXT BOOKS :
Hughes’ (W.) Manual of Geography, Hughes’ (E.) Physical Geo-
graphy, Tate’s Popular Astronomy.
ARITHMETIC; the whole Theory and Practice. TEXT BOOKS,
De Morgan’s, Thomson’s, Cornwell’s.
NATIONAL SCHOOL BOOKS : the whole of the Reading Series.
READING: Prose and Poetry,—Milton, Shakespeare, and other
standard authors.
WRITING : specimens of copy-setting, and letter writing.
PRINCIPLES OF TEACHING: including a knowledge of the nature
of the human Mind,
And one or more Alternative Subjects.
LIST OF SUBJECTS IN WHICH FEMALE TEACHERS
WILL BE EXAMINED FOR CLASSIFICATION.
Third Class Certificate.
READING.—Prose and Poetry, from the Lesson Books.
WRlTlNG.—Specimens of Copy-setting, in Text, Round, and Small-
hands.
ARITHMETIC.—SimpIe and Compound-Rules with Proportion. TEXT
BOOKS.'—First Arithmetic ; Colenso’s Arithmetic.


'GRAMMAR —Punctuation, Paraphrasing, Parsing, and Analysis of
Simple and Combined Sentences. TEXT BOOKS : McLeod s
Grammar ; Morell’s Analysis of Sentences.
GEOGRAPHY. —Elementary Geography. TEXT BOOKS : Hughes’
General Geography in Gleig’s Series.
ART OF TEACHING.—The Organization, Discipline, and Instruction
of Schools. TEXT BOOKS.—The Board’s Statement ; National
School Books.
SCHOOL BOOKS. —The Reading Books from the First to the Third
inclusive.
DOMESTIC ECONOMY.—Food.
NEEDLEWORK. —Plain Needlework in all its Branches
Second Class Certificate.
READING. Prose and Poetry, from the Lesson Books, or Literary
Class Book.
WRITING. —Specimens of Copy-setting, in three hands, and of Letter
Writing.
ARITHMETIC. —Practice, Fractions, and the simple rules of Mental
Arithmetic. TEXT BOOKS.—Tate’s Arithmetic; Colenso’s
Arithmetic,
GRAMMAR.—Punctuation, Paraphrasing, Composition, Parsing,
Derivation, and Analysis of Complex and Compound Sentences.
TEXT BOOKS.—Latham’s English Grammar ; Morell’s Analysis
of Sentences; Sullivan’s Dictionary of Derivations.
GEOGRAPHY. —Physical and Descriptive.—TEXT BOOKS.—Hughes’
(B.) Physical Geography ; Hughes’ (W.) Manual of Geography.
ART OF TEACHING-— Organization, Discipline, and Instruction of
Schools. TEXT BOOKS— Board’s Regulations; Dawes’ Suggestive
Hints ; Young’s Infant School Manual.
NATIONAL SCHOOL BOOKS. —The Reading Books to the Fourth
inclusive, with the Girls’ Reading Book, and the Spelling
Book Superseded.
MUSIC. —Theory and Practice of Vocal Music. TEXT BOOK—
Hullah’s Manual.
DRAWlNG—Outline Drawing, from copies and objects.
NEEDLEWORK. —Plain and Ornamental.
DOMESTIC ECONOMY.—Food and Clothing.
ALTERNATIVE SUBJECTS.
FRENCH —Grammar and Translation
MUSIC. —Instrumental—the Piano.
Note. —Either of the Alternative Subjects will be accepted in lieu
of Vocal Music or Drawing.


First Class Certificate.
READING.—Prose and Poetry, from Selections from the British Poets.
TEXT BOOK—The Art of Beading.
WRITING. —Copy Setting and Letter Writing
ARITHMETIC-—Decimals and the Extraction of Roots; Mental
Calculation, TEXT BOOKS—Thomson’s Arithmetic ; Cornwell
and Fitch’s Arithmetic.
GRAMMAR.—Punctuation, Paraphrasing, Parsing, Analysis of Sen-
tences, Composition, Style, Prosody. TEXT BOOKS—Latham’s
Grammar; Hunter’s Grammar; Morell’s Analysis of Sentences.
GEOGRAPHY.—PhysicaI, Political, and Descriptive. TEXT LOOKS
—Hughes’ (W.) Manual- of Geography; Hughes’ (E.) Physical
Geography.
PRINCIPLES OF TEACHlNG.—Subjects and Methods of Instruction.
TEXT BOOKS —Dawes’Suggestive Hints; Young’s Infant School
Manual.
NATIONAL SCHOOL BOOKS.—-The whole of the Reading Series
with the Spelling Bpok Superseded.
NEEDLEWORK. —Plain' and Ornamental.
DOMESTIC ECONOMY.—Food and Clothing, Health, Sickness,
MUSIC. —Vocal and Instrumental. TEXT 800K —Hullah’s Manual.
DRAWING.—Linear, Landscape, and Figure Drawing. And one or
more Alternative Subjects.
Note. —Teachers must be prepared for Examination in any of the
subjects prescribed for the Classes below that to which they
aspire.
LIST OF ALTERNATIVE SUBJECTS OF EXAMINATION.
Note. —Teachers must hear in mind that the examination questions may not be confined to
the text-books mentioned below, they being intended, to indicate merely the
general course and direction to be pursued in studying the various subjects.
Subjects.
Beanches.
Text Books.
1. Mental Philoso-
phy.*
Logic
Metaphysics
Ethics
Social Philosophy
Thompson’s Laws of Thought, Sir
W. Hamilton’s Lectures on
Logic.
Mansel’s Metaphysics, Sir William
Hamilton’s “ Discussions.” 1,2,
3,5, 6. Appendix 1. Hamilton’s
“ Reid” A 6 capp,, B (8 capp.)
Editor’s Dissertation, A. B. 0. D.
D* D** D**»
WhewelTs Elements of Morality.
Mill’s Political Economy for
Senior’s Political Economy),
Hallam’s Constitutional History,
or Creasy on the Constitution.


SOBJE-CTS.
Branches.
Text Books.
2. Mathematics.
Algebra
Geometry
Trigonometry
Conic Sections
Statics
Lund’s Wood, or Todhunter
Simpson’s Euclid
Hyrners, Snowball, or Todhunter
Hymers, Hamilton, Todhunter
3. Natural Pliiloso-
phy.
Dynamics
Optics
Astronomy
Latin
1
Goodwin’s Course of Mathematics.
Herschers Outlines of Astronomy.
Eton Latin Grammar. Madvig’s
Grammar.
4. Classics.
Greek
Wordsworth'sGrammar.Buttmann’s
Grammar.
5. English Lan
guage and Litera
ture.
Grammar
Literature
Latham’s English Language
Craik’s History of Literature and
Learning in England
Composition
<6. Modern Lan
guages.
French
German
Delille’s, or Dutruc’s Grammar
Becker's Grammar, Arnold’s Ist
German Book
Biagioli’s, or Cerutti’s Grammar
Italian
7. Experimental
Sciences.
Chemistry
Heat
Electricity
Magnetism
Botany
Zoology
Geology
Fownes’ Manual of Chemistry
8. Natural Sciences,
Lindley’s Introduction to Botany
Professor Rymer Jones’s Lectures
Ansted’s Elementary Course of
Geology
9. Music.
Vocal
Hullah’s Manual
Instrumental
Thorough Bass and
Composition
Burrows’ Primer
Marx’s School of Composition
10. Drawing.
Freehand
Harding’s Principles and Practice
of Art
Geometrical 1
Perspective J
Duffin’s, or Dicksee’s Perspective
Butler Williams’ Manual of Model
Drawing and Perspective
The following' works are recommended for consultation—for Logie, Sir W. Hamilton’*
Discussions, No. 4, Appendix 2, Mansel’s Prolegomena Logics. For Metaphysic, Intuition*
ol the Mind, Sir W.Hamilton’s Lectures on Metaphysics. ■»
Note, —In acquainting Teachers with the result of their examination, the following
terms will be used, the relative values being indicated by the numbers ;
Excellent, 10. ■ I Good, 8. 1 Fair, 6. I Moderate, 4. I Small 2.
Very Good, 9. | Very Fair, 7. | Tolerable, 5. J Indifferent, 3. | Utter Failure,


22. When Teachers have been appointed to Schools, they
are to report to the Inspector I'or the District, the fact of their
arrival at their post, and of their having commenced their
duties.
23. The duties of Teachers are generally, to observe faithfully
the Board’s Buies and Regulations, and to carry out the
suggestions of the Inspectors to the best of their abilities. In
particular, they are to instruct the children in accordance with
the directions hereafter given; to train them to habits of
punctuality, regularity, cleanliness, and orderly behaviour,
to pay strict attention to their manners, language, and
demeanour; and to take measures for their safekeeping, fiom
the time they arrive at School until they are dismissed.
Teachers are also to keep the School Records, and to furnish
Returns neatly and punctually ; to see that the following
documents are constantly suspended on the walls of the school-
room, namely, General Lesson, Notice to Visitors, lable of
Minimum Attainments, Time Table, Programme of Lessons,
Inventory of Books and Apparatus, and the Scale of
School Fees. They will also forward monthly to the
Inspector, a Return of the Lessons given in each class.
Teachers will take charge of the School buildings, and all
other property belonging to the Board. They will be
regarded as tenants of the school premises, and will
be responsible for keeping them in repair, allowance
beino- made for reasonable wear and tear. It is
further the duty of Teachers to consult the Local
Patrons, and to receive their instructions, on all matters not
relating to the internal management of the School. It is the
duty of the Teachers’ wives to be present at the assembling
and dismissal of the pupils, in order that they may take charge
of the discipline of the female children: and they are recpni ed
to teach Needlework to the girls, during at least one hour
every school day. In forming an estimate of the efficiency of


CL SS II. |
„ A....
„ B....
72
•’ * 99
• 66 „
60
64
9
99
CLASS TIL |
„ A....
• 60
48
99
„ B....
• 54
--r- 42
99
Schools, the competency and usefulness of Teachers’ wives,
and the amount of time they devote to School duties, will be
taken into account.
24. The income of the Teacher is to be augmented by such
School Fees as shall be paid by the parents of the children
under regulations to be framed by the Local Patrons, in
accordance with the provisions of Circular 29.
25. Teachers are required to give three months’ notice of their
intention to quit their situations, such notice to be dated on the
first day of any month ; and as a condition to the payment of
the salary for the last month of their tenure of office, they are
to hand over to the Local Patrons all the school property
belonging to the Board, and are to make out, in duplicate, an
Inventory of the same, one copy, signed by two Local Patrons
in testimony of its corectness, to be forwarded to the Board’s
Secretary, the other to be retained by the Patrons.
lII.—ASSISTANT TEACHERS.
26. When the number of Pupils in average daily attendance
exceeds seventy, an Assistant Teacher may bo appointed,
to whom the Board will award a salary according to the
following scale:—
Male. Female.
CLASS I. I Section A £B4 per Annum £72 per Annum.
1 » B 78 „ 66 „
*■ ” ” •■•••• »
Assistants will also be entitle to a proportionate share in the
School Fees, unless a special arrangement be made with the
principal Teacher.
IV.—PUPIL TEACHERS.
27. Applications for the apprenticeship of Pupil Teachers
will be received from the Local Patrons of any School, in which
the average daily attendance of scholars for the hallLyear


preceding the date of application, is not less than 50, provided
the Teacher holds a certificate of merit not lower than Class 11.,
Section B. It is also necessary that the School be well
organized and disciplined.
28. Candidates for the office of Pupil Teacher must be at
least thirteen years of age, and free from any bodily infirmity
likely to impair their usefulnesss, —a certificate to that effect
must be signed by a duly medical practitioner. Ihe
Local Patrons must also be satisfied that the moral character
of their parents is good.
29. If found properly qualified, candidates will be engaged
for four years as Pupil Teachers. Their remuneration
consists partly of instruction given by the Teachers, and partly
in a fixed yearly salary, which will be paid by the Board,
provided that the Teachers certify as to their good moral
character, and that they pass the annual examinations before
an Inspector in a satisfactory manner. The Teachers are re-
quired to give instruction for one hour and a half to the Pupil
Teachers on every school day. The Commissioners will award
to Teachers, a bonus, not exceeding twenty pounds, for every
Pupil Teacher who has successfully passed the four yearly
examinations.
y—GOVERNMENT OF SCHOOLS.
30. As the Commissioners themselves decide upon a
Teacher’s competency, so they also reserve to themselves,
through their officers, the power of controlling the internal
management of Schools.
31. Local Patrons ought, at least, to be capable of reading
and writing, to be persons of prudence and discretion and
especially to be of .temperate habits, and of good moral


character. The duties of Loca Patrons, in reference to the
Government of Schools, are, in general terms, to see that the
principle of the National System is maintained inviolate, and
to take care that all the Board’s Regulations and Instructions
are faithfully and efficiently carried out.
Local Patrons should remember that, singly , they have no power
to act, authority being vested in the body collectively, and not
in individuals.
The following are some of the more important matters
falling within the province of the Local Patrons :
1. To make due provision for keeping the School buildings
in constant repair.
2. To take care that they are not used for any improper
purposes. t
The Board require that no use shall be made of their School Houses
tending to contention —such as the holding of political meetings
in them, bringing into them political petitions or documents of
any kind for signature, or converting them into places of public
worship. In Non-Yested Schools, the Commissioners will not
exercise any control over the use of the School, except during
the hours of general instruction.
3. To cause a sufficient quantity of suitable furniture and
apparatus to be provided.
4. To see that the School is properly supplied with books, and
that the sums collected for the “Book Fund” are rightly and
economically expended.
5. To take precautions for excluding from the School, during
its ordinary business, all books not sanctioned by the Com-
missioners.
6. To inspect periodically the School Registers and Records,
and to countersign the Returns made to the Board.
7. To use their influence with parents to induce them to send
their children regularly to School.
8. To fix the rate of School Fees to be paid by the scholars.
The Local Patrons will Cx a certain rate of fee, and deter-


mine the mode of payment, whether weekly or quarterly?
whether in advance or otherwise. The scale should be fixed
with a view to the reservation of one-tenth of the sums paid as
School Fees. The fund so raised is to be appropriated, under
the direction of the Local Patrons, to the purchase of books,
maps, slates, and other school requisites. Before a Scale of
Fees is acted upon, it must be submitted for the approval of
the Commissioners.
In considering the subject of School Fees, thus confided to the
Local Patrons, they will do well to remember, that while the
circumstances of the parents ought to be taken into account,
yet the social position and adequate remuneration of Teachers
should also be regarded. With this view, the Commissioners
make it a general rule to promote the best Masters to the most
lucrative situations. To secure and retain an efficient Teacher
then, it will bo necessary to hold out every possible inducement
for him to remain in bis appointment. Whenever it is practi-
cable, School Fees should be paid quarterly and in advance.
The Commissioners sire of opinion, that not less than the sum of
sixpence per week should be paid, by every child attending a
National School; and they recommend Local Patrons to bear
this opinion in mind, when fixing the rate of School Fee.
The-scale of School Fees having been fixed, is not to be altered
without the sanction of the Commissioners; and six months
notice must be given to the Teacher, before the revised scale can
bo enforced.
9. To see that the School is open on all the usual school days,
and that the Teacher is present at his work.
The School is never to be closed upon any of the usual school days
without the written consent of the Local Patrons ; and if closed
fur more than three days, the circumstances should be reported
to the Commissioners.
10- To observe whether the Teacher regularly and punctually
discharges his duties; to report his conduct to the Board when
he is in fault; and to protect him from frivolous and vexatious
complaints.
The Commissioners do not wish to impose upon the Local Patrons
the difficult and delicate task of deciding upon a Teacher’s
competency. Their great duty is to supervise the Teacher ;


to observe if he attend rigidly and conscientiously to the Board s
Regulations ; and to mark his Zealand energy in the discharge of
his’scholastic functions. Any unauthorised deviations, neglect,
or disregard of the legitimate directions of the Local Pations,
ought, in justice to the public, to he reported to the Com-
missioners.
While the Commissioners strongly deprecate any vexatious inter-
ference with a Teacher out of school hours, they feel so deeply
that his efficiency depends mainly upon the respect -in which
he is held by the community, that they require any matters
affecting his moral character to he immediately reported. Ihe
Local Patrons are also empowered to suspend a Teacher f om his
office, upon receiving sufficient evidence of immoral coi duct on
his part.
All important communications should he made to the Teachers in
writing ; and it may be necessary to hurt that it is unadvisable
for the Board of Local Patrons to visit the School for the
purpose of expostulating with Teachers, in the hearing of the
children.
Parents should not bo allowed, to disturb the order of the School, by
going with complaints to the Master ; but should be directed to
make known their grievances, if any exist, to the Local 1 atrons
at their monthly meetings. The Patrons should carefully
investigate the circumstances, but calmly, dispassionately, and
with a view to preserve peace and harmony, and communicate
the result to the Parents complaining. Frivolous complaints
should, of course, be discountenanced.
11. To sign the Teacher’s monthly Abstract of Salary, pro-
vided they are of opinion that his duties have been
regularly and punctually performed.
12. To report at the end of every year upon the condition of
the School, and the conduct of the Teacher.
Without wishing to prescribe, the Board consider that the Report
may very properly touch upon the following subjects
Names of the Local Patrons and their Denominations.
Number of Monthly Meetings.
Number of visits to the School.
Number of Patrons who had not joined in the performance of the
duties.
Condition of the School House.
Whether the School Land is fenced in. and proper outbuildings
erected.


As to the supply of Furniture, Books, and Apparatus.
Conduct of Master and Mistress.
Progress of the Children, their regularity, cleanliness, and order I '.
If any Clergymen attend for the purpose of affording special
Religious Instruction
13. To correspond with the Commissioners on all subjects
connected with the School.
Much good would result from periodical meetings of the Local
Patrons. At these meetings, which should be held at least qnce
a month, complaints could be received from the Parents, and
reports or requisitions for supplies from the Teacher. A record
should be kept of the proceedings of the Local Patrons at their
meetings. For obvious reasons, it is desirable that all cor-
respondence between the Teacher and the Board in Sydney,
should be forwarded through the Local Patrons. The Com-
missioners decidedly object to the Teacher’s acting as Secretary
to the Local Patrons, and they also disapprove of his having
charge of the Book Fund. This is a duty specially appertaining
to the office of Local Patron.
32. While a Teacher is required to yield due respect to
Local Patrons, as administrators of the Board’s Regulations, it
is expected of the Patrons that they will treat him with the
courtesy and consideration due to his honorable and responsible
office, that they will second his efforts for the improvement of
the children, and aid him by their influence in the efficient
discharge of his duties.
YL—CONDUCT OP SCHOOLS.
33. The following is the usual Daily Routine which
ought to be adopted in every National School. The
time for cmmencing School may be varied according to
circumstances, provided the relative distribution of time be
observed.


DAILY ROUTINE OF A NATIONAL SCHOOL.
MORNING.
TIME
\to 9. —Children assembled in the play-ground; books,
slates, and other materials prepared for
lessons.
5 minutes to 9.—Children are arranged in ranks, and inspected
as to cleanliness and neatness. They are
then marched into t School in an orderly
manner.
9 o’clock.—Lessons commence as noted in Time Table.
•|-past 10.—Recess for ten minutes in the play-ground
accompanied by the Teacher.
J to 11.—Lessons resumed, in accordance with the Time
Table.
5 minutes to 12.—Class-Rolls called, to ascertain what children
are absent.
12 o’clock.—School is dismissed.
AFTERNOON.
TIME.
12 to 2.—Recess for dinner and recreation. During
this interval the Teacher is present with his
pupils, corrects what is wrong, and prevents
accident from boisterous play. The mid-day
recess may be made to terminate at one
o’clock, if considered desirable.
£to 2.—Children re-assemble in the play-ground;
materials prepared for lessons.
5 minutes to 2.—lnspection as to cleanliness ; march into School.
2 o’clock.—Lessons commence as noted in the Time Table.
5 minutes to 4.—Calling the Rolls.
4 o’clock.—School is dismissed.
On at least two days in each week, the ordinary Schoo l
business should close at a quarter to four o’clock, in order to
allow of the reading and exposition of the “ General Lesson,”
to the whole School.


The Commissioners require that the principle of the General
Lesson be strictly inculcated in all Schools under their
superintendence, and that a printed copy of the lesson itself,
to be furnished by them, be hung up in every School.
GENERAL LESSON.
“Christians should endeavour, as the Apostle Paul commands them, to live peaceably
with all men.”— Hum. ch. xii. 18,
“ Our Saviour Christ commanded his disciples to love one another. He taught them to
loVe eVen their enemies, to bless those that Cursed them, and to pray for those that
persecuted them. Ho, himself, prayed for his murderers.”
“ Many men hold erroneous doctrines, hut we ought not to hate or persecute them. We
ought to seek for the truth, and to hold fast what we are convinced is the truth ; but not to
treat harshly those who arc in eiror. Our Saviour did not intend his religion to be forced
on men by violent means. He would not allow his disciples to fight for him.”
“ If any persons treat us unkindly, we must not do the same to them, for Christ and his
Apostles have taught us not to return evil for evil. If wc would obey Christ, we must do to
others not as they do to us, but as we should wish them to do to us.”
“ Quarrelling with our neighbours and abusing them is not the way to convince them
that r,e are in the right and they in the wrong; it is more likely to convince them
that we have not a Christian Spirit.”
“ We ought to shew ourselves followers of Christ, who, when he was reviled, reviled
not a.,aim” —1 Pet. ch. ii. 23.
34. The following is the Time Table alluded to in the Daily
Routine. There will be no objection to an alteration of the
time of commencing School, provided that corresponding
changes are made in the other parts of the Time Table, so as
to preserve the relative distribution of time among the various
subjects. If other alterations are deemed necessary in any
particular School, they are not to be carried out until sanctioned
by the Commissioners. During (he hours appropriated in the
Time Table, to the ordinary instruction of the Pupils, the
usual routine of a National School must be observed in Non-
Yested Schools; but the Commissioners will not exercise any
control over the use of the School at any other time. Any
religious exercises, or instruction peculiar to the private
character of the School, must, therefore, occupj 7 some time
before or after the hours fixed for the ordinary duties, so as to
admit of the convenient absence of any children whose
parents object to their attendance.


TIME TABLE.
TIME,
9 to 10|. —Ordinary Instruction as* defined in the
Table of Minimum Attainments.
10J to 10f. —Recess.
lOf to 12.—Ordinary Instruction.
12 to 1 or 12 to 2.—Recess for dinner and recreation.
1 to 2 or 2 to 3.—Reading of Scripture Lessons.
2 to 3 or 3 to 4,—Ordinary Instruction.
Durmg an hour of each day (designated in the Time Table} children, whose parents
desire that they should r; ceire special religious instruction from the pastors or
other approved religious teachers of their respective communions, are to fco allowed
to receive such instruction, so far as the School Buildings will admit of distinct
classes being form. d. Every National School is to be so arranged as to admit of the
formation of one such denominational class at least; and if the simultaneous teaching
ol more than one be Impracticable, it will, of course, be necessary to arrange that
classes of the different denominations be formed on distinct days of ilia week, '"if the
hour appointed In the Time Table be found inconvenient to any Religion 5 Instructor a
special appointment for Bowp other time may be made with the Teacher. Such
arrangements are left to the good feelings ana convenience of the parties concerned
as circumstances must necessarily vary too much to admit of any uniform regulations
being applicable.
In case, no special religious Instructor should attend during this hour it is to be
employed by all the children who are able to read, upon the Scripture Lessons com-
piled for the general use of the National Schools, and all whose parents do not desire
them to attend the denominational class, are to remain so employed for the same
interval, wherever this is possible without their overhearing or interrupting the
denominational class; provided that if the parents of any children object to the
reading of the Scripture Lessons, such children shall be excused therefrom.
The Teacher is to take core that the religious hooks employed in the denominational
classes be strictly confined to the time and place of denominational instruction and
that they be not left in the way of the children whose parents may object to them.
A specimen detailed Time Table and Programme of Lessons will be found in the
Appendix.
35. The subjects of instruction in National Schools are fixed
by the Board, but not to the exclusion of such other branches
as may be required. The following Table shows the subjects
deemed appropriate to each class:
TABLE OF THE MINIMUM AMOUNT OF ATTAINMENTS
REQUIRED FROM EACH CLASS IN NATIONAL SCHOOLS
Ilns Table is to be suspended in a conspicuous position on the wall
oJ the School-room, in order that the Teacher may be able to
refer to it continually while giving instruction. Teachers should
also bear in mind the objects sought to be attained by the
adoption of this Table, viz :


Ist. —To furnish a general standard to which all Teachers could
work, and by which all Schools could be measured.
2nd.—To lay down a definite course of instruction in the subjects
now considered most appropriate to an Elementary School, and
thus to check unsystematic teaching.
3rd. —To prevent improper classification, and especially to correct
the tendency so often manifested to place children in classes for
which they are unfitted by the lack of the requisite attainments,-
4th.'—To secure the continuance of the pupils at School by ex-
hibiting their real progress, instead of leading parents, by an
improper classification, to believe that their children are more
advanced than is consistent with fact.
FIRST CLABS,
Children enrolled one Quarter, and being six years old, will be
expected—
READING-. —To read the First Book correctly and intelligently, as
far as page 8; lo answer simple questions on the subject
matter of the lesson; and to spell all the words.
WRITING. —To write monosyllables on slates, from copies, and
words of two letters, from Dictation.
ARITHMETIC. —To count and read any number as far as 30, and to
write the Digits from Dictation ; to perform mentally all the
Arithmetical operations with numbers, not involving a higher
result than 30.
SECOND CLASS,
Children enrolled one Quarter, will be expected—
READING. —To read with ease and fluency the Second Book, as far as
page 30, and to have a fair comprehension of the Lesson read;
to spell correctly all words occurring in their Reading Lessons;
and to understand their meaning.
WRITING. —To write on Slates from Copies, or from Dictation,
passages from the Second Book, as far as page 30,
ARITHMETIC. —To write from Dictation easy numbers, as far as five
places of figures: to work sums in Addition ; and to know the
Multiplication Table as far as Eight times
GRAMMAR. —To give simple Definitions of the nine Parts of Speech,
and distinguish the Article, Noun, Pronoun, and Yerb, in their
Reading Lessons.
GEOGRAPHY.—To be able to define the common Geographical
terms, to understand the Geography erf the locality, and to know
the use of the Map.
OBJECT LESSONS.—To be acquainted by means of Object Lessons,
with the habits and uses of Domestic Animals.


SEQUEL TO SECOND CLASS.
Children enrolled one Quarter in this Class, will be expected'—
READING.—To read with ease, fluency, and correct intonation, the
Sequel Book No. 1 as far as page 60; to understand the lessons
thoroughly ; to be able to spell, and explain the meanings of all
words occurring in the Lesson, and give synonyms.
WRITING.—To write in Books from Copies, and on Slates from
Dictation, passages from the Sequel Book, putting Capital Letters
where required.
ARITHMETIC.—To write Numbers, as far as nine places of figures
from Dictation ; to work questions in all the Simple Rules, and to
know the most useful Arithmetical Tables.
GRAMMAR.— To distinguish readily all the Parts of Speech in an
easy sentence selected from their Reading Books, and to know
the accidence of the Noun.
GEOGRAPHY.—To know the outlines of the Geography of Australia,
and to name and define the relative positions of the Continents
and Oceans.
OBJECT LESSONS. —To be acquainted, by means of Object
Lessons, with the properties and uses of Common Substances
employed in the production of food and clothing.
THIRD CLASS
Children enrolled one Quarter in this Class, will be expected—
READING.—To read fluently, and with proper emphasis, the Third
Book, as far as page 72; to understand the subject matter
thoroughly, and be able to spell all words occurring in the lesson,
explain their meaning, give synonyms and equivalent phrases;
and to know the Saxon and Latin Prefixes.
WRITING.—To write on Paper from Copies, and on Slates from
Dictation, passages selected from their Reading Lessons,
marking Capitals and Periods where required.
ARITHMETIC,—To know all the most useful Arithmetical Tables, the
easier rules of Mental Arithmetic, and to work questions in the
Simple and Compound Rules, including Reduction.
GRAMMAR. —To parse fully all the words in an easy sentence
selected from their Reading Lessons, and to know the principal
Rules of Syntax, and the Analysis of simple sentences.
GEOGRAPHY.—To be acquainted with the Geography of Europe
and Australasia, including New Zealand.
OBJECT LESSONS.—To re-produce in writing, from memory, the
substance of an Object Lesson on the commoner Minerals,
Vegetables, and Animals.


FOTJBTH CLASS.
Pupils enrolled One Quarter, in tins Class, will be expected—
READING. —To read with fluency and expression the Fourth Book,
as far as page 80; to know the meaning and derivation of
words occurring in the lesson; 'give synonyms; frame sentences
showing the uses of particular words; and to paraphrase the
sentences composing the Lesson.
WRITING. —To write on paper from Copies, and from Dictation,
—in the latter case with correct Spelling and Punctuation.
ARITHMETIC.—To solve questions in Proportion and Practice, and to
know the Rules of Mental Arithmetic.
GRAMMAR. —To parse fully any sentence selected from the Fourth
Book; to know the Prefixes, Affixes, and principal Roots ; to
analyse, and reconstruct combined, complex, and compound
sentences.
GEOGRAPHY.—To have a good knowledge of the Physical and
J Descriptive Geography of the Four Quarters of the Globe, and of
Europe in detail.
OBJECT LESSONS.—To rvrite with correct Syntax and Punctuation
the subject of any Object Lessons they may have received on such
subjects, as Natural History, Elementary Mechanics, or the
Science of Common Things.
FIFTH CLASS.
Pupils enrolled in the Fifth Class for One Quarter, will (in addition
to the requirements already specified for the other Classes,) be
expected—
READING. —To read with ease, fluency, and judgment, both Prose and
Poetry, and to express correctly, in writing, in their own language,
the substance of the lesson read,
GRAMMAR.—To Parse, Paraphrase, Analyse, (and in Poetry, to scan)
passages containing Simple, Combined Complex, and Compound
Sentences ; and to be acquainted with, and give examples of, the
principal Figures of Speech.
WRITING.—To know the forms of “ Epistolary Correspondence,” and
to write correctly from dictation.
\RITHMETIC. —To he acquainted with the whole Theory of Arith-
metic, and its application to the Mensuration of Superficies.
GEOGRAPHY. —To be thoroughly acquainted with Physical and
Mathematical Geography.
OBJECT LESSONS—To write in correct Language, a Theme on the
subject of one of their Object Lessons, which may be on any of the
subjects already mentioned under this head, or upon any others.


MATHEMATICS.—To be thoroughly acquainted with the First Book
of Euclid’s Elements, and Algebra to Simple Equations of two
unknown quantities.
LATIN". —For the latter subject, Latin may be substituted, in which
case the Pnpils will be required to construe Czesar (De Bello
-Gaßico) with facility, and to know the Accidence perfectly.
Note, — l. SCRIPTUEE—The Sequel Class will be expected to
know the contents of the Scripture Lesson Book, New Testa-
ment, No. 1; The Third Class, Old and New Testament,
Number One ; and the Fourth Class, the whole series.
Note.—2. GENERAL LESSON—It is expected that the whole
School will be well acquainted with the General Lesson.
Note. — 3. Greater progress will be expected from children, who
have been more than Three Months in their respective Classes.
Note. — 4. Children must be prepared for examination in any
of the subjects prescribed for the Class or Classes below that in
which they are enrolled.
36. Every Teacher ought to make himself acquainted with,
and to practise in his own School, the improved methods of
teaching now in use in the best Schools. These methods
have for their object, not the mere cramming of a child’s
memory, but the training and development of his intellectual
faculties. In other words, the Teacher of a National School
is expected to teach his pupils to think, and so to exercise
their minds on the subjects taught, as to assure himself
that his instruction is thoroughly understood. Hence, in
National Schools, generally, there is little learning hy rote in
such subjects as Spelling, Grammar, and Geography, the im-
proved methods of teaching these subjects being found much
more effectual.
37. Registers are to be kept in each School, according to
forms supplied by the Board. The Admission Register should
be filled up, in accordance with the directions inside the cover,
at the time of each child’s entrance to the School, or on the
date of his promotion from one class to another. The Roll
Book should be marked before the dismissal of the


School, morning and afternoon. A mark S implies presence in
the morning; thus \ presence in the afternoon; thus X
presence for the whole day. Full directions for keeping the
Daily Report Book are placed inside the cover. The Fee
Account and Book Fund Account should be regularly
kept in proper books of foolscap size; and these accounts
should be audited by the Local Patrons at the close of each
Quarter.
The Quarterly Returns, neatly and correctly made out, are
to be forwarded to the Inspector of the District, immediately
after the close of every quarter: ten days will be allowed for
transmission. They are to be made out in duplicate; one copy
to be furnished to the Inspector, and the other to be retained
by the Teacher as a Record of the School. No salary duo,
or accruing at the end of any Quarter, will be paid,
until the Return, properly completed, has been received, and
certified by the Inspector to be correct. The Annual Return
should be forwarded, with the Quarterly Return, immediately
after the close of the December Quarter. Salary Abstracts,
however, should reach the Office, one clear week before the
termination of each month.
The Board’s estimate of any Teacher’s character and efficiency will
be influenced by the neatness, accuracy, and punctuality with
which these Returns are compiled; and any errors will render
the Teacher liable to a fine, at the Board’s discretion, or, if
repeated, to a loss of classification. Wilful falsification of
Returns will be punished by the instant dismissal of the Teacher
so offending. These remarks are also applicable to the keeping
of the Register Book, the Daily Report Book, the Class Rolls, or
any other Record of the School.
38. The only Vacations sanctioned by the Board are a week
at Christmas, a week at Easter, and a week in Mid-winter.
The Mid-winter vacation is the first week of the third quarter
of the year. The Teacher is required to state on his Time Table
the ordinary vacations, and specified holidays of the School;
and should the School be closed from any other cause, he is to
give previous notice to the Inspector of the District.
39. The public have free access to every School during the
stated school hours, not to take part in the business or to
interrupt it, but, as Visitors, to observe how it is conducted.


YIL—INSPECTION OF SCHOOLS.
40. -With a view to ascertain whether the Government of
Schools, and their internal management, are carried out in
accordance with the Board’s Regulations, Inspectors have been
appointed to visit and examine Schools in the various portions of
the colony, and to report the result of their observations to the
Commissioners.
41. Teachers and Local Patrons are required to afford
every facility to Inspectors. They are the representa-
tives of the Board, and are authorised to enforce the observance
of the Regulations; but their decisions are subject to appeal
to the Commissioners,
42. Inspectors and other persons deputed to visit Schools by
the Commissioners, will be furnished with credentials under
their corporate seal, countersigned by the Secretary.
43. The following are the Districts into which, for the pur-
poses of inspection, the Commissioners have divided the
colony:
Metropolitan , including the counties of Cumberland and
Camden.
Hunter River , including the valley of the Hunter, and
its tributaries, and the country lying along the
affluents of the Hawkesbury flowing into it from the
north.
Northern , lying north of the Liverpool Range, and the
spur running down to Port Stephens.
Western , including the country lying south and west of the
former Districts, and north of a line drawn westerly
from the head of the River Abercrombie to the
western boundary of the colony. •
Southern , comprising all the remainder of the colony,


6 <6 bo
Maf/Ij
# < i >, b
.8.0 o .« . §
W Kfq S * • fc £ » f
o . fc • OP 5^0030,2
to V 3 CO rj o co O ft to »-H c« S
<J 2 M 2 CD s r/2 fcD $ CDajCQCOcD^.
« Mg* S 3 * - wo f |
f=q o p r 2 +3
r. . CJ •£ hi O fcfi i
I |.a g* h« |.g,
g h 3«> gs gS go s-i |S
B.S - ® s-2 ° s § s a
o .-s ® -a p. a-
- * * -
H
P
q | b
* 2 O an
2 . Bn . *a . . ts s
tt J Co S 3 . O H g O ® ■T' o«3
OS “-lOvr, tn >, o . ®3 Oi
C 3 QQ 3 0Q CD cn T/2 QQ Cj CG CC
OQ ~ h a ® a wg- ® g WrtwaWrt
CO |CB3 • .C JO H ® • JH MW fcjfl
re .13 gt 3 MS H O ag= as o S S ® '
-i I g-3 p| I l.s *3 I I* A g»
03 <2 § S*o g § g*P gS || !
g s | ° « a.s ° S 3 ffi;| ° £ |
E ®f f
J
ft _J
«
o » I <( g
p? 2
HH . O • w Tf\ w ,r* O co l-H co «s-4 O •
O.® CQ fcb W® CD -*~> no CC rt CD'*^ajbD
a ® a a c wago wawaga
6 g £ o w I g«, 'Jo rf E wg
■w ej b Ml BB ,a <3
g I is go g-E so »» 13 SX
g " s l-s |« § S| S* i
rH aj[C to to •£ to
e 3 s
K
s 1
,IH " '
H
M r<n
S m» «fIWO O 1-1 hß*
S Offi OIH fHrl BN NM S'#
| 2-2 o® I ® I® is gS ®2
OD ■ . . -
Note. Two principles are exemplified in this Time Table: Ist, That only one Oral Lesson
can be given at a time; 2nd, That each class in rotation must receive instruction
irectly from the Teacher.


LIST OF FURNITURE AND APPARATUS
FOR A SCHOOL OF EIGHTY CHILDREN.
Furniture.
Apparatus.
-to
CO
Nine desks, 9 or 12 feet each in length, arranged in
groups of three.
Two black boards.
One easel.
Twelve forms, 9 or 12 feet each in length, and four of
S feet each.
One hookpress.
One Master’s desk, or table, and two chairs.
A clock.
Seven dozen hat pegs.
One map-stand.
One set tablet lessons, reading, on boards.
One „ ,, ,, arithmetic, on boards.
One „ natural history lessons, on boards.
One „ mechanical diagrams.
A set of maps, embracing at least those of the "World,
Europe, Asia, Africa, America, the British Isles,
Palestine, and Australia.
Three dozen ink wells; one gross penholders and pens.
One gross pencil holders and pencils. Seven dozen slates.


>BOGRAMME OF LESSONS FOR A SEQUEL CLASS DURING THE FIRST QUARTER OF THEIB ENROLMENT,
DISTRIBUTED IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE PROVISIONS OP THE TABLE OP MINIMUM ATTAINMENTS.
Tims.
Reading.
Writing.
Arithmetic.
Grammar.
Geography,
Object Lessor
Scaipioui.
First Week.
Sequel to 2nd
Book, Nol. Bead
topage 11.
Capital letters, being
divided into 5 Classes.
Write 1st and 2nd.
Notation to 6 and 7
places of figures: con-
tinue the addition.
The noun : distinguish j
between proper and |
common nouns. j
Australia: Post- i
turn, Boundaries, j
Extent, j
Minerals. Goals,
Scripture Eessson,
New Testament No J.
Read to page 9th.
econd Week.
Read t» page
17 ch.
2nd and 3rd.
Notation to 8 and 9
places, with addi.
tion.
The noun: Number,
Coastlines, Gulfs,
Bays,
Plants. Maize,,
Read to page 15th.
Dhird Week.
Read to page
22nd.
3rd and 4th,
Subtraction of easy
numbers; easy
Tables.
Gender,
i
Surface, Mountains,
Quadrupeds.
The Sheep.
Read to page 21st.
mirth Week.
Read to page
28th,
4th and 6th,
Subtraction, more
difficult. Tables.
Nominative Case. j
Mountains more in
detail. Plains.
Common Substances
Salt.
Read to page 28th,
fifth Week.
Read to page
34th.
Text, Commencing
with Capitals.
Subtraction, more
difficult. Tables
Possessive Case. |
General Drainage.
Fictile Manufacture.
A Tea Cup,
Read to page 35th,
iixth Week.
Recapitulate the
34 pages.
Text, as last week.
Recapitulate; Prac-
tice, Subtraction and
Addition. Tables.
Objective Case:
Recapitulate Noun.
Eastern Rivers,
Birds. The Eagle.
Recapitulate,
.'venth Week.
Read to page
40th,
Round hand.
Multiplication by one
figure.
The verb more fully
than in the second class.
Western and South
l WesternRiversof N.S
Wales and Victoria.
Textile Manufacture,
A piece of Silk.
Read to page 41 et,
ighth Week.
Read to page
46th.
Round hand.
Multiplication by two
figures.
The pronoun more ful-
ly than in second class.
j Principal Comities
[ and Towns of
( N. S. Wales.
Fordign and remark-
1 able substances; as
Camphor.
i Read to page 46th.
Vinth Week.
Read to page
61st.
The 5 classes of Capitals
Tables continued.
Multiplication by
three figures.
Distinguish readily the
Adjective.
1 Climate, Production
[ and Occupations in
outline.
[ Fishes,
i The Shark,
| Read to page 52nd,
Tenth Week.
Read to page
66th.
Text and Round.
Division by one
figure.
The Adverb,
Positions of Conti-
nents and Oceans in
Eastern Hemisphere.
[ The Arts. A Bell,
Read to page 57th,
leyenthWeek
Read to page
61st.
Round and Small.
Division by two
figures.
The Preposition.
Position of Conti-
nents and Oceans in
Western Hemisphere
Insects and Reptiles.
Dragonfly, Snake,
Read to page 63rd,
'welfth Week.
Recapitulate.
Small hand.
Recapitulate Tables.
Is Division by three
figures.
1 The Conjunction,.
1
Recapitulate the
above.
Mathematical Instru-
ments. Mariner’s
Compass.
! Recapitulate the
above.
ioifi 1.—The principle upon which the above programme has been compiled and which must guide all future ones, is that the work of the quarter has been divided into eonal
weekly portions. H
Non 2,— on leaving the Second Class, should of course know more than the table of Minimum attainments require* of them for that class, before enterins the
fe quel Clas*. It is here assumed, however, that the pupils are just able to clear the Second Class when about to commence the Sequel Book. Unon their
pievious proficiency, therefore, depends the starting points of the various subjects in the programme; and when children are well advanced. a 'artrer oortioa of
time can be given to the remaining portion of the Minimum Standard which has to be attained. aqvancao, a -arger porttoo of
Sotb Each Class will require a distinct programme of lessons.
Note 4,-New Programmes should be made at the commencement of each quarter : the old ones should be preserved as records of work done.




