

illsks
I w
MELBOURNE:
Ti'WJ
W. MURRAY ROSS




STATEMENT
OF THE
CLAIM
W. MURRAY ROSS
AGAINST THE
GOVERNMENT OF VICTORIA,
FOR COMPENSATION FOR THE
ILLEGAL SEIZURE OF 6000 OF HIS SHEEP, IN THE
YEAR 1855,
BY THE OFFICIAL ASSIGNEE OF GEELONG,
RICHARD LE^IRIMIOnsrTIH;-
MELBOURNE:
MASON AND FIRTH, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST.
p I'D (0 5


CONTENTS.
STATEMENT 8
LETTER TO CHIEF SECRETARY 5
REPORT OF FIRST TRIAL S
REPORT OF SECOND TRIAL 18


STATEMENT.
The case, as set forth in the following Copies of Correspondence
and Reports of Trials, is briefly this :
In 1854 W. Murray Ross bought a station from A. Love, with leave
to depasture for eighteea months 6000 sheep on an adjoining station
of Mr. Love’s. In 1855 Mr. Love failed, and the Official Assignee,
procuring an order from the Supreme Court, signed by Chief Justice
A’Beckett, and bearing the seal of the Supreme Court, seized these
6000 sheep, and sold them to a Mr. Cameron (whom he pushed
through the Insolvent Court in six weeks) for 2s. 6d. a head; Mr.
Cameron selling them in three months for 14s. a head, besides get.
ting 2s. 6d. worth 'of wool from each of them; thus making
the price at which they sold, 16s. 6d. each. Ross brought
an action in 1857, and got a verdict (as per report of trial
printed herewith) for £3,425 10s. for 4000 of the sheep, the remain-
ing 2000 having been delivered by Learmonth to a Mr. Sharpe, on
Sharpe’s guarantee that if Ross brought an action, he, Learmonth,
was to be indemnified by Sharpe. Of this verdict £250 only was
paid, when Learmonth in 1859 suddenly left the Colony, since
which Ross has received nothing. After the verdict was obtained
Learmonth assigned this indemnity, “Sharpe to Learmonth,” to
Ross, through his solicitors, Messrs. Selwyn and Klingender, and an
action was brought upon it against Sharpe in May, 1861 (see
report of Trial herewith), and a verdict obtained against Sharpe




of £lll3 6s. 9d,, which was paid, still leaving the balance of the first
verdict, viz., ... £3,175 10 0 unpaid, which, with the
interest from 1867, at) 524 10 0
Bper " - f
makes ... £4,700 0 J) the amount claimed.
The case has thus withstood the test of two tylo before separate
juries of twelve, at intervals of four years from each other. All
the points reserved at both trials were decided in favor of Ross.
And the comments of the Judges and Juries (as will be seen by
reference to the reports annexed) unequivocally expressed their
feelings against the conduct of the Official Assignee.
• The passing through such an ordeal proclaims the claim to be a
righteous one.




COPY OF LETTER SENT BY W. MURRAY ROSS TO
THE HONORABLE THE CHIEF SECRETARY.
TO THE HONORABLE THE CHIEF SECRETARY.
Melbourne, July 10, 1858.
Sir, —In submitting the following case to the Govern-
ment of Victoria, with the view of obtaining compensation for the
loss I have sustained by the illegal conduct of an officer of the
Supreme Court, acting under the order of the Supreme Court, it is
desirable I should first account for the length of time that has
elapsed since the wrong was committed, and my present appeal.
After having, as I shall presently show, done all in my power to
prevent the consummation of the first illegal act of seizure, I sought
my remedy in the usual courts of law, and, on obtaining a verdict,
was still desirous that the burden should fall upon the individual who
had actually committed the illegality ; and, it is only when that indi-
vidual (the late official Assignee for Geelong) has been displaced, and
thus rendered utterly unable to make the reparation awarded to me
by the Supreme Court, that I feel I can with assurance appeal to
the Government, and my not having done so until I had exhausted
other means of obtaining redress, must surely be a strong point in
my favor.
In the month of September, 1854, I became the purchaser of a
station and sheep, from a Mr. Love, paying partly cash, and partly
bills, which bills were secured on the stock and station. I received
delivery of the sheep on the station I had purchased, and shortly
afterwards (having by my purchase a right to do so), sent 0000 of
them, together with necessary stores under charge of a shepherd, to
another run, then held by Mr. Love, who gave me permission to do
so. Mr. Love became insolvent, and Mr. Learmonth was appointed
official assignee, and, before either of my bills or any other liability
from me to Mr. Love became due, seized my sheep under the pre-
tence of an order from the Supreme Court, which, however, only
authorised him to seize Mr. Love’s sheep ; both these points are
material to be borne in mind. After the seizure, I made many


applications for their restoration—stated how I had obtained the
sheep, and gave every explanation in regard to the transactions
between myself and Mr. Love, and offered to indemnify the official
assignee against all consequences of such restoration. \ et, not-
withstanding all this, he persisted in maintaining his illegal seizure,
drove the sheep away, and took possession of the stores. Had the
official assignee immediately sold the sheep and impounded the
money until he could satisfy himself, had he any doubt of my
rightful ownership, I could better have imagined that he was acting
in good faith under an erroneous impression ; but, instead of that,
he allows the sheep to be driven about, carelessly attended to, and
nine months after, when less in number, and diseased from neglect,
they are sold by the official assignee’s order, and realise 2s. 6d. each.
I commenced an action for this illegal proceeding, and obtained a
verdict for the sum of £3426 10s. against Mr. Learraonth. The
strong feeling expressed by the jury, and evinced by the Judge, of
the gross illegality of the official assignee’s conduct upon the trial,
are recorded by the public journal of the day [Argus, May 30th;
June Ist, 1857), and are distinct proofs, if any were necessary, that
I have not exaggerated the circumstances of the case.
The official assignee declared his inability at once to pay the
amount, but offered to do so if time was given, and, as he held a
lucrative appointment, I was willing to take it, as he could provide
it, by instalments, and I have received £250 in that manner; but
the bill last due has been dishonored, and he, being displaced, all
hope of receiving any further sums from him has gone.
Upon these facts I must be allowed to remark —
First. The seizure of my sheep under pretence of a Judge’s order.
It may be truly said, that that order not applying to my sheep
could have been resisted even by force, and no doubt, had I been
present when the seizure was attempted, such would have been the
case ; but, can it be expected that, a person in the position of a
shepherd, who is told by a messenger of the Insolvent Court that a
Judge’s order has been given for those sheep, and the order shown to
him, as he states in his evidence, with Judge A’Beckett’s signature
thereto, is to discriminate merely as to the legality or applicability
of that order to the sheep in his charge 1 Certainly not ;he had,
as he said, in answer to the learned Judge’s suggestion, a whole-
some dread of disobeying a Judge’s order, and many others in a
higher position would have acted the same.
Secondly. What plea or excuse could the official assignee have
for seizing the sheep 1 The jury, by their verdict, have emphatically
answered, none —but I wish to see, if possible, what can be alleged.
There was no bill, or other liability due—nothing, but the fact of
the sheep grazing upon a portion of a run held by Mr. Love, a fact
of everyday occurrence amongst squatters ; but, even allow this as a
shade of an excuse for a temporary seizure, the subsequent explana-


tion should have caused their release instantly, and much harm
would not have been done.
Thirdly. What plea or excuse can be made for keeping the sheep
so long after their seizure, I cannot conceive, nor could the jury, who
most determinedly refused to allow the expenses incurred thereby.
If the sheep were mine, they should not have been seized; if Mr.
Love’s, they should have been sold whilst in a marketable state, for
the benefit of his creditors.
I regard the Supreme Court as a part of the Government of the
colony; and any injury inflicted on an individual by an officer of
that court, in his official capacity, as, in fact, done by the Govern-
ment that appoints him and invests him with the power to do so, in
the same manner that I am liable for any injury, of a civil nature,
committed by my servant through neglect or carelessness; and,
although I cannot seek any remedy in a court of law, the moral
obligation on the part of the Government is not the less ; and if it
be not thus acknowledged, where, I would ask, is the remedy, or
under what system of government are we living I—for1 —for instance—
A gentleman of limited means is appointed official assignee ; an
estate is confided to his management; without any proof, or the
slightest colorable excuse, he, under the pretence (and really pro-
ducing a document which a learned opposing counsel said, might
readily lead a layman into the belief that it was an authority) of a
judge’s order, seizes property to which he had no right, and over
which he had no control; dispossesses the rightful owner, and then
tells him to seek his remedy, who, after undergoing the whole vexa-
tion and mental anxiety of a lawsuit, obtains a verdict, and finds he
has sued a beggar. This is my case, and may be that of another
to-morrow; —property may be seized upon chance, sold, and the
proceeds furnish the means of defending the illegal act. Who is
safe if the Government do not come in to aid the individual in such
a matter ? The assignee, lam told, gives security, but it is to the
Government, and the amount can only be recovered by the Govern-
ment ; and if the nature of the case, as I have put it, does not come
within the extent of the bond, that surely is not my fault, but a
neglect on the part of the Government, for which I should not be
called upon to suffer.
One more observation, and I shall leave the matter in the hands
of the Government. The official assignee cannot be regarded in the
light of an officer acting solely for the public good, and entitled, as
are magistrates for instance, to a certain degree of consideration,
should they fall into error. So far from it, his cupidity may blind
his judgment, and as he gets paid in proportion to what he recovers,
he may be very apt to chance an action which he would, on no
account, risk on public grounds alone; so that the Government not
only gives him the power to injure, but it also inspires the motive,
and should, therefore, I respectfully maintain, pay the damage.
b 2


I have not, you will perceive, made any claim, or even alluded to
what I have suffered in mind and credit by the official assignee’s
illegal conduct. What I have undergone can be known only to
myself.
The amount of the verdict, and the interest at 8 per cent, since
that verdict was recorded, is all I seek.
I have th.e honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
W. MURRAY ROSS.
REPORT OF THE FIRST TRIAL.
SUPREME COURT.—OLD COURT.
Nisi Prius Sittings.
Friday , 29th May , 1857.
(Before his Honor Mr. Justice Barry, and Special Juries of Twelve.)
ROSS V. LEARMONTH.
An action of trover for goods, cattle, sheep, &c.
For the plaintiff: The Attorney-General, the Solicitor-General, and Mr.
Wood. For the defendant: Mr. Dawson, Mr. Atkins, and Mr. Aspinall.
The Solicitor-General stated the plaintiff’s case. The plaintiff was Mr.
Wm. Murray Ross, a squatter. The defendant was Mr. Richard Learmonth,
the Official Assignee in insolvency for the Geelong district. The action was
trover for a number of sheep, amounting to about 6,000, and other property,
being furniture and such stores as are commonly used on a station. These
sheep and property Mr. Learmonth had seized in his character of Official
Assignee, as the property of Mr. Love, an insolvent, whereas they were
really the property of the plaintiff. The pleas of the defendant were, not
guilty, and not possessed. Mr. Love had been the owner of two stations in
the Portland Bay district, near the Steiglitz Diggings, one called Moran-
fourke, the other called Dirdinwarra. In the month of September, 1854, he
ad sold the former, Morangourke, together with a large quantity of sheep,
some stores, and some furniture, to the plaintiff. He conveyed them by
deed, dated in that month. There were over 1.3,000 sheep, with a large
number of lambs, Sb() head of cattle, some bullocks and horses, with furni-
ture that had been estimated at £7OO, and stores valued at over £6OO, all of
which, with the station, 640 acres of purchased land, and a dwelling-house,
were conveyed to Mr. Ross in consideration of the sum of £29,500. Of this
purchase-money £5,500 was paid in cash, or what was the equivalent of cash,
an exchange of city property, and the balance in eight bills, which were to
fall due in eight successive years. The first of these bills was to fall due in
eighteen months from the time of the purchase. That was in March, 1856.
To secure the payment of these bills the whole of this property was again


mortgaged back to Mr. Love, but no default had been committed in the
payments at the time of the seizure complained of in this action. Mr. Love
continued to own the station Dirdinwarra, and he gave the plaintiff permis-
sion to depasture some of the sheep—about 6,000 —upon this station. After
the whole of the stock had been delivered to the plaintiff upon the station
of Morangourke, which he had purchased, he drove this 6,000 sheep over to
Dirdinwarra, sending his assistant overseer and shepherds along with them.
Some of the furniture also, and some of the stores for the use of the shep-
herds, he had removed to the Eclipse Inn, which was on the Dirdinwarra
station, and at which his overseer stayed, there being no homestead upon that
station. The sheep, furniture, and stores, which were thus removed to
Dirdinwarra, were the subject of the present action. In the month of
March, 1855, Mr. Love became insolvent, and on the 19th of that month,
Mr. Learmonth, acting as Official Assignee, seized these 6,000 sheep, and
the furniture arid stores which had been brought to the Eclipse Inn. It was
to be presumed that he had acted on the clause of the Insolvency Act, which
authorised the Assignee to seize any property which may be in the possession,
order, or disposition of the insolvent, with the consent of the true owner,
and of which the insolvent is the reputed owner. It would be found,
however, that this clause had no application to the circumstances of this
case. The property was not in the possession, order, or disposition of Mr.
Love, and Mr. Love was not the reputed owner of it. Mr. Ross made repeated
applications for the return of the property, and offered to indemnify Mr.
Learmonth against any actions that he might incur by the restoration of it;
but Mr. Learmonth, though seemingly willing at one time to return the
property on being indemnified, ultimately refused to do so. He finally sold
it for the benefit of Mr. Love’s creditors in the month of November, 1855.
The result of this seizure and sale to the plaintiff was that he was unable to
continue his business, and he was compelled to throw up his station, and in
this action he sought damages for the injury he had sustained.
Mr. Wm. Murray Ross—ls the plaintiff in this action. Knew Andrew
Love. In the month of September, 1854, purchased the station of Moran-
gourke from him, with its homestead, purchased land, 13,000 sheep, 300 head
of cattle, some horses, oxen, furniture, and station stores. Some time in
October went up to the station from Melbourne, and received a memorandum
of the delivery of the stock, and shortly afterwards, at shearing time,
received actual delivery of the stock at the Morangourke station. Mr. Love
continued to live at the house at Morangourke for about a month after
witness went up, but at the end of that time he delivered up possession of
it, and from that date witness’s overseer and assistant overseer, William
Clark and John Charles Holland, had the control and disposal of everything
on the station. The stores, which were transferred to witness, were esti-
mated at £7OO, and the furniture at £7OO. At the time of the seizure some
of the furniture was on Morangourke and some on Dirdinwarra. The value
of the furniture seized was £l4O. The seizure was made in March. £lO5
worth of stores were seized, which witness had sent up after the purchase.
The Eclipse Hotel stood on the Dirdinwarra station. It was occupied by a
man named Burtsey. The furniture was sent there for witness’s convenience.
After witness’s purchase he sent three or four flocks of the sheep, amounting
to probably six or seven thousand, from Morangourke to Dirdinwarra, with
the consent of Mr. Love. They were sent about shearing-time in October.
The number permitted by Mr. Love was limited to seven thousand. A short
time after the seizure by Mr. Learmonth, but before the sale, had a conver-
sation with him at Geelong. Witness asked him why he had seized these
sheep. He said he was justified in doing so as Official Assignee. Saw him
again about the month of August at He was at that time about to
give delivery of the sheep to other parties, and witness told him if he gave
delivery to witness he would give him a guarantee to hold him harmless


from all actions brought against him by Messrs. Stieglitz and Barden, who
were making some claim on them.' He agreed to do so. He subsequently
came to Melbourne and witness repeated the offer, and defendant accepted
it. Witness undertook that if he gave up the sheep, and gave him three
months time to depasture them upon Dirdmwarra station, this indemnity
would be given to him by witness, and that Bright Brothers would join in
it. It was necessary to have some tune to pasture them on Dirdinwarra, as
they had grown scabby from neglect, and the law would not permit them to
be moved over any other station in the condition they were then in. A
draft of the agreement was made, and defendant assented to it; but the
sheep were never delivered back to witness. Witness now produces a letter
dated the 4th of September, 1854, addressed by defendant to Mr. John
Charles Holland, whom he had taken into his service as overseer, authorising
him to deliver up to witness the sheep he had seized, the same that are now
the subject of this action. Witness bought this station to carry on the
business of a squatter, and the effect of this seizure has been to stop his
operations altogether. It left him without the means of carrying on the
business. The profits would have been considerable. Witness got the clip
of 1-854; did not get the clip of 1855. Witness was obliged to give up his
station. Got only the clip of one year. Did not get the profits of a year.
Was in possession only about six months. Witness paid the expenses of the
station whilst he held it. .
Cross-examined by Mr. Atkins: A part of the consideration given by
witness was Ross’s-buildings, situate in Melbourne, which were valued at
£5,500 over and above certain incumbrances —payments due to the Atlas
Building Society. Mr. Love and witness estimated these incumbrances at
£4,500. Mr. Love himself inquired as to the amount of them at the office
of the company, Witness has a letter of his, in which he says the informa-
tion he received justified him in valuing the property at £IO,OOO and the
incumbrance at £4,500. The memorandum of delivery was made out, and
mutually signed on the day of its date, the 27th of September. 4wo copies
were made, and each person, Mr. Love and witness, kept one.' There were
two mortgages affecting the station when Love sold to witness, one to a Mr.
Sharp, and another to Timms, Wilson, and Co. Witness knew of the
mortgage to Sharp, but did not know of the mortgage to Timms and W ilson.
Love gave witness a bond to pay Sharp’s mortgage, as the instalments
became due. He did not fulfil this bond. Sharp demanded an instalment
in March, 1855, and witness gave up peaceable possession of the station, not
wishing to involve himself in litigation. Timms and Wilson, whose mortgage
was subsequent to Sharp’s, paid the station a visit, to see what they could
get, and informed witness that their mortgage would swamp all that was
left after Sharp’s. This had a moral effect in driving witness from the
station. Witness was about six months in possession of the station. Paid
all the expenses from September, 1854, to the middle of March, 1855.
Witness clipped 13,106 sheep. Their wool sold for about £1,700. Witness
could not state the exact sum, but it was between £1,500 and £2,000. Had
got £1,500 advance upon it. Owed nearly £4OO for wages wdien he gave up
the station to Sharp’s agent. Was summoned for these wages. He was
not then in funds, in consequence of the seizure that had been made, but
afterwards satisfied the claims. The sheep in question in this action were
in very good condition. Witness does not believe that they were scabby.
Cannot say why the defendant sold them. That is for him to answer. The
letters now handed to witness are in witness’s handwriting. They are
addressed to the defendant. They are dated the 19th of March, 1855, the
31st of March, and the 13th of April.
Counsel then read the letjjprs. The first thanked Mr. Learmonth for
certain inquiries which it appeared he had made of Mr. Ross concerning
these sheep, and said that he would answer them after he had consulted his


lawyers. The second said that his lawyers would not permit him to answer
these questions in writing, but when he met Mr. Learmonth personally he
would afford him every information, and he promised to be perfectly unre-
served, adding, that he had no reason for being otherwise. And the third
said that he (Mr. Boss) had received a letter from John Holland, who
informed him that he, Mr. Learmonth, had left the sheep in the charge of
common shepherds, and that they were fast being lost.
Cross-examination continued : Saw Mr. Learmonth in Geelong. Witness
did not in that conversation consent to Mr. Learmonth’s continuing in
possession of the sheep. Had heard something of a claim by Messrs.
Bardin. Mr. Learmonth had said something as to delivering up the sheep
to Messrs. Bardin, but it is not true that witness ever wished the attach-
ment to remain on the sheep until Messrs. Bardin’s claim was settled. In
August, 1855, Mr. Learmonth agreed to deliver back the sheep and to
give three months’ depasturing in Dirdinwarra. The sheep had got into
such a scabby state from neglect, that it was absolutely necessary they
should be permitted to remain where they were. Messrs. Bardin’s claim
was mentioned by the defendant, probably also Sharp’s claim. Thinks
Mr. Learmonth also said that Mr. Steiglitz had made a claim for rent due
for depasturing the sheep on the station. Witness undertook to indemnify
him against all these claims if he would deliver up the sheep. Bright
Brothers were to join in the indemnity, because they had a lien on some of
these sheep, which witness was about to bring down to market. As to the
three months’ grazing, Mr. Learmonth did say, in the course of the con-
versation, that he had already received a claim from Mr. Steiglitz for the
time the sheep had been depasturing for him (Mr. Learmonth) and he was
not in funds to pay for any further time, but witness did not hear on
that subject from him after the agreement respecting the delivery of the
stock. The agreement was allowed to lapse without any distinct reasons
given. The bill now handed to witness is the first bill that was payable by
him. It is now overdue. It has not been paid. The station, in considera-
tion of which he gave it, has been taken from him; and, in fact, this
seizure has taken away all power of paying it; but even if witness
were able he could not pay it, as he has been left without consideration for it.
William Kaye :Is acquainted w r ith the value of sheep. Wethers of 50
to 55 lbs. weight would have been worth about 16s. each in March, 1855.
Sixty pound wethers w r ould go up to £l. Fattening ewes were worth 12s. 6d.,
and breeding ewes, if a good breed, about 12s. 6d. Hoggets, if twelve
months old, with the wool on, would sell for about 7s. each. A mixed lot
of store sheep, half ewes and half wethers, the ewes not being in lamb,
would be worth 9s. 6d. to 10s. If the ewes were in lamb they would be
worth Is. oris. Gd. more. These are the prices at market. Would say
the same prices at the station. Has estimated them at the rates that
would be got by one who was obliged to sell—an owner, not obliged to sell
might value his stock at more.
Cross-examined : These are the prices in Melbourne. It would cost very
little to bring the stock to market—only the wages of the men who drove
them. It would cost nothing for feeding.
Mr. Justice Barry : It would cost about a pound.
Mr. Atkins : Divide that among the number of sheep. If the wethers
were scabby they might be worth very little. They could not be sold to
be removed from the land; but they would be worth something to the
person who had them on his land. Three-fourths of the sheep in Victoria
are more or less scabby. Have often sold a lot of scabby store sheep at
9s. 6d. or 10s. a head. There are degrees of scab. There is a degree at
which it has not seriously broken out. It is still latent; it is not easily
detected, and sheep can travel without being interfered with. In that
stage it interferes very little with the value.


John Charles Holland : Was employed by Mr. Eoss as assistant over-
seer on his station of Morangourke. Went there in September, 1854. Was
present when the sheep were shown. The number shown was 13,000 and
odd. There were from 3000 to 4000 lambs besides. Gave orders for taking
a quantity of sheep from Morangourke to Dirdinwarra. Some 3000 were
feeding on Dirdinwarra at the time when the station was bought. The
shearing took place in October, 1854. The book now handed to witness
contains an account of all the sheep shorn at Moorangourke. The shearing
went on from the 20th of October to the 18th of November. The 3000
sheep at Dirdinwarra were brought to Morangourke for shearing, and
after shearing about 3000 others —6000 in all were sent to Dirdinwarra.
Has seen these 6000 at Dirdinwarra. The Morangourke brand was on a
great part of them—a square mark on the ribs of the wethers and on the
rumps of the ewes. Cannot speak to the earmarks of all the sheep. The
greater portion of them were earmarked, the under half of one ear slit and
the tip off the other ear. About 2500 were wethers, and the remainder
were ewes. In age they all ranged from three to four years. The wethers
were in fine condition, and the ewes were in lamb. The wethers were
very free from disease; they had been dipped. A good draft, say a thou-
sand fat sheep, could have been taken out of the wethers for market.
There was a good market on the station —the Steiglitz gold-field. Witness
remained at Morangourke until March, 1855. Stopped at the Eclipse
Hotel, Steiglitz. Eemember that about the 17th of March, Arthur Esgar
came to the station in company with Mr. Andrew Love, the insolvent. He
seized the sheep under a warrant from the Insolvency Commissioner.
He and Love counted the sheep. The furniture and the stores at the
Eclipse Hotel was also seized. Eemained at the station for about seven
months after the seizure, but was not in charge of the sheep during the
first month. After the first month, that is in the month of May, Mr.
Learmonth put him again in charge of the sheep. After being thus
restored to the charge of them in May, counted only 5580. Esgar’s
count at the seizure was 6051. It appeared that over 500 had been lost.
When witness resumed charge the scab was beginning to make its ap-
pearance. Communicated this to Mr. Learmonth. Eemained in charge
until November, when the last of the flock were sold and delivered over
to a Mr. Cameron. The wethers had then fallen off very much in condi-
tion from scab, and from the same cause only 600 or 700 lambs lived, out of
the produce of 3500 ewes. In August, 1855, while he was still in charge,
and before the sale to Cameron, witness had instructions from Mr.
Learmonth to deliver over all sheep marked in a certain way, that is, with
the Morangourke brand, to a Mr. White, agent of Mr. Sharp. Acted on
these instructions, and handed over 1900 sheep to one Sutherland, acting for
Mr. White. Thesese 1900 were part of the 13,000 that had been shorn at
Morangourke. In October Mr. Learmonth sold all that remained, about
3000, to Mr. Cameron, who took them to the adjoining station of
Bessenbroke, which he, Cameron, owned. Witness passed into Cameron’s
employment. His wages were at the rate of £l2O a-year. The stores and
furniture that had been attached at the Eclipse Hotel remained in witness’s
charge after the seizure, and the stores were used by him for the shepherds
on the Dirdinwarra station.
Cross-examined.—The sheep fed at Dirdinwarra went back and forward
occasionally to Morangourke to be dipped. They were driven to Dirdin-
warra for the last time about February. Witness was in the habit of visiting
the out-stations and counting the sheep. Did not see stray sheep ming-
ling with the plaintiff’s sheep. Did not observe the number vary. The
ear-mark of the Morangourke sheep was the lower half of one ear slit, and
the tip off the other ear. The Dirdinwarra sheep had various earmarks.
The sheep given up to Mr. White from Dirdinwarra were the sheep with the


Morangourke earmark. The number of 6051 were given to witness from
the office of Learmonth as the number seized by Esgar. The scab had
began to appear among the sheep, when witness resumed charge for Mr.
Learmonth. There was no means of dipping them on the station, and they
got worse every day. When the sheep were ultimately sold to Mr. Cameron,
they had got very bad. Cameron’s station of Bessenbroke adjoins the
station of Dirdinwarra.
Donald Charles Cameron. —Owns the Bessenbroke station conjointly with
other parties. Witness’s brother bought some sheep from Mr. Learmonth
in November, 1855. Witness conducted the negociation for purchase. Saw
Mr. Learmonth at Geelong, and told him that if the sheep that were then
running at Dirdinwarra were not taken off he would complain to the Bench,
and have them destroyed. Mr. Learmonth said he had better buy them.
It was agreed that he should buy them on the valuation of two valuators.
They were valued at 2s. 6d. each. Witness purchased at that price, and
afterwards received delivery of them from Holland. There were from 2500
to 2800. Clipped them. They averaged about a pound and a-half of wool
of very bad quality. It sold subsequently for 14d. a pound. Kept the sheep
afterwards until March, when he sold them, some for 7s. 6d., and others
for a little more or a little less.
Cross-examined.—Mr.'Love had owned both Bessenbroke and Dirdinwarra
stations. Dirdinwarra had no homestead on it; Bessenbroke had. Love
used to live at Bessenbroke. There were some cattle of Love’s, about a
dozen or twenty store cattle, on the Dirdinwarra station at the time the
seizure was made. Witness could not have bought these sheep if he had
not owned the adjoining run. He would not have been permitted to drive
them through any other person’s run. Knew of some of these sheep having
been put up to auction a month or six weeks before, when lOd. a head was
the highest price bid for them.
Plaintiff’s case closed here.
Defendant’s counsel raised several nonsuit points, which were all over-
ruled by the Court.
The Court adjourned to ten o’clock on Saturday, when the further hearing
of the case will be resumed.
Saturday, 30 th May, 1857.
(Before Mr. Justice Barry and Special Juries of Twelve.)
ROSS V. LEARMONTH.
The hearing of this case was resumed at the sitting of the Court this
morning.
Mr. Atkins addressed the jury for the defendant. He relied chiefly on
an alleged acquiescence of the plaintiff. As evidence of the acquiescence he
referred to the letters of the plaintiff to defendant which had been proved
on the previous day. The plaintiff had made no distinct claim of property
in these sheep. When written to concerning them immediately after the
seizure, his answer was, he could say nothing without consulting his attor-
neys. In his second letter, he said he had been advised by his attorneys to
say nothing in writing; and in his third, he only suggested that the sheep
should be placed under the charge of an overseer, a suggestion which was
immediately complied with. These were not the letters of a man dealing
frankly with the assignee, or of a person who had made up his mind to claim
property in the sheep. Positive evidence would also be produced that the
defendant had expressed himself pleased that the sheep were in the custody


of the assignee while rival claims to the right in them were being adjusted.
He had so expressed himself to Mr. Barden, who likewise considered himself
entitled to these sheep. It would be proved that the plaintiff had declared
that he had no interest whatever in these sheep; that Bright Brothers had
the whole interest in them. As to the final sale of them, it had become
necessary from their condition with scab, and this scab had not been caused
by any neglect of the assignee. The sheep were suffering under it when
they came into his hands. Mr. Atkins contended that as regarded the fur-
niture and stores, there was no proof of any conversion of them by the de-
fendant ; no demand and refusal had been proved respecting them, and they
should not have been sold.
Robert Clarke Morgan, an officer of the Insolvent Court, Geelong, pro-
duced and proved the proceedings in the insolvency of Andrew Love.
William Berthon: Was overseer to Mr. Ross, at Morangourke. Was
first engaged by him in January, 1855. Was only two months there.
Took little interest in the business, as there were no funds to carry it on.
and witness was not paid his wages. Received no wages, and left. Had
about ten men under him. The sheep were scabby. There were not the
necessary stores for dressing them. There was a small quantity of arsenic,
which he used.
John Holland, the same witness that had already been examined for the
plaintiff: The station at Dirdinwarra belonged to Mr. Love in the mouth of
January and February, 1855, and up to his insolvency.
Mr. Atkins was proceeding to question the witness as to the expenses that
had been incurred by the Assignee, in attending to the sheep while they
were in his possession.
The Solicitor-General objected to the reception of such evidence.
Mr. Atkins and Mr. Dawson pressed the evidence, citing the case of
Clarke v. Nicholson, 6 Carr v. Payne, in which, in an action of trover by
Assignees, the defendant was permitted to reduce by the expenses he had
incurred in selling the goods, the case being one in which the Assignees
themselves must have sold, had the goods been in their possession.
His Honor thought the cases were quite distinguishable. If they could
show that Mr. Ross must necessarily have sold the sheep himself, then, on
the authority of the case cited, he would receive evidence of the expenses
which the defendant had incurred in selling them, and would direct the
jury to make that a deduction in their verdict, should they find one for the
plaintiff; but he could see no reason in the proposition that a man should
first wrongfully take another man’s cattle, and then should send him a bill
for keeping them.
Mr. Atkins then would tender the evidence, and ask his Honor to take a
note of it. He then tendered the evidence in the following words:—
“ Evidence of necessary expenses incurred by defendant in respect of the
sheep, the subject of this action, while they were in his possession, and
which expenses must necessarily have been incurred by plaintiff had they
remained in his possession. ”
His Honor : I will undertake to reject the evidence for the purpose of the
present trial, but I think we had better take it now conditionally, and
assess these expenses as a collateral issue, to save the expense of a new trial,
should the Court above differ from me.
The witness was then examined in considerable detail as to the several
items of expenditure incurred by the Assignee during the six months that
the sheep were in his possession. They included the wages of overseer,
shepherds, rations, &c., &c. Among the rest was a bill for cooking the
shepherds’ rations.
His Honor : Including, of course, the cooking of their mutton. Then, if
I understand this item aright, it is a charge for cooking the plaintiff’s sheep,
which you took from the plaintiff, and which your shepherds ate.


The whole of these expenses amounted to £386.
Mr. Forwood, the defendant’s solicitor, was then examined : In the month
of August, 1855, witness, accompanied by the plaintiff and the defendant,
went to the Morangourke station to see the sheep. Met there Mr. White,
who held an order, which order there was an error in, and the order which
was finally given to Mr. Sutherland, acting for Mr. White, was then substi-
tuted. It was discussed with Mr. Ross before it was given. It was given
by the Official Assignee to Mr. Sutherland, as agent for Mr. Sharp or Mr.
White. Mr. White represented Mr. Sharp. Witness believed that the pre-
vious order was for all the sheep at Dirdinwarra, but that it was arranged
that this order should be only for a certain portion of them, and this order
was accordingly substituted.
The order was then read. It was an order from Mr. Learmonth to Mr.
Holland, the overseer on the Dirdinwarra Station, to deliver to Sutherland
the sheep attached by him on the Dirdinwarra Station, 2400, or thereabouts,
in number, bearing the Dirdinwarra brand and ear-mark. It was under
this order that the 1900 sheep mentioned on the previous day, were delivered
to Mr. Sutherland.
Witness, in continuation: Understood it to be then arranged that the
remainder of the Dirdinwarra sheep should remain under the attachment.
Witness had a conversation with the plaintiff in the month of July, 1855,
while the sheep were under the attachment. He said he was willing, if the
Assignee desired it, to make an arrangement with Bright Brothers, who
then held an interest in all his sheep, that the Official Assignee should give
up the sheep to Bright Brothers, and that Bright Brothers should indemnify
the Assignee against the claim of any other persons. Plaintiff went on to
say that the guarantee of Bright Brothers was a better guarantee than he
could get from any other persons, and that, in fact, this was the best thing
the Assignee could do. Witness assented for the Assignee, and it was
arranged that further communications should take place. Plaintiff never
claimed the interest in the sheep himself. He always said Bright Brothers
had all the interest that he had had. Witness had a conversation with the
plaintiff again in December. He then said the Official Assignee should have
accepted his offer with regard to Bright Brothers, and that if he would
act on it now, he would use his interest with Bright Brothers to have it
carried out. He expressly said on that occasion that he had no interest in
the sheep. Witness said “ I hear you are going to law with the Assignee.”
He said “It is not me. I have no interest in the matter; and if the
Assignee allows it to go to law, he must recollect it is Bright Brothers he
has to fight with, who have plenty of money to see it out.”
Mr. Atkins here tendered in evidence a letter from Bright Brothers, dated
February sth, 1856.
It was objected to and rejected.
Cross-examined.—This journey to Morangourke was the result of an engage-
ment made the previous day in Geelong between plaintiff, defendant, and
witness. The order that had been given for delivering the whole of the
sheep to Mr. Sharp’s agent was referred to when this arrangement was
made, and the substitution of the order for it which should authorise the
delivery of the Morangourke sheep only. When they got to the station
they found Mr. White and Sutherland there. To the best of witness’s recol-
lection, speaking after two years, the whole of the arrangement made on
that occasion at Morangourke was made in presence of all the parties he has
named, including the plaintiff. As well as he can say at this distance of
time, Mr. Ross did not leave the room. Is positive he did not leave the
room saying he would take no part in what was going on. On the contrary,
the alteration in the order as to the sheep to be delivered was made dis-
tinctly in reference to a future delivery of the remainder of the Dirdinwarra
sheep to Messrs. Bright Brothers. Witness was present in his capacity


of solicitor, having charge of this insolvency for Mr. Learmonth, the
assignee.
Alexander Sutherland. —Lives at Morangourke. Is Mr. kharp s overseer
on that station. In March, 1855, was commissioned by Mr. Sharp to take
possession of the sheep at that station from Mr. Iloss, the plaintiff. Lid
take possession of 6000 or 7000. They bore the Morangourke brand and
ear-mark. They were in a very bad condition, with both scab and foot-rot.
Remembers the interview referred to by the last witness as having taken
place at the station between him (Mr. Forwood), the plaintiff, the defend-
ant, Mr. White, and witness. An order had come up from the Official
Assignee (defendant) directing Mr. Holland to deliver up to witness all the
Dirdinwarra sheep. This order was withdrawn, and the other order substi-
tuted. Mr. Ross was present when the second order was signed. On this
second order witness got possession of all the sheep at Dirdinwarra that had
the Morangourke brand and ear-mark. Got 1900. They were in a horrid
bad condition; as bad as ever witness saw. They were a nuisance to the
neighbours, and were getting knocked on the head they were so infected
with scab. Witness acted as a valuator when the remainder of these Lir-
dinwarra sheep were sold to Cameron. Valued them at 2s. 6d. a head, the
sheep-lambs given in. Witness had been present at an attempted sale of
these sheep, when lOd. a head was the highest price offered for them.
Cross-examined. —These sheep were scabby when Ross bought them from
Love. . .
Donald Cameron (the same who was examined on the previous day).-
When witness bought these sheep he believed the representative of Mr,
Love’s estate to be the owner of them, and before the insolvency he con-
sidered Mr. Love to be the owner of them. Dirdinwarra was Mr. Love s
station, and lie was the reputed owner of the sheep on it. Witness knew he
had sold Morangourke, but he had not sold Dirdinwarra.
The Solicitor-General now insisted that, in accordance with an under-
taking given at a previous stage of the case, Mr. Ross, the plaintiff, should
be replaced in the witness-box, that he (the Solicitor-General) might examine
him as to the arrangement to which he was alleged to have been a party, and
the conversation stated to have taken place in his presence.
Mr. Ross was then placed in the box, and proceeded, on the examination
of the Solicitor-General, to give his account of the circumstances stated by
the last witness. —-Witness went down to Geelong in August to demand the
sheep from the defendant. Witness said to defendant he had come down to
demand the sheep. Defendant said witness had just come in the nick of
time, for at that moment he was about to write out an order in favour of
young Mr. Barden. Witness asked him why he was about to deliver them
to Mr. Barden instead of selling them for the benefit of the estate for which
they had been seized. Defendant answered that Barden had offered to give
him an indemnity if he delivered them to him, and he preferred that to the
risk of selling them for the benefit of the estate. Witness then told him he
was ready to give him a guarantee too, and defendant said if he gave him a
better one than Barden he might have them. Witness told him he thought
he would be able to get him Bright Brothers’, but that it would be necessary
for him to telegraph to Melbourne, Witness then left, went to the Tele-
graph Station, °and sent the necessary message up to town. Sunday inter-
vened. Witness got no answer from Bright Brothers until Monday. Mean-
time, on Sunday, Mr. Learmonth proposed to witness that they should take
a ride, a simple ride to enjoy themselves, in company with Mr. Forwood to
Dirdinwarra. Dirdinwarra was twenty-five miles from Geelong. They
meant to have gone to Dirdinwarra, but they lost their way. nust
Mr. Sutherland, who took them to Morangourke. After so long a ride they
had some lunch. After lunch Mr. Learmonth told witness for the first time
the object of his visit to the station. He said, now lam going to give Mr.


Sutherland an order on Holland for the delivery of the sheep. Witness told
him he could not have anything to do with it as he was waiting for the
answer from Bright Brothers, and he required the whole of the sheep to be
delivered to himself. They went into another room, that was called the
drawing-room, and prepared the order. Witness knew that an order had
been given, but he was not in the room when it was made out. The party
afterwards rode down to the inn where they slept that night, and returned
next day to Geelong. On that day witness heard from Bright Brothers,
who authorised him to offer their guarantee. He told Mr. Lear-
month. Mr. Learmonth said that on these terms he should deliver the
sheep to witness, and added he would be up in Melbourne in a few
days, when the arrangements should be completed. Within a few days
witness came to Melbourne, when an interview took place between witness,
Mr. Hart, acting as agent for Bright Brothers, and Mr. Learmonth. At that
interview the written agreement was drafted, which witness has already
stated in his first examination. It struck witness at the station that he had
been brought up there that he might appear to give a sanction to that which
in fact he objected to.
Cross-examined by Mr. Aspinall.—Witness has had several conversations
with the Rev. Mr. Barden, respecting these sheep. Witness never said to
Mr. Barden that it was a good thing that the official assignee was holding
them, as they would be kept without expense to either party. Witness
always objected to the assignee retaining them. If Mr. Barden swears that
he (witness) did say so to him, witness will not say he swears a falsehood—
that would be an insult $o Mr. Barden —but he will still say he (witness) is
morally convinced he did not say it; he could not say it.
Rev. Charles Barden —Knows Mr. Ross, the plaintiff; has had several
conversations with him repeating these sheep. On one occasion he said it
was a good thing that the official assignee had the sheep, as it would save
both of them expense. Witness was claiming the Dirdinwarra sheep, and was
at the time endeavouring to effect an arrangement with Mr. Ross as to which
of them should give up their claim to them. These Dirdinwarra sheep were
on the Dirdinwarra station at the time of the insolvency.
Cross-examined —Witness at one time owned the Dirdinwarra station.
Witness bought it from Mr. Steiglitz, and afterwards sold it to Love. Love
bought it in October, 1853. There was an agreement in writing between
Love and witness, that Love should keep a certain number of sheep upon
this station. The agreement was put into writing and executed in January,
1855, It was dated as of an earlier date. The reason of that was that the
actual agreement was of an early date, but certain calculations had to be
made, without which it could not conveniently be reduced to writing. This
caused the delay. The final execution was only sixty days before Love’s
insolvency. Witness suffered considerably by the insolvency.
This closed the defendant’s case.
The Solicitor-General replied for the plaintiff. He estimated the plain-
tiff’s whole demand at £4,428 IBs. fid.
Mr. Justice Barry in charging the jury said, the question for them was
whether the property of these sheep, furniture, and stores, was in the
plaintiff, and whether they were so disposed of by the defendant as to
deprive the plaintiff of the use of them. As to the furniture, his Honor
thought the evidence of conversion had not been satisfactory. At the
original taking under the Insolvency order, the evidence did not place Mr.
Esgar, who had actually seized, clearly in privity with Mr. Learmonth.
Even the paper then produced by Mr. Esgar was not proved to have been
an Insolvency order, and there was no evidence at all of a subsequent sale.
As to the stores, there was some evidence of a conversion subsequent *to the
taking. They appeared to have been used by the defendant, though to what
amount or value was not distinctly shown. With regard to the sheep, the


evidence of conversion was clear, as they were proved to have been sold
With regard to the sheep, therefore, the jury would have only to consider
whether"they were the property of the plaintiff, and what was the value °i
them. It was quite consistent with their being the plaintiff s property that
Bright Brothers should have had a hen on them; and it was equally in con-
sistency with the plantiff’s owning at the time of the conversion that he
should subsequently have transferred all his interest in them to Bright
Brothers, and. I that Bright Brothers should be entitled to
of the present action, should it result in a verdict ior the plaintiff. Hie
question was this—was this property in the plaintiff at the time the defen-
dant in legal phrase, converted them to his own use If they found for the
plaintiff, he must also ask them to find separately what_er] penses the de en-
dant had incurred in respect of the sheep, m order that if the Court above
should think that we had been wrong in excluding the evidence on that
point from their consideration in arriving at their general verdict, the Court
might have the means of rectifying the verdict without sending the whole
Ca The°jury'retiredj and, after an absence of about twenty minutes, brought-
in a verdict for the plaintiff of £3,425 10s. . . ~, ~ ,
The foreman at the same time expressed the opinion of the jury tnat the
defendant was not entitled to any allowance for expenses. . .
1 His Honor hoped that though the jury concurred with his present opinion
on that point, they had made the conditional assessment for the use of the
C ThelForeman informed his Honour that they made the assessment
but he was very anxious to stipulate, on behalf of his fellow-jurymen, that
if the Court above did allow the defendant these expenses, the allowance
should be neutralised by adding an equal sum on to the that
His Honor pointed out to the jury how impossible it was to adopt that
means of squaring it with the Court above, should they unfortunately come
to a perverse decision on this point, and the Foreman, apparently with some
reluctance, gave in their conditional assessment of these expenses at £29-.
The Court adjourned.
REPORT OF THE SECOND TRIAL.
OLD COURT HOUSE.— Thursday, May 30, 1861.
{Before His Honor the Chief Justice and Special Juries of Twelve.)
LEARMONTH V. SHARPE.
Mr Michie, Mr. Wood, and Mr. Fellows for the plaintiff; the Attorney-
Cencral Mr Dawson, and Mr. Higinbotham for the defendant.
G ThL acLon arose out of the great case of Ross v. Wmon h W m May
1857 in which the plaintiff, Ross, recovered a verdict of £3420 10s. in re
’pect of a lar-e number of sheep, which the then defendant, Learmonth had
seized as belonging to the insolvent estate of Andrew Love, junior, of which
estate Leamonth was the official assignee. In the course of the proceedings
connected with that suit, an indemnity had been given to Learmonth by


Mr. A. B. White, agent for Mr. William Sharpe, the present defendant, at
the time residing out of the country. The indemnity ran in the following
form:—
“To Richard Learmonth, Esq., official assignee of the estate of Andrew
Love, junior, an insolvent.
‘ 4 Sir—ln consideration of your having this day handed us an authority
to your messenger to deliver to us the sheep on the Dirdinwarra station,
which were removed from the Morangourke station attached by you, we
hereby undertake and promise to indemnify you against all losses, damages,
c< >sts, or expenses which you may sustain or incur on account of any action,*
suit, or proceeding which may be brought, instituted, or prosecuted against
you, in respect of the said sheep so removed and delivered to us as aforesaid. #
“ Your obedient servant,
“A. B. White, Attorney for W. Sharp.”
The sheep were accordingly delivered to Mr. Sutherland, on account of Mr.
Sharp, and Mr. W. M. Ross brought his action and recovered their value from
Learmonth, notwithstanding he defended the suit with all diligence in the
ordinary way, aided by professional advice. On being applied to for the
re-imbursement of the damages and charges Mr. Learmonth has been put
to, Sharp repudiated hisJiability, and hence the present action.
After an inquiry, whicn lasted the whole day, the jury returned a verdict
for the plaintiff.
Damages, £lll3 ss. 9d.
MASON AND PIRTH, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST, MELBOURNE.


j M- rf
&ÜbUO
f\S(Oi
■






Since writing this Pamphlet 1 have been forced to add the fol-
lowing : —lt used to be said, when they wished me to go from the
place where I was living and had been long enough there —“ If he
does not leave this we will make his head sore or his jaws ache.”
But now r it is, “ We will make his mouth run water if he is not off,
and that will settle the affair soon and which has been done more
or less tor the last month. It is done by people in the vicinity of
where lam keeping their own mouths wet. That this is achieved
by a chemical process—animal magnetism or electro-biology—no one
will deny ; but then the system is first made susceptible to those
impressions with deleterious substances—l am told it is with
strychnine—by putting a few grains in a large cask of water, which
may be used to any extent for three weeks or a month, and then the
victim must be forced elsewhere, which is very easily done by
getting him discharged from his employment, or insulting him in
his lodgings, and by the treatment I have alluded to, which latter is
almost sure to succeed, for a person is afraid to complain at first,
and many never would, and that accounts for the death of
the Poundkeeper’s wife, as was shown at the trial, that she
had been receiving strychnine for a very long time (two
years). She was a lunatic shortly before she died. It will be
remembered that her husband and the woman who administered the
poison were committed to take their trial. I should observe, when
a person is injured in the manner I have described, he can be made
to talk, laugh, and joke in his sleep, and any conversation which the
victim’s persecutors wish they can keep up with him even miles
away. It has been said, in my hearing, that it is the Freemasons
getting this done to me, but a gentleman who 1 believe belongs to
that honorable order has told me they would scorn to be guilty of
such inhuman treatment, and that no doubt it is Y and his
accomplices. But even if it were the Freemasons they would not
injure me for not complying with rules, and at the same time pre-
vent me from complying. It has been said it was in Castlemaine
where I had been injured ; that is not true, for I only slept one
night in Castlemaine since I left Gilbert’s Station in South Aus-
tralia, and it is now two years since I was in Castlemaine, and I
have since been living twelve months at the Railway Dining-rooms




in King-street, opposite the Western Gaol, where the tragedy took
place, part of which ended across the street in the gaol.
If they continue the present syste'm to cause me disease of the
chest or lungs, they will not be able to say it is through smoking, for
sixpennyworth of tobacco lasts me one month. Instead of living
twenty-five years longer, from my temperate habits and disposition,
as a doctor told me three years ago I should, while prospecting for
gold at Canoona, fifty miles from Rockampton, I shall not live ten
years.
The jwrson I have alluded to in this pamphlet told me he would
murder me or run me into the Yarra Bend if I would not go away
out of Melbourne. I have no doubt but that a Semple and a Guy
could be found in Victoria as well as in London, to say that a person
complaining of injuries received is not in their right senses ; and
thus the death of the Poundkeeper’s wife. But if there> are any
two such men (for I cannot call such men gentlemen), they might find
that if the journalists of Melbourne are not as independent and
honorable as the journalists of London are (viz., the Times and
Saturday Review), that the people of Victoria are, and will not allow
such conduct to pass unnoticed, even when committed by men high
in power. But, if there are any men who want J.P. added to their
names, or who have that distinguished title already, but wish to
court popularity, I trust they will ponder before they commit such
an act, as certifying that a sane person is of unsound mind, or
they may court popularity to their cost, and find that even the
minister of justice cannot always say who shall and who shall not
be committed for trial.
Mr. W. Lockhart Morton has shown in the A rgus of February 3,
1863, that the Exploring Expedition left Melbourne months too
soon. I think 1 have shown you the reason why. I have been
told that, if I cannot be managed otherwise, a false charge will be
got up against me. Now', to be imprisoned two years and a-half
wrongfully, and then to be turned away out of the colony, having
failed to make away with me—to try to make a lunatic of me
and to undermine my constitution, is treatment that ought not to
be tolerated even by a vindictive magistrate, and therefore I hope
and trust that half a million of people are not to be influenced by
a single individual, and that a feeling of humanity will prompt some
lady or gentleman to write to some private member of the Legis-
lative Assembly, or to the public journals, to know why 1 should
be wrongfully imprisoned, and not have justice, and ask why I
should be so ill treated I


E (&LJO
FISIO3
