

N° I Tarn ■ i
t,.v (’.WulktT, Sculp T
J’uhlidied tor the Journal oftheßogal Geographical Soctetg.bg JohrvMurray. Albemarle SfZondon Sept ’.' lit;l.




PAPERS READ
BEFORE THE
ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY.
I. —State of the Colony of Swan River, Ist January , 1830.
Chiefly extracted from Captain Stirling’s Report. By John
Barrow, Esq., F.R.S. Read 22d Nov., 1830.
In the infancy of the Royal Geographical Society of London,
and in this early stage of our proceedings, the Council may per-
haps not be indisposed to receive such communications as may
convey useful information, though not possessing that degree of
minute accuracy which may be expected from the proceedings of
the Society in its more mature state, when the higher objects for
which it was instituted shall claim more marked attention, and
when a more extended knowledge of its views shall have been
diffused at home and abroad.
With this feeling I have been induced to submit to the Society
a paper, drawn up from an authentic source, on the actual state
of the Swan River Colony, at the commencement of the year
1830, about six months after its establishment. The subject may
fairly be considered as not altogether unimportant at this mo-
ment, when so many conflicting statements and opinions have
been promulgated, by which persons disposed to emigrate to that
quarter are left in suspense as to the steps it may be advisable for
them to take.
It would seem desirable, for other reasons, to collect and dis-
tribute information regarding New Holland, or, as it is now more
generally called, Australia. Hitherto, a country as large as
Europe has been represented on our maps nearly as a blank.
Yet, as this extensive territory will, in all probability, in process of
time, support a numerous population, the progeny of Britons, and
may be the means of spreading the English language, laws, and


institutions, over a great part of the Eastern Archipelago, it is
presumed that every accession to our knowledge of its geographical
features, however limited, will be acceptable to the Society.
Some strange opinions were at one time held regarding the
formation of this extensive country. When the Blue Mountains
behind Sydney were first passed, which was not till many years
after the earliest establishment of the colony, and the waters there
were found to take a westerly course, it was concluded that this
new country a recent creation according to some had an
inclination, or dip, on every side towards its centre, and that
all the waters from the surrounding ridge fell, as from the
rim of a basin, into a Mediterranean Sea, or a succession of
swamps or marshes. And the loose surveys made of its coasts
having afforded no discovery of any river of magnitude, tended
to confirm this notion. Recent researches, however, and par-
ticularly those of Captain Sturt, have proved that, as in most
other countries, the land dips from the central parts towards the
coasts, and that the waters, as most waters do, drain oft’ into the
sea. On this subject I may quote a letter from Lieutenant-
Colonel Dumaresq, Secretary to the Governor of New South
Wales:—
4 It will not perhaps be uninteresting to you,’ says that officer,
* to be informed, that, simultaneously with Captain Sturt’s dis-
‘ coveries, which have solved the problem respecting the con-
* struction of this Continent, it has been ascertained that the hypo-
-4 thesis, with regard to its post-diluvian formation, is as ground-
-4 less as that of its absorbent interior marshes.
4 Some caverns in the neighbourhood of Wellington Valley
4 have lately been examined, and found to contain innumerable
4 specimens of fossil bones, deeply imbedded in stalagmite, or in
4 indurated clay. I have seen some of these bones, which must
4 have belonged to animals that do not now exist here, and are
4 larger than those of the rhinoceros or buffalo. Teeth, appa-
-4 rently similar to those described by Buckland, have likewise
4 been collected; and we have now many other proofs that this
4 country was once inhabited by beasts of prey, and that it is coeval
4 with the rest of the world.
4 The country in the neighbourhood of Wellington Valley is of
4 limestone formation, and the ridges are perforated by numerou
4 subterraneous caverns, which branch off' in various directions.
4 Others exist in the Shoal Haven gullies, (the most remarkably
4 formed country, perhaps, in the world,) and which will probably
4 be found to contain similar diluvian remains.
4 To the above physiological facts I may add, that Captain
4 Sturt does not appear to think it at all improbable that there is


1 an opening from u Lake Alexandria” into the Gulf of St.
* Vincent; and he is of opinion that the whole of that country is
‘ formed by alluvial deposit from the vast interior, through which
( flow the rivers Murray, Darling, Castlereagh, and Peel; as also
1 that the Darling will be found to be one of the longest rivers of
‘ the world.
‘ W e have recently ascertained that the finest tract of land exists
i to the south, immediately beyond our present boundary, which is
‘ abundantly watered by streams said to take their rise from snow-
‘ clad mountains. These facts induce me to think we should
‘ abandon the idea of pushing our settlements, at present, further
‘ into the interior, and that we ought to form a belt of coloniza-
c tion along the north and south coasts. The water communica-
‘ tion would give employment to seamen, and be the means of
1 converting the Colonial youth into sailors, who, in case of need,
‘ might contribute to the manning of the navies of the mother
1 country.’
Thus far Colonel Dumaresq. With regard to the discovery of
bones, Major Mitchell, the Surveyor-General in New South
Wales, thus writes to Mr. Hay : —‘ At length an immense quan-
‘ tity of the remains of antediluvian animals has been discovered,
f precisely in a situation such as that described by Professor
‘ Buckland. What is most singular is, that there appears no
‘ affinity, as far as I can discover, between these bones and those
‘of the caves of Europe, although some are very large. A bone,
1 the ulna of some huge animal, is somewhat like that of an ox,
‘ but it is four times as large.’
Colonel Dumaresq’s observation, that the finest tracts of land
are found towards the south coast of this great continent, is
fully confirmed, as to the western part of the same south coast,
by the discoveries made by Dr. Wilson of the navy, to the distance
of eighty or ninety miles northerly, from King George’s Sound,
recently annexed to the settlement of Swan River. Of this jour-
ney a brief account is contained in the following paper, and it is
also sketched on the map. Our acquaintance, however, is yet
far from being minute with this south coast, from Cape Leuwin
to Port Philip,—an extent of at least fifteen hundred geogra-
phical miles, —otherwise an estuary of sixty miles in length, by
thirty or forty in breadth, could not have escaped observation
until discovered from the interior; and our knowledge of other
parts of the coast is even still more defective. For instance, on
the western side, from North-west Cape, in lat. 22°, to Clarence
Strait, in lat. a distance of more than one thousand miles,
there are numerous large openings, not yet examined, in which no
land is visible to the eye of the spectator in the interior, and through


which rivers of the first magnitude might discharge their waters
unseen and unknown. The whole of this coast is fronted with
innumerable islands, with deep channels between them, through
which, according to Captain King’s expression, ‘ the tide rushes
with frightful rapidity.’ He suspects the great mass of land
called Dampier’s Land, extending from Cape Levique to Pointe
Gantheaume, to be an island, behind which there is an opening
of at least eight miles in width; and here, as well as in the
Buccaneers’ Archipelago, he found the rise and fall of the tides
six and thirty feet, which on other parts of the coast did not exceed
eight or nine feet. Prom these phenomena Captain King comes
to the same conclusion with that excellent old navigator Dampier.
‘ From all that is at present known,’ he observes, ‘ of this remark-
‘ able opening, there is enough to excite the greatest interest;
‘ since, from the extent of the opening, the rapidity of the stream,
1 and the great rise and fall of the tides, there must be a very ex-
‘ tensive gulf or opening, totally different from everything that has
‘ been before seen.’ But in parts of the coast so dangerous, no
survey can be made, except in boats, or by land, along the shore.
1 It will not be necessary for me,’ says Captain Stirling, in his
official despatches to Government, 1 to recapitulate the inconve-
‘ niences we had to encounter on our first arrival. The winter
‘ season, the loneliness of our situation, and ignorance of the
1 country, and of the navigation of the coast, and our anxiety as to
‘ whether w 7 e should succeed or fail, were sources of uneasiness
1 which are happily passed away. It is our present condition that
‘ will interest you most, and to that 1 shall confine myself.’
The first operation, on arriving at Sw ; an River, w ; as to mark
out the site of two towns, to one of which w 7 as given the name of
Freemantle, close to the entrance of the river ; to the other that
of Perth, about nine miles higher up, on its right or northern
bank. In August, 1829, the settlers began to crowd in; and hav-
ing received their respective allotments, commenced the erection
of temporary buildings. In November, the country on the banks
of the Swan and Canning Rivers, extending between the sea and
the mountains, and to the distance of fifty miles to the southward
of Perth, w r as thrown open to them. And many at once esta-
blished themselves on their lands, regardless of any danger from
the natives, who indeed were found to be so harmless, that single
individuals even, who had traversed the country, and particularly
among the mountains, had never met with any interruption, nor
sustained any insult or injury at their hands.
As settlers continued to flock in, towards the end of the year


Captain Stirling found it necessary to explore the country to a
greater extent than had hitherto been done, by which he ob-
tained a knowledge relative to the coast seventy miles to the
northward of Rottenest, and ninety miles to the southward of it.
In this extent, the only discoveries of any note were six rivers, of
no great magnitude, and a bar harbour, capable only of receiving-
boats. To the northward, the land seen was of indifferent qua-
lity, while that to the southward was found to improve in fertility,
the farther it was explored in that direction. One of the settlers
was so much struck with the fertility of the soil about Port
JLeschenault, that he determined at once to fix his abode there.
He describes this estuary to exceed that of Melville Water in the
Swan River, in point of size, and superior in the beauty of its
banks. It receives two rivers flowing down from the Darling
range, which is here about the same distance from the coast as at
Swan River. Across the mouth of the Colley is a bar, but to the
distance of sixteen or eighteen miles within it maintains a depth
of water from six to two fathoms, and here it becomes perfectly
fresh. The plains are well wooded with large timber trees, and
the whole country wears the appearance of an English park.
Port Leschenault is fit only for the reception of small craft, having
a bar with no more than from three to four feet, and two fathoms
water within.
The nature of the soil in the extent of country here mentioned
is of various descriptions. On the sea coast, where a continued
calcareous ridge exists, no gramineous plants are to be found, but
several species of shrubby or herbaceous plants rise out of the
sandy surface, affording good nutriment for sheep and cattle at all
seasons of the year. Next to this calcareous formation is a
parallel breadth of a superficial soil, still somewhat sandy, bearing
large timber trees, and affording good but rather scanty feeding
for sheep and cattle. Adjoining this district of light, sandy soil,
is a considerable breadth of red land, extending to the base of the
Darling mountains, the soil of which varies from red sandy loam
to the richest red marl and clay, apparently fit for all agricultural
purposes. The fourth variety of country is the uneven surface of
the mountainous range, which is of granite and trap formation.
The valleys of this range are exceedingly rich and verdant, and
the hills themselves, although occasionally rugged by the protru-
sion of the rocks, afford magnificent timber, and very excellent
sheep lands. The whole breadth of this range of mountains had
not been crossed*, though examined to the distance of twenty-five
miles from the western edge. Straggling parties of natives were
occasionally met with; and in one or two places were hovels of
* See, however, on this head p. 16, where subsequent discoveries are noticed.


grass and twigs, very small, and resembling in shape the half of
a bee-hive cut vertically. The men and children were naked: their
women did not appear. They seemed to be a good-humoured,
inoffensive people. In several of the valleys are pools and rills of
water. The fifth and last variety of soil is that which is found on
the banks of the rivers and streamlets. It is alluvial, and gene-
rally very rich, bearing spontaneously good native flax, many edible
roots, and thirty or forty species of grasses. This description of
the country applies more particularly to the extent of about forty
miles to the southward of Swan River. Farther south, the sandy
tract disappears, and the rocky ground is less protruding ; the
climate is cooler, and the surface seems to indicate the fall of
more frequent showers.
From the little inconvenience which a large portion of the
settlers suffered from want of dwellings, and exposure to the night
air for weeks together, the opinion is universal that the climate is
favourable to health in a very uncommon degree. Captain Stir-
ling says, that for two or three of the summer months it was
deemed prudent that the workmen should not work exposed to
the sun between the hours of ten and three; but that great exer-
tion at other times produced no consequent lassitude : and he adds
that, with the exception of ten or eleven days, the summer heat
had been tempered by southern breezes, and thereby rendered very
agreeable. Rain had not fallen for about three months ; but this
drought fortunately occurs at the season proper for harvest. And
though the grasses and other herbage are at this time much in-
jured by the great and glowing heat of the sun, it is worthy of
remark, that on sandy soils the plants sustain the heat much
better than on the clay. None of those whose roots are near the
surface can escape from the effects of the baking which this latter
kind of soil sustains.
Captain Stirling speaks with great caution on the productive
power of the soils, and how far they may be modified by climate.
4 The most skilful of the farmers who have come from England,’
he observes, ‘ profess themselves at a loss to form a judgment
1 here, as processes in vegetation are going forward before their
‘ eyes, even on mere sands, which are wholly irreconcileable to
‘ their pre-existing notions and modes of judging. I think, how-
‘ ever,’ he continues, 1 I am safe in stating that the sandy soils on
‘ the coast produce a shrubby herbage, on which horned cattle,
( horses, and sheep have lived now throughout the hottest and the
‘ coldest parts of the year; that there is, between the hills and the
1 sea, a breadth of red loamy soil, on which grain and artificial
1 grasses may be produced; that the banks of the rivers and nu-
‘ merous streams offer the richest alluvial loam ; and that the hills
e themselves, although occasionally very rugged, are capable of


‘ becoming good sheep pasture, as the soil on their sides, where
‘ it exists at all, is invariably excellent, resting on granite and
1 whinstone.’ He states that the supply of water for the use of
the people and for cattle is abundant everywhere. Though the
rivers are not of great magnitude, they are of value, by serving as
so many canals for boat navigation. Lakes, streams, and springs
are found in every direction; and even on the sea-shore wells have
been rarely sunk in vain. From this abundance, and from the
considerable provision of food for live stock which the territory
seems to possess, he thinks the pastoral life will be found more
profitable than the agricultural, and will be chosen by the bulk of
the settlers.
It is too early yet to form any estimate as to the number of
cattle, horses, and sheep which may be kept on an average of any
given extent of land; but that very considerable numbers may be
sustained is evident from the fact, that, at the very driest season
of the year, when no rain had fallen for three months, there were
both food and water in abundance. This is an important fact, as
{lie power of supporting these animals without artificial food will
secure not only a clear profit to their owners, but a supply here-
after of animal food for the use of the settlement. The live stock
which has been introduced is described as being, in several in-
stances, of the very best quality, and, with very few exceptions,
arising chiefly from neglect, all kinds of it have done well The
bullocks and sheep, even in the dry season, fatten upon the natural
grasses and herbage. Horses from England have not prospered so
well, but even these have maintained themselves without any food
beyond the natural herbage. In short, he observes, ‘ lam happy
‘ to say, with reference to grazing, that there is every reason to be
‘ satisfied with the result of our experience up to the present time.’
The views of those settlers who look forward to tillage are as
yet confined to gardening and farming for their own consumption.
Grain is not likely to be cultivated to any great extent, as it can
be imported from Java and the surrounding colonies of New
South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land at a cheaper rate than it
can be produced in the new settlement, at least for some time to
come. Captain Stirling thinks, however, that flax of a very su-
perior kind, and a species of hemp, both growing spontaneously,
may probably be cultivated to advantage ; that timber, which is
abundant, may find a profitable market; that wines, olives, figs,
opium, and tobacco may be looked to as future sources of export;
but that these and other articles must await the time when the
present subsistence and comfort of the settlers shall have been
provided for, and a stock of the necessaries of life permanently
secured.
Many of the settlers of Perth and Freemantle have employed


themselves in the construction of boats for the conveyance of their
goods on the rivers. The number of these in the settlement were
not less than forty. Some of the settlers employ themselves pro-
fitably in fishing; and Captain Stirling has reason to believe that
the settlement will be able speedily to export cured fish to Java.
Whales are abundant on the coast, and attention has been drawn
to the establishment of a whale-fishery, that can hardly fail of
success. Cockburn Sound is a safe and extensive anchorage : it
has been made easy of access now by buoying off the channel
leading into it; and no place could be better situated for a marine
establishment than the eastern shore of Buache or Garden Island,
where careening wharfs may be constructed at a trifling expense.
The favourable position which this part of the coast of New
Holland occupies, with reference to the trade of the Eastern seas,
Captain Stirling observes, has been shown in some measure by
the arrival of ships from various parts of the world, to the number
of more than thirty, in the seven months of the first year of the
establishment of the colony. Some of those from England landed
all their cargoes there ; but the greater part merely called, and
after landing passengers and part of their cargoes, proceeded on
their routes. Two vessels had been sent to the Malay islands; and
Captain Stirling understood that four small vessels were intended
to be employed in that and other lines of trade, diverging from
Swan River as a centre. By means of these, it will soon be de-
termined whether this position will prove favourable for the dis-
posal of British manufactures among the easternmost of the Malay
islands.
In the formation of all new colonies, there will necessarily be
found a large portion of the early adventurers giving vent to feel-
ings of discontent and disappointment. It always happens that
many of such adventurers are men unsettled in their views, inor-
dinate in their expectations, and wholly unfitted to encounter the
difficulties which are inevitable in the infancy of a colony ; and
that such persons should be disappointed, discontented, and their
ruin completed, is quite in the nature of things. Accordingly,
among the numerous settlers who have flocked to Swan River
were not a few whose minds, and bodies were but ill-suited to en-
counter the struggles and distresses which are the unavoidable
concomitants of a new settlement. ‘ Many, if not all,’ says
Captain Stirling, 1 have accordingly been more or less disap-
‘ pointed on their arrival, either with the state of things here, or
‘ their own want of energy to surmount the difficulties pressing
‘ around them—not greater, however, than such as must neces-
‘ sarily be experienced in the beginning of every new colony ; ’
and, it may be added, far less severe than those which the Ame-
rican colonists had to encounter, or those who first established


themselves on the opposite side of Australia. Captain Stirling,
however, observes, that ‘ from this state of depression the active
( and stout-hearted have now recovered ; and ten or twelve of
‘ the leading men having occupied their lands, and having de-
‘ dared themselves fully satisfied with the quality of the soil and
‘ the condition of their cattle, I consider the undertaking to be
‘ now safe from the effects of a general despondency, which at
‘ one time threatened to defeat the views of his Majesty’s govern-
-1 ment in this quarter.’
Among the heads of families there is a great majority of highly
respectable and independent persons ; in the working class a great
variety. Some masters have been careful in the selection of their
servants and workmen; but the greater part have either engaged
the outcasts of parishes, or have brought out men without refer-
ence to character—men who, incapable of succeeding at home,
are not likely to prosper in a new settlement to the extent of their
groundless and inconsiderate expectations. ‘lfit be possible,’
says Captain Stirling, ‘ to discourage one set of people and to
‘ encourage another, I would earnestly request that, for a few
‘ years, the helpless and inefficient may be kept from the settle-
‘ ment, whilst to the active, industrious, and intelligent, there may
‘ be a confident assurance of a fair reward for their labours.’
The state of the colony, abstracted from the official returns, at
the end of the year 1829, and of six months from the first arrivals,
was as follows :
Number of residents, 850. Non-residents, 440. Value of
property giving claim to grants of land, 41,550/. Lands actually
allotted, 525,000 acres. Locations actually effected, 39. Num-
ber of cattle, 204 ; of horses, 57 ; of sheep, 1096; of hogs, 106.
Number of ships arrived between June and December, 25.
Though, strictly speaking, there is no harbour at or near Swan
River, this deficiency is, to a certain degree, compensated by the
capacious anchorage in Cockburn Sound, capable, as Captain
Stirling informs us, of containing in safety a thousand ships. By
the entrance being buoyed off, it is rendered of easy access for
large ships ; but being strewed over with rocks, it becomes wholly
impracticable when the buoys are removed. Any number of
vessels would lie in perfect safety in this large sound from an
enemy’s squadron on the outside, as the middle part of it is out
of mortar range, either from the sea or the land side. Such a
port, situated as this is, in the hands of an enemy, might become,
in any future war, ten times more destructive to British trade than
even the Isle of France was in the last.
No other port or harbour exists on this line of coast, with the
exception of Port Leschenault, accessible only, as has been ob-
served, to boats. The great Baie Geographe, whose shape and


position, with regard to the points of the compass, is precisely that
of the Table Bay of the Cape of Good Hope, has safe anchorage
only when the winds are to the eastward, southward, and south-
west. But on the southern coast of Australia, about one hundred
and fifty miles to the eastward of Cape Leuwin, is the safe and
excellent roadstead of King George’s Sound, with which are con-
nected two harbours, sheltered from all winds, and completely
land-locked Princess Royal harbour to the north-east, and
Oyster harbour to the north-west; the former having an entrance
and anchorage within for the largest ships ; but the entrance of
the latter has not more than fourteen or fifteen feet at high water.
Plenty of wood and good water are to be had in either of the har-
bours, and also in the sound. The position, close to the tracks of
all ships proceeding to New South Wales, and the inviting con-
veniences of these two harbours, induced the government, some
few years ago, to take possession of them, and to establish a small
military post there, under the direction of General Darling. It
has now, however, very properly been placed under the authority
of Captain Stirling, as a part of the Swan River colony, and will
probably become, at no great distance of time, the head-quarters
of the settlement. Dr. Wilson, of the navy, an intelligent and
enterprising traveller, who has visited every part of Australia, from
Raffles Bay in the north to King George’s Sound in the south,
has given some account of the country contiguous to the latter.
In company with one or two others, and a civilised and intelligent
native belonging to the post, he travelled about eighty miles in the
interior to the northward, and returned by a more westerly course,
traversing in the whole about two hundred miles over a country
hitherto unexplored. Each of the party being obliged to carry his
own blanket, provisions, and water, (the latter, however, being-
found unnecessary,) the excursion occupied eleven days ; but such
is the excellence of the climate of this country at all seasons of
the year, but more especially agreeable in the summer months,
that they felt no inconvenience by sleeping on the ground in the
open air, nor did they suffer any privation worthy of notice. Dr.
Wilson being furnished with no other instrument than a compass,
the points marked down in the sketch of a chart which accom-
panies this notice, are the result only of the bearings and estimated
distances traversed, and must therefore be considered only as con-
veying a very general description of the nature of the surface tra-
velled over.
It will be evident, from the inspection of this sketch, and
still more so from the journal out of which this notice is extracted,
that, although in the immediate neighbourhood of King George’s
Sound the surface is sandy and wears an unpromising appearance,
yet in the interior there is no want of good grassy plains, large


orest-trees, rivers, lakes, and ponds of good fresh water, in almost
every part of the country traversed by Dr. Wilson. He says,
indeed, 1 that the country is so well supplied with water, that
1 those of his party who wished it enjoyed the luxury of a cold
‘ bath, at least once a day, one only excepted.’ The surface tra-
velled over consisted chiefly of fine plains and rich valleys, alter-
nating with ridges clothed with shrubby plants, a great proportion
of the former being capable of tillage, and the rest affording good
pasturage for sheep and cattle. On the ranges of the loftier hills
were clumps of forest-trees of large dimensions. On the most
barren lauds were various species of Banksia, stunted swamp oak,
the grass-tree, and other plants similar to those on the same kind
of soil in New South Wales. On the alluvial flats along the banks
of the rivers and streamlets, the vegetation was most luxuriant.
In the glens of the mountains, the blue gum, the turpentine, the
box, and the apple-trees predominated, many of them measuring
from twenty to thirty feet in girth, and from fifty to sixty of trunk,
free from branches. The prevailing genus here, as in most parts
of New South Wales, is the Eucalyptus, of which but few of the
species afford useful timber. The green wattle was but occa-
sionally observed : it flourished most luxuriantly on the hills in the
neighbourhood of Mount Lindsey. This mountain is described
as a peak rising out of a ridge to the height of five or six thousand
feet, terminated in a square of about thirty yards each side, per-
fectly level, paved with minute particles of quartz, and having at
each angle an immense block of granite. The extensive view
from this mountain gave Dr. Wilson an excellent opportunity of
crossing his former bearings round the whole horizon.
Out of the same range of hills, running nearly north and south,
rise three other peaks, which he named Mounts Roe, Mitchell,
and Frankland. Between this and a more easterly parallel range.
Dr. Wilson is satisfied, from his own observation and from the
accounts of the natives they fell in with, that a tract of good land
will be found extending into the original intended limits, and
now a part, of the Swan River Settlement; and he observes,
i crediting the report of the natives, which, from the correctness
‘ of their description of the nature of the land to the eastward, and
‘from their general intelligence, I am justified in doing, much
1 excellent land may be found to the north-east, beyond the
* second range of hills. Ido not,’ he adds, ‘ hesitate to say,
1 without fear of future contradiction, that the area passed over
e by us contained as much, if not more, land, fit for all rural pur-
c poses, as any portion of equal extent, at least as far as I know,
‘ in New South Wales.’
Numerous lagoons or lakes of fresh water occurred, to one of
which they gave the name of Loch Katrine; it was from seven


to eight miles in circumference, and frequented by vast flocks of
black swans, wild ducks, and various kinds of aquatic birds.
The streams issuing from the two ridges, east and west of their
route, were equally numerous ; and three of them, named the
Denmark, the Hay, and the Sleeman, were of considerable mag-
nitude, being in several parts not less than a hundred yards in
width, and deep enough in parts to float a vessel of two or three
hundred tons. All the streams had a southerly direction, and the
three above named fell into an extensive inlet, which communi-
cated with the sea by a channel composed of loose calcareous
sandstone, about seven hundred yards in width, but which, as
was afterwards found, is contracted occasionally to thirty or forty
yards; even then it has a sufficient depth of water to admit of
boats. On a subsequent visit to Mount Lindsey, by Captain
Barker, the resident, accompanied by the intelligent native be-
longing to the establishment at the post of Fredericton, another
large inlet was seen about thirty miles more westerly, lying be-
tween Cape Chatham and Point Nuyts ; and the opinion of the
natives they met with was, on comparing it with the former inlet,
that vessels of very considerable size might pass into it through the
entrance. Captain Barker, as well as Dr. Wilson, bears testimony
to the general accuracy of the descriptions given by these ab-
origines ; he observes, however, as they cannot swim, and possess
no kind of floating vessel, they have no means of speaking cor-
rectly as to the depth of waters that are not fordable.
As no survey has been made of that part of the southern coast
lying between Cape Leuwin and King George’s Sound, except
that of ascertaining the positions, in sailing along it, of a few
inlets, rocks, and projecting headlands, it is not improbable that,
on a closer inquiry, many inlets of a similar kind will be found on
this line of coast, towards which the internal waters pursue their
courses to the ocean. Indeed, there is every appearance of the
mouth of a river existing in the large opening which is left
in the charts, a little to the eastward of Cape Leuwin, at the
bottom of an open bay named 4 Dangerous Bightand when it
is considered, that the late expedition of Captain Sturt has been
the means of bringing to light the existence of a river, whose
course cannot be less than fifteen hundred miles, and may be
much more ; that it forms an estuary or lake of sixty miles in
length, and from thirty to forty in width, through which its waters
are discharged into the sea in Encounter Bay ; that Flinders sur-
veyed the western point of this bay, which he called Cape Jervis;
that Baudin, who sailed round it, has laid down an uninterrupted
line of coast; and that both were unconscious of any such river
or estuary, —it is not assuming too much to conclude, that many
rivers and inlets still remain to be discovered on this, and, indeed,


on every other, coast of Australia, which measures in the whole
extent from six to seven thousand geographical miles.
Since lift date of the preceding remarks another report has been
received from Captain Stirling, brought down to the end of Oc-
tober, 1830. In this report he observes, that 1 the progress of
‘ the settlement during the present year, although not unopposed
‘ by many adverse circumstances, has been as rapid as could have
* been expected or desired.’ He says, indeed, 1 that a greater
‘ increase than that which has taken place of ships, persons, and
‘ property would probably have been disadvantageous to the wel-
-1 fare of the settlement while struggling in its infancy and he adds,
‘ that although individuals may have suffered in the undertaking,
1 the settlement is now securely established, and its future prosperity
I no longer doubtful. Much has yet to be accomplished for its
‘ advancement, and there will probably be much individual disap-
‘ pointment and distress ; but with a healthy climate, abundance of
‘ good land, an advantageous position for trade, and some valuable
‘ indigenous products, I trust the issue of the undertaking will
1 not disappoint public expectation.’
In order to make himself acquainted with the nature of the
country to the southward, the Lieutenant-Governor embarked,
with the Surveyor-General and some others, on board a schooner;
examined Geography Bay throughout its whole extent, and ex-
plored the interior to some little distance ; the surface w r as uneven,
rising into high granitic hills, most of them rugged or sandy on
their summits, but the valleys contained a considerable quantity
of excellent land.
The Yasse River was the next point examined, to the distance
of three or four miles from the coast, but the result was not satis-
factory, the soil being too light and sandy ; but the straight and
vigorous growth of the trees seemed to contradict the apparent
poverty of the soil. Fresh water was abundant in this district.
They next anchored off the bar of Port Leschenault, where the
country presented so favourable an appearance, that a detachment
of the sixty-third regiment was landed, together with stores and
provisions for the better support of the settlers; and such were
the facilities for these troops housing themselves, from the abund-
ance of building materials, that in a very few days the party was
comfortably lodged, and were protected against the approaching
winter.
From hence a party set out and explored the country in every
direction, as far as the summits of the Darling range. The whole
of this range, consisting of well-wooded hills and fertile valleys,
continued to bear the character of great productiveness as far as
the eye could reach to the eastward. The general result of these


explorations may thus be briefly stated. The water which forms
the little harbour of Leschenault receives three rivers, one flowing
from the south east, called the Preston ; one from the east named
the Collie ; and one from the north-east, joining the Collie, to which
no name appears to have been given. The banks of all these are
composed of rich alluvial soil. The Preston is navigable for the
largest boats about five miles from its mouth, and is at that point
a running stream of good fresh water. The adjoining country is
well clothed with timber trees. The Collie is navigable ten or
twelve miles, nearly up to the first range of the hilly country. At
first the banks are sandy, but from the junction of the northern
stream it improves greatly, and becomes of an excellent descrip-
tion, On the whole, the district around Port Leschenault ap-
peared so favourable for settlers, that Captain Stirling left the
detachment above-mentioned for the protection of those already
there, and such others as might be induced to avail themselves of
the grants of land which the Lieutenant-Governor was prepared
to make. The climate is stated to be decidedly cooler than at
Swan River, and judging from the quantity of grass and the ver-
dure of the foliage, it appeared to the party that this district was
capable of sustaining a dry season better than the country farther
to the northward, and that the duration of drought was not so
long. It was thought remarkable, that in the whole of their ex-
cursions no natives were seen, though traces of them were evident
and numerous in several places.
On a second excursion to the southward by the Lieutenant-
Governor, accompanied by Captain Currie of the navy, and
Lieutenant Roe, the Surveyor-General, they doubled Cape
Leuwin, and anchored oft' the mouth of an inlet communicating
with the sea in the north-west corner of the great bay, com-
mencing with the Cape, and extending easterly as far as the Black
Point of Blinders. In the charts it is called ‘ Dangerous Bight/
but can only be said to be dangerous when the southerly winds
prevail. This discovery of an inlet and river in this particular
spot is just what is anticipated in the former part of this
report. Here it was determined to establish a town, to be
called ‘ Augusta/ where a river, which was named the 1 Black-
wood/ fell into the inlet; and several settlers to the number of
fifty persons, including three heads of families, their servants, and
children, disembarked together, with a detachment of troops for
their protection. The following is the substance of the Surveyor-
General’s report:
‘ The portion of the southern coast seen during the excursion,
‘ taken in connexion with our previous knowledge, leads to the
‘ belief, that there are three distinct parallel ranges of primitive
‘ mountains, traversing that part of the territory of Western Aus-


* tralia which borders on the sea coast, in the direction of north
‘ and south. The highest and easternmost of these has its southern
‘ termination near to King George’s Sound. The second termi-
‘ nates at Cape Chatham, and is that of which General Darling’s
1 range behind Swan River is a portion. Cape Leuwin is the
‘ southern termination of the third range, which is inferior in
‘ altitude as well as in extent to the other two, disappearing at
4 Cape Naturaliste, and only showing itself again at “ Moresby’s
‘ Flat-topped Range,” about half-way between Swan River and
‘ Shark’s Bay, or three hundred miles to the northward of, and
‘ on the same meridian with, Cape Leuwin.
1 On these ranges and their intervening valleys the soil varies
1 according to position and altitude. On the mountains and
‘ higher hills the surface is rugged and stony; in the lower sides
‘of both the soil is excellent; but in the principal valleys and
‘ the lower grounds, where the sandstone formation prevails, it is
‘ of a very inferior description, except where the alluvial deposit
e of the rivers gives it a different character. These general rules
( are exemplified in the neighbourhood of the newly established
‘ town of Augusta, and may be taken as applicable generally to
1 all other parts of the territory, except on the sea-coast, where
‘ the regular formations have been invaded and modified by ex-
traneous substances, generally of a calcareous nature.
1 The position chosen for the new town possesses the advan-
‘ tages of excellent soil, plenty of good water, a pleasant aspect,
c and easy access in moderate weather to the anchorage, and to
‘ the interior country. The inlet is of considerable extent, and
1 leads to the river we called “ Blackwood,” and which has a
1 southerly direction for fifteen miles, and a westerly one ten
‘ miles, before it ceases to be navigable by boats. Its banks are
‘ covered with good timber of the stringy bark and red gum ; but
c the soil is a light sandy loam, which is seldom sufficiently strong
1 for successful cultivation. The best soil, the finest blue-gum
‘ timber, and some good grass, are mostly to be found on hilly
e land ; but on the general surface there is usually found food for
‘ cattle, and very good sheep pasture on the downs skirting the
‘ coast. The anchorage is sheltered from the usual winter winds,
‘ but is open to those which blow between south and east-south-
( east. The position of Augusta, with reference to the navigation
1 of these seas, and the quality of the surrounding country, will
1 make it a convenient place for vessels to stop at, on their
‘ way to the eastern colonies from England, India, and the Cape ;
‘ and on these grounds there is great reason to hope, that it will
1 soon rise to a considerable degree of commercial prosperity.’
Another discovery has been made by Ensign Dale and a small
party on the eastern side of Darling’s range, and at the distance of


fifty miles due east from Perth. Having reached the eastern base
of this range, they found Ahe waters taking an easterly direction,
and discharging themselves into a river of considerable magnitude,
running north-west, about sixty yards in width, very deep, and hav-
ing a strong current. This river, in all probability, will be found
to discharge itself into some inlet on the coast ; perhaps in some
part of the unexamined coast of Shark’s Bay,—though Captain
King is inclined to think its mouth will rather be found somewhere
about ‘ Moresby’s Flat-topped Range,’ where, in passing, he ob-
served clefts in the hills, and a finely wooded country down to the
sandy beach. The hills of the Darling range were generally covered
with a red loamy soil, producing good grass and wild vetches.
The trees were chiefly of mahogany, of a very vigorous growth,
the blue and red gum, and a few Banksias. Where the waters
first began to take an easterly course, the trees were chiefly of
blue gum, casuarina, and black wattle, and a tree which is stated
to be similar in its growth to an apple, bearing a fruit resembling
in form, but exceeding in size, an unripe hawthorn berry. The
wood of this tree had a remarkably sweet scent, and the bark a
delicate pink colour. Mr. Dale says, c a specimen which we
‘ brought home with us has been pronounced by some professed
‘ judges to be a species of sandal-wood.’
They met with no natives except three men on their return,
who were very civil, and desirous of making themselves useful ;
but they observed many traces of them; and in ascending the great
river, about twenty-four miles to a spot where the hills assumed
a rugged and romantic character, they discovered, under a great
mass of granite, a large cavern, the interior of which was arched,
and had all the appearance of an ancient ruin. l On one side,’
says Mr. Dale, ‘ was rudely carved what was evidently intended
‘ to represent an image of the sun ; it being a circular figure about
‘ eighteen inches in diameter, emitting rays from its left side, and
‘ having within the circle lines meeting each other nearly at right
‘ angles. Close to this representation of the sun were the im-
-1 pressions of an arm and several hands.’ It is stated, that from
these heights the view to the eastward, for twenty to thirty miles,
exhibited an undulating surface and a well-wooded country.
16
State of the Swan River Colony, Oct., 1830.
