





STATEMENT
THE REV. ROBERT McCjjEAN, M.A,
IM
REFUTATION
AN ALLEGED NARRATIVE OF FACTS
THE REV. W. NICOLSON,
MINISTER OF CHALMERS’ FREE CHURCH, HOBART TOWN,
HOBART TOWN:
PRINTED AT THE OFFICE OF W. PRATT AND SON, ELIZABETH-STREET.
1853.


j ■
A
■


Statement of the Rev. Robert McClean, M.A., in Refuta-
tion of an Alleged Narrative op Facts by the Rev. W.
Nicolson, Minister op Chalmers’ Free Church, Hobart
Town.
It is very possible to give what purports to be a 11 of
Facts,” and yet, by the artful manner of doing it; and more parti-'
cularly by suppressing or passing lightly over what is essential, and
giving undue prominence and weight to what is unimportant or,
irrelevant—to render it the very opposite of a truthful narrative.
This I hope to shew, to the conviction of every unbiassed reader,
to be pre-eminently the character of the Rev. W. Nicolson’s alleged
narrative of facts relative to myself. With this view I will briefly
state the circumstances under which I came to this country, and the
causes which have really determined my conduct with reference to
Mr. N. and his Church since my arrival.
I came to Van Diemen’s Land in February last under an engage-
ment to labour as a missionary in connexion with the Presbytery of
Van Diemen’s Land.
This step was the result of a correspondence which I had, previ-
ously to embarking, w:th Mr. Duncan Macpherson, of this city, who
was then in London. Mr. M. had been authorised by the above
named Presbytery to obtain a Missionary from home, and to gua-
rantee a Salary of £2OO per annum for five years. A copy of This
guarantee, signed by the Rev. Dr. Lillie, as Convener of the Presby-
tery’s Standing Committee, was transmitted to me ; and I was also
recommended by Mr. M. to take my passage in the emigrant ship North-
umberland, for Launceston “as that port would most likely be
nearest to my station, which he expected would he Campbell Town.”*
* Exract from Mr. D. Macpherson’s letter to mo of 29th October, 1852.


It is due to that gentleman to state that though I had not an
opportunity of meeting with him, in England, yet he shewed me no
small kindness by the very great trouble he took in endeavouring to
effect a satisfactory arrangement for the passage of myself and
my family.
Before my correspondence with Mr M. I knew nothing whatever
either of the past history or the present condition of the Presbyte-
rian Church in this Colony. The Rev. Mr., now, Dr. Mac Naugh-
ton, of Belfast, through whom my correspondence with Mr. M.
originated, had given me vaguely to understand that there were
divisions in it, relative to the Free Church question, and had inti-
mated his fear that this might occasion me trouble. In my letter
to Mr. Macpherson of the Bth September, 1852,1 referred to this
matter in the following terms :
“ The only thing I regret is that the people of Hobart Town are
so divided in sentiment —some belonging to the Free, and others to
the Established Church of Scotland. I confess frankly that all my
prejudices and feelings are with the Free Church. At considerable
expense and trouble I went to Scotland in 1843, and actually wit-
nessed the Disruption, and a nobler or grander movement my eyes
never witnessed; and lam sure will never witness again on this
side heaven. But apart from this question I do not see why I
might not be useful to both sections of the Church; and if ‘ speaking
the truth in love’ be the right way of being so, I trust God by his
grace will always enable me to do that.”
As I did not see Mr. M. personally, the only definite information
I received with reference to ecclesiastical affairs in this colony was
the following brief expression in that gentleman’s letter to me of 21st
Sept. 1852:
“ You must be also aware that our Church has joined neither
Free Church nor Church of Scotland, although it is expected
they will amalgamate in Van Diemen’s Land.”
Such was my position, and the whole amount of my information
when I arrived in the Tamar on the 19th February last.
* The Rev. Mr. Garrett, who resides in the neighboui'hood, and who
had heard that a Presbyterian Minister was on board, called on me
the following morning (Sunday). He asked me to what Church I


belonged. I replied that I was a Minister of the Presbyterian
Church of Ireland. Our conversation, then turned on the Free
Church, of which I spoke in terms similar to those I have quoted
above from my letter to Mr. Macpherson. He gave me the same
information as that contained in Mr, M’s letter, viz., that the Pres-
bytery of Van Diemen’s Land had joined neither party—but that a
union was expected. Our conversation, which took place on a Sun-
day morning just before service, was very brief and general. Mr.
G. gave me and my family a very kind invitation to his own house,
and recommended me, on reaching Launceston, to call on Mr. Colin
N. Campbell, the individual most prominently connected with the
Free Church party there.
As our vessel was detained some time at George Town, Mr. Gar-
rett called ten days afterwards, and informed me that he had seen
Mr. Campbell, who had told him to let me know that he would be
very happy to see me when I got up to Launceston.
We had no further conversation on Church affairs. Mr. G., I
believe, had known nothing of my appointment as Missionary, and
I reserved all communications relative to it, till I should see the
Rev. Dr. Lillie, who, as I have said, was the only Minister of the
Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land whose name was officially known
to me.
On arriving at Launceston I therefore repaired to Mr. C. N.
Campbell’s ; and I and my family were most hospitably entertained
by Mr. C. and his Free Church friends during the week we remained
there.
This brings me to the first obvious breach of candour and truthful-
ness in Mr. Nicolson’s Narrative of Facts, He sets out with the
evident design of making it appear that Mr. Campbell and the rest
of his party were ignorant of the real circumstances under which I
came to this colony, as I have now narrated them, and that they
received me in the belief that I was a Free Church Minister from
home. Mr. Nicolson says that I introduced myself as a Free *
Church Minister to Mr. Garrett, and that the latter reported me as
such to Mr. Campbell. And evidently conscious that this was a


weak point, he labours by a quotation from a letter of Mr. C. in
which the words at home and in connexion with the Free Church arc
carefully put in italics, as part of ray account of myself to Mr.
Garett, for the purpose of shewing that it was not by “an act of
piracy” that they got hold of me.
Now every one must see that the question is not by what train of
circumstances I was introduced to Mr. Campbell; or even under
what name or designation Mr. Garrett or any one else reported me
to him.—But the real question for the purpose Mr. Nicolson had in
view is, how did I report myself to Mr. Campbell and his friends
after I was introduced to them, and what was the course they pur-
sued towards me then.
What then will the public of Van Diemen’s Land, and what will
my friends and the friends of the. Free Church at home think, when
I inform them, that during the few days I passed with Mr. Camp-
bell and his friends I not only communicated to them orally the
exact circumstances under which I emigrated hither, but I put into
Mr. C’s hands the whole of Mr. Duncan Macpherson’s correspond-
ence with me, including the copy of the guarantee from the Presby-
tery of Van Diemen’s Land ; and that I received these documents
back from Mr. C. arranged and docketed in his own hand-writing —
a tolerably decisive proof that he had had them in his possession.
Now these documents informed Mr. Campbell and his party, that
I was a minister of the Presbyterian Church of Ireland—that I
came to this country under an engagement to the Presbytery of Van
Diemen’s Land—and that I held a certified copy of the guarantee of
the latter body for my salary. They further informed Mr. C. that
Campbell Town was likely to be the field of my missionary labours.
Nay, I well recollect the attitude—holding up his hands —and the
language of exultation with which Mr. C. N. Campbell dwelt
on the idea of Mr, Garrett, a member of the Presbytery'’of Van
Diemen’s Land, being so exceedingly simple as to have introduced
me to him.
All this is most carefully suppressed in Mr. Nicolson’s Pamphlet.
I leave the public to form its own estimate of what is implied in
this suppi’ession.


But to resume my narrative: the week I stayed among Mr.
Campbell and his friends was productive of an important change in
my views with regard to the Presbyterian Church of this colony.
The party among whom I was thrown spared no pains to preju-
dice my mind against the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land.
They assured me in the strongest terms that it was utterly Erastian,
both in principle and practice,—that notwithstanding all assertions
to the contrary, it was ‘part and parcel’ of the Established Church of
Scotland, and its liberty as a Church altogether in the fetters of the
State.
Not satisfied with abusing it collectively, they spoke in the most
disparaging terms of not a few of its individual members—that it was
more than doubtful whether some,of them either knew or preached
the Gospel—and that it was absolutely impossible for me as a Mi-
nister of the Presbyterian Church of Ireland to have anything to do
with them.
These representations were made to me, not once, but again and
again, and formed indeed the chief staple of the conversation during
my stay.
The obvious design of all this was to induce me to abandon my
engagement with the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land (an engage-
ment of which I have shewn they were fully aware) and to connect
myself with their party. And deeply do I regret to say that for the
time they were but too successful.
Nor will any one who considers the circumstances in which I was
placed be surprised at this. I was an absolute stranger in the
country; my sympathies, as has been sufficiently shewn, were all
with the Free Church of Scotland. The party whose acquaintance
I first made, and who, as far as personal attentions were concerned
treated me most kindly, claimed to represent exclusively that very
Church to which all my antecedent convictions inclined me. They
had the great advantage too of making the first impression ; nor, as
I have shewn, were they slow or scrupulous in turning it to account.
The effect was most thoroughly to preoccupy my mind against the
Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land, and rapidly to develop in me the
resolution to withdraw from my engagement, on the ground that that


Presbytery was not wbat I had been led to understand it to be, be-
fore leaving my native land.
A proposal was very soon made to me to accept employment in
connexion with their party, and a salary equal to that which the
Presbytery of Van Diemen’s land had guaranteed was promised me.
As it was necessary for me to proceed to Hobart Town, to see the
Rev. Dr. Lillie, I was especially instructed to call first on the Rev.
Mr. Nicolson, in whose powers to satisfy all my scruples and con-
firm my adhesion to their side, they seemed to place an un-
bounded reliance.
In my interview with Mr. Nicolson, on the Monday after my
arrival in Hobart Town, he then (as he did habitually afterwards)
reiterated and confirmed all that had been told me by the Launceston
party relative to the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land. But his
manner of doing it was, I remarked, much more cautious and wary
than theirs, though by no means less significant and effective.
And here I must again charge Mr. Nicolson with a violation of
honesty and candour, in carefully concealing in his narrative, the
fact that he sought to make these impressions upon my mind, and
leaving it to be inferred that the whole was the result of my own
independent choice.
With my mind thus preoccupied and forestalled I called the same
day on the Rev. Dr. Lillie, with whom I had a long interview.
I explained to him the dilemma in which I found myself—that on
the one hand, my wish had been to carry out my engagement with
the Presbytery, but that on the other, I was afraid that by doing
so, I should compromise my principles in consequence of the relation,
in which I now understood the Presbytery was placed to the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland.
I dwelt particularly on the circumstance that the Presbytery
of Van Diemen’s Land had not been recognized by the Free Church
of Scotland, whereas Mr. Nicolson’s party had.
Dr. Lillie assured me that I had been altogether misinformed as
to the real merits of the case; and in illustration of his views he
shewed me a letter which he had addressed to the Rev. Dr. Cand-
liesh of Edinburgh, setting forth the true position of the Presbytery


of Yah Diemen’s Land, and vindicating it from tlie charges
which had been brought against it. He particularly called
my attention to what made a strong impression on me at the
time, though a much stronger one since—that the position of the
Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land was strictly analogous to the
Presbyterian Church of Ireland—that both were free and inde-
pendent Churches, though both were endowed by the British
Government; and that the Free Church party had no more right
to call the one a part of the Scottish Establishment than the other,
since whatever objections could be applied on this ground to the
one, was equally applicable to the other.
I confess I found it difficult to reply to Dr. Lillie’s arguments.
But my confidence in the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land had
been shaken by the representations which had been previously made
to me; and it was now with me a fore-gone conclusion to cast in my
lot with the Free Church party.
Dr. Lillie stated that I was at perfect liberty to follow my own
convictions, as neither he nor any member of his Presbytery would
wish me to act otherwise, even though I might be considered under
the obligation of an engagement. He requested me however to take
time to weigh deliberately both sides of the question, and to let him
have the result in writing. He added at parting that though he was
disappointed by the part I had taken, yet, as he believed I was act-
ing conscientiously, and could readily account fox my change of pur-
pose by the influences which had been operating on me, it should
make no change in his personal feeling or bearing towards me; and
that, though in apparently opposite ranks, he trusted we should yet
both be serving the same Master.
Here I cannot but remark the contrast between the conduct of Dr.
Lillie and the other members of the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s
Land, and that of Mr. Nicolson and his party. Though the former
had really good reason to complain of me, yet they never in any
single instance that I am aware of, manifested resentment, and far
less vindictive feeling; but have, on the contrary, been uniformly
Kind and Christian-like in their conduct towards me and my family.


There was no running to the press on their part to give vent to dis-
appointed passion, and cover their damage, by a cunning and dis-
honest attack upon my character and conduct.
Mr. Nicolson’s “ Nai'rative of Facts” shews too clearly the dark
side of the contrast.
A day or two after my interview with Dr. Lillie I was em-
ployed in drawing up a Statement in writing as he had re-
quested me, of my reasons, for the step I had thus been led to take.
I submitted this Statement to Mr, Nicolson and the Rev. Mr. Lind-
say, the Free Church Minister of Launceston. They both strongly
deprecated my sending it. I yielded to their advice, and addressed
the following note to Dr. Lillie :
Hill Cottage, March, 19th, 1853.
Rev. and Dear Sir,
I had intended to transmit you a long letter, which I had nearly
finished the day you were so kind as to visit me; but some friends
who heard its contents read, thought that as you were already aware
of the reasons why I could not conscientiously join your Presbytery,
there was no necessity for writing anything that might provoke
discussion between us. As I givc-you full credit for acting a con-
scientious part in the course you have adopted, I trust you will
give me credit for doing the same in the part which I have acted.
As I told you in my sister's cottage, I trust that whatever difference
of opinion may exist between us on a certain subject, you will never
find me acting an unkind or uncourteous part towards you ; and
should you ever have occasion to think so, please let me know imme •
diately. I say with unfeigned sincerity, I greatly regret that any
necessity should oblige me to differ from a Christian and a gentleman
whom I so highly respect, and of whom my relations in this town
have spoken in terms of high commendation. I do trust that the
very position I have taken will be the very one , painful as it is,
to both you and me, that God will ultimately bless to effect a truly
Christian union between the Presbytery and us.
I am, yours faithfully,
R. McCLEAN.
I publish the foregoing note, both as furnishing a truthful record
of the state of my mind at the time, and more particularly for
calling attention to the sentiment conveyed in the concluding para-
graph—for that sentiment forms a most important element in my
case.


After my conversation with Dr. Lillie, I felt myself truly in a
dilemma. Though I had been grievously prejudiced against the
Presbytery, both as a body and as individuals, yet my sentiments
were greatly modified by personal intercourse with that gentleman,
as well as by the terms in which I had heard others speak of him.
I found it too no easy matter to upset his positions, both as they
were detailed to me in conversation, and more methodically unfolded
in his letter to Dr. Candleish. Indeed I was fairly driven _in upon
the simple fact—that the Free Church of Scotland had not acknow-
ledged the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land, while the Ministers
of the Free Church party had come directly from that Church,
For all this time no answer -had been received to Dr. Lillie’s
letter to Dr. Candleish.
I therefore conceived that I was justified in adhering to the
latter party; but I resolved, as the above note testifies, most
sincerely and earnestly to do all in my power to promote union
and good feeling between the two.
This resolution, made in good faith, and in the spirit of that Gos-
pel of charity and peace, which it has been the business and the
delight of my life to preach, is truly the key to all my subsequent
conduct.
Though Mr. Nicolson, with his characteristic wariness, has taken
good care to suppress it, as he has suppressed everything that was
calculated to criminate himself and his party, yet he and they know
well how eager and importunate I uniformly was to accomplish an
object so peculiarly dear to me ; and I can with a good conscience
declare, as the sequel will shew, that it was the determined, the
factious, the schismatical, and above all, the unchristian opposi-
tion with which all my endeavours for this end were invariably met,
which mainly influenced me in seceding from their jurisdiction.
But to return to my narrative: the moment that I intimated ray
intention to adhere to their party, the proposition to constitute a
Presbytery was started. This was an object of no common import-
ance and value to them—determined as they were, and as the event
has shewn, to continue in a state of schism from the Presbyterian
Church of the colony; as it would give them organization and means


of action. Here again Mr. Nicolson, with his accustomed softness
and wiliness of manner whenever he has an object to gain, prac-
tices the suppressio veri by conveying the impression that I took
the initiative in making this proposition. He himself knows well
that he and his party were looking out most anxiously for a
third minister to constitute a Presbytery, and that the means
which my joining them gave them for this purpose, was anything
hut a matter of indifference to them.
It is truly painful for me to read his account of this transaction—
so opposed is it to that straightforwardness and honesty which lie at
the foundation of all character, and especially of Christian character.
Everything is represented as done at my request; and Mr. Ni-
colson appears scrupulously careful that no movement should be
made without his having previously in the most pointed and solemn
manner asked my concurrence, as if all his anxiety was about my
character and steadfastness, and none whatever about his own ends.
Of course I do not deny that I gave my ready concurrence to the
formation of a Presbytery, once my resolution to adhere to them
had been taken. But to me, with my vivid recollection of what
took place, Mr. N’s way of putting it sounds more like farce or bur-
lesque than sober and truthful narrative.
And let any one direct his common sense upon the obvious facts
of the case, and then say whether Mr. Nicolson could really have
been so very indifferent and disinterested as his narrative assumes
him to have been.
I had my first interview with Mr. N. at his own house on the
Monday, On the Tuesday he writes to Mr. Lindsay, a hundred and
twenty miles off, to come over and form a Presbytery. On the
Thursday Mr. Lindsay comes all that distance. The next day the
Presbytery is constituted; and on Saturday Mr. Lindsay travels back
his 120 miles. The amount and character of the work done in one
little week shew rather the impetuous haste of a man eager to se-
cure an object which he is apprehensive of losing, than the cold in-
difference snd equanimity of one who cares not, whether he loses it
or not.


The winch followed are quite in keeping with this. The
whole%arfy were in a state of high exultation and glee at the ad-
van l ia( l gained by my accession to them.
the next Sabbath for Mr. Nicolson ; and I well re-
member, when coming out of church, his taking my arm, and with
ose of his blandest smiles and most ‘ honied’ tones, saying to me
“ What a savoury discourse you have given us and on the Tues-
day following he called to present me with a hundred pounds, as an
expression of his people’s satisfaction with the part I had acted.
I come now to my appointment to Campbell Town. It has been
seen that this was to have been my sphere of duty under my engage-
ment with the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land. It had been a
Missionary Station of the latter body for a considerable time.
Ground had been obtained and funds provided for the erection of a
Church. The last Missionary had resigned at the close of the
previous year; and the Presbytery were waiting the arrival of an-
other to supply his place.
All this was well known to Mr. Nicolson and his Free Church
friends, —though, agreeably to his manner, every allusion to it is
suppressed in his pamphlet.
I have reason to believe too from what I have since learned, that
domiciliary visits were paid to certain parties in the district with the
view of withdrawing them from the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s-.
Land, and attaching them to their own body.
I began my labours in Campbell Town on the 27th March. I
went there with no sectarian purpose, but to preach faithfully that
Gospel of which I was a minister. I found the people free from all
party predilections, deprecating above anything strife and disunion
as altogether uncalled for in this- colony, and anxious only to have a
faithful and efficient Gospel ministry established among them.
I met with the most cordial reception and the greatest kindness..
My ministry was well attended ; and the people, as we shall pre-
sently find, gave me the strongest evidence of their regard by invit-
ing me to be their permanent Minister.
Things went on quietly for about two months ; during which I


had an opportunity of becoming personally
of the ministers of the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Lmn
ceiving from my own observation and experience a
impression of their character from that which I had been 1«
by the misrepresentations of the Free Church party ; and both
the information I obtained from them, and my own more matures
reflections, I began gradually to arrive at clearer views of the real*
position of their Church. *4s.
The Free Church Presbytery met at Oatlands on the 24th May,
when the Testimony and Declaration which Mr. Nicolson had pre-
pared became the subject of discussion. I had been, from the
first, most anxious that a definite statement of principles should
be made by both parties. I urged this repeatedly and in the
most earnest terms upon both Dr. Lillie and Mr. Nicolson, and my
reason for doing it was that the points of difference between the
two might thereby be more distinctly elicited, and as I became every
day more convinced that these points were-really insignificant, that
the way might thus be prepared for mutual good understanding and
ultimate union.
On the occasion referred to, Mr. Nicolson read his draft of the
aforesaid testimony and declaration. The first part referred to the
matters at issue between the Free and Established Churches of Scot-
land, about which there could be no difference of opinion. But the
second part embraced the more delicate question of State support,
and was manifestly designed to deal, in Mr. Nicolson’s peculiar way,
a left-handed blow at the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land.
It avowedly reserved the “ abstract question” as a convenient
refuge for tender consciences, and laid down the following proposi-
tion as its major premiss —“ that there is no civil government of
the present day, so distinguishing the truth of God from the errors
and delusions of men, as to recognize the obligation to give their
countenance and support to truth alone.” And then it proceeded to
condemn, as “ utterly wrong” any system of Church endowment,
given upon such terms. Every one will see that this not only puts
every existing system ef endowment under the ban, but from the


of Brahminism itself, in its East Indian possessions.
M’HE REV. R. M‘CLEAN, M.A. 15
nij^rersality of what it predicates of “ the civil government of the
renders it impossible to be otherwise.
Rms thing is how to reconcile with this dictum , the
Nicolson—not so very long ago—received, and for
xedly received, State support from that same British
, which was not only maintaining what Mr. Nicolson
BFve held to be the “ error” of Anglican Episcopacy, but main-
ig even Popery itself by the Maynooth Grant, and the Church
;s of the Australian Colonies, —nay, conniving at the apalling
Mr. Nicolson’s perception of “grievous error,” it appears, was not
so sharp then as it has become since. This is certainly paying a
high compliment to the moral atmosphere of Tasmania.
But Mr. Nicolson was not satisfied with this sweeping condemna-
lon of all ecclesiastical endowments. He has a special and a su •
eradded doom for those under the British Government. He affirms
that that Government, having in one instance, “ maintained and
acted upon the principle that a Church receiving State pay must
necessarily be under State control,” holds all who receive its endow-
ments liable to the same control. And then in the original draft of
the document came the conclusion, which at once raised my indig-
tion on behalf of my brethren, of the Irish Church, whose character
and independence it obviously struck at. This conclusion, as it
stands in the published document runs thus :—“ To receive such
endowments under a Government maintaining such a doctrine,
seems to be a virtual acknowledgment of such a power In the State.”
But in the Drafts, there was no seeming , but round, unqualified
assertion, coupled too with offensive epithets. Hamlet’s address to
his mother gives the distinction —“Seems mother! Nay, it is.”
Now such a conclusion would have stultified not only me, a Mi-
nister of the Irish Free Church, who continues to this hour to receive
endowments from the British Government, but it stultified Mr: Ni-
colson himself, as a professed adherent of the Free Church of Scot-
land, a Church which has all along been on the closest terms of
friendship with her sister in Ireland, and has never uttered a murmur


against her taking the Re//him Donum from the Brimm
Mr. Nicolson “emphatically” denies that the
would have had any such effect upon myself or rH
Ireland ; but he does not condescend to prove it.—No •
adroitly gets away from the point by the convenient
“ it is needless to argue it."
For the reasons I have given I expressed my strong dissatiSfacWS
with this part of the document. Mr, Nicolson, always the
Apollo of the party, then addressed himself with a smooth tongue”t(J
the task of disarming my opposition by proposing to modify the
language. The word “seems” was then proposed, as making it
merely a matter of opinion instead of asserting it as a necessary
truth.
It Is quite true I gave way to this seeming amendation, and confess
that I rather too easily allowed myself to be talked out of my oppo-
sition to a document which, even as it now stands, cannot be conj
sidered creditable to the consistency of any of-the parties concerned
in it, and least of all to that of its framer.
Mr. Nicolson knows right well that mine was at the last a re-
luctant assent. But by smooth words and sly manoeuvring, he
managed to get me into his trap: for trap it unquestionably was,
as the use he has sought to make of it clearly shows. He has,
in this instance, however, shared the fate of many trap-setters, of
being caught in his own snare. Cunning, even when practising on
unsuspecting simplicity is apt to overreach itself.
I now approach an important part of my narrative. At the same
meeting of Presbytery, on the 24th ,of May, the following letter
was read from the Presbytery of Van Diemen’s* Land :
Kirklands,' j Bth A pril, 1853.
Rev. Sir, < > .
At a Meeting of the Presbytery of Van DieiAen’s Land, held at
Campbell Town, on the sth and 6th instant —I received Instructions
to correspond with you for the purpose of proposing a conference
between your Presbytery and ours, with a view of promoting a union
of the two bodies.
The Presbytery of Van Diemen’s Land are of opinion that a con-
