

STATEMENT OF
POLICY
GENERAL ELECTIONS
1949
by the
PRIME MINISTER
(Mr. CHIFLEY)
A limited number of copies
may be procured from D. K.
Rodgers, Press Secretary
to the Prime Minister,
Parliament House, Canberra.


INDEX
Policy Speech delivered by P a £ e
Prime Minister (Mr.Chifley)
M6ndayJ November 14, 1949 .. 1-18
Acoustics Laboratory .. 27
Agricultural Economics .. 39
Aircraft factories .. 24
Apple & Pear Industry .. 38
Army ..3,20
Aust. Shipping Board 46
Banking ~ ..10-11
Bogeys by Opposition ~ 2,17
Britain, gifts to ..7
British Clth. Affairs .. 23
Budget .. . .. 6
Burdekin River 13,33,40
Butter .. .. 37
Gallide Caolfields .. 3,33
Child Endowment .. 26
Child Diseases, Chair of .. 27
Civil Aviation ..54-55
Coal .. .. 12-43
Communism .. .. 2
Clth Reconstruction Training
Scheme ..15,47
G. S. I. R. 0. .. .. 40
Clth Shipping Line .. 46
Dairy Industry .. 38
Decentralisation of Industry .. 31
Defence .. 7 9 13—119-21
Dental Services .. 28
Dollars .. ~ 49
Dominions, new ~ 22
Dried Fruits .. 39
Education .. ..15,55
Expenditure, General .. 9
Exports .. ..5,39
Factory Development .. 31
,f Establishment .. 12
Factories Act .. 44
Fiscal Policy.. ..49-51
Frequency Modulation .. 54
Full Employment 3-4,30-31,32
Health .. 16,27-29
Hospital Benefits .. 28
Housing ~ ..14,41
Immigration .. 14,34-35
Imperial Preferences .. 50
Industrial Expansion 11,30,31
Industrial Relations ..44,45
Information .. ..56
Interest rates .. 6
International Affairs 14,21-23
International Children's
Emergency Fund .. 22
International Wheat Agreement.. 5
Invalid Pensions .. 25
Joint Coal Board .. 15
Labor & National Service ..43-45
Labor Govt's work(introduction ) 1
Laboratories, E-stab. of ..28
Long term contracts with Britain 36
Pago
Mareeba-Dimbulah Irrigation .. 13
Maternity Allowances .. 26
Meat .. ..33,36
Medical scheme .. 29
Medicine, drugs .. 29
Minerals ~24,40
Munition factories .. 24
National Development .. 30
National Theatre .. 56
National Norks 6,30,32-33
Navy .. ~13,20
Open cut mines . * 43
Overseas Financial Reserves 5
Pens ions, Agreement with N. Z. • • 26
Postmaster-General’s Dept. 17*42-54
Poultry Fanners .. 38
Railway gauges ..51,16
Regional Planning .. 32
Relief of Distressed peoples .. 7
Rehabilitation .. 48
Repatriation ~15,48
Roads grants ..16,51
Rocket Range .. 23
R. A. A.F. , strength of ..13,20
Rural Production .. 39
Saving Bank deposits .. 6
Scientific Research 15,24,40-41
Shipping & shipbuilding 16,45-47
Sickness benefits .. 26
Snowy River Scheme 12,32,33
Social Security .. 3
Social Services 7,24-26
Standardisation of gauges .. 51
Steel .. ..42,49
Summary of Labor Govt'sßecord*.l2-17
Supply & Development ..23-24
Tariff protection ~ 31
Taxation .. 6, 7-9
Television .. 53
Tinned Fruits .. 39
T. A• A. *. 54
Transport ..51-52
Treasury .. .» 5-12
Tuberculosis .. 27
Unemployment benefits .. 26
United Nations ..21,23
U. Trade & Employment Gttee .. 50
Universities Commission .. 55
Uranium .. .. 24
War Service Land Settlement ..47-48
Waterfront .. 45
West Austn. water scheme 13,32,33
Whaling Industry ~ 39
Wheat Stabilisation ..13,37
Wool Agreement .. 36
Widows Pensions .. 25


STATEMENT OF POLICY, GENERAL ELECTIONS, 1949.
by the
PRIME MINISTER (MR. J. B. CHIFLEY)
(Mr, Chifley broadcast from 2CY, Canberra, over the Australian
national network at 8 p.m, (EST), Monday, November ih, i 9^4-9-
ELECTION DATE - December 10, 19U9).
Good evening listeners,
The Commonwealth Labor Government brings to you,
the electors of Australia, an account of its administration during
the three years since you returned it to office; a review of how
it has sustained the trust you gave to it when the call for
notional leadership went out in 19h1; and its plans for the
future, greater Auecralia.
You will recall that in 19U1 - after two years of
war - the Liberal Party and Country Party coalition Government
led by Mr, Menzies came to an unprecedented ending when his own
party deprived Mr, Menzies of the leadership. You will recall,
too, that a new Government led by Mr. Padden was also torn by
internal dissension and jealousy. It could not survive and,
eventually, the then Governor-General (Lord Gowrie) sent for the
late Mr, John Curtin to form a Commonwealth Labor Government.
And so, in war and in peace, this nation has been
served by a Labor Government. It was able to organise the
fighting forces, the working front and the economic resources of
the nation, on a scale unknown in our history. With the valour
of our fighting men and women; the magnificent response of the
labor force and the whole-hearted co-operation of the Australian
people generally, the war was carried on to a successful conclu-
sion.
Even before the war had ended, the Labor Government
began planning for the peace. You know of the success that
attended the demobilisation of the forces and their rehabilitation
into civilian life. These schemes have been carried through in a
manner that has not been bettered anywhere in the world.
/ When ~.


When, after five years in office, the Labor Govern-
ment went to you, the people, in 1946, you were told of what had
been accomplished and of what was planned for the future. There
were no glittering promises. A straight, honest undertaking was
given that the Labor Government, if returned, would do everything
possible to make Australia a better place for all Australians, It
is my duty tonight to show how that undertaking has been kept
and to say to you simply: If you return the Commonwealth Labor
Government, it will continue to carry out that pledge.
Further, I say this to you: Our opponents will
raise bogeys and whip up side issues. There will, no doubt,
be passionate declarations of what our opponents will do about
Communism. They have been saying the same thing for 20 years or
more. There will be scares about nationalisation. There will,
no doubt, be emotional appeals on behalf of the British Medical
Association which stands in the way of the sick receiving medical
bene fits,
The Government will treat all this with the contempt
it deserves because we believe that the Intelligent electors
of this country want to know the programme of each political
party; whether a party has a forward-looking policy and not
Just a return to the past; and they will then form their own
Judgment.
There has never been any mystery about the 'Labor
Party’s policy and platform. It is known to all; whether it
deals with social security; shipbuilding; banking or help for
Britain,
My colleagues and I ask that you Judge us on our
record and on our ability to go on with the Job of building
Australia into the nation wo all want it to bo.
The concern of every individual is not only for the
community but also for his or her own economic and social welfare
and I now review briefly the policy followed by the Labor Govern-
ment and its estimate of what the future may hold.
The /


The Labor Movement exists to promote social and
economic security for the people, higher living standards, and
the progressive expansion of Australia as a nation in the world
community of nations.
Through the past eight years, the Labor Government
has steadfastly pursued these alms and, despite the war and the
difficult conditions which followed the war, it has gone far
towards achieving them.
Full employment has been maintained. The economy
has been strengthened against the possibility of depression. A
wide system of social services now offers protection to the
individual against misfortunes of unemployment, sickness and old
age. Great headway has been made with the Migration programme.
Huge developmental projects have been put in hand to open new
resources and provide the foundation for the expansion of all
kinds of industries.
Before the war - and for as many years back as we
care to go - it was the usual thing bo have eight or ten per cent
of unemployment in Australia, Often the rate went higher than
that and in the depression it rose above 30 per cent.
That meant want and degradation for the unemployed
and their families. For those in work it meant ceaseless fear
of losing a job. For business people it meant slack demand,
low returns and unsaleable stocks. For the farmer it meant low
prices, unpayable debts and often foreclosure on his property.
For the community as a whole, it meant stagnation, wasted wealth,
a falling birth rate, frustration and bitterness.
The Labor Government has shaped all its financial
and economic measures towards maintaining full employment and it
will continue to shape them so.
So far as it can humanly contrive, never again will
the dole queues be seen in this country. Never again will corn-
petent workmen stand idle for months and years while limitless
work /


work remains to be done. Never again will young men drift hope-
lessly from town to town and from State to State, searching for
the jobs which, in all this wide land, did not exist for thorn.
During the last four years all the men and women
demobilised from the services - more than half a million of them
and all the people who worked in war industries have found peace-
time jobs. All the boys and girls who have left school in those
years, and all the new settlers coming to Australia have likewise
been absorbed.
Nearly everywhere today there is a shortage rather
than a surplus of labour, and the total number of people at
work has risen rapidly. At present, nearly 750,000 more people
are at work throughout Australia than in 1939,
Yot this policy of full employment is being
criticised and derided! It is blamed for shortages, blamed
for rising prices, blamed for strikes!
You cannot have discipline and efficiency - so
critics say - unless you have a degree of unemployment. Not too
much unemployment of course - that would be bad for business.
Just a nice six or eight per cent of unemployment, just a
quarter million or so out of work to keep the fear of the sack
in the hearts of all the rest.
The Labor Government rejects this barbarous and
intolerant view and dismisses as absurd the arguments used to
support it. It is utter nonsense to say that unemployment would
cure shortages - produce more goods, that is, by having fewer
people at work.
But full /


But full employment can be maintained only if
positive measures are taken to ward off depressions and to
ensure that as the economy expands and population grows there
will be jobs available for those seeking them.
In the present troubled state of the world,
economic affairs can change quickly and suddenly for the worso
and, linked as we are with many countries through our big over-
seas trade, a depression abroad can hardly fall to affect us
seriously.
A good deal has been done in recent years to buttress
our position against adversity abroad. Financial reserves held
overseas have been built up to a total in Australian currency of
more than £450 millions and this should be a valuable stand-by
if at any time our earnings from exports fall. Governmental debts
abroad have been reduced in the past eight years by £ll7m,
Australian pounds.
Through this reduction of overseas debt and successful
conversions of debt to lower rates of interest, the amount of
Interest payable annually abroad on account of Governments
has been reduced since 1941 from £23 millions to £l5 millions.
Further the Labor Government negotiated with the British
Government a number of long term contracts covering meat, dairy
products, sugar, eggs and dried and canned fruits. The effect
is that producers are guaranteed profitable returns on their
exported products.
Under the International Wheat Agreement, quantities
of wheat up to 80,000,000 bushels each year for a period of
five years can be sold within fixed price limits. For this
year the minimum is about 13/4 a bushel and the lowest price
that can be paid in any one year is 10/Bd. a bushel.
Business /


Business firms, farmers and private individuals
have been able in recent years to pay off debts and to accumulate
financial reserves which will stand them in good stead if diffi-
cult conditions return. Savings Bank deposits, for example,
have trebled since 1939 from £245 million to £720 millions
last June.
Low Interest rates will help in the same direction.
Before the war overdraft rates ranged from 5 to 6 per cent and
higher. Since 1945 the maximum rate has been fixed at 4s per
cent. Most other rates of interest have been similarly reduced.
In past times nothing did more to discourage enterprise and
burden the farmer, the home-builder and the ordinary man and
woman than the charging of excessive interest rates by financial
Institutions.
As a safeguard against unemployment and a fall in
incomes, the Commonwealth and State Governments have co-operated
in building up a very large reserve of constructional works. By
putting these works in hand, not only would employment be created,
directly but the demand for materials and equipment and for goods
and services generally would be sustained.
Let me turn now to the Budget, which has a vital
place in economic policy,
I first give you a brief summary of what has been
accomplished in this field. During the war, Commonwealth
expenditure rose above £600,000,000 a year and although taxation
was raised to the limits, revenue still fell a long w r ay short and
the Government had to borrow heavily from the public and the
Commonwealth Bank, In 1944-45, the last full financial year of
the war period, revenue was less than expenditure by £266,000,000
and this amount had to be borrowed. Since that time -
Tax reductions have been made which, on present Income levels,
would be valued at £2B 0,000,000 per annum;
/ Large ...
6


Large outstanding war accounts, Including the Lend-Lease
settlement with the United States, have been met;
£108,000,000 has been found for Interest and sinking fund on
debt arising from the war;
Gifts totalling £45,000,000 have been made to Britain;
Contributions worth £32,000,000 have been made for the relief
of the victims of war in Europe, Asia and the Middle East;
£132,000,000 has been paid in subsidies to keep down the cost of
living and to assist primary producers;
A post-war defence programme has been pushed ahead and great
national works undertaken in the fields of the Post
Office, Civil Aviation and power development;
Social Service expenditure has been increased under Labor
Governments from under £18,000,000 a year before the war
to an estimated £100,000,000 a year. In addition the
National Welfare Fund has been built up to £100,000,000.
Yet notwithstanding these great measures it was
possible during the last two financial years of the period to
balance the national Budgets In 1944/45, we had to borrow
£266,000,000 for current expenditure. In 1947/48 and 1948/49
the whole of current expenditure was met from revenue without any
borrowing whatever. In addition, to this, very substantial
amounts were put aside in reserves such as the National Welfare
Fund and the War Gratuity Reserves
Thus the national finances have been placed in a
remarkably sound position. That is another vital step to
strengthen our economy and ensure stability of business conditions.
But it is said by some that taxation should have
been reduced further and expenditure curtailed. During the war,
rates of taxation, especially direct taxation, were raised to
very high levels. Since then, however, there have been five
successive reductions in direct tax rates: For example, a man
/ with ...
7


with a wife and two children earning £6OO year, now pays only
£26 a year for social services contribution, as against £llB a
year in Income tax and social services contribution in war time.
Further, this £26 is less than the combined Commonwealth and
State Taxes paid by the same taxpayer in all States except one
before the war.
Remember, too, that the man concerned or his wife is
now getting 10/- a week for child endowment and is eligible for
other social services benefits as well.
The great body of taxpayers - all, in fact, except
the few on very high incomes - are now paying much less than half
the direct taxation they would have paid on their present Incomes
if war-time rates now applied. At the present time 75 per cent
of taxpayers pay only social services contribution, the maximum
rate of which is 18d. in the £.
A single person does not now become liable to income
tax as apart from social service contributions unless his Income
exceeds £5OO and a married person with two dependent children
does not become liable to income tax unless his income exceeds
£827 or nearly £l6 a week.
Indirect taxation, also, has been greatly reduced.
Reductions in sales tax and other indirect taxes since 1946 have
cost an estimated £35,000,000 a year. Sales tax has been eliminate
from practically all food stuffs, clothing and building materials.
Many material reductions have been made in Customs,
Excise and Primage. Entertainments tax rates have been reduced
by about one-fifth all round. The special reduced rate applicable
to the legitimate theatre has been applied to sports such as
football, cricket and certain other games conducted by non-profit
organisations. The war-time Company tax was abolished two years
ago and so was the Gold tax.
On the basis of present Inc ones the direct and indirect
tax concessions made by the Labor Government are worth nearly
£300,000,000 a year to taxpayers. Of this amount £46,000,000
represents concessions which have come into effect during the
present financial year.
This /
8


This policy of progressive tax reduction has been
followed out step by step as financial conditions made possible.
This is what, at the last election, the Government undertook to
do. Taxation measures, like all other financial measures, have
to be judged in the light of the overall position at any time.
All told, it may be said that the Government has
fulfilled its undertaking to make tax reductions as and when it
c ou Id.
I turn now to expenditure. It is said that the
Government has been extravagant and that taxation would have
been reduced more if expenditure had been curtailed. The Budget
this year provides for the expenditure of £567 millions. This
total is made up as follows :
Defence £60,000,000; debt charges (1939-45 war)
£49,000,000; War (1939-45) Services (Including Repatriation)
£36,000,000; War (1914-18) Services £22,000,000; Gift to
Britain £10,000,000; subsidies for price stabilisation and
primary production £16,000,000; National Welfare Fund
£121,000,000; payments to States £101,000,000; Post Office,
Railways and Broadcasting £47,000,000; Capital Works and
Services £55,000,000; and Territories £6,000,000.
All these items represent either past commitments
such as those for war debt, or expenditure on defence, repatria-
tion, social security, the running of vital services, payments
to the States, or constructive national works. It is for the
critics to say which of these they would eliminate or reduce.
So far they have not done so either in Parliament or out of it.
Yet in total, these items make up £523,000,000 of the aggregate
of £567,000,000 - by far the greater part of the Budget.
In the remaining £44,000,000, provision is made
for current expenditure on civil aviation, immigration, the
C.5.1.R.0, and a thousand and one other items essential for the
/government ...
9


government and progress of this country.
Nowhere does there exist a great element of waste-
ful unnecessary expenditure which could be reduced and allow
further big reductions in taxation to be made. In criticising
the cost of administration, some people even decry the splendid
work of the Public Service.
Certain other fields of policy, going beyond the
Budget, have a vital bearing on the welfare of our community.
Monetary and banking policy is one of these. No
factor counts more in the health of the economy, the state of
employment and the expansion of industry than the control of money
and credit through the banking system.
The banking legislation of 1945 recognised this
principle and under it the Commonwealth Bank was made responsible
for controlling banking (other than State banking) in the
national interest.
That legislation, and the principle it embodied,
were approved by the Australian people at the 1946 elections. But
in 1947 it was challenged in ways that appeared to endanger the
whole system of national control over money and credit.
In particular, doubt was cast upon the validity of
those sections of the 1945 Banking Act which enabled the central
bank to control the huge volume of surplus spending power
which had accumulated in the hands of the trading banks
through the war and post war years. To lose control of these
funds would have undermined the power of the Government and the
Commonwealth Bank to restrain the forces of inflation v/hich
were strongly active within the economy and might well have led
quickly to an unmanageable boom, from which depression and
unemployment would inevitably follow.
To ensure control of the monetary situation, therefor^
the Government passed the Banking Act in 1947 which provided for
the acquisition /
10


the acquisition by the Commonwealth Bank of the business
and assets of the private trading banks. Pull provision
was made for compensation to the shareholders of those banks
and generous conditions were offered to the staff of the banks.
The validity of this legislation was challenged
successfully in the High Court and an appeal by the Government
against the High Court decision was rejected by the Privy Council,
The Government cannot go beyond its constitutional
powers. The Constitution can be altered only by a vote of the
people at a referendum taken specially for that purpose. But the
Government has a responsibility, which it will uphold to the
utmost of its powers, to ensure that our resources of money and
credit are used to the best advantage -of the community. It will
proceed with its policy of expanding the services of the Common-
wealth Bank to provide an efficient and comprehensive system of
banking.
More than ever now it is necessary that a strong
forward movement of our economy would be maintained. The war
showed up the difficulties of our defensive situation, in parti-
cular the need for more people and for the expansion of key
industries. Migration plans on a scale not attempted before in
this country are the answer which the Government is making to the
population problem.
Industry is primarily a field for private enterprise
but the Government can assist. It has assisted in recent years
to establish and enlarge industries in Australia on a scale
unparalleled in our history.
But it rests with governments to provide the basic
works which open up resources and give the essential facilities
of transport, power and water supplies which Industry require.
The Commonwealth Labor Government in co-operation
with the States, and in some cases on its own account, is carrying
out great undertakings in many parts of Australia which will
pave the way for new industries, increase the output of present
industries and make possible the growth of new communities.
In brief /


In brief, now that the war and Its troubles
have largely receded Into the past, the grand aim of policy
should be to take up the tasks of national development on
a basis wider than ever before, bringing to the job all our
resources and all our energies, with the same will and the
same singleness of purpose as the Australian nation showed
in the crisis of the war.
I summarise the record of the Labor Government;
askyou to weigh it against the past record of our opponents;
and invite you to endorse our plans for the future.
The Labor Government has increased the value
of social services from under £18,000,000 a year before the war
to an estimated £100,000,000 this year. The system of Social
Service benefits which the Government has been developing over
the years will continue to be developed in the light of economic
and financial circumstances. In particular, consideration will
be given to those pensioners whose Income is wholly, or almost
wholly, confined to their pensions e
Employment is at an all-time high, unemployment is
almost non-existent. The Labor Government in co-operation with
all the State Governments has £743,000,000 of essential works
ready to promote economic and social development in almost
every locality in Australia,
Since Labor took office, the number of factories
has increased from 27,000 to over 37,000, Over 2,600 now
manufacturing projects have been commenced in Australia over
the last four years and 200 of them are from overseas. In
addition, the Government has pursued a planned policy of
de-centralis ing Industry throughout country areas. The number
of tractors in use in primary industries has more than doubled
since pre-war years.
The Labor Government believes in Australia and
her future greatness. In the forefront are positive
projects undreamed of ten years ago. These include the
£200,000,000 Snowy River Hydro-Electric Power Authority,
/The ~.
12


The Northern Australian meat production programme will
develop the Northern Territory, the Channel country of Queensland
and north-west Western Australia. It will assist Britain and
also meet our ever-increasing needs.
The Government is considering a joint effort with
the Queensland Government to develop the Burdekin River irrigati
scheme. An examination will also be made of the possibilities
of joining with the Queensland Government in a plan for the
development of the Collide coalfields and the Maraeba-Dlmbulah
irrigation project.
In Western Australia, the Commonwealth Labor Government
has made a grant towards the cost of the Great Southern water scheme.
In Tasmania, the Commonwealth and State Governments are
jointly establishing an aluminium industry.
In war and in peace, the Labor Government has had
a progressive programme to ensure continuing prosperity of Australia’s
agricultural, pastoral and other primary Industries. Today,
Australians primary producers are in a better position than ever
before in our history. The Labor Government succeeded where all
previous Governments failed and has secured Australian-wide
agreement on a wheat stabilisation plan.
In 1947, the Labor Government announced a five years’
defence programme which is now estimated to cost £295,000,000. This
is the first time in Australia's history that there has been a
programme of such magnitude and giving continuity of development.
The present strength of the permanent naval forces
is 10,148, Before the war, the total was 5,264, Permanent
military forces total 14,861 as against 3,863 in 1938-39, The
R.A.A.P. has a strength of 9,073, but it was only 3,489 pre-war.
The Labor Government’s defence policy is to provide
the most modern equipment for our forces. It is co-operating
with Britain in a practical manner. It has plans for the
expenditure of £33,000,000 for research and development of which the
long-range weapons project, is the main item,
/The defence ...
13


The defence programme is essentially based on
co-operation in British Commonwealth defence., Britain is
the heart of the British Commonwealth. It is vital to our
own security and our economy that we continue to co-operate with
the United Kingdom. Planning is actively proceeding between
Britain, Australia and New Zealand on mutual defence.
Immigration means security. Even more than that,
it means the full development of untapped resources. It means
greater production of goods and services. It means a better,
happier, more prosperous life for every Australian,
The great immigration drive, launched by the present
Labor Government in 1945 and carried out with remarkable success, will
be continued vigorously until Australia has the population she
needs to achieve the development of all her resources and
guarantee her security.
The Labor Government has carried out faithfully its
duties and obligations to Australia in the field of international
relations* The Labor Government recognises that, without world
peace, all social progress would be imperilled. It has,
given its full support to the United Nations, through which it has
made an outstanding contribution towards ensuring the effectiveness
of international machinery to maintain world peace, order, security
and improved economic conditions, Australia's efforts were
recognised by the election of her Minister for External Affairs
to the presidency of the United Nations,
Before the war ended in 1945, the Labor Government
Initiated a concerted effort to speed up the erection of homes.
Under an agreement with the States, £48,000,000 have been advanced
so far to State Governments. In all fields of housing, 52,000
dwellings were built and 60,000 were under construction last year
compared with an average of 27,000 for the ten years under
anti-Labor Governments before the war,
/Education ...
14


Education is primarily a matter for the States. The
Commonwealth Labor Government, however. Is assisting the States
in many fields of education. As a result, the Commonwealth
Government now provides £15,000,000 a year for education and
research compared with half a million pounds in 1939. Recently,
arrangements were completed for 3,000 students to be selected
each year for scholarships. Further, a coimilttee will examine
the finances and developmental plans of Australian universities.
An outstanding feature of the Labor Government's
programme in the last three years was the establishment
with the New South Wales Government of the Joint Coal
Board to re-organise and re-equip the coal industry.
About £20,000,000 is estimated as required to bring the
coal industry up-to-date and £14,000,000 to develop the
industry so as to give Australia the increased production
of coal needed for Australia's expansion. In the coming
year 19 open-cut mines will be in operation.
The Labor Government has provided for ex-service
men and women in a way that will bear comparison with any
country in the world. The Reconstruction Training Scheme
alone assisted 200,000 ex-service personnel. By contrast
with the experience after World War I, the present War
Service Land Settlement scheme has been an- outstanding
success. As in the past, the Government will give continuing
consideration to the repatriation needs of ex-service men and
women and, in particular, will review the assessment of the
pensions of totally and permanently incapacitated members
who depend on their pensions as their only source of income.
Scientific research is a necessity for the
maintenance of our standard of living and even for our
survival. The Labor Government has developed and will continue
to expand scientific research. The establishment of
/the National ...
15


the National University at Canberra includes a programme of
research, in atomic energy under the distinguished Australian
Professor Marcus Oliphant.
The past three years have seen development
under the Labor Government of great importance to national
health, and it is a matter for regret that greater co-
operation over a wide field of public health, extended by
State Governments, the dental and pharmaceutical professions
and proprietors of private’ hospitals, has not extended to the
British Medical Association, The people are now dependent on
the good-will of members of that association. Tho Labor Government
will continue its endeavours to provide tho people of
Australia with medical benefits in accordance with Acts of the
Commonwealth Parliament.
Since the war, the Labor Government has followed
a planned policy in regard to tho shipping and ship-building
industries. The Government is determined that Australia
shall have a modern and up-to-date merchant marine in case of
any future emergency. The Shipping Act passed this year is
designed to ensure that all vessels for use on tho Australian
coast will be built in Australian shipyards.
The Labor Government has endeavoured to provide
Australia with standard railway gauges. An agreement involving
a Commonwealth contribution of £17,000,000 has been reached with
South Australia, Negotiations are proceeding with Victoria and
Western Australia with the same objective.
During the throe years from July, 1947, tho
Commonwealth Labor Government has made provision for £23,000,000
for roads. Of that amount, £6,000,000 has been earmarked for roads
in areas which are difficult of access, Tho last anti-labor
Government provided only £11,000,000 for roads in tho throe
financial years before the war,
/The Postmaster-General's
16


The Postmaster-General's Department is • proceeding
with a three-years' programme involving £35,000,000 and an
important feature of the works being carried out is the Improvement
of facilities in rural areas.
As I said to you earlier, our opponents will endeavour
to catch votes by raising scares and bogeys. False and malicious
statements are being circulated to the effect that the Labor Party
intends to nationalise farms and homes and shops and all Industry.
Such statements are complete and utter untruths. The Labor Party has
no desire and no plan to do anything of the kind, and moreover it
could not do anything of the sort under the Constitution.
And now, listeners, there is something which goes deeper
than all that I have said. That is the welfare of the great mass of
the people - the ordinary man and woman. The Labor Party, and I
personally as one of its members, have always held as our fundamental
objective the betterment of the people.
Many of you will remember the period of the 30's onwards
when banks and the Bank Board decided that the only way to restore
financial stability was to reduce wages and pensions and to advocate
measures that resulted in hundreds of thousands of breadwinners being
thrown on to a pitiful dole. Farmers were sold up and shopkeepers
closed their doors, and insecurity, misery and want were forced upon
our people. Wo are determined with all the power at our command that
that shall not happen again,
I well remember when, by their thousands, breadwinners,
ill-clad and underfed, queued at factory gates seeking work. We,
the Labor Party, feel we have a sacred responsibility to see that
all sections of the community receive justice, and that the less
fortunate section of the community has protection from want, unemploy-
ment and insecurity.
We affirm for every man the right to receive a fair
return for his labour, enterprise and initiative. But we do say that
it is the duty and the responsibility of the community, and particularly
those more fortunately placed, to see that our less fortunate fellow-
citizens are protected from those shafts of fate which leave them
helpless and without hope. That is the objective for which we arc
striving. It is, as I have said before, the beacon, the light on the
hill, to which our eyes are always turned and to which our efforts are
always directed.
We work and fight, not for personal gain, but that our
fellow-citizens may labour under good and ever-improving standards and
conditions,, free from want, insecurity and misery.


DEFENCE .
In Its International policy, the Labor Government has
given, and will continue to give, unwavering support to the
United Nations and the principles of the Charter. The Australian
Government has consistently endeavoured to assist in establishing
a just and lasting peace based on those principles.
So far, it has not been possible to create a system
of global collective security among the great Powers, In the
meantime, reliance must be placed on co-operation in British
Commonwealth defence and in the development of collective
arrangements on the pattern of the Western Union and North
Atlantic Treaties. Arrangements of this nature are authorised
by Article 51 of the Charter, which affirms the inherent right
of collective self-defence.
The defence policy of a young and developing country
like Australia is governed by two'fundamental considerations
The long-term one is the development of the country
with population and resources to provide a deterrent
to aggression, and to enable it to make th maximum
contribution to collective defence on a British
Commonwealth, regional and world basis. The sooner
Australia can develop a capacity to bear a greater
share of the burden of British Commonwealth defence,
the better it will bo both for itself and the other
members of the British Commonwealth.
The short-term consideration is the extent of the
diversion of manpower and national resources which
should be made from the development of the country for
the provision of defence, and the form in which this
defence should be provided.
In 1947, the Government announced a Five Years*
Defence Programme of £295,000,000, This amount and the
man-power resources required to provide for the strength of
the forces, and for the supply of their material and works
requirements, was arrived at after considering the following
factors
The financial commitments required to bo provided
for in the budget for post-war charges for war
services, as well as for defence. The average
expenditure on the former since the commencement of
the programme has been £150,000,000 a year.
The target date by which the defence programme
should be completed. This was fixed at 1952
and has been kept constantly under review in the
light of the international situation.
The effect on our manpower and productive
resources of the number of ex-members of the
forces withdrawn for rehabilitation training.
The requirements of industry for manpower and
material to provide for its transfer to a peace-
time footing and for its post-war expansion.
The man-powor and material requirements of the
national housing needs.
The existence of an extensive reserve of war-
trained ex-members of the forces whose services
would be available in any emergency occurring
during the development of the programme.
/The
19


The size of the defence effort is, therefore, determined
by the proportions of the manpower and national resources which,
having regard to the considorations mentioned, the Government
is able to devote to defence. The form of the defence effort
was resolved by those things which Australia could do best to
co-operate in British Commonwealth defence.
This is the first time in Australian history that
there has been a defence programme giving continuity of
development for five years, and providing for a programme
of such magnitude.
The planned strength of the Permanent Naval Forces
is 14,753, The present strength is 10,148, Before the war it
was 5,264, The programme also provides for a Naval Reserve of
7,500, The Navy has an aviation branch for the first time and
will have two aircraft carriers. The local construction
programme provides for the maintenance of a nucleus ship
construction and repair industry capable of expansion in war.
The planned strength of the Permanent Military Forces
is 19,000. The present number is 14,861. The pre-war
Permanent Military Force strength was 3,863, In those days,
there was no field force establishment, nor was provision
made in the Army structure for Instructional or administrative
cadres for existing militia units. This organisation is an
essential prior requirement to building up the Citizen Forces
and for providing a basis for their expansion by full
mobilisation in war. The programme provides for a Citizen
Force strength of 50,000 by June, 1952, The present strength
is 16,459, Before the war it was 76,960, but, as already
stated, there exists at present an extensive reserve of war-
trained ex-members of the forces. The Army possesses
modern equipment which, in its main essentials, is as good
as exists anywhere today. Nucleus production capacity capable
of expansion in war is maintained for its requirements.
The planned strength of the Permanent Royal Australian
Air Force is 13,092. The present strength is 9,073. Before
the war it was 3,489. The strength of the Citizen Air Force
will be 400. Also, there is an R.A.A.F. Reserve of former
members of the air force still eligible for active service,
qualified aircrew and tradesmen of the aviation industry, the
present strength of which is 4,872, The programme provides
for 16 squadrons, all of which have been formed. They have
a unit equipment strength of 146 aircraft backed by adequate
reserves of operational and other types of aircraft. It is
the Government's policy to maintain an adequate aircraft _
Industry capable of expansion in an emergency. In addition to
the conventional types of bomber and fighter aircraft in production
in Australia, the Vampire jet-propelled fighter with the Nene
jet engine is being produced, and selections have also been
made for the local manufacture of new types of jet bomber and
fighter aircraft.
The Government's policy is to take all steps
within our capacity to provide the most modern equipment for
the forces, Australia is co-operating with Britain in a very
real and practical manner to give effect to the mutual
policy that
"Scientific and technical progress at the present time is
so rapid that safety lies far more in the maintenance of
an adequate organisation for pure and applied research
than in the building up of stocks of obsolescent equipment,"
/Accordingly


Accordingly, £33,500,000 has been included in the
five years’ programme for research and development in
pursuance of the policy of undertaking a greater share of
Commonwealth co-operation in defence. The Long Range Weapons
project, costing £26,500,000, is the main item in the research
and development programme.
Modern warfare involves the total mobilisation of
national manpower, economic and financial resources. Machinery
is functioning for the preparation of plans on a national basis,
the main bodies at this stage being the Joint Planning
Committee for strategic and service planning, the Civil Defence
Committee for planning civil defence measures, the Manpower
Committee for planning the allocation of manpower resources and
the Joint War Production Committee for planning the Industrial
war potential.
The defence programme is essentially based on
co-operation in British Commonwealth defence. Britain is the
heart of the British Commonwealth, and it is vital to our own
security and hers that we should render all possible support in
the commitments which she has accepted under the Western Union
and North Atlantic Treaties, Planning is actively proceeding
between Britain, Australia and New Zealand on mutual defence,
and it is the hope of the Government, when this is completed,
that it will provide a foundation on which to build a wider
arrangement with other nations with common interests in the
Pacific.
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS.
The Labor Government has faithfully carried out Its duties
and obligations in the field of international relations. The
policy pursued has been based on a fundamental belief that the
overwhelming desire of the people of Australia and of all countries,
is that world peace must be preserved and the basis on which that
peace can be built must be strengthened.
In the troubled state of international relations today,
there is an obligation on all to participate actively in the
struggle for the maintenance of world peace and security. The
Australian Government has made an outstanding contribution towards
ensuring the effectiveness of the international machinery
established to maintain world peace, order, security, and improved
economic conditions.
Two basic principles of foreign policy are of vital
importance to all Australians, These are continued support for
the United Nations, and the strengthening of the ties of the
British Commonwealth countries,
Australia is widely regarded as one of the architects of
the United Nations and one of its most Important members,
Australian representatives have given unswerving _loyalty to the
fundamental purposes and principles of the organisation.
The United Nations, and in particular the General
Assembly and its various commissions, have become potent forces
for the maintenance of world peace. By consistent advocacy of
/the


the settlement of international disputes after full and
thorough investigations of all the facts, and insistence that
methods of conciliation and mediation should be used, the
Australian representatives have ensured that final decisions
are based on principles of justice and equity.
This policy has achieved Important successes in
Palestine, in Indonesia, and in lifting the Berlin blockade. It
is assisting in the settlement of disputes in Korea, Kashmir and
the Balkans. In the majority of these instances, Australian
representatives have played active and constructive roles,
# No less Important has been the part played by Australia
in relation to the economic obligations Imposed on members of the
United Nations, Australian representatives have always insisted
on the need for the members of the United Nations to take active
measures to ensure for their peoples conditions of full
employment and Improved standards of human welfare.
Conditions of world peace and stability will be achieved
only in an atmosphere of economic and social progress in all
countries. Improved economic conditions for the world as a
whole rest on the willingness of each country to carry out the
economic obligations Imposed by the United Nations charter. In
that way the United Nations will be a strong force operating
against totalitarian and extremist political action.
Australia's sincere belief in the need for improving
living conditions for all peoples is further reflected in the
material aid given by Australia in alleviating world distress.
To the International Children's emergency Fund alone the
Government has contributed nearly £3,000,000. To this sum was
added the £600,000 so generously contributed by the Australian
people.
Through participation in the work of such agencies as
the International Refugee Organisation, the World Health
Organisation, and the Pood and Agriculture Organisation, the
Australian Government is assisting in other fields in improving
the lot of peoples throughout the world,
Australia's Influence has been marked in the field
of colonial welfare, Australian initiative in securing a binding
declaration by colonial powers to promote the economic,
political, social and educational advancement of the inhabitants
of dependent territories, has been followed by positive
contributions by Australian representatives on the Trusteeship
Council of the United Nations which is responsible for the well-
being of the peoples in these territories.
This developing role in the United Nations has proceeded
side by side with most active co-operation among British
Commonwealth countries. This Government has repeatedly taken the
lead in initiating improvements in co-operative consultation
amongst British Commonwealth countries and it will continue to do
so.
In the last few years a new conception of the British
Commonwealth has arisen. We have seen the growth of the new
dominions of Pakistan, India and Ceylon. We have seen a far
greater recognition by the Dominions of their responsibilities
both in times of war and in times of peace which has resulted
in the assumption of reciprocal duties by the Dominions and by
Br 1 ta in,
/The


The present concept of the British Commonwealth of
Nations is one of brotherhood which will bring together all the
nations of the Commonwealth and all individuals who are citizens
in those countries. Co-operation and consultation have
improved in efficiency.
Practical recognition of the part played by Australia in
British Commonwealth affairs and in the United Nations is fully
evident, Australia is the British Commonwealth member of the
Allied Council for Japan, and as such represents Britain, India
and New Zealand. An Australian is Commander-In-Chief of the
British Commonwealth Occupation Forces in Japan,
The respect with which Australia is regarded by other
members of the United Nations is testified by the election of
Australia to the Security Council on its establishment in 1946,
her election to the Economic and Social Council for the period
1947-50 and finally by the election of the Australian Minister
for External Affairs as President of the General Assembly
of the Organisation for 1948-49, Dr, Evatt’s work as President
has been universally acclaimed.
The Labor Government will adhere to its policy of
unwavering support for the United Nations and the British
Commonwealth always pursuing its great objective of international
peace based on the ideals of political justice, democratic
procedures and economic well-being.
SUPPLY AND DEVELOPMENT.
An important factor in national defence, without which
the armed forces are impotent, is the supply of fighting
equipment.
The provision of war material may ho grouped broadly
into the divisions of procurement and manufacturing, and the
development of resources that are lacking. During the recent
Parliament, the Government passed amending legislation, based
on the experience of war, to enable the Commonwealth to exercise
adequately the functions of supply and development in their
relation to defence.
The Minister of Supply and Development is a member of
the Council of Defence. Departmental officials are members of
the advisory and co-ordinating bodies concerned with the
administration of defence policy.
Arrangements are in train for serving members of the
armed forces to be employed for periods in senior directing
positions of the Department of Supply and Development,
I have mentioned that the Government has instituted a
five-year defence plan, estimated to cost £295,000,000, The
allocations under the p lan to the Department of Supply and
Development are £17,500,000 for procurement and manufacturing
and some functions of general development, and £33,500,000 for
specialist research and development in respect of
equipment. The greater part of the £33,500,000 will bo mainly
in connection with the Rocket Range project,
/Dur ing the


During the past three years a large scale plan for
scientific research and development in respect of defence
requirements has been planned in collaboration with the British
Government. An organisation has been built up of highly
qualified scientific and technical staff and a considerable
number of university graduates in science and engineering have
been sent abroad for training* Extensive works for research
and design and testing have been planned and are well under way.
These arrangements are so well advanced that already there
have been trials of fighting equipment of a highly secret
nature*
An essential feature in all defence planning is self-
containment in raw materials which, if not available from the
natural resources of the country, must be stock-piled, A special
section of the department has been designated for examination
of the needs and resources in respect of raw materials required.
The Bureau of Mineral Resources will carry out a complete
geological and geophysical survey of the Commonwealth, It is
being equipped as quickly as practicable with the necessary staff
and equipment so that the self-containment or otherwise of the
Commonwealth in respect of minerals may be established.
The Government has recently placed prospecting for and
mining of uranium on the same basis as other metals and to
guarantee a market by Government purchases. Many other minerals
are equally important from the aspects of both defence and
industry. Aluminium is an example, and the scientific and
technical investigations necessary in respect of this metal
have reached a stage whereby construction of the works has
c ommenced.
Government aircraft and munitions factories being
maintained number 12 of which eight are of major defence
importance. All the factories are undertaking commercial orders,
thereby reducing the overhead which is inseparable from the
maintenance of a defence potential.
The Government has made arrangements and is considering
further proposals designed to increase self-sufficiency in all
aspects of aircraft production.
In the Government's policy speech three years ago, I
stated that it was our objective to develop in peace, resources
for the manufacture of munitions and the supply of raw materials
so that the Commonwealth might be made as self-supporting as
possible in armaments and munitions of war, including aircraft
and shipbuilding, I said that with the development of Government
factories and the fostering of commercial industries, Australia
was seeking to provide the widest possible base for a supply
structure for the needs of the British Commonwealth in the Pacific,
What I have stated to-night shows that we have gone far with our
objective and that practically all the works necessary are under
way.
SOCIAL SERVICES.
The tabor Government has a record of outstanding
achievement in the field of social services and by Its progressive
policy has enabled the people of this country to build
security against the social ills and hazards of life.
/When


When Labor took office in October, 194 L, the only
Commonwealth social service benefits were age and Invalid pensions,
maternity allowances and child endowment. The Labor Government
has greatly liberalised and extended the scope of these benefits
and has introduced many new benefits covering fields not ■
previously provided for.
New social service benefits provided since 1941 in the
form of cash payments are - allowances for the wives and
unendowed children of invalid pensionersj funeral benefits in
respect of age and invalid pensioners; pensions for widows,
deserved wives, divorcees and women whose husbands are in a
mentalNaospltal or in prison; unemployment benefits, sickness
benefits and special benefits in these fields. A comprehensive
scheme of civilian rehabilitation has also been undertaken.
Increases and liberalisations of social service benefits
made by the Labor Government have been extensive and far-reaching.
In 1941, the maximum rate of age and Invalid pensions was 21/6
a week. It i s now 42/6 a week. Allowances payable for the wife
and one child of an Invalid pensioner introduced in 1943 have
been raised recently from 15/- to 24/- a week for a wife and
from 5/- to 9/- a week for one child under 16 years of age.
The means test for age and invalid pensions has been
substantially liberalised. In 1941 an unmarried ago or Invalid
pensioner was permitted to have, in addition to the full pension,
an Income of 12/6 a week and a married couple 25/-. These
amounts have been more than doubled, the permissible income being
now 30/- a week for an unmarried pensioner and £3 a week for a
married couple. An unmarried pensioner may thus have bension
and income totalling £3,12.6 a week, compared with 34/- in 1941,
and a married couple may have pensions and income totalling
£7.5JOa week, compared with £3.8,0 in 1941.
The income conditions for blind pensioners have been
eased to an even greater extent. In 1941 a blind pensioner was
permitted to have income of £3,7.6 a week in addition to the
full pension. He is now permitted to have Income of £5.17*6 a
week in addition to the full pension, so that he may now receive
by way of pension and income a total of £8 a week, compared with
£4,9,0 in 1941, A married couple, both blind, may receive by
way of pensions and Income a total of £10,2,6 a week, compared
with £5.10.6 in 1941.
Since 1941 the value of property (apart from a home)
which a pensioner may have without any effect on the pension has
been raised from £5O to £lOO, and from £lOO to £2OO for a married
couple. The total value of property (apart from a home) which a
person may have without becoming ineligible for a pension has also
been raised from £4OO to £750, and from £BOO to £l5OO for a
married couple.
The provision under which a claimant for invalid pension
was disqualified if he was adequately maintained by his parents
has been removed in respect of claimants 21 years of age and over.
Since the introduction of pensions for civilian widows in
1942, the maximum rates of these pensions have been increased
from 30/- to 47/6 a week for widows with one or more children
under 16 years of age and from 25/- to 37/- a week for widows
over -SO years of age without dependent children. Pensions
payable to other widows in necessitous circumstances have been
increased from 25/- to 42/6 a week. The means test for civilian
widows' pensions has been liberalised to much the same extent
/as for
25


as for age and invalid pensions. Provision has also been made to
enable a pension to be continued to a widow until her child
reaches 18 years of age if the child is undergoing full-time
education and,is dependent on her and not in employment*
The Government has abolished the means test' for
maternity allowances and has Increased these allowances from
£4.10*0 to £l5 where the mother has no previous children, from
£5 to £l6 where she has one or two previous children and from
£7,10.0 to £l7*lo*o where she has three or more previous
children. An extra £s,is paid for each additional child in
multiple births* Provision has also been made for £5 of the
maternity allowance to be made available at any time within
four weeks prior to the birth.
The Government has doubled the rate of child endowment
payments, the present rate being 10/- a week for each child under
16 years in excess of one in a family, compared with 5/- in
1941, Special provisions have also been introduced to avoid any
loss of endowment in cases where families become dlvidled owing
to the death or separation of the parents. The period of 12
months for which a person newly arrived in this country had to
wait before qualifying for endowment has been abolished in the
cases of persons taking up permanent residence in the country.
In 1941 the Commonwealth had no provision for the pay-
ment of benefits during unemployment or sickness. These benefits
were introduced in 1945. An adult or married claimant who is
unemployed may receive a benefit of 25 /- a week for himself plus
£1 for a dependent wife and 5/- for one child under 16 years.
The benefit is not affected by private income up to £1 a woek,
A claimant who is temporarily incapacitated through sickness
or accident may receive the same amount in benefits, as well as
£1 other income and £1 from a friendly society, and his wife
may have Income of her own up to 30/- a week.
The Government has concluded a reciprocal agreement with
New Zealand, the general effect of which is to enable persons
proceeding from one country to the other for permanent residence
to receive the social service benefits of the new country on the
same basis as citizens of that country.
The Government is now giving attention to the question
of securing a comprehensive reciprocal agreement with Britain
covering the various social services, so that, as far as practicable,
people moving from one country to the other may do so without
loss of benefits.
The great expansion which has taken place in Commonwealth
social services since Labor took office in 1941 is indicated by •
the fact that the total expenditure on these services has risen
from under £18,000,000 before the war to an estimated £100,900,000
this year. The estimated expenditure on all Commonwealth social
services. Including the health benefits, for the year 1949-50 under
the Government's programme is £100,425,000,
The Government's programme of social security is directed
to establishing a maximum degree of well-being and security below
which no one should be permitted to fall and without waiting for
anyone first to fell a victim to destitution and grievous distress.
At the same time these barriers against adversity are not provided
on a scale that eliminates personal Incentive or a proper measure
of self help,
HEALTH /
26


HEALTH.
With the alteration of*the Commonwealth Constitution
by the referendum in 1946, specific powers were, for the first timo,
conferred on the Commonwealth Parliament to make provision for
pharmaceutical benefits, sickness benefits and medical and
dental services.
The power to provide medical and dental services was
sought by the Government and granted by the people in terms which
expressly forbade any form of civil conscription. It is beyond
question that the Government not only has no power to nationalise
the medical or dental professions but that it never had any
desire to do so.
The past three years have seen developments of groat
importance to national health. The National Health Services Act
authorises the taking by the Commonwealth of all steps necessary
for the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of disease and the
promotion of positive health.
The rate of development of these national plans will bo
regulated by the availability of professional and auxiliary personnel
and of labour and materials for the necessary buildings and
equipment.
The Commonwealth Government has initiated a drive in
co-operation with State Governments to bring tuberculosis under
control in as short a time as possible. The Commonwealth has
agreed to provide the whole of'the additional money required
by the States for this purpose.
The Conmonwealth will boar the cost of all additional
buildings, plant- and equipme nt and all additional maintenance
Involved in putting the plan into effect. This plan is prevention
at its best. It is hoped that every citizen will co-operate
fully in this attack on a disease that is the greatest killer of
our people in their most fruitful years.
The Labor Government has arranged for the establishment
and maintenance at Commonwealth expense of a Chair of Child
Health at Sydney University, The chair will be concerned with
the post-graduate training of doctors in the diseases of
children and will conduct research in that field.
The Labor Government has increased the amount
available to the National Health and Medical Research Council
for medical research from £32,000 in 1946/47 to £60,000 a year.
Following the passing of the Acoustic Laboratories Act
in 1948, the Comionwealth has set up acoustic laboratories in
five States and is about to establish a laboratory in the
remaining State, These Laboratories are concerned, on behalf
of the Department of Repatriation, with the provision and
servicing of hearing aids for ex-service personnel whose
hearing has been adversely affected.
They have conducted experiments with school children
/affecbed


affected by deafness.
The Labor Government authorised the appointment of a
Director of Dental Services. After discussions with the
Australian Dental Association, it is proceeding with national
plans for public education in nutrition and dental hygiene, the
provision of dental facilities for outback areas, and of complete
dental attention for all children up to 16 years of age.
The Government believes that bio-chemical and pathological
tests and facilities should be readily available to all people
to aid the medical profession in their diagnoses and treatment.
New Commonwealth Health Laboratories have recently been opened
at Wollongong, Albury and Tamworth making a total of 16
laboratories in Australia. In the main their services are free.
The Government intends to establish more laboratories
throughout Australia as departmental medical officers complete
their training as pathologists and bio-chemists at the School of
Public Health and Tropical Medicine,
The Government recognises the urgent need for more
hospital beds, particularly in convalescent and chronic stages of
Illness. The Government is aware, too, of the need for
additional nursing staff; and to an appreciable extent has
been able to relieve the more urgent needs of hospitals for
domestic staff and to some extent for trainee nurses by
arranging for immigrants to fill vacancies on hospital staffs.
But the main obstacle to any rapid expansion in hospital
facilities at the present time is the shortage of labour
and materials. Until these physical limitations are overcome -
and I have already, referred to what the Government is doing
in this direction - no spectacular increase in the number of
hospital beds available for all cases will be possible.
The Labor Government has been active in giving effect
to its belief that there should be substantial or complete relief
from the financial burden of disease or sickness,
A payment by the Commonwealth to each State Government
8/- a day for each occupied bed in the public wards of a public
hospital is made subject to the condition that no charge is made
to the patient. As a result, accommodation, medical treatment
and nursing and medicine are available throughout Australia,
without charge of any kind, to every patient in a public ward
of a public hospital,
A payment of 8/- a day is made by the Commonwealth
towards the hospital expenses of every patient in an approved
private hospital or in an intermediate or private ward of a
public hospital.
The Commonwealth Government has concluded arrangements
with four State Governments whereby, in consideration of payments
made by the Commonwealth towards the cost of maintenance of a
mental patient, no charge for accommodation, medical treatment,
nursing or medicines is made to the patient or to his relatives or
against his estate. It is hoped that the other State
Governments will soon conclude similar arrangements with the
C ommonwe a 1 th,
/The Labor


The Labor Government’s proposal to provide useful
drugs and medicines prescribed by a medical practitioner without
charge to the people was launched in June, 1948, At that time
it was left to each medical practitioner to please himself
whether or not he co-operated in the scheme* When, after a
year's trial, it was found that, because of the attitude of
the Federal Council of the B.M*A,, there was no general co-
operation from the medical profession, the Government passed
an Act obliging a medical practitioner who prescribed within
the scope of the Commonwealth Formulary to write the prescription
on a Commonwealth form and so set in motion the machinery
that would enable the patient to have the prescription
dispensed without charge. The validity of this Act was
challenged in the High Court by the Government of Victoria
and by the British Medical Association. The court's decision
has been given and the Government has now decided that there
will be no change in the present form of the Pharmaceutical
Benefits Scheme > which continues to operate on a basis of
voluntary co-operation by doctors*
All members of the public are now dependent for the
free supply of penicillin, the sulpha drugs. Insulin, liver
extract, biological products, tablets, and many kinds of
Important medicaments on the goodwill of their doctors. Use
of the forms and the formulary is the only system that will
enable the scheme to function without embarrassment to patients,
to chemists and to efficient and economical administration.
The Government had deferred the setting up of the formulary
committee - a body to be charged with the revision and
expansion of the formulary - pending receipt of the High
Court decision. The B*M*A* has hitherto declined to nominate
its members to serve on that committee* The Government will
establish that committee at an early date without B*M*A,
nominees unless that body reverses its decision*
The Commonwealth Government has decided to launch
a scheme whereby the Commonwealth will pay one-half
of approved fees charged by medical practitioners to
their patients. While, at the outset, this scheme may not
embrace the full range of specialists services, it will,
as rapidly as possible, bo expanded to include them.
The degree of co-operation extended in the
provision of benefits by Soate Governments, the dental
and pharmaceutical professions and the proprietors of
private hospitals has been extensive and gratifying and
is in marked contrast to the attitude of the controlling
body of the British Medical Association,


IMMIGRATION
In the three years since the 1946 general
elections, the Labor Government has put into smooth and
successful operation the greatest and most imaginative
immigration programme in the nation’s history*
Immigration means security. Even more than
that, it means the full development of untapped resources.
It means greater production of goods and services. It means
a better, happier, more prosperous life for every Australian..
I give this promise - that the great
immigration drive launched by the present Government in 1945
will not abate in vigor until Australia has the population
it needs to achieve the full development of all its
resources and to guarantee its security from outside attack.
The fruits of the Labor Government's
immigration programme are already being enjoyed in the form
of increased production; and already the shape can be seen
of the great and powerful Australian nation of 20,000,000
people. At cur projected rat- 5 of population increase-
resulting from the excess of births over deaths and from
planned immigration, most Australians now living should
survive to se° their country inhabited by 20,000,000 people.
An Australian nation of 20,000,000 dedicated
to those same ideals of democracy, liberty and international
fair dealing which inspire Australians of today, will be a
powerful influence for justice and peace in the world of
tomorrow.
The Government is proud of what it has been
able to achieve in immigration with the co-operation o*nd
support of overseas Governments, the State Governments, and
a host of private organisations and persons throughout
Australia. It has tackled and overcome some very difficult
problems of the selection of migrants, shipping for them, and
provision for their reception and accommodation.
New settlers are being brought to, Australia
in numbers greater than those attracted by the gold rushes
of the last century. In the two years up to last June,
about 160,000 permanent new settlers cams to Australia.
Of these than 76,000 arrived in the first six months
of this year, about two-thirds being financially assisted
by the Government, In the 12 months ending next June, we
expect about 170,000 new arrivals, and thereafter an even
greater flow of migration in the years ahead.
Apart from the vital defence and security
considerations, there is also every economic advantage to
Australia in immigration. Additional workers are needed
immediately to fill employment vacancies in industry and to
develop basic resources. There arc no prospects of meeting
all the demands for workers without migration.
Australia is getting large numbers of migrants
from Britain and from areas controlled by the International
Refugee Organisation in Europe, together with Maltese,
Dutch settlers and others from many sources, who have brought
with them a wide range of skills which are now being used
in Australian industries.
/ For ins tance ....


For instance, more than 40,000 former
displaced persons have been placed in employment ranging from
the production of building materials, building construction,
and domestic service including work in hospitals and
institutions to defence work, food processing, the manu-
facture of clothing and textiles, iron and steel production,
mining and quarrying, public utilities, and work on farms
and stations. About one in eight has gone to work connected
with the building industries. As a result significant
increases can be seen in the output of many items such as
timber, bricks and household fittings.
With the expansion of immigration, there will
be many problems and difficulties to be overcome. These
are inevitable and the Government will tackle them with
the same vigour and determination that have been brought to
the tasks of getting the migrants.
It is of vital Importance for the future of
Australia that all the increase in the population does not
go to swell the capital cities. Development must, as far
as possible, mean an economic growth in regions outside the
big cities. Immigration as extensive as we intend to achieve
throws out a challenge as well as an opportunity to the
Australian people and to all sections of Industry, particularly
those engaged in the all important basic industries.
It demands forward planning on an unprecedented scale.
To assist in the consideration of these and
related matters, the Government has set up an Immigration
Planning Council which will advise on the economic and
industrial implications of immigration and consider ways in
which immigration can best contribute to the development
of the Australian economy, with close regard to the need for
decentralization and a wide general distribution of our
expanding population. The Council will consist of leading
men from a wide range of industry and others with special
knowledge of economic and individual problems.
PRIMARY INDUSTRIES.
The Labor Government recognises that Australia's
economy is closely linked with the agricultural, pastoral
and other primary Industries and during the last
Parliament, it directed many measures towards ensuring their
continued prosperity.
In 1939, Australian primary industries, due
to a decade of low prices, were in a deplorable condition,
and their sad plight was reflected in lower living standards
among other sections of the community.
When it took office. Labor's programme was
immediately devoted to inc re as ing .farmers ' Incomes, and
improving their standards of living. The Government used its
war-time powers to provide organised marketing and
guaranteed returns for many primary products.
Returns to producers generally were increased
to payable levels, in some cases through the granting of
subsidies. Subsidies were also paid to absorb some of the
rising cost of materials required by the farmers and to
assist them in adverse seasons,
/This assistance...


This assistance was given producers when
defence expenditure was very heavy. It lifted farmers'
incomes aid by the time war finished, most producers had
regained their financial strength. They were able,
therefore, to take greater advantage through increased
production, of the high prices since prevailing overseas.
The coming of peace and the subsequent
disappearance of war time powers presented the Government
with the problem of devising means of ensuring continued
prosperity for farmers.
I stress that unless powers are delegated
by the States, as in the case of wheat, the Commonwealth
Government has no power for marketing or price fixing within
the Commonwealth. Marketing of potatoes, oats, barley and
a number of other products has, therefore, reverted to the
States. Commonwealth Government guarantees for them have
necessarily been discontinued, since, to implement a
guarantee arrangement, there must be some physical control
or supervision ever the product concerned.
The Government's efforts, therefore, have
been directed to ensuring stable and payable markets
overseas for exported products. It has the necessary
Constitutional powers for this purpose and has provided
legislative and other assistance.
To ensure that wheat, meat, butter, cheese,
eggs, apples and pears would continue to be advantageously
marketed in fbture years, legislation has provided Export
Control Boards for those commodities. These boards have
majority representation of producers.
Long-term contracts for the sale of
exported meat, butter, cheese, eggs and dried fruits have
been entered into with Britain, which continues to be our
best market.
The Government considered it was sound,
when high overseas prices prevailed, to make contracts for
long periods , thus ensuring future markets and payable
prices. It accordingly secured a seven years' contract for
butter and cheese: a five years' contract for eggs; and
five years for dried fruits. In addition satisfactory
short-term arrangements have been made in respect of wheat,
canned fruits, fresh apples and tallow.
When I visited London this year, I obtained
the British Government's approval for a 15 years' contract
for meat. This contract is not yet finalised but it is
expected to supersede the existing agreement which expires
in 1950.
The assurance of a continuing market
resulting from the agreement will enable the Government and
individual producers to plan expansion of the meat industry
and give Britain greater supplies. Already plans for the
development of beef production in Northern Australia are
taking shape.
The wool agreement under which 10,000,000
bales of war-time surplus wool stocks and current clips of
Australian South African and New Zealand origin are being
marketed, has been most successful and may terminate in
1950. The bulk of Australian stocks has been sold. When
the remainder has been cleared the balance of the profits
will be distributed to growers who supplied wool to the
Contra! Wool Committee during the war.
/ The liability ~...


The liability of £40,000,000 which the
Government undertook in re-purchasing a half share of unsold
Australian wool, has been met, and Australia’s profits when
all surplus wool has been sold, are expected to be from
£55 to £60 millions. An interim payment of about £25
million has been approved by the Government and it is expected
that r,hls will be paid to growers by the end of this month.
The Labor Government has Indicated to other
participating governments its willingness to bo represented
at a conference early next year which will consider the
possibilities of a post-Joint Organisation Wool Marketing Scheme,
The plan which the Labor Government sponsored
for stabilising the wheat Industry through joint Commonwealth
and State legislation, is now in operation. The plan provides
a guaranteed price based on production costs, covering all the
wheat consumed in Australia, plus 100 million bushels of
export wheat.
The guaranteed price to growers for the 1948-49
season was raised to 6/8d. a bushel. A further survey of costs
was made recently, and the finding will Influence the guarantee
for the present crop.
The Labor Government desires the stabilisation
plan to be a continuing one, giving growers guaranteed prices
for a reasonable period ahead. It will, therefore, confer with
State Governments and growers 1 organisations at the end of the
third year of operation of the present plan regarding its
extension.
The Australian Government was a signatory to the
International Wheat Agreement, which came into operation last
August. Canada, U.S.A. and Australia, as exporters, agreed
to supply a large number of importing countries, including
Britain, with 456 million bushels of wheat in each of four years,
Australia’s quota under the agreement is 80 million bushels a
year. Devaluation of Australian currency with the dollar
resulted in a substantial rise in returns in Australian
currency under the agreement. The maximum price is now
expected to be raised to around 16/- a bushel, for the four
years, and the minimum price to about 13/5d, in the first year
and down to about 10/8d. in the fourth year.
In 1947, the Government put into operation a five
years plan to stabilise the dairy industry. It guaranteed
producers their production costs and undertook, after yearly
surveys, to vary the guarantee to meet any rise or fall disclosed.
The Advisory Committee’s report in 1947 resulted
in a guarantee of 2/- a lb, commercial butter, equal to 2/5
a lb. butter fat. In July, 1948, the committee reported that
costs had Increased by 2d, a lb. commercial butter, and in 1949
a rise of an additional 2id. a lb. These Increases in costs
were granted to the industry. It is now on the soundest basis
in its history.
Dairy Farmers’ /
37


Dairy farmers’ organisations have asked the
Labor Government to extend the scheme for a further period
.As in the case of wheat, tho Government favours a
continuing plan and will consult with the industry at
the end of the third year of operation of.the plan.
In 1948, a new seven years' contract was
entered into with Britain for the sals of surplus butter
and cheese. Record prices wore obtained. The Labor
Government was also successful in having placed in the
contract a clause providing against price variation of
more than 7|-% in any one year. This protects the
industry against a return to disastrous pre-war low
prices.
The Labor Government made a grant of
£250,000 a year for five years commencing last year for
the promotion of efficiency and increased production
in the dairy industry.
Record prices are being obtained for
eggs, exported to Britain under the terms of the five
years' contract that started last July. This contract
also contains a clause preventing variation of more than
in the contract price in any one year. The new price
of 2/7d. a dozen for shell eggs is based on a survey of
production costs made at the Government’s direction by
the Bureau of Agricultural Economics. It compares with
a contract price of l/2d. a dozen in 1939,
Poultry farmers have benefited from sales
of fowls, chickens, ducks and turkeys to the British
Government, which have been negotiated by the Common-
wealth Government* This valuable outlet for poultry
augmented Britain's supplies to the extent of 9,000 tons
in 1948-49 and this year the quantity may reach 12,000
tons.
Financial and other assistance given to
the Australian Apple and Pear industry maintained its
stability when its export markets were closed during
the war. The Apple, and Pear Marketing Board acquired
the crop in Tasmania and Western Australia until the
end of the 1947-48 season under war-time powers. During
last season, at the request of the Tasmanian and Western
Australian Governments, it again marketed the apple
crop of these two States. The Commonwealth agreed to
meet any losses sustained by the respective governments
in making advances to growers. For the incoming crop
in western Australia and Tasmania the Government has
agreed to continue the plan successfully operated for
the past two years and to raise the guaranteed payments
to growers by an average of sixpence a unit. Legis-
lation was provided by the Labor Government for the
reconstitution of the Australian Apple and Pear
Board. The board has powers to control exports of
applas and pears from the Commonwealth and will be
in operation in the coming export season,
/ A satisfactory


A satisfactory five years’ contract for
seasons up to 1953 for the sale of Australian currants,
sultanas and lexias, was arranged by the Government.
Under this contract, currant and sultana prices were
advanced by £lO and £5 (Australian currency) a ton
respectively, on those paid during the previous contract.
The British Ministry of Pood has agreed
to purchase 1,750,000 cases of peaches, pears and
apricots from the 1949 pack. It is hoped to obtain
a further substantial order for sales from the 1950
pack. Substantial help was given through Government
act in directing new Australians to work in the
Industry.
To assist primary production, the Labor Government
has continued the subsidy on superphosphate. This has cost
£14,500,000. The Government owns and operates four
sulphate of ammonia plants, thus roduc ing Australia’s
dependence on overseas supplies. This fertiliser has
also been subsidised by the Government. The cost this year
will be £500,000,
Rural production during 1948-49 exceeded
£600,000,000 for the second successive year, compared with
an average of £211,000,000 during the five years ended.
1938-39, This remarkable increase in farmers’ returns
has resulted mainly from higher overseas prices and
good seasonal conditions. The Labor Government’s help
to primary industries in the early war years and its
financial assistance charing adverse seasons enabled the
producers to stimulate production and to take advantage
of the good markets. Private enterprise was incapable
of financing marketing on such a vast scale, Coirmonwealth
Government finance and government-to-governraent trading
are inseparable from the marketing of primary products to
the best advantage of producers.
Expansion of Australia's export trade is
complementary to national development and essential to its
programme of full employment. The Labor Government is giving
active assistance to manufacturers and exporters in finding
and developing export trade, by modifying or removing export
handicaps and by forming export panels representative of
various industries. Australian Trade Commissioners are now
posted in 18 world trading centres.
Legislation was passed by the Labor Government
this year establishing the Australian Whaling Commission,
A most important development in Australian
agricultural economics has been the cost of production
surveys undertaken at the direction of the Government by the
Bureau of Agricultural Economics. Surveys of production costs
of wheat and dairying industries were made in conjunction with
representatives of those industries and accepted as the basis
of the Government’s guarantees to them.
Survey of costs in the egg industry and the pig
industry enabled the Government to successfully present a
factual case to the British Government for an increased
price in those products
39


SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH.
We live in a scientific age, and money spent on
research is a necessity for the maintenance of our standard of
living and even for our survival.
Since the Labor Government came into office eight
years ago, it has increased the vote of the Commonwealth Scientific
and Industrial Research Organisation five-fold. That organisa-
tion now covers a v/ide field of primary and secondary industries,
and has some 800 investigators, plus some 2,000 other staff, at
work in the fields of plants, animals, insects, soils, foods,
forest products, fisheries, physics, chemistry, radar, irrigation,
building materials, meteorology, dairy products and flax. The
fruits of this work are many. Now an old industry is helped or
a new industry started; now the primary production of a whole
region is lifted.
There are many large areas, particularly in the
north, where science can play on outstanding part in development.
The Government is accordingly using the organisation to survey the
land-use possibilities of all the various regions of the north
whose agricultural and pastoral conditions show promise. Already
some 250,000 square miles of the Katherine-Darwin region and the
Barkly Tablelands have been covered, and studies of the Ord and
Burdekin River regions are in progress.
Successes are becoming more and more numerous.
One of the latest is the discovery that by applying small amotmte
of the sulphates of zinc and copper to the soils of the 90-mile
desert between Victoria and South Australia - a procedure costing
a few shillings per acre - a former waste region of some 2,000 to
3,000 square miles can bo brought into comparatively high produc-
tion.
Other workers have gone a long way to the control
of the sheep blowfly problem by means of the Mules operation and
D.D.T, Much progress has also been made in weed control. The
control of St. John’s Wort by a variety of beetle has been a
spectacular instance.
Yet another success is in the field of flax.
Types of bacteria have been obtained which give an efficient
retting treatment and produce high grade fibre well up to the
world’s best. Fisheries ?/ork has led to considerable increases
in the Australian fish canning industry. Investigations of
timber have evolved several ways of avoiding waste of this
important material.
Research workers in radar have evolved direction-
finding and other radio equipment which is now being installed and
which seems destined to give civil aviation in Australia safety
aids ahead of all other countries.
New developments the organisation has in mind
relate to wool textiles and to coal. There is every reason to
believe that the comprehensive and fundamental work that will be
carried out on wool will enable Australia to meet the throat of
artificial fibres to the all-important wool industry.
Fuel research is another field which it is hoped
to enter at an early date. The importance that fuel will play
in the further development of this country is obvious. It is,
therefore, of particular Importance that studies should be made of
how best to use coal, particularly the extensive brown coal and
semi-bituminous coal of the south,
/ The ...
40


The organisation is tackling the rabbit problem-.
The Intention is to set up a section to study the life history
and habits of the rabbit in the hope of discovering a weak link
through which the pest can be attacked by new methods or by
modifications of the old which the pest has so successfully
resisted in the past,
Australia now has a powerful Instrument whereby to
raise the living standards of all her people. The Government
Intends to support and develop that instrument to the full.
HOUSING
The Commonwealth Government recognised in 1945 that
there would have to be a concerted effort to speed up the erection
of homes and I informed you in 1946 that the Government had
initiated the Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement. This is a
co-operative venture, whereby the Commonwealth advances the
finance to build the homes and has guaranteed to stand three-
fifths of any losses incurred. The States do the erection of
the homes and their allocation,
I am pleased to be able to report that, to date,
over 23,000 homes have been erected and a further 10,000 homes
are at present under construction. A total of £51,000,000
has boon advanced to the State Governments to finance the scheme.
The programme of construction has been stepped up
each year since the war as the figures will show. In 1945-46,
2,825 homes were completed; in 1946-47, 4,887 homes; in 1947/48,
6,370 homes, and in 1948/49, 7,743 homes, A further increase nn
this figure is expected for the current year.
The Commonwealth-State Housing Agreement is an
assurance that the low-income earner can secure a good homo at
the rent he can afford because of the assistance rendered to him
under the rental rebate system.
The Commonwealth Government is directly responsible
for the provision of War Service Homes. An energetic drive
has brought about a step up from 428 homes in 1945/46 to 6,084
in 1948/49. At 31st July last, 5,180 homes were under construction,
indicating that a considerable increase can bo expected for the
current year.
Financial assistance to ex-servicemen has boon
Increased from £950 to £2,000, The group homo construction with
its special attention to war widows is another progressive step
Introduced. The insurance cover afforded to ox-servicemen was
further improved. The cover is comprehonsive and compares more
than favourably with that of private companies.
In all housing fields, the number of dwellings
erected last year was over 52,500 and some 60,000 were under
construction. The average for ten years under anti-Labor Govern-
ments before the war was 27,000 homes a year.
In addition, the Government recently offered to
assist all State Governments to import 10,000 pre-fabrlcated
houses,
COAL /
41


COAL.
The coal shortage remains serious. New South
Wales production this year may reach 10,800,000 tons, or about
900,000 tons less than in 19U8. This deficiency arises mainly
from the recent general strike. The coal shortage, although
accentuated by strikes, derives fundamentally from the current
inability of the industry to meet the rapidly growing require-
ments of the community.
If 19U9 had been completely free from strikes, in-
duction would still hove fallen about 1,000,000 tons short of
requirements. This fact emphasises the urgency and importance
of the Joint Coal Board’s programme for the re-organisation and
re-equipment of the industry and for the expansion of productive
capacity.
The Board has estimated that the Australian economy
will require the following quantities of New South Wales coal -
I9k9 .. Ik, 700,000 tons
1950 .. 15,800,000 ’’
1951 ♦. 16,500,000 "
1952 .. 17,300,000 "
1953 .. 18,000,000 "
This estimate makes provision only for Australian
consumption and for bare minimum export commitments to Pacific
Islands. It does not allow for the recapture of Australia’s
export markets nor for any increase in stocks of coal in the hands
of consumers.
If industrial disputeswere entirely eliminated,
the industry would be in a position to produce about 13,600,000
tons of coal annually. With industrial disputes causing losses
of betv/een 1 ,500,000 tons to 2,000,000 tons a year, it will be
seen that it is necessary to expand production by about ,50 per
cent within the next five years. This is an extremely difficult
task, but the board expects that it will be achieved.
Steel production is held back firstly by the
shortage of coal, and secondly, by the shortage of labour, which
cannot be obtained because of. the shortage of building materials
for housing. The re-organisation of the coal industry is
retarded by the shortage of steel and of labour, which again
depends on housing for the conmunity as a whole, and for the
coalfields and the steel centres in particular, is delayed
because of the shortage of steel and coal. This shortage
affects not only those industries (such as bricks, cement,
tiles) which use coal directly, but also other building
materials industries (such as timber) which rest heavily on a
rail transport system which is unable to carry the freight
offering because of lack of coal.
To meet the increasing demand for coal, the Joint
Coal Board has engaged in an extensive prospecting programme.
This has been done by 35 geological investigations. Altogether
133,75k feet of drilling have been done in New South Wales. As
a result of this work it has been proven that 35,000,000 tons of
commercial quality cool is available for open-cut mining.
During I9k9, substantial improvement in production
capacity was made at 3k mines in New South Wales. The work
carried out included the introduction of further mechanical units,
of improved haulage and man transport facilities and of improved
pit-top arrangements. In addition, the use of power borers
became general in New South Wales mines, 616 units now being in
operation,
/ During .,,
42


_ During i9US/k9 the capacity of New South Wales
underground mines increased from k7 f 600 tons a day to 50,300 tons
a day,
Due to shortages of manpower and materials, it
has not been possible to proceed with the mechanisation of all
mines in New South Wales, but substantial progress has been made
in hi mines. To assist owners to mechanise their mines, the
Board has purchased a large quantity of machinery which is
available either for hire or for purchase.
While there has been an improvement in the
American supply position and deliveries of American coal loaders
are well ahead of schedule, cutters, shuttle cars, transformers
and other ancillary equipment of British and local manufacture
are behind schedule. The cost of equipment ordered is £1,858,000,
This is a first instalment of the mechanisation plan. When
installed this equipment will increase production capacity by
about 12,000 tons a day.
Of the total estimated cost of £19,500,000 to bring
the coal industry up to date, over £6,000,000 is needed for the
overhaul and replenishment of existing mines so present produc-
tion can be maintained. Nearly £13,500,000 is needed to develop
the industry to give the estimated increased production needed.
During 19U9/50, nineteen open-cuts will be in
operation and £1,250,000 is being spent on the purchase of
excavators, cranes, tractors, drag lines and other coal and
earth-moving equipment to mechanise the q>en-cut mines.
Increased production means added transport
problems. The Department of Railways in New South Wales has
undertaken a major expansion programme to handle the increased
coal production the board is planning. The main Western line
to V/allerawang will have to be electrified and the number of
rail tracks increased from two to four, while 2,000 additional
UO-ton coal waggons are required.
The Railways Department, although hampered by
lack of steel, is engaged on the construction of rail sidings,
To handle the production of open-cuts, the board
has designed a portable standard screening, crushing and loading
plant. Eight of these plants have been ordered at a cost of
£63,000. Three of these plants are installed at Renown and
Newdell, and one is being installed at Branxton,
To enable the contemplated increased coal produc-
tion from the western districts of New South Wales to be
shipped interstate, the N.S.W. Maritime Services Board, in co-
operation with the N.S.W, Railways Department, is constructing
a new coal-loading wharf at Pyrmont,
LABOUR AND NATIONAL SERVICE.
The Commonwealth Employment Service was established
in Besides aiding workers to find jobs and to improve
themselves and helping employers to obtain the workers they
need, the service provides an advice and Information service to
all.
A major function of the Commonwealth Employment
Service iSt to assist British migrants to find employment. An
even greater task relates to the displaced person scheme. The
/ Commonwealth ...
43


Commonwealth Employment Service not only canvasses for vacancies,
but checks accommodation and wages and conditions of employment,
and whether Australian labour is available that could be employed.
Officers of the Commonwealth Employment Service are stationed at
Naples, they travel on vessels to Australia to record all details
of each individual that will assist in his placement and on
arrival special officers allocate the Displaced Persons to
vacancies, arranging movement to the place of employment.
Placements are made in a restricted range of employment,
principally in industries and services that are vital to the
Australian economy, that are starved for labour and upon whose
development the Australian economy and the Government's plans
for its expansion depend, and under circumstances to avoid
depriving Australians of accommodation.
Increased production and improvements in the
physical conditions under which workers are employed and the
circumstance's surrounding their employment go hand in hand.
Considerable contributions have been made by the Labor Govern-
ment in these spheres. The activities of the Department of
Labour are at present directed particularly to the improvement
of physical working conditions in the fields of lighting
(natural and artificial), heating, ventilation, safety, general
design of structures, orientation of buildings, provision of
amenities, encouragement of industrial canteens, participation
of employees in works activities, reduction of labour turnover,
and the like.
To provide a closer liaison with the States, and
generally endeavour to raise the standards appearing in the
Factories Act, by agreement with the State Ministers for Labour,
the Commonwealth and State Departments of Labour Advisory Com-
mittee reviews the standards proposed as the result of research
activities by the Commonwealth Department in the hope that, pro-
gressively, the States.will write these new standards into their
Factories Acts, or, alternatively, that the State Factories
Inspectors will use these higher standards in their advisory
work.
The incidence of accidents which are avoidable, and
the presence in Australian Industry of hazards to health are very
high. It is believed that with proper attention to protective
measures, coupled with advice to industry on hazards and their
elimination, training in industrial safety, and the development
of industrial health services, much can be done to reduce loss
of productivity.
On the return of the Labor Government to office,
particular attention will need to be given to the question whether
the Commonwealth should give leadership in the field of industrial
safety.
The Government is kept in touch with all indus-
trial happenings which may bear on industrial peace, and thus
enables the Minister for Labour and National Service or the
Government to take appropriate action,either by ensuring that
the matter is brought speedily before the appropriate industrial
authority or that other action is taken to preserve or restore
industrial peace.
The Industrial Relations Division provides an
information service to both sides of industry, particularly in
relation to Awards of all Commonwealth authorities, and, to a
lesser extent, in relation to Awards of other authorities,
particularly where there is some problem of relationship to
Commonwealth Awards.
/ The ~.


Special attention is now being given to the need
for reviewing the whole of the circumstances surrounding
apprenticeship and it may be that, with the return of this
Government to office, special consideration will need to be
given to the Commonwealth bringing together all concerned with a
view to reviewing existing apprenticeship conditions in the
light of present day requirements.
WATERFRONT.
Since the establishment of the Stevedoring
Industry and Maritime Industry Commissions during the war,
the Governments policy has been to provide for the speedy
settlement of industrial disputes and for the safeguarding
and improvement of the working conditions of employees in these
Indus tr ie s ,
In consequence of the work of these commissions,
an organisation and an improvement of conditions generally in
these industries have been effected which has contributed to
industrial peace. An efficient and adequate manning of vessels
has been maintained while the gang roster system has been of
considerable benefit in providing regular waterside labour.
Recently the Stevedoring Industry Commission was
replaced by a Board of three members, and the industrial functions
hitherto performed by the commission were transferred back to the
Arbitration Court. The levy on the industry which provides funds
for the board's administration has been reduced from fourpence
halfpenny to twopence halfpenny per man hour.
In the stevedoring sphere, the Government plans,
through the new board, to continue the improved conditions won
for the industry by the commission, and to move steadily towards
the speedier loading and unloading of ships and their quicker
turn round in port. The Government is confident that through
its administration machinery on the water front, the latter
objective will, in due course, be achieved.
In the maritime sphere, the Government plans the
continuation of the Maritime Industry Commission, and through
this body the speedy settlement of ship disputes and the
minimisation of delays of vessels.
SHIPPING AND SHIPBUILDING.
Since the war years, the Government has pursued a
planned, progressive policy in regard to the shipping and ship-
building industries. The war emphasised the great importance
of these industries to the adequate defence of the Commonwealth
and showed the deficiencies in the size and modernness of the
Australian merchant marine.
/Since ...


Since 1945, the shipping position has gradually
improved, but the tasks of rehabilitation and the resumption of
many Important projects necessarily deferred during the war,
have maintained the demand for shipping space at a high level.
Without the assistance of Commonwealth-owned and chartered
ships, privately-owned vessels would have been quite incapable
of meeting the post-war shipping demands made on them. The
Government, therefore, continued to operate its own vessels
together with overseas chartered ships and was compelled by
circumstances to continue until August, 1947, the requisitioning
of privately-owned vessels, from which date these vessels were
returned to their owners.
During the war, the shipbuilding industry was
rehabilitated and an extensive programme was undertaken for
the construction of new and up-to-date vessels for the
Australian coastal trade in Australian shipbuilding yards.
The Government plans to pursue vigorously its policy of
fostering the shipping and shipbuilding industries. To this
end, the Government during 1949 passed the Shipping Act which
is designed to ensure that all vessels (with exceptions to meet
special cases) for use on the Australian coast will be built
in Australian shipyards. It also provides that (again with
exceptions to meet special cases) vessels will be replaced as
they reach 24 years of age. These provisions are intended to
ensure that not only will there be a permanent market for the
output of the Australian shipbuilding yards, but also that the
Australian merchant marine will be maintained in a reasonably
modern and up-to-date condition.
To prevent an undue rise in the cost of new vessels to
Australian shipowners, which in turn would mean increased freight
rates, the Government has planned to provide financial assistance
to the shipbuilding industry which, it is hoped, will enable
shipowners to secure ships at a price comparable to prices
ruling in British shipyards. Pears have been expressed
that the Government may use the provisions of the Act to proven
private shipping companies from securing the vessels they need
These fears are groundless, as the Government is anxious to
encourage private companies to place orders in Australian ship-
yards, Several companies already have placed orders, and the
Government has sold two of its newest vessels to private firms.
The Shipping Act also provides for the setting up of an
Australian Shipping Board which will operate a Commonwealth
Shipping Line, The line will operate in the Australian coastal
trade and will continue to supplement services being provided
by private shipping companies. There is still pressure on
shipping, and the Government is satisfied that there is ample
room in the coastal trade for both privately-owned and tho
Commonwealth Line to operate, and also that with the continued
expansion of industrial activity and development of the Common-
wealth, there will be room for expansion of both the Commonwealth
and private fleets.
The Commonwealth Line is Intended also to be used to
provide developmental services to places which have hitherto not
been served by shipping, or which have been inadequately served.
It is hoped through these services to assist the decentralisation
of Australian Industry and the economy generally, and to facilitate
the more rapid development of areas suitable for industrial and
agricultural purposes. At a later stage, whan the coastal
position permits, it is hoped that it will also be possible for
Commonwealth-owned vessels to operate in overseas services,
/ The ~.


The Government is determined that, in a future
emergency, there shall be in being an adequate and efficient
ship-building Industry and a modern and up-to-date merchant
marine, capable of meeting the tasks which war will impose.
The defence aspect is an additional and compelling reason for
the Government’s direct interest in both shipping and ship-
building, These two industries are of such vital importance
to the defence of the Commonwealth that their expansion and
maintenance on an adequate scale cannot, as in the past, be
left to the uncertainties of commercial enterprise.
COMMONWEALTH RECONSTRUCTION TRAINING SCHEME.
The Government’s re-establishment of Australia’s
hundreds of thousands of ex-servicemen and women was a special
phase of the application of the fundamental. Labor principle of
full employment. The Commonwealth Reconstruction Training Scheme
is one of the world’s most ambitious adult education programmes,
and undoubtedly, in proportion to population, the greatest re-
establishment measure conceived and carried through by any
country.
Since 19UU» the scheme has steadily developed into
a Commonwealth-wide organisation working under a democratic
administration of representative committees. It has provided
free tuition and equitable living allowances for tens of thous-
ands of trainees. It opened opportunities for thousands who
would never have had them in the ordinary course of events. At
the end of last June, 150,000 ex-servicemen and women were
engaged in full-time and part-time training at universities,
technical colleges, rural training centres and elsewhere, while
a further 50,000 had already completed courses of preparation
for over i|oo different occupations. By the time the scheme is
complete, more than one in every four of the men and women who
served in the armed forces and their auxiliary services will have
seized the opportunities provided by the Commonwealth Reconstruc-
tion Training Scheme,
In terms of lasting benefit to the nation, the
value of the scheme cannot bo overestimated. The £38,000,000
it has cost has provided, and is providing, Australia with doctors
and carpenters, dentists and electricians, nurses and artists,
lawyers and bricklayers - a small array of professional men and
skilled artisans. But what is equally important, in the view
of the Labor Government, it has provided the means whereby men
and women may load happy and satisfying lives of productive
service for the Australian community.
WAR SERVICE LAND SETTLEMENT.
One of the most successful phases of re-establish-
ment has been soldier land settlement. The Government’s
opponents were critical of the slow start. But the Government
had in mind the disastrous failure those same critics made of
land settlement after the first war, when thousands of young
men’s hopes and tens of millions of your money were sacrificed
in over-hasty, half-baked land schemes.
The Labor Government has subjected properties to
the most rigorous examination as to their productive and economic
suitability. It has ensured that a proper home-maintenance
area was allotted in every case. The Government has developed
the land and, to the extent of availability of materials, fenced
it and made adequate housing provisions. Settlers have been
/ chosen ...


chosen carefully and nearly £1,000,000 has been spent on
giving them special training before leaving them to work their
own waj’. Already nearly 5,000,000 acres have been allotted to
3,000 settlers; and another 12,000 men have received loans to
acquire or improve blocks of their own choice. Thus 15,000
have already benaflttod to the extent of £18,000,000 of Common-
wealth money spent in land acquisition, in loans and advances,
in living allowances to tide them over the first year's settling
down, '
In the face of these achievements - achievements
of a sort which point to success and not tragedy in tho future -
the Opposition critics have become silent.
REHABILITATION
Tho Labor Government has broken now ground In the
medical treatment, training and employment of physically
handicapped ex-servicemen not eligible for benefits under
the Repatriation let. Thousands of ex-servicemen suffering
from various disabilities have been returned to civil life
with an assured, congenial and independent future.
The success of the scheme was so pronounced that
the Government decided to extend It to civilian members of the
community - invalid pensioners and recipients of sickness benefits
under the Labor Government's social service legislation. Apart
from its tremendous significance as a moans of personal
rehabilitation, the scheme will eventually mean a saving of
tens of thousands of pounds annually in the payment of pensions
and social service benefits, while adding to tho productive
forces of the nation.
FISCAL POLICY /
48


FISCAL POLICY
The present Labor Government has followed, and will
continue to follow, the broad lines of economic policy laid down
by previous Labor administrations. In general terms, this
policy is :-
The promotion of a sound national economy, incorporating
efficient primary and secondary industries;
The maintenance of a high and rising standard of living;
The guarantee of employment to all.
So that many Australian secondary industries may be
maintained and developed it is essential that Australia should
obtain from overseas large quantities of capital plant and
equipment; raw and partially manufactured raw materials; and,
under present circumstances, supplies of steel. Many of these
commodities, are in short world supply today and either cannot
be obtained at all or are available only in limited quantities
from sterling area and easy currency sources. Although those
sources of supply,have been thoroughly combed, it has been
necessary for Australia to allocate substantial quantities of
dollars and other hard currencies for the purchase of those goods.
The amount of dollars and other scarce currencies
available to Australia is insufficient to meet Australian
requirements. The Government has, however, allocated the maximum
quantity of dollars and other hard currencies for the purchase of
capital plant and equipment. As a result it is noteworthy that
Import licences have been issued for sufficient replacement
parts of U.S.A. origin to maintain all capital plant at
present used in essential industries in the Commonwealth
with the result that the Government’s full employment
policy has been implemented;
New machinery and maintenance parts of dollar origin have
been licensed to fulfil the urgent needs of the Common-
wealth and where possible to expand industry to afford
Australian manufacturers the most modern plant available;
Complete now plants, in many cases of dollar area origin,
have been licensed for use in many important industries
which, in the long-term view, will be of the greatest
importance to the economy of the Commonwealth,
These industries inclxide the tinplate project to be
carried out at Port Kembla (N.S.W.) and open-cut coal mines on a
large scale in Victoria.
Secondary industries could not function unless import
licences were granted for raw and partially manufactured materials,
such as textile goods and yarns, to be used for processing and
finishing in the Commonwealth. Here again, as in the case of
capital plant and equipment, the countries of the sterling area
and the easy currency countries have been combed for these commodi-
ties, But it has been necessary to provide hard currency funds
for the importation of those goods from such countries as Western
Germany and Japan in addition to providing dollars for the
importation of many typos of raw and partially manufactured raw
materials.
It has been'necessary for Australia to import increasing
quantities of iron and steel products from abroad. The quantity
of these goods which Australia can obtain from within the sterling
area and from easy currency countries falls far short of require-
ments, It has been necessary to allocate substantial quantities
of dollars /


of dollars and other difficult currencies, such as Belgian francs,
for the importation of galvanised iron, wire netting, fencing
wire and rods for concrete reinforcing.
The Government has not been unmindful of the requirements
of primary Industries. Large dollar allocations have been provided
for the importation of American wheel tractors and for certain
components for the production of tractors in Australia, By the
latter means, the Australian economy will benefit by the encourage-
ment of local production of tractors. Dollars have been provided
for the Importation of commodities such as pest eradicators and
fumigants for the destruction of rabbits.
In the Labor Government’s plan to promote an economically
sound Australia, trade relations occupy an important part, Austra-
lian producers need markets for a growing diversity of exports and
sources of supply for the raw materials used by our Industries,
and other essential goods. Without these our standard of living
would not rise and could oven decline. For this reason the
government has taken steps - by means of tariff negotiations - to
afford Australian Industries every opportunity to sell their
products in world markets.
At the same time, it has made every endeavour to assist
local manufacturers in obtaining supplies or urgently needed raw
materials in world short supply, such as manganese ore, pulp and
paper and inedible oils and has assisted in the procurement of
goods which are indispensable to primary producers.
The Australian Government has been pressing for the
abolition, or at least the reduction, of the unduly restrictive
measures which so hampered world trade during the immediate pre-
war period. But mere reduction of unduly restrictive trade
barriers is not enough. At all meetings of the United Nations
Trade and Employment Committee, the Australian delegates have
stressed the need to create conditions in which it will no longer
be necessary to impose these barriers, conditions in which the
legitimate aspirations of the peoples of the world can bo realised
in ways which do not in any way impair the Interests of other
countries.
Australia's representations led to the inclusion in
the Charter for an International Trade Organisation of articles
which recognised that the avoidance of unemployment and the
maintenance of a large and steadily growing volume of production
and effective demand for goods and services are not only of
domestic concern, but are necessary for the achievement of
world-wide economy and social progress and development.
But, although adhering to the general view that
barriers to world trade should be reduced, the government main-
tains that protective rates of duty have a legitimate place in
the tariff schedules. Protective duties should be capable of
being applied when they are used as devices for building up
industries appropriate to the Australian economy. But the grant
of protection to producers must be regarded as a privilege which
carries with it the responsibility of maintaining the highest .
possible level of industrial efficiency. Protection in the past
has been granted on the advice of the Tariff Board, and the
government proposes to continue to rely upon that body.
Although the Australian Government has agreed in general
terms to the reduction of Imperial preferences, it has accepted this
principle only on the clear understanding that any reduction will
be effected as the result of a mutually advantageous bargaining
process whereby Australia receives equivalent tariff concessions
in compensation.
The government fully appreciates the importance of the
tariff in assisting in the development of a sound and balanced


economy but is also appreciative of the fact that on occasions the
net interests of Australia are best served by permitting the
Importation of many goods at by-law rates of duty. Many building
materials such as corrugated roofing, reinforcing rods, conduit
piping and steel plates and sheets in short supply or unprocurable
in Australia have been permitted entry under by-law. In every
case the Australian economy has benefitted and in no case have t . ;
Interests of any Australian Industry been sacrificed. Whenever
the opportunity has occurred the Government has reduced or
eliminated primage duty in an endeavour to remove any unnecessary
costs of these imported goods.
So that the interests of Australian industries and of
the Australian export trade may be safeguarded, the Government is
closely observing the effects on world trade and their possible
repercussions on Australia of the recent devaluation of the
Australian pound in relation to the United States dollar and
various other currencies, and, whenever necessary, will take
appropriate action to meet contingencies.
The policy of the Labor Government is designed to bring
about the establishment of a sound economy based on efficient and
prosperous primary and secondary industries. It is the intention
of the Government to achieve this objective, to follow the
broad principles I have outlined. Continued development along
present lines affords bright hopes for the economic future of our
country.
TRANSPORT.
The effeetlvenesg, of transportation is vital to the
national well-being during this post-war era of rapid development.
The Commonwealth Labor Government has obtained the co-operation
of all State Governments in the setting up of the Australian
Transport Advisory Council. This Council has been very active
in the urgent field of co-ordination of transport.
The Commonwealth Labor Government is pursuing its policy
for the standardisation of railway gauges. It has become necessary
for the Commonwealth to negotiate for separate agreements with
individual States and agreement has been reached already with South
Australia, The necessary legislation has been introduced and the
Commonwealth Government will assist South Australia by providing
£17,000,000 towards the project. Negotiations are proceeding
with Victoria and Western Australia with the same objective.
Valuable surveys have been made in Western Australia
and South Australia, while a detailed investigation into the
national deficiency of locomotives and rolling stock has been
completed.
The Commonwealth Government has given very substantial
assistance to the States, towards the construction and maintenance
of roads. In 1947/48 the Commonwealth contribution for roads was
£6,200,000; in 1948/4^it was £7,600,000; and for 1949/50
£9,000,000 is provided. This makes a total of almost £23,000,000,
In making this contribution the Commonwealth has been aware of the
problems and difficulties faced by people living away from the
capital cities and big towns and who, under such difficulties,
play so important a part in our economy. The Conmonwealth Government


has expressed this recognition in a practical form, and no less
than £6,000,000 has been reserved for roads in remote areas during
the three years mentioned. The extent of this assistance to tho
man on the land can be gauged by the fact that in 1948/49 funds
were approved for no less than 581 local government bodies,
Tho Increasing number of accidents and casualties
resulting from heavy road traffic has received the attention of
the Government, and an annual sum of £IOO,OOO has been provhed
for the past three years for road safety purposes.
POSTMASTER-GENERAL - DEPARTMENT
The Post Office servos practically every settled part
of Australia and the importance of adequate and convenient commu-
nication services to the community needs no emphasis. The
Government has tackled post-war problems with vision and energy
and, even before the war ended, a special programme of now
works had been planned. Despite difficulties in obtaining
skilled labour and materials, an amount of £20,700,000 was spent
on new capital works during the financial years 1947/48 and 1948/49,
and it is estimated that more than £14,000,000 will be spent
during 1949/50, bringing the total expenditure for the throe
years to nearly £35,000,000.
By its prompt and realistic action, the Government
has shown that it is solidly behind the plans of the Post Office
to meet the greatest emergency that organisation has ever faced.
For the first time in its history, the Post Office has boon
authorised to proceed with its developmental planning on a long
range basis with the knowledge that, subject to the acceptance
of the Budget by Parliament, the necessary funds will be available
from year to year.
At the same time, the Government has introduced more
liberal conditions governing the provision of facilities, with
particular emphasis on services in rural areas, including new
and extended mall services, house-to-house letter deliveries,
increased hours of attendance at telephone exchanges, the opening
of many new post offices, and the raising of others to official
status,
The establishment of automatic exchanges in rural areas
has received special attention, and the plans provide for 650
new exchanges of this type to be Installed. Already 192 rural
automatic exchanges are in operation, of which 51 have been
Installed in the past 2 years.
Works in metropolitan areas have included the extension
of existing automatic exchanges and the establishment of new ex-
changes; the laying of underground cables to provide telephone
subscribers' services and of junction lines between exchanges;
the installation of additional switching equipment in many
automatic exchanges; the erection of new automatic exchange and
post office buildings; the modernisation of telegraph offices;
and the provision of mechanical equipment for the handling of mall
matter.
Works in country districts have Included the provision
of many additional trunk line and telegraph channels; the erection
of lines to serve rural communities not yet connected with the
public trunk line system; the laying of underground cables between


the capital cities and important provincial centres; the erection
of now post office buildings; the extension and remodelling
of existing promises; and, as already stated, the establishment
of a large number of rural automatic exchanges designed specially
to meet the needs of outback areas.
During the past throe years, the Postmaster-General's
Department has
Added 172,000 telephones,
installed 97 automatic exchanges, including 51 in rural areas,
provided 1,062 additional trunk lino circuits and 158 carrier
telephone systems,
laid 384,000 circuit miles of underground cables,
added 29,000 miles of telegraph channels.
Installed 90 teleprinter systems for public traffic,
provided new phonogram equipment at Chief Telegraph offices,
modernised Chief Telegraph offices,
provided public picturegram services between Sydney, Melbourne
Brisbane and Adelaide,
established 7 regional and 3 short wave National broadcasting
stations,
completed 97 new buildings and has 100 others under construction,
remodelled and extended 57 buildings and has work in progress
on 48 others,
acquired 361 new sites,
provided 460 house-to-house letter deliveries in new areas and
extended and Improved delivery services in 730 other centres.
Installed 1,224 street letter receivers,
opened 330 new post offices,
provided 573 new mall services, and extended and improved
.1,958 Others,
greatly increased domestic air mall facilities, which now
operate on 68 routes,
provided for mails to bo conveyed by air at normal letter
rates in several outback areas,
recruited and trained 7,000 technicians and linemen.
During the present financial year the post office alms to
add 90,000 new telephones.
Install 200 automatic exchanges, including 150 in rural areas,
provide 1,100 additional trunk line channels,
lay 200,000 circuit miles of underground cables,
convert 50 Morse telegraph channels to machine operation,
continue to improve phonogram equipment,
link up Perth, Hobart and Newcastle with the picturegram
service,
establish 14 medium frequency and 2 high frequency National
broadcasting stations,
accelerate its building programme.
The introduction last July of increases in certain
postal, telegraph and telephone rates was made because of
Increased annual costs of £13,000,000, due chiefly to rises in
wages of Post Office employees and the additional costs of
materials, particularly those imported from overseas,
Australian postal, telegraph and telephone charges
remain among the lowest in the world. The Post Office, in
common with private business and other public utilities, must
pay its way, and the overall Increase of 16$ is very moderate
in comparison with the additional charges for goods and services
imposed by privately operated public utilities and business
undertakings.
Television has been engaging the attention of the Govern-
ment for some time and it has studied closely the latest develop-
ments in overseas countries. The Broadcasting Control Board has
53


been authorised to prepare an overall plan for the Introduction
of a National Television Service. Standards to meet local
conditions have already been adopted and tenders for providing
transmitting equipment in the capital cities are under consider-
ation.
Frequency modulation, with its capacity to provide for
transmission on the higher wave lengths, has definite possibilities,
particularly in improving service to people in rural areas.
The plans covering the overall development and expansion of
broadcasting services will embrace this alternative system of
transmitting programmes.
CIVIL AVIATION
Australian civil aviation, both at home and abroad, has
grown out of all recognition during the life of the Parliament that
has Just ended.
During the war years, millions of pounds were spent on
airports and aircraft for the R.A.A.F, But most service aircraft
were unsuitable for civil flying and most service aerodromes
were not situated where they would be of most use for civil opera-
tions.
The Department of Civil Aviation has successfully
negotiated the transition from war to peace. It has built up an
organisation capable of handling the greatly increased amount of
air traffic and communications facilities required. It has
created and Improved new airports in the capital cities and in
the outback. It has laid down new standards of fitness for
pilots and the airworthiness of aircraft. It has negotiated
important air transport agreements with countries overseas.
The Commonwealth Labor Government created Trans-Au stralla
Airlines, which is carrying passengers at the rate of almost
500,000 a year and is operating over a network of 13,500
unduplicated route miles. The growth of the people's airline
in only three years is a unique achievement.
Civil aviation has revolutionised life in the outback.
Every community is within a day's flying of a capital city and
medical help is never more than a few hours away. Distant places
are no more. Australian air fares are among the lowest in the
world.
When the Labor Government took office, our air routes
outside Australia were less than 5,000 miles. Today, they are
more than 26,700 miles.
The Department of Civil Aviation is Introducing now
electronic equipment costing £6,500,000 so that ground facilities
will keep pace with the growth of air traffic. Nearly £14,000,000
has been set aside for the improvement of 134 airports in all
States, during the next three years.
The Labor Government has not allowed financial considera-
tion to decide whether Australia should have essential equipment
for the development of civil aviation, especially where safety is
concerned. But the money is being well spent. The economics
of each new piece of equipment and each new service are closely
investigated. All sections of the community benefit from an
efficient airways system.


The Labor Government's future policy on civil aviation
can be summed up as follows
We will further develop airports and air navigation
facilities, so that we will be ready to cope with the
heavier traffic expected and additional demands Imposed
by the use of jet aircraft.
New air routes will serve communities not yet receiving the
benefits of air transport,
Australian operators will be encouraged to use the best and
latest equipment, and provide a service to the community which
is second-to-none. Fortunately, the world is now looking to
Britain for the latest ideas in air travel, and the purchase
of new aircraft should not involve large dollar expenditure.
There will be no relaxation in safety standards. We will try
to Improve them, as experience shows that improvement is
necessary. Vtfhatever new developments there may be, Australia
will not be lagging behind.
EDUCATION
The Labor Government recognises that primary responsi-
bility for education remains with the States.
At the same time, war and post-war experiences have
shown that many aspects of education could be satisfactorily
undertaken only with more direct Commonwealth participation. Although
much has been achieved, Australia is as yet only on the threshhold
of a vast expansion which will require leaders of vision and trained
judgment, scientists and technicians, commercial leaders and
adralnis trators.
The Universities Commission was established by the Labor
Government to maintain in war-time the flow of graduates from science
and other faculties. Since the end of the war it has been concerned
mainly with the administration of the university and professional
training side of the Commonwealth Reconstruction Scheme and of the
Commonwealth Scheme of Financial Assistance for University Students,
Under the latter scheme over 5,000 boys and girls, on leaving school,
have had their university or senior technical school fees paid and
have received living allowances from the Commonwealth. Recently
the Government completed arrangements for a Commonwealth Scholar-
ship Scheme which will assist 3,000 students selected competitively
to commence university or senior technical studios each year from
1951 on far more generous terras than under the existing Financial
Assistance Scheme for University Students,
State Universities have received from the Commonwealth
Labor Government over £3,000,000 in buildings, equipment, subsidies
and fees. The Commonwealth now makes available over five times as
much'as pre-war for the vital business of training research workers
and developing research in State universities. Meanwhile the work
of establishing the great National Research University at Canberra
is making excellent progress.
The Commonwealth Office of Education has many responsi-
bilities. Not the Spst Important is the work it does with new
settlers from Europe. The Office has also broken now ground
in adult education for Australians generally. It has been,
moreover, the Commonwealth's link with education progress abroad.
55


INFORMATION
Since 1946, the Government has welded the Department of
Information into a compact national publicity organisation which
tells the rest of the world what Australia has to offer to the
immigrant, the tourist, the trader, the investor and the
industrialls t.
The efforts of this Department play a large part in
maintaining and Increasing goodwill towards Australia in other
lands which was earned during the war. It co-operates fully
with other Government Departments. It maintains news and
Information bureaux and information libraries at London and
New York, and at 12 overseas points officers are acting as
public relations officers or press attaches to Australian
Diplomatic Missions or to Trade Commissioners.
"Without the help of the Department of Information,
Australian immigration authorities in Britain and in Europe
would not be able to work so effectively in getting now
citizens here not only in quantity, but also of the very best
quality.
The Department of Information can organise overseas
the national publicity which will bring large numbers of
tourists, many of them from dollar-currency areas, to our
shores. Because of shortages of shipping and of accommodation
within Australia for pleasure-travellers, no major moves to
encourage tourists have yet been made. However, it seems
likely that the next largo national campaign which the Depart-
ment of Information will have to conduct will be one to bring
tourists here, and to spread the story of Australia in their
own countries when they return. In the hands of the department,
such a campaign will be carried out with vigor and skill.
NATIONAL THEATRE
The Labor Government has taken active stops towards tho
establishment of a National Theatre. At the last Premiers' Con-
ference the Government offered to provide £30,000 to bring high-
class productions to Australia and to establish a reserve for the
operation of a National Theatre Company if the States were
prepared to allocate a similar sum between them. At the same
time, the Commonwealth offered a further £20,000 to provide for
overseas scholarships for the training of actors and theatrical
technicians.
