

STATEMENT
CONCERNING A PROPOSED
EXCHANGE OF PULPITS
BETWEEN
The Clergy of the Church of England
ANA
MINISTERS OF DENOMINATIONS
IN THE
City of Adelnide,
UNDER THE NAME OF
CHURCH UNION,
IN
NOVEMBER, 1858.
ADELAIDE:
PRINTED BY EDLIN, SHERRING, AND WEBB,
18, HINDLEY STREET.
1858.




STATEMENT
CONCERNING A PROPOSED
EXCHANGE OF PULPITS
BETWEEN
€\)t Clugtj nf tjje CJjxirrJj of Cnglonii
%
AND
MINISTERS OF DENOMINATIONS
IN THE
Ctttj nf Siulaiiu,
UNDER THE NAME OF
CHURCH UNION,
IN
NOVEMBER, 1858.
ADELAIDE:
Printed and published by edlin, sherring, and webb,
18, HINDLEY STREET.
1858.




In
THE MEMBERS OF
THE UNITED CHURCH OF ENGLAND AND IRELAND,
IN THE DIOCESES OF
NEW SOUTH WALES, NEWCASTLE,
MELBOURNE, AND TASMAN lA,
AND IN THOSE OF
NEW ZEALAND,
AND OF
THE MOTHER CHURCH,
THESE PAGES ARE RESPECTFULLY PRESENTED,
AS CONTAINING RELIABLE INFORMATION CONCERNING
A Proposal
(declined by his lordship the bishop)
TO INTRODUCE INTO HER PULPITS,
IN THE DIOCESE OF ADELAIDE,
PREACHERS IN AVOWED SEPARATION FROM HER COMMUNION:
AND IN TOKEN
OF THE FIRM DETERMINATION OF CHURCHMEN IN
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
TO ADHERE TO, AND TO MAINTAIN INTACT, THE DISCIPLINE, POLITY, AND
RITUAL OF THAT PRIMITIVE AND APOSTOLIC CHURCH OF WHICH
IT IS THEIR PRIVILEGE TO DE MEMBERS.




STATEMENT.
The prefixed dedication will convey to the reader all that is necessary to the introduction
of the following pages. “ The cause of truth and justice.” to borrow the language of the
press, mioht, however, suffer, were we to refrain from other preliminary information.
We write, it must be remembered, for the perusal of a large body of churchmen, who, from
the distance which separates them from ourselves, can form no precise ideas of the peculiar
relations of the public press in this colony and the Church of England.. Our statement,
there lore, will be best commenced with extracts from a communication forwarded by
the November overland mail to an English journal of deserved and wide circulation in
every diocese of our Church—we mean the Guardian— to the editor of which we then
wrote as follows :
“We mav premise that the entire public press of this colony consists of two daily
newspapers," each of which has a weekly adjunct circulating through the country
districts—the latter, for the most part, epitomizing the news of the week from the daily
j° u ™^ se dail papers are> as you will have observed, conducted with a degree of ability
which renders them second, probably, to none of the newspapers in the Australian colonies ;
but here they have this peculiar characteristic—they are the especial organs of religionists
who are in separation from the Church of England. . T i „„
“ About three months ago, Mr. Thomas Binney, of considerable celebrity in London as
an Independent preacher and writer, arrived in our city, where he has many personal
friends-in high official positions, but dissenting from the Church—amongst whom we
mav number one of the Judges of the Supreme Court, the Commissioner of the Insolvent
Court, and the Attorney-General By these gentlemen, and indeed by all classes, Mr.
Binney was received with that kindness and marked distinction which is the invariable
tribute paid to superior talent by every generous mind. nmin „ .
« He was listened to by crowded congregations in the chapels of every denomination in
the city and its neighbourhood ; he was the guest of his Excellency the Governor, and of
all our leading citizens who had the means and opportunity to show him private hospi-
tality. Nay, more ; he was honored by a public breakfast, including all classes of reli-
gionists and ranks of men amongst us ; and those who declined to desert their own church
to hear him preach, were gratified by the felicitous matter and manner of his public
lectures on subjects of literary interest and common ground.
«go f ar so good. Honour was rendered to whom honour was due.
u pj u f this creditable and marked attention to a distinguished visitor degenerated into
a decree of adulation which, we think, must have been as distressing to Mr. Binney as it
became odious to calm-judging men. It gradually increased to the fever almost of idolatry,
and, insensibly as it were, even the higher order of Church dignitaries, in the Bishop s
absence, became subjects of the common infection.”
In the midst of this excitement, a Memorial addressed to the Lord Bishop, then absent
from Adelaide, bearing the signature of His Excellency Sir R. G. Macdonnell, the
Governor-in-Chief, followed by those of about sixty other members of the Church of
England—praying His Lordship that Mr. Binney might be invited to preach from her
pulpits in this city—made its appearance ; and here we again borrow from the communi-
cation to the Guardian: —
« Such a proposition, as you will readily suppose, was not a little startling to those
amongst the members of the Church of England, whose consistency and ideas of proper
churchmanship had not altogether taken leave of them.


“ It drew forth, as was natural, various letters, to which only such admission was given
oy the press as was calculated the best to serve the wild project that had been put
forth. r
“ And thus the adjuncts of the daily papers deluged the entire colony with a one-sided
representation of this movement, so exhibited as to have the temporary appearance of the
unanimous action of a Church awaiting only the promised sanction of the Bishop, and
already possessing that of His Excellency.”
We should be unfaithful in our duty if we did not thus, at the outset of our statement
exhibit to other dioceses how in this colony the public press has failed in that impartial
and comprehensive statement of the truth which churchmen had a right to look for at the
hands of public journalists.
can we suffer the disingenuous policy of an individual leader in this movement to-
pass unnoticed, which scrupled not to invest purely party action with an “ Official”
character to which it had not the shadow of a claim—a character too eagerly caught at
ard pourtrayed by editors as “ the warm co-operation of His Excellency the Governor-in-
Chief and the members of the Administration, with the most influential of the Episcopal
laity ’ a representation, however, which was a fabled combination, warranted neither by
authority nor facts.
Under such circumstances, it remains for us only to request the general reader calmly
to consider the facts which follow, leaving it to his candour to determine to what extent
the case of the Church of England would or would not have been fairly represented had
not these remarks been passed upon that information which has been so hastily tendered
to the world by the press of this colony, as a faithful transcript of the sentiments of the
churchmen of this diocese.
We have now to place before our readers, in chronological order, the facts and documents
necessary to a disclosure of that impulsive movement which forces us upon the notice of
our brother churchmen.
During the visit already alluded to, the Bishop of Adelaide, in a letter characterized by
much eloquence, took occasion to express to Mr. Binney the course of thought into which
an Episcopate of ten years in this colony had gradually led his Lordship, in respect to the
following propositions:—
First—Whether an outward union, supposing no essential truth of the gospel to be
compromised, is desirable among the Protestant Evangelical Churches ?
Secondly—What are the principles and conditions on which such unions should be
effected ?
The lettei which developes the Bishop’s ideas on the questions thus propounded cannot
be read otherwise than with deep interest; and for reasons presently to be stated, it is
desirable to keep in mind the significant language of a note by which, on the 4th October
last, that letter is accompanied.
The Bishop writes as follows:
Bishop’s Court, October 4, 1858.
Dear Sir, ’
1 sei }d yon some thoughts which have occurred to me on a subject which
has often occupied my mind, but more especially since 1 had the pleasure of formino- your
acquaintance. Such as they are, and expressed in the words pretty nearly which” came
first to hand, I lay them before you in the hope that they will not widen, if they do not
bridge, the gap that separates us ecclesiastically, though I trust not spiritually, nor
for ever. r J
I remain, Keverend Sir, yours faithfully,
„ _ AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE.
Rev. T, Binney.
P-S. I leave Adelaide to-morrow morning on a five weeks’ tour, and fear that I shall
not have an opportunity of bidding you farewell.


Bishop’s Court, September 23, 1858.
Rev. Sir,
1. During our social intercourse yesterday at the house of a common friend,
you were pleased to take notice of a remark which fell from me to this effect—that we
in this colony had the advantage of occupying “an historic stand-point,” so to speak,
from which we might look back upon our past, social, political, and Church life in England ;
and, removed from the smoke and noise of the great mother-city, might discern through
all its greatness somewhat of folly and meanness, of defect and vice, in its habits and
institutions. The survey would not be unprofitable if it should lead us to perceive how
we had been blinded by its attractions, so as to become unconscious of its faults ; and so
hurried away by its feelings and associations as to be insensible of the conventional
bondage in which we then lived and moved.
2. It must, I think, be admitted that the clerical mind is peculiarly swayed by party
principles and sectarian prejudices. Withdrawn very much from practical into contem-
plative life, and valuing abstract truth as the basis of all moral obligation and excellence,
clergymen are too apt to exaggerate the importance of certain truths which they con-
scientiously hold, and to treat as essential principles of the doctrine-of Christ matters of
inferential or traditional authority. Ido not suppose that Nonconformist ministers are
exempt from this failing, though it may be fostered in the Establishment at home by the
alliance of Church and State.
3. Be this, however, as it may, both clergymen and ministers may look back with
some degree of regret that a mid-wall of partition should so have separated kindred
souls; pledged to the same cause, rejoicing in the same hope, and devoted to the same
duty of preaching Christ and Him crucified to a dark and fallen world By the very
discomfort, however, of thus “ standing apart ” we are thrust rudely back upon the
principles in which we have been brought up, and are constrained to put the question to
our consciences, “ Are you as sure of your ground as true to your convictions? Are your
views so authoritatively scriptural as to put you exclusively in the right ?’’ And if, after
careful review and earnest prayer, we still feel unable to quit the “ old paths,” yet does
not this very enquiry dispose us to place a more liberal construction on the conduct of
others, and to respect their equally stiff adherence to their conscientious convictions ?
A candid mind will not fail to see that much is to be urged on the other side of the
question ; and if with our present lights we had lived in the time of our fathers, we
snould not perhaps have been disposed to break up the fellowship of the Reformed
Evangelical Catholic Church for non-essential points, or narrow its communion on matters
of Christian expediency rather than Christian obligation.
4. I have thrown these remarks together by way of preface in order to show the course
of thought into which an Episcopate of 10 years in this colony has gradually led me. You
yourself have given a fresh impetus to such reflections. Your fame as a preacher had
preceded you. I knew that you would be welcomed by all who in your own immediate
section of the Evangelical Church take an interest in religion, and by all in our own who
are admirers of genius and piety, even though the echoes of your King’s Weighhouse
sermon had not quite died away. Hundreds 1 knew would ask themselves, “ Why
should I not go and listen to the powerful preaching of Mr. Binney T" And when they
had heard you reason of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come ; of Christ,
who He was and what He did ; how He died for our sins and rose again for our justifica-
tion, I felt assured that they would ask again, “ Why is he not invited to preach to us
in our churches ? What is the barrier which prevents him and other ministers from
joining with our clergy at the Lord’s table, and interchanging the ministry of the Word
in their respective pulpits ? Was it any real difference with respect to the person, office,
and work of the Redeemer, the power of the Spirit of God, or the lost condition of man
without Christ and the Comforter.”
5. lam truly glad that so considerable a person as yourself should by your presence
in this colony have forced me to consider again the question, “ Whv I could not invite
you to preach to our congregations ; to review my position, principles, beliefs, and pre-
possessions ; more especially as the absence of sectarian prejudice on your part, and the
presence of all that in social life can conciliate esteem and admiration, reduced the ques-
tion to its simple ecclesiastical dimensions.
6. Again and again the thought recurred to me, Talis cum sis utinam nosier esses /
Still I felt that neither the power of your intellect, nor vigour of your reasoning, nor
mighty eloquence, nor purity of life, nor suavity of manners, nor soundness in the faith
would justify me in departing from the rule of the Church of England ; a tradition of


18 centuries which declares your orders irregular, your mission the offspring of division*
and your Church system—l will not say schism—but dichostasy*
7. But, while adhering to this conclusion, I am free to confess that my feelings kick
against my judgment ; and I am compelled to ask myself is this “ standing apart” to
continue for ever ? Is division to pass from functional disease into the structural type of
Church organization ? Are the Lutheran and Reformed, the Presbyterian and Congre-
gationalism the Baptist and Wesleyan bodies to continue separate from the Episcopal
communion so long as the world endureth ? Is there no possibility of accommodation, no
hope of sympathy’ no yearning for union? Will no one even ask the question ? None
make the first move ? "Must we be content with that poor substitute for apostolic fellow-
ship in the Gospel. “ Let us agree to differ or an evangelical alliance which, transient
and incomplete, betrays a sense of want without satisfying the craving ? Or ar9 we reduced
to the sad conclusion that as there can be no peace with Rome so long as she obscures the
truth of Jesus, and lord’s it over God’s heritage, so there are no common terms on which
the Evangelical Protestant Churches can agree after eliminating errors and evils against
which each has felt itself constrained to protest ? Are not Churchmen, for example, at
this dav, just as ready as you, Rev. Sir, can be, to condemn the treatment of Baxter,
Bunyan. and Defoe bv a High Church Government? And do not Independents and
Presbyterians readily allow that a Leighton or Ken relieve Episcopacy from the odium
brought upon it by the severities of a Laud or Sharp ?
8. It appears to me that in this colony we are placed in a peculiarly favourable position
for considering our Church relations, because one great rock of offence has been taken out
of the way—l mean the connection between Church and State. We can approach the
matters in dispute simply as questions of evangelical truth and Christian expediency.
Neither social, nor civil, nor ecclesiastical distinctions interfere to distract our view or
irritate our feelings. There is no Church-rate conflict here. I have accordingly seized
the opportunity oT laying before you a few thoughts on the possibility of an outward
fellowship as well as inward union of the Evangelical Churches, with the hope that they
may suggest enquiry if they lead to no immediate practical results.
9. The questions I would propose for consideration are—
-Ist. Whether an outward union, supposing no essential truth of the Gospel to be com-
promised, is desirable amongst the Protestant Evangelical Churches ?
2nd. What are the principles and conditions on which such union should bo
effected ?
I submit my ideas to you with great diffidence, but from the desire to show that there
is no unwillingness on my part to consider how we might possibly serve at one and the
same altar, walk by the same rule, and preach from the same pulpits the words of this
10. With regard to the first point, I conceive outward union to be desirable, because it
appears to me to be scriptural and apostolic. That all the congregations of the
Universal Church were subject under Christ to the Twelve Apostles, and that the decree
directed by the Holy Ghost, but framed by James with Simon Peter, Paul, and Barnabas,
and assented to by the elders and brethren,was delivered to the Churches to keep, is recorded
in the Acts of the Apostles. That the whole Church was viewed as one visible body by
St. Paul is evident when he bids the Corinthians give offence to neither Jews nor Gentiles,
nor the Church of God ; and whatever be the figure under which the Holy Spirit charac-
terizes the body of true believers in Christ, unity of organized life is the substratum of
the idea; be it in vine or olive-tree, family or household, city or kingdom, the body or
spouse of Christ, the thought is still the same.
What, then, should we think of a family whose several members, inhabiting the same
house, kept each to his own chamber, and though continually jostling on the common
stairs rarely exchanged a friendly salute and never a visit. Is this family life ?
And is it true Church life to say I am of Peter, and I am of Paul, and I of Luther,
and I of Knox, and I of Wesley, and I of Whitfield, and I of the Fathers ? Are we
not carnal, and speak as men? In the apostolic age there must have been outward
union of the Churches, so far at least as the general order of a common worship, the
celebration of common sacraments, the profession of a common creed, and preaching in
common the Word of Life ! The spirit of Diotrephes we may hope was rare. _ ...
11. If the odium theologicum be indeed the worst type of that disease, it might be
expected that a real union of the Churches and their publicly acknowledged fellowship
in the Gospel might arrest the progress of that malady. It is the effect of party feeling,
* Gal. v. 20, seditiousliterally “ standing apart."


jealousy, and suspicion, fostered by rivalry and contention. Thu 3 Christian sympathy,
which is meant for mankind, is too often restricted to a system or a sect. On the other
hand : _
12. In what an attitude of strength would such union place the Gospel of Christ before
Jew and Gentile; before Brahmin and Mohammedan. No subtle Pundit would then
point to the differences of Christian teachers as indicating error, at least in some, and
uncertainty in all. No Bossuet could enumerate, and perhaps exaggerate, the variations
of Protestants, and unmindful of the like in his own communion, claim for the Church of
Home the symbol of Unity as the mark of its being the True Church. But now, instead
of fighting the Lord’s battle as one great army, our resistance to the Powers of Evil is
like the death struggle at Inkermann ; a series of hand-to-hand combats, broken regi-
ments fighting in detached parties, never receding indeed, but incapable of combined
effort or mutual support. _ _
13. It may, however, be urged, on the other side, that the divisions of the Christian
Church are helps to its vitality, even as the troubled sea which cannot rest is thereby
preserved from stagnancy and corruption ; that rivalry promotes exertion, and exertion
results in expansion. Yet has not the Bible Society attained its , strength by
acting on the opposite principle ? Is it not because all Protestants ca"n unite in furthering
its object, truly catholic, and, because catholic, triumphant ? .
14. The union I contemplate is not a yoke of subjection—an iron rule suppressive of
individual or sectional thought, aspiration, energy, and action ; far otherwise. If the
great Apostle of the Gentiles would provoke his brethren after the flesh to jealousy in
order to save some—if he stirred up the Churches of Macedonia by the forwardness of
Achaia and reciprocally urged the Achaian Churches to be ready with their contributions
lest he should be ashamed of his boasting concerning them —certainly a loving zeal
striving for the mastery is not to be cast out as unmeet for the Christian commonwealth.
Unity is compatible with variety, and variety is pregnant of competition. God has
created but one vertebrate type of animal organisms ; but how infinitely diversified are
the specific forms? I know no reason why in our reformed branch of the Catholic
Church there might not be particular congregations of the Wesleyan rule, or some other
method of internal discipline, or usage, or form of worship, even as the Society of Ignatius
Loyola, or Dominic, or Francis exists in the bosom of the Roman obedience. The
seamless coat of the Redeemer was woven from the top throughout. The Roman soldiers
said “ Let us not rend it.” Why should chronic disunion be the symbol of Evangelical
Christianity ? I cannot call alliance union; nay, it is founded on stereotyped separations.
I pass to the second question :
2. What are the principles and conditions on which a union of the Protestant Evan-
gelical Churches should be effected.
15. It must be evident, I should suppose, after an experience of 300 years, that neither
the Episcopalian, nor Presbyterian, nor Congregationalist can reasonably hope to force
upon the Christian world his own particular system. Is either one or the other entitled
by the Word of God to exclude from salvation those believers who do not follow the same
rule of Church government ? If, however, submission may not be demanded on the ground
of its necessity to salvation, then any negotiation for outward union may and must pro-
ceed on grounds of what is best and wisest, most likely to unite, as being most in accordance
with Scripture and apostolic tradition ! We must lay aside hard woids—schism, Church-
authority, sectarianism. In the comity of nations de facto Governments are recognised
and treated with ; the question whether they are de jure is left in abeyance. So must
it be with respect to any union of the Churches. They must meet together like brethren
who have been long estranged, yet retaining the strong affection of early youth ; resolve
to forget the subject of their dispute, and walk together in the house of God as friends.
It will be unnecessary to ask “ Which man did sin—this man or his parents ? ” or to say,
“ Thou wast altogether born in sin, and dost teach us ? ” or, “We forbad him,
because he followeth not us.” No ;we must meet in the spirit of godly fear, of mutual
respect, with the earnest desire by all right concession to promote God’s truth, and
advance Christ’s kingdom. We must receive one another, but not to doubtful
disputations.
16. A second principle is, “ Whereto we have attained,” or shall attain ; that some rule
must be publicly acknowledged, in that rule we must walk and by it steadfastly abide.
I firmly believe with Mr. Maurice, in his “ Kingdom of Christ,” that the Church of the
apostolic age embraced every principle for which in later times each section of the Christian
world has felt it necessary to contend, even to separation from the main body of the
brethren. But the Church of the apostolic age, the true visible model Church, does
B


more, It harmonizes them all ; giving to each its due place, its real proportion Each
portion of the truth, obscured, distorted, or denied in the mediaeval Church, each detail ol
the outward building of God, has been jealously rescued from corruption or decay by sects
or individuals. It remains, perhaps, for this or the coming generation to restore the
orio-inal fabric, and take away whatever is inappropriate, unsightly, or inconvenient, But
is the spirit as yet willing ? Alas, I know not. It is certain that the flesh is weak.
17. Let me endeavour to state, as accurately as I can, what seems to be the leading
idea, the characteristic principle, of each section of the Christian Church : .
The Church of Rome, then, contends for external unity, founded on one objective creed,
in subjection to one visible head of the Church on earth.
The Lutheran for justification by faith, antecedent to and irrespective of works.
The Reformed Calvinistic Church upholds the free and sovereign grace of God.
The Anglican witnesses for a scriptural creed, apostolic orders, and a settled liturgy.
The Presbyterian asserts the authority of the Presbytery, as derived immediately from
th claims unlimited right of private judgment, and the independent
authority of each congregation, as a perfect Church, over its own members.
The Wesleyan preaches spiritual awakening, sensible conversion, and social religious
Baptist contends for personal religious experience previous to admission to the
C *Every one of these principles is substantially, though not exclusively, true. When
their mutual relations are forgotten each becomes exaggerated ; the beauty ol proportion
•is lost, and a faulty extreme is made the Shibboleth of schism.
Is there no analytical process possible, no law of affinity, by which the spiritual mind
could precipitate the error, and leave pure and limpid the Gospel stream . or remove from
the much fine gold of the Temple the dross with which it is alloyed ? Would there not
still remain a scriptural truth, a godly discipline, a settled order, a common altar, a united
ministry, a visible union as well as fellowship in the Spirit ? Might there not still be
variety in unity, partial diversity of usage, and a regulated latitude of divine worship.
The Episcopalian, the Presbyterian, and Congregationalist might consent to harmonize
what they cannot exclusively enforce ; they might surely “ m understanding be men, and
exercise the great privilege of spiritual men—that is, combine freedom with submission
to law, and general order with specific distinctions.
18 But it is time to draw these general remarks to a close, and define with somewhat
more of precision, that Church of the future which is to conciliate all affections and unite
all diversities. I scarcely know which to admire most, the pleasantness of the dream, or
the fond imagination of the dreamer. Still, let me speak, though it be as a fool. My
object is not to dictate proceedings, but to suggest consideration; to provoke enquiry, but
not force conclusions. And since concession in matters not absolutely essential to salva-
tion or positively enjoined must be the basis of the system adopted by the various
Evangelical Churches, it may be fairly put to me m the language of the proverb-
“ Physician, heal thyself.” I will begin, then, with the Church of England, and will
state^what it appears to me can be given up for the sake of union. 1. A State nominated
Episcopate. 2. Compulsory uniformity of divine worship.
Already the former has given place in Canada and New Zealand to an Episcopate
freely elected by the Church itself. . .
The latter, it appears, even in England, is only required from the clergy in parish
churches, but not when preaching in the fields, or streets and lanes of the city.
In addition, then, to the separation of Church and State m this colony, and the absence
of the legal machinery connected with that union, greater freedom aiul diversity o the
modes of worship seem attainable ; ami an Episcopate, moderate m its pretensions as
well as constitutional in its proceedings, associated with and not lording it o\er the
Presbyters ; above all, chosen by the free suffrages of the united clergy and laity.
I believe the doctrinal articles of the Church of England, and many others among the
Thirty-Nine, are allowed on all sides to be scriptural. 1 conceive, then, that a settled
form of sound words, a deposit of objective faith, would not be deemed a yoke of bondage,
but a guide to truth. ~ ~
I conceive, also, in order that all might worship with the understanding as well as
the spirit, that certain liturgical offices, such for instance as the litany, might form part
of the stated services, but not to the exclusion of extempore prayer in connection with
the sermon at the discretion of the preacher. So also in the admimstiation of the


Sacraments and conferring Holy Orders, a portion of the office might be fixed and
invariable, and a portion left to ministering pastors. .
These points being settled, the trial, nomination, institution, or designation of pastors,
the dissolution of their connection with their flock or removal, their mode of payment,
the internal discipline of the congregation over their members and officers, are details
which may well be left for after regulation; if, indeed, there is really much or any
injurious difference at present existing in these matters.
A spirit of mutual forbearance and real affection must be largely shed abroad before
such a system as here spoken of can possibly be inaugurated. Even if thought feasible
for the future, how can it be made to take retrospective effect ? How can we, who are
de facto ministers, and think ourselves to be de jure so, besides being pledged to our
respective systems, throw ourselves out of the one to enter upon the other?
Let us search the Scriptures for guidance. The beloved disciple was instructed to
W'rite by the Holy Spirit to the seven angels of the seven Churches of Asia, and Titus
was left by St. Paul in Crete to ordain elders in every city as he had appointed him.
But besides these later exertions of apostolic authority, we find. Barnabas and Saul
separated by the Holy Ghost to a special mission through the laying on of hands, and
prayers of the prophets and teachers of the Church at Antioch, Simeon Niger, Lucius of
Cyrene, and Manarn.
Assuming the existing ministers of the several denominations to be recognised as de
jure by their congregations and de facto as such by the Anglican Church, might not the
Bishops of the latter, supposing the before-mentioned terms of union were agreed upon
to take effect prospectively, give the right hand of fellowship to them, that they should
go to their own flocks and mission, also as preachers to the Anglican congregations, when
invited by the pastors of the several Churches? If the licence of the Bishop can
authorize even lay readers and preachers, how much more men like yourself separated to the
work of God, eloquent and mighty in the Scriptures ! Indeed, Ido not feel sure that I
should have violated any ecclesiastical law in force in this diocese or province, by inviting
you to give a word of exhortation to each of our congregations.*
In this way, then, of mission without compromise, but on declared assent to certain
fixed principles and truths, existing ministers might co-operate with us in the preaching
of the Gospel, and under the benign influence of this brotherly love a Reformed Catholic
Church might grow up and, like the rod of Aaron, swallow up our sectarian differences.
20. I have said nothing about hypothetical ordination, which has been suggested, (like
conditional baptism where irregularity in the administration may be suspected), because it
savours of evasion or collusion, neither of which is agreeable to Christian simplicity and
due reverence for God’s ordinances. Neither have I suggested the consecration as
Bishops of existing Wesleyan Superintendents and Presbyterian Moderators, or those who,
like yourself, seem sealed alike by nature and the Spirit to be special overseers in the
Church of God. Missions, as preachers to our congregations, without imposing the
obligations incident to the incumbents and curates of Churches, but not until lull evidence
had been given before licence of soundness in the faith, would seem to meet the exigencies
of the case so far as regards the present generation of ministers who have received
Presbyterian orders.
Having attained to this step, perhaps God would reveal to us a yet more excellent way.
Old systems have, in fact, been found wanting. Which of the Churches now existing is so
perfect, so scriptural, so apostolic, as to insure instant acquiescence from the enquirer to
the exclusion and condemnation of all others ? If there be none, wdll all the learning,
and eloquence, and traditional authority devoted to the support of each persuade the
E resent or future generations to substitute another for that in which they have been
rought up ? A few may perhaps be convinced or converted, but the masses never. A
fresh combination must, therefore, be sought; traditional prejudices must be set aside ;
cherished associations lain upon the altar of love, to rise, like angel messengers, in the
flame of sacrifice, to purer and loftier spirituality ! Oh, for that millenial reign of peace
when a Chalmers or a Cummiug, a Binney or a Watson, might serve at one altar and
plead from one pulpit with the Bishops and clergy of the Church of England ! It is the
cause of God and Christ, of truth and holiness, of righteousness and peace, of faith and
duty, of grace and salvation, of man delivered and Satan bound, of God alone exalted on
that day, and reigning on Mount Sion gloriously. Then might the fulness of the Gentiles
* Canon 54 of tlie Province of Canterbury, a.d. 1603-4, requires “conformity as a sine qua non
to preaching in the parish churches of England.’’ Ido not know that it is binding in colonial
dioceses It shows that persons were licensed to preach who were not disposed to take upon
themselves all the obligations of the parish priest under the Establishment.


come in, then Israel be restored, then Babylon overthrown, and that regenerated state
of this fallen world be made manifest for which Jehovah reserved the last great display
of His providential love —the union in the God-Man of the Manhood with Himseit.
I remain, dear Sir, respectfully yours,
AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE.
It is not within our province to follow his Lordship into the views thus laid before the
Church of a Christian commonwealth. Our duty is rather to record the unauthorized
action taken by other parties, without conference with his Lordship or the Church, in
relation to the Bishop’s letter, and to dispose of the unfair and gratuitous inferences such
parties have felt themselves at liberty to make public, both as regards his Lordship and
the Church of England as a body. _
In a few days after the Bishop’s departure on his northern tour, leading articles appeared
in the public journals expressive of strong hopes that the idea of a fraternization of
Protestant Churches, promulgated by a dignitary of the Church of England during his
Lordship’s absence, were about to eventuate in an invitation to Mr. Binney “to officiate in
one or.more of the Episcopal Churches in Adelaide. And why,’’ they asked, “should not this
be done ? There are,” they affirmed, “no Dissenters in South Anstralia; there is no State
Church in South Australia; and it is hard to say why there should be ecclesiastical barriers
erected between religious communities who are not separated by doctrine or worship.”
Such, on the 1 sth of October, was the language of “ the press.” On the 19th of October, we
rea( ] «a. few days ag-o, we recommended that Mr. Binney be invited to preach in one
of the Episcopal Churches in Adelaide ; and it is with peculiar satisfaction we find that
arrangements are being made to secure this desirable result.” _
The anticipations here described as “ arrangements” have reference to. a Memorial
then in course of signature, a document which it may be convenient here to insert.
«• Adelaide, October 16, 1858.”
“ To the Lord Bishop of Adelaide
“ We the undersigned members of the United Church of England and Ireland, attached
to her Ritual and Church Government, yet desiring to promote union and Christian
fellowship between the Churches agreeing in our common I rotestant faith ; believing also
that vour Lordship is most desirous of adopting all measures calculated to extend and
establish the common Catholic principles of faith lield by the Protestant Church of Christ
into whatever sections that Church may be divided, and earnestly desiring to assist your
Lordship’s efforts in that behalf, seize the opportunity now afforded by the presence in
Adelaide of a distinguished member of the Church of Christ, to ofter a sign of good
will towards our brethren of the Evangelical Churches, bv requesting your Lordship to
invite the Rev. Thomas Binney, previous to his departure from Adelaide, to fillone ol our
rmlnits in this city ; in the belief that Christian union and Christian love will be thereby
promoted and diffused in the hearts of those who, holding like faith m the great saving
doctrines of our common religion, have been hitherto kept asunder by differences m
matters of form and discipline.” #
The signatures that were appended to this Memorial were originally those simply of
the individuals signing it; but in the transmission of them to the newspapers for
publication they acquired the following official aspect, and so appeared in print-without
repudiation by any party till His Lordship, the Bishop, took occasion to observe upon the
application of pressure of such a character in relation to matters so peculiarly of an eccle-
siastical kind.
His Excellency Sir R. G.
Mac Donnell
The Hon. W. Younghus-
band, Chief Secretary
The Hon. F. S. Dutton,
Commissioner of Crown
Lands and Immigration
* The Hon. Arthur Blyth,
Commissioner of Public
The Hon. Capt. C. H. Bagot,
M.L.C.
Capt. Wm. L. O’Halloran,
Audit or-General
Capt. John Watts, Post-
master General
J. Woodforde, J.P., Coroner
Wm. Gosse, J.P.
Samuel Tomkinson, J.P.
Charles Simeon Hare, J.P.,
Comptroller of Convicts


* R. B. Colley, J.P.
L. W. Thrupp, Official
Assignee
H. Edward Smith, Inspector
of Schools
* 0. K Richardson, Under
Secretary
* Samuel Stocks
* Pitt Cobbctt, wine merchant
* Fred. G. Morgan, solicitor
* William Alex, Hughes,
Town Clerk
Fred. S. Monk, A.D.C.G.
Wm. Ross
H. S. Needham
E. W. Andrews
N. S. Quick
John Taylor, merchant
Samuel Goode
Jas. P. Boucaut, solicitor
W. M. Sandford, solicitor
Henry Martin, merchant
John Bailey
G. W. Haines
J. W. Allison
J. W. Bull
Joseph Perry
Alex. J. Wright
G. T. Light
Thos. B. Murphy
Thomas Murpny
Alfred Watts, J.P.
Chas. S. Poole
Henry Stodart
William Walters
Joseph Walter
* E. W. Wickes, Secretary
Board of Education
Samuel Pearce
T. B. Barnard
Joseph March
William Main
* Henry P. Denton
W. H. Formby
Alfred Bonnin, solicitor
John Hancock
Wm Johnson
R. G. Symonds
Chas. Fenn, J.P., solicitor
* Henry Jickling, Master
of the Supreme Court
Matthew Smith, S.M.
John Richardson
Robert Tod
Robert Cottrell
Thomas Coutts
This mark (*) denotes members of Synod.
If, added our enthusiastic press, only due facilities had been given, “ thousands of
persons” would most gladly have affixed their names to the memorial thus put forth.
What hindered so many zealous and conscientious persons from flocking to the vestibule
of a well-known bank, at which this abortive document was advertised as lying for signa-
ture, remains yet to he explained. Perhaps it was considered to be all the better for the
absence of what might appear to he a popular demonstration.
Meagre, however, in substance, and wanting in signatures as this Memorial undoubtedly
is, it was nevertheless most industriously proclaimed as the herald of a movement about
to realize amongst us that “ communion of saints,” long an article of faith, but rarely an
object of practice. To what further extent the occasion was intended “to be improved,"
the exponents of the Memorialists—“ the press”—will best explain ; and in this instance
we freely admit the sincerity and truth with which it speaks :
“ And what are we about to do ? Is it simply that the leading clergymen of a parti-
cular denomination are about to pay a compliment to an eminent clergyman of another
denomination ? Is it merely an interchange of ecclesiastical civilities ? Is the move-
ment to be exceptional; a temporary removal of barriers to admit an honoured guest,
behind whom those barriers are to be immediately re-erected as against all future comers ?
We hope not. Much as Mr. Binney deserves the respect of all denominations of Christian
people, it is not in the light of a mere compliment to himself that we feel anxious to see
him officiate within ‘ consecrated’ walls. Such a service would be a great spiritual
reunion ; the beginning of other and similar manifestations of good-will amongst Christian
people. It will be impossible to welcome Mr. Binney into the edifices of the Episcopalian
body, and arbitrarily to exclude other men of equal reputation, and of orthodoxy equally
sound. The present movement, though originating in the visit of an individual, will be
regarded as the assertion of a principle, and as the realization of a common wish. That
principle is the principle of religious fellowship on equal terms ; that wish is the desire
at once to reduce the principle to practice.”
The “ Banquet” to Mr. Binney, as we find it somewhat grandiloquently styled, on the
20th October, afforded the next opportunity of giving impetus to the “ movementand
on that occasion His Excellency the Governor thus expressed himself:—
“If any step in advance was to be made, some one must begin it; and with this view,
he had placed his signature to a Memorial to the Bishop to invite Mr. Binney to gratify
those of his own Church who had expressed a wish to hear him, and with a view of pro-
moting Christian union generally. In doing so, however, he took care to assure himself
of what were the sentiments likely to be held by His Lordship in such a case; and he had
satisfied himself that they would harmonize entirely with their wishes. He had read a
letter from the Bishop which confirmed him in this belief. Ho believed His Lordship


would, from expressions he had used, be greatly pleased to hear Mr. Binney from his own
pulpit; and he thought the Constitution of the Church permitted it. His Lordship, how-
ever, had not acted as if he had formed that conclusion from the premises which he (His
Excellency) had. (Applause.) Still, he believed it would be the sincere wish of His Lord-
ship that such a union should take place, in opposition to the inference that he might have
been forced into it. He believed there was no constitutional law in the Church against
what was proposed. He would not have it inferred that Mr. Binney, in occupying a pulpit
in the English Church, should use any other services than those pertaining to the Estab-
lished Church. If in matters of discipline they held different views, still that was no reason
why they should object to hear a man, the glory of whose life had been to preach the word
of God, and who mainly agreed with them in doctrine. In this interchange of ministers he
considered the service should be according to the usage of those places of worship which
were visited. But when he signed the Memorial, it was not on Mr, Binney’s account
alone. He signed it for the purpose of establishing a very important principle. (Ap-
plause.) He did not mean to say that the pulpit should be thrown open to every one or
anyone who liked to ascend it, but only to those whose education and talents fitted them
for it. It would be a great mistake if they lowered the standard of those who should be
considered competent to afford religious instruction. He by no means thought that any
one who failed in everything to which he had turned his attention should then be per-
mitted, as a last resort, to fly to the pulpit, and at once declare himself an ambassador of
Christ. He, for one, should strenuously oppose such a course, and he hoped they would
all support him in that. (Hear, hear.)”
We may here observe that, as our main object is to collect and place before our brother
Churchmen, bound like ourselves by the authoritative teaching and discipline of the
parent Church, authentic information in respect of facts and propositions, it would be as
needless as it would be ill-judged and out of place to intrude upon them the opinions of
the various denominational ministers by whom this meeting was addressed in favour of the
“ movement.” All, therefore, as it seems to us, that is essential for completing an
exposition of the views of its projectors, is to add the words of Mr. Binney, at what
we trust we may be pardoned for describing simply as the breakfast: —
“ I wish it,” said that gentleman, “ to be distinctly understood that I had nothing
to do in any way, nor was I in the slightest degree cognizant of the movement to which
His Excellency has referred, until I saw it announced in the papers. But since it has been
referred to, I make no hesitation, now, in stating that 1 had tne happiness and honour of
receiving from the Bishop of Adelaide a very long, carefully written, and admirable letter
upon that very subject, and that I have the copy of another letter which he wrote to a
mutual friend, in which he said that he had been putting before Mr. Binney’s mind the
idea of the possibility of Church union and fellowship, so far as an occasional communion
was concerned, and an interchange of pulpits, and asking whether the want of that was to
go on for ever, and become the fixed condition of the Church. (Hear.) It seems to have
arisen partly in conversation with me. The remark was made that in this colony there
was a fine opportunity of throwing off in some degree the traditions of the old land—that
our fathers had been mistaken; for they were not always wise any more than they were
always foolish. I believe in the wisdom of our ancestors, but they hedged in the Church
with a number of tyrannical traditions. Ido not mean the English Church only, because
other sects are tied and bound by customs and usages. In times of persecution, when our
fathers were compelled to build churches out of sight, plainness, and even ugliness, became
fixed as the ideal of church architecture. And so it was with our spiritual architecture.
But we have reached a better state of things ; and I suggested to the Bishop that this
was the place for a manly recognition of each other, as churches and ministers. Following
out that hint, His Lordship has sent me an interesting and admirable document, which,
perhaps, does not come to the direct conclusion it might have come to—but there it is.
To my surprise, on Monday morning, I heard that an effort had been made, and that His
Excellency had headed tfie signing of a document, presenting before the Bishop the
particular idea referred to. Now, it happened that I received the Bishop’s letter while I
had the honour of paying a visit to His Excellency. It was, therefore, a natural thing to
say to His Excellency, I had received such a letter. His Excellency said —‘ If you think
it proper, I should like to see it.’ The letter was written in such a form, and w ith so
much care, that it struck me the Bishop must have meant it for publication ; at any rate,
it could do no discredit nor dishonour to him, as a Bishop, to have such statements seen


by his friend the Governor-in-Chief. I said to His Excellency, we Ecclesiastics are all in
danger of looking at such things in a narrow point of view, for we are fettered in various
ways ; and if your Excellency has no objection, I shall feel obliged if you will read the
Bishop’s letter carefully, and put down some jottings of your thoughts, for I should like to
see the particular light in which an intelligent layman will look upon this ecclesiastical
matter. On Monday morning, His Excellency gave me the Bishop’s letter, and a letter
of his own containing comments upon it, and in the presence of His Excellency I will say,
it is admirable in expression, in sentiment, and in argument, and placed side by side with
the Bishop’s letter does not suffer a jot. (Cheers.) Now I may as well say that His
Excellency mentioned to me that the Dean and Archdeacon had stated that they thought
it would be a good thing for those two letters to be published. I took the liberty of
writing yesterday to the Archdeacon, and asked him if he could give me authority to
publish the Bishop’s letter. He wrote, in answer, that he had not authority to sanction
the publication of that letter. ‘I am aware,’ said he, ‘ that he is quite prepared to make
it public though he did not contemplate it. Both the Dean and myself are of opinion
that its publication, together with that of the Governor, would do good.’ (Applause.)
I have just passed to His Excellency a pencil-note—“ Could I act'on this, does your
Excellency think ?” His Excellency replied, “ I should think so, and should recommend
it but still, unless I can have a guarantee from those gentlemen—His Excellency and
the Dean—the Governor and Dean and Chapter, if you like —(laughter)—that they do
not consider me doing a dishonourable thing—(laughter)—and that they will hold me all
safe with the Bishop, I should not feel authorised to act without his express and direct
authority. I must say if the step had been taken—if the Bishop had acted upon what
he says in his letter—he thinks he might legally have done, if here the Act of Uniformity
is in some degree modified and relaxed—had he acted on it, and had given an invitation to
Mr. Binney to preach, not as an individual, but as the embodiment of a principle—l
should, I know, have done it. (Applause.) I should have felt it would have been a great
fact—a step in advance, in the right direction. If that could have been done, the news
would have gone back to the old country and have acted on men’s minds there; for in
the papers which have come out by this mail there is actually a suggestion that some of
us should preach in St. Paul’s. (Immense cheering.) That is to say, as I understand it,
as the public mind is at present so excited by monster meetings—numbers of people
being brought together for the mere purpose of hearing the Gospel, somebody or other
proposed that any one who has love to mankind, and God’s truth in them, should speak a
word to the people. (Cheers ) I quite agree with the Chief Justice, that if there
was any hesitancy about the legality of the matter, it were well to pause. I would not do
an illegal thing, but I wish to act so as to try and get things into that position that it
would not be illegal. That is the proper way to do it. I think it right to read what His
Excellency has written to me in reference to this subject. “It may be well to state that I
was merely induced to sign the Memorial by the conviction of the Bishop’s having that
power—a conviction forced upon me by his own letter to you, and the strong argument
to that effect in his letter. Before signing that Memorial I satisfied myself as to the
soundness of the Bishop’s arguments. In conclusion, I would only say that the inter-
change should be complete, and should involve nothing with respect to the question
of any Church giving up anything that substantially belongs to itself, nor should it
interfere with the mode of worship.’ ”
Here, then, we have a project obviously subversive of the discipline of the Church of
England, and diminishing the importance of, if not ignoring altogether, the Scriptural
grounds and Apostolic authority on which that discipline was in the beginning founded,
and has ever since continued, launched at a public breakfast, and accepted by the wild
acclamations of a mixed multitude, four-fifths of whom were separatists from her com-
munion, and impugners of her teaching and polity; and although the project was wanting in
even so much as the official sanction of a common vestry, yet we find it forthwith ushered to
the world by an interested and party press, as the elements of a so-called Church Union ;
and all this paraded as something nearest the heart of the Bishop, and for the
consummation of which, if he were not indeed already prepared, His Lordship was most
anxious. But to enter at this period of our narrative into any lengthened discussion of
the studied attempts, which meet us at every turn, to implicate the Bishop in this movement,
would interfere too much with our direct progress. We propose, therefore, separately
to touch upon this point in a subsequent page.


Lot it not, however, be forgotten that at this impulsive and erratic exhibition, the
Chief Justice of the Province, Sir Charles Cooper, (whatever might have been his private
views) had the manliness, as chief expositor of the law amongst us, to remind His
Excellency how marked a difference of opinion existed between them. His Honor spoke
as follows :
“He (Sir Charles) would state what he would not have felt himself at liberty to say,
but for the remarks which had fallen from His Excellency the Governor with reference
to the Memorial which had been signed to the Bishop. He (Sir Charles) declined to
sio-n that Memorial, but he was induced so to do not because he disagreed with its
purport, for he cordially agreed with it, but because he doubted whether it was right to
ask the Bishop to do that which by the Constitution of his Church he was restricted from
doincr. He did not mean to infer that His Excellency the Governor was wrong m taking
an opposite course. No doubt His Excellency’s views were formed from conscientious
convictions; but when the Memorial was brought to him he had felt it his duty to reruse
on those grounds.”
To these sentiments Mr. Binney thus responded;—
“ I quite agree with the Chief Justice, that if there was any hesitancy about the legality
of the matter, it were well to pause. I would not do an illegal thing; but I wish to act so
as to try and get things into that position that it would not be illegal. That is the
proper way to do it—
remarks to which it may be necessary for us to revert.
Although our Church friends will by this time have learned to estimate aright the
ovations of the press, yet, in order that they may see how as opportunities occurred,
opportunities continued to be “ improved how mirage succeeded to mirage—we are once
more tempted to illustrate the mode by which the public ear was tickled, and the public
mind beguiled.
“ The great event of Wednesday”—“the event for which parliamentary business was set
aside” —is thus depicted by the Register : —
“The representative of Her Majesty takes a part in the demonstration,
the dignitaries of the Episcopalian Church sanction it with their presence,
the acknowledged leaders of all the more numerous religious denominations are
prominent actors in the scene. Cabinet ministers, members of both branches of the
Legislature, the Chief Justice of the province, bankers, merchants, tradesmen, men of
all°professions and men of no profession, all join in the public manifestation of respect
for the ‘distinguished’ guest. And while the intensity of the demonstration is
softened, its brilliancy and its interest are enhanced by the presence of ladies, not less
able to appreciate, nor less slow to acknowledge the abilities and excellence of the
honoured stranger. Undoubtedly the event to which we are referring is not only
an extraordinary fact, but it has also unusual significance. It indicates something more
than meets the eye; something of the universality of the demonstration is doubtless
due to the commanding talent and high reputation of the guest. Much of its cordiality
is perhaps owing to the fact that some of Mr. Binney’s early friends, and many of his
less familiar, but still friendly, acquaintances, occupy prominent positions here, and
naturally took a leading part on the occasion. But after these things have been fairly
considered, there remains much to be accounted for. The true explanation of the
completeness of the demonstration has still to be sought. We think it might be found
in the fact that Mr. Binney’s presence has been made the occasion of mooting certain
thoughts consonant with the advanced intelligence of this community, but far ahead of
its habits. A hope has been aroused that by his instrumentality a long-existing
barrier against the friendly co-operation of Protestant Churches would be broken down.
Liberal ‘ Churchmen,’ and enlightened ‘ Dissenters’ have longed for the overthrow of
antiquated restrictions on their Christian intercourse ; and men of the world have
approved the removal of exclusive distinctions which imply dominancy on the one hand and
inferiority on the other. We regard the demonstration of Wednesday as an act of
homage to this Idea, and whether it be realised at once, or postponed indefinitely, it is
not a trifling circumstance that the thought has been entertained, and, for a while at least,
believed to be of possible accomplishment. The proposal to invite Mr. Binney—a
Congregational minister—to preach in the pulpit of an Episcopalian Church —a proposal
sanctioned by the approval of some of the leading members of that Church, both cleric


and laic, and indirectly countenanced by the Bishop of the diocese, is indeed a significant
fact. It indicates much in relation to the character of this community, much in relation
to the salutary effects of the disconnection of the Church from the State, and much in
relation to the future of the world. As Mr. Binney said on that day, this is the only
spot in the British dominions in whioh the representative of the Crown could with
propriety give utterance to a sentiment favourable to the proposition.”
Strange that with the intimation of the Chief Justice as to the illegality of such a
step; still more strange that with the volunteered renunciation by Mr. Binney of all
premature and unadvised action, the Bishop’s letter, together with an extended project by
the Governor, and a reply from Mr. Binney to the Bishop, (apologetic to minuteness in
explanation of its typographical aspect, yet full and able in its advocacy of the pulpit
movement), should start forth in print, under the auspices of Mr. Binney, even while the
words of the Chief Justice and the acceptance of them by Mr. Binney himself were yet
sounding on the ear. Tf, as it is attempted to be shown, the object of publication, without
His Lordship’s knowledge or concurrence, was to disabuse the public mind of any false im-
pression in respect of his preparedness to accede to the wishes of the Memorialists, surely
the simplest way of setting the Bishop right with his church and the public, would have
been to print his letter, without further comment than a statement of the necessity for
its appearance. When, however, we seethe announcement which was adopted justified
on the ground of “ equity” as regarded the Bishop we confess that we have yet to learn how
it can be either lawful or just, not merely to print a man’s letter without his knowledge,
but to hand it to the press with a proposed “ extension ” of which the writer never dreamt,
and a reply which he had never seen, and that, too, at a crisis of no slight moment to the
high interests which he had in charge. And when, moreover, an analysis of these accom-
paniments shows how signally they fail to tally with the motives which are alleged to have
induced the publication, a still greater difficulty in the appreciation of this so-called
“ equity ” presents itself.
Coupling these discrepancies with a review of the preceding circumstances, to us it is
obvious, that all the pressure that could be brought to bear was concentrated to coerce the
Bishop into the vague uninstructed views of the Memorialists. Public clamour—the press—
the one-sided press—His Excellency’s crude project—the presumed favourable opinions of
the Dean and the Archdeacon (extracted evidently by a side-wind) —the letter of Mr. Binney
skilfully adapted to relieve the question from every difficulty by a cession less j list than
generous of the Anglican pulpit (yet cavalierly throwing overboard everything suggested
by His Lordship), presented to our minds very much the appearance of a concerted
attempt in the first place to take advantage of the leaning and bias that every man is known
to entertain for a favourite theory, and thence to push on with a view of carrying both the
Bishop and his pulpits by storm. But of this let our readers, after perusing the painfully
explanatory epistle that now follows, judge for themselves
“Felixstow, October 21, 1858.
“ My Lord Bishop,
“ The letter which your Lordship addressed to me ‘on the Union of Protestant Evan-
gelical Churches,’ with its accompanying note of the 4th instant, reached me on the evening
of the sth, the day on which you were to leave Adelaide ‘on a five-weeks’ tour.’ I felt
myself in a difficulty to know what to do, either in the way of simply acknowledging the
™»Pt of the document or of addressing to your Lordship such remarks in reply as the
study of it might suggest. I was at the time, and have been ever since, quite unable to
g"V‘that attention whieh its importance demanded—at least so far as writing for your
Lordships eye, or with a view to publication, what might occur to me on carefully
weighingits principles and suggestions. I mention publication, because it appeared to
me that there was internal evidence in your Lordship’s letter that this was contemplated
by yourself; and because I thought that this was the only mode by which any practical
result would be likely to issue from the discussion which you had initiated. Your Lordship's
absence, the prospect of my soon haying to leave the colony, and the circumstances in
*iT WaS P^ ky the pressure of engagements, all concurred in leading me to think
that the most respectful course I could pursue would be to wait till I had leisure fully to
c


, ~ . f _ pi-. fn send ton my thoughts, and then to ask you to
enter into the subject of your letter ,to TO ® atter before those whom it
I‘Uf»
SSTJya ASStf : -4 —*
of tteTth tatat, tie Venerable Wootok, in
have important results-or something to that effect. * SXJT On enquiring of him,
HispiiaSkSiH
Memorial to your Lordship headed by ]His^celtencyj£ e Q f other bodies, was, in your
the opening of your P# B’*” 8 ’*” PJJJ Chapter. Calling upon Sir Richard that day,
absence, to be presented t° the Deau and f^n(l that he had had an
as I had arranged to do, to receive DacK your ina , Arch(]eacon an d had read to
interview previously to hw Memg D j of your Lordship’s He
them a letter to myseir which V Farrell and Archdeacon Woodcock,
sh^’-s^sssks
ZSritb«Uh“ X. morning I wrote and dialed th. following not,
“Beaumont, October 19, 1858.
“ EeVer .< n Wh a rn d l d s e aw Hi's Excellency the Governor-in-Chief yesterday, te intimated to
t i Viim that the Dean and yourselt had expressed a wish for the pub
have been meant for publication,
“To the Venerable Archdeacon Woodcock.”
To this note I received the following reply :
“ Parsonage, Christchurch, October 19.
Rev. a " d d ®“ ’ the en iry contained in your letter of this ‘ date ’ *
I have reason to believe that he did not originally contemplate such event.


“ Both the Dean and myself are still of opinion that its publication, together with
that of the Governor’s, would do good. :
“ I am, rev. and dear Sir,
“ Yours respectfully,
“ W. J. WOODCOCK.
“ The Rev. Thomas Binney.”
Yesterday morning (Wednesday), at the public breakfast which then took place, '
rased the Archdeacon’s note to Sir Richard Macdonnell, with the question “ Coulc
act on this ?" to which he wrote, in reply, “ I should think so, and woulc
recommend it.”
Such, my Lord, were the circumstances which, up to yesterday morning, transpirec
relative to the publication of your letter. The thought did not originate with me
though, when it was suggested by your friends, I endeavoured to ascertain how far ]
should be justified in acting upon it. Ido not think, however, I should have venturec
to act upon it, even though fortified by the opinions and recommendations of such high
authority as those referred to, but for the consideration which I shall now state. At the
public meeting yesterday morning, the proceedings of which halve been very fully
reported, such frequent allusions were made to your Lordship s sentiments, especially
as contained in your letter to myself, that I think it becomes due to your Lordship
that what you have really said should be seen. It may be supposed that you have gone
further than you have, or meant to do, or than the words imply; and the shortest way
of ascertaining whether this be the case, and the most equitable towards your Lordship,
is for those who are interested in the subject to have the means of judging for themselves
I am sure your Lordship will appreciate this motive, and would probably have been
satisfied had I stated nothing else; but so anxious am I not to do what might seem
improper, that I have thought it right, and due to myself, to set forth, with something
I fear of tedious minuteness, the various circumstances which have been operating for
some days past. I regret that I cannot append to your letter the thoughts which it has
suggested to my own mind, and the remarks which some points in it seem to demand. I
propose to give it my best attention, and toembody myreflections and viewson the two letters
in a small pamphlet, as soon as I can command the requisite leisure. In the meantime the
public mind of South Australia is so interested in the subject, and so excited by recent
occurrences, that I think it best not longer to withhold from it what so many are anxious
to see; the publication of which, like the writing of it—to use your Lordship’s own
words-—" will not, I hope, widen if it does not tend to bridge the gap that separates
Christians ecclesiastically, though not, it is to be hoped, spiritually, nor for ever.”
.It may.not be improper to say one or two things before I conclude, to avoid
misconception with respect to myself. A very few words must suffice for the present.
I beg,, then, to assure your Lordship that while I highly admire the kind and
Christian feeling that prompted your communication, and cordially sympathize in the
desires and the aspirations after more visible union to which you have given utterance,
I greatly fear that the “idea” you entertain and would seek to realize includes too
much ; and not only too much, but that it has that in its elements which must be
softened or lost sight of before it can find acceptance with others. It sometimes has
the appearance of the old attempts at “ comprehension,” by which the early
Nonconformist used to be solicited back again to the Episcopal Church; at others, it
looks like a wish to. form “ a Church of the future” out of a fusion of the different
bodies at present existing, all altering something, the result being a new order of
things, in which, however, your ecclesiastical peculiarities shall predominate. Now,
without entering into the question as to the likelihood of this being the case (which,
however, I think likely), supposing amalgamation and fusion to occur, I content
myself with saying that it is premature to indulge in visions of the ultimate, before
we have taken such steps as are possible to us—the only steps perhaps that may be
possible for years to come. What we need first , before anything else can be thought
of or hoped is, not the absorption by one Church of others—not the conformity of
others to it, of the toleration by it of the peculiarities of others, nor yet an attempt
to constitute a platform of discipline or service in which all may give up a little
(or much., perhaps, in some cases) and unite. No, it is not this. First and foremost
and alone must come the honest and hearty recognition of each other, as Churches
and ministers (de facto only, if you like), by the different Protestant Evangelical
denominations, their members and clergy. Let such recognition be shown by the
occasional interchange of pulpits ; and let this again be understood to involve nothing
and imply nothing but their substantial oneness in faith, as holding in common the


essential truth, of the common ““J^Wtfto meTTtfi
compel no one to invite it, or any to open tle PP. P eive Then, again, the
way —whom, for many reasons, it might crned shouid be held to imply
■tendering of service, so far simply as P reac l £o ' f ’ d to Had your Lordship,
nothing on either side beyond the oneness of faith t J haye been
for instance, invited me to preach m reco-ni’tfon in me of a preacher
considered as committing yourself to noth & . . of Ohrist according to the
of that Gospel which we hold in common and of amm rot CJirst according
constitution of that portion of the Church to which . [ not
could not have been required to receive any licenc c from \ reßpect you
have become my bishop, though you are one in y b ’ o wn c l er g Y ;
as such. Those who would have needed your licence ° nor tfey
they might have wanted your permission to act. Ini the sam.e 7, 7 sanction to
would have been so far compromised as justly to be regarded as g g ; li ro ve, any
notions or custom, among the
more than I, by consentmg to preach the GospeltoJTr iSncethat interpretation of
supposed by that to profess anything eZse P ’ . involves sentiments which I
your “ offices ” (I distinguish them from tbe Ldurgv), wnicn invoi yiew> an
clo not hold ; which sentiments, it required to either whatever, should suppose
adequate ground of clerical[nonconformity. No
that it confers a favour on the minister ot another y o tb ing 0 f this sort is
rather that it does what is proper and seemly for itself. AU
understood, and the first step taken in harmony \ ’ ostv)on ed until this be done. I
other things and theories, however, m^ st > p’t tant Churches in relation to each
believe it might be done by very many of the P oreat and blessed results
other—done without compromise and without dwhonour, and t S helping on so
would soon follow from it. That your-Lordship may
desirable a consummation, and may thus realize that alter wmcn your p
seems to yearn and pant, is the sincere prayer ot, my Lord,
Your friend and servant in our common BI^E y
In —to so
mW th r .t‘™ indebted (Teething to the speculative suggestion, of any single
• 1 Wp have it happily in our power to refer to an apostolic standard, either m ie o ar(
mind. _ We By we believe that Popery can be
freedofTen-ors end its corruptions, end Dissent reodled fro» tosbuse of
speculation to the acknowledgment of an external law. Hg y, ’ J
alone is competent to propose. His Excellency will, therefore, see at once that to reprint
purely individual suggestions, however able, would be to acknow edge a ngi
interference which we feel it our duty to disclaim.
The same reasons we may here state weigh with us in avoiding the re-publication
in our statement of may constitute purely private suggestions for altering
settled condition of our church.
Having thus clearly traced out and eliminated “ the movement,” we have now to follow
Havin 0 thus ole y whicb it waß inten ded to have been introduced.
Thkdocument, in the absence of the Bishop, was forwarded to the Dean and Chapter, who
dealt with it by letter and by resolution, which we propose shall here speak «
themselves. „ Adelaide, October 19, 1858.
.ri® - a
J 0?. 'trouble jou by .toting the reasons upon winch


we have come to the resolution alluded to, but we trust you will give us credit for
sincere respect for the opinions and wishes of the gentlemen making the request.
“ 1 have the honour to be, Bcc.,
“JAMES FARRELL.
“To His Excellency Sir Richard Graves Macdonnell, Messrs. W.
L. O’Halloran, Tomkinson, and other members of the United
Church of England aud Ireland who signed an address to the
Lord Bishop of Adelaide.”
“Chapter House, Adelaide, October 19, 1858.
“ The Dean, in the absence of the Bishop, having submitted to the Chapter a Memorial
addressed to His Lordship, and signed by certain lay members of the Church of England
requesting that the Rev. Thomas Binney should be invited to preach in one of the city
churches—
“ It was resolved unanimously, that it is not within the province of the Dean and
Chapter to comply with the above request.
“ JAMES FARRELL, Chairman.”
The following letter of the Bishop of Adelaide, in reply to Mr. Binney, would seem at
last to evince His Lordship’s just perception of “ the movement: ”
Dear and Rev. Sir, Anama, November 5, 1858.
On my arrival yesterday at this place I received your note, accompanied by a
printed copy of our correspondence. I was fully prepared to see it in print, but forbore
to suggest that course, being satisfied that you would choose the proper time and place
for so doing. It was, however, rendered necessary by public allusion having been made to
my letter, and a correspondent, on no better ground than his own surmises, having
thought fit falsely to disparage an eminent lady, with whom I was not personally
acquainted until after I had been consecrated Bishop of Adelaide. I should have
preferred to receive from you at your leisure the matured conclusions of your judgment
on the interesting topic to which I have drawn attention. The discussion, however, has
been precipitated, I would fain hope without prejudice to the cause. I must now beg to
say a few words explanatory of my impressions on the proceedings which have taken
place during my absence.
1. I think it “untoward” that His Excellency the Governor should have been mixed
up with the correspondence between you and myself. Church and State have been
separated in this colony, and I know not why an “ official ” character should have been
given to a Memorial concerning the administration of this diocese “by the signatures of
the Governor-in-Chief and Ministers of State.”
2. If I have doubts how far the letter of the Ecclesiastical Statute Law of the Esta-
blished Church of England is applicable to this or other Colonial Dioceses, I have none as
respects its spirit, nor of the inspired authority of the apostolic “ tradition of eighteen
centuries ”on which that law is founded. The evidence even of Jerome, and the argument
of Chillingworth, are to my mind conclusive on that head. I could not, therefore, nor
can I feel justified in departing from that traditionary rule, even in your case. Had I
felt sure that no Statute Law would have been violated, I should not have transgressed
the “ custom ” of our Church without first consulting the Metropolitan and other Bishops
of the province of Australasia, as well as the Archbishop of Canterbury; consequently I
think that I ought not to have been invited by those high in authority in this colony to
take a step on my own responsibility, which, though possibly not an actual, would at least
have been a virtual, transgression of the law of our Church. You, Sir, well enforced the
duty of obedience to existing laws in your farewell speech.
3. Having stated why I was unable to invite you to preach to our congregations, I took
occasion from thence to urge a consideration of the terms on which at some future time
possibly that inability might be removed. The indispensable conditions appeared to me
to be three.
A. The acceptance in common by the Evangelical Churches of the orthodox creed.
B. The use in common of a settled liturgy, though not to the exclusion of free prayer,
as provided for in the Directory of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster.
C. An Episcopate freely elected by the United Evangelical Churches, not (as I have
been misapprehended) exclusively by our own.
No notice, however, of these preliminary conditions was taken in the Memorial
addressed to me. Without them there would be no security against the intrusion even of
heretical preachers in our pulpits.
I have now done. The object of my letter to you has been answered. I have drawn


attention to the possible future union of Evangelical Churches; but I have found, like
another before me, that there are those “who, when I speak unto them of peace, make
themselves ready to battle.” *
Charlesi V. after his abdication amused himself with trying to make some watches keen
time together. Finding his hopes disappointed, he wondered at the folly of his own
hfelong endeavours to make men be “of the same judgment, and walk by the same
e# ~ letter certainly has not bridged the ecclesiastical gap which separate us. On
the other hand, Ido not think it has widened the breach. I am content to “ bide the
time, and allow the leaven to ferment. If the counsel be of God, it cannot be
overthrown. Meanwhile, as the evangelical watches, though all professing to be set by
the sun, do not seem at present inclined professedly to go together, I must continue to
set mine by the Old Church Clock,” which after all is the surest-going timepiece
m the world, and as near, perhaps, as any other to the true time of the Sun of
Righteousness.
I am, dear Sir, truly and respectfully yours,
Kev. T. Binney. AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE.
Our readers will have noticed that the preceding letter was written from Anama, on
the Bishop’s homeward route, at which place, through the medium of “ the press,” the
first information, in detail, of the Memorial handed to the Dean and Chapter reached his
Lordship, yet in such an aspect of official intrusion as to compel official repulsion. Hence
His Lordship’s very natural remarks on a circumstance so apparently “ untoward ” in
reference to a legitimate administration of his diocese—a jealousy which every true
Churchman will rightly appreciate who remembers that he is engaged in the maintenance
of a thing— of a substantial reality—of that which ever has been, and is, and shall be, to
which naught may be added, nor from which can anything be taken away, by any process
of State meddling or other earthly power—and not in any mere squabble for a
denominational name.
It is, however, only just to state that His Excellency disclaimed not only any intended
but all possible official interposition in a letter to the Bishop, from which it would not be
fair to withhold the following paragraphs:—
My Lord, Glenelg, November 15, 1858.
t i 1- , attention has been called to a paragraph in a letter, signed by your
Lordship, and addressed to the Rev. Thomas Binney, which appeared in the lleqister of the
11th instant.
2. Y °u therein express yourself thus:—“l think it ‘untoward’ that His Excellency
the Governor should have been mixed up in the correspondence between you and myself.
Church and State have been separated in this colony; and I know not why an official
character should have been given to a Memorial concerning the administration of the
diocese by the signatures of the Governer-in-Chief and Ministers of State.”
3. The obvious meaning of that paragraph is that I and some members of my Ministry
by signing a Memorial to the Bishop of the diocese on a matter affecting the discipline
ot our Church, gave an official character to the transaction ; and by so doing had somehow
overstepped the bounds of propriety and duty. Hence I presume the “ untoward”
appearance which the transaction wears in your eyes.
+ i, 4 \V As .i y ’°T r L ° rdshi P’ B letter is da ted so long back as the sth instant from Anama, in
the .North, I at first imagined that as your mistake arose from not examining the Memorial
to which you refer, your letter had found its way to the papers without your having
enjoyed an opportunity of correcting it. I have, however, ascertained that your letter
has been published since your return to town, and by your own desire. Therefore, as in
r p tt “fjlr,, S ! gn the Memorial otherwise than as stated therein, viz., “as a member
ot the United Church of Great Britain and Ireland,” your Lordship must have published the
above comment without previously asking for or at least referring to the document itself,
it so, lam sure you will admit that, however excusable such a mistake might be in a
private letter, it is not equally excusable in a public document, into which your letter was
immediately transformed when it was printed, with your sanction, for public information.
• f here further observe, that even if I had signed as Governor, the inference
that an officer of the State could thereby give an official character to the Memorial in a
colony wuere, as you correctly remark, Church and State are separated; or, ill other
words, that 1 could extend an official character to matters beyond my office, is an inference
entirely ot your Lordship’s own reasoning.


To which the following is the Bishop’s reply:—
Bishop’s Court, November 15, 1858.
My dear Sir,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your letter on the subject of my reply to
Mr. Binney, containing a paragraph arguing on the supposition that you had signed a
Memorial to me in your official character. I think it due to your Excellency at once to
state that I was misled by the signatures as printed in the Register.
I have been informed (for I have not yet received the Memorial) that the signatures
in the original were without any official designation. When, or how, or by whose
instrumentality this untoward addition was made I cannot say, nor is it my business to
enquire. I can only say I regret that it compelled me to write the paragraph in
question.
I remain, yours very faithfully,
His Excellency Sir R. G. Macdonnell. AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE.
How, in expressing, in a letter to Mr. Binney, His Lordship’s sentiments in regard to
the official aspect of a document published by apparent authority, and in the authenticity
of which, in common with the public, he had every reason for believing, the Bishop could
justly have been blamed, we confess we cannot discover. It was the daily and notorious
boast of the press that the movement had the patronage of the Governor and the Chief
Officers of his Ministry. If, therefore, blame was imputable at all, it would seem to
us rather to have lain at the door of the Memorialists, in their not at once repudiating,
as ultimately they were compelled to do, the unauthorised use of these official designations,
than to rest with. the Bishop, on whose part it would have been not a little outre to
have been hunting up and poring over the signatures to a Memorial which had never
been presented to him and for the withdrawal of which, for anything that His Lordship
might have known, the Memorialists would have been delighted to have had an
opportunity.
The introduction of the official designations of the first Memorialists is thus explained
by Mr. Tomkinson:—
“ I was applied to by the newspaper authorities to give them information, and accordingly
after the Memorial was presented and the reply received, I sent them eaeh copies. I also
furnished a list of the signatures with their official designations, in order that the world
might know who they were. In doing so, I took care to separate the list of signatures
from the Memorial in these words—‘ The following is a list of the signatures that were
appended to the Memorial;’ so that no person could for a moment be under a wrong
impression—indeed, one of the papers omitted the description.”
This, however, as appears from the following, His Lordship did not admit:—
Bishop’s Court, November 17, 1858, 4 o’clock p.m.
Sir,
The long-delayed Memorial has at length been sent to me. It reached me an
hour ago.
Mr. Tomkinson’s avowal of his having made the unauthorised addition of the official
designations of the subscribers does not exactly measure the extent of his apparent dealing
with the document. Mr. Arthur Blyth’s name has been transposed and, with Mr. Francis
Dutton’s, placed next after Mr. W. Younghusband’s and that of Sir R. G. Mac Donnell,
together with their official designations. This transposition and the official designations
appended misled me as to the apparent “ official character” of the document.
How could I imagine that a “copy” with an incorrect list of signatures to the Memorial
had been sent to you for publication ; or that you had omitted any part of the document
sent to you, namely, “ The following is a list of signatures that were appended to the
Memorial ?’
I entirely acquit His Excellency and the other subscribers of intending to give it an
official character ; but I cannot be responsible for the consequences of the alterations
introduced into the list of signatures as printed, unjust alike to myself and the subscribers.
Yours, &c.,
To the Editor of the Register. AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE.
His Lordship’s answer to the Memorial was conveyed by the following letters, and;
as we trust, for ever of similar propositions in this diocese :


Bishop’s Court, November 19, 1858.
My dear Sir,
, _ , T° you, in your private capacity as a member of the United Church of England
and Ireland, whose name stands at the head of a Memorial (forwarded to and received
by me soon after two p.m., on Wednesday, November 17) requesting me “to take steps
to invite the Rev. T. Binnev to occupy one of our pulpits in this city,” I beg to transmit
the enclosed reply, and remain,
Yours very faithfully,
To His Excellency Sir R. G-. Macdonnell. AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE.
May it please Your Excellency and Gentlemen,
xt. -n immediat ? ob J ect ,°. f J our Memorial, requesting me “to take steps to invite
the Rev. T. Bmney previous to his departure from Adelaide to fill one of the pulpits in
this city,” being impracticable, permit me to remark that the spirit out of which that
request proceeded appears to me worthy of all respect; but the obstacles in the way of
giving effect to the principle involved in such an invitation are in my opinion little likely
under the present circumstances and views entertained “in the various sections of the
Protestant Church,” to be overcome.
I have the honour to remain, your faithful servant,
TQ . p ., , n ~ , „ . . AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE,
lo Sir Richard Graves Macdonnell, <fec., &c.
Although such a result as this might readily have been predicted for the Memorial of
which the history has thus been narrated, yet in its brief career it did not fail to
encounter the strenuous opposition of a large majority of our Churchmen, 162 of whom
thus recorded their opinions in a counter address to the Bishop :
To the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Adelaide
My Lord,
v i xv. x W e, the undersigned, members of the United Church of England and Ireland
feel that we should be wanting in respect to your Lordship’s high office and in faithfulness
to the Church of which it is our privilege to be members, were we to withhold the
expression of our deep regret that a Memorial urging the invitation of an unordained
minister, and of a denomination in separation from our Church, to teach from her pulpits
should have been addressed to your Lordship by certain of her members, professing at
the same time attachment to her ritual and government, and to be animated with a desire
to promote Christian union on Catholic grounds, and of aiding your Lordship’s personal
exertions m that great object. 1 1
Relying on the forecast and wisdom of your Lordship to maintain our Church in its
integrity m this our adopted land, and to preserve her alike from all unauthorized
measures from within, as well as every intrusion from without which may tend to obliterate
even the least of her time-honoured and distinctive characteristics, we await with everv
confidence your Lordship’s determination. J
Well aware that the fallacies of the positions assumed in the introduction of that
Memorial will not escape your Lordship’s notice, it would be out of place were we
longer to dwell upon them than to add, that while we earnestly desire and await the
reduction of every profession of Christianity into the bosom of one communion, we are
not at liberty, as reasoning and reflecting men, to forget that the name of Christianity
affords no security whatever for substantial unity, and that Christianity in
any form, without the proof of its being a revelation, is but a human opinion—
reasons which lead to the inevitable conclusion that any such anticipated union as that
purely Meaf emona iStS 80 and vaguely described must be considered as
We are prepared with abundant reasons why it is not possible for us to consent on the
present or any occasion that our Church should unite or ally herself, or make any conditions
of mutual assistance, with any man or body of men, involving the slightest compromise
of principle; but, aware that your Lordship will anticipate us in all these respects
it seems only to remain for us to express the unfeigned satisfaction with which we have
received the decision of the Dean and Chapter in your Lordship’s absence.
We remain, your Lordship’s faithful servants.
The plan adopted by the first Memorialists makes it necessary for us to add a classified
list of the signatures to the Counter-Memorial, which are as follows


J. H. Fisher, President
Legislative Council
A. H. Freeling, Capt.R.E.,
M.L.C.
Major T. O’Halloran,M.L.C.
E. Castres Gwynne, M.L.C.
Abraham Scott, M.L.C.
Bloomfield Douglas, Col-
lector of Customs
W. A. Wearing, Crown
Solicitor
Ed. A. Hamilton, Colonial
Architect
W. B. Carter, Deputy
Registrar-General
* G. W. Hawkes, Assistant
Treasurer
* Handasyde Duncan, Esq.,
M.D., Immigration Agent
J. G. A. Branthwaite, As-
sistant Clerk Legislative
Council
J. N. Blackmore, Assistant
Clerk House of Assembly
J. B. Hughes, J.P.
C. Lyon, J.P.
Thomas Gilbert, J.P.
* Nath. Oldham, J.P.
* Stephen King, J.P.
* W. H. Lewis, J.P.
A. F. Lindsav, J.P.
R. F. Newland, J.P.
John Ellis, J.P.
Henry Gawler, barrister
John Hindmarsh, do.
R. B. Andrews, solicitor
Fred. F. Turner, do.
John Rudall, do.
W. R. Wigley, do.
*L. J. Pelham, do.
Charles Lowe, do.
N. A. Knox, jun., do.
B. F. Frankis, M.D.
Thomas Taylor, M.D.
Andrew MTntyre
Allen, James
Adams, Charles P.
Allen, James, Yankalilla
Anthony, J.
Bartleet, G. A.
Barns, Fred. Harry
Bathurst. Wm. Lloyd
Brooks, Edward
Burton, Leonard
Brook, John
Butterworth, E.
Beevor, H. L.
Baigent, J., Churchwarden,
St. Matthew’s
Baker, Simon
Beare, George
Blackford, Stephen
Cope, J. S., sen.
Collier, John George
Conway, F.
Clarke, John H.
Church, John
Cunningham, W. J.
Cherry, John
Cusssn, R.
Cope, J. S.,jnn.
Cowan, J. B.
Connor, C. H. T.
Cruttenden, H. D.
Chalwin, Thomas
Cook, W. G.
Douglas, Wm. S.
Driffield, Fred. S. C.
Deane, Allen
Drew, F.
* Dolman, Chas. J.
Dinham, Chas.
Edwards, Joseph
Fox, G. H., merchant
Fisher, Fredk.
French, E., Mayor, Port
Adelaide
Fenwick, T. M.
* Forster, John
Greenwood, Samuel
Gee, Thomas Egremont
* Gray, Benjamin
Hulbert, G. E.
Harrold, Daniel
Holroyd, H., Inspector
M.P.
Hunt, Stephen
Hill, J. R.
Harris, James
* Hall, Thomas
Hill, Charles
Hicks, Wm.
Hale, R. B.
* Hawker, J. C.
Hackett, Walter
Hackett, Elisha
Hibbart, R. J., Church-
warden, Yankalilla
Haynes, H. C.
Hibbart, A. H.
Haynes. T. W.
Haynes, Thos. C.
Hallett, John Hayward
Hancook, Robert
Ive, C. G.
Ingleby, John
Jones, T. Oliver, Church-
warden , Glenelg
Lindsay, John, merchant
Lewis, Wm.
Lucas, Robt. R.
Lower, Samuel
Lamb, Charles
Longson, E. C., Church-
warden, Glenelg
Lenney, John
Littlewood, Thomas
Milne, Robert
Morgan, R. B.
Moore, Wm.
Miller, Wm. S.
Martin, Thos. A.
Mansell, Samuel Day
O’Hal lor an, Thos.,iun.
O’Halloran, Geo. W.
O’Halloran, H. D.
Osborn, Michael
Parr, James Hamilton
Payne, Joshua
Pearson, Henry
Poole, Robert Temple
Page, James
Parkinson, James
Perry, C. A.
Ridlington, F.
Rawlings, James
Reynolds, Francis
Skinner, Thomas
Smith, Ralph
Scott, Chas. W.
Stilling, Joseph, mer-
chant
Sowter, Wm.
Sanderson, Wm. A.
Smythe, Thomas
Smith, John
Sanderson, J. J.
Scott, Henry
Sheffield, John
Sabine, J. H.
Thomas, H. Hearde
Temple, W.
Thompson, Wm.
Thompson, H. E.
Thompson, Geo. T.
Thomas, J. M.
Vautin, John
Wliinnerah, Thomas
Wildman, Edward T.
Wilson, C. A.
Worsnop, Thomas
Ward, Edward Grant
Windsor, E. C.
Warren, George
Wilkins, John
Willimott, N. C.
Wright, Robert
Wright, Chas. C.
Willmott, Charles
Witt, Walter James
Those marked (*) are members of Synod.
Scarcely had the Counter-Memorial received the first 20 signatures, when the daily


press, “ improving its opportunities” at every turn, presented its readers with the following
advertisements:—
We take the following from the Advertiser :
“Mr Biniiev.—A pamphlet wiH shortiy be published, including a full and corrected
report of the Breakfast at White’s Rooms; the whole of the correspondence between His
Jijtcellency, Mr. Binney, the Bishop of Adelaide, and other gentlemen ; also the Memorial
o tle Bishop from Members of the Church of England, and the comments of the Press,
witn an introductory paragraph by the Rev. Thomas Binney.”
The subjoined appeared in the Register
“Tenney Correspondence, &c.—Shortly will be published, in form of a Pamphlet,
the whole of the Correspondence between His Excellency the Governor-in-Chief, the
ord Bishop of Adelaide, the Rev. A. R. Russell, and other gentlemen, on the proposed
fraternization of Protestant Churches. The Pamphlet will also include a Bill and
corrected Report of the Breakfast given to Mr. Binney, at White’s Rooms, together with
the opinions of the public press on the movement; with an introductory Preface by the
Rev. Thomas Binney.” J
This incident necessarily leads into an episode, the best told by the correspondence to
which it gave rise. r
g. Adelaide, October 28, 1858.
Observing from an advertisement in the daily papers that you are about to
edit a correspondence between His Excellency the Governor, the Lord Bishop of Adelaide
yourself, and other gentlemen, on the subject of a proposed Church Union in this
province; that it is your intention to append to such correspondence a Memorial from
certain members of the Church of England—suggestive of the subject—and that as
a first step towards such a movement, an invitation should be given to you to preach
from some of the pulpits of that Church—and above all, that such publication is to be
introduced by a preface from your own pen, we, who take a different view of The subject,
as members of the Church of England, are desirous that our Counter-Memorial to the
Bishop should not be omitted from your pamphlet.
Thoroughly convinced of your desire only to represent faithfully the opinions of the
members of the Church of England in this province, we forward to you a copy of a
Memorial now in course of signature, and which already has the subscription of the
i resident of the Legislative Council, and various other influential gentlemen, and request
that you will do us the honour to include it in your publication. Had yeu not
however, notified your intention to publish the documents specified in your advertise-
of 6 mir'Memorial 6 eSS ’ “ & ° f and res P ect > should have sent you a copy
Although we are unable to entertain the hope that any practical plan of union can be
you observe that we are no less anxious than yourself that all differences
should be swallowed up in the dominion of the Church universal.
whils , t we are at the present time unable to agree in the mode the best calculated
eiK .’ can .oot suffer any difference of opinion, however marked, to blind us
to the talents and gifts with which you are endowed.
,AJ 3 ’ moreo ™ r > our sinc ® re ™h that your voyage to the southern world may
promote ° f renoVatlon of ? our health and strength which it was designed to
We are, Sir, your faithful servants,
G. W. HAWKES,
NATHANIEL OLDHAM,
Acting for the Memorialists who have signed
m, -n. ~ , the Counter-Memorial.
Rev. Thos. Binney, Adelaide.
So far the correspondence was strictly of a private character, but on the 30th October
the Advertiser thus introduces the matter to the public :
g- r Highercombe, October 30, 1858.
, T . shaH he glad if you can find room for the two letters and the appended paver
which I herewith forward. I think, also, that, after reading the letter of Messrs. Hawke s


and Oldham, if you saw your way to insert their Memorial, it will gratify and oblige
them. So far as the Memorial casts light on their letter to me, its insertion will also
confer a favour upon myself. Yours &c
ours, c., t BINNEY.
On the copy of the Counter-Memorial received by Mr. Binney from Mr. Hawkes and Mr.
Oldham, and thus by Mr. Binney forwarded to the press, was written—“ The following
signatures have been already affixed, but a complete list shall be forwarded to you in
time for your forthcoming pamphlet.” Yet, notwithstanding this, both the daily papers
felt justified in the suppression of the notified intention to forward further signatures
the one characterizing the Memorial as prepared for transmission to the Bishop (and
therefore completed); the other, as “ a Memorial to His Lordship the Bishop, signed by
about 20 members of the Episcopalian body.” As, however, the mistake occurs with the
same consistent chroniclers of facts who so shortly before were to make the
world believe that 61 persons represented “ many thousands,” we presume it may be
pardoned; if only for the sake of more speedily entering upon the followingand somewhat
amusing correspondence, arising out of the advertisements to which we have necessarily
to died ft, attention of onr malm Highcrooml( , 3 O, 185 s.
Gent e ac k now i ec io- e the receipt of your letter of the 28th inst., which reached
me here last °night. I was exceedingly surprised by the mistake which ran through it
from beginning to end—a mistake which so fully possessed you as almost forcibly to
obtrude Itself in every sentence. I was totally ignorant of the existence of anything
that could have so misled you. I was not aware of my being employed in editing any
pamphlet, or of being about to publish one, or that any advertisement had appeared that
could convey such an idea. 1 had not seen such an advertisement, and I certainly had
not authorised the appearance of anything of the sort On carefully examining the
papers, however, this morning, I found one which, on a hasty or cursory reading, might
convey the impression under” which you laboured. It announces that a■
intended to be put forth, containing such and such articles, and it closes with the
statement that it will be “ with an introductory paragraph by the Rev. T. Binney. Now
instead of limiting the connection of my name to the four words which immediately precede
it, a person might extend it to the whole advertisement. This you seem to have done, and
hence, instead of meaning what it says, that an - introductory paragraph is to be
furnished by me, the advertisement came to mean, in your apprehension, that the entire
pamphlet was to be mine. I admit, then, that on a cursory reading, you might get this
impression, but I beg most distinctly to say that a careful reading would instantly have
comreted the mi,tie-suck a reading as, yoni mil «cu,e
ought to have given before writing such a letter as yours. the pointin there
being no full stop after the word “paragraph;” “by” having only a small b not
a capital letter, and the obvious grammatical meaning of thesenteiceouhtto have
prevented the misconception which you have so elaborately built m two-tlurds of your
C °Anowm a e tl to’explain to you how the thing originated and how it stood ; and permit me
also to say, that, seeing that it is possible for persons like yourselves, of education and
ability, to mistake the meaning of the advertisement, I am glad that
me the opportunity of a public explanation before it be too late. On Monday last, just
as I found*that I could lot get Iff that day by the “ Havilah,” and had succeeded in
transferring the places I had taken to her next trip, a gentleman said to me- i think
of putting into a pamphlet the letters which have appeared on Ohristian Umon, with t
speeches at the public breakfast on the same subject, and the comments of the press . would
you favour me with a short preface?” I hesitated lor a time. I did not feel sure that lougbL
At length,knowing that the thing could be done, lor there is nocopjiig , advantage
is written in newspapers, the thought struck me that it might be well to
of the request to say one or two things which I was anxious the keepm
mind, or be made aware of. I also thought that I might, without off.
explanatory, illustrative, or other remark that would not, Perbapsbewffhou l its uje.
On these grounds I consented to furnish a preface to the proposed collection papere ,
but so far from my writing the work —or its being mine or my liai g. y
D


assure you, Mntiemen, tbfd knowledge of it is limited to the fact that it is to
consist of a, selection of such articles from the newspapers as have recently appeared on a
certain subject. I have never seen a sheet of proof; I don’t know which or how many of
the articles referred to the pamphlet is to consist of; I have nothing to do with
compilation, or arrangement, or anything else; all that lam concerned with is, that the
book is to refer to a subject and to proceedings in which I am personally interested—
that the opportunity was offered me to say something to the public in connection
witn it—and that x thought of glancing at one or two things which I wished the
public should not overlook.
I am convinced, however, by your letter, that my promise to the editor has placed me
in a false position. It was well intended on my part, but I see that my fulfilling it, and
aving my name on the title-page of the projected publication, will expose me to much
misconception. I have determined, therefore, to withdraw from it. I have explained
to the gentleman w-ho asked from me the favour of a very small service, how I feel myself
to be circumstanced. I have requested him to release me from my promise, and to allow
me to retire from all connection with his work. He has complied with my request, so that
Kertn 1 pUt , f ° rth al ° n - witb iL Henceforth, I shall stand as I have
hitherto done, without being voluntarily mixed up with what others may write or do. My
tboßkfof™^ 1 ! m tak ®, an opportunity of communicating directly with His Lordship
TirtinfiSP f Adelai , d . e ontte contents of the letters which he kindlv addressed to me.
bflvii/on’ hoWe r r ’, tha 1 Sh . ould , llke t 0 P ut or kee P m J se]f Hght with the public, by
oln vfi t P portUmtj °/ Saj r n f Y llat 1 was intending to say in the promised preface, or
' l paragraph.” I liad completed the piece before your letter came—every
tb uv°V h ? n T aS a -gentleman. It is all the same to me, whether
the P ubb e through the medium of the advertised publication, or in connec-
; fnTfof h,S corres P° nden f • I shall append it therefore to this letter, and send it with
the mkf fl ke3? e wV l promptly, not losing a day, because 1 feel it important that
the mistake under which you write should be at once publicly met. If gentlemen of
ifohV Jr n f in r'v° U d “ into I . lfc > th . e probability is that it is very general; and I certainly
think that, if it were to continue, it would be to me very serious.
rJwL G n ° P ower ’ as yon wdl I )erce i ve , to direct your Memorial to he inserted in the
P am P hlet ; Hs appearance m the newspapers, however, will place it among
°Lf n rl ont ;°L w} !i. the pamphlet is to he constructed. Whether the editor
dl 1W ’° 5V* sultabI T e , t ,°. hls object, I cannot tell; but to put it within his reach is
iubHc 1 \ wPUeSIT+i, I f thm + tbat * vou are right in wishing it to go before the
nserfion Tf I T tberef ore, to the papers with this correspondence, and request its
nifir lt ! almost necessary, indeed, to do this to make the correspondence fully
ntelhgible, yet I should not have felt warranted to do so, but that your request
°fTnnk WS th fi t 1 Sha j tbu , s onlj be carrying- out your own expressed desire.
t.ank you, gentlemen, for the courteous terms in which you speak of me personally •
v« ur good wish., ; „„d I earnestly pray that nothing that i SZd li
onnection with my visit to your city may have any result but what we may all look back
S',#"" 0t “ " 0t Wi,h
I am, Gentlemen, yours faithfully,
To G. W. Hawkes, Esq., and Nathaniel Oldham Esq.
6 ‘ ‘ e, “ e ' Ke “ of the
T. B.
p ear g; r; Adelaide, 2nd November, 1858.
We have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of two letters from you in renlv
our communication of the 28th ultimo; the one in print, the other expknltori of The
pographical character of its companion. explanatory ot the
mrenflvTflS 6 tbe f® le .H ers ™re inclosed was written, in the handwriting,
patently, of Mr. Tomkmson-“ Delivered at Union Bank, at 9.40 p.m., 31st October ”
To-em°pnf a de i lVerJ ° f favours , as 10 o'clock on Sunday night, and our official
jagements, have precluded an earlier reply; a step, however, which we should


not have deemed necessary, were it not that your elaborate printed letter, and the
comments of the editors of the daily press, to whom it was forwarded by you with our
own, forced not only the subject of our correspondence but ourselves upon the public,
whilst your arrangements for so singular a mode of reply were such as to preclude us
from all chance of any prior or contemporaneous explanation.
It seems, however, to be chiefly necessary on our part, by a plain, statement of facts to
free from the mist and doubt cast over it, a matter so exceedingly simple, that our wonder
is how it possibly could have become one of laboured discussion.
What, then, are the facts ? Some brother members of the Church of England address
a Memorial to their Bishop, in which, as members of the same Church, we are unable to
concur, and prepare, therefore, a Memorial expressive of our own views intending it
for no other purpose than presentation to the Prelate to whom.it was addressed. Whilst
our Counter-Memorial was in course of signature, an advertisement appeared in each
daily paper, of which the substance was that a proposed collection of papers, inclusive
of what was termed “ the Memorial to the Bishop from members of the Church of
England, with an introductory preface by the ..Rev. Thomas Binney, would shortly be
published.”
The appearance of such a pamphlet as that advertised was calculated to lead to the
erroneous impression that if the sentiments in “ t he ” Memorial did not embody the
unanimous opinions of Churchmen, they were at least so generally entertained as to
meet with no opposition.
Cognizant, then,as we were, that a majority (as will presently be seen) of the members
of our Church were averse to the first Memorial, it was. our duty to take, such
proper precaution as might relieve them from the suspicion of acquiescence in its
The only course open to us seemed an appeal to your candour. But for forwarding to
you, with the sole object we have thus expressed, our Counter-Memorial, we are charged
it would seem with haste and inconsiderateness, and visited with an intimation that we
do not read quite as carefully as is required to read aright.
We admit that we did not con the advertisement pbilologically, and that we read it in
that conventional sense which men of business attach to such, announcements.
Shortly to be published, a collection of papers with an introductory preface, by the
Rev. Thomas Binney, may not, it is true, strictly imply that the writer of the preface
must necessarily be the editor of the compilation. But, however unskilled we may. be as
sophists, it does appear to us that an introductory preface implies a close relation to
the subject matter ; that few public men would be at the pains carefully to introduce, by
their own pens that of whicn they did not cordially approve ; certainly, that no writer
of your position would permit his name to be used merely as a figure-head for heralding
across the turbulent sea of public opinion, a cargo, the contents of which were wholly
unknown to him. . __. .
If, in thus viewing you as identified with the forthcoming publication, we tell into the
mistake of supposing that you were the editor, we heartily beg your pardon tor the
blunder To disclaim the imputation that you were employed m ushering to the w t oi Id
your own laudation, or any cause of personal annoyance, is unnecessary such thoughts
occur to us only when we cast about to arrive at the import of the term “ serious,” which
you use in reference to our mistake. So far from attaching anything derogatory to you
in the editing the publication in question, w r e regard your preface as the employment ot
great talent, to a great purpose, free from all alloy. .
We regret that a blunder, therefore, into which we have, with many others,
unconsciously fallen, should have been so widely magnified, and have caused you the
trouble of writing and printing so much upon the subject of it.
Of this we think we nave just right to complain. There w r as ample time tor you to
have acquainted us with our error, and for us to have acknowledged and regretted it,
through the medium of “ private” correspondence. But, instead of affording us such an
opportunity, we suddenly find (without the sanction which in such cases is usually sought
and conceded by either party) our papers in the hands of adverse writers, and ourselves
proclaimed in print as wilful offenders—ignorant even of a correct comprehension ot our
mother-tongue. We certainly may not be much the worse for it; but this, air, is
nevertheless a species of treatment which few people like, and, as far as we have learned,
is not often usual amongst Christian gentlemen —but we have no desire to press tne
matter, nor is there occasion. . , , , . •
Tou have placed us before the public, and we are quite content to leave it to their
verdict to what extent our blunder may be a pardonable one on the score ot syntax, o


otherwise; and whether the employment against us of the type of known opponents, without
previous communication, or our assent previously obtained, is or not a transgression of a
rule that in courteous and Christian intercourse is rarely infringed.
Although on a comparison of the offences on either side (if such there be) we do not
think the balance is really against ourselves, we hope you will continue to accept ou
friendly assurances.
Again offering you our best wishes for your restoration to health, and every success
your appointed sphere of usefulness that your talent deserves, and will doubtless
command, we are,
With respect, dear Sir,
Your faithful servants,
G. W. HAWKES.
NATHANIEL OLDHAM.
The Bishop meanwhile, having completed his missionary tour of five weeks, returned t
Adelaide, and thus at length the Counter-Memorialists had the opportunity of placing thei
appeal to the Chief Pastor of the Diocese in His Lordship’s hands. To this the Bisho
replied in the following letter, serving essentially to relieve the minds of Churchmen
from those doubts which, so sudden, so bold, so well-combined, and so well-sustained an
attempt at innovation (at length, we trust, successfully unmasked), had excited—a letter
which whilst it would stimulate us to increased exertions of unity and brotherly love with al
who differ from our Church, yet affords us but fresh inducements to learn “to appreciate
her the more truly, defend her the more ably, love her the more enthusiastically: ”
Bishop’s Court, November 15, 1858.
Dear Brethren,
I should be “ presumptuous and self-willed ” if I did not give due weight to
Memorial, signed by no less than 164 members of our Church, who address me on
subject of grave importance, from the conviction that not to do so would “ show a warn
of respect to the high office ” which I hold, and unfaithfulness to that Church of which
they feel it a privilege to be members,” as well as in “ confident reliance upon my forecas'
to maintain the Church in its integrity,” to preserve it from unauthorised innovations
from within, and “ intrusions from without, which might obliterate even the least of her
time-honoured and distinctive characteristics.”
The Memorial refers specifically to the admission of persons to the office of preaching
in our pulpits, who have not been ordained by the laying-on of hands of the Bisnop with
the Presbytery.
For my views on this subject I have only to repeat that portion of my letter to the
Eev. T. Binney, in which I said “ neither the power of your intellect, nor vigour of your
reasoning, nor mighty eloquence, nor purity of life, nor suavity of manners, nor sound-
ness in the faith would justify me in departing from the rule of the Church of
England, a tradition of eighteen centuries, which declares your orders irregular, your
mission the offspring of division, and your Church system, I will not say schism, but
“dichostasy”—that is, standing apart.
It is true I added “ that my feelings kicked against my judgment,” but not, I trust, to
its overthrow.
It is true that *' I did not feel sure how far” I was restrained by force of law from
breaking through that tradition, but I never supposed it would be imagined that I could
on my own authority settle that intricate and extensive question.
Grieving, however, at what I cannot but believe to be unscriptural “divisions” of the
Orthodox Protestant Denominations and Churches, I cast about to see in what way union
might be restored, and the work of God carried on in common by the co-operation of all
evangelical ministers and people “ who love the Lord Jesus Christ out of a pure heart
fervently.” I did not, however, flatter myself with the delusive expectation that my
suggestions would be adopted. It was enough if they should be considered, and I was
not unwilling to show that the intolerant spirit which once silenced Baxter, and failed to
employ Wesley, no longer animated our Church.
By recurring’ to the scriptural principles and usages of primitive Christianity, the
midwall of partition which now separates men of God In preaching the Gospel I thought
might be removed,
I, for example, have ever understood that the Orthodox Dissenters of England did not
object to what are called the doctrinal articles of our Church.


I knew that a “ stated form of prayer” (to say nothing of the hymnolog’y of Watts or
Wesley) was used by many Wesleyan and by some Independent congregations. I
remembered that Richard Baxter had composed a liturgy for our Church.
I had read that both Luther and Calvin esteemed Episcopacy lawful, and would
have retained it, had circumstances permitted, in their respective Churches.
I knew that the Old Independents, while they denied “ the divine rights ” of Presby-
terianism, did not claim it for their own system.
I imagined that the founders of the Free Kirk would hardly insist upon it as a dogma
of the faith.
It seemed, therefore, to me possible, that with the growth of brotherly love among the
various portions of the Reformed Orthodox Church, a longing for closer union on the basis
of the Primitive Church might arise, to which, in the language of Bishop Jewel, the
Church of England had acceded when she seceded from Rome. If this is a dream, it is
as least as harmless as it is pleasant; but if it be the counsel of God, it will yet be
accomplished. Be that as it may, it cannot be brought about by rudely breaking in
upon cherished associations, deep-rooted convictions, or even reverend prejudices.
From the relations of Colonial Dioceses to each other, and the Mother Church, it is
plainly the duty.as it is the wisdom of each Bishop, after he has ascertained the general
feeling on any given question of the clergy and laity of his own diocese, to communicate
their views to their brother Churchmen in the metropolitan province, through the
Metropolitan and their respective Bishops, so that in all matters affecting discipline and
worship we may act in common, neither disregarding the supremacy of the Crown, nor
the legitimate authority of the Mother Church at home.
It is a pleasing thought that the same rule and order of worship which link us with
the. earliest ages of the Gospel—those generations of martyrs and confessors which, by
patient suffering, overcame the rulers of the darkness of this world—also associate us with
multitudes of fellow-Churchmen in more than thirty Colonial Dioceses, as well as in the
vast territories of the United States.
I heartily. wish that the wise, and good, and able of all Evangelical denominations may
find it possible hereafter, by the adoption of common principles, to join the great
confederacy in the Gospel. I desire no prominence for myself; I claim no dominion for
my Church; but if, by the manifestation of kindly feelings and a just estimate of a really
f reat man, I can in the slightest degree further that object, I do not think I shall have
one amiss in writing to Mr. Binney, nor yet have given just ground for imagining that
I am willing or able to compromise one single principle or time-honoured characteristic
of our Reformed Branch of the Catholic and Apostolic Church.
I remain, dear Brethren, your faithful servant in the Lord,
m . AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE.
To the Hon. J. H. Fisher, President of the Legislative Council,
and the other Memorialists.
Before we pass on to the observations by which we propose to conclude these pages, we
have to dispose of a specific rumour current throughout ‘‘the movement,” viz.—that in
carrying out what it aimed at, effect to our Bishop’s views and wishes would be given.
Such was the position invariably assumed by one of our daily journals; whilst its
perhaps more guarded contemporary spoke of the pulpit proposal as sanctioned by some
of the leading members of the Church, both cleric and laic, “ and indirectly countenanced
by the Bishop of the Diocese.” The Memorialists, who were about to plant their scaling
ladders against our pulpits, pointed to the project as one calculated to assist the Bishop’s
personal efforts. The same things were echoed by the press as the views of office-bearers
of no mean importance in our Church. His Excellency the Governor was reported to have
said, that in putting his signature to the Memorial, he had taken care to assure himself
of what were the sentiments likely to be held by His Lordship, and that he had satisfied
himself they would harmonize with the wishes of the Memorialists. As to more than
one of the signatures to the Memorial, we had the subscribers’ assurance that they were
affixed upon a representation that the plan had the distinct sanction of the Bishop. And
when writers of high consideration were not wanting to twit the Bishop, however unfairly,
for flinching from views of his own projection, these impressions became fixed to a certain
extent in the public mind. It is, therefore, essential for us to address ourselves to the
task of dissipating them.


A moment’s reflection will suffice to convince each dispassionate reader, that the views
thus attributed to the Bishop could at no time have had a place in His Lordship’s mind
or intentions.
Let the reader look attentively at the course of this movement. About the 4th
October a letter is addressed by the Bishop to Mr. Binney, of which but a few of the
most influential members of the Church were cognizant. At the time it came to the
hands of Mr. Binney the Bishop had left town. In scarcely less than a week afterwards
this movement grew rife, and with it a rumour that the Bishop was acquiescent and
approving. Now, by the publication of His Lordship’s letter, it would have been apparent
that the one could have formed no just ground for the other, and so the erroneous
rumour at the outset might have been refuted. The rumour, however, is suffered to do
its work among the credulous; it was even essential to the success of the Memorial; and
when the time arrived that it was said to be only “ equitable ” to the absent Bishop to
publish His Lordship’s letter, in what shape was it presented to and by the press ?
Why, with adjuncts and annexures to relieve the subject of the difficulties to the object
in view created by the letter itself.
This one simple fact, therefore, acquits the Bishop of participation by thought, word,
or deed, in the affair. The object of the Memorialists was not to follow the Bishop in his
suggestions, but to win over His Lordship to their own.
Were it not that so very significant a fact as this had been thus established, we might
refer to the internal evidence of the Bishop’s letter, which is throughout opposed to
action to be taken of any kind—it is suggestive of grave consideration solely; nor
can the points submitted, by any ingenuity, be construed so as to warrant any such
proceedings as those suggested, and subsequently enlarged upon, by the Memorialists.
As if to guard, indeed, against all possible misconception, in the note which accompanied
His Lordship’s principal letter to Mr, Binney, he is reminded of a severance yet to be
bridged—bridged, as we gather from the Bishop’s views—at least by the main timbers of
the Orthodox Creeds, the use of a settled Liturgy, and the acknowledgment of, and
submission to Episcopal Government: a process which, as it occurs to us, is so widely
different from the iconoclastic first stages of the Memorialists, that by no stretch of
perversion can its origin be imputable to their Diocesan.
It were needless to press the argument further. We are contented to lay before our
Brother Churchmen a correspondence which will determine, beyond all doubt, the precise
extent to which the Bishop’s sentiments are to be understood as “ harmonizing ” with
the request of the Pulpit Memorialists. And it is the more satisfactory that this
correspondence should embrace a written decision by our Bishop upon the point in
question, given some weeks before the subject of the Memorial was set on foot. It is as
follows
Gilbert-street, Adelaide, September 9, 1858.
My Lord,
I have the honor, by the direction of the Committee of the South Australian
Sunday School Teachers’ Union, to enquire if your Lordship is willing to receive a
deputation from the Committee; and, if so, to request an appointment for that purpose
of a time and place convenient to your Lordship.
The deputation named consists of Mr. Samuel Bakewell, one of the Vice-Presidents of
the Union, Mr. Martin, and myself. Its object is to obtain the consent of your Lordship
to preside at a Lecture about to be delivered on behalf of this Institution, by the Rev.
Thomas Binney, of London.
If agreeable to your Lordship, the deputation would be glad to fulfil its duty on
Saturday next, the 11th instant, at three p.m.
Requesting the favour of an early reply,
I have the honor to be, my Lord,
Your most obedient servant,
S. J. WAY,
Honorary Secretary.
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Adelaide.


Bishop’s Court, September 10, 1858.
Sir,
I am sensible of the compliment paid me, whether personally or officially, by
the Committee of the South Australian Sunday School Teachers’ Union, in offering to
depute some of its Members to request me to preside at a Lecture about to be delivered
by the Rev. Thomas Binney, on behalf of this Institution. Allow me to assure the
Committee, that as a powerful advocate of Orthodox Evangelical Christianity, I highly
respect Mr. Binney—a respect which a slight personal acquaintance has tended to
increase.
Had it, in my view, been consistent with the acknowledged principles of the Church
of England, and an honest adherence to them, I should have hastened to invite Mr. Binney
to preach to our congregations; but such is not the case, and I can only wish that the
work, to which he and others believe him to be duly called, may prosper in his hands.
For a like reason, I have felt it to be beyond my power to join tli9 Sunday School
Teachers’ Union. The Congregations to which those Teachers belong have separated in
times past from the Church of England, on some not unimportant points of doctrine and
discipline. They still differ in their views and teaching respecting the Sacraments and
Ministry. I can only make “common” ground with them by abandoning, or ignoring,
the practice and principles of the Church, over which I have been called to be an
Overseer. It would be inconsistent, and not “of faith ” in me so to do, nor can I
sanction in others what I disapprove in regard to myself.
For these reasons, I regret to be obliged to decline receiving a deputation from the
Committee, not being prepared to join the Union, for the special benefit, of which Mr.
Binney has been invited to Lecture.
I remain, Sir, yours very faithfully,
AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE.
S. J. Way, Esq.
Such, then, are the main features of a movement which ought to put each single-
minded Churchman more than ever on his guard—the more so, assailed as here he on all sides
is, by the subtle argument now reproduced in the journals of this city—“ that in South
Australia there is no State Church, and it is hard to say why there should be
ecclesiastical barriers erected between religious communities, who are not separated by
doctrine or worship ? Hear, however, on this subject, one not so long since eulogized by
our Governor for statesmanlike ability and eloquence, and who, filling the high office of
Secretary of State for the Colonies, had no superficial knowledge of the duties belonging
to his post.
“ The Australian colonies have most broadly avowed the principle of indiscriminate
establishment. It is one thing to mark wisely the limits of our real power, to disavow
all compulsion, to aid that which we hold to be true, and where we can do no more under
protest to permit ; but it is another thing to confound the boundary lines of truth and
falsehood, to concur in, to promote, to originate measures which may fall in with the
inclinations of the day, but which being intrinsically vicious, though they may yield a
harvest of present popularity, are also the seed of certain evil for the future. If the
democratic characteristics and tendencies of these colonies, taken together with the
religious difference of the inhabitants, prevent their eujoying the benefit of the
nationality of the Church, these circumstances may be resistless; but let us at least see
and describe them as they are, and, instead of hugging ourselves with a false theory
contrived to flatter our self-love, let us honestly recognise in the causes an evil, in the
result a misfortune.”— Mr. Gladstone on the State in its'Relations to the Church.
With those who seem to look upon our church here as if she were severed from that
of England; who can write of her as of an institution so wanting in distinctive lineaments
as to be capable of easy adaptation under the moulding of the clever theorist, and as
susceptible even of fusion with the mixed multitude that would unite for her overthrow
as the witness of a scriptural and apostolic discipline, we can entertain no feelings
m common. We protest (to use the words of our late lamented metropolitan Bishop
Broughton) against whatever might “ appear like a surrender of our claim to be regarded
as constituting an integral portion of the Established Church of England and Ireland,
“To this,” said his Lordship, “ I could not possibly assent. The Diocese of Australia is as


truly a member of that Church as those of Exeter, Lincoln, Carlisle, on any other
English see. The Lav Members in this diocese are recognised as holding full and
undivided communion' with the same Church in every part of the empire. Your
Bishop, priests, and deacons are consecrated and ordained under a transmission of office
identical with that which prevails throughout the. provinces of England, to the
metropolitan of one of which we are all canonically subject.”
Now our Diocesan Church in this colony neither consists in nor depends upon its
continuing to be endowed with any particular amount of State Aid. The effect of any
colonial Act in depriving her of such assistance, has not abrogated the connexion of this
colonial diocese with the United Church of England and Ireland.
Upon what foundation of reason or justice can it rest that the Crown should interpose
in the nomination of bishops in every colonial diocese, and require them to receive
letters patent under the Great Seal, the badge of temporal sovereignty and jurisdiction,
defining the limits within which they are to exercise the spiritual powers conferred on
them by the Church ; if, after all this, the colonial diocese partake no more of the
character of and in membership with the Established Church of England, than any form
or denomination of Christian worship, which may of its own will set up, and at its own
discretion exercise its own approved policy whatever that may be.
The Church of England, then, in this diocese is an integral, inseparable Member of the
Church in the Mother-country, by law established, and, as such, is amenable to the spirit of
whatever canon is applicable for its government, as at the conference of the five
Australian Bishops, in Sydney, their Lordships (of whom our respected Diocesan was one)
unanimously held. And these same canons, be it remembered, impose upon church-
wardens certain duties touching preachers presenting themselves without a license, which
it may be useful for those officers to bear in mind.
If, however, there were no “ custom” having by prescription the force of law—if
there had been no opinion of the highest legal authority in this colony to the contrary
if no canon spoke in the spirit, and we contend in the letter also, to forbid his. presence
there, Mr. Binney has divorced himself from the Anglican pulpit, so long as in edition
after edition carefully revised, constantly cited, but yet neither re-called nor atoned for,
that writer continues year by year to disseminate such passages in detraction of our
Church as follow—passages which still remain unwithdrawn, and which any man may
read in print who pleases.
In an Address delivered on laying the first stone of the New King’s Weigh House, on
the 16th October, 1834, Mr. Binney thus expresses himself.—
“In spite of Acts of Parliament, creeds, and subscriptions,_ the Church of England
is the most discordant and divided Christian denomination in the land. The most
opposite and conflicting opinions are professed and inculcated by her sons,—bj men who
solemnly signed the very same identical declarations. The clergy are separated
into parties; the°pretence that uniformity exists among them is a pretence, and nothing
and every man knows it to be so, who has an eye to observe, or an ear to hear or
a head to think ; and every such man will admit the assertion, who has honesty to
acknowledge what he cannot but perceive. And these differences of opinion are not
confined to minor and insignificant matters, but, upon the showing, and accoidmg to the
current language of some° of the clergy themselves, enter into the very essentials and
fundamentals of faith.”
In the Appendix to that Address, the following occurs :
“ I have no hesitation about saying, that I am an enemy to the jimd 1
do not see that a Churchman need hesitate to say, that he is an enemy to Dissent.


therefore, its end is most devoutly to be wished by every lover of God and man. Right or
wrong, this is my belief, and I should feel not the slightest offence if a Churchman were
to express himself to me in precisely the same words with respect to Dissent. We
know very well that we do thus actually differ in opinion, and it would he very foolish
for either to be offended because the other expresses it. We are bound, each of us,
to adopt those principles which we conscientiously consider to be true, and we are equally
bound, in proportion to our ability, to defend and diffuse them.”
In a Lecture on Church Extension, delivered in the same chapel, on the 24th April,
1840, is the following :
“We believe it to be a fact that the official services of the English Church, and the
views which she sanctions of the priestly functions, and of the nature of the sacraments,
are at variance with Scripture, and that they operate most injuriously, on both
ministers and people, in relation to evangelical religion. We believe it to be another fact,
that an overwhelming majority of the English clergy are not now, and never have been,
evangelical, either in their sentiments or spirit, however it may be accounted for—
whether from the direct influence of the Church, or from the many evils connected with
private and official patronage which belong to the Establishment.”
It is but fair that Mr. Binney’s explanation of the true intent of these passages, as
extracted from his speech at the Breakfast, should here follow them. Whether by his
eloquence they have been rendered as “ perfectly harmless ” as he pronounces them to be,
our readers will judge for themselves. Could we, however, honestly have received the
explanation as a removal of the cause of offence, these passages would not have been
reprinted, and the remarks which precede them would have been spared us. But having
once taken up our pen, we had no intention of trifling with our subject; and had there
not existed cogent reasons in justification of the course we have adopted, the refusal of
the public press to put the Churchmen of the colony in possession of these extracts
would alone have furnished ample ground for our determination—that in relation to Mr.
Binney’s explanation, Churchmen were not to be deprived of that information by which
alone they could judge of its sufficiency.
Extract from Mr. Binney’s speech at the Breakfast:—
“ Even with our Episcopalian friends, the time was when we had a little rub of the
shoulders. I unfortunately made use of an expression which I will not use. If the
phraseology is offensive, 1 did not mean it, and when it was looked at with all its
conditions, it was perfectly harmless ; so harmless was it, that before the storm got up
the whole passage was extracted by a High Church publication, with the simple remark,
—‘ We perfectly agree with Mr. Binney in this sentiment.’ I put the thing so—l, as a
Dissenter, think this way, Churchmen think otherwise ; but why should we quarrel with
each other. Unfortunately, somebody in extracting it cut off all the conditions of the
surrounding phraseology, took out the passage, and made it something which I never
said. My friends on the other side never looked at the original, but took it as it was
given, and the consequence was that for three years I was, as O’Connell said of himself,
the best blackguarded man in all England. Well, my own friends, the Dissenters, were
laughing at the hurricane pouring upon me. They said, ‘ You agree far more with the
Churchmen than we do; they are utterly mistaken ; they have got the wrong man;’ and
so it was.”
It remains for us only to notice the honourable fairness with which Mr. Barrow withdrew
from publication the preface of Mr. Binney, to the “ Binney Correspondence,” and
substituted one by himself—to request the attention of Churchmen to the appended
letters under the signatures “ Cunctator,” and “ In Statu Quo” —and to thank those
authors, both of whom we learn are clergymen of the Church of England, for advice at
once so calm and reasonable.
The Lord Bishop, the Clergy, and Laity of this Diocese may rely upon the deep-rooted
hereditary attachment for the Church of England that pervades the great bulk of her
people in this colony ; and let them rest assured that whenever the exigency of the case
shall demand it, that affection, calm as it may seem, is capable of being called into action
with an energy commensurate with their privileges as Churchmen and responsibilities as
Christians.
NOLUMUS LEGES ECCLESLE ANGLIC ANiE MUTARI.
E


APPENDIX.
Although the preceding pages contain all that is essentially necessary to our subject,
yet the following may, in some respects, tend to its completeness—
“ Si quis tamen hcec quoque, si quis
Captus amore leget.”
On the 11th November, Mr. Bmney sailed from Adelaide for Melbourne, leaving
unaccomplished the great object of the first Memorialists.
Shortly after that gentleman’s departure, His Excellency replied to the letter of the
Bishop, which declined compliance with the first Memorial. Of this reply we reluctantly
make a single remark—that in it, for the first time, perhaps, during his prosperous and
effective rule, His Excellency lost sight of the dignity and importance of his subject,
and in so doing somewhat compromised his own.
“ Snch
A strain befits not argument so high.”
Other writers, chief leaders of the movement, followed; but their letters, criminatory
in tone, and trivial in context, were wisely suffered to pass unnoticed.
The letters which follow are selected from those of numerous writers appealing to the
public press, To those of “Cunctator,” and “In Statu Quo,” we have already adverted.
The first, of “ Anglicanus,” shows how the official character given to the first Memorial
retarded a free and spontaneous expression of the real sentiments of more than one too
timid Churchman; whilst the second letter of the same writer brings into bold relief, and
with much good temper, some of the passing scenes in this extraordinary drama, and is by
no means wanting in faithful Church feeling.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE REGISTER.
Sir,
Whatever may be the result of the present movement on the subject of Church
"Union, it is clear that it is a matter which requires far more thought and consideration
than the Governor and those signing the Petition to the Dean and Chapter have as yet
given it. For a movement, the object of which is of so much importance, it has had but
an inauspicious commencement, commencing, as it did, with a request to the Bishop to set
aside, on his sole authority, one of the oldest traditions of the Church, if not to break a
law which the Bishop could not say was either obsolete or not binding upon him. It
would be giving the Bishop an unheard-of power if, wherever law is silent or doubtful, he
were free to act as he liked, without respect to custom.
I now write to ask my fellow-Churchmen to consider the matter well in all its bearings
before they make up their minds, or take any steps in the matter.
I confess that I have some grave doubts on the subject, and am not at all sure but that,
full of making South Australia take the lead in everything, we are trying more to make
a show than to attain the substance. The interchange of pulpits alone would, after all,
be a show rather than a reality. But even for that I do not think that we are yet
prepared. I know that a great number of the Clergy of the Church of England are not
yet ripe for it, and, from what I hear, many Ministers of other denominations have much
to learn and unlearn before they could, with propriety or consistency, enter our pulpits.
It may come in time. Great good feeling at present exists, but I should be sorry to take
any decided step just now, lest more harm than good should arise.
This interchange of pulpits appears to me either to do too mush or too little. It does
too much if it professes to say that Churches and Ministers are united when they differ,
not merely in matters of discipline, but of faith. Mr. Binney requires that Churches
and ministers shall be recognised as such by each other; but before that can be done
honestly and heartily, there must be some standard of faith—some declaration as to what
is essential, and what is non-essential. Are we all, however, prepared to agree upon


this ? Upon certain essential points, such as those proposed by Mr. Russell, there would,
I think, be no great difficulty. lam not so sure, however, that we are all prepared to
declare the rest non-essential; for if we did. where would be what has been called the
boast of Protestantism—that each individual may form his own private judgment on
anything and everything, and make such points as adult and infant baptism, extempore
prayer or a liturgy, sprinkling or immersion, of so much importance and so essential as,
if not to die for them, to cause a schism about them ? A certain few bodies claim to
represent Protestantism to-day; but there are other bodies of Protestants, and there
probably will be more, whose cause of division and schism is of the most trifling nature.
I should be sorry to have to judge of their orthodoxy, or their admission into the
Christian Union. Their creed might be sound, but what if their schism from some other
body were merely a personal matter? Are we still to admit them? We must have
some rule whereby to decide what Churches are in union ; also a mode of admission into
the union, otherwise the present union among a few denominations will soon be looked
upon as “ exclusive.”
But supposing that some ground of union could be agreed upon, so that we might
honestly say to the Romanist and the Unbeliever, that we agree in essentials, and only
differ in non-essentials—which would be a great point gained—then would not the same
objection be made against the bare interchange of pulpits that is now made against the
present practice of the Church of England? We are friends, it is. now said, why not
interchange pulpits ? We interchange pulpits, it would then be said, why not go on to
a more complete union, namely, a Common Communion ? .There is, as far as I see, no
rational ground for stopping at the first point. But, if we arrive at a Common
Communion, and can get on so well without regard to this or that form, then why stop
short of the Bishop’s dream, and not have one comprehensive Church ? Otherwise, we
should still be liable to the taunt of disunion—you profess, it would be said, one Lord,
one faith ; you join at one table, and yet you stick to your different forms as if they
were matters of life and death.
I do not see where, with any real consistency, we could fairly stop short of this con-
clusion. But under present circumstances, at least, would such a union, if it were
feasible, be an advantage ? I very much doubt it. Much harm may have been done,
but I believe more good has been done, by our present divisions. It has produced a
noble emulation between the Churches and has thus caused truth to spread faster than
it otherwise would. At present each one strives for his own Church. If all were united,
I doubt much if more friendly feeling would exist than there exists now between the
various congregations, while what emulation existed would be, not for the Church, but
for either money or fame. In the present state of society and of liberty there must be
some divisions. Now each one joins that body which is most congenial to his feelings
and his faith. He bears no ill-reeling against his neighbours of other communions. .We
agree to differ; and each in our own way to promote the one common cause. If this be
done with real charity, do we need more ? As real union exists it. will find vent for
itself, and a field for its display, even if not exhibited in a neighbouring pulpit. It now
finds a field in the meetings of the Bible Society, and in those for other good purposes.
For the present I feel inclined to say, let well alone. What I feel the want of at present,
is more intercourse and more interchange of services with Ministers of my own Church.
In the exclusion of narrow views and extreme prejudice, we may trust in these days to
our common liberty and the general diffusion of knowledge.
The interchange of pulpits is then but a half and unsatisfactory step. Yet it is a
step, some one may say, in the right direction. For myself, lam doubtful even of that.
Putting aside the inconsistency of the half step, I doubt much whether practically it
would work well in our Church. We have many prejudices, which many of those who
would like to hear Mr. Binney preach would not easily relinquish. Taking our
congregations as they are, the majority of any one congregation would not be satisfied
by seeing in the pulpit and desk some reverend farmer, or one who, in a few weeks, was
to turn into a Member of Parliament. The love of regularly ordained Ministers set
apart for their office, and the perpetuity of their orders, may be a prejudice, but it is one
that I should not like to see weakened. There would also be the difficulty mentioned by
Mr. Binney—of a stranger reading the Liturgy —a difficulty, by the way, not easily got
over so as to make the service edifying. There would also arise other disadvantages.
Discipline would be relaxed, unless we recognised each other’s system of discipline;
otherwise a Minister in bad odour with his brother Ministers, would feel it but little if he
could find sympathy elsewhere. As far as our own Church is concerned, it would also tend to
promote some little disunion among those of the Clergy who would admit others into
their pulpits, and those who would not. Now, this is a more serious matter than it may


seem on the surface; for with all the slavery for which you, Sir, give us credit, there
is, I believe, a greater latitude of opinion allowed by our Church within its communion,
than in any other, the Independents, perhaps, excepted, who, I believe, leave a great deal
to each congregation. , , ,
These latter objections are of course such as, if there were any real good to ne
obtained, might all be removed. But the question is, what is the real present good i
Beyond the mere show of union—to judge from the letters in the newspapers—l can
find little to entice me to join in the present movement. There is a great cry for us all
to join in the shout of Liberty, Fraternity, and Equality, with the prospect of as good a
result as that cry generally produces. A great deal has been said about the Church ol
Eno-land giving up its pretensions and exclusiveness, but not a word about giving to
that Church the respect to which her age, her services, and her actual position entitle
In conclusion, I would say, let our motto be in essentials unity, in non-essentials liberty,
in all things charity. When that is fully acted upon we shall, I think, obtain more real
o'ood than under any mere outward and imperfect form of Church Union.
° I am, Sir, &c.,
CUNCTATOR.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE REGISTER.
Sir ’ Yesterday, for the first time, I had the opportunity of reading through the
whole of the correspondence which has arisen out of the desire expressed by His
Excellency and others that the Bishop would sanction interchange of pulpit ministrations
between the clergy of the Church of England and the ministers of the other Protestant
denominations in this colony. Will you allow me to offer a few remarks upon the suggestion
contained in the Memorial ? . . .
1. I think the proposal in question involves the incorrect assumption that Christian
fellowship and harmony amongst the various Protestant denominations cannot be main-
tained without some such blending of pulpit labours as that which has been suggested.
Mv own impression is they can, and, moreover, that a union of the nature contemplated
does not touch the root of that disease which infects the various members of the great
body of the Church. Let every Christian man, to whatever section he may belong, learn
to discriminate between the features of God’s children and the dress they wear ; between
the tests of true discipleship and the various customs and observances of the different
Churches ; between what is primary and what is only secondary; between that which
identifies the spiritual interest of men and that which diversifies their temporal; between
the great motives which draw them to one and the same throne of grace and those
circumstances in the Church on earth which demand, not only “ diversities ol gifts,” but
“differences of administrations;” and then—but, I think, not until then—will that
unity of heart and soul be secured which we must all feel is so wanting amongst us, and
to cultivate which is, nevertheless, so obvious a duty.
I cannot agree with those who imagine that the arrangement proposed m His Excel-
lency’s Memorial to the Bishop would tend to promote such feelings (and without them
all would be a sham, and tend only to greater disunion and misery in the end) for I do
not see how any man is to be united in spirit to his brother Christian by such
means, when those motives, urged upon him by the Saviour himself, have failed.
I can see that this movement Is a social one, but I fear it is social at the expense of true
religion.
2. The advocates of this reformation are unanimous m their expression ol the opinion
that it would never do for the various Churches to amalgamate, or to part with either
their characteristic doctrines, customs, or polity. It seems to me that the very
arguments (and they are powerful) which are employed in support of distinct
ecclesiastical constitutions are equally weighty in favour of separate Church action. On
the platform of the Bible Society, or other catholic institutions, a combination of
effort may and should take place; but, in my opinion, it would be a serious evil
if the “ barrier of exclusiveness” (if you please) in pulpit ministrations were broken
n His Excellency, in his letter to Mr. Binney, asks the question, “Are we to
have for ever merely a community of faith, and not a community of labour in all good
works
I would respectfully ask, in reply, whether we have not a community of labour, if we
have, indeed, a community of faith. _ _
I regard a community of labour as implying unity and community ol object and ol
effort ;°not a union in the employment of the means to secure that object. The labourers


in the same vineyard have a community of labour; but. they may be wholly separated m
their work, attend to different departments in the cultivation of the vine, wear different
dresses, and possess very different qualifications. Or, to use another figure, the various
regiments constituting an army have a community of labour on the battle-field; yet
some are mounted on horses, whilst others are on foot; some use the lance, others the
bayonet; some manage the heavy guns of the battery, whilst others make use of the
rifle or the musket. Need there be any want of brotherhood amongst such men ? Does
not a community of labour bind them together, although the means employed to secure
the common end are so various ? It may be urged that an interchange of friendly
feeling, courtesy of demeanour towards one another, and mutual recognition as agents in
forwarding the one great object, are everyday exhibitions in a well-organized army, and
even amongst allies. True ; and to such co-operation amongst the Churches of Christ,
no Christian man would, I should hope, object for a moment. These exhibitions,
however, are to be met with rather during the intervals of comparative inactivity than
when the fight is actually going on, and when each regiment must use its own weapons,
by itself, in its own place, and in its own way. To assume that the cause of Christianity
really suffers loss from the mere observance, on the part of Churchmen, of the rule which
the Memorial seeks to set aside, is tantamount to assuming that the allied armies in the
Crimea would have done better had the French and English officers exchanged regiments
for a while during action. Certain I am that, whatever opinions may be entertained
reo-arding the value of such an arrangement, the want, of it formed no barrier to
friendliness of feeling between the two armies, neither did it destroy their community ot
4. I will suppose that henceforth there is nothing to prevent the various Protestant
Churches from opening their pulpit doors to all ministers of their own creed. Is it too
much to assume that all who enter the Ministry of Protestant truth are not competent
men; or that, at least, the standard of competency will vary with the different
con<>Te«-ations ? Where is the line to be drawn between those who are competent and those
who are not ? And who is to draw it? An invitation to preach, according to the advocates of
this reform, is to be considered complimentary, and to be regarded as an act of
brotherhood and Christian consideration, independently of its aim at the edification of the
congregation sending it. But will not the absence of such invitation (and there may be
many cases in which it cannot be given) tend only to create jealousies a,nd heartburnings,
and to foster ill will ? Must the minister of a flock, in addition to his other trials, be often
subjected to trials of faithfulness arising out of the claims of his people on the one hand,
upon his pastoral oversight of the doctrinal food with which they are supplied, and of
some neighbouring minister on the other, to his attention and courtesy m the offer
of his pulpit to him ? What greater “ community of labour” or union of feeling has been
established hitherto between those societies where the practice argued for is commonly
pursued? Ido not say it fretfully, but sorrowfully, when I state that in no one thing can
I trace it, except in the painful opposition of bitterness manifested towards my own
beloved Church. There is union of feeling enough in this. But are Wesleyans and
Bible Christians walking as brothers together? Do Congregationalists and Primitive
Methodists feel the value of this connecting link of brotherhood ?
5. The institutions of the Church of England are branded as prejudices; yet all
other Churches in the colony have theirs, and will not. part with them. The conviction
which we feel that our own Church system, as a whole, is the best amongst the many with
which we are surrounded : and our determination to repair her gaps and maintain her
fences are perpetually styled “sectarianism,” whilst similar convictions and similar
determinations are not only manifested, but loudly professed by all others with impunity,
not excepting that most unsectarian institution, the Bush Mission.
I do think, Sir, that real union between the Church of England and the other
Protestant bodies in the colony would be much sooner effected, and much more lastingly
secured, than in the latitudinarian way suggested by the Memorial, if those bodies would,
in the spirit which they profess to have, accord to her the right of legislating for herself,
and of abiding by the laws which she frames, without subjecting her to the unkind taunts
which continually find their way into your columns—a right exercised by themselves in
the very liberty which they claim to differ from her. The rule, it must be remembered,
whereby Dissenting ministers are prohibited from preaching in the pulpits of the Church
of England is not aggressive but defensive; not for opposition but for protection ; and
it is painful to reflect that we are not at liberty to refuse to violate this rule, even though
the Governor should have been the first to suggest the violation of it, without incurring
the additional odium which that suggestion will have been the means of bringing upon
our Church.


lamby no means blind to imperfections in our own system. I have always advocated
revision and re-adaptation of our “ offices,” and shall hail the day when the peculiar
position of our Church in this colony shall render, as I hope it soon will, such changes
possible. Neither do I ever suffer denominational differences to interfere with my free
social intercourse with Dissenters.
If at any time that intercourse is checked it is for such social (it may be) religious
reasons as would weigh with any ordinary Christian man, and not on* ecclesiastical
grounds. Entertaining, therefore, the sentiments which I have expressed above, you
will not be surprised if, with all best wishes of peace to my brethren in Christ of other
denominations, I still differ in opinion from those who think on this subject as the
Governor thinks, and subscribe myself, with reference to the particular change suggested
by the Memorial,
IN STATU QUO.
November 2, 1858.
POLITICAL AND RELIGIOUS FREEDOM.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE ADVERTISER.
October 29, 1858.
Sir,
I need not remind you of the value of those Institutions of England and her
Colonies which secure to us the free utterance of our conscientious convictions without
“ let or hindrance,” —to use a brace of expressive words which have long hunted in
couples; for adopting that principle have you not given to the public an “ Open
Column,” which ensures to every one that measure of fair play to which he is entitled,
and the free discussion which is necessary to give effect to the rule “ audi alteram
partem ?”
I am one of those who have subscribed a Memorial to the Lord Bishop of Adelaide,
expressive of opinions not in unison with those of the Memorial recently printed at
length in your paper, under the heading, “ The Binney Memorial,” and have, with other
gentlemen, applied to Members of my own Church, by whom the first Memorial has not
been signed, for their subscription of the latter. To'my surprise, I find, that from the
fact of His Excellency’s signature having been prefixed to the first Memorial, there are
gentlemen who, on that ground, hesitate to sign the second; that men of high social
position are to be found, who instead of thinking only of their duties as Churchmen, and
knowing no other fear than the neglect of them, are afraid lest His Excellency, having
honoured them with his friendship, should think they do not estimate it aright unless
they are prepared to sacrifice in favour of it even a sacred duty; and that there should
be official gentlemen to whom it is considered that it would be an unfair thing to offer a
Memorial, counter to any document to which His Excellency may have lent all the wemht
of his exalted position as the Queen’s representative.
Now, Sir, although I hope there is not any one prepared to regard His Excellency with
more deference than I am disposed to do on all occasions, and although I feel under a
positive obligation to His Excellency, for consideration and kindness of no ordinary
character, yet I have not hesitated to express my views in regard to my own Church,
without respect of anything but that first allegiance she claims of every Member; and I
hope that those to whom I have alluded will better evince their own manliness and
decision of conduct, and better appreciate that of His Excellency, than by adopting
a silent, and a neutral course, at an hour when they are called upon to quit themselves
as men.
His Excellency has shown no such vacillation. The noble Earl at the head of the
Queen’s Government is, as Sir Richard is well aware, a Churchman, whose principles
would not admit of the indiscriminate union of denominations, each in a condition of
independence rather than of unity. Nor is the noble Lord at the head of the Colonial
Department a whit less decided in his views of proper Churchmanship. Now, althouoh
with each of these high officers of state, His Excellency’s position brings him into direct
contact, yet he has not shrunk from an act, (the publicity of which through the Colonial
and English Press will be unbounded), which may be deemed one in direct opposition to
the personal views of their Lordships.
Why, then, should not other men amongst ourselves rise above the wretched attitude
which flunkyism dictates, and demand through your “ Open Column ” a free expression
of their thoughts on this subject as an open question. Is that duty to be confined
alone to
Yours, &c.,
ANGLICANUS.


CHURCH CLOCKS.—CHARLES V.-PEACE AND WAR.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE ADVERTISER.
There, Mr. Editor, is a heading for you ! Think of all the hours church clocks have
told, which now are mingled with the years before the flood ; and, as you reckon by their
epochs, then, although Charles's deeds and policy may merge in the acts of mightier
men, and the march of grander systems, and the Emperor may be lost in the debris of
nations, yet peace and war remain subjects of never-failing interest. Witness the
trophies of the Crimean Russell, and the shell that spared our Dean. Can you, with
such a “ preface ” forbid me your Open Column—that which acts as a leech upon the
frenzy of the fevered patient: through which men breath forth their pent-up ire and
discontent, and resume the even tenor of their way—which is a state physician, the
purge, and, it is to be hoped, the purifier of the province. You graciously assent. That
is as it should be; may “ Christian Union ” never be wanting amongst us ! but, “ Church
Union,” (alas ! that it should be so), through what shall I say— mais n* import e —is a far
less practicable affair. Let me then congratulate you upon the adoption of a title under
which we may now all jog along in our beaten tracks serenely; and I, bigot as you
doubtless account me, may, if I should so be minded, even refresh myself with Spurgeon’s
Revivals, read a chapter in the Koran, or edify myself with one of Mr. Woods*
(equally fidelic) lectures.
But speaking wide of questions before the House must annoy an editorial M.P. To
apply myself then to my theses.
Smeaton took the bole of the oak as a model for his Eddystone Lighthouse. Brunei
was instructed by the Teredo Navalis in the formation of the shield, by means of which
he wormed his way beneath the channel of old Father Thames. These eminently
skilled men, though at the summit of a scientific profession, did not disdain to borrow
wisdom from the book of nature. In so doing lay their success ; for they wrought after
plans of no merely mortal fashioning. To take one illustration only: —The rolling
billows vainly spend their fury upon that monument of human skill which rises in their
midst— totus teres atque rotundus —to warn, to guide, to save the tempest-driven—an
inextinguishable beacon in the world of waters, planted by that love and power which so
put it into the mind of the creature to copy and apply the works of his great Creator.
By the habits, too, of irrational creatures of animal organization, is man schooled—
“Go to the ant, thou sluggard.” But here again, in the appeal to instinct, we consult
the unerring law of nature.
Gifted, then, as he is, with reason and a lofty intellect, how strange that, left to his
own guidance, though—
“ Reasoning at every step he treads,
Man yet mistakes his way 1 ”
Is not the true cause of all this—that like Charles the Fifth and his many watches—man
is always puzzling his brain to arrive at true conclusions, through the distorted medium
of his own fabrications ?
Had Charles the Fifth possessed only half the perception of a modern Church Unionist,
instead of fretting over their discrepancies, he would carefully have noted the vagaries
and eccentricities of his chronometers, and have been satisfied to adopt the mean time.
But I would submit, Sir, that there is no infallibility in a watch, any more than in any
purely social regulation ; and, doubtless, the Emperor found out either defect.
But to keep to the watches. Now, Sir, the best watch is liable to derangement.
Even the old Church Clock itself for many centuries fell into a most untrustworthy state ;
and it was nothing short of the cleaning of the entire works, and the freeing them from
rust, and more especially the useless and cumbersome additions introduced into the
original mechanism, that restored it to efficiency and truth.
How this was effected is directly in point. It was not, Sir, by adopting the additions
of Rome ; nor yet consenting to those abstractions by which the contents of a portly gold
repeater were reduced into the narrow compass of a Genevan case ; nor could it have been
by any comparison of the combinations of those who, setting up shop to-day or opening it
to-morrow, like many young watchmakers, would attain the reputation of old-established
artificers by all numbering their time-pieces 1858. No, Sir ; it was simply by consulting
that dial upon which the meridian line was drawn by the finger of Him who said, “Let
there be light,” and the flash followed upon the supreme command. Here then, Sir, was
found the true time, by which our old church clock was regulated, and all our watches
may go together. There may, Sir, be many watches, but there can be only one true
dial.
In regard, indeed, to that watch which I had always thought, until now, had


descended to me as an indefeasible heirloom, I confess that so considerable was my alarm
lest I should lose my ancient repeater, with its choral service, that I resolved to act at
once upon the advice of the epigrammatist—
“ He that his watch would keep, this must he do—
Pocket his watch, and watch his pocket too.”
Hence, I was unfortunately driven, as you are already aware, to the necessity of
becoming a Counter-Memorialist.
I say “ unfortunately,” because it is supposed that all such Memorialists have war in
their hearts. Not a bit of it, I assure you, Sir. I pledge myself that out of the whole
200 of us (which number, by a typographical error in your English Summary, I regretted
to see was printed 20), 150 at the least take in your paper. Can any condition, as regards
yourself, be more amicable !
Then, again, how courteously Mr. Binney, Mr. Hawkes, and Mr. Oldham fire off their
paper pellets !
Independently, too, of that first Memorial, so redolent of charity—have we not the
supplementary one of our venerable and respected Archdeacon, commended by special
missive to the Clergy, for the express purpose of taking off the keen edge of our
somewhat it might be too pointed declarations ?
Then comes our Bight Reverend Bishop’s letter, almost too elegant for the stern
theologian. It reads as if the Muses, or some, at least, of the Nine, had been ensconced
behind the patristic volumes and were whispering pleasantly as he wrote. In another
aspect (for Counter-Memorialists sometimes take odd fancies iqio their heads), it reminded
one of an athletic broad-chested gentleman, driving a high-conditioned horse, held well in
hand, from out of whose left ear he now dexterously cuts a fly, and next upon whose
shoulder at the junction of the hames the whipcord cracks in playful reminder, and anon
tickles him upon this flank, and now “ touches up” the other, No cutting or slashing.
No maddened steed covered with foam ; all the work of a finished master of the
whip. There! Did you see that, Sir ? As I live ! Moleskin actually lashed out at
“an eminent lady.” Ah ! now he has it. The driver must have been more than Bishop
had he spared that cut.
And though last, not least, is His Honor Mr. Justice Boothby’s specific for Church
Union; who, when he found that there were special grounds of difference touching
pulpits not to be overcome, cleverly united (without any locking up for the night) all
denominations in one unanimous acknowledgment of that courtesy and hospitality His
Honor can so gracefully dispense at a recherche and most unexceptionable dinner at Glen
Osmond—a peaceful policy even worthy a Town Clerk of Ephesus ;or that pursued by
Louis XL to relieve the coasts of France from the presence of our Edward IV.—
“But our Louis, subtle monarch,
Sent him store of brisk champagne ;
So the king, content and jolly,
Back to England sailed again."
Surely, Sir, in all these indications that 1 have reckoned up for you, anythin" less like
war can scarcely be conceived.
There has been a mistake—a great mistake if you like, but still a mistake, and that is
all. It will soon blow over, and take my word for it, without much bloodshed. Sensible
and practical men in general (a category from which I should be loth to exclude the
editor of a paper so ably conducted as your own) are already beginning to see that
anything worthy the name of Church Union is impossible by the means proposed, and
exhibit daily less desire to prolong the controversy it has provoked.
As regards the Church of England, but one course remains for her—to “study quiet,”
wherein consists at once her majesty and strength. Her “ itching ears” must learn to be
content with the faith once delivered ; and those amongst us who would rescue her from
the reproach of unfinished churches, to busy themselves in the works of our own
household.
But whilst she calls daily upon all to come into her gates with thanksgiving, and into
her courts with praise, and disavows every relationship hut that of peace, we are not to
forget that there is justifiable war; that, for example, by which we would defend from
aggression our ancient landmarks. And if, unhappily, that toleration which the Church
of England cedes to others is by them denied to ner, and she is to be arbitrarily called
upon to surrender any of the just birthrights of her children, most unquestionably will
they unite to defend and to maintain her cause. In such an hour, may the trumpet which
is to prepare them for battle give no uncertain sound.
I am, Sir, &c.,
ANGLICANUS.






