

F(TTH
£ \ C ‘4
KELlfilOuj f-»A H p.
Box
ATE AID QUESTION
STRICTURES
THE PAMPHLETS
o*' THE
EEY. DK. CAIENS & T. T. A’BECKETT, ESQ.
BEING A GUIDE TO A PROPER FORMATION OF OPINION
ON THE SUBJECT.
I'-
A SCOTCH CATHOLIC.
JAMES CAPLE, 33, COLLINS STREET, WEST.
1856.




STATE AID QUESTION
Dr. Cairns’s pamphlet having been first published, came first to
my observation. I must say I felt much disappointment in the
perusal, nor do I think the arguments and facts adduced tend to
alter or improve, in the smallest degree, the opinion held pre-
viously by any one, on the subject. His quotations are of the
most co:
andling of his subject is so
evasive and shifting, that it is impossible to find out what he
would be at.
Mr. a’Beckett seems to have given the subject more thought,
and is certainly more comprehensible than our reverend Doctor.
Both, however, commit a very great mistake, in jumping hastily
at conclusions, and taking for granted, as admitted, certain
grounds which require proof.
First, Mr. A’Beckett says :
“ I shall assume that the State is an embodiment of the whole mass of
the people; that, in its public acts it is as capable of acting sinfully or
virtuously as are any of the individuals that make up its integral
portions ; and is clothed with spiritual as well as temporal obligations ;
that in fulfilling or neglecting the former, it will he blessed or deserted by
God ; and, in proportion to the fulfilment or neglect of the latter, will be
the measure of its temporal prosperity or disaster.”
And Dr. Cairns states ;
“ Having created families, he made provision for their welfare. They
were not left to grope in uncertainty, nor were they abandoned to caprice
or passion. He declared himself to be the Governor of nations, ordained
magistrates to rule, or to give to the people the benefit of just and
equitable government. The kingly office is, therefore, the ordinance of
God, by means of which he carries on the affairs of nations, —is a terror
to evil doers, a praise and a protection to them that do well. Thus stated
we see at once that they who fill the office of the king or magistrate, are
bound to know that it is the ordinance of God for good, that the ruler is
God’s officer, that the law of his office is God’s will, that the good he is to
a 9


realise, is that which is good in God’s sight, and the means he is to
employ, those only which are agreeable to him, who is God over all,
blessed for evermore.”
And then he goes on to state —
“ This admitted it follows that a nation, as such, is a moral
agent, is charged with a moral obligation, and is responsible to
God for its official acts.”
Mr. A’Beckett, in the one case, at once assumes the necessity of a
spiritual as well as a temporal administrative power by the State,
while Dr. Cairns not only does all this, but clothes the king and
magistracy as possessing divine right, and holding their authority
to rule direct from God. Is the Doctor prepared, after this ad-
mission, to defend the beheading of Charles the First, or to
support the national side in dethroning James the Second, and
placing a usurper on the throne. Perhaps the Doctor may twist
the accession of William and Mary as of divine right, and the
exile of the banished and lawful king as divine right also. I
shall allow that Government assumes an existence, either, being
the embodiment of the whole mass of the people, or (it is to be
hoped like all other public institutions) deriving direct power
from the Almighty, or both, still this proves nothing more than
the existence of a body or Government; and leaves for these
gentlemen to define what ought to have been their first subject
of proof, viz., “ What are the primary ends of such a body, or
Government, or State.” In order to make the opening of this
subject more intelligible, I shall supply this desideratum in the
following quotation from Macauley on Church and State.
“ To say to many excellent and intelligent people that the ends
of government are temporal and not spiritual, is tantamount to
saying that the temporal welfare of man is of more importance
than his spiritual welfare. But this is an entire mistake. The
question is not whether spiritual interests be or be not superior in
importance to temporal interests, but whether the machinery which
happens at any moment to be employed for the purpose of pro-
tecting certain temporal interests of a society, be necessarily such
a machinery as is fitted to promote the spiritual interests of such
society. Without a division of labor, the world could not go on.
It is of much more importance that men should have food, than
that they should have pianofortes. Yet it by no means follows,
that every pianoforte maker ought to add the business of a baker to
his own, for, if he did so, we should have both much worse music
and much worse bread. It is of much more importance, that the


knowledge of religious truth should be widely diffused, than that
the art of sculpture should flourish among us. Yet it by no
means follows that the Royal Academy ought to unite with its
present functions those of the Society for Promoting Christian
Knowledge. For the effect of such folly would be, that we should
have the worst possible Academy of Arts, and the worst possible
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge.
“ The community, it is plain, would be thrown into universal
confusion, if it were supposed to be the duty of every association
which is formed for one good object, to promote every other good
object.
“As to some of the ends of civil government, all people are
agreed. That it is designed to protect our persons and our pro-
perty ; to supply our wants, not by rapine, but by industry, and
is designed to direct our whole force, as that of one man, against
any other society which may offer us injury. Now, these are mat-
ters in which man, without any reference to any future state, is
very deeply interested.
“ Every human being, be he Idolater, Jew, Papist, Socinian,
Episcopalian or Presbyterian, Deist or Atheist, naturally loves
life—shrinks from pain—desires comfort, which can be enjoyed
only in communities where property is secure.
“ To be tortured, to be robbed, to be murdered, are evidently
evils from which men of every religion, and men of no religion,
wish to be protected ; and, therefore, it will hardly be disputed,
that men of every religion, and men of no religion, have thus far
a common interest in being well governed.”
I might quote several extracts from Smith’s Wealth of Nations,
which distinctly defines the main ends of Government to be tem-
poral, but the above is sufficient for our present purpose.
I give every consideration of respect to Mr. A’Beckett and
Dr. Cairns for their sincerity, in coming to the conclusions which
they arrive at, as to what a government ought to be ; and it would
be well if such a constitution could be raised as these gentlemen
define ; but where, or at what past time, did a government exist
where a unity of principle in regard to religion was accomplished ?
Does it exist now, or will it (within the range of probability) ever
exist ? The re-introduction of the Test Act, and Penal Statutes,
would fail to produce unity, and I would give my two learned
friends credit that they do not wish to see such Acts brought again
into force. But without them, how are we to preclude from our
assemblies the Deist, the Roman Catholic, the Unitarian, the Jew,


and the Episcopalian, and if our State has within its walls many
of each of these denominations, can we expect unity in religious
opinion ? or is it necessary to enforce the question on them?
In a word, a Government may act in perfect harmony, and be a
most efficient and useful Government as to temporal matters, but
very bad legislators in spiritual matters. I think now we more
clearly see “ the relation the State bears to the Church,” let us
take another view and see “ what is the relation the Church bears
to the State.” The Church is a constituted body whose primary
ends are the evangelizing of the heathen, and providing spiritual
instruction for the world at large. ** The repeal of the com laws ”
is a most beneficial act, adding much to the general prosperity of
the people ; “ The abrogation of all import duties,” might be a
very good object in itself; “Vote by ballot,” may be intrinsically
of benefit to the country; “ A system of railways and improve-
ments in our roads;” “ Compensation to Squatters and throwing
open the Crown lands, ’ may be intensely interesting State ques-
tions, still the Church as a Church has nothing to do with such
considerations, and it would be going out of its position, and
foreign to its “ primary ends ” to grant money for the advancement
of any of these objects, however good in themselves.
The Church may act in perfect harmony, and be a most efficient
and useful Church in spiritual matters, but very bad legislators in
temporal matters.
Again, Mr. A’Beckett, page 11, states :
“ The great lever in the raising funds for religious purposes from indivi-
duals, is the corresponding liberality of the State. The exhibition of a liberal
spirit on the part of the private person, always exercises an influence
within a certain circle more or less extensive, according to the position
of the donor and the extent of his generosity. The other day a large sum
was promised by one man for school purposes, if an equal amount were
raised by general contribution, and the corresponding sum was conse-
quently procured without difficulty, but I believe the amount required
would not have otherwise been obtained. The inducement held out by
the State grant operates on the mind of the public generally as did this
liberal act of an individual on the minds of a limited class; and the
continuance of this inducement will, I feel persuaded, for some years to
come be the means of obtaining a large amount of money for the support
of religion, which in the absence of State aid, would not be forthcoming.
Thus much for the opposition to the grant by those who are the advo-
cates of the voluntary principle.”
Here, I think, Mr. A’Beckett has made a grievous mistake; he
has proved a little too much, and left to the voluntary a noble


reason why State aid should be abandoned. What a miserable
class of religionists Mr. A’Beckett must have met with, whose only
inducement to uphold or advance the interests of their church
and their God, is produced from a competition with some other
person or State, not influenced by the generous charity of the poor
Avidow Avho gave her all—her mite ; not influenced by the glorious
direction of our Saviour to the “ moral young man,” “ go and sell
all that thou hast and give to the poorbut based upon the
sordid idea of which Ave had a public exemplification the other
day, Avhen one of our bank managers Avrote a letter to the neAvs-
papers that he would give £5O to the Hospital, if the other
banks in the city would do the same! If charity is to be
extracted in this compulsory manner, and if no higher inducements
lead the donors to give, so that “their right hand knoAvs not Avhat
the left doeth,” I ask can a blessing accompany such forced
gifts ? No ! and I would be prepared to cry out with the volun-
ich grants which produce ..such
tary, in
unchristian motives.
And now for Mr. A’Beckett’s third proposition, Avhich involves
the whole question at issue.
“Is the aid now granted to religion, by the State, calculated to assist,
in the main, the progress of religious truth ?”
And he says :
“If I can settle this question affirmatively, I claim to have established
all I contend for : viz,, that it is desirable the present grant be con-
tinued, It is perfectly consistent with this assertion that some should
be found protesting against the grant, and this, too, upon good and sub-
stantial grounds so far as they are individually concerned, and yet that the
State should, as a matter of public duty, keep it on foot. It may be
perfectly justifiable, nay, highly praiseworthy, in an individual to do an
act which his conscience allows, while the very same act, performed by
another individual, if against his conscience, would be a highly sinful one.
“ One believeth that he may eat all things; another who is weak, eateth
herbs. Let not him that eateth despise him that eateth not, and let not
him which eateth not judge him that eateth, for God hath received him.”
“ The object professed to be desired is the spread of religious truth, and
all the various Christian sects declare their belief in the Bible, as the
standard of truth, their differences lying in the various interpretations
given to it. With many Protestant sects, these differences are such as
render it quite possible for them to co-operate Avith all other denomi-
nations, except the Roman Catholics; and the Roman Catholic church, on
its part, stands altogether aloof from the Protestant denominations.
Between these two classes there is a great gulf fixed, which each would


declare it utterly impossible ever to bridge over. But with all this the
State, as a State, has nothing to do. The Roman Catholics have as much
right to political consideration as the Protestants; and whatever may be
the indignation felt against the tenets of the Protestant or Roman
Catholic, by the members of each opposing denomination, however
persuaded some portions of the Protestant church may be that the Roman
Catholic can entertain no rational hope of salvation, and however
persuaded the Roman Catholic community may be that Protestants are
heretics and unbelievers, and will meet the fate of such, —I think that an
immense majority of Christians believe that salvation may be obtained
in both the Protestant and Roman Catholic church, though firmly
persuaded that there are serious and dangerous errors of doctrine in the
sect to which they do not respectively belong.”
Mr. A’Beckett makes one stumble after another—the further he
goes, the deeper he gets in a mire of confusion. Legal points
seem to be more agreeable to his talents than the subject he
has taken in hand. What act can be conscientiously praise-
worthy in one man to do, and conscientiously sinful in
another, if he would do the same ? If this theory is correct,
why the Hindoo is perfectly justified in his acts; nay, highly
praiseworthy in adoring his image, with its half-a-dozen heads,
and double the number of eyes, because his “ conscience
allows.” The Chinese are not only justifiable, but highly praise-
worthy in following the doctrines of Confucius, because their
“ conscience allows.” The Roman Catholics also; but, as he
intends to give them some portion of the Government spoil, I will
discuss that portion by itself. And, here, it will be apparent to
all how absurdly our learned solicitor handles his subject; he still
clings to the Bible as his standard, and ingenuously hints that “ all
sects of Christians are generally agreed upon the main points, and
may co-operate one with another, except the Roman Catholics,
between whom and the Protestants there is a great gulf fixed,
impossible to bridge over.” But how does he get out of this?
What is the duty of the State now ? What is the limit to the
godly discretion of the State ? Is the State (being God’s ordinance)
to consult the Bible? Mr. A’Beckett distinctly replies, No! the
State has no right to exercise a godly discretion ! has no right
to consult the Bible! and at once destroys all his previous
arguments. As to the State being “ clothed with spiritual as well
as temporal obligations; that in fulfilling or neglecting the
former, it will be blessed or deserted by God ; and, in proportion
to the fulfilment or neglect of the latter, will be the measure of
its temporal prosperity or disaster,” and boldly tells us that, no


matter what may be the errors and corruptions of the Romish
church, “ with this the State, as a State, has nothing to do ; the
Roman Catholics have as much right to political consideration as the
Protestants .” Well, Mr. A’Beckett, I shall further follow up your
argument; there is, also, a great gulf of error between the Protes-
tants and the followers of Confucius ; but I contend, with you,
that the State, as a State, has nothing to do with that, and that
the Chinese have as much right to political consideration as the
Protestants ; so also have the Jews, Unitarians and Deists.
As to conscientious belief, I will quote an extract from
Gladstone’s “ Church and State,” which shows, at all events,
straightforwardness, if nothing else. He says :
“ I do not scruple to affirm that, if a Mahometan conscientiously
believes his religion to come from God, and to teach Divine truth,
he must believe that truth to be beneficial, and beneficial above all
other things to the soul of man, —and he must, therefore, and
ought to desire its~extension, and to use for its extension all
proper and legitimate means. And, if such Mahometan be a
prince, he ought to count among those means the application of
whatever influence or funds he may lawfully have at his disposal
for such purposes.”
Therefore, at this point, the argument, so far as we have gone,
might resolve itself into this—endow all sects, or none.
I have taken up again the pamphlet of Dr. Cairns, but really
must confess that I see “ nothing in it.” In one part, page 18,
he supports voluntaryism, by a forcible appeal to his congregation,
to abound in the grace of a flowing liberality in support of their
ministry, this being a duty distinct from the State Aid. This
is quite correct; and in all the Doctor’s addresses seems to be a
point which he never fails to inculcate. Again, in page 19 he
puts it down as an axiom that—
“ The duty and ability of the Church is one thing, and the duty and
ability of the State is another. And whatever the Church may do, or may
not do, the State that deliberately allows any portion of her people to
lapse into a condition of practical heathenism, is abdicating the highest
of her functions, and converting the ordinance of God, designed for good,
into an apology for the most ruthless neglect.”
This is really going too far; the reverend Doctor throws over-
board the Church altogether, and her mission, and puts the whole
onus of the christianizing of the heathen, and their want of
spiritual instruction, upon the State, who ought to turn into an
immense missionary society, rather than that any portion of her


people remain in barbarism, —no matter what the Church is
Baying or doing. From what Dr. Cairns states, the sooner our
Government turns its attention to evangelizing the heathen the
better; for, he lets us into a secret as to the extent of support we
are likely to obtain through the influence of the Church, he says,
page 92
“For nearly three years, I have used every argument my reason could
form, and every entreaty and mode of appeal my heart could suggest, to
induce able ministers of the gospel to quit the quiet of their Scottish homes,
and join our feeble ranks, in this most interesting and necessitous field;
but all in vain. The supposed privations of ministerial life in this Colony,
aided perhaps by fancy and the haze of distance, are so formidable in their
eyes, that they positively refuse to come ; they recoil from us with a feeling
of dismay. They will go cheerfully to the backwoods of Canada, or to
the sultry plains of Hindostan, to publish to dying sinners the glorious
tidings of mercy. But such is their idea of the hardships to which
ministers are subjected here, that, with a most painful unanimity, they
decline our pressing invitations, and seem panic-struck by every proposal
to help us in our anxious endeavours to evangelise Victoria. Let no man
make light of this evil. To me and to all it is a sad reality; and he who
can despise it, is not entitled to deference. How this evil is to be
obviated, is a most serious question, and one not to be solved by the
rashness of a novice, or the fearless assurance of a sanguine mind.
“ Most sincerely, therefore, do I respect the scruples of my brethren, and
appreciate the consideration which leads them to shrink from the respon-
sibility of advising the State to withhold its pecuniary aid.”
This is peculiarly rich. What a sequence of well turned
sentences, no doubt capable of having a certain influence on the
casual hearer, but I must say the Doctor should have been
extremely cautious before he deliberately put in print the result
of his home correspondence, and attempting in a certain extent
to mislead the public mind. I think that such men as the reverend
Doctor has been Corresponding with, are much better to remain in
the quiet of their Scottish homes, as, under any circumstances,
they would not suit us. I will take the liberty of giving the
Doctor a hint of the kind of clergymen he ought to try and
influence to come out here. There are two classes—first, those
after the apostolic character, who would leave house and home, father
and mother, brethren and sisters, and who are prepared to face
persecution, to be weary often, in fastings frequent, and face death
itself for Christ’s sake ; or some of those of my English brethren,
the Doctor might more easily induce to come out here, by holding
out to them excellent sport in hunting the kangaroo, wallaby,


and emu, and shooting wild duck, swan, and parrots. Tlite
would he sufficient inducement for some of the younger sons of
noblemen and bishops, buf the indolent, sordid class of men with
whom the Doctor has been corresponding, and who will not
move until they know where the loaves and fishes are to come
from, are better either at home, in Canada, India, or any where
else than here. The remainder of the Doctor’s arguments is
composed of the usual amount of abuse against the Roman
Catholics. I give the following as the last from the Doctor, and
upon which apparently his whole argument against the Roman
Catholics depends :
“A more forcible objection is stated thus : this country is, upon the
whole, a Christian country; five-sixths of the inhabitants are avowedly
of the same creed, that is, they are Protestants ; why then allow the dis-
content of a minority to overawe the State, or to ’restrain it in the
performance of its duties ? Now, although the feelings, and even the
lightly disregarded, and will never
prejudices, of a
be contemned by a Christian government, the objection now referred to is
not easily repelled. In so far as the papal church is concerned, the ob-
jection admits of no satisfactory reply. The question is, what is the duty
of the Christian magistrate to the Church of Christ ? That, my friends,
is the question. And on what principle is it to be s olved ? Appeal to
any Roman Catholic tribunal, and the decisive answer will be that, to
encourage, and much more to foster heresy, is a mortal sin; that the
highest of all reasons, duty to God, forbids the church to sanction, or the
magistrate to tolerate it. Yes, the State which, for any object of tem-
poral gain, should promote the spread of error, and contribute to the
promotion of a corrupt religion, is guilty of flagrant unfaithfulness, and is
to be denounced as the abettor of apostacy. And if the principie be sound,
that duty to God is incompatibie with the endowment of a false faith,
then how can the Romanist expect, or ask, of a Protestant State, the
recognition or the support of his religion? To a Protestant nation.
Popery is essentially an elaborate and most mischievous delusion, —a
perversion of all truth, an offence to God, and a degradation to man. And
even mere honesty should compel the State to answer this clamorous
faction, whether we should obey God or patronise you, let your own doc-
trine judge, let your own practice declare. Would you have us relinquish
the very highest of our duties ? Would you wish us to trample on a good
conscience, and pay that reverence to a pernicious heresy which is due to
Divine truth alone ?
“ This argument leaves, or should leave, the Romanist speechless; it
should silence, if it did not put him to shame. But what avails the
plea ? Rome, true to herself, counts on our inconsistency. She adheres
to her error, and she reckons that we will not abide by our truth. She
grants nothing to us, but she calculates that she will entice or frighten


us to concede everything to her. She will not forego one of her lordly
pretensions, but she confidently expects that we will humble our heads
at her footstool. It is exquisitely painful to witness the perplexity of
governments at this critical juncture. Cowed by the audacity of Rome,
instead of resolutely facing the foe, they weakly shrink from the encoun-
ter ; and, a prey to cowardice, they sacrifice the interests of eternal truth,
in a miserable attempt to purchase conciliation. We grant, nay, we
teach that no Christian State should trifle with the convictions or opinions
of any body of its subjects; and that, to the very utmost verge of duty, it
should go in its desire, and in its endeavour, to reconcile differences, and
to ensure the peace of the commonwealth. And be it remembered that,
while the policy of Rome creates embarrassment, the divisions that rend
the Protestant Church on this very subject, aggravate the evil an hundred
fold.”
And now, when the Doctor gets quit of this invective, and which
to some minds -in a congregation might, at the moment, seem
a remarkably beautiful peroration, and old ladies might go away
impressed with all the horrors of Popery; but in looking into it,
what does it all come to ? I would ask the Doctor, is he prepared
to carry out to the full this, his minor proposition. If, as he
states, “ That to a Protestant nation, Popery is essentially an elaborate
and most mischievous delusion, a perversion of all truth, an offence
to God, and a degradation to man," I would ask the Doctor if it
is not the especial province of the Legislature, not only to
refuse them aid, but also an equally especial province, to prevent,
by all means or enactments in their power, the introduction into
this colony of any person or persons holding such mischievous
delusions, who perveri the truth, who are an offence to God, and ivho
are a degradation to man ? If this pulpit declamation be received
as a correct and faithful representation of the Roman Catholics,
then nothing short of their total extirpation, by conscription,
imprisonment, fire and fagot, or all and any means, would be
constitutionally correct, to effect their extinction. None will
surely deny that Government has the power, and ought to
exercise it, in repressing and punishing a people ivho are an offence
to God, and a degradation to their fellow-men. Perhaps the Doctor
would treat us to his views on this subject, and how he would
propose to deal with the Roman Catholics and the Chinese ; would
he put on both a heavy capitation tax ? He denounces the Roman
Catholics as a class Avho are a degradation to their fellow-men; and
Government denounces the Chinese as being an equal degradation
to their fellow-men , If the Doctor is correct in his tirade against
the Roman Catholics, then, they and the Chinese should be put


on the same constitutional footing by the State, Is he prepared to
go so far?
Further, Dr. Cairns seems to think he has signally defeated all
reply to the non-endowment of the Roman Catholics, and that his
argument should leave the Roman Catholic speechless, put him
to silence, and also to shame. The Doctor’s mind and views
seem circumscribed to the small spot of the habitable globe,
called Britain, and a still younger and less populated colony
called Victoria; and for the sake of discussion, we shall allow
the Doctor the full benefit of all his arguments;
First, that the Roman Catholics only bear one-sixth to the Pro-
testant inhabitants in this colony.
Secondly, that the minority should give in to the majority.
Thirdly, that the Roman Catholics cannot complain of hardship
by not participating in any grant, because, if you refer to any of
their own councils, they will distinctly tell you that it is a dan-
gerous error to support heresy.
Fourthly, if Protestants merely act up to the doctrine thus
enunciated by the Roman Catholics, the Roman Catholics can have
no ground of complaint.
Now, if my readers will follow me in taking the argument
inversely, we shall see to what the Doctor would lead us.
First, that the Protestants only bear one-sixth in proportion to
the number of professing Christians in the civilised world; the
Roman Catholics, five-sixths.
Secondly, that the minority, in any community, should give in
to the majority.
Thirdly, that the Protestants could not complain of any hardship
or persecution, by not participating in any grant, or from being
expelled from any Roman Catholic state, because it is a fundamental
and conscientious conviction, as stated by the Rev. Dr, Cairns,
that it would be a dangerous error to allow or promote the spread
of heresy.
Fourthly, if Roman Catholics, when they have a majority, merely
act up to the doctrine enunciated by Dr. Cairns, the Protestants
can have no ground for complaint.
In fact, in order to introduce a most unconstitutional measure
into a small portion of the civilized world, Dr. Cairns holds out a
premium for the advance, throughout the greater portion of the
habitable world, of the very doctrine which he would wish to
smother; and if our Scotch or English missionaries were summarily


expelled from amongst a Roman Catholic community, Dr. Cairns
at once shuts the door to a single complaint.
We must either hold this doctrine, or go back to the views of
either Macaulay or A’Beckett, and say that, with regard to the
existence of religious errors and differences between Roman
Catholics and Protestants, be they ever so aggravating, still with
these the State , as a State, has nothing to do; and the Roman
Catholics have as much right to political consideration as the
Protestants.
From what we have read in the foregoing, and now having
brought before you the different arguments of Mr. A’Beckett and
the Rev. Dr. Cairns, with what observations naturally suggested
themselves, I will, without further comment, lay before you an
extract from Macaulay, and show his ideas of the relation of
Church and State, which, combined with the opinions canvassed
previously, may tend to lead to a more proper understanding of
the subject.
“ We may illustrate the view of the policy which governments ought to
pursue, with respect to religious instruction, by taking the analogy of a
hospital. Religious instruction is not the main end for which a hospital
is built; and to introduce into a hospital any regulations prejudicial to
the health of the patients on the plea of promoting their spiritual improve-
ment, to send a ranting preacher to a man who has just been ordered by
the physician to lie quiet and try to get a little sleep; or to impose a strict
observance of Lent on a convalescent who has been advised to eat heartily
of nourishing food ; to direct, as the bigoted Pius the Fifth actually did,
that no medical assistance should be given to any person who declined
spiritual attendance, would be the most extravagant folly. Yet it by no
means follows that it would not be right to have a chaplain to attend the
sick, and to pay such a chaplain out of the hospital funds. Whether it will
be proper to have such a chaplain at all, and of what religious persuasion
such a chaplain ought to be, must depend on circumstances. There may be
a town in which it would be impossible to set up a good hospital without
the help of different opinions, and religious parties may run so high that,
though people of different opinions are willing to contribute for the relief
of the sick, they will not concur in the choice of any one chaplain. The
high churchmen insist that, if there is a paid chaplain, he shall be a high
churchman. The evangelical stickle for an evangelical. Here it would be
absurd and cruel to let an useful and humane design, about which all are
agreed, fall to the ground because all cannot agree about something else.
The governors must either pay two chaplains, or they must appoint none.
“We should say the same of Government. Government is not an insti-
tution for the propagation of religion, any more than St. George’s Hospital
is an institution for the propagation of religion ; and the most absurd and


pernicious consequences would follow, if Government should pursue, as
its primary end, that which can never be more than its secondary end,
though intrinsically more important than its primary end. But a Govern-
ment which considers the religious instruction of the people as a secondary
end, and follows out that principle faithfully, will we think be likely to do
much good and little harm.”
I will now, in conclusion, offer a few remarks on the question,
which ought to he more clearly defined in the minds of our candi-
dates for legislative honours, viz.:—
Taking it for granted that Government can spare sufficient
funds for the purpose of aiding the different sects of religionists,
in the extension of their doctrines, how, in the present state of
the interior of this country can it be most beneficially applied ?
In reading the different addresses of those who wish to secure a
place in the arena of politics, I observe a hackneyed phrase
running through nearly all: “ That they will support State aid,
but only to be applied to the thinly populated districts in the
interior.” I have not the slightest doubt that such opinions are
merely the echo of some other person, who has previously issued
his address, and is daily repeated without, I may safely say, one
of the candidates knowing the why and the wherefore they should
entertain such a doctrine.
We shall suppose, in some of the thinly populated districts, that
the great majority of the inhabitants, with but few exceptions, are
Presbyterians, and would enjoy the services, and pay much atten-
tion when these are conducted in the unadorned Presbyterian style
which they have been accustomed to from their infancy; but if
the Bishop of Melbourne came before them, with about twenty
yards of white lawn surrounding his person, and commenced
leading the prayers of the assembly in the words of the Liturgy,
I can imagine the congregation, with a few exceptions, dispersing
in a fit of Calvinistic uproar; while the few, too few to support
a church or clergyman of their own, are immediately laid up with
an attack of Erastian despondency.
Now, this thinly populated district is not capable of supporting
two churches, and it would be a waste of money to build more
than one; and, in many districts, no regular church would be
necessary, owing to the unsettled state of the population ; and
taking the foregoing arguments to apply to all districts, allowing, of
course, that some may preponderate in Episcopalians, some in
Eoman Catholies, and some in Wesleyans: What is to be done, so
as to provide for the few as well as the many of each district, and


still not to violate the consciences of any ? I throw the following
out as a suggestion: supposing a number of missionaries, with head
quarters at the principal towns in the interior, who are prepared
each Sunday to take different districts of country, each taking a
distinct round, so that on every successive Sunday these provinces
would be visited by a new missionary, when the particular
adherents of his faith might attend, as well as any others who
chose to join in. If the individual members of any community
in any district, chose to provide funds for a pastor to reside con-
tinually with them, by all means let them do it, but by purely
voluntary assistance.
Much more might he said, hut if in the foregoing I have
suggested sufficient to open up the subject, so as to lead to a more
clear comprehension of it, my object has been attained.
