

Jteiu Hebrides Ijjteion Jtlaritimc
STATEMENT BY THE “DAYSPRING” BOARD
ON THE QUESTION OF
A NEW MISSION STEAMER.
In view of the present position of affairs in regard to the maritime
service of the New Hebrides Mission, the “Dayspring” Board
have thought it desirable to submit a statement on the subject to
the several Churches interested, and to the Mission Synod,
with the view of guiding all concerned in the discussion and
determination of the future policy of the Mission in regard to this
matter.
The following is the statement here referred to :
There are two ways in which a transport service may at
present be secured for the New Hebrides Mission. Either the
Churches connected with the Mission may provide and maintain
a vessel for the exclusive service of the Mission, or arrangements
may be made with the Australasian New Hebrides Company,
Limited, for the Mission service to be done by means of that
company’s steamers now, and for some time past, running
regularly among the islands, and maintaining a three-weekly service
between the islands and Sydney.
Of both of these methods the Mission has already had some
experience.
In the early years of the Mission —up to the year 1890 —there
was only one course open for the Mission in respect of this
matter. As there was then no regular means of communication
with the islands in existence, the Churches supporting the
Mission had no alternative but to provide and maintain a Mission
vessel for the service of the Mission. This, therefore, was the


method followed in those early years; and from the year 1864 to
the end of 1889 the Mission was served by the Mission schooner
“ 1 )ayspring,” which made two trips annually between the colonies
and the islands, and spent several months each year in inter-
island work. Towards the end of the eighties, however, great
changes began to come over the islands in respect of trade and
commerce. In these respects the prospects were so promising
that the Governments of New South Wales and Victoria were
moved to subsidise a line of steamers to open up regular
communication between the islands and the colonies. Under
this arrangement the A.U.S.N. Company began in 1890 to run a
monthly line of steamers, and as by that time the Mission schooner
“ Dayspring ” had become inadequate for the increased work of
the Mission, that vessel, with the consent and approval of the
Churches and the Mission S%nod, was sold, and the transport
service of the Mission was performed by the A.U.S.N. Company’s
steamers. This continued for a period of three years, at the end
of which time, in consequence of the withdrawal of the Government
subsidies, this line of steamers was withdrawn. Thereafter
arrangements were made with the Australasian New 'Hebrides
Company for the service of the Mission by means of that
company’s vessels. Under these arrangements, during 1894 and
1895, every Mission station in the group was visited not seldomer
than twice in every nine weeks, and many of the stations were
visited regularly once every three weeks; and in addition special
arrangements were made to meet the requirements of the
missionaries for the meeting of Synod and for the opening up of
new stations. In the end of 1895 the s.s. “Dayspring” arrived,
and with the view of testing the suitability of that vessel, and of
giving her a “ fair and sympathetic trial,” the arrangements with
the A.N.H. Company were allowed to lapse, and the s.s.
“ Dayspring ” was employed to do the service of the Mission.
This continued until 16th October, 1896, when the s.s.
“ Dayspring ” was wrecked. Immediately after this disaster the
services of the A.N.H. Company were again called into
requisition. Arrangements were made at once to meet as far as
possible the immediate wants of the missionaries, and negotia-
tions were entered into with the view of arranging for a
service for 1897. These negotiations have now been completed,
and an agreement has been concluded by the “ Dayspring ”
Board with the A.N.H. Company to do the work of the
Mission for the current year, visiting every Mission station
in the group once in about every six weeks, and certainly
not seldomer than once every two months, and also making
special provision for the meeting of Synod.
Such is a brief outline of the course and methods followed in
regard to this matter up to the present time.


ESTION OP
ON STEAMER,
The following is the statement here referred to :
ion rltlarifimi' JSmiijt
“ DAYSPRING ” BOARD
>f affairs in regard to the maritime
service or me i\ievv neunues Mission, the “Dayspring” Board
have thought it desirable to submit a statement on the subject to
the several Churches interested, and to the Mission Synod,
with the view of guiding all concerned in the discussion and
determination of the future policy of the Mission in regard to this
matter.
There are two ways in which a transport service may at
present be secured for the New Hebrides Mission. Either the
Churches connected with the Mission may provide and maintain
a vessel for the exclusive service of the Mission, or arrangements
may be made with the Australasian New Hebrides Company,
Limited, for the Mission service to be done by means of that
company’s steamers now, and for some time past, running
regularly among the islands, and maintaining a three-weekly service
between the islands and Sydney.
Of both of these methods the Mission has already had some
experience.
In the early years of the Mission —up to the year 1890 —there
was only one course open for the Mission in respect of this
matter. As there was then no regular means of communication
with the islands in existence, the Churches supporting the
Mission had no alternative but to provide and maintain a Mission
vessel for the service of the Mission. This, therefore, was the


method followed in those early years; and from the year 1864 to
the end of 1889 the Mission was served by the Mission schooner
“ 1 )ayspring,” which made two trips annually between the colonies
and the islands, and spent several months each year in inter-
island work. Towards the end of the eighties, however, great
changes began to come over the islands in respect of trade and
commerce. In these respects the prospects were so promising
that the Governments of New South Wales and Victoria were
moved to subsidise a line of steamers to open up regular
communication between the islands and the colonies. Under
this arrangement the A.U.S.N. Company began in 1890 to run a
monthly line of steamers, and as by that time the Mission schooner
“ Dayspring ” had become inadequate for the increased work of
the Mission, that vessel, with the consent and approval of the
Churches and the Mission S%nod, was sold, and the transport
service of the Mission was performed by the A.U.S.N. Company’s
steamers. This continued for a period of three years, at the end
of which time, in consequence of the withdrawal of the Government
subsidies, this line of steamers was withdrawn. Thereafter
arrangements were made with the Australasian New 'Hebrides
Company for the service of the Mission by means of that
company’s vessels. Under these arrangements, during 1894 and
1895, every Mission station in the group was visited not seldomer
than twice in every nine weeks, and many of the stations were
visited regularly once every three weeks; and in addition special
arrangements were made to meet the requirements of the
missionaries for the meeting of Synod and for the opening up of
new stations. In the end of 1895 the s.s. “Dayspring” arrived,
and with the view of testing the suitability of that vessel, and of
giving her a “ fair and sympathetic trial,” the arrangements with
the A.N.H. Company were allowed to lapse, and the s.s.
“ Dayspring ” was employed to do the service of the Mission.
This continued until 16th October, 1896, when the s.s.
“ Dayspring ” was wrecked. Immediately after this disaster the
services of the A.N.H. Company were again called into
requisition. Arrangements were made at once to meet as far as
possible the immediate wants of the missionaries, and negotia-
tions were entered into with the view of arranging for a
service for 1897. These negotiations have now been completed,
and an agreement has been concluded by the “ Dayspring ”
Board with the A.N.H. Company to do the work of the
Mission for the current year, visiting every Mission station
in the group once in about every six weeks, and certainly
not seldomer than once every two months, and also making
special provision for the meeting of Synod.
Such is a brief outline of the course and methods followed in
regard to this matter up to the present time.


The question now to be considered is which of these two
methods should be adopted for the carrying on of the service
after the contract for the present year (1897) shall have been
fulfilled ;
1. With regard to the method of having a steamer owned
and maintained by the Churches for the exclusive use of the
Mission, the great objection to this method is the large expenditure
which it involves. Not only is there the original cost of the
steamer to be provided (viz., £B,OOO to £10,000), but the running
expenses of such a steamer, and the tear and wear and the
insurance of same cannot be set down at anything less than
£4, 000 a year. The schooner “Dayspring,” over a period of 15
years, cost an average of £1,966 per annum, and if everything is
taken into the reckoning £4,000 a year is the sum which
would be required to keep a Mission steamer running. And
even with this large expenditure the service provided would not
be equal in point of frequency and in some other respects to that
obtainable by the other method. Four thousand pounds (£4,000)
a year is a large sum to have to raise; and even if such a sum
were readily forthcoming, it is a question to be gravely considered
how far the expenditure of such a large sum on this department
of the Mission work would be justifiable, especially when another
and much less expensive method of doing the same work is
available. %
2. With regard to the method of having the service done
by means of the A.N.H. Company’s steamers, the great
advantage is that it can be obtained for about half the cost
and with none of the trouble and risk involved in owning
and running a Mission steamer. The average cost of such a
service during the six years in which it has been in operation
has been ,£1,825 per annum; and allowing for the recent
increase in the number of missionaries, the average cost from
this time forward ought not to exceed £2,000 a year, and
even that is about £5OO a year in excess of the present
guaranteed revenue. Besides this, by this method, the Mission
has no first cost of a steamer to provide and no responsibility to
meet in the case of accident to, or loss of any of the vessels
employed. Still further, the arrangement with the A.N.H. Com-
pany is one whereby payment is made according to the work
done, so that if the work done is small the expenditure will be
small, and if the expenditure at any time is unusually large the
meaning of that will be that an unusually large amount of work
has been performed.
Notwithstanding, however, this great difference in the cost
respectively of these two methods, it is held by some that the
advantages of having a Mission steamer are sufficiently great to
warrant the adoption of this method in preference to the other.


First, it is said that there are certain objectionable practices
connected with the commercial steamers which it is not good for
the Mission to be in any way implicated in ; and that to avoid
these we ought to have a vessel of our own at any cost. lae
practices specially objected to are such as the use ot profane
language by the ship’s company, the sale and use of intoxicating
drinks, and the doing of unnecessary work on Sundays.
With regard to the use of profane language, it may heie be
stated that the difference between Mission vessels and other
vessels in this respect is not by any means so great as is some-
times alleged. On the A.N.H. Company’s vessels this practice is
discountenanced and forbidden just as it is on the Mission
vessels. But in the practical management of ships occasions arise
when men break the ship’s regulations and indulge in objection-
able utterances, and these occasions take place on Mission vessels
as well as on others. When the schooner “Dayspring’ was
running, the authorities had frequently occasion to deal with
complaints of this kind. In regard to this, the most that can be
done is to use discrimination in the selection of the men employed,
and to discountenance the practice by the general moral tone of
the ship. And this the A.N.H. Company do.
With regard to the sale of intoxicating drinks, of course that
is a thing which never has been permitted or practised on any of
the Mission vessels. But seeing that it is a thing which is done
in all other commercial vessels, it is hardly to be expected that the
A.N.H. Company should be required to do away with it absolutely.
Nevertheless, it has always been provided in our Articles of Agiee-
ment with the company that the company shall not supply any
intoxicating drinks to any natives, and shall place every restiiction
in the way of the ship’s company doing this. And this provision
has been, so far as is known, faithfully adhered to. Cases may
have occurred in these steamers where men have been found using
intoxicating drinks too freely when they had the
But instances of a similar kind occurred sometimes in the old
“ Dayspring,” so that the possession of a Mission vessel affords no
absolute security against such a thing.
With regard to the doing of unnecessary work on Sundays,
that also is "a thing which has never been permitted on the
Mission vessels. But in regard to this also our agreement with
the A.N.H. Company expressly stipulates that no such work shall
be done at any of the Mission stations on Sundays, except under
j very special circumstances. And this provision also has been very
generally carried out. In some instances of the steamers leaving
port on Sunday, or doing some loading or unloading of caigo,
there may have been a difference of opinion as to the urgency
of the circumstances: but the arrangements of the vessel generally
are so planned and conducted as to keep this regulation in view.


In these remarks it is not intended to deny the existence of
the evils referred to, or in any way to make light of them. So far
as they exist they are real evils, and for the sake of all concerned
it is imperative that every effort should be made for the mitigation
and removal of them. JBut the employment of a Mission steamer
would not of itself secure their absolute abolition. The matters
objected to are of such a kind as can most effectually be
controlled by discrimination in the selection of men and by using
all endeavours to maintain a high moral tone in the management
of the ships. And experience has shown that when the Mission
occupies business relations with the company it has greater
influence in these directions than it otherwise would have. In
any case, the mind of the Mission in regard to these matters
being distinctly declared, the Mission cannot be held responsible
for them when they do occur.
Secondly, it is said that although the amount required for
the keep-up of a Mission steamer is comparatively large, yet by
having such a vessel a definite object of interest is presented to
the Churches and Sabbath Schools, and the appeals for
contributions for its support are not only more liberally responded
to, but in other departments the missionary cause is indirectly
benefited. The force of this argument may be admitted, and yet
the question remains whether it is wise or right to spend
such a large sum on a Mission vessel when, under the altered
circumstances of the islands, a service as good, and in some respects
better, can now be obtained for half the amount.
Thirdly, it is said that other Missionary Societies, as, for
example, the London Missionary Society and the Melanesian
Mission, have Mission steamers of their own, and if these
find it necessary and desirable for them to maintain such
vessels it must be to our advantage to follow the same
course. To which argument it is sufficient to say that, among
the islands occupied by the London Missionary Society, the
state of matters as regards facilities of communication and
transport is entirely different from that which now obtains
in the New Hebrides. Many of the islands occupied by the
London Missionary Society are entirely out of the way of
other traffic, and in order to keep up regular communication with
these a Mission vessel is a necessity, just as it was in the New
Hebrides at the first. In the New Hebrides now the case is quite
different. The line of steamers at present running among the
New Hebrides touches every island occupied by our missionaries.
So far, then, everything seems to point in favour of having
the maritime service of the New Hebrides Mission performed
under arrangements with the A.N.H. Company rather than by a
Mission steamer.


It remains to be added that in the present state of the New
Hebrides Islands, politically and commercially, it is of very great
importance for the sake of the Mission that British interests should
be strengthened as much as possible. The employment of the
A.N.H. Company’s steamers for the service of the Mission would
undoubtedly have that effect. A very decided and vigorous effort
is at present being made to increase French interests and French
influence in the Islands. Large subsidies have been granted by
the French Government to this end. It is generally believed in
the Australian Colonies that these movements have in view the
annexation of the islands to France at the first convenient oppor-
tunity. If this should happen all the probabilities are that it
would mean the ruin of the New Hebrides Mission. The action
of France in relation to Protestant Missions in Tahiti and the
Loyalty Islands, in Madagascar and Algeria, may be taken as
indicating the policy that would be pursued in the New Hebrides in
the event of annexation. It is of urgent importance for the sake
of the Mission that everything possible should be done to avert
such an issue. The strengthening of the A.N.H. Company, which
is at present the chief representative of British commercial
interests in the group, would do much in that way.
In view of all these considerations, the “ Dayspring ” Board
in Sydney recommend that instead of taking any step with the
view of procuring a new Mission steamer, an endeavour be made
to negotiate an agreement with the A.N.H. Company for the per-
formance of the Mission Service for a period of years on the most
favourable terms possible. Circumstances at present unforeseen
may yet arise which may render it imperatively necessary for the
Churches to provide and maintain a Mission steamer. But in the
meantime, when a line of steamers is already running to and
from Sydney every three weeks, and an inter-island steamer is
constantly running among the islands, and when all the
probabilities are that such facilities of communication will increase,
rather than otherwise in the future, it seems the wisest and
most prudent course to direct the policy of the Churches
and the Mission in this direction, and to follow out what is
here recommended.
For the “ Dayspring ” Board.
JAMES COSH,
Secretary.
Sydney,
March 26, 1897.


Jleto Ijcbvibcs fission iftaritimc Serbia.
STATEMENT SHOWING THE ANNUAL COST
from 1875 to 1895.
I. —Per
MISSION
SCHOONER
“DAYSPRING
Chandlery Harbom .
Repairs. Ex P enses
Wages.
Stores.
Printing.
£ € £ £
808 373 239 61
753 582 339 88
2,121
964 340 109 37
1,784
771 378 263 43
753 371 521 39
1,730
875 446 231 88
746 364 214 47
1,632
805 448 178 43
634 478 760 52
2,208
1884 |
1885
725 450 1 35
100 50 /
916 438 203 47
768 504 538 46
1,896
2,096
1886
J 1887
(“Cairndhu’
1888
816 \ 506 1 268 \I 81
204 / 234 J 400 /1 (
1,926 )
848 J
765 430 122 28
901 630 250 ' 38
1889 -J
2,095 )
142 /
Freight on Goods forwarded
by steamers
Average annual cost of service by “ Dayspring”
£1,966
ll—Per
A.US.N
s and
A.N.H
!. Go ’s
STEAMERS
Freights and
Pares.
Transhipments,
&c.
Printing.
1,770
1,972
1,320
1,480
2,252
2,451
Average annual
coat of
service
by steamers
£1,825
JAMES COSH,
Sydney,
Secretary to “ Day spring ” Board.
26th March, 1897.


iIUJD
mi (o(o
