

STATEMENT
FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES
RELATIVE TO THE
ANGASTON CHAPEL CASE.
For 'private circulation only.
ADELAIDE :
PRINTED BY DAVID GALL, KING WILLIAM STREET.


PREFATORY NOTICE.
For some months past the officers and members of the Church of
Christ, worshipping in the New Chapel, Angaston, have been subjected
to much painful feeling by statements, privately and publicly circulated,
affecting the conduct and supposed future intentions of the Pastor and
Church.
However vexatious it may be to lie under misrepresentations and im-
putations, as groundless and ill founded as can well be imagined, we felt
that the obligations of Christianity imposed on us the exercise of
patience until the time arrived for presenting our ‘ case’ to view, in its
true and simple character, in order that our conduct might be fully
understood and rightly judged of.
For while we hold it to be both a Scriptural and a fundamental
principle of Christian polity, that a Church is fully competent to
manage its own affairs, without appeal to external judgment or authority;
yet this view of a Church, as to its own powers and privileges
does not, we think, preclude all notice of circumstances such as
this statement records, when a crisis involving pain or blame has
unhappily occurred.
It appears to be due to ourselves and the cause of Christ, that we
should endeavour to clear away the mist of misrepresentations which
has fallen upon us, and we do so by the light of truth thrown upon
our conduct in the succeeding ‘ statement.’
The impossibility of supplying the requisite information by means of
manuscript copies will at once account for recourse being made to the
printing press, although the statement is intended only for private
circulation.
John Hannay, Pastor.
Thomas Eadfoed, 1
Charles Masters, > Deacons.
James Wishart, j
Angaston, June 14th, 1861.


STATEMENT.
HISTORY OF THE CHURCH, TAKEN FROM THE
CHURCH BOOK.
In the year 1844, a chapel was erected in Angaston by the liberality
of one individual, for the use of the neighbourhood. For years the
worship of God was conducted in that chapel by ministers of various
denominations, but chiefly by an Independent, Mr. Oldham; a Baptist,
Mr. Stonehouse ; and a Wesleyan, Mr. Sawle.
On the 18th of June, 1849, a meeting of Christians, residing in
the neighbourhood of Angaston, was held in the house of Mr. James
Smith, for the purpose of considering the propriety of forming a
Christian Church. The Rev. T. Q. Stow was invited to attend the
meeting, which consisted of twelve Christian friends : seven Inde-
pendents, four Baptists, and one Presbyterian. Mr. Stow stated
that the object of the meeting was to consider ‘ the desirableness of
uniting together in the formation of a Christian Church, on Congre-
gational principles.’ The views and decisions of this meeting are set
forth in a letter written by Mr. Stow to Mr. Sawle, dated
Lindsay House, June 18th, 1849.
Dear Sir, —There are eighteen persons in this neighbourhood who stand
connected with the Church of which I have the happiness to be the Pastor,
besides one who is about to present his English testimonials for admission.
These Christian friends desire the full enjoyment of those privileges of fellow-
ship, from which distance has cut them off.
In order to meet this desire, I have this day met my friends, and conferred
with them as to the measures necessary to be taken in the case. I am
requested by them to communicate to you the result of their conference. It is
their wish to unite with Christians of other denominations in the formation of a
Church, on a basis that shall admit of the fellowship of all true believers, stipu-
lating only for these following points:—
Ist. The Purity of Communion, that is to say: that only those shall be
admitted who shall give evidence of a true conversion to God.
2nd. That members be admitted by the suffrages of the Church, assembled
in regular manner.
3rd. That the Church act freely and without control in the choice of its
pastor and other officers, in the exercise of its discipline, and in the transaction
of all its affairs.
4th. That the expense of worship, and the support of the pastor be met from
voluntary sources alone.
I am further directed to request, that you you will communicate this over-
ture to those Christian friends whom you may deem eligible, and seek to obtain
their concurrence.
In order to facilitate and simplify your movements, it is thought two or
three suggestions may be of use.


My friends desire it to be understood, that they do not require any relin-
quishment of usages, which may have been found useful, such as class meetings,
&c., &c. ; mutual freedom to be exercised in these things.
My friends desire me to say, that they have a lively and grateful sense of
services long continued and cheerfully rendered by yourself; that they approve
of, and enjoy your ministry, and that, in the event of a church being formed,
they are prepared cordially to unite in a call to yourself to become their pastor.
Should any Christian friends feel that they could not become members of the
projected church, they would cordially be welcomed to the Table of the Lord as
communicants, on the approval of the church.
Having now stated all the points on which nay friends desire their views to
be known, I have only to express the desire that God may guide and bless.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours truly,
Thos. Quinton Stow.
On the 30th July, an application for dismission was forwarded to
the Church in Freeman-street, signed by seventeen persons; but one
of them has never united with the Church at Angaston.
To this letter Mr. Stow replied on the 9th August, as follows,
addressed to Mr. James Smith:—
My Dear Sir, —The Church in Freeman-street grants dismission to the friends
at Angaston applying for it; and I write to say, that I hope to be in Ang-
aston on Sabbath week (19th), for the purpose of assisting to form your church,
and administering the Lord’s Supper. Yours truly,
T. Q. Stow.
According to intimation, Mr. Stow preached at Angaston on
Sunday, 19th August, and after stating before the congregation the
proposed movement, called upon his late members present to signify
their assent thereto. The ordinance of the Lord’s Supper was then
administered to the members of the infant church, and such other
friends (members of Christian churches of other denominations), as
had previously been accustomed to commune together, Mr. Sawle
assisting ; and thus the Church was formed.
At a church meeting held immediately after the service, it was
resolved—
That a meeting of the Church be held on Wednesday, the 24th instant, and
thereafter every Wednesday evening next preceding the first Sabbath in each
month.
This meeting consisted of six Independents, five Baptists, one
Presbyterian, and one Wesleyan. On the 20th August the following
letter was addressed by Messrs. Evans, Salter, and James Smith, to
the Kev. James Sawle, the object being to request, in a more formal
manner, his acceptance of the office of first pastor of the Church at
Angaston:—
Rev. and dear Sir—-Although we trust that the feelings of ourselves and our
fellow members were sufficiently made known to you by Mr. Stow’s letter of
the 18th June last, we hereby, as the deputation then appointed, request that
you will accept the cordial and unanimous invitation of the Church of Christ
now formed in this place to become its first Pastor, and would briefly add our


church in 1849 to April, 1854
38
Kemoved by death and otherwise
13
Members remaining . „
25
Consisting of Independents
9
Baptists
11
Episcopalians
3
Wesley ans
2
earnest prayers, that the great HTead of the Church may abundantly bless you
in your labours amongst us, and the church also, the formation of which is
hereby formally consummated. We remain, dear Sir,
Very truly and respectfully yours,
( Hbnet Evans
Signed on behalf of the Congregational Church, < James Smith
Angaston, ( William Saltek.
In reply to this, Mr. Sawle wrote as follows :
Park Cottage, August 24th, 1849.
Dear Brethren—l accept the call and invitation of the Church of Christ to
become its Pastor, believing it to be the call of God.
I never had the most distant idea of receiving the honour now conferred upon
me, therefore it never could have operated on my mind as a motive to labour.
1 trust I have been influenced only by one motive, that is, the glory of God and
the salvation of immortal souls. That motive I trust will ever be prominent,
and while I have your prayers, co-operation, and direction, with that of the
church generally, I have no doubt but that we shall be favoured with tokens for
good, and rejoice in the prosperity and extension of the Redeemer’s Kingdom.
I am, dear Brethren in the Gospel,
Your devoted and humble servant,
To the deputation of the Congregational Jambs Sawle.
Church, Angaston.
Church Meeting held August 29 th, 1849.
Three persons were admitted into church fellowship.
Church Meeting held October 3rd, 1849,
Two persons received into church fellowship.
At that period the church consisted of the minister and twenty-
two members, representing five sections of the Church of Christ—
Independents, Baptists, Episcopalians, Wesleyans, and Presbyterians.
From October, 1849, to May, 1851, no additions were made to the
church ; but in June, 1851, eight persons were admitted to member-
ship by letters from churches in England and Scotland, consisting of
five Baptists and three Independents. In 1853, two persons joined
the church. In 1854, four persons from England joined the church ;
three Baptists and one Independent.
Number of members, including minister, from the formation of the


Dr. Birks in the chair ; and seven members present.
Baptists
4
Independents
3
Wesleyan
1
Total of members with Chairman
...8
Such was the character and numerical strength of the church when
the present Minister came to Angaston, April, 1855, by invitation
from the church to supply the pulpit for six weeks. At the expiration
of that time, a special church meeting was held on Sunday, May 13th,
1855. G. F. Angas, Esq., in the chair. Twelve members present;
seven Baptists, four Independents, and one Episcopalian; when it was
unanimously resolved—■
That the Rev. John Hannay be invited to take the pastoral charge of the church,
that a stipend of £2OO per annum be offered to him for the present, and that G.
F. Angas, Esq., and Dr. G. V. Birks, be appointed as a deputation to wait on
Mr. Hannay and convey to him the sentiments of the church.
[*ln discussing the subject, several questions were asked. Mr. Wishart enquired if Mr.
Hannay was acceptable in every other respect, would there be any objection to him as a
Baptist ? Mr. Salter and Mr. Smith both said that ‘So far as they concerned, they have
no objections.’ It was also asked, * How shall the children be baptized?’ The answer was
—‘A change of ministers could be made for this purpose.’—Statement by Jambs
"Wishaet, and Chaeies Mastees.]
The deputation waited on Mr. Hannay with the request of the
church, when he stated that he was not prepared to give a definite
reply until he had received letters from England, which he was daily
expecting, and proposed to extend the period of his probation for a
further six weeks. \
Church Meeting , June 29 th, 1855.
The following letter from the Eev. John Hannay was read : —■
TO THE CHURCH AT ANGASTON.
My dear Christian Eriends, —The time appointed as my probationary sojourn
among you having expired, it is now my duty to inform you of my decision
respecting the future. And, without preamble, I would say, having prayerfully
considered the indications of Divine Providence, and the claims of the colony
upon those who preach the glorious Gospel of the ever blessed God, I have
arrived at the conclusion that I ought to remain in Australia, although I had
no such intention when I left England. I therefore cheerfully cast in my lot
with you, praying that the God of all grace and consolation may be with you,
for if God vouchsafes not his presence the great end of church fellowshp cannot
be attained, viz.: the exhibition of Divine Love in saving man, and of Divine
Purity in sanctifying them ; and without the attainment of these glorious results,
no minister is in his proper sphere, or ought to be satisfied with his labours ; and
no church can prosper.
I need not descant upon the reciprocal duties of pastor and people necessary
for obtaining and carrying out the purposes of God’s love towards our fallen
race, for I fully believe you look upon the church as a Divine organization, and
upon the ministry as a Divine institution, and upon the Lord Jesus as ascended
to receive gifts for men and to give pastors and teachers lor the work of the
ministry, for the perfecting of the saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ,
till we all come in the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of


Psedo-Baptist
28
Said to have become Psedo-Baptist
.. 3
Baptists
Total
God unto perfect men, unto the measure of the fulness of the stature of Christ.
I trust we shall all endeavour to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, that our connection together may be for the Saviour’s glory, for our
own spiritual good, and for the salvation of many in the neighbourhood : and to
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost be present and everlasting glory.
I remain,
Yours, in Gospel bonds,
Angaston, June 27th, 1855. John Hannay.
Letter received. Recognition services proposed, and arrangements
made for the opening of the new chapel.*
[*When preparations were making for the opening ‘Tea Meeting/ Mr. Radford,
called Mr. Smith and Mr. Evans aside and said, ‘ W e are going to have a Baptist minister;
what if the Baptists should become the largest party in the church ? The answer made
by Mr. Smith, was, ‘We must give way to them, the minority should submit to the
majority!’ ‘ But how about baptizing children ?’ Mr. Evans replied, ‘ Oh! you can get a
minister to do that/
Statement by Thomas Radioed, Sen.]
On Lord's Bay, Jxtly Ist, 1855.
Dr. (x. Y. Birks in the chair.
Mr. Hannay’s letter was again read to the church, after the morning
service, as most of the members were then present.
Thus the present minister began his labours in a church consisting
of twenty-five members, and representing four sections of the Christian
Church.
Pass then from April 1855 to April 1861. During those six years,
sixty-eight persons had been added to the twenty-five original members,
making in all ninety-one connected with the church under Mr. Hannay’s
care. Of the sixty-eight members added, seventeen had been
received by letter and restoration, and fifty-one from the world. Of
these fifty-one, twenty-six had been received as Psedo-Baptist, and
twenty-five as Baptist. And with two or three exceptions they had
all been proposed to the church, waited upoh by deputations appointed
by the church, recommended by those deputations, and received
into fellowship before any of them were baptized by immersion.
The members now stand—
The present number of members—representing Independents, Baptists,
Episcopalians, Presbyterians, and Wesleyans.
Thus it will be perceived that the church has retained its
original character of a Mixed Church, which was the wish of
the founders, as expressed by Mr. Stow when he said— ‘ It is their
wish to unite with Christians of other denominations in the formation


of a church on a basis that shall admit of the fellowship of all true
believers.’ Let us now turn our attention to the new chapel.
The church which met in the old chapel was called a Congregational
Church, and this Congregational Church called a special church
meeting, March 17th, 1853, for the purpose of taking steps for the
erection of a new Congregational Chapel in Angaston.
Ist. Proposed by Mr. Smith, and seconded by Mr. Radford —•
That it is necessary to erect a Congregational Chapel.
Carried.
2nd. Proposed by Mr. Kealley, and seconded by Mr. Salter —
That a subscription list be opened for the purpose.
Carried.
3rd. Proposed by Mr. Salter, and seconded by Mr. Masters —
That Mr. Kealley be Secretary and Treasurer.
Carried.
4. Proposed by Mr. Masters, and seconded by Mr. Kealley—
That Messrs. Smith and Eadford be appointed to canvass for subscriptions.
Carried,
Church Meeting, April 4 th, 1853.
Messrs. Smith and Radford reported that the subscriptions
amounted to £6BB 13s. 7d. Fifteen trustees nominated.
Public Meeting held in Chapel, April 22nd, 1853.
Building Committeee appointed.
Mag 10th, 1853.
Resolved —
That the subscriptions be placed in the Bank of South Australia to the credit
of the ‘Angaston Congregational Chapel,’ in the names of Messrs. Evans,
Salter, and Kealley.
Resolved —
That Mr. Kealley forward the names of the Trustees to Mr. Angas, for his
approval.
After many meetings and much deliberation upon plans, speci-
fications, &c., the plan of Messrs. Cocking & Aggett was adopted,
and the building commenced.
Copy of document placed in the foundation stone—
‘Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will
TOWARDS MEN.’
The foundation stone of this Congregational Church was laid by the Hon.
G. F. Angas, M.L.C., on the third day of November, 1854.
Minister ; Eev. James Sawle.


Trustees :
James Sawle William Salter
Samuel Kealley Thomas Radford
Samuel Smith James Smith
Henry Evans William Oldham
John Howard Angas Henry Giles
Architects : Messrs. Cocking & Aggett, Adelaide.
Church Meeting, Wednesday, May 3rd, 1855.
Trust Deed of new chapel read.
Proposed by Mr. Kealley, seconded by Mr. Salter, and resolved^
That the names of Charles Masters, William Yates, and Ebenezer Keynes,
be inserted in the trust deed.
It was evident that the new Congregational Chapel was built for
the use of the Congregational Church meeting in the old chapel.
This was so self-evident that their right to possession was never
questioned. The church that proposed the erection of a new
chapel, opened a subscription list for that purpose; appointed col-
lectors, secretary, treasurer, from its own members ; opened an account
in the bank in its own name, called meetings, appointed committees,
nominated trustees, received reports, adopted plans, superintended
their execution, met all liabilities connected with the undertaking,
gave definite instructions for the drawing up of a trust deed, appointed
one of its members to correspond with Rev. T. Q. Stow on the subject
of the trust deed ; and was considered, by all parties, to have a right
to the building.
The correspondence which took place between Mr. Evans and Mr.
Stow is not in the possession of the church. But we find that Mr.
Stow forwarded to Angaston a document, entitled a ‘Declaration of
the Faith, Church Order, and Discipline of Christians, denominated
Congregationalists.’ This ‘Declaration’ as a whole was considered
to express the views of the church, except in two particulars,—
Ist. The members of the church were not to be called ‘ Independents ,’
as set forth in the ‘Declaration,’ but ‘ Congregationalists.'’
2nd. The words in the xviii. article of the ‘Declaration,’ ‘ Baptism
to be administered to all converts to Christianity and their children ,’
were to be omitted, as it was considered this clause made the baptism
of children obligatory upon the members of the Church, which could
not be carried out in a church composed of Psedo-Baptists and Baptists.
To meet this difficulty, the clause ‘ converts to Christianity and their
children ’ was struck out, and the words, ‘ baptism to be administered
by the application of water to the subject, ’ were inserted, on the
supposition that this phraseology left the question of baptism an open
one, so that each member might act as his conscience dictated.
The ‘Declaration,’ with the above alterations, was returned to the
Rev. T. Q. Stow, accompanied by a letter from G-. F. Angas, Esq., to
which Mr. Stow replied as follows :


Felixstowe, March 14th, 1855.
My dear Sir—Your letter respecting the trust deed I did not get until I was
starting for Melbourne, and I returned so unwell that I have not been sufficiently
well to answer it until now.
With regard to an alteration of the ‘Declaration,’ if made, it should be by
setting aside the clause respecting baptism altogether, and making provision that
opinions on that subject shall not form the basis of your chwrch constitution, nor
effect the conditions of trust. Your proposal simply to cut off the words, ‘and
their children, would have the effect of making it exclusive the other way, or
at least have that appearance.
The only reason for referring in our trust deeds to the ‘ declaration’ was to
shorten the document by rendering it unnecessary to go through a long
enumeration of articles of belief. But we have a number of Chapels upon the
broad basis for which you plead. The Church at Angaston was formed on this
basis, and it would be better that your deed should also, if that is the wish of
your people. In this case we simply say, ‘ln trust, for a Church of Protestant
ChristianSj holding what are termed the Evangelical doctrines of the fall and
condemnation of man—the proper Deity—and real atonement of Jesus Christ—
a free justification through faith in the Redeemer—the influence of the Holy
Spirit to change and sanctify the heart—and the obligation of a holy life.’
That members be received into this Church on the ground of personal
spiritual piety, evidenced to the satisfaction of the Church.
That this Church be Congregational in its constitution and action, that is to
say—that it manage its own affairs, elect its own officers, and admit its own
members without control from any other Church.
In this case you do not require the ‘ declaration’ at all. All the particulars
respecting the property, mode of election of Minister, filling up of Trustees, &c.,
would be the same, of course, as in their usual deeds.
If there is any other aid I can render, I shall be happy to do so.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours very truly,
To G-. F. Angas, Esq., Angaston. Thos. Quinton Stow.
It will be seen from the above letter that Mr. Stow had no
objection to the distinctive appellation ‘ Independent’ being omitted,
as the Church was only in part composed of Independents. The term
‘Congregational’ was adopted as the term expressing the polity of the
Church, viz.: —that of managing its own affairs, electing its own officers,
admitting its own members without control from any other Church.
This polity made the Church Congregational, and its members
Congregationalists.
On the second point Mr. Stow advised the setting aside of the
clause on baptism altogether, on the ground that simply to cut
off the words ‘ and their children ’ would have the effect of making it
exclusive the other way; or, at least, have that appearance.
Whatever the effect may be, the words ‘ and their children’ were cut
out for they do no not appear in the deed. If Mr. Stow’s opinion
was correct, then it is evident the Chapel is not a Poedo-Baptist
Chapel.
The deed was prepared without containing the word ‘ Independents,’
which is found in all deeds belonging to that body of Christians, and
also without the words ‘ and their children ’, which are essential in
constituting a place of worship a Psedo-Baptist Sanctuary.


The deed was signed, and it is reasonable to suppose the Trustees
fully understood the nature of the document they set their hands and
seals to, and the kind of duties they pledged themselves to discharge
with fidelity. Their testimony is subjoined :
We, the undersigned Trustees, set our hands and seals to the deed of the
Angaston Chapel, understanding it to be a Congregational or Union Chapel.
Thomas Radford )
Charles Masters \ Deacons -
When I signed the trust deed of the Angaston Chapel I did so with the firm
conviction that it was a Union place of worship. J. H. As gas.
I did not subscribe to the Angaston Chapel and become a Trustee thereof,
supposing it to be an Independent Chapel. It is my opinion it was not for
sectarian purposes. Samuel Kealley.
My impression regarding the Church is (and I state this as one of its first
members at its foundation), that it was neither Baptist nor Pasdo-Baptist, but
was what is generally termed a Union Chapel. James Smith.
The fact that the Trustees hold different views on baptism, appears to me to
strengthen the evidence as to the wishes and intentions of those who erected the
place of worship, and to favor the idea, that it was intended to be a Union
Chapel. Henry Giles.
We were compelled to make a Union Chapel of it. Henry Evans.
Mr. Salter stated, at a meeting held May 17th, 1861, ‘that when
he signed the deed the impression upon his mind was, that the
deed did not make it an Independent Chapel.’ [Attested statement.]
At the same meeting of Trustees present—Messrs. Evans, Salter,
Yates, Keynes, Kealley, Masters, and Samuel Smith.—The Trustees
were asked (by Mr. Kealley at the request of the Minister), if ‘ when
they signed the deed they understood it to be a Union Chapel.’ The
Chairman replied in the affirmative, adding ‘ although that was not
the original intention of some of the Trustees.’
The new chapel was publicly opened for the performance of
Divine worship, on the 22nd October, 1855. The Rev. T. Q. Stow
(Independent) had engaged to preach in the morning, and the Rev. Gr.
Stonehouse (Baptist) in the evening. Indisposition prevented Mr.
Stow from fulfilling his engagement, and Mr. Hannay supplied his
place.
The church, which had for six years worshipped in the old chapel
removed in a body and took possession of the new; and continued
to worship therein unchallenged until the 11th of May, 1861, when
the following documents were handed to Mr. Hannay, who called a
church meeting for the 15th instant, and read them to the church :
To the Eevd. John Hannay.—
Eevd. and Dear Sir, —It has already been intimated that the opinion of
counsel was being sought, relative to the trust deed of the Angaston
Congregational Chapel, in connection with your ministry therein.


That opinion having been obtained, we herewith respectfully send it for
your information and guidance.
It is not without deep concern and regret that we forward this document, as
we cannot doubt it will occasion you much pain.
A conscientious faithfulness to our duties as trustees, and no personal or
unkindly feeling towards yourself, constrains us, after long and painful forbear-
ance, to take this step.
We are, Revd. and Dear Sir,
Yours, most faithfully,
William Saltbb, Henry Evans,
Samuel Smith, Wm. Yates.
To the Officers and Members of the Church, meeting in the Congregational
Chapel, Angaston.—
Dear and much esteemed friends, —-You are not unacquainted with the
circumstances in connection with the chapel and pastor, which have given us
great uneasiness for a considerable time past. We became convinced that the
course pursued by the Revd. John Hannay was opposed to the conditions of
the trust deed.
Although esteeming him in other respects, we feel that his proceedings were
incompatible with the relations in which he stood.
With these convictions no course seemed left to us, but to act with fidelity to
the trusts committed to us ; we have, therefore, obtained the professional
opinion of two of the leading barristers in Adelaide, Messrs. Hanson & Stow,
and now beg, most respectfully, to place it before you.
We most earnestly disclaim all hostility to the church. We bear towards it
esteem and affection; we desire its prosperity ; and now seek to restore it to
the original position provided for it by the deed of trusts.
We remain, dear Sir,
Yours, with very much regard,
Samuel Smith, William Salteb,
Henry Evans, William Yates.
CASE SUBMITTED TO COUNSEL BY DISSENTIENT
TRUSTEES.
By indenture left herewith, bearing date the 3rd day of October,
1855, George Fife Angas, Esq., conveyed to certain persons therein
mentioned, certain allotments of land, at Angaston, with the buildings
thereon, upon trust, to hold the same for the performance of Divine
Worship, by the society of Protestants called Congregationalists,
holding the principles and preaching the usages therein set forth.
One of the doctrines therein set forth it will be perceived is as
follows: —
The obligation of baptism is perpetual, by the application of water to the
subject. By the term ‘Congregationalists,’ is always meant the religious body
known as ‘Congregationalists,’ or ‘lndependents.’
The religious body termed ‘Baptists, although congregational in
their form of church government, are never termed ‘Congregationalists.’
Congregationalists do not practice baptism by immersion, and when


they practice that rite, it is by pouring or sprinkling. The usual
and technical mode of expressing their doctrine is by saying, that a
person is ‘Baptized by the application of water to the subject.’
The Baptists, so called, practice baptism by immersion, and in
expressing their doctrine, say that a person is baptized ‘by the
application of the subject to the water.’
The Revd. Mr. Hannay was appointed Minister. Mr. Hannay is a
Baptist, and has of late given prominence to the subject of baptism
by immersion. The special grounds of complaint are set forth in an
extract from a letter hereunto annexed.
The consequence of all this is, that a considerable number of the
members of the church, who are Congregationaiists, and therefore
disapprove of the practice of baptism by immersion, or do not consider
it of importance, are dissatisfied with Mr. Hannay’s teaching, and the
necessity has arisen, either that Mr. Hannay should cease to be the
pastor of the church, or that they should cease to be the members of it.
One of the results of Mr. Hannay’s teaching is, that a considerable
number have lately joined the church, who are of his way of thinking;
it is probable, that a majority of the members of the church would
side with him in any question that may arise.
Under these circumstances, you are requested to advise—
-Ist. Does the property comprised in the trust deed above referred
to, belong to the religious denomination known as Congregationaiists,
otherwise Independents, or to the denomination known as Baptists ]
2nd. If it belongs to the Congregationaiists, otherwise Indepen-
dents, have the trusts of the deed been violated, by reason of Mr.
Hannay’s proceedings, and if so, what course would you recommend
the trustees to adopt in the matter 1
Adelaide, 22nd April, 1861.
OPINION OF COUNSEL ON THE CASE.
Ist. We are of opinion, that the property comprised in the deed belongs to
the religious body known as Congregationaiists, or Independents, and not to
the Baptists.
2nd. From the facts stated in the extract of the letter of Mr. Evans, we
think that there is clear evidence, that the proceedings and conduct of Mr.
Hannay have been altogether at variance with the principles of that body, and
with the tenets declared in the deed, and we are therefore of opinion, that the
trustees, if unanimous, should exclude him from the chapel.
If they are not unanimous, then a bill in equity will be required, to declare
that he is no longer minister of the Congregationaiists assembling in that chapel,
which bill, we think, must be successful.
ned ) r:j Ha Z:
As the extracts from the letter, written by Mr. Evans, on which
counsel formed their opinion, had not been forwarded to Mr. Hannay,
he, on the 11th of May, applied to Messrs. Evans, Salter, Smith, and
Yates for them, but received no answer to his communication. At the


church meeting the extracts were produced and answered by Mr.
Haimay to the satisfaction of the church.
THE ‘ CASE’ CONSIDERED.
Ist. The term Congregational is a generic term and applies to
Baptists equally with Independents. Webster says, £ Congregational
is appropriately used of such Christians as maintain that each
congregation is independent of others and has a right to choose its own
Pastor and govern itself, ‘ Congregationalist’ one who belongs to a
Congregational Church or society •’ ‘ one who holds to the right of
assembled brethren to elect their Pastor, and to determine all
ecclesiastical matters.’
Dr. S. Davidson, late of the Lancashire Independent College,
defines a Congregational Church to be c a church subject to Christ
alone ;no external power having ecclesiastical jurisdiction over it.’ A
church competent to transact its own affairs, being complete in itself.’
The ‘ case ’ says— ‘ Baptists,’ although Congregational in their
form of Church Government, are never termed ‘ Congregationalists.’
If any one will consult the ‘ statistical records’ of this colony, under
the head £ Religions,’ £ he will find that Baptists are termed
Congregationalists. In the census returns for 1856, 1857, 1858,
under the head 1 Congregationalists’ Baptists and Independents are
included. A church at North Adelaide is registered as a Congregational
Baptist Church, also one in Pulteney-street, Adelaide. Many
churches in England and America of the Baptist order are called £Con-
gregational Baptists. ’
Independents are not known in history as Congregationalists. The
term has been taken by Independents of late years, partly because so
many Baptists were found in their churches ; but it does not
exclusively belong to them, and, consequently, it has not been given to
them by general consent. There are many histories of the Independents
and Independency, but not of Congregationalists as a religious
society.
Again the £ case’ says, Congregationalists, that is Independents, do
not practise baptism by immersion. As a body they do not, but
many Independent Ministers baptize by immersion when asked; as
witness the practice of the Rev. H. W. Beecher, of America; and the
Rev. C. W. Evan, of Adelaide.
Again the £ case’ says, Baptists, when they express their mode of
baptism say, 1 the application of the subject to the water;’ and the
Congregationalists say, £ the application of water to the subject.’ We
ask for proof, for as far as our knowledge goes this is a distinction
never made.
Dr. S. Davidson, in his Congregational Lectures, vol. xiii., p. 222,
says, £ when water is applied to the body of an adult or to the face of an
infant, the person immersing or sprinkling communicates no moral


efficacy to the baptized.’ Here is one Independent Minister of
eminence, who does not make the distinction set forth in the ‘ case.’
Dr. Cox, in his work on baptism, says ‘ a person may be immersed
by pouring , water may overflow, or overwhelm, or ascend upon the
subject.’ Here is a Baptist Minister who does not make the distinction
set forth in the ‘ case.’
Dr. Halley, Independent, says, ‘ the earth was as truly baptized by
the flood as a stone is baptized when thrown into water.’ These are
instances in which the distinction set forth in the ‘ case’ is not made
by Independent or Baptist ministers.
In the ‘ opinion’ it is said ‘ the property comprised in the deed is
not the property of the Baptists.’ The Baptists never said it was,
they consider it is no more theirs than it is the Psedo-Baptists.
Again, it is said, ‘ the proceedings and conduct of Mr. Hannay have
been altogether at ’variance with the principles of Congregationalists and
with the tenets declared in the deed,’ The trustees state only one point
in which they suppose his conduct at ‘ variance with the deed,’ viz. :
His mode of administering baptism. In all other points of belief
and practice his conduct is admitted to be in strict accordance with
the deed. ‘ There is no difference of opinion as to Mr. Hannay's
general character as a preacher and minister.' Why then should a legal
opinion be given that his conduct is altogether at variance with the
deed %
The above explanations having been given, the Church passed the
accompanying resolutions, as embodying their sentiments on the points
in dispute between the Trustees named and themselves.
Resolutions passed at a Special Church Meeting, held in the
Angaston Chapel, May 15th, 1861.
1. Proposed by Mr. Kealley, seconded by Mr. Clark :
It is the opinion of this meeting that the Church assembling in the Angaston
Chapel composed of Psedo-Baptists and Baptists, is a Congregational Church, that
is—-a church managing its own affairs, electing its own officers, admitting its
own members without control from any other church, and thus acting, its
members are Congregationalists.
Passed unanimously.
2. Proposed by Mr. David Randall, and seconded by Mr. Gates :
It is the opinion of this meeting, that the Angaston Chapel is not the property
of the Peedo-Baptists, or Baptists, or any distinctive sect, or denomination of
Christians, but the property of the Church as originally formed, now existing,
and as set forth in the church book and trust deed.
Passed unanimously.
3. Proposed by Mr. Masters, and seconded Jby Mr. Wishart: —
It is the opinion of this meeting, that we, as a church, hold the principles
and practice the usages set forth in the trust deed, and that the proceedings and
conduct of the Rev. John Hannay, our minister, have not been ‘at variance with
those principles and usages.
Carried (one against).


4. Proposed by Mr. Randall, and seconded by Mr. C. Masters :—-
It is the opinion of this meeting, that the conduct of four of the Trustees,
viz. : —Samuel Smith, William Salter, Henry Evans, and William Yates has been
at variance with the conditions of the trust committed to them. Ist. By calling
and holding Trustee meetings contrary to the conditions of the trust deed, which
provides ‘that every meeting of Trustees shall be called by public notice, given
on the Sunday preceding, during the time of divine service. 2nd. By appealing
to lawyers for an opinion on questions for which the deed provides as follows; —
Ist. That the only appeal in all questions touching their faith and practice
shall be to the Sacred Scriptures. 2ndly. Which provides ‘ that all matters
connected with the church and building shall be managed by the officers of the
church under its sanction : and 3rd. By seeking to remove the minister
contrary to the conditions of trust, which provides, ‘ that the minister shall be
appointed and removed by, at least, two-thirds of the whole of the members of
the Church.’
Passed (one against).
5. Proposed by Mr. Wishart, and seconded by Mr. Masters ;
It is the opinion of this meeting, that if the Trustees resolve to act upon
the opinion of their counsel and file a bill in equity ; the church will feel called
upon to order the sale of the chapel, and apply the money arising from such
sale as the deed provides.
Carried (one against).
6. Proposed by Mr. Randall, and seconded by Mr. C. Radford.
It is the opinion of this meeting, that as the Trustees set their hands and
seals to the deed of the Angaston Chapel, believing it to be a Congregational or
Union Chapel, as ordered by the church, March 11th, 1855, the Trustees be
requested to do any and all things required to secure the chapel as a ‘ Union
Chapel,’ and that all matters affecting the chapel be submitted to the church
for its consideration, rejection, or ratification, to be made by two-thirds of the
members at a meeting to be called for such purposes.
Carried unanimously.
7. Proposed by Mr. Clark, and seconded by Mr. Randall ;
That the here assembled, Paedo-Baptists and Baptists, pledge themselves not
to endeavour hereafter to take the trust property from each other.
Carried unanimously.
8. Proposed by Mr. Clark, and seconded by Mr. Randall :
That it is not the wish of this meeting that any alteration should be made in
the name of the Trustees.
Proposed by Mr. Randall, and seconded by Mr. Masters: —
That the charges contained in the ‘ extracts’ from a letter written to the
Hon. G. F. Angas, by Henry Evans, Esq., and on which counsel has given an
opinion, have been fully and satisfactorily answered by Mr. Hannay.
Carried unanimously.
10. Proposed by Mr. Geo. Roberts, and seconded by Mr. Gates :
It is the opinion of this meeting, that the resolution be read at the Trustee
meeting, called for the 17th instant, if such shall be the wish of the Trustees.
Carried unanimously—
11. Proposed by Mr. Clark, and seconded by Mr. Randall


That the proceedings of this meeting be kept, entered in the church book
and attested by the Deacons.*
Carried unanimously.
12. Proposed by Mr. Kealley, and seconded by Mr. Randall:—
That a document be drawn up expressive of an opinion of Mr. Hannay’s
teaching and conduct amongst us since he became our minister; as counsel has
been informed that a considerable number of the members of the Church are
dissatisfied with Mr. Hannay’s teaching.
Carried unanimously.
13. Proposed by Mr. Masters, and seconded by Mr, C. Radford :
That Messrs. Kealley, Clarke, and Randall, be appointed by this meeting to
to draw up the above document.
Carried unanimously.*
These resolutions were forwarded to the trustee meeting, held on
the 17th inst., and accompanied by the following note :
TO THE TRUSTEES OF THE AND ASTON CHAPEL.
Gentlemen,- —At a special church meeting, held on the 15th instant, it was
proposed by Mr. Roberts, and seconded by Mr. Gates, that ‘ it is the opinion of
this meeting, that these resolutions be read at the trustee meeting, called for the
17th instant, {if such he the wish of the trustees). ’
The resolutions in the charge of Mr. Kealley were passed by the meeting, and
will be read by him, if the trustees make a request to that effect.
I am, Gentlemen,
Yours truly,
To the Trustees of the Angaston Chapel. John Hannat.
We now continue our investigation of the trust deed, on the points
in dispute.
Ist. The deed gives the chapel no name. It is never called a
Congregational, or Independent, or Baptist, or Union Chapel ;
according to the deed it is simply ‘a chapel for the performance of
Divine worship, and the service of Almighty God.’
2nd. By whom ? ‘The society of Protestants, called Congregation-
alists, holding the principles and practising the usages following.’
This language cannot apply to the whole society of Protestants
called Congregationalists, neither can it apply to any section of
Congregationalists into which the body may be divided, for among
Congregational Churches, belief and practice obtain, as contrary to
the requirements of the deed, as the east is to the west. The
Trustees hold the chapel, not for the use of the general society of
Congregationalists, but for the use of a particular society, viz., the one
at Angaston; and while it consists of five persons holding the
principles and practising the usages set forth in the deed, the Trustees
have no option but to hold the chapel for their use, or to resign.
*The above resolutions were entered in the church book, examined and found correct,
and signed on behalf of the church.
Thomas Radeoed, ")
Charles Masters, >■ Deacons.
James Wishart. j
And confirmed by the church meeting, held May 29th, 1861.


£
8.
d.
£
8.
d.
Original cost of chapel, ... ,.
2,679
3
2
Balance in hand on leaving old chapel ...
7
9
H
Monies subscribed by Psedo-Baptists members ...
357 10
0
Do. do. by Baptist members ...
1,618
11
0
Subscribed by congregation and general public ...
408
6
0
Proceeds of bazaar, collections, tea meeting, and
opening services ...
278
0
H
Sale of scaffolding ...
9
6
9
2,679
3
2
3rd. Does the church worshipping in the Angaston Chapel, hold
the principles and practice the usages enumerated in the trust deed ?
It is admitted that the minister and members hold the principles and
practice the usages set forth in the deed, with one exception, viz.,
the mode of administering baptism. The objection does not regard the
doctrine of baptism, or its perpetual obligation, but, simply the mode
of administering that ordinance. Who is to decide the matter as to
mode? This.is the subject of controversy, and the deed provides
‘that in all controversies the original Scriptures are to be consulted,
by the aid of sound criticism, as a final appeal.
Again, the deed provides that ‘their only appeal in all questions
touching their religious faith and practice, is to the Sacred Scriptures.’
Thus the point in dispute can only be decided by an appeal to the
word of God. But, grant the distinction made, that water in baptism
is to be applied to the subject. Who is the subject ? Not
necessarily a child, for the deed makes no mention of children, and its
silence on this important point is accounted for thus— ‘ the baptism of
children not to be binding upon the members who worship here.’
• —‘Not to be obligatory,’
The members of the church being under no obligation to baptize
children, are left by the deed free as to mode, provided only, that
water be applied to the subject.
The opinion entertained by some ministers in the colony with whom
we have conversed is, —that the deed institutes a new kind of church,
a church, the members of which believe certain doctrines, and then are
baptized by the application of water, though not necessarily by
immersion. How far their opinion is correct is left for others to
judge.
Having endeavoured to show some of the reasons we have for
claiming the ‘right to worship God in the Angaston Chapel, let us
consider one more, which, although it is a pecuniary one, is, neverthe-
less of importance, viz., the share the Baptists have borne in the
erection of the chapel.
THE COST OF THE CHAPEL.
Alteration of roof, &c., since opening of Chapel, say 300 0 0
£2,979 3 2
From the above it will be seen that the Baptist members of the


Church gave nearly five times as much as the Poedo-Baptists towards
the building, and a third more than was derived from all other sources.
In addition, they gave a fair proportion of the sums placed
to the credit of the general public. Surely then they have some little
claim to an interest in the house erected for the worship of Almighty
God, in Angaston.
The members of the Church and the public have been very generally
asked to say, if they gave their money for the erection of a Sectarian
Chapel, and the replies have been in the negative. As the Hon. G.
F. Angas was the principal subscriber, it may be of importance to
hear his opinion. It was given in writing thus :
‘As to the reasons why I gave the land and so large a sum of money for the
erection of the chapel, I declare, most solemnly, that it was with the clear
understanding that it was to be a Union Chapel, that is, that all Christians who
hold the essential saving doctrines of Christianity as expressed in the present
deed, were to he admitted as members if their practice was moral and consistent,
but as to all non-essential points there was to be a liberty to differ ; and, I
suppose, all the church will consider it a point non-essential, whether the
subject in baptism goes to the water, or the water is brought to him.’
‘lt is well known that I have acted out the utmost degree of Christian
charity towards all sects of true Christians, although I did not see with them on
non-essential matters ; and it is not to be supposed for a moment that I would
act on other principles in the erection of a place of worship at Angaston, where
the small population could not admit of a chapel for every sect.”
Abundance of evidence can be given that the money was subscribed
and received for the erection of a chapel for the use of Christians of
all denominations. The deed was made out in accordance with such
intentions, and signed by the Trustees with this understanding.
Although the Trustees signed the deed as a Union Chapel, some of them
now consider it a ‘ Psedo-Baptist Sanctuary.’ ‘ Their own Sanctuary
exclusively ,’* and ‘ they feel that unless the Trustees interfere to
prevent it, the chapel will be to all intents and purposes alienated
from the body for whose use it was erected, and devoted to the
exclusive use of another sect of Christians.’
They also say, ‘when Mr. Hannay came to Angaston, he found
there an Independent Church, and a large sum of money collected for
the erection of an Independent Chapel.’ ‘Surely it was never
understood when Mr. Hannay was asked if he could conscientiously
undertake the charge of a Union Chapel, that the Psedo-Baptists should
be compelled to hear Baptist views urgently preached from the pulpit.’
Then Mr. Hannay was asked to take the charge of a Union chapel,
although ‘when he came to Angaston, he found there an Independent
Church.'' We leave Messrs. Evans, Salter, Smith, and Yates to
explain these discrepancies in their own statements.
In the letter of invitation given to Mr. Sawle, no mention is made
of ‘ Independents ,’ or in his answer to that letter. hTo mention is
made of Independents or Congregationalists, in the letter of invitation
* ‘The chapel is placed in our hands to be handed down as a Psedo-Baptist place of
worship to our children’s children.’


given to Mr. Hannay, or in his reply to it. And no mention is made
of Independents in the church hook or trust deed.
The first minister was a Wesleyan, and he was not required to
relinquish any usages he considered useful, or to practise any contrary
to his conscience ; but the second minister, a Baptist, after six years
service, is required (by a very small section of the Church) to
relinquish what he considers scriptural, as well as useful, and to
practise what he considers otherwise, or resign his charge as minister.
Surely such requirements are most unreasonable, and ought to be resisted.
The dissentient trustees say, ‘there is no difference of opinion as to
Mr. Hannay’s general character as a preacher and minister. It all
turns on the question, has Mr. Hannay adhered, practically or not, to
his engagement as the pastor of the Angaston chapel 1 ’
What the engagement entered into between church and minister
was, the letters of invitation and acceptance plainly declare, and if
any person can show that the engagement has been violated, let him
do so, in a constitutional manner, and let the church decide.
As far as the chapel is concerned it cannot be shewn that it was
ever intended for an Independent Chapel by the originators of it,
or by the subscribers towards it. But suppose it was intended for a
Sectarian Congregational Chapel—we might say in Mr. Evans’s own
words, ‘ the question is not what was intended, for one may say one
thing and another the contrary. But what does the deed of trust
express V For this is the summary manner in which the rights of the
Baptists are disposed of, who, if they had chosen, might easily have
built a chapel of their own with the money they gave towards the
Angaston Chapel. Their endeavours to ‘ live as brethren’ and keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace,’ have been ill responded
to by the recent movement, which ignores their existence as a church,
and calls all their acts, null and void from the beginning,’ and alleges
that there is no minister, deacons or church ! Truly this extraordi-
nary assumption of the ‘ Dissentient Trustees’ is just of a piece with
what follows,—— 4 we are quite willing to unite with Christians of other
denominations, and to admit them to the sacramental table, but we
are not prepared to admit them as voting members.’ Hear this
ye Baptists of South Australia, who have given your influence, time,
and means, to the extension of Independency.
It now only remains to examine the charges brought against the
Minister, as contained in two letters printed by Mr. H. Evans and
party, and circulated widely throughout the colony.
The charges in these letters have very little weight with those who
know the circumstances connected with them. We shall, however,
examine the principal of them.
DEBATING SOCIETY.
Ist. Two of the letters have to do with the ‘ Young Men’s De-
bating Society.’


A pamphlet on Psedo-Baptism had been sent by the post throughout
the neighbourhood, and the Psedo-Baptist party had challenged any
one to answer it; had again and again declared it the production of one
of the master minds of England, a man as good as he was great, and to be
unanswerable. The young men of opposite opinions resolved to take up
the gauntlet, and try what they could do. The pamphlet was proposed
for discussion, and the proposition carried. When the time arrived
for the discussion, it was rumoured that Messrs. N. Player, 8. Smith,
senr., G. P. Hodge, H. Evans, junr., &c., not members of the society,
were to be present. This intimation rather intimidated some of the
members, consequently a request was sent, that Mr. Hannay should
attend in his capacity of President, and take the chair ; which he did,
and the proceedings passed off very well. A vote of thanks to the
Chairman, for the impartial manner in which he had conducted the
meeting, was proposed, seconded, and supported by three Psedo-Baptists.
The Chairman, in returning thanks, said, that as during the
discussion many remarks had been made contrary to fact, he wished
to correct one or two, which he did ; and in the course of his remarks
said, ‘the pamphlet in question had been re-printed without the consent
of the author.’ This was considered by Mr. Evans as uncalled for,
although, when made, he (Mr. E.) was not known by the speaker to be
the cause of the re-print. He has since avowed it in the following
words : ‘I have no objection whatever to take upon myself the sole
responsibility of re-printing and circulating Mr. Thorn’s invaluable
tract, “Dipping not Baptizing.” Others may claim a share in this
honour, and will, with me, glory in what we have done ; and we are
prepared at any time to justify ourselves, both to the church and the
world.’
It will be seen, then, that baptism was not the subject discussed,
but ‘Mr. Thorn’s pamphlet;’ and when this was proposed for discussion,
Mr. Hannay was not present, and had no knowledge of the mattter.
He went by invitation, and conducted the meeting to the satisfaction
of all, and to his remarks any one present might have replied, had he
thought fit to do so. Therefore, for the authors of the printed circular
to say, ‘and no reply was permitted,’ is a pure fabrication.
This, then, is the history of the baptismal controversy in the Young
Men’s Debating Society.
LETTERS ON PROSELYTING.
The first letter is written by a person designating herself ‘ Mrs.
David Radford ,’ but to whom addressed does not appear. Now as
Mrs. D. Radford (formerly Martha Smith), makes no profession of
Christianity, and was never once spoken to on the subject of baptism
by Mr. H.; it is surely quite out of place for her to say that she was
‘ proselyted to Baptist views.’
The second letter is signed ‘ Edward Salter,’ and is in answer to a
request made to him by some one to know if Mr. H. ‘ proselyted’ him.


The charge in this letter is, that Mr. H. ‘ invariably explained passages
that related to baptism in favour of adult baptism and by immersion.’
How should Mr. H. have explained them ? Contrary to his belief 1
or not at all 1
If Mr. Salter was influenced by Mr. Hannay’s instructions
at the Bible class, surely this cannot be charged upon him as a fault,
or as proselyting.
The third letter is from ‘ Elizabeth Smith,’ and is addressed ‘ Dear
Sir’, she says, ‘ I was baptized through the influence of an address
which I heard from Mr. Hannay, when witnessing the ordinance of
believers’ baptism.’ No sensible person would call this ‘proselyting.’
The fourth is from ‘Sidney Smith,’who says, ‘I was baptized in
consequence of instructions received at the Bible class, and should not
have been baptized had I not received those instructions.’ Very likely
not; but is this style of proselyting a crime ?
All the young persons who have signed these letters (with one
exception), have been brought to a knowledge of the truth by the
preaching of the Gospel in the Angaston Chapel; and it is rather
strange that they should write in May so oppositely from what they
did in January last.
Angaston, January Ist, 1861.
To our beloved Pastor,
Dear Sir—We, the members of the bible class, beg to tender our sincere
acknowledgments for the interest you have manifested in our spiritual welfare,
and humbly hope that your instructions may have been blessed to our growth in
knowledge and in grace.
We rejoice in the evidence we have that your labour of love has not been in
vain in the Lord. May he still honor you by blessing the truth from your lips,
giving efficacy to the word of his grace in teaching the young to remember their
Creator in the days of their youth, and to devote their lives to him, ‘ whose yoke
is easy, and his service perfect freedom.’ May the Cod of all grace enrich you
with heavenly wisdom and spiritual discernment, that you may be able out of
the treasury of divine truth, to bring forth all that doctrine, reproof, correction,
and instruction, by the reception of which in love, we shall become fruitful in
every good word and work.
We cordially wish you every temporal and spiritual blessing, and unitedly
desire your acceptance of this small token of our love and esteem—a new year’s
gift—and a memorial of our appreciation of your ministerial services.
Martha Smith, (now Mrs. D. Eadford,)
Elizabeth Smith,
Mary Jane Smith,
Sidney Smith,
And eighteen other members of the class.
To the Eev. J. Hannay.
The fifth letter is from Mr. Smith, senr., who says he ‘was
proselyted by Mr. H.’ who brought Mr. David Eandall to see him, &c.
Mr. Eandall will speak for himself.
Glen Para, Mount Crawford, June Bth, 1861.
Eev. Jno. Hannay,
My dear friend—ln a printed circular, issued apparently by five ‘dissentient
resident Trustees,’ and dated, ‘Angaston, May 24th, 1861,’ I find myself referred
to in the following terms in a letter signed ‘Samuel Smith.’ ‘Mr. Hannay on


one occasion brought Mr. David Randall to my house, and said that he (Mr
Randall) ‘would talk to me on the subject of baptism.’ The inference of any one
from reading the above extract, especially as taken in connexion with the former part
of the letter, can only be this : That I was taken by Mr. Hannay to Mr. Smith’s
house, to talk on the subject of baptism, in order to proselyte Mr. Smith.
Now I unhesitatingly affirm, that this is an assumption on the part of Mr. Smith
utterly without foundation.’ For Mr. Smith to say that (you took me to his
house to talk to him on the subject of baptism, is altogether untrue. In point
of fact we neither of us on that occasion entered Mr. Smith’s residence. I can
only hope that Mr. Smith will, in future, be more careful in his statement
of facts.
I am,
Yours, very sincerely,
David Randall.
The sixth letter is from Mrs. Smith, and is merely an echo of her
husband’s.
The letter signed ‘ Fidus’ is quite a misrepresentation, as the writer
must be fully aware. To him we would say, ‘the next time you inform
us in the social circle that you have not sprinkled children for many
years, and express a doubt as to immersion baptism, we may decline
lending you any book on the subject.’
The letter stating that the ordinary weekly service would be held in
the Old Chapel, and signed ‘ Henry Evans, Samuel Smith, and Sidney
Smith,’ is quite a mis-statement. Mr. Hannay is not so ignorant
of the meaning of words as to call an extraordinary service an ordinary
one. On a former occasion a baptismal service was announced to take
place in the Old Chapel, which gave offence to Mr. Evans; and to
avoid offending a second time, the nature of the service was not
announced, but simply— ‘ The service on Thursday evening, will be
held in the Old Chapel.’ The reason why the service was held on
Thursday instead of Friday, is well known to have been to afford the
opportunity of holding a temperance meeting on the latter day.
The attack said to have been made on Pgedo-Baptists is equally
incorrect, and the expressions imputed to Mr. H. were not used by
him. But as Messrs. Evans and Smith, sen., and junior, were not at
the meeting, they may be excused for their credulity in believing the
reports ; but that is no reason why they should print and circulate
them without proof.
The letter signed ‘ Henry Evans,’ and referring to a woman, whose
name he has forgotten , records no solitary instance of obliviousness,
as he seems to have forgotten many things which, if recorded, would
materially alter his statement.
The letter signed Wm. Salter, Samuel Smith, and Henry Evans,
says, ‘Mr. Hannay circulates works on Immersion Baptism, but
publicly denounces Pjedo-Baptists if they follow his example.’ How
Mr. Salter could sign the above truthfully we leave him to say, for he
has not heard Mr. H. ‘denounce’ any one since Dec. 28th, 1859, and
never before that time, as there was no occasion for it. Also, ‘Mr.
Hannay is at the present time circulating a tract of his own writing


among the Pgedo-Eaptist members.’ They forget to add, that the
pamphlet in question is a reply to ‘Mr. Thorn,’ which Mr. Evans
circulates.
The remaining letter is as follows :
We, the undersigned, have been obliged to get ministers from a distance to
baptize our children.
William Yates,
Ebenezeb Keynes.
William Yates is a member of the church, and as such he has a right
to complain if he has been inconvenienced. But Mr. H. was not
aware that he had been. He has never complained to him (Mr. H.) or
asked him to baptize his children. The Revd. T. Q. Stow baptized
two of his children before Mr. H. came to Angaston. This is,
perhaps, the instance referred to. In Mr. Keynes’ case, Mr. IF
asked Mr. Stow to baptize two of his children, which he did, and he
(Mr. H.) would have acted on the late occasion in a similar manner,
had he been desired to do so.
SEVERANCE FROM CONGREGATIONAL UNION..
[ For many years the Congregational Church at Angaston was
connected with the Congregational Union of South Australia, of which
it formed a part. After Mr. Hannay’s connection with the church, as
its minister, the union existing between it and the Congregational Union
was terminated without the sanction of either the church or
congregation.’]
In 1850 the Congregational Union was formed. The church in
Angaston was requested to send delegates to its first meeting. Messrs.
Evans and Salter were appointed to go. Whether they ever went is
not recorded.
In 1851, Mr. Salter was appointed delegate, but he refused the
appointment. No delegate sent.
In 1852, the church book contains no minute of any delegate being
sent to the Union.
In 1853, Mr. Angas was requested to attend the union as delegate.
In 1854, the late Rev. James Sawle (without request from the
Church) was on his way to attend a meeting of the Congregational
Union, when he met with an accident which prevented his
attendance.
In 1855, the year in which Mr. Hannay 1 was all that the most
fastidious could desire ,’ he was not asked to attend the union as
delegate, or as minister, or in any other capacity by the church.
During the six years Mr. Hannay has been minister, he has never
been requested by the Church to attend any meeting of the union.
And, indeed, the greatest apathy has been shewn towards it by the
very persons who now espouse its cause. They have never mentioned
its claims, or proposed that delegates should be sent to its gatherings
at any Church meeting since 1853. Had Mr. Hannay gone to the


Union, he would not ex-officio have been received ; Baptist ministers
not being eligible for admission into it. True, he might have
gone as a delegate if the church had chosen to send him; and in that
capacity, no doubt, he would.have been received, or, probably, by in-
vitation from the secretary. Yet Mr. H. is blamed for severing the
church from the union, while the church, by unanimously electing a
Baptist minister, cut the tie that bound them to it.
SUNDAY SCHOOL.
[‘The Sunday school connected some years ago through Mr.
TFT an nay’s advice and influence with the church, has been entered in
the returns of the Sunday School Union as exclusively Baptist.’]
The Sunday School was never united to the church by Mr. Hannay.
The school was in existence before the church, and when the church
was formed in 1849, the school was united to it, as the subjoined
minutes will show :
‘Church Meeting, 30th Oct., 1849. Mr. James Smith proposed a
tea meeting, for the scholars and friends, and sought the advice of the
church therein. The members present cordially approved of the
movement,, and thought it a fitting time, at which more particularly
to identify the school with the church .’
‘Church Meeting, Feby. Ist, 1852, Mr. Samuel Smith brought
before the church the state and prospects of the Sabbath School , all
the teachers, except one, having left, and the superintendent having
resigned the charge of the school into the hands of the church ,
Eesolved—
That next Sunday a Church Meeting be held, for considering the Sabbath
school.’
‘Church Meeting, Feby. Bth. Proposed by Mr. Evans and seconded
by Mr. S. Smith, —
That Mr. Nesbit take the superintendence of the Sabbath school.
In course of time Mr. Smith became superintendent, and endeavoured
to separate the school from the church, which endeavour was resisted
at a Church Meeting held April 22nd, 1858, when it was affirmed that
‘ the Sabbath school is in connection with the church.’
‘ Moved by Mr. Evans and seconded by Mr. Wishart, —
That the teachers nominate the superintendent when required, submitting such
nomination to the church before the election takes place.’
From the above it will appear, that the school was not connected
with ‘the church by Mr. Hannay’s advice and influence.'
Mr. Hannay never entered the school as a Baptist School. All that
he ever did was to give the secretary of the S. S. Union the number of
scholars and teachers, and name of superintendent, as requested.
Probably the secretary of the S. S. Union, knowing Mr. Hannay to be
a Baptist minister, entered the Angaston school as such, but Mr
Hannay never saw the magazine said to contain such an entry.


HYMN-BOOK.
_[‘ Baptist hymn-book, with sectarian title page, was introduced
without the knowledge of many of the members of the church any
congregation ;’ ‘ the former hymn-book had been chosen bd
Independents , in a great measure on account of its unsectarian title-
page.’]
The church first used the Wesleyan hymn-book, then the
Congregational; and before Mr. Hannay came to Angaston the
propriety of introducing a new hymn-book was discussed at a church
meeting, held March 11th, 1855, when ‘it was proposed by Mr.
Masters, and seconded by Mr. Kealley (two BaptistsJ, and carried
unanimously, that the hymn-hook, Watts' and Supplement in one, be
obtained for the future use of the church and congregation.’ When
the books came, (instead of the one ordered) Dr. Reed’s hymn-book
was found to have been sent. As the mistake was made through the
late Dr. Birks (to whose care the order was committed), the church
reluctantly introduced the book, and used it until the stock was
exhausted and a new supply required. Thus, it will be clearly seen
that the hymn-book, chosen hy Independents on account of its
unsectarian title-page (as Mr. Evans alleges), was sent to the Church
by mistake, and was in no way ‘ introduced by Independents,’ or ‘on
account of its unsectarian title-page.
The stock having run out, it was considered a fitting time to
introduce a new hymn-book, and, at a church meeting held 30th
November, 1859, it was ‘proposed by Mr. Kealley, and seconded by
Mr. Smith, that the church take into consideration the propriety of
introducing a new hymn-book at its next meeting.’
A hymn-book entitled ‘Psalms and Hymns,’ had just been published
and favourably reviewed. Twenty-one copies were procured from
Melbourne, and placed in the hands of Independent and Baptist
members, who were requested to attend the next church meeting, and
express their opinion on the book, verbally or in writing.
At a Church meeting held Dec. 28th, 1859, ‘it was proposed by Mr.
Samuel Smith, seconded by Mr. Charles Radford, aud supported by
Mr. Gates, —
That a hymn-book, entitled ‘Psalms and Hymns,’ for public and private
worship, be used in the chapel.’
The minister was requested to send the order for the books, Messrs.
Smith, Kealley, and Masters guaranteeing the payment. In giving the
order, Mr. Hannay requested (on his own responsibility), that a
title-page be prepared, without the words ‘For the use of the Baptist
Denomination.’ Unfortunately the books on their arrival contained
the obnoxious clause, the excuse made by the bookseller was, that Mr.
John H. Angas had only given him a week’s time from the receipt of
the letter to the sailing of the vessel, to make up the order, and as he
had no title-pages of the kind required in stock, he was compelled to
use others; but he expressed a hope that the people would not object


to the book on account of its title-page. These circumstances were
fully known to Mr. Evans when he penned the words ‘ A Baptist
Hymn-Book was introduced, although a hymn-book of the same sort
without a sectarian title-page might have been got. One with it was
obtained, thereby making it a standing advertisement, as much as
anything could be, that the chapel was a Baptist place of worship.’
BIBLE CLASS.
[‘ The children and young people of the church and congregation
have been invited to Bible classes held in the chapel, and there
indoctrinated by Mr. Hannay in Baptist views. Many of them have
been baptized. Some of them regret the course they have taken and
deplore the hasty step.’]
Mr. Hannay never invited young or old for any such purposes. He
has had a Bible class for several years, and has always allowed the
class to choose the Book of Scripture it wished to have expounded.
In order to prove how unjust this charge is, we here insert the
following letters, dated
Angaston, May 16, 1861.
To the Rev. John Hannay.
Rev. and dear Sir, —Whereas certain charges have been brought against you
of having, in your capacity as minister of the church meeting in the Angaston
Chapel, indoctrinated the young converts with your views as a Baptist, using
improper means, and giving undue pre-eminence to the subject of baptism, with
a view of forcing it upon the attention of the members of the Bible class and the
enquirers. We beg to say truthfully, that in the Bible class you have not
introduced the subject unless in the course of our reading it came under review,
which was frequently the case in considering the Acts of the Apostles (a part of
Scripture chosen by the voice of the class) ; and we consider you were there to
expound the Scriptures according to your views of Divine truth.
As enquirers we have found you supremely desirous to instruct us in our duty
as sinners before God our Saviour ; to many of us you have not mentioned the
subject of baptism, unless we have sought for information, and have not been
forward to introduce and to descant upon it.
Thanking you for the kind interest you have manifested in our spiritual
welfare, and expressing deep sympathy with you under the present
misrepresentations and false accusations.
We beg to subscribe ourselves,
Yours affectionately,
[Twenty-five signatures attached.]
And the following ;
Angaston, June 4th, 1861.
We, the undersigned, in arriving at the conviction that it was our duty to be
baptized by immersion, we were not influenced by Mr. Hannay directly, for he
had not named the subject to us, or by his teaching, but simply by reading the
New Testament for ourselves.
William Chinner, Eliza Charlotte Gates.
Mart Chinner, Joseph Dunkley Gates,
John Williams, S. A. Player,
Catherine Venning. Maria Kealley.
The persons signing the above are persons of age and experience j
all are well known in the neighbourhood and their veracity cannot for
a moment be doubted.


BAPTISM BY IMMERSION OBJECTED TO.
[‘ A sermon on Immersion Baptism exclusively was preached by the?
minister, which was offensive to Psedo-Baptists.’]
Samuel Smith, Henry Evans,
William Yates, Sidney Smith.’]
Mr. Samuel Smith highly approved of ‘lmmersion Baptism,’ and
thought it scriptural until the appearance of Mr. Thorn’s pamphlet.
His son, Sidney, was baptized at his own request, and on a pro-
fession of his belief in the ordinance. Now, the said sermon was preached
we are told before the appearance of the pamphlet. How, then, could
it be offensive to these individuals 1
Mr. Henry Evans was the only person to whom the sermon appears
to have been offensive, and for five years he has cherished the offence,
and now acts upon it. The matter is thus explained.
In 1856 Mr. Hannay expounded the epistles of Peter to his people,
and when he came to 1. Peter, iii. 21, —‘ The like figure whereunto
even baptism doth also now save us,’ he endeavoured to show the
connection between baptism and salvation, without mentioning mode
at all. In fact, no sermon on baptism has ever been preached in the
new chapel; and so careful has Mr. Hannay been not to give offence
on this point, that he has never made use of the word Immersion , in
any discourse delivered by him in that chapel. This he is so positive
of, that he is sure no person can truthfully gainsay it. But even if
occasionally the subject had been mentioned, it ought to be remembered
that at least half the congregation are Baptists, and they might,
reasonably, expect some reference to the subject. Indeed, many
Baptist members have considered Mr. H. remiss in not giving the
subject consideration from the pulpit.
Mr. H. is stated to have said— ‘ If you asked me, whether you
can be saved without this baptism , I should decline to answer the
question,’—meaning by this baptism, immersion. These words are by
a gross perversion made to imply a sentiment never intended. The
church at Angaston and its neighbourhood know, that Mr. H. has ever
been ready to extend the right hand of fellowship to all Christians,
and his sermons on the death of the Revd. J. A. James, and
Captain Rodda, and others, show that he believed men were saved
without ‘immersion baptism.’ The baptism referred to was that
which consists in 1 the answer of a good conscience towards God .’ In
fact the whole gist of the exposition was to shew, that not water
baptism or fleshly ‘ putting away of filth,’ but the enquiry of a good
conscience after God, was that , without which salvation could not be
expected. (This exposition seems to have been misunderstood in the
case of adult salvation, as another exposition on infant salvation was
misunderstood by the same party who charged Mr H. with denying the
doctrine of human depravity.) The question was, can we not be
saved without this 1 the answer was, ‘ ask God, who alone knows the
state of the conscience.’


The word ‘blasphemous’ occurred in a sermon on ‘ regeneration
Remarking on the different ways in which regeneration is said to
be effected by men in themselves, or by priests upon other persons in
baptism, such views were considered to be blasphemous, as they ignored
God’s power in regeneration ; and, surely, if blasphemy is an indignity
offered to God, for man to attempt what is His prerogative alone
looks very much like blasphemy.
The persons who made use of this word against Mr. Hannay know
very well that he had no reference to them when the word was used,
consequently they, by insinuation, endeavoured to misrepresent his
sentiments.
GENERAL CHARGES.
To examine all the expressions chronicled by Messrs. George P.
Hodge and H. Evans would be an endless task. One specimen may
suffice to shew the perverted medium through which subjects are
viewed. Certain resolutions were passed by the church, and one to the
effect, that, they he read at the trustee meeting called for the 17 ih
inst., if such should he the wish of the trustees. Yet, Mr. Evans
heads one of his circulars by telling the public that they were ordered
to he read; and in a letter to the church, he makes he read
imperative, and goes on to condemn minister and church for doing
what they never did. Mr. Hannay is also accused of unfairness
in refusing to read a letter from Mr. Evans, addressed to the church,
while he read one from Mr. Angas. The facts are these—Mr. Angas
sent a letter to the church, as he was unable to attend the meeting.
It arrived previously to the commencement of the meeting,
and was arranged with the business for which the meeting
was convened. When the preliminary part of the business was
disposed of and certain resolutions were about to be put, Mr. Smith
got up and proposed to read a letter from Mr. Evans. He was
asked if the letter contained charges against the minister and
he replied in the affirmative. It was then objected to on the ground
of unfairness, as Mr. H. might not be in a position to meet the
charges there and then. Again, as Mr. H. had written to Messrs.
Evans, Salter, Smith, and Yates, four days before the meeting, for a
copy of the charges brought against him, Mr. Smith was asked why such
application had not been complied with 1 The reply was, ‘you did not
answer Mr. Evans’s letter, and he did not answer yours.’ Now, the
letter written to Mr. H., which he did not answer, contained a series
of charges against him without sufficient foundation ; and as this letter
was sent to Angaston open, was read by several persons, and its
contents known before it came into Mr. H.’s hands, he considered it
did not require a private answer but a public one, which it received.
Again, it was not known by any one present that the letter from Mr. Evans


was addressed to the church. When this was stated, the church was
asked if it wished to hear the letter, and Mr. H. then offered to read it
to them. But Mr. S. would not allow Mr. H. to read it, but continued
doing so himself, when he was informed, that unless it was read in the
ordinary way he must wait until the particular business for which the
meeting was called was over, then Mr. Smith might read it and make
any remarks he thought proper. Whereupon he got up in a state of
great excitement—abused the minister, ignored the church, and walked
out. So much then for the ‘ dictation’ of the minister and the want of
dignity and self-respect on the part of the church !
Enough has been said, we hope to place the ‘ Angaston Chapel case’
in its true light, and lead the readers jof this ‘ Statement’ to form a
correct opinion as to the ‘just cause and righteous motives’ which have
actuated the ‘ Dissentient Trustees.’ If their cause is a just one, why
give it up 1 If the chapel is bona fide the property of the Psedo-
Baptists, are the trustees not bound by their own signatures and by
the duties they pledged themselves, ‘to discharge with fidelity,’ to
convince all men that their claim is a just and righteous one 1 The
validity of their title to the chapel might have been tested in various
ways—for example, a friendly suit might have been arranged, or the
building offered for sale by private contract as the deed provides, 5 and
the legal title thereby ascertained. It may be answered—this was
unnecessary, as a legal opinion in favour of the trustees had already
been obtained; but the opinion expressed by Messrs. Hanson and
Stow rests upon an ex-parte statement, or, in their own words, ‘ from
the facts stated in an extract from the letter of Mr. Evans, we think,’
&c. How, the things stated as ‘facts’ cannot be proved to be such ;
and if they could, it would by no means follow that the chapel belonged
to the Psedo-Baptists, or that Mr. Hannay had violated the conditions
of trust.
The Dissentients consider themselves wronged, and say, ‘we are
driven from our privileges and our rights, and are suffering hardship
and wrong.’ By whom driven ] Did Mr. Evans receive no
intimation from his solicitor that he had better drop further proceed-
ings 1 Were the five trustees not divided among themselves, and two
of them anxious to desist 1 Did not the only legally called meeting
of trustees plainly declare the utter want of unanimity among
the dissentients themselves ? We need not at present mention
the circumstances which led the dissentients to resign. They
may solace themselves with the idea that ‘they deem it better
to act upon the apostolical advice “‘rather to suffer wrong.’” But
no one acquainted with their conduct in the matter, or the
facts of the case, will consider them as ‘ suffering joyfully ’ or
even willingly. Necessity was laid upon them for they declare
‘ necessity has arisen either that Mr, Hannay should cease to be
the pastor of the church, or that they should cease to be
members of it’


Suppose Mr. Hannay and the church (with a few exceptions) had
been driven from their just rights and privileges, would no wrong have
been inflicted, or hardships endured ? Would no interests have been
sacrificed, or church property misappropriated 1 Would the trustees,
who believe they are bound by the conditions of trust to keep the
chapel a Union chapel, have suffered it to pass into the hands of a
body of Christians for whose exclusive use it was never intended 1
We think not! The rights of individuals now living, the claims of
posterity, and the cause of truth, would have compelled them as men
of honour, to defend any action the dissentients chose to take.
To draw this statement to a close: —When the present ex-
citement passes away, and calm reflection takes its place, the
question may be asked, whence all this religious dissension at
Angaston 1 Then some such answer as the following may be given—
In the year 1860, the church at Angaston was deeply impressed by
hearing of the progress of religion in America, England, and other
places, and resolved to use the means God’s people had employed in
those places, in the hope that like results might follow.
For five months, daily meetings for prayer were held, and God
answered prayer in the conversion of many persons, and the church
seemed in a prosperous condition, when offence was taken by one
member, because several persons were baptized, and soon a pamphlet
appeared, entitled ‘Dipping not Baptizing,’ which led to controversy,
and to many remarks, calculated to wound the feelings of Baptists,
such as ‘instead of pointing men down to the cold, dark, chilling, and
meaningless waters of the baptistry, cause them to look to Christ,’ and
‘I thank God, I have not made a fool of myself, by being baptized,’
and many other similar expressions, we have no wish to record, as the
parties who uttered them may yet regret their ‘ hard sayings.’
The church remains the same as it originally was —a union of
Christians, all who love the Saviour, are freely admitted to full
communion and fellowship, equal privileges are enjoyed by all, and
no one is made to feel that he is ‘ not of the body,’ by denying his
right to vote on any question. Our bond of union is purity of life ;
our polity is congregational; and the chapel shall, through Divine
assistance, be handed down to coming generations as a place where all
Christians may worship God —‘ none daring to make them afraid.’
The minister remains in faith and practice, what he was when
first invited to the pastorate. It is said ‘ during the first year of his
ministry, he was all that the most fastidious could desire.’ Yet, in
that year, he baptized two members by immersion, and has only
continued the same practice year by year.
Though the church was cautioned not to issue a testimonial to its
minister, it has done so. And he gratefully accepts it of as a proof of
their continued confidence in him, and their sympathy with him under
present troubles.


STATEMENT OF FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES.
To the Eev. John Hannay, Minister of the Congregational Church, worshipping
in the Congregational New Chapel, Angaston :
Dear Sir, —We, the undersigned, being members of the Congregational
Church, worshipping in the above chapel, hereby testify our satisfaction with
your teaching and conduct, as our minister, since you have been over us : we
desire to express our devout thankfulness to Almighty God for the
success which has attended your ministry; and our hope that the Great Head of
the Church, will, in His good Providence, long continue you among us, and
abundantly bless you, in your work of faith and labour of love, as a minister of
His Glorious Gospel.
[Signed by 57 members.]
The church consists of 72 members : 3 refused to sign, desiring to
remain neutral; 4 were not applied to by reason of distance ; 8 not
applied to on account of recent events.
This ‘ statement’ has been drawn up with an anxious desire to give
a fair and impartial view of the whole case, without attempting to
disturb an opinion entertained by many, who have read the printed
letters of the ‘dissentient trustees,’ that the baptismal question is not the
real cause of the opposition, as it does not sufficiently account for such
productions. We trust the end aimed at in this statement may be
attained without further explanation.
FEINTED BT DAVID GALL, KING WILLIAM STREET, ADELAIDE.
