

STATISTICS
AND
RESOURCES
OF THE
WILD RIVER DISTRICT.
FOR DISTRIBUTION AT THE CHARTERS TOWERS
EXHIBITION.
AND A GENERAL DIRECTORY
OF THE
SEVERAL CENTRES
OF
POPULATION.
PRINTED AT THE “HERBERTON ADVERTISER” OFFICE,
HERBERTON, NORTH QUEENSLAND.
MDCCCLXXXIV.




HERBERTON SCHOOL OF ARTS.
PRESIDENT:
JOHN NEWELL ESQ., J. P.
VICE PRESIDENT:
HERMAN SELIG ESQ., J. P.
\
TREASURER:
THEODORE H. HILL ESQ.
—*
COMMITTEE:
MESSRS. E. MYERS, P: G. GRANT,
J. CAIRNS, J. COLLINS,
J WHITE, T. P. WOOD,
D. M‘COLL.
- «-
SECRETARY:
MR. DAVID GREEN.
Gentleman In Charge of Exhibits:
MR, W, C. R ANSON,




THE DISCOVERY AND STATISTICS OF THE
WILD RIVER DISTRICT.
The Committee of the Herberton School of Arts recognise the
* difficulty they have undertaken in compiling this pamphlet owing
to the distance of centres and the migratory nature of miners gener-
ally. They have, however, availed themselves of all possible inform-
ation to procure correct data and statistics, and if any omission be
discovered either in the details or directory of the several centres, the
Committee must be held blameless. With regard to the collection
for Exhibition, the Committee tender their thanks for the generous
and prompt response by mineholders and others generally, and fully
appreciate the handsome monetary contribution by the Tinaroo Divi-
sional Board as a recognition that the utility of the local School of
Arts has extended its bounds in the service of the Wild Kiver
District.
The object for which this pamphlet is issued is that the public may
comprehend by the nature of the several exhibits the varied resources
of the Wild River District, and the desire that its community be
numbered amongst the great mining centres of Queensland. The
promoters of this undertaking also hope to secure public estimation
of the value of the district as a component part of the colony, upon
pure ine'-its, and in making known what items of its early history
they have been able to gather, every care has been taken to adduce
facts only.
The Committee have the highest confidence in Mr. W. C. Ranson,
their representative, to whose energy, good taste and discretion will
be due what praise may be accorded to the collection exhibited, and
the executive department is solely under his management
The following brief sketch of the Wild River tin fields may prove
interesting.
Messrs. William Jack, John Newell, Thomas Brandon and John
Brown who had tin interests at Tinaroo, were the first who practic-
ally discovered the minerals of the locality.
Stream tin was first found by John Newell inthegullyin November,
1879 ; and the four gentlemen above named discovered the present
Great Northern p.c. on the 19th April, 1880, posted notice of applica-
tion on the following day ; on the 6th May, they took possession and
made the necessary application on about the 12th of the same month.
The first mining operations at Herberton actually commenced on
the Bth May, 1880.
Mr. John Newell has kindly furnished the above particulars.
Owing to the absence of all local records of the Wild River tin
fields of an early date, a large portion of the items herein contained


are copied from the Cairns Advertiser, which was de fdcto, ihe
eaiaest ana only representative of these newly discovered mineral
lands, the traffic being solely to Cairns until the dray route was
marked, cleared, and constructed to Port Douglas, which took place
some four months subsequently.
The rapid progress socially and commercially which ensued has no
parallel in the history of Queensland, and the large metalliferous
area over which the Tinaroo District extends leads to the probability
that the first decade will see it peopled by the largest inland popu-
lation in the colony. 1 1
Herbeiton is now four years old, and vies favorably in every
feature with any Northern towns of double its years. '
Numerically, it exceeds them ; socially it equals them, and com-
mercially it is a very long way ahead and owes its present status to
the energy of the discoverers and the introduction of capital by Mr
The climate is unsurpassed, and the nights most enjoyable In
high summer the average heat in the shade at mid-day may be com-
puted at 83 , while at night it descends to about 63°. The winter
has its frosts yet vegetation thrives luxuriantly, and the soil repays
whatever care may be beetowed upon it. Hence, may be seen in the
district the most delicate roses, dahlias and every variety of flowers
rich grapes, oranges and almost every other fruit is growing vege-
tables and esculents grow to an immense size including English and
sweet potatoes, maize, sorghum, durrhum, millet, sugar cane ban-
anas and vheat, &c. &c. Hay, chaff and maize are already’bei no-
provided locally for market and when the several surveys of home-
steads and selections are complete and settlers receive their confirm
ation of tenure, agriculture will be vigorously pursued.
Amongst the earliest items are noted the following
Ihe first tin from Herberton arrived at Cairns, 17th July 1880
On the 24th July, 8 ewt of bagging ore arrived at Cairns from
the Prospecting Claim; and by the 31st of the same month 100
tons of tin ore were stacked on the field,
On the 21st August, 1880, Warden Mowbray laid out the town
n^ fir . St u 1 f lerberton from Port Douglas on the
b. S ;n mber ’ 18 °?’ ‘ d t whl ? h date the bmldm g 3 consisted of one
hotel (R. Bimrose, who brought his family in a waggon from North-
T w°lf butebe r ® ho P (Woodward), three stores owned by W. Jack
. W. Merry and Poy and Collins respectively. ’
On the 30th October, 1880, Warden Mowbray issued the first
mining licenses at Herberton.
The Dry River was first mentioned about the 16th October, 1880.
On the 13th November, 1880, the first machinery owned by the
Heiberton Tin Co. left Port Douglas for Herberton.
ihe first mail service was on the 20th November, 1880, between
Herberton and Cairns.


The first ton of stream tin from the Tate River was received at
Port Douglas on the Ist January, 1881 ; on which day also occurred
the first picnic on the Wild River, the only music being the bagpipes
operated upon by Hugh Harrison.
On the 31st December, 1880, an open air meeting was convened
for the purpose of establishing a School of Arts, when Mr. W. C.
Ranson was appointed the Secretary and effected a collection of .£5O.
The present site of the Institution was purchased for £lB on the
Bth January, 1881. On the 22nd of the same month the Institu-
tion was fairly established in a bark humpy.
February 19th, 1881, Nettle’s Creek was opened ; and in the
same month R. 11. Watson discovered the Western, the present
Watsonville.
About the middle of 1881, the Wild River Independent news-
paper, edited by Morgan Green, was started and in September of the
same yeai the Cairns Advertiser under the name of the Herber-
ton Advertiser, edited by Edward Myers made its appearance at
Herberton.
The progress of the field continued and to avoid prolixity, gene-
ralities only are expressed bringing the status of the district .direct
to date.
The export of tin from the Tinaroo District to 31st March, 1884,
has been 6970 tons valued at £383,350, upon which £62,730 have
been paid for carriage to ports.
The number of Mineral Leases issued is 175 covering an area of
1801 acres, and the Mineral Lands collections for 1883, amounted
to £2,526 Is 6d.
There are four mineral freeholds (prospecting claims 60 acres each)
owned by the Great Northern Tin Mining Company, at Herberton ;
J. V. Mulligan and Co., at Newellton; Fischer Brothers on the
Tate ; and J. A. J. Macleod and Co,, at Mount Garnet, making a
total of 240 acres. In addition to the above there are about 171
lode claims, some of which are exceedingly rich properties.
The centres of the district at present date are as follows : Herber-
ton, Watsonville, Coolgarra, Irvine Bank, Scrubby Creek, Newellton
(Silver Yalley), Nigger Creek, Eureka Creek, California Creek, the
Tate River, Hal pin’s Creek, Gregory’s Gully, Mount Garnet and
Silverfield, the total population being computed at 3.500.
The total area of land opened for Selection in October 1882, was
123,350 acres, and the total selected to date is 27,500 acres, consist-
ing of 73 homesteads and 41 conditional purchases.
Herberton, the principal town of the Tinaroo Distinct, contains in
addition to what will be found in the appended directory, a Court
House, Police Quarters, Post and Telegraph Offices, Hospital, State
School, Powder Magazine, Roman Catholic and Primitive Methodist
Chapels, two Crushing Machines, Smelting Works. . The site of the
town is on both sides of the Wild River branching from the original


prospecting claim.
6 R Watson,d isiantfrom Herberton abet
Moffatt ZTL b L'£Zi i olm
acme very rich claims notably the iforth bv O’boan
and Casey, from which £50,000 worth of tin has been ov , 7 V
tremwa “JKfta, 6 Gm “ WeSt ‘ r ' ! Co ' *“'• i c.hm
na,r R - 7 mi-
this locality superintended by Hindi Dempster Th matllin i at
and Telegraph Office, a
visional School. aempoiary Lomt House, a Pro-
ing°Mldiine ’' Delany" an^CV>'° m eiberton has its Crush-
Po li o 4 1 e a Sk S _n h e e ht 1S t S ?° d T" i " '“■l^'v^nity 1
Gibbs and Party and recently £ M^r'a'd
dam Tld?,r e fr g m ™ U ™? »>“' b.vo completed an extensive
Xyet‘d!:ctsr y,,e sau i ° »-“* ™ <*»» ,r
■JOUSTS Us r. 7 T d «» cedar
10 miles and forms the j,motion el t'ie*r ' f ''° m ld, "*erton about
r “kv ,U R V l!! KamS “ nd <* h»ve alt m U het
SSSr^JS 9 «
Nigeer Creek •ut'l? ‘’Vt COnsiderd properties,
and A?r ' TeM He, ''?"f on “ composed of Mineral
machinery managed bv CenrL ji o i, m, Lo . m P a '/ hfUe extensive
The AgriLltZfSlZ
promises to become a large farming centre E Creek . ” d
have also an extensive Sawing plantat Flagt CreJk ThoN,tU°'
“P “ d W - B « R »* Course
about i6Mi ' es
tm properties hereabouts, one of which has h,t Hre s 9 me excellent
by a local Company at a aatisfactorv fiwj f ieo(int| y purchased
M-Kexzie of WatsonviUe ’ a " d a Becond ** 'M«
California Gully, Halpin’a Creek arid-Gregory’s Gully , are Minin-


Centres within nine miles of each other, distance from Herberton
about 35 miles, via Watsonville. These centres are principally the
resorts for stream tinners, although a.t the last named place one of
the richest lodes in the district has been opened -
T lie Tate River.—6o miles from Herberton is the locale for stream
tin and over 100 tons were obtained from the p.c. alone during the
last season.
Mount Garnet, about 35 miles from Herberton via Return Creek
is a huge outcrop of carbonate of copper estimated at 4000 tons in
sight and which is computed at 21 per cent metallic copper. Silver
ore of high per centage is also procured here while a superior class
of fire clay abounds. Between this property and Return Creek, a
distance of 10 miles there is a continual chain of Silver and Copper
lodes.
Silver Field.—The latest mineral discovery by Prentice Brothers,
is situated 21 miles from Herberton and four miles from Irvine Bank.
A large quantity of Galena has been opened up and the lodes are
well defined.
At Northcote the Northcote Antimony. Smelting Co. have com-
menced operations.
Brief and scant as is this compendium, it is deemed to contain
sufficient information to show the immensity of the industry alone,
the future extension of which, with the aid of railway communication
to the coast, it is impossible to conjecture. It requires but theearlv
construction of this railway to develope in addition the Copper,
silver and antimony mines irrespective altogether of the impetus that
will be given to agriculture and the timber trade which already has
attained enormous dimensions.
As shewing the communities to be permanently settled a directory
of each centre is appended by which it will be seen that almost every
line of Industry is represented.
GENERAL DIRECTORY.
HERBERTON.
Police-Magistrate, Acting Commissioner of Crown Lands, Mineral
Land Commissioner, and High Bailiff—W. M. Mowbray.
Clerk Petty Sessions, Sub Immigration Agent, Crown■■ Lands Agent,
Mining Registrar, Registrar District Cdnrt, Deputy Sheriff,
Assistant Registrar of Births and Deaths, District Receiver in
Insolvency, Agent for Curator of Intestate Estates, and Com
missioner for Aitxdayits—Charles Carrington. * -
Justices gf the Peace—Charles O. Gat butt* John Moffat, William
Sam pel. John Denney, George John Newell,
R. N. Williams, It Selig. v
Members of the Divisional (Chairmtiv); John
Collifis'; John Newell, Colin Douglas, A. Muuro.


Clerk of tlie Divisional Board—W. H. Stansfield.
Inspector of Works and Nuisances—R. G. M‘Lean-
Bailiff of District Court and Small Debts Court—John Bowler.
Post and Telegraph Master—Charles Mestrez.
Line Repairer—E. Kingsford
Mining Surveyor—P. G. Grant.
Land Surveyors—F. Hutton, Rankin.
Officer in charge of Native Troopers—Sub Inspector J. Nicholls.
Officer in charge of Police Station—Sergeant Breen.
Tinaroo District Hospital—President, W. M. Mowbray, Vice Presi-
dent, W. Jack, Treasurer, W Stevenson, Committee, Messrs
Collins, Cairns, Bonar, Newell, Hynes, Miller, M‘Cann, Frith,
Mackintosh. Medical Officer, W. D. Bowkett, Secretary, W. IT
Stansfield, Wardsman, R. Montgomery.
School of Arts—President, John Newell, Vice-President, Herman
Selig, Treasurer, T. H. Hill, Committee, Edward Myers, p . G.
Grant, J. Collins, J. Cairns, T P. Wood, J. White, D. M'Coll,
Secretary, D. Green.
State School—Head Teacher, T- P. Wood, Assistant Teachers, Misses
Craig and Hides.
Progress Association—Chairman, Dr Bowkett, Joint Secretaries, T.
Mirls and D. Green.
Wild River Jockey Club—President, C. O. Garbutt, Treasurer,
W. Stevenson, Secretary, T. Mirls.
Cricket Club—President, John Newell, Vice-President, H. Selig,
Secretary, J. Cairns.
Lodges—Evelyn, Freemasons, M. U. I. O. O. F., I. O. 0. F.
Societies—Caledonian Society. President, W. Jack, Vice-President,
W. M. Bonar, Secretary, A. Love.
Miners Association —M. Me. Browne, Secretary.
Irish National League—C. O’Loan, President.
Auctioneers and Commission Agents—Stansfield and Douglas, Go-
vena ment Auctioneers, A. J. J. War by.
Commission and Mining Agent—J. A. J. Macleod.
TErated Water and Cot dial Maker—P. J. Cronin.
Bakers—Joseph Robson, Michael Hynes.
Banks—Queensland National, W. Stevenson, Manager; Australasia
T. H. Hill, Manager.
Blacksmiths—F. Haase, O. Barrett.
Bootmaker—P. Minriis.
Booksellers and Stationers—H. Selig, Berkeley and Airey.
Builders and Contractors—J, Miller, H. Petersen, W. Crawford T.
Gordon, C. Tipton.
Butchers—Callaghan and Wilson.
Cabinetmakers and Upholsterers—J. Miller, C. Hurrev.
Chemist—E. J. Martin.
Companies—Herberton Tin Co, John Munday, General' Manager,


Herberton Co-operative Tin Crushing Co, D. A. Mackintosh,
Manager, Herberton Tin Smelting and Crushing Co., Herberton
Hall Co., W. 0. Ranson, Secretary, Great Northern Tin Co,
W. M. Bonar, Manager, New Zealand Tin Co., J. M'Donald,
Manager, West Herberton Pioneer Co., H. Tracey, Manager,
Monarch Tin Mining Company., G. Baker, Manager.
Drapers—Jack and Newell, J. H. Brunjes, J. Bor rest.
Fruiterer—-C. Mueller.
General Storekeeper’s—Jack and Newell, B. M'Cann, S. Ker*h, Mrs.
M'Bride.
Fancy Warehouseman—H. Selig.
Gunsmith—F’ Haase.
Hairdresser—J. W. Allen. i
Hotelkeepers—R. Bimrose, Herberton Hotel,j Hides and M‘Cull,
Royal Hotel, E. M‘Manus, Australian Hotel, M. Geratthty,
Royal Hotelj M. T. Casey, Mining Exchange Hotel,l R. Frith
Post Office Hotelj J. Finnigan, Criterion Hotelj E. o‘Brien,
Queen’s Hotel,l H. Harrison, Commercial Hotel,] J. Farrell,
Tattersalls Hotel,! A. E. Kilgour, Mill Inn Hotel,] J E. Uhr,
West End Hotel,]P. J. Purcell, Retreat Hotel,] G. Ryle, Oak
Grove Hotel,] John Hogsflish, Cosmopolitan Hotel-]
Watchmakers and Jewellers—Berkeley and Airey.
Jewellers —C. G. Hurrey, H. Selig.
Produce Merchants—Jack and Newell, Stanstield and Douglas,
A. J. J. Warby.
Machine Owners—Herberton Tin Co., Herberton Cooperative Tin
Crushing Co.
Milliners and Dressmakers—Mrs. Kearney, Mrs. Brunjes, Mrs,
Bourke.
Ironmongers—Jack and Newell; IT. Selig, S. Kersh.
Professors of M usic—Carlton and Hardy.
Saddlers—Hosiene and Co., B. J. Buckley.
Sewing Machines—Stanstield and Douglas, Berkeley and Airey, H.
G. Livesey.
Restaurant-keeper—A, Fullarton.
Tailors—J. Craig, J. W. Reid.
Timber Merchants—E. P. Williams and Co.
Tin Buyers—Jack and Newell, Herberton Tin Co., John Foy.
Plumber and Tinsmith—H. G. Livesey.
Undertakers—J. Miller, C. Hurrey.
Newspapers—Herberton Advertiser, Published Wednesdays and
Saturdays, E. Myers, Proprietor, Wild River Times, Published
Saturdays, J. K. Boyett.
Livery Stablekeepers—Stanstield and Douglas, A. J. J. Warby, J,
Finnigan.
Brickmaker—E. Mahoney.
Bricklayer—George Dewar.


CoaC MsoMU tore ~ C ° bb and °°’ A ' J - J - W “ rby ' Agent - William
WATSONVILLE.
Public buildings— -Temporary Co!rt House, Police Barracks, Provi-
sional School, Post and Telegraph Office
Post and Telegraph Master—J. Barrett.
Officer in charge of Police Station—Senior Constable Mulvev
Companies—Great Western Tin Co., R. N. Williams, General Man-
ager .North Australian Tin Mining Co, D. Garvey, Secretary,
Bischoff herberton Tin Crushing Co, Hugh Dempster, Manager,
Medoman 1 m Mining Co, H. Hammond, Manager, Ironclad
Tm Mining Co, W. Dick, Manager.
Machine Owners—Great Western Tin Brining Co, Bischoff Herber-
ton Tin Crushing Co.
Progress Association—Chairman, E. N. Williams, Secretary, T.
Sparks. 4
Provisional School—M. M. Malone, Teacher,
Cricket Club—Secretary J. Armstrong. ’ ‘ ■
Assayer—S. J. Denney.
Butcher—T. Halpin.
Bakers—A. Gibson, J. Simpson.
Blacksmith—F. Bickle,
Bootmakers—J. Barry, T. Stevens.
Hotelkeepers-J Jennings, Family Hotel, |w. T. Hutchinson, Com-
mercial Hotel! Harvey and Bird, Royal Hotel,| Hudson and
Goble, Caledonian Hotel, E. Borghero, Albion Hotel,l W Lee
Victoria Hotel. 1 ’
General Storekeepers-J. G. Jack, J. J. Curthew, Hudson and
Goble.
Stationer and News Agent—H. Seli".
Tentmaker—J. Pascoe.
COO LG A RE A.
Officer in charge of Police Station—Senior Constable Stubbs
Compames-S. J De Lanj- and Co., Victoria Battery, Beaconsfield
Tin Mining Co., E. Eield, Manager.
Progress Association-Chairman, J 1. Wilson, Secretary, P. Muir.
Cricket Club—Secretary, F. Muir. J
Postmaster—F. Muir.
Baker—D. M‘Gregor,
Butchers—Garbutt and Wilson.
Hotelkeepers—F. H Merry, Family Hotel, C. Denford, Coolgarra
f' p ra^ field> Mlne *[ Arms Hotel, W. Murray, Return
Creek Hotel, P. Armagnacq, Rupublic Hotel, William M'Aulav
Thistle and Shamrock, F. Read, Mill Inn Hotel. 7 ’
General Storekeepers—H. Hurrey, F. Muir.
Machine Owners—De Lany and Co,


IRVINE BARK.
■ *
Companies—John Moffatt and Co,
General Storekeepers—Jack and Ne veil.
Baker—A. Robson
Batcher—Thomas Halpin,
Hotelkeepers—J. Tait, Commercial Hotel, James Bethel, Mining
Exchange Hotel.
Machine Owners —John Moffatt and Co.
NE WELL TON.
Companies—Silver Valley Silver Mining Co., Captain Phillips, Mam*
ager, Silver Mountain Silver Mining Co., D. Garvey, Manager.
Baker—W. Blanchard.
Butcher—George Hume.
Storekeepers—W. B. Stenhouse, J. Stewart.
Hotelkeepers—John Dow, Silver Valley Hotel.
Machine Owners —Silver Valley Silver Mining Co., Pacific Galen*
Smelter and Calcine Furnace.
NIGGER CREEK.
- <♦—;
Machine Owners—Monarch Tin Mining Co.
Provisional School—\V. Richards, Teacher.
Hotelkeeper—R. Moss, Horse and Jockey Hotel.
Dairymen—P. Culhane, W. Corey, J. Harrison, W. D. Nash, R.
Moss.
Gardeners—A. Allen. J. Hampson.
Sawmill Proprietors—E. P. Williams and Co.
SCRUBBY CREEK.
+
Postmaster—M. Petersen.
Baker—M. Petersen.
Blacksmith— I. Chappie.
Butcher—M. Petersen.
Hotelkeepers—M. Petersen, Carriers Arms Hotel, C. Carnes, Scrubby
Cieek H ffel, Cameron, Horse Shoe Hotel, I. Fretwell, Rangf
Hotel.
Sawmill Proprietors—E. P. Williams an l Co.
CALIFORNIA CREEK.
♦ 7
Bakers—J. Toohey, Win. Mullaney and Co.
Postmaster—Wm. Mullaney.
Gardener—W. Williams.
Storekeepers—J. Toohey, W. Mullaney and Co
HARVET.S CREEK:
-
Butcher and Storekeeper—P. Halpin,




S™HSl
AND
1
mJQR.CHABTTS.
r ==~H=
CASH PURCHASERS OF TIN ORE.
_a tSS s"
GENTS for the Australian Lithofracteur Company,
Commercial Union Assurance Company,
Mutual Assurance Society of Victoria.
jj »
if 9J
HERBERTON & IRVINE BANK.


