



STELLA SOTHERN.


THE STRICKEN MAN SEEMED TO BE LISTENING.
Stella Sothern, Pag e 3.


STELLA SOTHERN
A STORY OF BOHEMIA AND THE BUSH
BY
IVAN ARCHER ROSENBLUM
With Eight full page Illustrations by Harry Julius.
£
SYDNEY
N.S.W. BOOKSTALL CO,, LTD,
I9U


- RISISTOID ROOFING -
at -
Anthony Hordern’s Famous Low Prices
RISISTOID as a ROOFING Completely Fills all REQUIREMENTS as
an Economical. Durable, and thoroughly Waterproof Covering
free from the disadvantages of other Materials. •
The cost of transport is far less than that of Iron, Slate, or
Tiles. RISISTOID is a non-conductor, and a building roofed with
RISISTOID is cool in Summer and warm in Winter. It does not
affect Rain water, and the roof is cleaner than slate or shingles.
It is made of felt, thoroughly saturated with a scientifically pre-
pared waterproof material, and will resist the heaviest
rainstorms, or the most scorching rays of the sun. It will neither
rust nor rot.
RISISTOID is sold in rolls of 72 feet, is made in one width only
(36in), and each roll will cover 200 square feet. Price : —J ply,
17/6 ; 1 ply, 21/6 ; 2 ply, 28/- ; 3 ply, 34/6 per roll, which works
out at per yard super., about -/9 for £ ply, -/ll for 1 ply, 1/2 for
2 ply, and 1/5J for 8 ply. Cement, Tacks, and Washers for
Laying Furnished free with each roll.
Risistoid Building Paper
RISISTOID Building Paper is put up in rolls of 336 feet long
by 3 feet wide. The full measure is guaranteed, and each roll will
cover 1,000 feet of surface. RISISTOID Building Paper will not
deteriorate and will not rot, and being an efficient non-conductor,
is invaluable in the construction of Cold Storage Plants, Hospitals,
and Barracks, also for interlining Houses, Roofs, Walls, and Floors.
It is damp-proof and air-excluding, and is largely used for covering
Silos and Haystacks, in place of trays for sun-drying fruit, and as
a wrap for trees.
Sold in Four Thicknessesl ply, 861 n. wide, 15/- per roll; 2 ply,
86in. wide, 21/6 per roll; 3 ply, 86in. wide, 27/6 per roll }
4 ply, 86in. wide, 88/8 per roll.
Write for Samples and Illustrated Booklet, Posted Free.
ANTHONY HORDERN & SONS
Only Universal Providers, New Palace Emporium,
BRICKFIELD HILL SYDNEY


CONTENTS.
BOOK I.
Page.
PROLOGUE 1
Chapter.
I. STELLA SOTHERN ... 5
11, MARIE 13
HI. DR. HUGH 17
IV. SAD SONGS 23
V. MARIE SEES A GHOST 28
VI. DR. HUGH PROPOSES ... 32
VII. A MODERN MEPHISTOPHELES 37
VIII. THE GAIETY OF DESPAIR 48
IX. GHOSTS DON’T SMOKE 51
X. JIMMY THE GROOM TAKES A HAND 57
XL PALS ? ... ... 64
XII. MEN WERE DECEIVERS EVER 66
XIII. A SNAKE IN THE GRASS 74
BOOK 11.
I. THE PENSION SUISSE 79
11. MARIE MEETS A FRIEND ... 87
111. IN THE MINOR KEY 94
IV. CITY EXPERIENCES 97
V. IN PRAISE OF THE BACK BLOCKS 102
VI. BEHIND THE SCENES ... .... 107
VII. A'FEAST FOR THE GODS 114
VIII. GOOD BYE TO BOHEMIA 120


BOOK 111.
Chapter. Page.
I. IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY 123
11. A TIMELY" RESCUE 133
111. RAFFA UNMASKED 140
IV. RAFFA’S RUSE 146
V. RISING MISTS 162
VI. RAFFA’S FIGHT FOR LIFE 162
VII. THE ARREST OF RAFFA 167
VIII. WOMAN’S CURIOSITY 174
IX. IN COMMUNE WITH THE STARS 180
X. WESTON VISITS THE PENSION SUISSE ... 187
XL RAFFA’S ESCAPE 196
XII. BURNT TO DEATH ' 198
CONCLUSION 204
CONTENTS.— continued.


ILLUSTRATIONS.
Pack.
The Stricken Man seemed to be Listening Frontispiece.
“ Stella,” said the Doctor, “ I Only Ask for a Word
of Hope ” 35
“I Love You, Raffa ; Isn’t that Oath Enough?” ... 72
Marie Made Money as an Artist’s Model 109
It was a Drawing of Marie without a Tailor-Made ... 117
It was Dr. Hugh. Weston Recognised Him immediately 132
“ Good Bye ! ” Raffa Called, and Fired at the Lamp 150
Weston Looked at the Chalk Drawing of Raefa ... 191


Copyrighted, 1911, by A. C. Rowlandson, " Montana”
Harbour Street, Mosman , and 476 George
Street, Sydney, Australia.
Siuunons-Bloxliaiu, Ltd., Sydney.


PROLOGUE.
DEATH AND THE DESERT.
THE sun set threateningly —a ball of red-hot copper,
full and round, amidst the misty purple of the
horizon. In the upper sky, bands of green and greenish-
yellow, through which the stars peeped, looking down on
the desert and its tragedy. And all around and above—
silence, the ominous, fateful silence that more often
precedes a storm than follows one, the grim silence that
hints of approaching doom, that seems a prelude of death.
. . . . Only a fortnight had passed since Henry Weston
and his party had set out to pioneer the way through the
desert to the newly discovered goldfield at Natami, in the
desolate North-west of Australia; only a fortnight, and
yet disaster had already overtaken them. They had
prospered until a tornado had hurtled down, killing the
camels and scattering and burying the stores, and, worst
mishap of all, ruining their instruments. The track was
obliterated.
For three days Weston had struggled on alone,
hoping against hope, fighting a forlorn battle against
the inexorable elements. He had seen his two mates
perish of thirst in that cruel desert which has • claimed
numberless victims, hiding with sand and silence all traces
of its tragedies. The first died cursing God for keeping
“ the clouds just out of reach ” ; the second, laughing


heartily as he pointed to the desert, saying—“ We could
do with a shower ; a little rain would improve the going ;
anyhow, I’ll have a pound on the favourite and chance it.”
And so he had a win, for Death was favourite, and Death
always wins. And now Henry Weston, surveyor and
explorer, lay down to die in the desert alone. He had
fought on until he could stand up no longer. He was
out-lasted by opposing circumstance; he had taken his
beating like a man. All that was left was to die.
Pale and emaciated he had struggled onwards until he
fell, and, when he fell, he lay too utterly weary even to
despair, too absolutely beaten to heed what further evil
fate might send. . . . Already in the upper sky the
stars were showing vaguely through the haze. He was
conscious of the constellation of the Cross glowing dimly
and with ever diminishing lustre as he, himself, became
weaker and weaker. The Southern Cross ! What mem-
ories it awakened even in that grim hour of dire extremity.
He thought of home, of Warrawee township, and of beau-
tiful, fragrant, peaceful Golden Gully where Stella Sothern
lived. How nebulous it all seemed; how impalpable,
intangible, unreal, as he lay there whilst the shadows
surely deepened and his power of concentration became
less and less. Yet, amidst the clouded realm of phantoms
and unrealities, there still was dominant the distinct form
of the sweet woman who would wait in vain for his return.
As he passed, slowly, surely drifting, drifting, into the
gloom, he still could see his loved and lost Stella—his
star —smiling on him with ineffable charm.
Only a fortnight ago he had ridden from Golden Gully
with a light heart; without any presentiment of evil.
He was to blaze a trail to the new goldfields, and then


return to claim his wife. Weston was one of the popular
men of his district; somewhat reserved, as the bushman
mostly is, no talker, but a doer. He was a notable horse-
man, a fine shot, and an experienced explorer. He had
won many a steeplechase as a gentleman rider, and had
gone with the Bush Contingent to South Africa, when the
Empire had called on her sons. Stella had persuaded him,
but resultlessly, to abandon the attempt to cross the
desert. He had compromised by definitely agreeing that
this expedition should be his last. He, and his party,
fully equipped, had started for the interior on a glorious
morning of January. Everything had seemed propitious.
But the unexpected had happened, and they had stumbled
on to tragedy.
Suddenly Weston, with a supreme effort, raised himself
on his elbows. He seemed to be listening. They say that
men in their awful extremity hear weird mysterious voices
coming to them from the unknown; that the dying
musician hears far sweeter melodies, harmonies more preg-
nant with vital meaning and potent suggestion, than ever
had come to him in his hours of health and so-called sanity.
Who shall say ?
For a moment the stricken man seemed to be listening,
the next he fell back. And just then the scene darkened,
and night descended on the desert.




BOOK I.
CHAPTER I.
STELLA SOTHERN.
TT was a fit morning for the day—the 26th day of January,
Australia’s national holiday—a glorious morning,
cloudless and mild. Just the day for a picnic, the young
people opined ; and, being young and therefore practical,
early morning saw them setting out for their favourite
places in all sorts and conditions of conveyances, from
dog-carts for two, to furniture vans for forty. There is no
man or woman who can play more thoroughly than the
Australian. This also is a proof of his or her capacity for
work. And what a jolly, good-natured throng! How
the boys and the girls—for every boy a girl, you may be
sure, or it were no picnic ! —do enter into the spirit of the
outing. What games, what eating and drinking, what
love-making under the shade of the sheltering fern-tree,
or wattle, or she-oak, or even gum, which is a poetical tree
under some circumstances, particularly by moonlight; and
then the home-returning, when the heads nestle closer
together, and—but who dare play Paul Pry on that or any
other occasion ?
It was a radiant morning, and as Stella Sothern stepped
from the verandah to the garden walk, and strolled towards


the gate, she looked a picture of health and grace in her
simple cotton frock, and large, sensible straw hat. For a
while she lingered by the gate, looking up and down the
road, and waving salutes to the picnickers as they passed.
“ Come along, Miss Sothern; come and be one of us.”
She had many such hearty invitations from the holiday-
makers, but she only shook her head and smiled her
appreciation of their good nature and kindly thoughts.
There was none better loved in all that district than sweet
Stella Sothern. Her story was well known, and it was
because Henry Weston, her absent lover, had also been
well liked and respected, that Stella had general sympathy
in her distress that no tidings had come.
Everyone knew that Stella and he were to have been
married when he returned from his survey of the track to
the Natami goldfields. But he never had returned. The
desert had claimed her lover, and the national holiday
brought no joy to Stella’s heart, only sad memories, for it
had been on that day three years ago that Henry Weston
and his party had set out.
And still she waited and hoped. “ Hope on, hope ever,*’
she had many a time said to herself. She was twenty-four
—a charming and a beautiful woman.
“A sweet girl.” That was the general verdict; and,
though a woman in years, and in heart and knowledge of
the true meaning and significance of life, she was a girl in
her naturalness and fine unconsciousness of self and of selfish
motives in others ; and she was a girl in the purity of her
thoughts and life. Practical enough in the every-day
affairs of her environment, she was, nevertheless, some-
thing of a dreamer, of an idealist. She was not a new
woman, but a true woman, and the girlish element in her


nature only endeared her the more to everybody who
enjoyed her intimacy. And Stella Sothern was rich,
exceptionally rich for one of that part of Australia. Her
father had been a successful dealer in stock, and had left
her thirty thousand pounds in real and personal estate,
and as her mother had died when she was a little child,
there had been no one but Haifa, Sothern’s confidential
business agent, to leave in charge of the estate until Stella
grew up. Raffa was a man of about forty years of age, of
Italian descent. No one knew much about him ; - nobody
wanted to know. He had been in the district for twenty
years, and had been Mr. Sothern’s employee and friend.
Stella had no relations in Australia ; and, as relatives
have to be known to be appreciated at their proper value,
she was blissfully unconscious of her isolation. She had
been used to Haifa since her childhood, and placed perfect
confidence in him. He managed for her, and was appar-
ently a man to be relied on. Yet there were those who
did not like him. Why ?
“ I do not like you. Dr. Fell,
The reason why I cannot tell.”
Haifa had an office in the township of Warrawee, two
miles distant from Golden Gully, where Stella lived. He
rode up to her as she stood at the gate watching the passing
picnickers.
“ Good-morning, Stella. You’re looking just the thing
this morning. There’s a large picnic in the gully. Ah,
but I see you’re dressed to join them.”
The gully was at the back of her home, within a quarter
of a mile —a beautiful spot, where the silver wattles, with
their blossoms of gold, flourished luxuriantly.
“No, Haifa, lam not going to join them; at least, I


don’t think so, I may stroll down the gully for a while in
the afternoon. Any news from town ? ”
Although the city was well over two hundred miles from
Warrawee, the nearest township to Golden Gully, Haifa
frequently went thither, ostensibly on Stella’s business.
More often than on her account he went to please himself.
He found the routine of station life dull. A day or two at
a city hotel, an occasional afternoon at the racecourse —.
these things made life tolerable.
Whilst they were standing thus, Doctor Hugh Fairleigh,
familiarly known as Doctor Hugh, rode up. Still under
thirty, he was the only medical practitioner in that wide
district. An entirely self-made man, he had won scholar-
ships which had enabled him to pay for his higher education.
Earnest work had done the rest. He drew up at the gate
and exchanged greetings with Stella and Haifa.
“ Where are you going on this holiday ? ”
“ I’ve a case out back —fever; so I must go,” he ex-
plained.
“ Duty first, eh, Doctor ? ” said Haifa.
“ It would be a madder world than it is, if not,” was the
answer.
“ I think ‘ doctor ’ is another word for duty,” Stella
said, sweetly.
“It should be often,” he rejoined, adding—“ I hope to
be back some, time this afternoon. I’ll call for a cup of tea,
Miss Sothern, if you will give me one; or, perhaps you’re
going to join some of these merry picnickers down the
gully. If so ”
“ If I’m not indoors, or somewhere about the garden,
you’ll find me down the gully. I won’t be far away,” said
Stella.


Then, raising his hat, the doctor rode off.
Raffa watched him intently as he rode into the distance.
“ He rides well,” he said carelessly ; but he had not been
considering Doctor Hugh’s equestrian accomplishments.
“ You were saying you had been to town on business
for me. May I ask what it was ? I fear I’m very careless
about all these things. Any cheques want signing ? ”
She was careless about certain matters, leaving Raffa
in sole control. Mr. Eustace Watt had often impressed
on her in his profoundest legal phraseology the foolishness
of placing implicit confidence in her manager, but Stella
always met his criticism with one axiom—“ Raffa suited
my father, so he suits me.”
“ No, thanks; no cheques on a holiday, you know.
No ! your business was the sale of some Queenslanders —
cattle, you know. They were regular starvers when I
bought them at four pounds per head. What do you
think I sold them for at the market yesterday ? ”
“ Six ? ” said Stella, guessing.
“ Seven and a half,” he returned ; and he smiled, and
looked pleased with himself, as well indeed he might, being
a villain, and successful in his villainy.
“ How good,” said Stella.
“ It was good,” he repeated.
True; it was good that he had sold cattle that he had
bought for four pounds per beast at nine pounds; but it
was not good to pay into Stella’s account seven hundred
pounds instead of nearly a thousand.
Stella’s heart was not in the conversation. She was
thinking of that morning three years ago, and the stock
market did not interest her. Raffa saw it, and guessed the
reason. He diplomatically changed the subject.


“ I have brought you back some new music. I hope
you will like some of the songs. A friend of mine, a fine
tenor, who is going to make Caruso take a back seat, told
me they were good.” And he handed her a roll.
“ Thanks very much.” She brightened momentarily,
until her eye fell on the cover of “ For All Eternity.”
Then in a second the memory of her lost lover surged on
her soul once more. Many a time they had sat together
and plighted their troth by the Southern Cross for all
eternity.
“ I think I’ll go inside and try some of them over,” she
said.
“ Yes ! They are good. Some time I may have the
pleasure, too, of hearing you sing the ‘ For All Eternity ’
Perhaps ? ”
She made no answer.
Kaffa explained that he, like the doctor, had a little
business to transact with a farmer ‘ out-back,’ and he rode
away.
Amongst the music was a song, entitled “ One Summer
Night.” The design on the cover, as well as the name,
attracted her. It was an old rose-garden, and there were
pine-trees through which the full, round moon was showing.
On a rustic seat in the foreground a man was sitting alone,
and that man reminded her of her lost lover. It was a
mere coincidence, of course ; and on that particular day
she was in the mood to receive such impressions only too
readily. Yes, surely there was something in the lonely
figure sitting in the wild, that once had been a well-tended
garden that was strongly reminiscent of Henry Weston.


She opened the music and read the words
“ Where are the garlands we gathered together,
When Love’s old rose garden was all aglow ?
Sweet was that season of unclouded weather,
When we were one in the dear Long Ago.
Scentless the blossoms, their beauty long vanished.
Faded the red rose and withered the white ;
Still in my soul, though all beauty be banished,
Lingers the fragrance of one summer night.”
That was the first verse; there were three others, and
then the last—
“ And now in the garden I linger alone, love,
Singing the old songs, whilst waiting my call;
Out of my life inspiration hath flown, love,
You were my harmony, melody, all.
But though your gift of a garland hath vanished.
Faded the red rose and withered the white,
Still from Love’s garden, whence Beauty is banished,
Comes the rare fragrance of one summer night.”
Yes ! she remembered one summer night—one perfect
night, when the moon of her delight had shone at the full,
before the roses red had faded, and the roses white had
withered. She tried the music. It was well suited to the
words ; there was a clever suggestion of Schubert’s ‘ Adieu ’
running through it, and the suggestion was more in the
rhythm and in the harmony than in the melody. She rose
from the piano, and went out on to the verandah. It was
there, three years ago, she had taken leave of her lover.
“ Three years—three long, lonely years ; I wonder, I
wonder. Oh ! and all the lonely years to be. Ah ! —but I
must not be weak of faith. He’ll come—l know, I know.”
But in spite of such solace-giving meditations, Stella was
on the verge of tears, when Jacko, the magpie, hopped on
to her lap, and proceeded to make irreverent and irrelevant


remarks concerning theological and decidedly mundane
matters, mixing the divine and the dirt with fine melo-
dramatic effect. Jacko was a pupil of Jimmy, the groom,
and had graduated in vituperation and vindictive epithets
“ ! ! ! ! ! ! ” said Jacko, with great
earnestness.
“Ah ! but you don’t understand,” said Stella, stroking
the naughty bird.
“ Damned rot! ” said Jacko, emphatically. And
Stella laughed, which was decidedly better than crying.
As for moralising on the subject, that was out'of the ques-
tion, for Jacko was hopelessly outside the pale of redemp-
tion.
“ Damned rot! Fill ’em up again, and hang the
expense.”
He was a most profane bird, and heartily enjoyed his
character.


CHAPTER II.
MARIE.
11 7TARIE LAMBERT was not even of French parentage,
•*■■■*■ though her name suggested that probability,
Nevertheless, she was a French type —short, fair-corn -
plexioned, with dark eyes and hair. But, unlike anything
French, she was wicked. It has been seriously suggested
that legislation against the mixing of the sexes before
marriage, except in the presence of the prospective mother-
in-law, or mothers-in-law, should be enacted to prevent
many undesirable complications which do at present
arise. Whether or not kissing is a crime, or even a
menace to health, is a problem too profound for immediate
solution. It is quite possible that the ringing of a Curfew
bell, when all girls under a certain age should be safely
housed, or else be seen home by the policeman, would
prevent occasional tragic happenings, but there is no doubt
such a social innovation would spoil a lot of harmless sport.
It would have been better for Marie Lambert had she
been “ rung in ” at sundown ; but, if she were a sinner,
she was certainly a very cheerful one, and if she were the
talk of the township—well, townships will talk, and
perhaps half the ill-natured gossip concerning her was
quite undeserved.
Marie had always been in love. She said of herself that
she could not remember the time when she was not in


love. Jimmy Spencer, the groom at Golden Gully, had
been one of her Romeos. But recently she had experienced
a very grand passion ; she had discovered that Raffa had
“ beautifully passionate ” eyes ! The township did not
know of this love affair. There had often been but a small
fire when considerable smoke of scandal had resulted ;
now there was no smoke when there was actually a fierce
blaze undiscovered. It was Raffa who managed this.
There must be no talking about his doings.
Marie Lambert lived, when she was not in a situation as
housemaid on one or other of the stations in the vicinity,
with her parents at the farm by the junction of the Warra-
wee and the old Forest roads. Her father was a cockie-
farmer. He appeared to have come into the world carrying
a milk-can and an axe, and he had carried them ever since.
He would probably die carrying them, and, like the Wan-
dering Jew, would bear his particular trouble for all time.
Marie was the sixth child of thirteen. She had arrived
at her twenty years as best she could. She had seen
demoralising incidents, and had a wide and varied exper-
ience of life. And she was a cheerful little soul in the face
of adversity. She was one of the best horsewomen in the
district, and rode her mount astride. She neither knew
nor cared that her method was up-to-date. It suited her,
and she could cut across country with safety, taking
fences, logs, and water-holes as they came, with a good
horse under her, without any fear of a fall.
On the morning of the, great national holiday, Marie
ambled slowly down the Warrawee-road towards the town-
ship. She had not gone far when she met Raffa.
“ Were you coming to our place ? ” she asked.
“ No; I’m going to Mount Rock. Where are you
going ? ”


“ I was going But what is that to do with you ? ”
she added pertly.
“ Oh, nothing. Are you not for any of the picnics ? ”
“ I don’t think so. I’ve a good mind to ride as far as
Mount Rock with you. Shall I? ” She looked a challenge.
“ No,” he said ; “it is not wise.”
“ That for being wise,” she said, and snapped her fingers.
“ What do I care for people and what they say ? They
run me down enough now ; they accuse me of things I’ve
never done. What should I care if they tell the truth for
once ? ”
She spoke angrily, defiantly. She was no meek and
mild rustic maiden in distress. She was no living picture
of innocence betrayed. Marie, like the great majority,
had sinned with her eyes wide open. She was only nine-
teen or twenty ; she looked older.
Raffa said nothing. In her wilful way she was fond of
him, and he knew it. But, though weak where her emotions
were affected, she, nevertheless, had the Australian
woman’s sense of her own individuality. She was carried
away by impulse at times, but, fortunately she recovered
quickly. Her flippant humour was assumed to make him
think that she did not care.
I
Marie had been to dances in the Warrawee Mechanics’
Institute since she had come of age —sixteen, and had,
accordingly, met all sorts and conditions of men ; amongst
them were commercial travellers, and others from the city,
and she was an apt pupil, and learnt both intuitively and
from experience— a 'priori et a posteriori.
“ You will come to-night ? ” she asked.
“ Yes, certainly,” he answered, and rode off at a canter.
She watched him as he disappeared in a cloud of dust,
then she turned towards the old Forest-road.


Marie, the talk of the township, had resolved to leave
home and go to the city. She had come to the conclusion
that she would never do any good in Warrawee. Perhaps
there was a more serious reason. Into that it is not for us
to enquire too curiously. At any rate, she had determined
to see Stella Sothern, and to confide in her, and she was on
her way when she had met Raffa. The meeting had caused
her to readjust things. She could not confide in Stella
without being disloyal to Raffa. Her confession would
mean his downfall from Stella’s favour. It might mean
his ruin, and resultant disaster to her own cherished
hopes.
She rode along the old Forest-road towards Rocky Creek,
which ran through Mount Rock Estate, and was, in fact, a
continuation of the creek at Golden Gully.
“ I’ve been a wicked fool. I wish I’d stuck to Jimmy ;
but what’s the use of regrets now.”
Further and further she went into the bush. For many
years this road had been used only by an occasional rider.
There had once been a well-defined bridle track, but it was,
for the most part, overgrown with saplings and bushes.
“ I’ll have it out with him to-night, and then I’ll get
away to the city.”
Having come to this conclusion, she rode across country
at a brisk pace. Coming to a halt for a moment, she
happened to look back over her shoulder. She saw a
solitary horseman walking easily along the old road she
had left. She gazed at him long and intently, noticing
the peculiar way he leaned forward in the saddle.
“My God !it can’t be ! It’s a ghost —a ghost! ” she
cried, and rode off at a gallop.


CHAPTER III.
DOCTOR HUGH.
DOCTOR Hugh Fairleigh did his duty by the patient
out back. Then, after a meal of cold mutton,
damper, and tea, he started on the return to Warrawee.
He seemed to be in no particular hurry, notwithstanding
he was to call on Miss Stella Sothern. A crisis had come
in his life, and he knew that his whole future depended
on the events of the next few hours. He loved Stella.
He had loved her for a year before Henry Weston went
away ; he had loved her since, silently, until a year ago,
when, at a dance, he had in a moment of passion and
enthusiasm told her of his love. She had given him no
hope that his love would be returned, but, in spite of
that, and of himself, he had continued to love her.
Fairleigh was a man without worldly experiences. He
had been too busy at the university to experiment outside
of the curriculum. Whether this strict adherence to an
academic career is of ultimate advantage to a doctor is
questionable. For one destined to settle in a country
practice it may be best. One who has not tasted the
forbidden tree can have no regrets. He can have no
irksome memories, either. It cuts both ways. But
there is safety in ignorance, though never bliss. Doctor
Hugh, though a strictly good fellow, was no Puritan. He
did not touch alcohol himself, but he kept a decanter
for his visitors. He was genuinely religious, so he never
quoted Scripture. He was just the man to love one


woman, and, unless lie won her, to continue true to her
throughout a life of useful endeavour, a strong life un-
manned by cheap sentimentality, yet limited because of
its unnatural self-sufficiency. He had determined to
make a final appeal; to ask Stella Sothern once again
to be his wife. If she accepted his offer, he would con-
tinue at Warrawee ; if she refused, he would sell his prac-
tice, and go as medical officer on one of the liners and see
the world.
By seeing the world, he meant seeing the great hos-
pitals and medical museums of the world. He loved
Stella Sothern; he also loved his profession, and aspired
to its highest attainments.
When he reached Golden Gully, as Stella’s homestead
was called, because of the splendour of the wattles in
spring and summer, he round rode to the back, and left
his horse. Mrs. Anderson, who had been housekeeper
when Stella was born, and still held the position, met him
as he came towards the house.
“ Miss Stella’s down the gully, doctor. The girls came
up in a group and just carried her off. Will you go
down ? ” .
“ Yes, I think I shall,” he said, and he took a short
cut through the orchard, at the side of the house, down
re he heard gay voices ringing—
ly ! and welcome Day,
) and sorrow ;
jid with one voice
e good-morrow.
I clouds have fled,
38 we’ll borrow;
laughter ring,
9 good-morrow,
>s we’ll borrow.


“ Full from his throat the magpie’s note
Rings clear in fern and furrow;
And heaven high his melody, _
Gives summer time good-morrow.
The lark and thrush in briar and bush
Sing sweet. Away with sorrow.
Come, with one voice let us rejoice,
Give summer time good-morrow—
Joy from the birds we’ll borrow.”
Have you heard a chorus of irresponsible young people
who are out for the day, who are intoxicated with deep
draughts of air that is heavy with ozone and the frankin-
cense from the wattles and gums ? Have you heard them
sing ? Then imagine that is how they sang as Doctor
Hugh stepped into their midst that summer afternoon. ,
“Hello, doctor! Come and join in.”
Half a dozen handsome, smiling girls were around him
in a moment. How attractive they looked in their light
costumes ; how free, and what pictures of health and
splendid womanhood. Not a poorly-built or ill-dressed
unit amongst them; and yet they were all children of
people in simple walks of life. In Warrawee there were
no hard and fast class distinctions. Even that august
personage, the local bank manager, occasionally played
euchre in the pub parlour with the cronies who frequented
the place. The president of the shire was the butcher;
and he had been fined on several occasions for “ boiling
down ” within the prescribed area of the town. In fact,
Doctor Hugh, as health officer, had been compelled to
prosecute his shire president, who, being incorrigible, and
of Scotch descent, paid the fine and shouted whisky for
the bench immediately afterwards. It is a fallacy to call
a Scotchman mean. Show him a whisky bottle!
Doctor Hugh joined in games and gaiety. He played
rounders vigorously, and drank home-made ginger beer


till rounders became impossible. But there was no
sign of Stella’s presence. He learnt, upon enquiry, that
she had been commandeered by the girls, and had sat
down to luncheon with them, but that she had suddenly
disappeared.
“ Oh, this is a bad day for poor Miss Sothern,” said one
of the girls, who remembered that the 26th of January
was the date of Henry Weston’s leaving Warrawee on
the fatal desert expedition.
Dr. Hugh heard the remark, but attached no particular
meaning to it.
“ Come, doctor, sing us a song. Do ? ”
“■ Yes ! do, do ! ”
There was no escaping. They literally took possession
of him.
“ Well, just one, then I must go. What shall it be ? ”
One suggested “ Good-bye, Little Girl, Good-bye,”
another called for “ Blue Bell.”
“ No,” he said. “ I’ll sing you an Australian song.
It’s about time we sang our own songs ; and it’s all in
your hands, you know. If you wouldn’t sing those trashy
American ballads you would soon be singing something
better.”
“ Don’t be too rough on them, Doctor,” said Marie,
who at that moment joined the group. He sang pleas-
antly, in a light baritone—
A flower of flame is the waratah,
’ Midst the purple shade it gleams,
A blood red flash like a battle-star,
No mystic flower of dreams.
But the emblem of pride in our nation’s might,
I rejoice in its petals red,
That hint of a future full and bright,
In our land of liberty and light,
When the Past and its wrongs are dead.


A flower of love is the wattle gold,
’ Midst the gully’s shade it gleams,
Alas for the heart too soon grown cold
To delight in summer dreams.
’Tis the emblem of love and of youthful power,
New-born beneath Southern skies.
Ah ! come my love ere the shadows lower.
And make life perfect one passing hour
Ere the gold of the wattle dies.
“ What do you call that song ? ” they asked, after
having heartily applauded his performance.
“ Waratah and Wattle,” he told them.
Just then Haifa came up. He had heard the concluding
bars of the doctor’s song.
“If they only would come when we call them, eh,
doctor ? But woman is like that little word if: she
suggests a doubt. Woman is the greatest ‘if’ of all.”
“ You’re cynical, Raffa,” Doctor Hugh returned. And
then—
“ You’ve been to the city. Any news ? ”
“ What news could I bring ? Igo to attend to busi-
ness, that is all.” He shrugged his shoulders and lit a
cigaratte. “ I hear, doctor, that it may be you will be
leaving us, eh ? ” he added, after a pause.
“ Well! It is true I have mentioned it. It is just
possible. The rumour has spread, evidently. You know
what gossips our good townspeople are.”
Raffa smiled. Yes ! He rather thought he knew all
about that.
“ But, if I may ask —there it is again, that little word
‘ if ’ —what is your reason for leaving us so —so myster-
iously, eh ? ”
The doctor hesitated, then—“ Raffa, you know my
reason well enough.”
Raffa laughed, and showed his white regular teeth.
Yes! He knew the reason. He nodded.


“ I suppose you heard nothing—no word of the ill-
fated expedition to the desert; nothing of Henry Wes-
ton ? ” Doctor Hugh asked.
“ Not a word,” Haifa replied, seriously. “ Not a
word; and we never shall. Dead men, even heroes,
send no messages. It is all very sad ; but who can help
it ? He had everything a man could wish for—money,
a beautiful girl, everything.”
It was significant that he mentioned money first.
“ But he was ambitious, and so was she. It meant
fame for him to explore the desert and open up a way to
the goldfields. I honour him for a brave man,” said
Doctor Hugh, warmly.
“He would have fame ; he would be a hero ; he would
cross the desert, and make a name. A name ! A fig for
such ambition. Well—what was his reward ? A grave—
an unknown grave.”
“ I repeat, I honour him, I honour his memory,” and,
turning away, the doctor waved his hand to Haifa, and
walked up the gully towards the house.
“ A cad ! And I don’t like him, and I don’t believe
in him ! ” That was his opinion of Stella’s manager.
“ A fool—a lovesick fool, who will ask her to be his at
his earliest opportunity. And she, full of memories of
her lost lover, will sigh and sympathise, and offer to be a
sister to him. He will go away to seek consolation afar.
Then will come my turn. Yes ! I can afford to wait and
watch, and I shall win her in good time. I wonder if she
liked the new music—the ‘ For All Eternity ’ and the
‘ One Summer Night.’ A doctor ! —bah ! a fool! And,
yet, how well it suits me!”
And, with these pleasant thoughts of triumphant
scheming, Haifa strolled slowly down the gully, smoking
his cigarette.


CHAPTER IV.
SAD SONGS.
RAFFA had selected the new music with a purpose.
He knew that Doctor Hugh intended to propose
again to Stella, and that if she refused him, he meant to
leave the district. The doctor had never told Haifa, nor
anybody else, that such were his intentions ; but sixteen
quarters make four, just as surely as twice two ; and the
Italian had a good memory for small things, and a subtle
imagination. He was an excellent mental arithmetician,
and he had not lived for twenty years in Warrawee not to
know how to “ learn things ” when he wished to.
Now, Haifa meant to win Stella Sothern for himself,
and he believed in the triumph of the man who knows
how to wait. An Italian is passionate. Yes, at twenty ;
at forty he is a Machiavelian without any of his subtle
master’s virtues. An Irishman is also supposed to be the
creature of impulse. So he is—when it suits him ; but
while his right eye is in fine frenzy rolling, keep your
eyes—both of them—on his left, for he is summing you up
with that, and coldly, impassively considering how he
can get the best of the bargain. Italians and Irishmen
come from the same original stock. It would take a
volume to prove this, so you must take it for granted.
Now, when Haifa had transacted his business in the


city, he went to a wine shop in the slums, a resort of the
bibulous and impecunious art students, who played at the
Latin Quarter, and ruined their prospects —never too
bright—and their nerves by drinking cheap wines and
smoking till the place reeked. They were all Socialists,
of a sort, and believed in the regeneration of society;
and sometimes, when they had drunk enough vermouth
and soda, they made speeches on the subject, and applauded
one another in the most magnanimous way. Then they
would sing the Marseillaise, and drink more vermouth,
quite careless of the fact that they would have racking
heads in the morning, and that the old world would roll
on in much the same indifferent way as it ever has done,
before there were any Socialists with their “ theories,”
either good or bad.
And to this place Raffa went with a purpose. He
knew that Guiseppe Stassi, the tenor, who was going to
make Caruso take a back seat, would be found there
amusing himself and his admirers by singing “ Non e Yer ”
or “La donna e mobile ”in his dashing style. Peppino,
as he was familiarly called, was delighted to see his dear
friend, Raffa.
Raffa was equally transported to meet his beloved
Peppino. They dined together, and Stassi, who ate
three huge piles of macaroni, smothered in oil and Par-
mesan cheese, said—when he found time to speak—that
he thought Raffa was certainly looking ten years younger
than when he was last down. Then while he waited for
some more tripe, braized with garlic and tomato sauce,
he hummed softly, “ Che senza d’ amor la vita non val
nulla ” —“ Without love, life is nothing worth,” and he
smiled knowingly at Raffa.


While they smoked their cigarettes and sipped their
wine, Raff a confided in Stassi. “ I want some sad songs
—songs of true love, constant love,” he explained. “ Are
there any new ones ? ”
Stassi laughed. He was a fat, oleaginous, good-natured
fellow who liked his dinner, and took the world as it came.
“ Che senza d'amor, la vita non val nulla,” he repeated.
“ Yes, I can go with you, and we can buy some. That
sort of song is always new—to the young.”
Raff a referred to the matter no further; but joined in
the general conversation. The universe was re-arranged
every dinner-time, and problems that have vexed the
minds of philosophers in all ages were solved and settled
off-hand.
In the afternoon Raffa and Stassi went to the music
shop. There they purchased some of the old songs that
are ever new, and by the evening train Raffa returned to
Warrawee, and thence to Golden Gully. He meant those
songs to cause Stella pain. He intended that Doctor
Hugh Fairleigh should propose to her when her soul was
vibrating with sacred recollections of the one who was
gone. He was being cruel only to be kind —to himself.
He was no stagy, impossible villain—no motiveless schemer,
no sage, but a very real and living rascal who schemed
with a purpose, and that his own gain. Like all unscru-
pulous men, he plotted with a distinct aim, his selfish
triumph ; his was no purposeless planning. He did not
play at being a rascal for the sake of the play. Only the
monomaniac does that, or the melodramaniac. He had
a definite objective, and all his strategetic moves were
towards that.
As he strolled along the gully he came suddenly on


Stella. She was sitting alone. The gracious afternoon
and soft, cloudless sky brought neither sunny smiles nor
peacefulness to her. The months had passed into years,
and still she waited, in vain. Yet, strange enough, she
was not without hope, though on this day of days her
heart was heavy, and the singing and laughter of the gay
picknickers jarred on her. She started on seeing Raffa.
“ What! sitting all alone,” he said, as he stopped
before her.
“ Yes; all alone, as you say. I suppose it does seem
strange; but, really, I’ve no heart for fun,” she answered,
quietly.
“ Well, you know I deeply sympathise ; but—but —
Ah ! but you would not forgive me if I said it.”
“ Speak what is in your mind. You were my father’s
friend, and you’ve been mine—say what you think. I
can half-guess it.”
“ What ? ” he asked.
“ You would tell me, as you have before, that I am
foolish and weak to waste my life in a vain regret. But
then you don’t understand. We see things differently,
don’t we ? ”
“ Yes,” he agreed; “we see things differently. A
vain regret—it is true. You are young, you are beautiful—
ah ! you smile at that. It is true ; there is none more
beautiful. And yet—ah ! well, perhaps I am wrong to
interfere.”
He spoke, as always, with a definite intention.
“ You mean kindly, I know ; but —there can be no
change in my purpose. You may think me mad; but
I tell you I know that he will return to me some day.
Yes,” she continued, rising, “ I have had a message—a


message from Heaven—and I know that Henry lives,
and will come to me again. Yes—yes—l see him now,
now. Nothing can change my faith—nothing, nothing.”
How beautiful she was in pale heliotrope against a
glory of gold and green. She spoke with passionate
intensity. She looked away into the blue distance as
though even then she could see her lost lover coming to
her.
Raffa was satisfied. Doctor Fairleigh’s dismissal was
certain. As for himself—well, he had no faith in dreams
and visions. He knew that the desert would not give
up its dead. So he must play a waiting game.
“ Doctor Hugh was looking for you,” he said. “ Didn’t
you promise him some afternoon tea ? ”
“ Dear me! I had quite forgotten him,” and she
laughed lightly.
And Raffa laughed lightly, too. Certainly the doctor
would be favoured with much sisterly advice when he
proposed to Stella. But the doctor was a fool, and knew
nothing about women.


CHAPTER V.
MARIE SEES A GHOST.
“ W/HERE have you been ? I’ve been looking
everywhere for you. Oh, Raffa, I’m so
startled.”
“ Always look startled when you come to me. You
look the thing! Your eyes sparkle. What has startled
my sweet Marie, eh ? ”
He was in a playful humour. He was guiding develop-
ments quite to his satisfaction. But he was about to
receive a rude shock. •
“ I’ve seen a ghost,” she said, with great seriousness.
“ All ghosts are out of date, except one sort,” he replied.
“What sort?”
“ Creditors, my sweet Marie; they still come on and
startle us when we least expect them.”
“ But, seriously,” she continued ; “ seriously, I did
see a ghost. I was, as you know, out for a ramble this
morning. When I left you I went some way along the
old Forest-road. I was thinking of things. Raffa, I’m
in trouble 1 ”
“ Yes, yes ; but the ghost.” He missed the significance
of her words. He scorned the idea of spirits and of visions
—yes ! but he was superstitious in spite of himself; and
he was a rogue, and therefore inordinately curious. “About
the ghost,” he repeated.


She would tell of her trouble afterwards, so she con-
tinued—
“ As I was coming homeward, I saw a horseman aiding
along the old track in this direction. I couldn’t believe
my eyes; but it was Henry Weston, or his ghost, sure
enough.”
That moved him.
“ What! ” he cried. “ You must be dreaming.”
“ No,” she repeated. “It was Henry Weston or his
ghost. Do you think I don’t remember how die used to
sit his horse —his funny lean frontways ? Rather ! I’d
drop to him anywhere, but on a neddy, I could swear to
him.”
Her slang was doubly impressive. He saw that she
was in deadly earnest.
“ Was he far from you when you saw him ? Could
you see his face ? ” he asked.
“ No, I couldn’t see his face, but I know his cut on
horseback. It was Weston, right enough. Miss Stella
always said he would come back.”
“ Miss Stella, be hanged,” he said, sharply. “ Why
don’t you call her Stella ? You’re as good as she is.”
His flattery was unappreciated.
“ No, I’m not, Raffa, and you know I’m not. I’m not
fit to be in the same room with her. And I must speak
about that, too. Things can’t go on any longer.”
“ Oh, don’t bother about anything else just now,” he
said, brutally. Then he saw an expression in Marie’s
eyes which gave him pause. No doubt this ghost was
merely the result of her imagination. But he must be
careful how he spoke to her. Under no circumstances
must she become inimical towards him.


“ Marie, do you love me as much as ever ? ” he asked.
“ God knows I try not to love you,” she admitted.
“ I’ve been a fool —a wicked fool, I know. And I suppose
I’ll have to pay for it. I’m sorry about mother. I’ll
have to go away to the city; and—oh ! we’ll just have
to live and love and chance it.”
“ I’ll do everything for you,” he began.
“ Marry me ? ” she flashed.
“ Yes ; marry you,” he repeated, without a quiver.
“ You won’t, I know, but, my word ! you’ll have to be
fair to me, mind that always.”
The sun was going down behind the purple ranges.
From the branch of a neighbouring white gum a kooka-
burra made cynical observations concerning human
destiny. The singing of the picknickers as they journeyed
homewards grew faint as they passed into the distance.
“ Well! ” she said, “ What are you thinking about ? ”
He took her hands in his, and drew her to him.
“ Do you really love me as much as ever, eh ? ” he
asked.
His “ beautifully passionate ” eyes were looking into
hers.
“ Yes,” she said ; “ you know I do.”
“ Then promise me not to mention about this—this
imaginary ghost—to anyone. It was your fancy ; nothing
more. Poor Weston’s bones bleach on the desert sands.
He will not come back, and there are no ghosts. If you
love me, if you value my love, you will promise me never
to mention this. I have reasons—serious reasons—for
asking your silence.”
The kookaburra laughed long and loud. Marie was
quick to notice her lover’s grim seriousness.


“ You believe me, or you wouldn’t be so serious,” sbe
said.
“ I am thinking of Stella. She has had her life spoilt
all these years. She does not forget; but time—ah !
time does many things, and she may yet learn to forget.
But if you mention this ‘ ghost,’ and she gets to hear of
it—well, it will do much harm, and no good. Ghosts
awaken memories that should sleep.”
“Oh ! so you wish Stella to forget! Why ? ” Marie
asked, sharply.
“ Because Doctor Fairleigh wishes her to be his wife
and he would make her a good husband; and it is my
duty to her father to see to her future welfare. Are you
satisfied ? ”
“ Yes,” said Marie. “ I promise not to mention the
ghost.”


CHAPTER VI.
DOCTOR HUGH PROPOSES.
W/HEN Doctor Hugh returned to the house and did
* * not find Stella there, he sat on the verandah and
waited.
“ She can't be far away,” Mrs. Anderson assured him.
“ I’ll just see if she is down the bail-yard. She sometimes
milks her pet, Daisy, herself.”
But, before the housekeeper had gone many minutes,
Doctor Hugh spied the sweet figure in heliotrope coming
slowly through the orchard. He went to meet her. She
smiled pleasantly on seeing him.
“ You’ll think me a nice one. I quite forgot you were
to call on returning. You see I am candid, and confess
it. Am I forgiven ? ”
“ I went down the gully to look for you. I heard you
had been taken possession of by some of the girls,” he said.
“ Yes; I had lunch with them. And how is your
patient ? ”
“ Oh, I think I’ll pull him through. Typhoid, and a
bad case. How pleasant it is here among the fruit trees.”
He was not in the mood for discussing his professional
experiences.
“ Yes ; and if you like we can have our tea out here.
If you’ll excuse me a minute, I’ll go and see to it.”
While she was away he braced himself for the coming


ordeal. He meant to ask her then and there to be his
wife. His was a story that was simply told. There
were no deeply-learned chapters of a psychological or
psychopathic character to be read and studied. It was
a love story; nothing more.
“ I love her. If she can’t love me, I shall go away.
That is all.” So he summed up the situation in a few
words.
Stella’s instinct assured her that a crisis was at hand.
She had felt incoming for some time. She admired the
doctor, but it was in a safe and sisterly way. Lucky is
the lover who is not too much admired. He has a chance.
Doctor Hugh’s case was hopeless,
“ Miss Sothem,” be began, after the tea and home-
made scones had been discussed. Then he paused irre-
solutely.
“ Yes, doctor ! ”
“You remember the dance at Mount Rock ? ”
Yes ; she remembered it. It was then he had proposed
to her for the first time. The prelude was suggestive.
There was no doubt as to the theme to follow.
“You remember, then, that, although you gave me no
hope, I told you that the day would come when I should
speak again ? ”
Yes ; she remembered that also.
“ The day has come,” he said, earnestly.
“ Oh, I wish it had not,” she cried. “ And to-day of
all days.” There was a faint ring of reproach in her
tone.
Then it flashed on him that he had chosen the anni-
versary of Weston’s departure on which to speak to this
steadfast woman of his love. “ I didn’t think of that,”
he said, weakly, then pulled himself together ; “ but why
c


should it make any difference ? Weston was my friend.
I honour his memory. If you can’t love me as you loved
him, that cannot alter my love for you. Stella, I only
ask for a word of hope. God knows Ido not seek to
change your faith ”
“ But that is just what you do,” she interrupted ;
“ you may not mean to, but you do. Henry is not dead ;
he will come again. I know it; nothing can alter my
faith in that. Oh, doctor, let us be friends. We can never
be more than friends,”
“My God ! ” He leant his head on his hands. His
was worthy love—the love of a strong man without
cheap sentimentality. He was silent for several heavy
minutes. She admired him, and now she pitied him.
But admiration is not love ; and pity never yet was akin
to love awakened.
“It is three years,” he said at last —“ three years this
very day since Weston left. If,> for one moment I believed
that he could by any chance be alive I would plead no
further. But—oh ! don’t think me cruel; I don’t wish
to trifle with your faith. What chance is there ? ”
“He is alive,” she said simply ; “ and he will return
to me. I can’t explain things to you. You would laugh
—no ; I don’t mean that, but you would not be able to
put any faith in my reasons for ray belief, and yet—■—
Tell me, doctor, don’t you think those whose minds are
in close relation can communicate with one another at a,
distance ? ”
“ I really haven’t thought about it,” he said, frankly,
“ I believe it. Nothing can alter that belief. On
bright, starry nights we used to look at the Gross together,
and we agreed that we would send messages to one another
every night by the stars. And we do ; yes, we^do.”


“STELLA,” SAID THE DOCTOR, "I ONLY ASK FOR A WORD OF
HOPE.”
Stella Sothern Page 34.


“Itis a very beautiful belief,” he said. “ Well, Stella,
I shall say no more. I shall go away. I could not continue
to live here.”
“I am sorry —very sorry.” She took his hand in hers.
“ But perhaps it will be for the best. If you go, where
will you go ? ”
Again he was silent. Suddenly he sprang to his feet,
his grey eyes flashing with inspiration.
“ What is it ? ” she asked.
“ I have just thought of something,” he said.
“What? You look so excited! What is it?”
“ Stella,” he said, “ I meant to go across the sea ; but
I won’t. A minute ago I said that Weston could have
had no chance of life. I was wrong. If he fell in with
friendly blacks he would have a chance. But, again, it
is three years. Think of that—three years. No ! I was
carried away. It is impossible.” His enthusiasm passed
as suddenly as it had come.
“ No, doctor ; it is not impossible,” she said. “ Sup-
pose he reached the north, and got mixed up with the
Malays and others. I have thought it all out; I have
thought of it night after night. Australia is only half—
no, not half, known. He is alive, I know; he will come
again, I’m certain.”
He warmed again under her influence. “ Yes ! there
is a chance ; I suppose there always is a chance. Who
shall say when things are at their worst ? Yes, I’ll do it.
I’ll go away, and I’ll devote a year to searching for Henry
Weston. If I fail, I shall come to you again. May I
hope ? ”
“ Yes,” she said ; “ you may hope. I promise nothing.
Come back to me at the end of a year.”


CHAPTER VII.
A MODERN MEPHISTOPHELES.
A LURID band of red light lingered in the western
distance, a threatening, suggestive gleam, refracted
from the sunken sun. But for this,' night, robed in infinite
purple, reigned everywhere. From the gully came the
low, insistent murmur of the bush ; the mopoke spoke of
fate in his gloomy minor third, and occasionally a cuckoo
called. It was so still that a native bear in the ranges
a mile away could be heard making his monotonous
complaints to the moon, that arose calmly from the depths.
The day, with its light and laughter, had departed;
now the tragic night had come—night, with its half-
tones and gloom.
Marie and Raffa stood in the shadows together.
“You understand ? ” he said.
“ Yes ; I will cut across country to Blue Block railway,
and there take a ticket to the city.”
- “ Then go straight to Caruso’s, as I have told you.
They will put you up till you hear from me, or till I come.
In less than a week, anyhow. You understand ? ”
“ Yes. I must go now ; I’m afraid.”
“ What of ? ” he asked.
“ Meeting the ghost,” she said.
He laughed; but it was as the crackling of thorns


under a pot. “ I’ll see you on to the main road,” he
said. “ Where is your mare ? ”
“In Miss Sothern’s loose-box. I gave her to Jimmy,
the groom.”
They went, by the back way, to the stables. It was
not long before Marie was riding homewards. She w r as
to leave the old place in the early morning, and thence
go to the city, “to live and love and chance it.” When
she had disappeared, Raffa strolled thoughtfully through
the paddocks back towards Stella’s house.
“ Sie ist die erste nicht! ” Raffa was unacquainted
with Mephistopheles’ most devilish remark, but he was
villian enough to invent the phrase for himself. “ She
is not the first! No ; and she won’t be-the last to live
and love and chance it.” He had given her the means
of going to the city, and had promised to join her there.
She had little faith in his promises; but she meant to
make him act fairly by her. She knew he dreaded a
scandal.
. “ Peppino Stassi, the great tenor of the wine-shop, will
make eyes at her. We shall see ; we shall see.”
And Raffa lit a cigarette and walked on deep in thought.
He was upset. Marie’s earnestness concerning the ghost
had affected him in spite of his saner judgment. It
all her imagination. There could be no doubt of that.
But Stella’s firm belief in Weston’s return had something
of the supernatural in it. Now came this ghost story.
As he threw his cigarette away he looked up.
“ My God ! ”
He peered at the phantom before him. He trembled
so violently he could not speak. It was a ghost indeed ;
or it was Henry Weston back from the grave. Which ?


“ Speak, for God’s sake ! Are you a man, or what are
you ? ” he cried at last.
“Yes, lam a man, or what is left of one. Why, it is
Haifa ! Haifa, old fellow, don’t you know me ? ”
So it was no ghost, but the living man himself.
“Weston! You! This is a miracle!”
So Marie had made no mistake. Her eyes had not
deceived her. Her ghost was not the figment of an excited
imagination.
“ Yes ; I’m back again, and it is a miracle,”
“ Back from the grave,” Haifa said, solemnly,
“ That’s true ; back from the grave,” Weston repeated,
and then—“ Tell me—how is Stella ? ”
Haifa made no answer. He was thinking. This was
checkmate to all his moves.
“ She is well,” he said, after a pause—“ well, and—
happy,” he added, significantly. It was a quick lie, but
he was a quick schemer.
“ Happy ! ” Weston repeated after him. “ Ah, well
lam glad to hear that. But, come, Haifa, you must tell
me everything. I camped off the Old Forest-road all
day, as I didn’t want to be seen. I must hear all the news
first, and prepare her for my return. You see, I’ve been
away nearly two years, and—but, come, tell me every-
thing.”
Nearly two-years! Haifa grasped the grim meaning
of the words as soon as they were spoken. The man who
had returned after a real absence of three, and fancied he
had been away but two years, had evidently lost his
memory of time, and possibly of events.
“ There is much to tell,” he said, seriously. “ But,
first, tell me your wonderful story —how you have returned


from the desert. Why, man, we have mourned you f as
one lost for ever.”
They sat on a trunk close by the spot where the merry
picnickers had sung and danced a few hours before.
The native bear still continued his depressing monotone,
and from the bush came the intermittent minor of the
mopoke.
“ Did never any word of the fate of our party reach
you ? ” Weston asked.
“ Oh, yes. A relief party followed you along the route
you had proposed to take. That was three months after
you set out. They found relics ; they found—you know
what—skeletons. They guessed that your party had
missed the springs, and perished of thirst. One lot of
miners, too impatient to wait for the Government survey of
the route to the goldfields, set out a week after you. None
of them have been heard of since. The officials pub-
lished notices warning prospectors and others. Every-
thing was done that could be done. When the relief
party returned with their awful tidings, everyone thought
of you as dead. But come—l must hear your wonderful
story ; I will tell you more afterwards. You must tell me
all, all.”
Weston rose and paced to and fro.
“ It was only natural they should think of me as dead.
And Stella ? ”
“ Don’t ask me anything more just yet. I will tell you
everything.”
So Weston sat down again and told his tragic story.
“ Haifa, old fellow,” Weston said, and there was a great
pathos in his voice and gesture—“ Haifa, it is no use ; I
can’t tell you all my story. I don’t remember. I have


tried—God knows how I have tried to remember, but it is
a great deal blank. The last thing I can remember is a
terrible sunset as I lay down to die. I awoke in an abori-
gines’ camp by a billabong. I learnt from them that
they had found me unconscious, and had taken care of
me. I was lucky to fall in with friendly blacks. Most
of them in the north-west are treacherous and unreliable.
I must have been very ill, and for a long time. When I
got better my memory was gone. Got better! For
months after I was so miserable and played out I couldn’t
walk half a mile without knocking under. I believe
some of the blacks were for getting rid of me, as I was
only a burden to them ; but, you see, I am a member of
the Curlew Club in the city, and, strange to say, I had the
club’s medallion of membership, badge—you know what
I mean—in my waistcoat pocket. That saved me. They
talked ‘ totem ’ pretty considerably, and I think they
looked on this thing as a sort of charm. Anyhow, I gave
it to the fellow who seemed to have the most to say, and
that settled it. I was all right after that.”
He paused suddenly, and peered eagerly into the bushes,
There had been a sharp sound, like the crackling of dry
leaves under foot, Raffa, too intent on his story, had
not noticed it.
“You seem to remember very well,” he said, en-
couragingly.
“ Ah, yes ; all that part I do ; but from the time of
reaching the desert till I lay down to die—all that is
a blank. I can’t recall anything about my comrades.
And then, later on, I got ill again. But I’ll tell you all
about it.”
And this was his story: —•


By short stages he had reached the Northern Territory,
somewhere on the coast. There he fell ill of malarial
fever, and was nursed by a settler and his wife. When
he recovered he had lost all sense of his own identity.
He did not know who he was. He had stayed some
time with these good people, taking his share in the work
of the selection, when they resolved on going back to the
Malay Peninsula, where the man had worked before as a
boss in the tin mines. As' he did not know who he was,
and had no particular interest in life, he decided to go
with his new friends in search of adventures. What did
it matter where he went ? His search was not in vain;
his experiences would fill many volumes. One thing is
certain, he not only had lost all knowledge as to himself,
but he had also lost his power of correctly fixing the dates
of past events.
His re-discovery of his right personality was simple
and sudden. He happened to take up an old copy of one
of the great Australian weeklies. In it were illustrations
of the Warrawee P. and A. Society’s show. He not
only recognised many of the photographs of people, but
immediately regained knowledge of his own lost identity.
But his recovery of memory was not complete.
“ And now, Haifa, tell me all that has happened in
these long two years.”
“ My poor friend—my poor, unfortunate friend,” said
Raffa, with such profound sentiment that one might
easily have thought him sincere. Weston, of course,
was deceived.
“ Oh, never mind me and my troubles. I*ll soon be
myself again. You can’t believe what a sniff of the dear
old gully means to me.”


“ Henry,” said Raffa, “ you have been away longer
than you think. You have been away more than two
years.”
“ Two to the day. This is national holiday, isn’t
it ? ”
“ Yes ; and it is five years to-day since you went away.”
Weston sprang to his feet with a cry.
“ Five years! Years ? Five hours, days, weeks,
months, but never years.” His face was pale ; he pressed
both hands to his temples.
“ Five years to-day,” Raffa repeated.
“My God ! then I have missed count of time. Other
things have seemed strange to me. Five years ! —years !
Five years make history. . . . But Stella—tell me
of her ; what of Stella Sothern all these, these five years ?”
Raffa had been busy whilst listening to Weston’s story,
and had determined on a master stroke of villainy. If
it failed, then it would be a case of exit Raffa ; if it suc-
ceeded—well, nothing succeeds like success. He played
carefully; but was a gambler none the less.
“ Well, since you ask me, I must answer you. Think
of it—five years. Come, Weston, you must brace yourself
to hear the bitter truth.”
“ The bitter truth ! She is not dead ? ” he asked.
“ Not dead, and yet ” He paused dramatically,
then continued—“ Think of it—five years. You say
true—they make history ; yes, in a woman’s life. They
can be wooed and wed, children can be born . . . .”
Weston moaned. “ The bitter truth indeed.” Raffa’s
insinuations were subtle poison to his soul. And then—
five years. “ I can guess your meaning. Don’t mind me.
Tell me all—all.”


“ My friend,” Raffa continued, “ you remember Doctor
Hugh—Doctor Hugh Fairleigh ? ”
“Of course. He was my friend. What about him ? ”
“You must be strong —strong.”
Weston writhed under the lash. Almost fiercely he
cried—“ Out with the truth, man; I’ve been in hell, I
can bear a little more.”
“ Well, of course, you see, you understand ” Raffa
began.
“ For God’s sake tell me ! ” Weston said passionately.
“ When the relief party came back with their story of
the skeletons they had found, and identified by different
means, pocketbooks, watches, and such things—well, as
the years passed, and we all thought you dead ”
“ And Stella—what of Stella ? ” Weston interrupted.
“ Alas ! she, after years of waiting, lost hope, too.”
“Ah ! ” He staggered for a moment, then—“ But
it was only too natural. Poor girl! Five years—five,
five I ” -
“ Only a month since she was married to Doctor Fair-
leigh.”
“ I guessed your meaning.” That was all he said ;
but there was hopelessness in every syllable.
Raffa watched him intently. Weston believed the
villainous lie. It was a desperate chance, but Raffa
felt certain that Weston, under the circumstances, would
go away again without seeing either Stella or the man he
thought she had married. And yet, in spite of feeling
sure of this, it was a desperate move. He guessed that by
this time Doctor Hugh would have been finally refused.
He knew that he would leave Warrawee at an
early date. And now, if Weston again went away without


having made any sign—ah ! that thought gave him
sudden pause. Had anyone besides Marie seen Weston ?
“ Why did you camp during the day ? Why didn’t
you come along here straight ? ” he asked, with apparent
indifference.
Weston was lost in thought. Raffa repeated his
question.
“ Why ? Because—l can’t tell you why—but I was
afraid. that' things might have happened. I wanted to
look about the place first without being seen. I don’t
know why, exactly. A man often acts on impulse. T
can’t say why.”
That was satisfactory. It rang true.
“But you will have been recognised along the road ? ”
said Raffa.
“No ! I wore a beard as far as Wattle Creek. I had a
shave in a barber’s shanty there. I saw no one. T
avoided people on purpose. I hated the thought of a
paper-blaze. But now—what does it matter ? ”
Raffa thought it mattered very much, but was silent.
“ Married only a month ago. My God ! my God ! ”
And then his emotions, with which he had struggled
bravely all through, overwhelmed him.
Raffa walked some little distance away. He was a
human being; he was shaped and dressed as a man, but
he was absolutely devoid of feeling for anyone but him-
self. And in this respect he was not remarkable, which
is a pity, but the pity is, it is true. What cared he for
Weston’s anguish ? What for the lie which was to darken
Stella’s life ? He had schemed for years to win her him-
self. Ever since the return of the relief expedition this
thought had obsessed him. And for many years he had


played false with her money and property. It was neces-
sary for him to win. He must win. What was another
man’s suffering to him ? Nothing—less than nothing.
The whole thing was a mere matter of business. There
is no such thing as morality in business, though it is much
spoken and written about. The principle of all business
is—get the best of the deal. Raffa meant to get the best
of the deal. But sometimes—for which God be greatly
thanked—being too clever, even in business, causes the
most appalling bankruptcy. A little point is overlooked,
and everything comes down with a crash. Raffa had
overlooked a little point. He was to rue that negligence
in due season.
When he looked round he saw Weston coming slowly
towards him. “ Raffa,” he said, “ I want you to do me a
favour. It is easily done. Will you ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ Just to keep it all to yourself about my coming back.
Just to let me be dead, as they think lam dead. I shall
go away again. No one has seen me. I shall get away
to-night. No one need be any the wiser. Never mention
my name ; never a word of what I’ve told you. Do you
know if they did anything with my property ? ”
“ There was no will.”
“No ; I didn’t think then that I was to die,” he said
solemnly.
“ Everything was done in order, I think,” Raffa told
him.
“It doesn’t much matter. lam dead—dead ! Nothing
matters. You haven’t given me your promise ? ”
“ Do you really mean it that you will go away again ? ”
“ Raffa, as God’s my judge, I wish to be dead. I know


that my return could only cause Stella and—and her
husband—pain. You promise ? ”
“ Yes, I promise.”
“ Never a word ? ”
“ Never a word.”
They went through the paddocks to the place where
Weston had left his horse. He mounted and rode slowly
away, in silence—a grey figure, leaning slightly forward
in the saddle.


CHAPTER VIII.
THE GAIETY OF DESPAIR.
WHEN Doctor Hugh had left her, Stella returned to
the house. She was lonely and sad. She could
not be otherwise. She did not tamely accept her hard
fate. She rebelled against it, and sometimes felt like
losing faith in life’s mystical better things. She was no
simple, love-sick maiden, but a woman whose intuitions
were as potent in developing her nature as are the ex-
periences of those less delicately constructed to receive
and to retain impressions. She was weary of waiting
and hoping ; and yet, though the years brought no message,
she felt that her lover was not dead, that he would return
again. And her rich, warm nature craved for him with
a passionate intensity that at times overwhelmed her.
The sun was in her blood—dreams and make-believe did
not satisfy her unutterable longings for the company of
the husband of her choice.
And yet—the years were passing on; slowly, surely
passing ever on. But she never wavered in her faith.
Dark hours came—hours of yearning and of restless dis-
satisfaction with her lot; but those hours passed, and she
was still the same steadfast, loving, self-respecting Stella.
What was to become of the world if woman should cease
to suffer and be strong ! What was woman’s true emanci


pation but her high privilege of self-renunciation for the
benefit of the race. Stella Sothern knew of the modern
movement; she lived far from the stir and commerce of
cities, but she had been to school in the town, and had
read her daily paper, which is a questionable advantage.
She played golf, and was the champion tennis player of
the district; and she was an accomplished musician,
and sang well.
But what were these occupations to her, lacking that
which makes a woman’s life full and complete—the love
of husband and children ? And yet, unless she could
give herself with love, she would remain as she was. Some
of the noblest women in the world are spinsters ; not those
who are forever trying and failing to meet the right man,
but those who have had an ideal, and have lived up to it.
If she had to be one of the army of single women—well,
she would try and live so that the world would be the
better for her life. But she had no imaginary nor morbid
desire for such martyrdom, and she clearly recognised that,
in so far as it is not a natural state, it must be a state of
martyrdom for her.
She stepped on to the verandah. How clear and calm
the air was. The night was dark for January, and over-
cast. She watched the moon as it rose beyond the ranges.
She heard the mopoke and the bear complaining against
fate—a gloomy monotone and an intermittent minor
third. From the garden came the fragrance of night-
bulbs. The very air was heavy with vaguely passionate
suggestion. She paced the verandah, her heart faint
with longing. Oh"! how she wanted him—how she
yearned for her lord ! She, too, rebelled against fate.
She could be reasonable enough at times, but this was one


of her “ bad hours,” and she kicked against the pricks.
Then, asshe'walked to and fro, she thought of the piano
and the new songs. She looked them through; but the
melancholy humour that had possessed her during the
day had passed. She threw them aside, and in a half-
defiant mood played “ Our Jack’s Come Home To-Day,”
and sang it with so much merry madness Ander-
son, in the kitchen, clapped her hands with delight at the
sudden change to cheerfulness.
“ And on this day, too,” she said to herself, and smiled,
well pleased to think her fair young mistress was going
to be sensible at last.
“ And on this day, too ! My God ! pity me ! ” said
Henry Weston, pale and haggard, as he turned away from
the orchard fence and passed again into the shadows,
He had come back, irresistibly drawn thither after leaving
Haifa, to have a last, a parting look at Stella’s home.
He had stood by the orchard fence, lingering irresolutely.
He had hoped to see her, if only for a moment, or perhaps
to hear her voice. And that was his reward, to hear -her
sing a rackety sea song in a rollicking way—“ Our Jack’s
Come Home from Sea To-day.”
“ And on this day, too. My God ! have mercy ! ”


CHAPTRE IX.
GHOSTS DON’T SMOKE.
T EAVING home was not an occasion for any weak
display of feeling. So, at any rate, Marie thought
as she made her silent and secret preparations for setting
out.
“ Poor old mother,” she said ; but it was merely a
passing qualm. As for “ dad,” who had moiled and toiled
for a quarter of a century to “ keep a roof over their heads,”
and had battled with nature in good reasons and in bad
with the unconquerable grit of the Australian settler—
well! dad was a man, and could look after himself. Any
sentiment where dad was concerned was absurd. Then
there were “ the others ! ” “ Oh, well,” she soliloquised,
“ my going away will make one less to be fed and kept.”
Her real regret was the necessity for parting from her
mare, named, on the suggestion of her former lover, Jimmy
the groom at Golden Gully, after the poet Gordon’s famous
Britomarte.
Marie decided to cut across country as far as Blue
Block station. She had made no mention of her de-
parture, but had written a brief letter to her mother, in
which she said she was going to a situation—“ a place,”
she called it—in town, that she would be all right, and
that there was no need for any anxiety on her account.


She carried this with her, intending to post it at Blue
Block. Had she left it on the kitchen table, dad would
have found it, and laboriously deciphered it, and then
the loss of “ his Mary ” would have been the occasion of
a visit to the township. And Marie—she had been
christened Mary, but, having received a liberal education,
and become cultured, she had adopted the quasi-poetical
Marie—knew that dad’s visits to the township under
ordinary circumstances were disastrous. She dreaded to
think of the quantity of beer he would drink to drown
his sorrow at her loss.
Accordingly she set forth in the early morning without
disturbing anyone, and relying on her mother to tactfully
manage dad. She left the Warrawee main road at once,
and crossed the paddocks in the direction she had gone
that morning. When she reached the Old Forest-road
she struck along it, making towards Mount Rock boun-
dary fence. That was her shortest cut to Blue Block
railway station, her objective.
She had walked for nearly an hour, when suddenly
she came on a r man camping by Rocky Creek, close by
the boundary, but in a secluded spot, where the stringy -
bark grew along the roadside. She would not have
noticed him but for his horse, which whinnied as she
approached.
He on the side of the creek, and he was
smoking. A glance was enough. She recognised him as
she caught a side view of his features in the white light
of the early dawn.
It was Henry Weston.
She was not frightened this time, but she was over-
whelmed by curiosity. Ghosts don’t smoke, that was


certain. What mystery was here ? She lay down in the
dry grass and wriggled along until she had a fine view
of him without the chance of herself being seen. She
meant to watch him. If she missed the morning train,
she would go to town later. Her vigil might have been
a long one only for a grass seed. This very insignificant
thing tickled her nostril, and caused her to sneeze violently.
Before she recovered, Weston was facing her.
“ I thought you were a ghost,” she said, weakly.
“ So I am,” he said, sternly.
“ Oh, no, you’re not,” she rejoined, pluckily. “ Ghosts
don’t smoke.”
“ Then why did you think me a ghost ? ” he asked,
severely.
“ Because you looked like one when I saw you yesterday
morning,” she returned.
“ Yesterday morning ! Where did you see me yester-
day morning ? ”
“On . horseback along the Old Forest-road. You’re
Mr. Henry Weston that they all thought was dead. What’re
you doing camping in the bush like this for ? ” she asked.
He eyed her almost fiercely when she spoke his name.
Was his plan to be spoilt by a chance meeting with a girl
like this ?
“ Henry Weston ! That is not my name.”
“ Oh, dicken,” she replied. “ I dropped to you the
moment I spotted you on your neddy. Think a girl
forgets how a champion steeplechaser sits his mount. I
was only a kid when I seen you riding at the 800100100
races, but I don’t forget your funny seat, not me.” This
was meant to be distinctly complimentary. She was
impressive, as she always was when slangy, for then she
was natural.


“ I assure you you’re all wrong. Anyway, what’s
your name ? ” he asked.
“ Marie Lambert,” she told him. “ But, you don’t
know me, though I know you.”
He scowled angrily. “ Know you ? Of course I don’t.
How should I know you ? and, as for your knowing me,
I tell you you’re mistaken. I’m not Henry Weston.
I never heard of him.”
She winked at him and laughed.
“ All right,” she said, “ you’re not, since you say so.
You oughter know,”
This was disconcerting. He was grimly in earnest.
She was evidently convinced that he was indulging in
some practical joke on a grand scale.
“ You could trust me, you know,” she told him. “ I
wouldn’t put you away. But if you don’t like—well, it
doesn’t matter. Anyhow, I must be getting a move on.
How grey your hair’s gone, hasn’t it ? And thin, too ?
Ah ! you see, I know you. And she laughed till the bush
rang.
“ Where are you going ? ” he asked. “ I mean, which
way?”
“ Why should I tell you—a complete stranger to me ? ”
she returned sharply, laughter in her eyes all the while.
“Oh 1 it doesn’t matter,” he said, carelessly.
“ Well,” she confided, “ I’m going away from home;
so you needn’t be afraid of me spoiling your little game,
whatever it is. And good-bye, Mr. Weston; I must
be going.”
She had not gone many yards before she turned and
called to him—“ What time do you make it ? ”
“ Half-past five,” he told her. .


“ Bother it! I can’t make Blue Block by six.”
She stood irresolute for a minute, then walked back to
him.
“ I’ll have to catch the evening train,” she said. “Come,
now, it’s your turn ; where are you going ? ”
He looked into her wicked, laughing eyes. She was
an incorrigibly festive young person, one of those naturally
naughty, but nice, people whom it is impossible to dislike.
He did not answer her question at once, “ Marie,” he
said, “ I believe you’re the right sort to do a fellow a good
turn.”.
“If I could,” she admitted, readily.
“ Well,” he continued, “ I want you not to say any-
thing about having seen me here. I’m not Henry Weston,
though I must be something like him, because you’re not
the first who has told me so. Anyhow, I’m not Henry
Weston. Who I am doesn’t matter. But I’ll tell you
this much, it is a question of life and death with me.
So don’t say anything about having met me. That will
be doing me a real good turn, and one I’ll never forget.”
He spoke so earnestly that she was convinced against
her will, which means that she was not convinced at all.
However, she agreed to consider herself mistaken, and the
subject was dropped.
“ You didn’t say which way you were going ? ” she
said.
“ I don’t know. I’m going to stay here through the
day. I shall move on again to-night. As I told you, it is
a case of life and death.” -
Marie was impressed. She was also practical. “ But
you’ve no tucker,” she said.
“ You’re a good girl,” he replied, kindly. “ Never
mind about the tucker. I’ll be all right.”


“ And you’re going to camp here till night ? ”
“ Yes, Marie.”
“ Good enough, then. I’m going home again. I’m
not going to knock about all day about Blue Block, not
much. I’ll have to go home to get you some tucker.
You can’t do a perish onyour own out here all day. There’ll
be a rumpus, I know, but it’s all in a lifetime. What arc
you looking like that for ? Don’t trust me, eh ? ”
It was true, and she had been quick to read the doubt
in his eyes. “ Now, look here, if you don’t trust me, you
can’t look on me as a pal, can you ? ” she said severely.
“ Well—well—come, I’ll trust you right enough. There’s
my hand on it.” He smiled for the first time.
Then they shook hands solemnly. That won Marie.
“ Right 0! ” she said, gaily. “ I’ll be off now, and I’ll
ride back with some tucker. Ta-ta ! ” And she walked
briskly back the way she had come. She turned once or
twice, and waved to Weston, who stood looking after her.
Marie neither knew nor cared whether she was taking
part in tragedy or comedy. It was a romantic drama,
and, all unconsciously, she was playing a leading role.


CHAPTER X.
JIMMY THE GROOM TAKES A HAND.
JIMMY, the groom, awoke with the dawn. He rubbed
his eyes and took a casual inventory of his sur-
roundings. Then, suddenly, he remembered things—
that is, some things. He had made the national holiday
the occasion for a big “ booze-up ” over at Warrawee,
and had fallen asleep on the road home. His horse had
brought him safely as far as the stables at Golden Gully.
As for the rest ! But, after a “sluice” at the pump,
he felt somewhat more sure of his mundane existence,
notwithstanding his head still seemed to belong to some
other sphere. He lit his pipe and tried to smoke. It
was no good. He went up to the kitchen, and the sympa-
thetic Mrs. Anderson made him a cup of tea. This he
negotiated after some finessing.
“ Off your breakfast, Jimmy ? Not even an egg ? ”
He shook his head dismally. When Jimmy suffered
a recovery everyone knew it.
“I say, Mrs. Anderson, was there anybody here last
night ? ” he asked suddenly.
“ Anybody here ? Whatever do you mean ? ” she
rejoined, stopping in the buttering of a large round of
toast, and staring at him.
“ Oh, nothin’, nothin’. I on’y thought ther’ might


er been,” be said enigmatically. Then he sauntered off to
the stables.
He was a sadder, if not a wiser, man. Warrawee
whisky hurts ; it is venomous and cruel. The “ snake
brand ”it should be called. One night of it meant strange
sensations for hours after apparent recovery ; two nights,
and the surrounding bush became a phantasmagoria,
and. surely that is bad enough for anything!
Jimmy was vaguely conscious of having overheard a
conversation between two men in a paddock. He also
knew that the men were not strangers to him; but he
could not place them—not yet. Suddenly he gave a long,
thin, whistle, which broke off in the middle. “ Weston !
By Jove! Weston. I wonder,” he said, doubtful of
himself. He pressed his hand to his brow. Then he
cursed the villainous “ snake-juice ” he had imbibed.
Little by little he remembered that, after his horse had
brought him to the stables, he had not gone up to his
bunk, but had wandered off, and fallen asleep in the shade
of the tree, where he had awakened at dawn. Then, in
a flash, he thought of his rival, Raffa. Yes, it was Raff a
for certain, and—yes, it was Weston, so far as he could
remember. He recalled seeing two men in the moonlight,
and how he had dodged with drunken difficulty behind
the trees, and crawled in the shadows close up to them
to spy on them, but had been overcome by the fiery spirit
he had drunk during the day. He had left the township
early in the night. He remembered that. “Weston!
Rot! The snake-juice ’as got me down, Weston!
Why, Vs dead long ago.”
Nevertheless, the idea did not leave him so readily. He
set to work and prepared the buggy for Miss Stella, who


was going into the township that morning. The brushing
and hosing and moving about did.him good.
He began to feel more like James Spencer, groom of
Golden Gully, via Warrawee. He was soon so far re-
covered that he could smoke; so he sat on the loose-box
and lit his cherry-wood. Once again the weird, indefinite
memory of overhearing a conversation between a living
man and a man he knew to have been long dead obsessed
him. He tried to exclude it from his mind, but it was too
strong. Then recollection came, as it often does to the
healthy man who has indulged in a carouse the night
before, as a sudden and irresistible tide overwhelming
him. “ Weston and Haifa, by Jingo ! Yes ! I remember
it all.” He was wildly excited. He saw the two figures,
grey in the moonlight paddocks ; he heard again Weston’s
wonderful story, and recalled all Raffa’s.wicked lies. He
even remembered how when moving nearer to them, ho
had crunched a dead twig beneath him, and that the
noise had caused Weston to turn sharply and suspiciously.
He could repeat their conversation, so strongly had it
been impressed on him. He could recall everything
except the moment when he had fallen asleep.
Jimmy was a man of action. He deduced from what
he had overheard villainy on Haifa’s part, and trouble for
Weston and Stella. He hated Haifa, admired Weston,
and loved his mistress. Ergo, he must act at once. But
how ? There was Marie, formerly' his Marie. If there
was a shrewd, clever “ one ” in the district, that one was
Marie. Thinking of her, he simultaneously thought of
Haifa. He suspected it was Haifa who had come between
Marie and himself. He had no proof, but he was certain
of it nevertheless. He hated Haifa accordingly. Then,


as hia head became clearer, he began wondering at Rada’s
lies to Weston—what was the reason for them ? Why
had he told poor Weston that Miss Stella was married to
Doctor Fairleigh ?
“ I have it! I have it! ”he cried, excitedly ; and the
next minute he was in the stable harnessing his hack.
“He wants Miss Stella for himself; that’s his game.
I’ll ride over and tell Marie, and then she’ll show ’er ’and ;
and that’s where I come in.”
He did not spare his horse. He rode hard, because,
after the interview, he would have to hasten back to
Golden Gully to see Miss Stella off to the township. The
fast ride did his liver good. He was himself again when
he neared Lambert’s farm; and Jimmy, clothed, and in
his right mind, was a man to be reckoned with.
“ ’Twas merry in the glowing morn amid the
gleaming grass.”
He knew the lines, and often spoke them, but the
glowing morn and the gleaming grass were unnoticed as
he hurried onwards.
“ He wants her himself, and ’e’s up to no bloomin’
good.” That was the burden of all his thoughts as he
pressed on between the fences or over them.
“ Hello ! ” he said, as dad came out of the house, a bucket
in one hand and an axe in the other.
“ Hello, Jimmy ! what brings yer up yere so early,
lad ? ”
“ Well,” said Jimmy readily, “ I was jus’ passin’ on to
Mount Rock, an’ thought I’d give yer the time of day.”
“ Mary’s out,” said Dad, without the faintest sug-
gestion of any double meaning. Dad was an unconscious
humorist.


Jimmy actually got red in the face—blushing, some
call this unpleasant distension of the peripheral facial
capillaries.
“ Out, is she ? Stayed in town after the dance at the
institoot, I suppose. Put up with the Martins, eh ! ”
Now, this r was chivalry indeed. The Martins were
cousins of the Lamberts, and kept a small store in Warra-
wee township. In truth, Jimmy did not think Marie
had stayed after the ball at the Mechanics’ Institute
with the Martins. He feared—but perhaps his fears
were unworthy even of a jealous and discarded lover.
At any rate, whatever evil thoughts came to him, he kept
them to himself, and he made a ready excuse for Marie
to her father.
“ Yes, I suppose so,” dad concurred.
“ Well, so long,” said Jimmy, who indeed was greatly
disappointed at the failure of his mission, and turned to
go, when he spied Marie herself plodding along the road
towards the farm.
He rode to meet her. Dad, bucket in one hand, and
axe in the other, walked towards the bail.
“ You’re out early,” she said.
“ Yes, Marie, and so are you.”
“I suppose I can please meself,” she said sharply.
“ Of course,” he agreed.
“ What ’yer doing over here so early ? ” she enquired.
“ Come to see you,” he told her,
“No ? What’s up ? ” she asked.
“ I’ve seen Henry Weston,” he said.
“ Oh I ” she cried, considerably startled.
“ Yes ! True’s death ! Seen ’im last night, an’ ’eard
’ira an’ Raffa talkin’. There’s some game goin’ on. Listen
an’ I’ll tell yer.”


He sprang to the ground and walked beside her. How
fresh she looked—too fresh to have been at the dance and
with his rival afterwards. And, as she had come towards
the farm, his jealous eye had been quick to notice that
she had not approached from the township, but from the
Mount Rock side.
“ Been out for a ramble ? ” he asked.
“ Just you ask no questions,” she returned.
“ All right,” he said; “ you needn’t bite a feller,”
“ Pugh ! you always was a baby,” she said. “ Come,
now, I’m not going any further. Now, tell me all about
what you want to tell me. I’m listening.”
He sat on a fence, the bridle over his arm. She stood
by him, and he told her his strange story. But he was
shrewd enough to make no mention of his own condition
on the occasion of his eavesdropping. Indeed, she cross-
questioned him sharply on that point.
“ Sure you hadn’t a skinful ? ” she asked.
“ Only two beers all the bloomin’ day,” he assured
her, and he even emphasised the words by blowing on
his hand, and then touching his breast with it—“striking
his breath,” he called this quaint proceeding.
“ And you heard him say as how Miss Stella was mar-
ried to Doctor Fairleigh ? You swear you heard that ?
Come, do you swear it ? ” she cried. She looked him full
in the eyes. She was in a temper, having come in a flash
to the same conclusion as Jimmy, that Raft’a was playing
a deep game to keep Miss Sothern for himself.
“ Yes ! I swear it; an’ carn’t yer see through it, eh ? ”
he asked.
“ Curse him, yes ; but I’ll be even with the black snake ;
I will so.” And with that she burst into tears.


Jimmy jumped from the fence and tried to console her.
“ Don’t! Don’t touch me, Jimmy Spencer ; I’m not
fit to be touched ; I’m Oh ! ”
But the Spencers have been knightly from time imme-
morial ; and this somewhat undersized and ugly descen-
dant of a chivalrous race, a mere groom in a place in the
backblocks, was worthy of his ancient name.
He took her hand in his, and patted her encouragingly
on the arm, and told her cheerfully that “ there are worse
in the bloomin’ world than you, Marie; an’, if you like
to say nuthin’ more about the past—well, I won’t, s’elp
me, I never won’t, so there.”
After a few minutes she became calm again, and told
Jimmy of her meeting with Weston. “ I promised not to
say a word, but what you’ve told me makes everything
different. Poor Mister Weston; and poor Miss Stella ;
and, oh ! that villain Raffa ; and yet, and yet . . .”
And yet, and yet!
When she had recovered, Jimmy said—
“ Is Mister Weston waiting for the tucker ? ”
“ Yes. I’m a beauty, ain’t I? ” she said quickly.
“ Never mind,” Jimmy returned, soothingly ; “it
ain’t every day we kill a pig, but, strike me pink, we’ll
do it right enough to-day,”
Marie understood his cryptic utterance, because she
smiled and looked herself again. t
“ Come with me,” she said ; “ you’ll be proof of things.
Then we’ll see what Mister Weston thinks is best.”
Jimmy went without demur. Miss Stella would excuse
him on such an occasion at this. He led the horse, and
they walked side by side.


CHAPTER XI.
PALS?
JIMMY waited while Marie hurried over to the farm for
some tucker. When she rejoined him she was
riding Britomarte. Cold mutton, bread, some tea and
sugar, and a billy-can constituted her field equipment.
They rode together to the spot where she had left
Weston.
He had gone !
“ Cut an’ run; s’elp me cat! ” said the expressive
Jimmy, with striking emphasis. But Marie made no
comment. She was hurt. Jimmy lit a cigarette-butt,
and, going on his hands and knees, examined the ground
with a critical and experienced eye. . After two or three
whiffs the all-too-short smoke burnt his lips. He said a
brief prayer, and flung it into one of the few water-holes
that remained to mark the bed of the creek. Then he
turned to Marie : “ You wait ’ere a shake. I’ll find ’im.”
With that he walked fast into the scrub.
Now and then she saw him stop, but not for long. He
followed the trail with a true bush boy’s accuracy. In
ten minutes he was back.
“ Well,” she asked.
“ I’ve found ’im. E’s campin’ in the scrub. Strike
me lucky ! ’e didn’t reckin on yer ’avin a bloomin’ tracker
wid yer, eh ? ”
Marie did not answer. She was deep in thought. Whilst
she reviewed the position, Jimmy scratched his head.


“ Look here, Jimmy,” she said, at last. “ You show
me where he is. Then you cut away to Golden Gully and
just you bring Miss Stella right here. Go easy, you
know; she ain’t like me. We’ll soon settle whether he’s
Mister Weston or not.”
It had cost Marie a struggle to decide against Raffa
thus finally. Her momentary passion was past. Jimmy
was nothing to her. Raffa was everything. There is a
difference. But she loved Stella Sothern, too; and so,
after a battle royal with herself, she decided to send for
Stella.
But Jimmy would not go.
“ Dicken !” he said, sharply. “ Dicken to that! I
ain’t no good at breakin’ the noos. You go yerself, and
I’ll stop an’ watch ’im.”
“ Oh, very well. Now I’ll take him the tucker.”
Weston had chosen a densely scrubby corner about a
quarter of a mile from the road. He was weak and hungry
when Marie, swinging the billy, stepped boldly into his
retreat.
“ You ! little pal ? How did you find me ?” he gasped.
He seemed destined not to escape.
“ Never you mind,” she replied. “ Just you tuck into
some of this while I boil the billy.” Then she added in
reproachful accents, “ You call yourself a pal; you ! ”
She made the tea, and he drank from the lid. When
he was refreshed, she said : “ Now, good-bye, I suppose
you’ll camp here till night. You can keep the billy,” and,
as she moved away—“ You call yourself a pal ! ” He
started an explanation; but, Marie, winking at Jimmy,
who was watching from a position of vantage, hurried
away to tell Stella of her discovery.
D


CHAPTER XII.
MEN WERE DECEIVERS EVER.
TT would have been well had Marie not encountered
RafFa on her way to the homestead, She had har-
dened her heart against him, and was adamant—until
she met him. Then, in a moment, Jimmy and unselfish
resolves were forgotten. Raffa smiled, and she was
conquered. Her flippancy never left her; but he could
afford to ignore that. He looked his best. He had been
early astir; and the flush of the morning was in his face.
He met Marie about a mile from Golden Gully.
“Well, early bird ! Where are you bound for at this
time of day, eh ? ” He was considerably surprised at
seeing her. But he did not show it. His question was
carelessly spoken.
“ I suppose you thought I was on the way to the city,
didn’t you ? ” she returned. “ A nice game to play on
me and Miss Stella, wasn’t it ? ”
If woman would only learn the strength of silence, the
power of reserve, and of keeping her own counsel 1
“ Game ? ’’.Raffa repeated, and he laughed disdainfully.
“ Yes, game ! And let me tell you I’m not going to
be made a fool of by you. You only wanted to get rid
of me, the same as you did of Mister Weston, the ghost.”
She was in a temper; therefore, indiscreet and weak.


She showed her hand ; he saw all her cards ; and, being
an experienced player he knew he could win easily. But
he liked to finesse a little. He was intensely egoistic.
It pleased him to manipulate other people’s emotions to
his own ends; but not for nothing. He knew all about
lago, and rather despised him.
“ I don’t know what you mean,” he said carelessly.
“ Oh, yes you do,” she snapped. He touched her gaily
on the shoulder. It was a little way he had when in a
playful mood.
“ Come, Marie, my love ”
“ That’s enough of that,” she interrupted, though she
did not really dislike it.
“ Something has upset you,” he said, neglecting to
notice her words. “ Tell me what—what you want—
what is the matter. Come, now—have you seen the
ghost again ? ”
“ Yes,” she retorted, “ I have. And a pretty lively
ghost he is, too.”
Balia was chagrined. He was not in much doubt
about his influence over Marie. He could not even guess
what had ruffled her temper. But he recognised that
security depended on a thorough knowledge of the details
of the strategic position. How much did Marie actually
know ? If she had spoken to Weston, it was certain
that he would not have made her his confidant.
“ Do you really mean to say you’ve seen Weston in the
flesh ; and spoken to him ? Surely ! surely h”
There was much expression in the surely! surely!
infinite deprecation ; suggestion of improbability ; scep-
ticism tempered with benevolent consideration for the
victim of such a delusion.


“ Yes, I have. I have seen him and spoken to him;
and now I am going to see and speak to Miss Stella. You !
How could you be so cruel ? ”
There was a tremor in her voice. He noted it, and
determined on a bold stroke.
“ I don’t know how much you know,” he said, sternly,
“ and I don’t care a jot, either. If you want to ruin the
one who loves you, and do him all the harm you can—
well! go straight to Miss Stella, as you call her, and tell
tales and make mischief. Go, go now! And I’ll curse
you, and the hour I ever saw you; but I’ll deny every-
thing you say, for all that. And see who will be believed.
You ! To think you would treat me like this ! You, that
I was going to marry as soon —as soon as I could arrange
things, and get away from this dull life, to join you in the
gay city. Yes, I swear it. Well! never mind. Woman’s
second name is’ ingratitude. Go ; and tell all you like.
He spoke as though he were the injured party ; cleverly
reversing the position.
“ Well,” said Marie, after a pause, “ What do you want
to go and play a game behind my back for, eh ? What
did you want to tell Mister Weston, Stella was married
for, and get him to go away ? What did you do that for,
if it wasn’t because you wanted her for yourself; tell me
that ? ”
So ! Jealousy was the cause of her perturbed spirit. He
sighed. It was a sign of infinite relief.
“ Come, little one, come,” he said, soothingly. “ I
thought better of you. Have you trusted me as far—
well! as far as you have trusted me—for nothing ? Fancy
you turning on me at a moment’s notice, just because you
misunderstood things entirely. I don’t know how you
learnt things— ”


He paused, giving her a chance to speak. But she
said nothing. He continued—
“ I don’t know what you really do know, but you’re
right in saying that I told Weston that Miss So them was
married, and in persuading him that it was best for all
that he should go away.”
“ Then why did you do it ? ” she asked, holding close
to her argument.
“ Well! I’ll tell you ; but you must first promise me
never to speak of it. .' . .”
“ Oh, I don’t know that I will,” she said, petulantly.
But the very petulance was a sign of weakness; and he
noticed it.
“ Then go, and do your worst,” he said, roughly. “I’m
done with you.” And, saying this, he made to go, but
she caught his bridle, as he knew she would.
“ Yes ! I’ll promise,” said the woman.
“ Then,” he said, nonchalantly, “ I’ll tell you. I got
Weston to go away because he is mad ! ”
“ What! ” cried Marie. “ Mad ! Not he. I spoke
to him, and he’s right enough.”
“So you may think. So I thought till all of a sudden
I mentioned Stella’s name. By heavens ! that’s the test
of a madman. Just you touch them on the subject of
their lunacy, and off they go. I tell you he is mad. He
would commit some crime if he stayed here.”
But Marie was not satisfied.
“ Why did you tell him it was five years when you know
well enough it’s only three ? ” she asked.
This staggered him for the moment. She evidently
knew everything. How had she learnt all this, unless,
indeed, Weston had confided in her ? Then, had she,


in turn, told him the truth as she knew it ? No ! or she
would have flung this at him in her temper.
He answered her with another question.
“ Why did Weston stay away all this time, if he was
in his sane senses ? Come, now, didn’t he seem a bit
mad when he told you all these things ? ”
It was a cunning move.
“He didn’t tell me,” she said. “ Jimmy, the groom,
heard you and him talkin’ last night. He told me—and,
well! I thought you was puttin’ up a game on me, so
there. Jimmy’s watching Weston now. Oh! I’m all
in a fog. I dunno what’s best to do, and chance it.”
Raffa drew nearer to her.
“If you care for me; if you really do care, you must
go to the city as we arranged. Go this afternoon. You
must trust me. I’ve acted for the best. Fancy you
being so foolish as to think I cared about Stella Sothern.
She hasn’t half go enough in her for me. Good heavens !
how she would laugh, too. Come, now. You must
promise to get away to town to-night; go straight to the
Pension Suisse as I’ve told you ; and, if you do, I’ll make
you a promise.”
“ What ? ” she asked.
“ I’ll come to town within the week, and we’ll get
married.”
Promises like that are made more often than it pleases
the optimistic ladies of either sex to realize. It was his
finishing stroke of villainy. Self-preservation was the
first, last, and all the other laws in the life of Raffa.
“ And tell me how Jimmy came to overhear us ? It
seems very strange to me,” he said.
Marie hesitated. She was a brave, and genuinely
loyal little creature; but she was in terrible hands ; in


an awful dilemna. She struggled with herself. Raffa
silently watched her.
“ He was at the township yesterday, and he had too
much to drink,” said Marie; and then she told him all
she knew.
He listened intently, with grim interest. Things were
much more favourable to him than they had, at first,
appeared to be. If the worst came to the worst, he could
laugh Jimmy’s story to scorn. What was it but the
delirious dream of a drunken groom ? Weston and he
speaking together in the moonlight! Pah 1 Who would
listen to such a tale ? As for Marie’s possible corro-
boration well! he knew how to deal with Marie. It
was true, too, that there were vague rumours in the town-
ship of someone like Weston having been seen at Wattle
Flat. Well! he would go, as arranged, with Doctor
Hugh, and investigate, and disprove these baseless reports,
“ Is Jimmy watching Weston now, did you say ? ”
he asked.
“ Yes, he is; and he will, too. He thinks I’m off to
bring Miss Stella.”
Raffa thought earnestly for a few minutes,
“ Tell me exactly whereabouts they are. I know every
inch of the bush.”
She described the place.
“ I know it,” he said. “ Listen,” he continued. “ I
want you to ride straight away into the township. Go
to Doctor Fairleigh’s and tell him—tell him to meet me
at the junction, by your place, you know, at two o’clock.
And now, Marie, never a word of this to any living soul.
Promise me.”
“I have promised,” she said. “I love you; isn’t
that oath enough ? ” she added, with intensity.


“ I LOVE YOU RAFFA, ISN’T THAT OATH ENOUGH.”
Stella Sothern. Page 71.


Poor Marie! Her idea of love may not have been of
the exalted order. I fear she was a sensual little creature,
whose moral code was original and peculiar. Yet there
was much good in Marie, much natural good.
“ Right, then,” he said, his equanimity restored. “Off
you go, then, and give Doctor Hugh the message. I’ll
ride on to Weston at once. I’ll know how to deal with
boozy Jimmy’s ridiculous ghost yarn.”
She turned in an instant. “ You mustn’t hurt Jimmy,”
she flashed.
“ All right. I promise,” he said.
Reassured on this point, Marie rode off towards the
township. As she passed Golden Gully she drew rein.
Her better nature struggled forlornly for victory; but
Raffa’s promise of marriage was irresistible. She rode on.
Rafia hastened to Weston’s camping-place. He decided
to continue his recklessly bold game. He had a fascinating
joy in manipulating a dangerous plot when a word, a
tone, a gesture —any slip, might prove fatal to his plans.
Nor did he even momentarily forget that Stella’s money
was his one objective. His scheming was a definite
means to a distinct end. As he rode on, he weighed
matters over again and again. He felt sure that unless
Jimmy and Weston had by any chance engaged in con-
versation since Marie left, Weston must still be ignorant
of the truth. He had affected indifference whilst ques-
tioning Marie on that point; but he recognised how much
depended on answer,
I tell yer, Jimmy is on’y watching him till I come
back with Miss Stella.”
Those were her words; so he was justified in con-
sidering himself secure.
He rode on.


CHAPTER XIII.
A SNAKE IN THE GRASS.
JIMMY settled himself to watch Weston. He was
responsible to Marie, and he meant to do his
duty faithfully. He had to be careful; a sound would
betray him. There was not a trick of the bush which
was unknown to him. While keeping an eye on the man,
his chief interest, however, was in the man’s horse. It
was a good horse ; he saw that at a glance. Horse first,
man second, in Jimmy’s estimation. As he watched
he saw that this particular animal was in imminent peril,
A large death-adder lay within a foot of his hind legs.
The reptile was the colour of the sand. It never moved.
It was utterly indifferent to the horse’s presence. Yet
Jimmy, thorough bushman that he was, knew that, though
a regiment of soliders might step over the adder un-
harmed, one would have but to touch it, in passing, for
it to strike with deadly sureness rind vindictiveness.
Deaf-adder is the old bushman’s name for the snake.
If it does hear, it is satanically indifferent until touched.
Jimmy recognised the horse’s danger. Excited, yet
cool in his actions, he sprang to his feet, and struck at
the snake with the switch he invariably carried. It was
the work of an instant, and surely done. The adder’s
back was broken, the horse was saved, and Jimmy was
face to face with the astounded Weston.


“ Strike me pink 1 I couldn’t see yer bloomin’ neddy
bit,” said Jimmy. Weston regarded him severely for a
moment.
“ You’re a good chap,” he then said, “ and I’m very
thankful to you. Travelling ? ”
“No 1” Jimmy replied. No ! I’m not travellin’! ”
“ Well, you’ve done me a turn, anyway. I’ve a long
way to go, and if that had bitten my neddy, it would have
gone hard with me. How did you manage to spot it ?
I didn’t hear you coming. I suppose my thoughts were
far away.”
Jimmy made no answer. He was nonplussed This
man was so exceedingly cool, so self-possessed. .He did
not know how to “ come at him.”
“ Goin’ fur ? ” he asked, thinking it necessary to say
something.
“ Yes! North,” Weston replied. “ What’s your
game ? ”
“ I’m groom at Golden Gully Why, what’s up ? ”
Weston was self-possessed, but this second encounter
with one who was likely to know him, rather shook him.
“ Well, I must be getting a move on,” he said, abruptly.
Jimmy was just about to make some further observations,
which would have changed the course of several lives,
when, melodramatically to the phychological moment,
Haifa appeared on the scene.
“ I’ve brought a message to you, stranger , from a girl
I met on the road,” he said, with perfect coolness, pur-
posely ignoring Jimmy, until it suited him to see the ab-
sentee from the stables. “ Her horse had gone lame,
and she asked me to give you her word that Ah!
Jimmy, you here ? Ha, ha, ha ”he laughed heartily.


It was a good joke. Jimmy turned very red. “Of
course, I see,” he continued, “ It was Marie Lambert, of
course. That accounts for you being abroad so early;
or did you stop out all night ? No matter. It was a
holiday, so it doesn’t matter. Too much liquor yester-
day, eh ? Bad for the liver; makes you dream and
think you hear and see things that don’t happen, eh ?
Off with you, and don’t be trying to lose your billet. If
you do, you’ll be sorry. I’m going to run a racehorse at
our stables. Off you go.”
So he touched the strings of the poor lad’s emotions
with practised fingers. It was as easy to him as for
Kubelik to play a scale in tenths. So long as one is a
master, it is simple enough. He spoke in’ a playful way ;
and Jimmy recognised the danger. He knew that Haifa
could dismiss him any hour. And the possibility of being
• trainer of a racehorse ! It was no use fighting against
fate. And what was it to him whether Weston went
away or stayed ? Marie would be angry; but he could
explain things. Haifa must have met her; had, in fact,
so, doubtless she would sympathise with him in his predi-
cament. In short, there was nothing for it but to go,
leaving Haifa and Weston together.
“ Did he recognise you ? ” Haifa asked, innocently.
tf I don’t think so. The girl, Marie, did. You met
her ? ”
“ Yes ! she will say nothing. Now, look here, Weston
—do you really think you ought to go away at all ? ”
It was a dangerous question. Weston hesitated; but
not for many seconds.
“ Yes, and at once,” he said. “ I shall make a move


at once. Go ? My God ! Yes; what is there for me
to stay for ? ”
“ Nothing, nothing ! ” said Haifa, coldly.
By this time the sun was fiercely hot; the leaves and
the withered grass shimmering in the gleaming light.
“ Won’t you wait till night; it will be cooler ? ”
“No ! Haifa. I tell you I’d blow my brains out if I
stayed here. I must go, go now.”
“ Then,” said Haifa, meaningly, “ keep away from
Wattle Creek. There were men drinking at Warrawee
last night who said they had seen Henry Weston, or
someone like him, at Wattle Creek. Be careful. If you
want your secret kept, you must keep dark till you get
away from this district.”
“ Good-bye,” said Weston. “ I’ll keep dark, never
fear.”




BOOK II.
CHAPTER I.
THE PENSION SUISSE.
IN one of the oldest and least frequented parts of the
city is a wine shop, which is the haunt of all sorts
and conditions of Bohemians—artists, writers, musicians,
and others ; many others. From the outside, the Pension
Suisse is a simple-looking place, a harmless wooden struc-
ture built in the old colonial days, and left standing because
its portion of the town is unprogressive. With grim
appropriateness the adjoining allotment is occupied by a
tombstone-mason. One has to drink deep of the wine
of the Pension Suisse to comprehend the irony of its
funereal situation. . . . Inside is a short passage
which leads to the main room —a long and broad apart-
ment. The walls are of brick without plaster, painted a
sea-sick green, and adorned with chalk and pen-and-ink
sketches —the work of the artists who frequent the place.
There they play at being gay and irresponsible Bohem-
ians. They succeed in amusing themselves, and do not
hurt anybody else, so what does it matter ?
Along the middle of the room is a wooden bench ; an
orthodox table would not be sufficiently Bohemian. On
one side of the large, grimy, open fire-place is a decent
piano; on the other are shelves with bottles of wine,
red and white—also of vermouth, none of which are labelled


poison—for external application only ; or dangerous —
to be taken in water. The whole place, dismal and ill-
lighted, reeks of garlic and oil, of cheap cigarettes, and
the fumes of wine too young to be so fiery and offensive.
Lounging about the bench in the centre, are groups in
animated converse. It is evident,that these people are
in earnest in their opinions. They are emphatic, and
sometimes profane. They have banished God—not quite
such an original proceeding as they seem to imagine—
and have arranged the entire universe according to their
immediate satisfaction. Who are they ? There are some
Italians who have come to Australia to better themselves
and, incidentally, the country. Here is a little Spaniard,
who plays the guitar, and smiles at the fair creatures who
frequent the Pension. He strums the same tune, a march,
and sings the same song, a romance, night after night,
and is rewarded with a round of applause from the same
audience. This is his soul’s delight, for he thinks himself
a great artist; and no doubt he is, but not in the way he
thinks. When he has contributed to the entertainment,
the curly-haired Rosenfeldt, the musician, sits at the
piano, and plays Schubert’s Serenade with great expression,
charming the circle into silence, the circle, as a rule, con-
sisting of his immediate friends, the artists—painters,
black and white men, poets, writers for the journals, etc.,
etc.
There is comparative peace in the Pension, till one or
other of the company starts an argument on some subject
which arouses the interest of all.
“ The nude ! Of course, I believe in painting the nude.
Who cares a fig for old-fashioned ideas of clothes and
that rot ? ”


“ Clothes ! What have clothes to do with art ? ”
“ Or an artist,” says a wag.
“ The nude is the best dressed, I say.” This from
another. Then follows immediately an animated dis-
cussion to the accompaniment of much wine and many
cigarettes. They are respectfully quiet while the “Golden-
haired Girl ” sings the flower-song from Faust. Then
someone says—“ A moral woman is half a man ” ; and
the whole room settles to the satisfaction of the whole
room all the sex-problems that have perplexed the minds
of philosophers in all places and times.
And all the while Caruso —no relation of the tenor —
smiles sweetly, showing his teeth, and pours out the wine,
red and white, and the vermouth and soda, as it is called
for.
“ The radical difference between the sexes is not a
radical difference; it is an artificial one. Let a man
enquire of the wants of his own heart, and he will learn
all the wants of the woman’s ; and have a few to spare.”
This from a rising journalist on a rising paper; one of
those that rise and fall, and are neither remembered
nor missed.
“ Art has to thank democracy for nothing,” says Rosen-
feldt; and he is immediately, metaphorically torn to
pieces, having forgotten that he is in the midst of a des-
perate (theoretically) set of socialists, democrats, and
anarchists.
“ Art cannot live except it be free, so what better
regime for art than a democracy ? ” This from a poet
who had recently become immortal, having had six stanzas
published in a notable weekly.
“ Rot! ” says Jack Winton, “ Art has to take its time,


and as democracy is always in a hurry, hence always
superficial. Everybody can paint and play nowadays;
but where are the painters and the players. Waxy is
right. A democracy is utterly inimical to art. Art hates
a hurry. Lorenzo Ghiberti took twenty years to build
his gates. Nowadays, Laurence, Gilbert and Company
Limited would run ’em up in as many days. But their
“ Oh, hang all this,” says Ingleton, “ let us have some
more wine, and, Waxy, play us the Merry Widow Waltz,
and I’ll hop to it.”
This is a suggestion generally favoured. In the midst
of the grotesque performance, Rosenfeldt suddenly stops
playing. All eyes turn to the door, where stands a pretty
country girl, bag in hand, looking wonderingly from one
to another.
It was Marie.
Caruso advanced towards her, smiling, and showing his
white teeth.
“ You look for someone ’ere ? Ye —es ? ”
Madame, his wife—not signora, it was too clumsy for
pronunciation when the wine had flowed freely—also
approached the girl. She was a fat, squat, good-natured
woman with oily face, and large dark eyes.
“ Won’ta you come and sitta down ? ” she asked.
“ I am a friend of Mister Raffa’s,” Marie explained ;
and Caruso and madame were at once her humble, obliged
and obedient servants.
“You wanta to stay ’ere for a while, ah ! Ye—es;
Come alonga me ” ; and madame led her from the room.
“ Who’s the girl, Caruso ? ”
It was a general question. A stranger was always


noticeable at the Pension Suisse. A girl, unmistakeably
from the back-blocks, was extraordinary.
“ A frienda of Haifa. You know Haifa ? ”
Yes! They all knew Haifa. Haifa was a good fellow,
and popular. He always shouted round for the whole
room. He was no bloated fatman, although he was the
manager of an estate! Oh, yes! They all knew
Haifa
Peppino Stassi, the tenor, was immediately interested.
Was this the girl that Haifa had bought the sentimental
love-songs for ? He smiled knowingly, and as soon as
Marie, following madame, returned to the room, he moved
to the piano, and persuaded Rosenfeldt to play La donna
e mobile, which he sang with great effect, causing his
whole frame to tremble with emotion, the result of auto-
suggestion, purely, and not by any means of his musical
susceptibility. He made his eyes to roll in quite the
Italian- manner, and looked straight at Marie when he
took his top note, and nearly gave himself an apoplectic
seizure with the execution.
“ ’E’s wondaful, ain’t ’e ? ” said madame, and Marie
certainly thought that he was. She pressed the girl to
take some red wine and soda; but Marie instinctively
avoided it.
The good-humoured artists soon made her feel at home
amongst them. Marie took it all in good part—laughing
at things she did not understand in quite society manner.
Ingleton danced his famous version of the Merry Widow
Waltz especially for her benefit, and she laughed heartily
when, with great agility, he hopped from the floor right
upon the bench, knocking over several bottles and
glasses, and creating quite an uproar.


Jack Winton was flirting with a dark woman, who
smoked without cessation, lighting one cigarette from the
butt of the previous one, and so on—a smoky serial,
punctuated with many notes of interrogation—glasses of
vermouth and soda,
“ You swore to be true to me, for ever,” she said, gaily,
and blew the smoke artistically in rings to the ceiling.
“Ah ! but that was a month ago,” said Jack.
Marie overheard it, and thought of Raf Ea. She became
self-conscious and nervous, although the artists made her
feel at her ease.
“ Hope to see you again soon,” they assured her when
they departed, en masse, as they had come.
Such was Marie’s introduction to life in the city. She
made her entrance amidst the jingle of glasses, the ripple
of tongues which wagged incessantly, but never seriously,
and the smoke of cheap cigarettes. It was ominous.
RafEa kept his word, and came to town on the third day.
He had managed to get Weston safely out of the way.
In comparison with that, nothing was of moment. He
did not marry Marie. Of that he never had any intention.
But he was most affable, most engaging, and he spent his
money freely at the Pension Suisse, and “ shouted for
the room ” several times —a hero, indeed. He stayed at
a leading hotel, which was much affected by the squatters
with whom he hobnobbed. He was a man of considerable
consequence, both in manner and in appearance. In his
well-tailored clothes, carefully groomed, and decked out
as a station-manager of importance, he impressed Marie
more than ever—over-awed her, in fact. In her native
bush she was “ cheeky ” and self-confident; but in the


city, hundreds of miles from home, she felt, and she was
helpless. She had all to learn. Haifa recognized this,
and acted accordingly. For the time, Marie’s weakness
made him safe.
“ I can’t marry you just now. What does it matter ?
Marriage ! Pah ! What do they care about marriage
at the Pension Suisse ? They are all advanced in their
ideas. A man loves a woman ; the woman loves the man.
What more is there ? Old-fashioned stupid notions.
Funny, eh ? ” And he laughed. Honour, truth, social
obligations, moral law—all old-fashioned stupid notions
not worth a moment’s considering !
But Marie, being a woman—and even the worst of her
sex had some sense of right and responsibility—did not
laugh. She had heard many advanced ideas since her
brief sojourn at the wine-shop.
“ ‘ But you swore to love me forever ! ’ ”
“ c Yes ! but that was a month ago !’ ”
She recalled the flippant words. She had shuddered
at the time. She looked questioningly at Haifa.
“ What is it ? ” he asked.
For a moment she was the self-assured, self-confident
bush girl.
“ If I thought you meant to play a game on me, I’d
go straight to Miss Stella, and I’d tell her everything.”
Then she trembled at her own temerity, realizing that
she was hundreds of miles from home, without money;
without proven friends.
“ Come, come,” he said, conquering his passion, for her
defiance enraged him momentarily. “ You mustn’t make
threats to your Haifa. What harm have I ever done
you ? ”


What harm had he not done her ?
“ I’m a fool,” she returned, “ I know I’m a fool to get
in tempers ; but—oh ! I don’t know.”
That was the truth—she did not know. She was yet
to learn her lesson; to read her book.
“ Forgive me,” she said, after a pause. “ Forgive me,
and I’ll just be content to live and love and chance it, as
I said.”
“Ah ! That’s more like it; more like my little Marie,”
he rejoined, cheerfully. “ And now get your hat and
we’ll go to the theatre, and have an oyster supper after.
So there ! ”
And he hummed Caro Nome whilst she went for her
hat.


CHAPTER II.
MARIE MEETS A FRIEND.
> I *HE artist was, is, and always shall be an aristocrat,
an uncompromising conservative. With the people
he has nothing to do. If his work elevates the masses,
so much the better for the masses; that has nothing
whatever to do with him, himself —ipso ipsissimus.
The two men were lunching at the Royal. One was
a painter of reputation, Hubert Bernard; the other,
Doctor Hugh. They were friends of university days ;
both were earnest workers, who loved their work.
“In a sense, that is true . . .” the artist began.
“In every sense,” said the doctor, emphatically. “It
-is the same with the scientist. I don’t believe any great
discovery was made with any other objective than the
discovery itself, per se. The inventor invents because
he can’t help himself. I don’t refer to the maker of an
improved mouse trap; not to the Edison type at all.
I am speaking of the man who makes that type possible ;
the Ampere, the Volta, the Ohm, the Oersted—the original
investigator of Nature, whose sole reward is in the search
itself, and thus in the discovery.”
The artist smiled at his friend’s enthusiasm.
“ And yet it takes all types to make a world,” he said.
“ Yes; more is the pity,” Doctor Hugh returned.


“ Besides, let me make an epigram—beware of the epi-
gram ; another—an epigram is only a half-truth. Query ?
Does it really take all sorts to make a world ? Are they
all actually necessary ? ”
“ Well,” said Bernard, laughing lightly, “ look around
the room. They are all here; you must admit that.”
“ Here, yes; but necessary, eh ? Like the French
judge— Je ne vois pas la necessity”
“ There,” said the artist, “is the difference between
the scientific and the artistic viewpoints. I feel sure
that all are necessary ; you think all are not. But, come
—tell me about your plans. You said you were going
away for a while. Where ? May I ask ? ”
“ Yes. I’ll tell you; but keep it to yourself. lam
going to the North to try and find out something more
definite about the fate of Weston’s exploring party. I
“ Good heavens, man ! Surely you have no hopes of
learning anything new ? It is—let me see. It is going
on for four years since they left.”
“ Yes; it will be four years in January. Personally,
I have little hope of hearing anything new; but—well,
1 am going with a purpose.”
The artist vaguely understood. Evidently there was
a lady in the case.
“ Well, there’s not so much risk now that the way has
been surveyed. I have read all about it. I knew Weston
well. He was a reserved man, strong, but a lovable
fellow,” said the artist, earnestly.
“ Yes, a man, every inch. I hope I hear of him, poor
fellow. As you say, the trail has been blazed, there’s not
so much danger now. If I fail in my quest, I can write
a book of travels,”


“He is the exception who does not write a book,”
Bernard rejoined. Then, after a pause, he asked, “When
do you make a start ? ”
“At once. In a day or so.”
“ I wish you luck. Write to me when you have the
chance of getting a mail away. I’ll be anxious to hear
how you’re progressing.”
“ Say nothing about it. I should be looked on as a
sort of a Don Quixote,” said Doctor Hugh.
“ Even so. I, for one, have never laughed at the good
Don. You see, though an artist, lam not conservative.
I heartily sympathise with the enthusiasts who tilt at
wind-mills, and set out to rescue disconsolate damsels in
distress.”
“ Then you’re more an aristocrat than you know,”
said the doctor, “ because chivalry and democracy are
irreconcilable. Democracy levels, it is true. It brings
down; it doesn’t elevate. Never yet has Art or Science
to thank a democracy for anything.”
And he again waxed eloquent on his favourite topic.
“ Come along,” said Bernard, laughing heartily. “ I
see I’ll have to take you round to the Pension Suisse, and
get you going amongst some of the fire-brands there.
They’ll chasten your conservative spirit, I’ll warrant.”
This was said jokingly; but Hugh was interested at
once.
“ The Pension Suisse ? I’ve heard of that. We must
go there for an hour. I should like it very much.”
“ Well then your blood be upon your own head if you
are done to a violent death by some wine-headed disciple
of Demos. Come along.”
When they reached the Pension, the artists and their


friends were in possession. Ingleton was dancing like a
kangaroo, while Waxy Rosenfeldt was playing the eterna
Merry Widow Waltz. The usual groups sat about the
room, smoking, drinking, playing cribbage or dominoes.
“ Garlic, oil, cigarette-smoke, wine-fumes—all germi-
cides,” said Doctor Hugh in an aside to Bernard, as they
entered the room.
“ This is the happiest and least harmful set in the
city,” said Bernard, softly. “ And, yet, if you didn’t
know them, you might excusably think you had stumbled
on a nest of blood-thirsty anarchists and revolutionaires.
As for their morals—they have none, which accounts for
their happiness and harmlessness. They hurt no one but
themselves.”
“ The greatest harm of all,” said Hugh, severely. But
he had no chance to fall a-moralising. Jack Winton
came up to the painter.
“ Glad to see you, Mr. Bernard,” he said, respectfully.
“ You don’t often join us,”
“ Quite my loss,” Bernard rejoined, courteously. “ Let
us have a bottle of wine, Caruso.”
Caruso was all attention in a moment. His guests
were distinguished. One of them wore a bell-topper!
A hat of such a kind was unheard of in the Pension Suisse.
The owner of it must be a very great man, perhaps a
herbalist. Ah, ye —es! There was Mr. Bernard calling
his friend Doctor,
Caruso brought forth from his cupboard a very special
bottle. At the far corner of the long table, near the
piano, sat a withered old man with a blotchy red face and
fishy blue eyes, with the degenerate lids of the reptile.
He was known familiarly as “ The Colonel.” He had


the real military air. He looked important, but was not;
unintellectual, and was. Yet for an old man —he was
past seventy—he carried himself well. One could see
that when he rose and proposed his invariable toast—
“ May our present happiness never grow less.” He bowed
and leered at everybody, and drank his wine to the dregs.
He maintained order when anyone played, recited, or
sang, and was an habitue of the Pension.
Sitting close to him was a rat-faced woman with beady,
black eyes. She affected the costume of a nurse. Sitting
next to her were two young women of a different type.
These Doctor Hugh regarded questioningly. There were
several others smoking and drinking. One of them was
the Gfblden-Haired Girl—a popular little character at the
Pension. She was ultra-Bohemian ; in fact, ultra-every-
thing. Of those sitting near the nurse who also had
beautiful golden hair. She wore a tight-fitting black
dress, and was, what she looked, a seamstress out for an
evening’s amusement. The other had a striking face—
pale, with pencilled brows, and large, dark violet eyes.
“ What on earth are girls like that doing here ? ” Doctor
Hugh asked Bernard.
“ Don Quixote, my dear fellow ; don’t ask me riddles.
They are here because they think it naughty and ven-
turesome to be here. They will go to their work to-
morrow, and the next day, and the day after that, none
the worse for having had a glimpse at the other side of
the question.”
“ Come,” said Hugh. “ I can’t breathe in this den.
That pale-faced girl with the eyes and eyebrows—talking
to that damned Spaniard with the guitar—has the face
of a saint.”


“ They mostly have,” said Bernard, drily.
They were going; had reached the street door, when
Doctor Hugh found himself face to face with Marie.
“ What! Marie ! Whatever are you doing here ? ”
“ Oh, doctor ! ”
“ Yes ! myself, and no ghost,” he said.
She shuddered. That word ghost was associated with
grim happenings.
“ When did you come to town ? ” he asked.
“ Months ago. I’m in service. That is, I’m . . .”
He glanced at her in an apparently non-critical way.
It sufficed.
“ Come,” whispered Bernard. “ I must be going.”
“ Do you come here often ? ”
“ Not often, doctor ; that is to say, sometimes ; occas-
ionally of a night. It keeps one from being too lonely,
you see.”
Yes, he did see, and plainly. This was not the Marie
he had known. He did see, and he understood.
“ If I were to drop you a line here, I suppose you’d
get it ? ”
“ Yes, doctor.”
“ Then good-bye just now. You may hear from me.
Keep a brave heart. You’ll need it . . . . in this
city,” he added.
“ Ah, Don Quixote,” said Bernard, “ you have a good
heart, I can see. You see it does take all sorts to make
a world. As for the girl—who is she ? ”
“ A little country friend. Her father is a struggling
settler. She left home to go to service, so it was said.
But there was another rumour, at the time. Her name
was mentioned with that of a groom at Golden Gully,


but no one knew tbe truth of things. It must have been
true; the girl’s in trouble. I’ll send her a little money
with a cheerful word of advice. I guess she will need
some help before long.”
“ You are Don Quixote, in the best sense,” said Ber-
nard.


CHAPTER III.
IN THE MINOR KEY.
WHEN Weston again set out on the lonely track, it
was with the final determination that never again
would he return to his native place. He was dead. So
let it be. On every side was the bush; above was the
clear, cloudless blue. Birds sang in the trees ; all around
was the insistent murmur of life. Reproduction was
going on everywhere. The flowers had their insect lovers,
attracted to them by their brilliant colours or fascinating
intoxicating perfumes. The air pulsated with life; was
vibrant, rhythmic with the eternal melody of creation of
evolution; everywhere was endless, inexorable, inscrut-
able development. And yet, in the midst of throbbing
life, this man was in the presence of death. His hope,
his faith, his desire, his love—all were dead. As he moved
slowly, indifferently onward, away from the past careless
whithersoever the present or the future might lead him,
he felt unutterably lonely. It was an awful fate for any
man, at any age ; awful, indeed, for one wl j was naturally
full of vitality, one who was quite yoi ag. He would
overcome the indifferent mood in time. Yes ! but, as he
pushed on through the bush, he was wholly dominated
by his gloomy emotions. Everything was black, gloom-
enshrouded. And in all this world where is the place


more likely to add gloom 'o gloom than the Australian
bush, by day or by night ?
It is fashionable amongst a class of cheap optimists
to write of the colour, the gaiety, the glory of the bush.
In Spring, it is true, the young gums gleam and glance,
a shower of million-tinted leaves, glinting in the sun !
but they are glittering gems set in a background of black
—the charcoal of last year’s bush-fire. But in Spring,
Summer, Autumn or Winter, the key of the symphony
of the bush is a minor key; and even the brightest
phrases, the most inspiriting gleams of melody, are super-
posed on one solemn, dirge-like under-melody, a solemn,
slow-moving ground-bass, that gives the true sentiment
to the whole work. It is not always heard. When the
voices of picnickers ring sweet and clear as they make
merry in bowers agleara with golden wattle, the under-
song is hushed awhile, or is only heard for a moment,
suggestive as the entry of the horn in Beethoven’s sym-
phony.
One thinks a mistake has been made by a careless
performer. ‘ What obtrusive, harsh, discordant tone is
that ? Wait a little while, and its significance becomes
appreciable. Wait until the picnic is over, and the merry
voices have ceased their song. Hark! that tone again.
All*through the long night it vibrates on. It is the voice
of the bush itself, of the primeval wilderness—a voice
grave, low, pot'ht, passionate; as full of deep meaning
as the voice of the neighbouring ocean. All through the
night the music of the ancient bush murmurs on, immutable
amidst a world all mutable and inconstant.
Weston, without waiting for the fall of the shadows,
was already shrouded in night. Clearly he heard the


voice, and well lie understood. It was the requiem over
his vanished hopes. So to everyone it appeals individ-
ually, though with special directness to none. No man
with a soul, and who hath passed through sorrow, who
hath been in the bush alone, but hath heard its music,
and comprehended its meaning.
It was a dirge over his dead hope.
So Weston died, and another stood in his shoes, and
was called Smith, of Anywhere.


CHAP IV.
CITY EXPERIENCES.
SEVEN months of city experience considerably changed
Marie. She learnt quickly, readily. Haifa had
not neglected her. He was too subtle to make enemies.
He supplied her with money ; and she had no compunction
in taking it. But at first she did not use it on herself.
She banked every penny, and maintained herself by
working in the kitchen at a sixpenny restaurant. She
was a good-looking girl, petite but beautifully formed
and the artists had tried to persuade her to sit for them,
when she had first come to the Pension Suisse.
At the restaurant she met with the usual gallantry
from the men. Even the “ ’aughty, ’igh, and haristo-
cratic” De Vere, the chef, made love to her. She resisted
him, and—lost her situation. The sum of her experiences
tended to weaken Haifa’s influence. For the past two
months she had been living in a room. Her home —
such as it was —was in one of the cheap suburbs. When
she looked from her window she saw—backyards. Back-
yards were everywhere; backyards and blousy females.
She lived on the money she had saved, and degenerated
little by little.
She could not go to work any longer She wrote a
long, angry letter to Haifa, weakly indulging in her old
threat to “ write to Miss Stella, and tell her everything.”


Thus the ignorant play the game—and lose. Bankrupt
indeed is the one whose only available asset is revenge.
Haifa did not reply. To write would have been to put
his head in the noose; to sign his own death warrant.
Hut he went to the city and met Marie by appointment.
“ Do you know why I’ve come ? ” he asked,
“ No,” she said, “ unless you’re afraid.”
“No!” he returned, with mocking emphasis. “No!
I’m not afraid.”
“Oh ! aren’t you ? ” she began, angrily. He
stopped her with a gesture.
“No ! ” he repeated. “No ! I’m not afraid. I’ve
come because I wasn’t such a damned idiot as you think.
You thought I would write, didn’t you ? Now, I’ve
come to tell you that I’ve done with you once and forever.
You’ll threaten me, will you ? It’s not the first time;
it’s not the second time ; it’s the third and last time,
though. Go to Stella Sothern; go, and tell her your
fool’s story. Who will believe it ? You are jealous.
It is just what a jealous woman would say. You think
Jimmy will back you up. Jimmy has charge of a cham-
pion horse, Ben Bolt; and he has his own opinion of
you ”
“ You coward ! ” she flashed. “ Jimmy is a better
man than you.”
He laughed disdainfully. “ I’ve no ambition to be
either good, better, or best,” he said scornfully, sneeringly.
“ Anyhow, I’m done with you. If ” He paused,
and regarded her carefully. She was changed ; he saw
that. She was seeing life ; learning the game.
“ If what ? ” she asked, still defiant, though momen-
tarily weakening.


He laughed heartily, naturally this time.
“ Look here, Marie, I’m hanged if I can keep in a temper
long with you. I was going to say if you ever lost your
temper and threatened any more. Confound it, is it
fair to be always threatening ? You know I got Weston
to go away for Miss Stella’s good ”
“ Oh, stow that,” said Marie.
Very well! Think what you like. But don’t threaten
me any more. I’m at the limit. Come—What is it you
really want ? ”
“ Make my child honest when it comes ? ” she said,
bluntly. Then she gave way. Just for a moment, the
better nature in the man asserted itself. It came, and
saw, and —was conquered. A passing qualm ; a fitful
gleam of natural sympathy—then he was himself again.
“ No! I can’t just yet. It would . . . .” He
stopped.
“ You won’t ? ” she said, through her tears.
“ I can’t,” he repeated.
“Oh ! very well,” she said. “ You won’t, or you can’t.
It don’t matter. I’m not the only one, I suppose.”
Instinctively she knew that he meant to use her ill; to
desert her when he felt inclined. She forced herself to
appear calm; but in her breast surged a stormy sea of
rebellion.
“ Then we understand one another, at last. No more
threats ; no more bad tempers ; no more cheap senti-
ment. I’m going up town, now. What would you like ?
Say the word.”
She hesitated ; then—“ I’d like a wedding ring,” she
said, and for a moment her eyes glistened ; then a fierce
light burned in them.


“ Why not ? ” said the accommodating Raffa, smiling
as though it were all a huge joke. “ Why not! I’ll bet
you’ll be as faithful to it as are most of the jays in pea-
cock’s feathers.”
She did not understand him; but she seemed pleased.
His influence was waning every hour; but it was para-
mount still. When he left she went to the kitchen, where
the lodging-house keeper was busy cooking a mess of
liver and bacon with fried onions. On the deal table
stood a quart bottle half full of beer, and a broken glass.
“ Have a drop of beer, me dear. I always likes one
about elevin.”
Marie declined the beer. She drank wine, at times ;
and she had learnt to smoke an occasional cigarette.
“ Never seen one in your ways as didn’t like a drop of
beer or somethin’. Was that yer ’usbind come to see
yer ? ”
“ Yes,” said Marie, without premeditation or hesi-
tation.
“ A ’ansome man, me dear. And ain’t ’e dark. Like
one of them Hitalian counts ole Martin Simonsin use ter
’ave in his hoperas. I use ter be a show girl, me dear.”
And her wizened features wriggled themselves into the
caricature of a smile; and Marie shuddered. There is
nothing sweeter than the smile of a good old woman—
pensive, sympathetic, motherly; there is nothing uglier
than the evil grimace that distorts the already distorted
features of a bad old woman, and has the impudence to
call itself a smile.
“ Yes, me dear! And didn’t them Hitalianos make love
to me, just. Wait, and I’ll show yer me photo.”
From a mass of papers—playbills, dodgers, newspaper


cuttings—the woman drew a faded old portrait—the
counterfeit presentment of what she once was.
“ How nice,” said Marie, unthinkingly. “ Was that
really you ? ”
The woman looked hurt, Was that reallv her!
“ Oh, well, yer know,” she said, “ we all grow older,
don’t we ? Any’ow, so long’s we can show a little kind-
ness to one another in a rough world, it ain’t so bad.
That reminds me, me dear, yer owes me fur yer room,
three weeks now, and yer ’usbind give yer some money,
I suppose ? ”
Marie paid her seven-and-sixpence—her rent.
“ ’Ave a drop of beer, me dear. So that was yer ’usbind,
eh? Well, well! I ’ad a usbind like ’im meself once;
so I know all about ’ow things are. Never you mind,
me dear. You be a good girl to one man, and never care
wot the world says one way or the other. Life’s a funny
thing, me dear; and it ain’t all beer and skittles fur the
best of thim, let alone fur us poor ’elpless wimmin wot
’asn’t got their rights ”
And so she maundered on, until the beer was finished,
and Marie tired. Then she ate the liver and bacon and
fried onions, and went for “ twopennorth more beer.”
She liked to get twopennyworth at a time, because in
that way she thought she really got more for her money.
And perhaps she did.
“ Yer ’usbind an Hitaliano ! ” she tittered. “ I’d know
’im agin anywheres.”
With that she fell asleep, and imitated the bassoon in
its lower register, played con giusto, which is Italian,
and means with nasal effect.


CHAPTER V.
IN PRAISE OF THE BACK-BLOCKS.
■* I r HE manner of life in a country town varies little as
the years slowly pass. The seasons have their
appointed tasks; they come and go, and are marked by
no unusual happenings. Life is quiet and unhurried ;
if monotonous, still healthful. Far from the world’s
greater commerce, there is the compensation of peaceful
hours which are unknown to the hustling and hustled
dweller of the city. Yet the settler in the back-blocks
knows how to take his pleasures, such as they are, and to
be content. At all events, if he does not, his sons and
daughters do. Have you never seen them dancing in a
barn decorated with saplings ? Dancing gaily to the
music of a concertina played by a musical shearer ? 1
have watched them when not even a concertina was to be
had for love or money. Do you think they enjoyed the
dance any the less because an enthusiast beat out a
rhythmic noise with two sticks on an empty kerosene
tin ? There are hard times, and hard seasons, for the
Australian settler, but there are good times and plentiful
seasons, too ; and life is not all moil and struggle. Wait
till the dancers halt and make for the supper tables in the
next room, or in the open, may be. -
Look at that supper table. What! Trifle in the back


blocks ? and sponge-cake, light as a feather, that breaks
in flakes as you hold it up on your fork (if you are foolish
enough to use a fork), and jellies and cream-cakes, and
Victoria sandwich, and almond cake with hundreds and
thousands, and, last, but not least, white, round, puffy,
perfect, home-made scones that melt in your mouth.
Is it possible ? “ Nonsense,” says ray critic of the office
chair. “ How on earth could the necessary articles for
the making of such things ever reach Wayback ? ” Ask
the road-hawkers and the river-hawkers, and they will
tell you. Nay; if they like the look of you (and they
probably won’t) they will trust you with some of their
special lines, luxuries, on credit; and they will know you
again when they call for payment, may be a year hence,
if the roads are bad or the river is low.
“ Even so. How do the unskilled girls of Wayback
make such delicacies as you have mentioned ? ”
Australian bush girls can do anything, my dear sir,
anything. And the best of it is—these handsome, joyous-
hearted, sweet-natured women think nothing of their
work. To milk a dozen cows at dawn ; bake and wash,
and make scones and buckets of tea for the men, if it be
harvest time, and then again milk the dozen cows at dusk—
such is their day. And when it is over, and the tea dishes
washed and put on the shelves, what is it to your Australian
girl to saddle her favourite hack and ride any number of
miles to a dance, where she will laugh and make love till
—well! till it is time to again remember the cows waiting
at the bail-yard twenty miles away ?
The Australian man is a fine fellow, no doubt. I am
one myself. But the Australian woman ! And there
are they who would paint her as one to be pitied in her


far-back bush home and sentimental poetasters, and the
writer who lives in the city and reeks of it, indulged in
much vain repetition, as the heathen do, concerning
Australia’s illimitable spaces, the desolateness of those
whose lot is to dwell, etc,, etc It is a waste
of sentiment; of ink. ...
Sometimes there comes to the township a grocer’s
assistant, or a saddler’s journeyman, with a taste for
elocution and for theatricals. He becomes a member of
the local branch of the A.N.A. He makes a speech, and
offers to “ get up ” a performance for the benefit of some
needy person or necessary thing. In a few weeks a club
is formed, and rehearsals begin. I have known girls
ride ten miles with a lantern swinging by their side to light
them when they came to a “ stiff pinch,” or in case of
accidents. Squatters’ daughters and wives mix without
pretension with their maids—sing beside them in the
choruses, in fact; and many a time has old Hayseed, the
cockie up the creek, driven Mary Hayseed into rehearsal,
and sat at the back of the hall for two or three hours
waiting and watching, and then at eleven o’clock, after
a pint at the pub, or a drop of whisky—if the night be
cold—driven her out back again. And they think nothing
of it.
“ Pooh ! Pooh ! ” says my critical friend ; “ What
sort of a performance is it when it does come off ? ”
From a stage-manager’s point of view, quite as present-
able as any amateur effort ever is ; from a musical point,
vocally considered, it will far surpass in quality of tone
anything heard in the best city theatres.
Fresh air, clean, wholesome living, lungs constantly
expanded by natural exercise—what a felicitous com-
bination.


“Oh ! tut, tut! How about scenery, dressing, lighting,
etc., etc. ? ”
There probably be a painter working at
the local wheelwright’s for a small wage. He has “ seen
better days,” but he is reticent on that subject. Over a
pint of beer he promises to “ knock up ” a bit of scenery.
He does, and it serves excellently. Then there are the
rival storekeepers who are ever willing to lend furnishing
on conditions they receive some compensating advertise-
ment. All very different from the city, is it not ? Habitat
so alters our intrinsic human nature, does it not ?
Outcasts of Wayback! Ah, well—they have their
own lives. Far away from the jostling highways, life
jogs along peacefully, pleasantly enough; and the very
secret of its restfulness is its ever-recurring, unremitting
work —its appointed task for every season, for each day.
Stella was known far and wide for the sweetness and
kindliness of her disposition. Though naturally passive
in regard to her own life ; she was active indeed where the
interests of her neighbours were affected. She was a
perfect horsewoman, and had ridden many a mile to bear
succour to a woman in her hour of need, or to a settler
who had met with an accident or a reverse. She was
organist at the church, and rode into choir practice, “hail,
rain, or snow,” every Thursday evening. She had her
prize poultry; was a champion tennis-player, and had
recently started a branch of the St. John’s Ambulance
class, having herself qualified when at school in the city.
Summer passed to autumn, autumn to winter, and the
long nights of gloom and rain were depressing and dis-
heartening. Yet Stella never lost hope. She felt that
Henry Weston would come back. She could not explain


the feeling. She was not addicted to the twentieth century
vice of self-analysis. She believed in God, the Father of
All, and that He ordered things in His own way. She
did not argue about God —she accepted Him, and was
happy in a serene and beautiful manner. She was always
advancing , but was never an advanced woman.
Doctor Hugh had left the district. He had refused to
say whither he was going. “If I hear anything you
shall hear from me,” he had said. , The months passed,
but brought no message.


CHAPTER VI.
BEHIND THE SCENES.
MARIE and her baby became the fashion at the Pension
Suisse. Everyone was kind to the mother, and
made much of the boy. She was a favourite among the
frequenters of the caf6; and, as they all prided them-
selves on being the best of Bohemians and of Socialists,
no awkward questions were asked, Marie was rather a
heroine than otherwise. She accepted the web the Fates
wove ; and would have been content had not the un-
foreseen happened. Guido, as the child was called, drank
some of the wine of the cafe and—died. Marie became
reckless. She drank the wine and—lived. It was her metier.
She became careless, reckless, indifferent. What did it all
matter ? What was the use of bothering ? It would be
all the same in a hundred years. And so the work of
degeneration, long since begun, steadily progressed.
Doctor Hugh had kept his word, and had sent some
money, also some good advice. She had spent the money,
but neglected the advice.
“ What’s the odds about me ? Who’ll notice one,
more or less, in this great cityful ? Give me a cigarette.
It all ends in smoke.”
Ingleton gave her a cigarette, Rosenfeldt played
Schubert’s Serenade, while Gerald—Lugubrious Gerald


they called him because of his abstracted air and melan-
cholic countenance —recited Kipling’s Gungah Dhin.
They were merry in the approved fashion of the Pension
Suisse.
Marie made money as an artist’s model. She sat for
the figure, everything, anything, and was on the best
of terms with those who employed her. She had given
up bothering about Haifa. She sometimes drank more
wine than was good for her, and was not a model (in the
usual sense), not by any means.
The months passed. Summer had come again.
It was a hot night in January, when Marie and Ingleton
went to the seaside for the cool evening air. They were
sitting on the beach smoking cigarettes when a lady and
gentleman passed by. It was dark ; only a faint greenish
glow lingering amid the purples of the upper sky.
“ No! lam quite unchanged. lam sure he is still
living. I never try to explain my feelings. I feel sure
he will come back; certain.”
“ You wrong yourself, your friends . . . .” said
the man, and then they were out of hearing.
Marie knew them. , Raffa and Stella Sothern. She
had become indifferent so far as Raffa was concerned.
It was a severe test to see him thus with Stella, and to
overhear him pleading with the woman of all women that
Marie respected and reverenced. She sprang to her feet.
“ Come,” she said to Ingleton. “ I’m going to follow
them. Don’t ask questions. I must.”
Marie had never believed Raffa’s lie concerning Weston
being mad.
“ I won’t,” said Ingleton. “ Who are they ? Who’s
the man ? ”
“ Raffa,” she replied, defiantly.


MARIE MADE MONEY AS AN ARTIST’S MODEL.
Stella Sothern. Page 108.


“ Damn Raffa,” he returned sharply. “ Haven’t you
had enough of a bounder like him ? ”
“ Yes,” she said, taking him by the arm. “ Yes!
but lam not going to stand by and see her got at; not me.
I knew her when I was a girl.”
When she~was a girl. Twelve months had made all
that difference.
However, she was mistaken in thinking that Raffa
was at that moment directly pleading his own case. He
meant to win Stella and her estate. But he could wait.
He felt certain that ultimately she would forget her lost
lover, and then, in her despair and loneliness, seeking
sympathy, would herself give sympathy to him when he
pleaded for love. Her sympathy and estate would do
very well in place of the love she would tell him she had
given to one who was dead. He had thought it all out.
But he had miscalculated. He judged all women from
his own experience of the sex. When he looked at a
pure woman he saw a shadow where he should have seen
a clear and radiant soul—it was the shadow of his own
evil imagination. As to him, Stella was deceived only
as to the quantity of his undesirableness ; of his quality,
as a human unit, she was never in doubt. She had heard
the rumour about Marie and Jimmy, the groom—a rumour
cleverly started by Raffa himself—but she had not believed
in its truth. She had also “ heard things ” about Raffa ;
but her father had trusted him. He had been her guar-
dian, and the manager of her affairs. She “ did not
like” to be hard on him ; and this very natural sentimen-
tality cost her dear
Ingleton experienced considerable difficulty in res-
training Marie from her impulse to follow them. However


he ultimately persuaded her to listen to reason. Never-
theless, that night she went on her knees—a most unusual
proceeding—and registered a vow to disclose all to Stella
should Haifa continue to seek her hand in marriage. She
did not actively hate Haifa ; though she had by no means
forgotten his bad treatment. Marie was not addicted to
sentimental introspection. Regrets were futile, so she
did not waste time regretting. She had Ingleton to
sympathise with her; and the life she led among the
students, and the artists generally, helped her to forget
when unpleasant memories would intrude themselves
upon her. Marie could not be judged by any ordinary
standard of morality. She had her moral code for all
that, and she lived up to it, and to prove it, was not such
a bad one in the end
Haifa still sent her presents on her birthday, and, in
the expressive slang of the Pension, “ kept sweet with
her,” in his cunning way. In a like manner, and for a
similar reason, he apparently was “good” to Jimmy, the
groom. He blackened his character with a word, the
while he bought his soul with a racehorse. And, indeed,
he actually befriended him in many ways. Your true
villain does not make enemies. For the time, Marie just
let herself drift; for the time, Haifa laughed with the
world, and the snob of the world laughed with him. . .
Stella had a cottage by the sea for the summer months.
Mrs. Anderson, the housekeeper, had persuaded her to
take this change. Elva Robson —the girl with the pale
face like a saint’s, and the beautifully pencilled eyebrows,
whom Doctor Hugh had particularly noticed at the Pen-
sion Suisse —had joined Stella. They were old chums,
their friendship dating from school-days. Elva was a


journalist, who went everywhere. She knew everybody
worth knowing, and some who were not.
Raffa came to town occasionally, on business, so he
said. - But he neglected the Pension Suisse. He pat-
ronized his old haunts no longer. A year had made a
difference in him, too. Between twenty-five and thirty-
nine there is little difference in the life of a man. Between
thirty-nine and forty h an epoch. . . .
“ Stella,” said Elva, as they sat on the verandah over-
looking the sea; “ Stella, what do you say to a ramble
behind the scenes, eh ? ”
“ What do you mean ? ” Stella asked.
“ Well, there’s an artist’s night at the Pension Suisse
to-morrow, and I promised to be there. The Pension is
supposed to be a very naughty place, and, I dare say,
in a sense, it is just a little over-proof. But one has to
see things to write about them ; so I go there sometimes.
The artists and the scribes, and—no, not the Pharisees—
all go there. They hobnob with their models, and are
free and easy over the cigarettes and the wine. I’ve often
been. What do you say ? ”
Elva was enthusiastic. She was an observer not given
to expressing opinions. She seldom talked for talking’s
sake, being unlike most lady journalists in that respect.
“ I should like to go—if you don’t think it would be —
be wrong,” said Stella, rather dubious.
“ Oh, nothing to write to the papers about,” said Elva.
“ I see the joke of it all myself, and don’t think it does
one any harm to look on. All our moralising won’t alter
it one scrap. And you’ll like the artists. A lot of nice
fellows go there. But you mustn’t fall in love with my
Waxy; that’s Rosenfeldt, who has a wonderful touch,


and plays Schubert’s Serenade to break your heart; and
he is also famous for his thirst, and for his talent of bor-
rowing half-crowns that he really doesn’t want. Then
there’s the human kangaroo—Bert Ingleton—who hops
to the Merry Widow Waltz, and is very funny. And if
we are in luck’s way, you’ll hear some good recitations,
and if George Paans, the Dutchman, is there, you’ll hear
the violin speak. They’re a jolly lot; off the chain for
the night, as they say. They are all earnest workers,
and some are already well-known. What do you say ? ”
Stella said “ Yes ! ” —as Elva knew she would.


CHAPTER VII.
A FEAST FOR THE GODS.
HARICOT beans in oil; tomatoes and onions in oil;
beetroot in oil; potato-salad in oil; herrings in
oil; sardines in oil; oil in the bottles of the cruets, and a
general oily smell pervading the room. Garlic in every-
thing. Soup, with grated Parmesan—“ sawdust ” they
called it at the Pension Suisse. In a condensed description
of the feast provided for the artists and their freinds one
must not forget the macaroni—also in oil. As for the
wine-card, there was an heroic disregard of detail—wine,
white and red ; that was all. '
“ Come along, Hal, take the chair, and let us begin.”
Thus admonished, Harry Wall took the chair, and the
banquet began. There was Wilkinson and Longwood; the
former’s face beaming with optimism—a genuine love for
all good things (and some bad, for Wilk. was very human)
and especially for good cheer and a Scotch song. Then
came Ingleton and Marie, Jack Winton, Waxy, and
the others. The Musical Parson—a rubicund Scot in
clerical garb, who loved Bohemia and its artists—was also
there ; also the Little Doctor, whose portrait adorned the
wall; quite an array of talent and some celebrities. Then
the trouble began. What a clatter of knives and clinking
of glasses; what a ripple of gay conversation; what
laughter and joviality I


“ The wine’s not so bad to-night.”
“ Have tasted it worse.”
“ What! is there a worse ? ”
“ Is there a better ? ”
“ No criticism, drink.”
“ What a glorious country, our Australia.”
“ Best on earth,”
“ Beyond a doubt. Gad ! I wish I could come back
in a hundred years and see it: the home of Art; home of
music, poetry, painting.”
“ Best place on earth,” said Waxy, who was full of oil
and optimism.
“ Hard on the artist, though.”
“ Never mind. We suffer ; our children won’t.”
“ Haven’t any.”
“ Go and amend thy ways.”
And so on; till as the wine circulated they became
perfectly happy. In the midst of it, Elva Roberts and
Stella arrived. A dozen men were up on the instant
offering their chairs. Formal introductions were dispensed
with in that cheerful company. Stella found herself being
helped to sardines and onions and oil. Remonstrance was
out of the question. She accepted the inevitable, and
talked to the beaming Wilkinson as though she had known
him from infancy. The musical Parson adjusted his gold-
rimmed pince-nez and scrutinised the newcomers. He had
an eye for the ladies, which showed his good taste.
Marie, sitting between Ingleton and Jack Winton,
leaned back in her chair. Stella was on the same side of
the table, and could not see her. Marie was too astounded
to drink her wine, though Ingleton pressed it on her.
“ What on earth brings her here ? ”


Then she at once thought of Raffa, and of the vow she
had taken, and her fun for that night was at an end.
Stella, observing everything, could not take her eyes from
a crayon sketch on the wall opposite her. It was a life like
drawing of Marie; one of those black and white master-
pieces that Wilkinson made in a few minutes, and never
finished, or touched,, again ; which was the reason of their
unique finish and perfect breadth of touch. Stella was
fascinated by it; nor did she neglect to notice that it was
Marie in puris naturalibus, Marie without a tailor-made,
or any other, gown.
Dinner lasted an hour ; and if the happy exchange of
ideas stimulated by congenial surroundings does, in truth,
give tonicity to the whole system, physiologically as well
as psychologically, then most assuredly were the artists
and their guests in no danger of indigestion—mental or
physical.
‘ Come, Waxy ; set the ball rolling,” said Hal Wall;
and Rosenfeldt played the inevitable Schubert’s Serenade,
his own arrangement. But then he did play it. He had
never had a lesson, and sat at the piano in an ungainly
way, huddled over the keyboard, his round shoulders
rounder and more hunched-up than ever. He scarcely
raised his fingers above the level of the music-rest; yet he
played with a fine singing tone, largo e cantahile.
“ It is divine,” said Stella, when the applause had
subsided. “He plays like an angel.”
“ Yes,” said Wilkinson ; “he plays like one ; but Waxy
isn’t much of an angel.”
“ Whatever do you call him Waxy for ? ” she asked.
“ Because he’s supposed to be as emotionless as a wax-
figure. No one can quite understand him.”


IT WAS A DRAWING OF MARIE WITHOUT A TAILOR-MADE.
Stella Sothern. Page 116.


“ Nobody like a wax figure could play like that. Per-
haps he hides his feelings.” Stella suggested. The music
had made her interested in the player.
“A sort of Athos, eh ? ” Wilkinson returned.
Melancholy Gerald, after making some unpleasant
grimaces, screwing his lips and rolling his eyes, and passing
his long, bony fingers through his unkempt hair, recited
“ Gungah Dhin.” Waxy’s Schubert’s Serenade and Gerald’s,
Gungah Dhin were always on the programme. Yet it was
evident they were always welcome items. Both men were
artists.
A violin solo by George Paans, the Dutch musician,
followed, Stella had never heard the violin speak before.
He was a great player ; though he had not made money
by his gifts. But when he played amongst his fellows,
then his soul went into the instrument, and the Pension
Suisse rang with such tones as have seldom been heard
anywhere else in Australia.
Item followed item ; each was a masterpiece interpreted
by a master. There was nothing cheap in that programme
—no jigs or Merry Widow waltzes. Ingleton was a
sensible fellow; and recognized that such foolery would
have been utterly out of place.
Marie had made her escape immediately after dinner.
About eleven o’clock, Elva and Stella, accompanied by
Rosenfeldt and Wilkinson, left. -
“ Enjoyed it, eh ? ” Elva asked.
“ Yes ! but I meant to ask—Oh ! Mr. Wilkinson, you’ll
be able to tell me . . . .” Stella stopped as suddenly
as she had begun. She was going to ask the artist about
Marie’s picture ; but her modesty caused her to hesitate.
“ What is it, Miss Sothern ? ” he asked.


She braced herself to ask. After all, these artist’s thought
nothing of the nude. They were right, too. So she turned
to him.
“ I seem to know the girl whose portrait is over the
mantlepiece. Is she a model ? Is her name Marie ? ”
“ Yes,” said Wilkinson, surprised. “ She is a model,
and her name is Marie. She was there to-night; to
dinner. Now I come to think of it, I missed her afterwards.
Yes, Marie is a hard little case ; a nice little thing, though.”
“ Oh, very,” said Rosenfeldt.


CHAPTER VIII.
GOOD-BYE TO BOHEMIA.
THE usual odour of fried onions and of liver and bacon
pervaded the house. In the kitchen the landlady
—Nellie Blye, one-time' wood-warmer and pantomime
show-girl hugged her quart bottle of beer, and
maundered on in her accustomed way about the days
when she led the March of Nations in “ Ricky and the Tuft ”
at the old Regal Theatre.
“ I ’adn’t the lumbago then, me dear, I could walk as
straight as a rush. And a fine figure I had too; though
to see me now you mightn’t believe it. And the men !
Didn’t I ’ave a time when I come out of the stage-door
after the show. There they stood ”
It is an old story, oft told. Nellie Blye’s vanity was
strong in ruin; it would live with her to the end. In
squalor, poverty, and drunkenness she still retained the
power of calling up visions of the golden good time that
once was; a quart of beer transformed her miserable
surroundings into a garden of dreams—for an hour. Then
!
Marie lay on the sofa in her dingy room, looking at a
paper three days old. She was hot and restless. Gradually
the print seemed to dance before her. She shut one eye
and tried to fix the letters with the other. Her head
ached ; was burning. Her temple throbbed. She threw
the paper down and lay back, her arms behind her head,
her long hair flowing freely alaout the pillow.


The room was poorly furnished: a deal washstand, a
Chinese-made chest of drawers, odd crockery, and a rack
on which her skirts and hats were hanging. There were
a few sketches on the walls; one of Ingleton, another of
Waxy ; both drawn by Wilkinson, and a drawing in water-
color of herself by the same artist. Her face was flushed ;
her eyes more brilliant than ever. The racket of carts in
the street and the bawling of hawkers with vegetables and
“ Wild rabbo, wild rabbo,” and “ Fish, 0! ” almost
distracted her. She felt very ill. She tried to sleep, but
her brain was working automatically. When she looked
at her picture on the wall she saw that her face had sud-
denly changed. It looked old and haggard, and the eyes
were those of*a demon. She thought that her own portrait
was mocking her, laughing at her. She shut her eyes.
The picture would not be shut out. It was on her brain,
her soul. She heard a voice laughing out loud. She sat
up a moment and listened. It was the drunken creature
in the kitchen. She had upset the frying-pan and spilt
the mess of onions and liver and bacon. She was laughing
in an imbecile way, and cursing, too.
Marie fell back on the pillow and awakened three days
afterwards to find Elva Robson and Stella beside her.
She was in a strange room. There were pictures on the
wall; but they were not her pictures. The walls were
white, spotless; and there were flowers in a bowl on the
table.
Stella had found Marie’s place in the cheap suburb easily
enough, having obtained the address from Wilkinson, and
the adventurous Elva, who knew the city and its environs
well, led the way. They arrived to find Marie sick almost
to death with typhoid fever, and had her removed to the
hospital, where Stella arranged for her comfort and care.


Weeks passed. The artists did not forget their “ little
pal.” They came to see her, and brought all sorts of gifts,
and eatables, which if eaten would have speedily ended all
Marie’s troubles. When at last she was able to leave the
hospital, she was greatly changed. Pale and worn to a
shadow of herself, there was an expression in her eyes
which everyone noticed. She had learnt her lesson ; she
knew her book.
“ I’m better,” she said to Ingleton ; “ but I’ll never be
the same again.”
“ Cheer up. You’ll be all right. Wait till you’re able
to have a night at the rub-a-di-dub (Pension Suisse) and
you’ll soon be yourself,” he said, encouragingly.
“No ! That’s all done with. I’m going back to the
country with Miss Sothern. You’ll say good-bye to them
all for me, won’t you ? And don’t think me—don’t think
hard of me for going away from you, too. You see, I—
well, I’m not going back on what we’ve done, and not
going to be a rotter, but—well—it’s just this way, Miss
Stella’s an angel, and I’ve given her my promise, and I
must go.”
She touched him on the arm in the old familiar way ;
and Ingleton, who was a really good fellow at heart, broke
down. “ Dash it all, Marie, I’ll go straight and marry you
now, if that’s all you’re thinking about. Come along ! ”
She smiled and was deeply affected, greatly pleased.
“No ! old boy,” she said, “ it’s not up to me to spoil
your life because I’ve spoilt my own.”
So without any formal farewell, Marie left the city, not
bitterly, as she might have done, but with many mingled
thoughts—regret, love, joy, sorrow —but dominant was the
kindly recollection of her friends, the artists, who had
been gay and genial and “ good pals ” always.


BOOK III.
C HAPTER I.
IN THE NORTHERN TERRITORY.
TN the almost unknown country lying westward of the
Overland Telegraph Line, south of the rivers flowing
into the Indian Ocean, is the central division of the Nor-
thern Territory. It is not a barren waste of sand and
stone ; not an irreclaimable desert. There are many miles
of good land admirably adapted for horse and cattle-
breeding. When saved by the blacks from death in the
desert, Henry Weston had wandered with his deliverers to
the coastal division of the North. This runs inland for
a hundred miles, and stretches from the Gulf for twelve
hundred miles along the Indian Ocean. He had lived
with a settler for some time by one of the rivers—all of
which are tidal, and navigable for sixty or seventy miles
from the sea. On returning there after having left Golden
Gully for ever, he fell in with a horse-dealer, who was
coming south from Palmerston.
Ted Hassett was a wealthy man —a pioneer who had also
made a fortune, which is exceptional. At sixteen he was
earning money for his widowed mother. After three
years in a Palmerston grocery-store, he set out to seek his
fortune in the Bush. Business in the town was in the
hands of the Chinese. Ted Hassett made for the interior.
In ten years he was rich, and doing a constant trade with


the Palmerston buyers for the remount service in India.
He was returning from Port Darwin by an unusual and
somewhat roundabout route when he met Henry Weston
camped by a river.
“ How is it for some grub with you ? ”
“ Good enough. Going far ? ” Weston asked.
“ Home! About a hundred odd miles. What’s your
game ? ”
“ Nothing in particular. What’s yours ? ”
“ Oh, I’m Hassett, the horse-breeder.” This was not
said boastfully; a mere statement of fact. “ Who are
you ? ”
“ I’m Smith, of Anywhere,” said Weston, and proceeded
to boil the billy. "
“ Want work ? ”
“ Yes! Anything.”
“ Ride ? ”
“Anything.”
“ Good enough ! You can come along.”
The following morning at day-break, Hassett and
Weston started south.
“ They call Victoria the ‘ Garden of Australia ’ ; a
kitchen garden, perhaps. This is the Promised Land,”
said Hassett, as they rode on.
“ I wish to the Lord it would keep its promise, then,”
said Weston.
“ What do you mean ? ”
“It owes me a lot,” said Henry ; and he told Hassett
something of his rough experiences, but he did not reveal
his name, nor refer to his attempt to blaze a trail across the
unknown country leading from civilization to Natami
goldfields.


Hassett soon understood that Weston was a man of
education and one who had seen better days. He was
certain that neither drink nor dissipation had driven him
to the Bush. He did not seem like a man who had com-
mitted a crime. But Hassett did not judge rashly one
way or the other; he resolved to give him a chance, and
keep an eye on him in the meantime.
“ You can keep books ? ”
“ Yes.”
“ Used to horses, I can see that. Know anything prac-
tical about breeding ? ”
“ Everything.” This was simply true. Henry Weston
had been brought up on horseback at his father’s farm.
“ I believe I was born on horseback,” he said, and they
laughed heartily for two men who never talked for talking’s
sake, or laughed idly.
“ I call my place ‘ The Ranch.’ I don’t like it. It
sounds too foreign.”
“ What’s in a name ? ” said Weston, drily, thinking of
himself.
It was in the heart of the interior that Hassett had made
his home. His next door neighbour lived a hundred miles
away. He raised cattle and bred a special line of horses,
useful, as has been said, for the Indian remount service.
He employed three men, boundary-riders by courtesy,
but there were no boundaries. The place had never been
surveyed. It was Hassett’s Ranch —that was all. Papers
from him to the Lands Department controlling the territory
had been under consideration for seven years. Something
would be done some day. Hassett was a philosopher and
accepted the inevitable departmental circumlocution and
delay.


To the South was a creek, always running, in part a
tributary of one of the great coastal rivers ; in part the
result of a constant spring. By this Weston was to live
in a bark humpy—Hassett having built it when he had
first come to the Ranch.
“ That was my original hut,” he said.
“ After I’ve raided the fleas it will do very well,” said
Weston.
Before many weeks passed, Hassett found that Weston
was likely to be of great service to him. He understood
stock thoroughly, and was a crack rider. He was also a
pleasant companion, for, being young and healthy, an
active busy life prevented him from brooding and becoming
morbid. The Past was dead ; let it rest. That was his
philosophy, it is true, but at times, when he sat in his
humpy alone and heard the faint mysterious murmur of
the Bush, the call of the curlew, and the manifold voices of
the night, memory asserted itself. Then, in spite of brave
resolutions not to recall the days that were no more, he
found himself dreaming again of Golden Gully and of
Stella, of all that once was—all that might have been.
At such times, restless and gloomy, he would take his gun,
whistle-up the dogs, and go into the Bush to spend the
night mooning ’possums, or other game.
In leisure hours he sought solace in reading the lyrics
of his own land. He had lived both in the city and in the
country ; knew both the town and the Bush ; the former
well enough to recognise its similarity to city life anywhere,
and everywhere, else; the latter, as only he can know it
who has lived in it as boy and man, and learnt to see
beauties which make no appeal to the unsympathetic eye
of the stranger. Familiar things grow beautiful through


love. ... As he read, many a sweet note set him athrill: —
“ Ah ! let me hope that in that place,
Those old familiar things,
To which I turn a wistful face,
Have never taken wings.”
Away flew thought again to Golden Gully. Was Stella
happy ? Doubtless, for Hugh Fairleigh was a real white
man. Yet it troubled him not a little to think of her having-
been able to forget; for her vows had been spoken with
such passionateness, such ihtenseness, such sincerity. He
wondered if man were not the more constant. But there
was no trace of cheap cynicism in his feelings. He was,
like every true man who has come into contact with the
primeval wilderness, a practical philosopher. He would
not have been pleased had you told him so. It is not
pleasant to be accused of being a philosopher; but a
practical philosopher is another thing. Consciously or
unconsciously, he became inured to his destiny,
“ March of shadows to muted music,
White gums waiting, ve know, we know !
And we know, dear Land, that our desolate story,
Has its hidden sweet and its inner glory.”
He had seen the shadows ; he was cognisant of the inner
glory. The sweet that is only hidden to those who have
weak sight, or who are wilful not to see. Practical, yes !
He was doer as well as dreamer, by no means an unusual
combination.
Ah, when Death’s hand our own warm hand hath ta’en,
Down the dark isles his sceptre rules supreme—
God grant the fighters leave to fight again,
And let the dreamers dream.”


Weston had been to Port Darwin on business for Hassett,
and had a few days to himself, so he rode into some of the
unknown country along the Indian Ocean to the West,
and thence inland, trusting to himself and his horse to get
safely through. He camped by a river the third night
after leaving the Port, and was sitting smoking before
making himself snug for the night, when the weird signal
cry of marauding natives came from the scrub. Seizing
his revolver, he lay flat and waited. But no spears
whizzed over, or near him. But in a few minutes the air
was vibrating with the fierce yells and defiant screams of
blacks attacking, and others defending. It was a des-
perate battle of savages. He rose and remained a fas-
cinated spectator of the fight, which occurred within a
hundred yards of his camp. Leaping natives, daubed with
white paint, bounded high in the air or on one side to
avoid the spears of their enemies. Sometimes with
unerring eyes and wonderful quickness, they turned
the deadly spears aside from their very bodies,
with sweeping cuts of their woomeras or waddies, giving
vent all the while to terrible howls of rage and defiance.
Many were transfixed with the cruel barbed weapons.
Suddenly, both sides closed up, and a fierce hand-to-hand
encounter ensued. Clubs, iron bars, and tomahawks were
used, and when, at last, the attacking party was defeated
and driven off, a horrible slaughter followed. The victors
dashed out the brains of the disabled with relentless
energy.
! Sickened by the spectacle, Henry Weston lay still till
he could bear it no longer, when, mounting in haste, he
galloped away from the bloody scene. He had gone
about a mile when he came up to a native, one of the


marauding tribe, who had the barbed point of a spear still
sticking in his hip. He had, himself, broken off the shaft.
The poor wretch was in agony. Weston soon convinced
him of his friendly intentions, and remembering that he
owed his own life to the blacks, he did all he could to
relieve the wounded boy, from whom he learnt, in a
vague way, the cause of the battle. It was all over an
aborigine woman —some black Helen ; the old, old trouble
—who had been abducted from his, the Bay tribe, by an
ardent wooer of the hated River tribe. The attack on the
River natives was one of vengeance, and it had failed.
The next morning, seeing that nothing could be done
to alleviate his anguish until the barbed spear-point was
removed, Weston set out with the black for Port Darwin.
It took them four days to reach there. When they did,
the black was operated on in the Palmerston Hospital,
and eight broken barbed points were extracted from the
wound.
Weston’s humanity was not to go unrewarded.
On his way to Hassett’s Ranch he rode by still another
route, iiis adventurous spirit, that of the born explorer,
impelling him to this course.
In his journey he came across some outcropping stone
that was gold-bearing. It was sunset when he made the
discovery. He waited for the dawning, and carried out
an exhaustive search. He followed the stone ; soon dis-
covered its “ pitch,” and the general “ lay ” of the country.
In parts he saw that it was immensely rich. Burning
with the fine enthusiasm of the pioneer, he set to work to
establish the position of his “ find.” He had no instru-
ments ; but he was not only a trained surveyor, but the
perfect bushman. All day he stayed at this place, ex-
F


ploring, examining. Apart from his own mine, he would
receive the Government reward for the pioneering of a
new field. Then, suddenly, he looked around him, and
aughed.
Gold ! Government reward! What was one or the
other to a man who was dead ?
Smith, of Anywhere ! That was who he was ; his name
and his description. Weston’s Reward—that would have
sounded well, hut Weston was dead. Stella’s Reward !
He said that over two or three times, and the grim irony
of it struck home.
“ Yes ! I might call it that; work the mine for all it is
worth, and then leave it, or give it all to her. I wonder
if she would ever guess. Bah ! ”
And he laughed at such sentimental folly.
“ Oh, well,” he soliloquised, “ it will keep for a time,
anyhow. Not much chance of anyone coming along this
way in a hurry. Anyhow, I’ll peg out for myself and
Hassett, and—well! we’ll see how things go.”
Three nights after he was again at the ranch. He said
no word of his discovery. It could wait. He would speak
at the right time .... Months passed on. The blacks,
quiet enough, as a rule, had recently become troublesome
in the neighbourhood of Hassett’s. The hot weather
seemed to affect them. It had been excessively hot and
dry. One of the boundary-riders of the ranch had been
speared at the waterhole at the western end of the run.
It was after a scorching day that Weston lay on his bark
bunk smoking a pipe before turning in for the night. He
had been thinking over his discovery, and Thad decided to
speak to Hassett, at an early date. Then he would go to
Palmerston and in the name of Smith claim the Govern


ment reward of five hundred pounds for the discovery of a
new goldfield. He had been out shooting that afternoon,
and whilst alone had come to the conclusion, which further
thought strengthened, that now the weather was-settled,
and the roads fit, he must make his discovery known. He
turned over a couple of wallaby skins he had secured, and
the pelt of a rufous kangaroo. He collected the skins—
it was his hobby. Suddenly he started to his feet and,
going to the door, listened intently. Yes ! there could be
no doubt of it. He had not been the victim of imagina-
tion. He distinctly heard, for the .second time, a faint,
far-off coo-ee ! Putting his hands to his mouth he coo-eed
back in hearty fashion and listened. Fainter, and more
feebly came the third call. He took his loaded gun, and
calling his dogs, set off in the direction whence the sound
had come. He knew what it was to coo-ee for help in the
heart of the Bush, to strain the ears for the answer which
means life or death. After he had gone some distance he
stopped and coo-eed again. Faintest of all the answering
coo-ee came through the night. He strode on, the dogs
delighted at a ramble, joyously careering to and fro.
But they were dogs who had always earned their own
living and ready for work at any moment. Weston called
them to him, and spoke a few peremptory words. They
understood, and bounded off, intent on their business.
Before long it was evident they had found the object of
their search. Stump, the big cattle dog, came running
excitedly back, and led Weston to the place where the
terrier was barking loudly. A man lay prone before him.
At a glance Weston saw that he had been speared. He
knelt beside him. It was Doctor Hugh. Weston recog-
nised him immediately.


IT WAS DR. HUGH WESTON RECOGNISED HIM IMMEDIATELY.
Stella Sothern. Page 131 .


C HAPTER II.
A TIMELY RESCUE.
* I r HE wounded man lay still. Henry gently raised
his old friend’s head, and saw that he was living,
though unconscious. He examined the position of the
spear. He knew something of rough bush surgery, but to
draw that spear from that wound meant life or death.
He could not do it. And he dared not carry him—the
jolting would kill him if there were internal bleeding. So
he called Stump, the cattle dog, patted him, and sent him
away for assistance. Without a moment’s hesitation
the wise fellow ran in the direction of the ranch, little Jack,
the Australian terrier, yelping at his heels.. Then Weston
went to the creek and brought some water in his hat.
At last Stump came bounding back, followed by Hassett,
and one of the men.
“ Those black devils again,” said Hassett, as he looked
on the stricken man.
“ What about the spear ? ” Weston asked.
Hassett examined the would critically. The spear was
embedded in the side of the thigh.
“ He’s fainted through shock and pain. He’s been in
a pretty bad way when he was hit. He’s all right. It’s
missed the artery by an inch.” With one heroic tug
Hassett plucked the weapon from the wound. There was


no gush of blood; only a trickle. Doctor Hugh opened
his eyes, groaned, and fainted again. They gave him some
spirits, then, between them, carried him to Weston’s hut;
Stump, the hero of the piece, taking front place in the
procession.
They laid him on the bunk. He soon recovered con-
sciousness, and was able to sip a little more brandy and
water. By the light of the hurricane lamp, swinging
from the roof, he recognised Weston sitting by his side.
“ It’s all right, old fellow. Yes ! It’s Henry, all right;
no ghost. Don’t speak; don’t try and say anything.
You’ll be all right soon.”
They shook hands—that is, Weston took Hugh’s hands
inf his, and pressed it reassuringly.
He sat by his side through the night. Towards morning
Doctor Hugh awakened from a refreshing sleep,
“ Better ? ”
“ Weston ! Yes ; and no dream,” he said ; and then
he remembered everything.
“ I was out to hear of you,” he said.
Weston understood no word of this; so he impressed
on his friend the necessity for quiet,
“ We’ll talk over everything later on. You must keep
quiet. You ought to know.”
“ I’ll be all right,” said the patient; and he sat up and
examined his own wound. As he unwrapped the bandage
and came to a layer of young gum leaves in immediate
contact with the flesh, he smiled.
“You surgeons of the bush believe in antiseptic dressing.
Nothing could be better.”
After a swift glance at the wound, he replaced the
bandages, Henry assisting.


“ I’ve had a close call. It grazed the femoral artery;
another eighth-of-an-inch, and I should have saved a lot
of trouble.”
He fell back on his rough pillows, almost in a state of
collapse.
“ Damn it, man, you’ll just have to keep quiet,” said
Weston.
But kangaroo tail soup and careful nursing soon caused
the patient’s colour to return. The wound was only a
deep flesh wound, after all. In a week he was able to sit
outside the humpy, and amuse himself with Jack, the
terrier, who was as full of tricks as a circus dog. Stump
had no time for sentiment or play. He was a busy dog,
with grave responsibilities.
“ Well,” said Hugh, as Weston came up after the burden
and heat of the day’s work ; “ Well! can we talk now ? ”
“ What on earth brought you here ? ” Henry asked.
“ I told you. I came to try and learn something definite
about your party; about you in particular. You see,
some of us did not feel satisfied that you . . . Why !
what is the matter ? ”
Weston had flushed and then gone pale. He trembled
violently.
“ Nothing, nothing,” he said, with an effort.
“No ! we thought there might still be a hope of your
being alive. Weston, old chap, it is hard for me to tell
you this.”
Weston sprang to his feet, staring into Hugh’s face.
“ What—what do you mean ? ” he cried.
“ Well, old man, you know I loved Stella, too ; I really
did think it was all up with you; that you were dead
; so I proposed to her again. You know she
refused me once. . . .”


“ Yes,” said Weston, forcing himself to be calm. “Yes.
Don’t think I blame you. She thought me dead ; it was
natural enough, after five weary years of waiting . . .”
. It was Doctor Hugh’s turn to look astounded.
“ What! five years ! What are you talking about ? ”
he cried.
“ What I say. And, now, since you’ve found me, I
may as well tell you that I got back home to the Gully
last year on National Holiday. I had lost my memory
when ill—like you, after being lost—and I had clean lost
count of time. I met Haifa, and he told me everything.
I thought it was only two years, but he told me it was
five ”
“ What! ” cried Hugh, fiercely, “ What! ”
“ And he told me how, at last, Stella—forgive me calling
her by the old familiar name ”
“ Good God ! ” Hugh moaned, guessing the truth before
he heard it.
“ Yes ! he told me that you had asked her the second
time, and that you were man and wife.”
Doctor Hugh caught Weston’s hand and raised himself
up from the bench on which he was sitting.
“He told you that ? He told you that ? And
let you go away thinking that ? My God, Henry.
He told you Stella and I were married. The
damnable villain. God ! What you’ve suffered ! What
Stella has suffered. Why, man, I came to seek you for
her sake ; to bring you back to her, the truest, sweetest,
dearest girl in all Australia—all the world.”
It was well that at that moment Ted Hassett came up.
Further strain had been too much to bear. Haifa’s arch-
treachery was exposed. The two men clung tight to each


other’s hand, looked hard into each other’s eyes; and
were eloquent without any feeble, futile words.
“ Hello ! you two, what’s up ? What’s the matter ? ”
cried Hassett; for there was hell’s light in Weston’s
eyes.
There was a moment’s pause, a moment of suppressed
murder.
“ Tell him,” said Henry to Doctor Fairleigh ; “ tell him
everything. I’m knocked out.”
So Doctor Hugh told Hassett the whole story of Haifa’s
villainy; of Weston’s leaving Golden Gully with his
party to survey a way to the Natami goldfields; Weston
now and then supplementing the* narrative with details
which made Hassett indulge in language that was ruddy
and over-proof.
“ What a damned villain. Evidently wanted the lady
for himself,” he said, whereat Henry again looked re-
entless.
“ I’ll be even with him, the dog,” he said, savagely.
“ And so Smith of Anywhere is really Weston of Golden
Gully, eh ? ” said Hassett, laughing. “ Well! I had
my own opinion about Mister Smith of Anywhere.”
“ Don’t be rough on Smith,” said Weston, when his
calmer mood returned. “ Smith is a name that will last.
See, here, Fairleigh, you’re a white man, if ever there
was one, and Hassett here, he’s another; so I’ll let you
both into a secret —one of Smith of Anywhere’s secrets.”
“ More secrets,” said Hugh.
“ Yes ! Last time I was away at Port Darwin, I took
a round way coming home. Well, I guess Smith of Any-
where struck gold. I came on a nice bit of ouctropping
stone, rich as you like. I marked the spot, but I didn’t


say anything about it. I meant to, later on; but I
didn’t want money; I didn’t want notoriety for dis-
covering a new field. I didn’t want anything. So I
haven’t said a word, not yet. Well ”
“ This beats cock-fightin’ ” said Hassett, greatly excited.
“ Where’s the find ? ”
“ As soon as Doctor Hugh, here, is fit for the saddle,
we’ll go. We can choose our ground. I’ll go on to Pal-
merston to the mining registrar and claim my five hundred
for finding a new field, then I’m off to settle accounts
with that damned villain, Haifa. Partners, eh ? ” he
added.
It was sudden, but certain, unlike love at first sight.
Ten days later they rode to their Eldorado together.
Thence Doctor Hugh and Henry Weston went to Pal-
merston, where the pioneer lodged with the warden his
application for five hundred pounds for the discovery of
a new goldfield. Smith of Anywhere’s was the name he
gave to the find. Smith’s Reward was the pioneer claim.
Weston had another mine which he called the Southern
Star.
“Northern Star would be more suitable up here,”
Hassett remarked.
“ But that wouldn’t be reminiscent-of Stella Sothern,
the doctor observed.
“Eh ! I forgot that. Stella means a star, eh ? ”
“ A fixed star,” said the doctor.
Doctor Hugh had desired urgently to send a telegram
from Palmerston to Warrawee, advising Stella that Henry
was well and coming to her; but Weston hesitated about
that.
“ Isn’t there anyone we could wire to ? What about


Eustace Watt, the lawyer ? You see I’ve kept up the
name of Smith on purpose so that they won’t go wiring
about Weston to the papers. I want to see that cur,
Haifa, face to face ; and if he learns I am alive and coming
back to confront him, he will sneak away for a certainty.
I don’t want that. I can trust Stella, of course, but
when a woman is over-excited, you don’t know what she
may do. She would tackle Haifa, I know. I don’t want
that. I want to do the tackling.”
Enquiry elicited that the s.s. Peregrine was bound for
Southern ports at once.
The men stood wharf together; Weston, one
foot on the gangway.
“ Doctor, you’re a brick. I can’t say any more,” he
affirmed, as he shook the sterling man by the hand.
“ We can’t all have the prize, though we may all strive
for it Go to be happy. For ray
part, I’m glad of change, and work. The mines will
keep me occupied One never knows one’s
luck.”
“ That’s true,” Weston returned. “ One never knows
one’s luck.”
The whistle was blown, the gangway braced up. There
was the waltz-time rhythm of the screw, the seething
accompaniment of fiercely displaced water, and Henry
Weston was bound South once more.


CHAPTER III.
RAFFA UNMASKED.
STELLA had been sitting on the verandah watching
the evening glow fading, and the calm night coming
down like a curtain, star-spangled, and far-spreading
over a world longing for the shadows and cool hours after
the burden and heat of the day.
She had left her seat, and was strolling in reverie about
the garden, when Raffa came up to her.
“ I shall be going to town to-morrow,” he said. “Is
there anything I can do for you ? ”
“No ! thank you,” she returned, shortly.
He paused a moment, regarding her intently.
“ Why do you speak so coldly, so sternly ? ” he asked,
at last.
Stella flushed a little. She was not accustomed to
being cross-questioned. She resented his tone.
“ Perhaps my voice expresses for me what I don’t care
to put into words,” she said.
“In what have I offended ?” he asked. “ I feel from
your manner towards me lately that I must have done
something to offend you. Surely we are old enough—
friends, ah ! to, to be quite outspoken with one another.
Surely you will tell me what I have done ? ”
He was sincere enough. He really did want to know


the reason of her coldness. She was quick to notice his
earnestness. For Haifa in earnest, was Haifa eloquent.
The emotionalism of his race helped him.
“ Really,” she said, “ I can’t tell you anything. You
must let your conscience (she laid emphasis on the word)
tell you. Have you lived such a very noble life that your
conscience (again the galling emphasis) accuses
nothing ? ”
“ Of so much,” he replied, readily, “ that I am quite
at a loss to know which of the many sins I have com-
mitted is the particular one that has given offence to you.
Ah! don’t be too hard on me, because I ”
He was about to tell her he loved her. A daring villain
this; and afraid of nothing. But Marie passed up the
walk to the house at that moment.
“ Marie,” called Stella. “ Marie, I want you a minute.”
As Marie came up Haifa walked off into the shadows.
“ Then I can do nothing in the city for you ? ” he said,
hesitating a moment.
“ No, thank you,”
Stella merely wished to hear Marie’s news from Warra-
wee, whither she had sent her on a message of enquiry
concerning one of her tenants, who was down with in-
fluenza, and in a bad way.
“ They’re all wishing Doctor Hugh was here again,”
Marie told her; and immediately thought flew off to the
far North-West, and she wondered when she would hear
any tidings from her friend.
“ Doctor Hugh has gone to try and find some trace of
Henry Weston,” she said.
Marie trembled. For a long time she had resolved to
make a confession to Stella. The hour had come. But
first she determined to speak to Haifa. She would not


turn dog on him like he had on her,” not without giving
him warning, at any rate. As for the burden she bore —
it was too heavy, too weary. She could bear it no longer.
Stella had been a friend to her. The blackness of her
ingratitude in hiding the truth from this long-suffering
woman was forced on her till her self-torture became
unbearable. She had sworn to baulk Raffa if he ever
attempted to make love to Stella. Of late her suspicions
had been aroused. Why should she consider him ? In
what had he. considered her ? So she resolved to face
him that night, tell him her intentions, and then confess
herself to Stella.
It was nearing eleven o’clock when Raffa and she mot
in the shadows of the pines that lined the walk from the
house to the orchard. A clear, starlight night, only the
usual voices of the bush making a monotonous mur-
muring,
“ Well,” he said, “ what is it you want to say ? ”
“ Only that I am going to tell Miss Stella everything.”
“ What! ” he began, but she was not to be intimidated.
“ I have kept quiet too long. Why should I ? What
are you to me, anyhow ? ” she asked, and her eyes flashed.
“ Nothing ; I know it. But what do you think you’ll
gain by telling ? I’ll deny it all, and she’ll only think
you’re spiteful and revengeful. Can’t you see that ? ”
But he had used the same argument too often. She
continued, unheeding him:
“ I mean to tell everything about that business; not
yours and mine. I’m not one of that sort. If I sinned
I guess I suffered for it, and I’m not full of texts and that
sort of thing, and then ready to go back on a pal. You
treated me pretty rotten, and chance it I but that’s not


to say I’ll do the same. 1 don’t mean anything about
our affair; but Ido mean all about Weston’s going
away.”
He did not answer at once. He* was carefully weighing
the chances. What was the meaning of Stella’s coldness
and hauteur ? Did she suspect their affair ?
“ Marie,” he said, suddenly, “ do you still care for me
—a little ? ”
“ Yes,” she said, “ a lot, not a little. I care for you so
much I’d like to see you get your dues, and that ’ud be
ten years and the cat. No! I don’t care that (flipping
her fingers) for you. But Ido care for Miss Stella, and
I’m dashed if I’ll stand by and see you marry her, so
there! ”
“ Oh! so you hate me, do you ?” he said, angrily.
“ Is that it ? ”
And she laughed'lightly.
“ No,” she said, “ I don’t hate you. I don’t care for
anything now but the right. If he was mad, then what
have you to fear ? But I know better. I’m not bitter
against you, though, God knows, I might well be; but
I’ve sworn you shall never marry Miss Stella for her
money, and ruin her life. Anyhow, she shall know every-
thing.”
His face worked with passion. Murder was in his
heart. In a rage he hissed : “ And what will Ibe doing,
eh ? . I’ll tell a story, too. I’ll tell her how you left your
baby to go and drink with a dirty lot of daubers, I’ll ”
He sprang back. Pale and awful in the starlight, Stella
stood before them.
“ You coward ! Oh, you coward ! ”
she placed her arm in Marie’s, and they confronted him.


“ So ! ” lie said, “ a trap, eh, a trap ? ’*
“ Oh, you coward, you coward, you coward ! ” Stella
repeated, and he quailed before the intensity of her gaze.
She had been attracted by the voices at that late hour.
She had only heard the last few sentences ; but for some
time she had felt certain that Haifa had wronged Marie.
Indeed, it was common gossip. Now she knew it was
the truth,
' “ Excuse me ”he began.
“ Coward ! don’t speak to me,” Stella cried, and she
led Marie away with her, ever and anon turning and
calling back to him, “ Coward ! Coward ! ”
She took Marie into her own room,
“ Tell me everything,” she said, “ and remember, that
I don’t blame you for anything.”
The crisis had arrived, and Marie was staggered by
its suddenness. She trembled violently, and looked
vaguely around the room. She had never been in that
room before. It seemed a holy place to her; the old-
fashioned furniture, and the bed with hangings, all so
white and so innocent looking. The window was thrown
up, and the cool night wind from the ranges puffed the
curtains out with a mysterious rustling.
“ Don’t be frightened, Marie,” Stella repeated. “What
did you mean when you said if he was mad then what have
you to fear ? Whom were you talking about ? ”
“ About Mister Weston,” Marie stammered.
“ I knew it. My God ! Oh, Marie, Marie, what does
it mean ? Tell me, tell me. All these years I have
waited and had faith. Every night, here, here by my
bedside, 1 have knelt and prayed, and I have heard him
calling me. Oh, Marie, what do you know ? What do
you mean ? ”


So Marie told her the whole truth, reserving not a word.
“ Oh, Henry, Henry, my lover, my darling ! And to
think they sent you away like that.”
Marie fell on her knees before her; but for a long time
Stella did not even see her. She stood by the window
looking out on the stars. The silence was deep. Suddenly
she heard the familiar clicking of a horse on the metal
road. She peered into the night, and could just discern
Raffa riding into the shadows.
Then the passionate desire for revenge or retribution,
which is in every human being’s nature, asserted itself.
“He shall not escape so easily,” she said. “ Come,
Marie, come. I’ll follow him and confront him before
all the world.”


CHAPTER IV.
RAFFA’S RUSE.
IN bis office at the township, Haifa sat, grimly con-
sidering. For more than a month he had been aware
of a subtle change in Stella’s manner, and in her bearing
towards him. He had not been able to define it. It was
too indistinct for terms; too nebulous, too vague, for
description; yet it was vital, real. . . . There is a
strange system of telepathy by which country people
inevitably manage to know all about the doings of their
acquaintances who “go to town.” It is said that General
Gordon’s death at Khartoum was discussed in the bazaars
at Cairo, 1200 miles away,' the day after it occurred.
Country folk are equally quick in transmitting and dis-
seminating intelligence (particularly if scandalous) amongst
themselves. Hence it was generally known throughout
the district and in the township of Warrawee, that Raff a
and Marie had been “ thick.” That is a convenient
word. It may possibly be rather slangy; nevertheless
it is a good word.
Raffa knew that in a vague way the story was known ;
but he doubted whether Stella had ever heard it. Yet
for more than a month she had plainly, yet without any
definite spoken word, shown him that her feelings towards
him had undergone a change. He had felt for some time


that he had reached the end of his tether. He had mis-
appropriated Stella’s monies for years ; but with such
•adroitness that he had little fear of ever being found out.
He had resolved, however, to make himself doubly secure
by marrying the one he had so villainously wronged. It
scarcely occurred to him that she would refuse him. Like
all supreme rascals, he was a supreme egoist. He even
treated Marie with contemptuous indifference, scorning
the idea that Stella would listen to such a cock-and-bull
story as she had so often, so very often, threatened to
tell.
But now, in spite of all his scheming, he was on the
horns of a dilemma. How much of his conversation with
Marie had Stella overheard ? All, probably; as he did
not doubt for a moment but that Marie, in having asked
him to meet her for a few minutes at that shadowy spot,
and at that late hour, had led him into a carefully pre-
pared trap. He ground his white teeth at the thought.
He opened a drawer and took out an ugly-looking bull-
dog revolver. It was a short, wicked thing ; yet he toyed
with it lovingly.
“ Damn- her,” he said, savagely. And then he threw
the revolver on to the sofa, and lit a cigarette.
“ I wonder ; I wonder.” And he leaned forward over
the table, took up a pen and began carelessly scribbling
on the blotting pad. Quite suddenly he stopped, and
stared at what he had written.
‘*What a fool I am,” he said. He had written— Stella,
Stella Sothern, S. Sothern —and the characters were the
facsimile of Stella’s own; It was her signature forged to
perfection. Long practice had made him sure. He
carefully scrawled all over it. As he was lighting a second


cigarette from the glowing butt of the one he had just
smoked, he heard two horses stop short outside. Then
there was a sharp knock at the door
When Stella had called to Marie to follow her, unsub-
stantial and indistinct ideas of revenge floated across her
mind. But they did not possess her long. Such passions
as hate and revenge were strangers to one so pure and
sweet. Yet she was determined to face Raffa, and to
hear the evil truth from his own lips. She felt that there
might be some word here or there that would guide her
loving mind to an intuitive knowledge of Henry’s inten-
tions after leaving Raffa to face the lonely future. Perhaps
one word might be clue enough for her as to his inmost
thoughts ; and, guessing his determination, she might be
inspired as to his whereabouts. So she urged Marie on,
and in a few moments they were at the stables,
Jimmy, the groom, was hopelessly drunk, so they had
to saddle their horses without his assistance. This
caused little delay, as they were both to the bush born,
and had been used to horses from their earliest years.
Before long they were up and away towards Warrawee,
whither Stella felt certain Raffa had gone. Reaching his
office, they sprang to the ground, and Stella knocked
peremptorily at the door.
Raffa did not answer, but took the revolver from the
sofa.
There was a second, louder knock.
“ Who’s there ? ” he questioned.
“I! Stella Sothern, and I must see you.”
In a few seconds he had matured his plans. He would
not see her. The game was up, so far as she was con-
cerned. It was a case of sauve qui pent.


“ Good-bye, good-bye,” he called, and the next moment
he fired the revolver at the lamp, shattering it to pieces.
He fired a second shot, fell heavily, knocking over a chair,
and lay on the floor intently listening. He heard Marie’s
shriek ; and the hurrying of their footsteps as they ran
off towards the police station. He had calculated rightly ;
they were too terrified to force the door, even to attempt
it'. There was no time to waste. He took some papers
from the table drawer and placed them in his breast
pocket. He tipped a quart bottle of kerosene against
the wall, and lit it. Bending low, he ran out of the back
door, locked it after him, and hurried to his horse. Then,
looking back at the office, which was already in flames,
he rode off towards the ranges.
When the local sergeant of police and his subordinate
fully grasped the seriousness of the situation, they pro-
ceeded to the scene of the supposed tragedy.
“ An’ ye think as how he’s shot himself an’ thin burned
himself by kerosene lamp exploding due to the revolver
shot. Poor divil! ”
The younger constable ran to the fire-brigade station
at the far end of the town, and set the bell ringing. Long
after Raffa’s office was a smouldering heap of ashes the
Warrawee Volunteer Fire Brigade arrived on the scene
with their antiquated manual engine and leather buckets.
Of course it did not matter when they arrived, because
there really was no adequate water-supply.
“ Poor divil! ” said the sergeant. “ Divil a sign of
him lift for an inquest.”
Then he impressed on Stella the necessity for his having
her evidence.
“ Come, come, sergeant,” said Mr, Eustace Watt, the


“GOOD-BYE !” RAFFA CALLED AND FIRED AT THE LAMP.
Stella Sothern. Page 149.


town solicitor, “ Miss Sothern is upset enough for one
night, I’ll warrant. To-morrow will be time enough.”
And the lawyer insisted on Stella and Marie coming
home to his place for the night; and there his wife, that
buxom, good-natured lady, made them comfortable.
“ But, my dear,” said Mrs. Eustace Watt to her hus-
band, when their unexpected guests were safely abed;
“ but what could they be doing at his office at such a time
of night ? ”
“ Bring me a glass, my dear, and a little drop of my
favourite, and I’ll tell you a secret.”
Mrs. Eustace Watt, all curiosity, ministered unto him,
and awaited his words.
“ Well ? ” she said, at last, “ what is the secret ? ”
“ Three and one make four, my dear,” said the lawyer,
with profound gravity.
“ What ! ” The lady adjusted her gold-rimmed pince-
nez and regarded her spouse curiously. He did not, as a
rule, make flippant observations on serious occasions.
Had he been having a little too much of his favourite ? ”
“ Twice two make four, my love,” he remarked.
“ How extremely remarkable. What of it ? ” she
said, amazed.
“ Only this, my dear; there are more ways of arriving
at the truth than one. To-morrow, to-morrow you shall
know—ahem! all that is to be known.”
Then he lit his pipe and smoked, and was silent and
inscrutable as—well, to be original, let me say as—the
Sphinx.


Chapter V.
RISING MISTS.
THE following morning Mr. Eustace Watt was up
betimes. He enjoyed a hearty breakfast, lit his
favourite briar, and strolled leisurely about the garden.
His mind was at rest. He had resolved on a course of
action, and accordingly nothing perturbed him any further.
It is a general proposition that lawyers are, like Moham-
medan ladies, entirely untroubled by the possession of
souls. One is not sure whether to pity or to envy them.
A soul may be a pleasant thing to call one’s own. On
the other hand, it may be a most embarrassing belonging.
I have known musicians who were said to be “ all soul.”
But after having had the misfortune to dine at the same
table with them, the illusion died suddenly. They seemed
to be all —mention it softly— stomach ! And there is
such a variety of souls. Sweet souls, for instance, are
women who get all their own way. Then there are the
“ dear old souls,” the elders who are either too simple or
too senile to say “ no ” when they should, to the “ sweet
souls,” and to others. Then there are —but no! quantum
sujjicit, even of soul.
Mr. Eustace Watt had enough good nature to genuinely
sympathise with a woman in distress, notwithstanding
she was a wealthy woman, and his client. He knew that


she was directly connected with the tragic death—or
what she supposed at that time was the tragic death—
of her manager, Raffa.
For a long time the shrewd, but somewhat lazy, lawyer
had suspected that Raffa was not “ going straight.” In
fact, to continue in the expressive language of the turf,
Eustace Watt was certain that the manager of Golden
Gully was a “ dark horse.” He had no very definite proof
of the man’s evil doing ; but two and two made four,
just as surely as three and one did. A little thing here ;
another, if possible less trifling, there ; apart these were
utterly insignificant; combined, they were immediately
suggestive. He knew something of the way Raffa lived
when in town —of his swaggering airs, his champagne
dinners, his plunging at the races. Of course, after years
of service at Golden Gully, he was well off. That was
natural enough. But there were limits to the ready cash
of a station manager; yet, at times, there seemed no
limit to the money Raffa could command. And then the
running of a racehorse in Stella’s name ! Certainly, this
had only lasted a season, but Jimmy, the groom, was
addicted to excessive pints of beer, and when hewa&“-sy£?
the odds,” as he was very often, he had no hesitation in
discussing what should have been stable secrets. Per-
haps this is why the racehorse only ran for a season.
Taking one consideration with another (which is a little
way lawyers have), Mr, Eustace Watt arrived at the con-
clusion that Raffa had been suddenly called to account
for his stewardship, and that he had taken his own life,
and burned all documentary evidence at the same time,
so that his defalcations might remain undiscovered in
detail, and the extent of his evil-doing unknown.


It was a shrewd guess, but only correct in so far as the
destruction of the papers and books were concerned.
“ I’ll be back in about half-an-hour, my dear,” he said
to his wife, adding : “ Ask Miss Sothern to wait till I
return. It is very necessary that I should have a serious
talk with her; and . . . .”
He hesitated and rubbed his chin.
“On second thoughts,” he continued, “ perhaps it
would be better for her to come along with the girl, Marie,
to my office. I have all the necessary papers and seals
there. Anyhow, I’ll be back in half-an-hour. Tell her
to please wait till I come.”
“ Yes, my love,” said Mrs. Eustace Watt. And she
threw hirq a kiss. So early in the morning, too ! They
were an incorrigibly happy couple.
There was the usual crowd of inquisite loafers standing
by the ruins of the manager’s office.
“ Well,” said the lawyer to the constable, who had
been searching amongst the debris, “ found anything ? ”
“No, sir, nothing. He must have been burnt to a
cinder,” the policeman replied.
“ Terrible, terrible.” And Mr. Eustace Watt walked
in amongst the charred remains of the building, and cast
his eye around.
Leaving the tragic place, he went to his office. It was
in the front of the Mechanics’ Institute, in the main street.
There were no letters. He threw the window open, and,
locking the door, returned to his private residence. Stella
was in the garden awaiting his coming. She was pale,
and the dark rings under her eyes were eloquent of a sleep-
less night.
“ I think you had better come to my office. My dear


wife, you see, is so—ahem! so very interested—ahem !
You understand! ”
Yes ! Stella understood. Mrs. Eustace Watt was well-
known as one of the best-natured women, but withal one
of the most inquisitive and loquacious in the township.
So they went to his office together, after leaving word for
Marie to follow them in about an hour.
“ And, now, my dear Miss Sothern, I’ll sit back whilst
you just tell me everything. You know that I have
your interests at heart. I’m very much afraid that—
ahem ! having—ahem! lived so long, so very long, in a
country town, out of touch with strenuous life—ahem !
that I have been affected—ahem! by the general even
tenor of our—ahem 1 ways. I fear, I have perhaps,
not been as keen as I might have been in watching your—
ahem 1 interests. At any rate, if you will just confide
in me, tell me everything, I assure you —ahem! I’ll do
everything that lies in my power.”
Stella was fond of the lawyer, and had no shyness as
to speaking with perfect freedom before him.
“ I know you are my friend,” she said, “ and I am in
sore, sore trouble.”
“ Tell me everything,” he repeated, “ and don’t be
afraid to speak plainly.”
“ You know of my engagement to Henry Weston.”
“ I know,” he said, encouragingly, “ and I know of
your firm belief that he is still living . . ,
“ He is still living,” she repeated, solemnly, “ and only
last night I learnt it for a positive fact; or, rather, I
learnt for a positive fact that he was still living when
everyone mourned him as lost; that he actually came
back here, came back to me, and was met by that


by Raffa, and told a wicked, wicked lie—was told that I
was married.”
“ What! ” cried the lawyer.
So Stella told all her story; whilst the lawyer, utterly
amazed, listened.
“ My God ! ” said Mr. Eustace Watt, “ what a villain ;
what a fearful, wicked thing. Poor Weston ; ay, and you,
poor Miss Sothern. What can be done ? ”
He rose and paced about the office. Her story had
stirred the good-natured man to the depths. What a
tragedy !
Stella arose, too, and faced him.
“ You ask me what can be done ? Well, I have lain
awake all night thinking, and I have decided to go and
seek my lover—seek him to the world’s end. ,What do
I care for what the world may say. So long as I know in
my own heart that my action is all womanly, I care nothing
for criticism. Yes, I shall go and I shall find him. He
came back from the very grave to me, and was sent away.
My God ! Mr. Watt, can you picture what his thoughts
what his feelings were when he rode off into the dark
.night for ever. And he would look up at the Southern
Cross, the stars we had plighted our troth by, and he
would curse me. Oh ! no, no—not that. Ah, Henry,
Henry . . . .” Then she sank into the chair, and
found relief in woman’s good old-fashioned way.
“ Dreadful! dreadful! ” Mr. Watt reiterated. He did
not attempt to stay her weeping. He was too wise for
that. When she grew calmer, he said:
“ And are you really in earnest about going to seek
him ? Because, my dear, you see, it will be 1 a terrible
undertaking ”


She interrupted him.
“ I care for no difficulties, I have sat idly at home
whilst he has been in hell—l must, I shall go and find him.
Woman’s love is too poor a thing nowadays; no wonder
men rate it so cheaply. Yes ! I’ll go ; I’ll go.”
The lawyer was completely dumbfounded. Although
he liked Stella, and admired her in many ways, he had
always considered her rather a passive creature; and,
though a heroine in her faith in her lover, a rather colour-
less, lifeless heroine. Her decision, and the energy of
her expression astonished him. He had not expected it.
“ Now,” he said, “ will you tell me why you think Haifa
committed suicide ? ”
“ I can think of nothing except that he was ashamed
to face me,” she replied.
But that did not satisfy Mr. Eustace Watt. He knew
very well that no such sentimental reason had moved
Raffa to his desperate act,
“ Have you—ahem ! never had any —ahem ! doubts
of his integrity ? ” he asked.
“ I have always trusted him,” she returned. “ You
see, my father trusted him. Why should not I? ”
“Yes, that is true,” said the lawyer, “ but-*-ahem !
did you never hear of his extravagances on the —ahem !
the turf; I mean—ahem ! the racecourse, when in the
city ; and—ahem ! other things ? ”
“ I know,” Stella replied, “ that he was a very wicked
man in every way. I have known for some time that he
it was who led poor Marie away from home. I was almost
sure of this, because the woman at whose house Marie
lived when I found her ill with fever, told me that her
husband ‘ ’er ’usbind was an Italiano,’ as she expressed
it. Besides, it was generally suspected about here. Marie


had often threatened to tell me all she knew; but, you
see, he had her in his power for more than a year after
Henry went away; and then when she threatened to tell
me, he only scorned her and jeered at her, telling her that
I would not believe such a story after such a length of
time. Oh ! he was a black, black villain. Poor wretch I
What \ fate,” she added, impulsively.
At this juncture Marie arrived, Stella rose to leave.
“ Perhaps, yes,” said Mr. Eustace Watt, and he and
Marie were left together.
“Go back to the house, Miss Sothern, please ; I’ll come
to you soon. And—ahem ! be discreet—ahem ! my
dear wife, you know—ahem ! ”
Yes ! Stella knew. She smiled in spite of her troubles
and walked briskly out of the office.
“ Now, my dear,” said the lawyer, in his most engaging
and paternal manner, “ I suppose you have read a lot of
novels in your time, eh ? ”
“ A few,” Marie confessed, wondering what was about
to follow.
“ Well, Marie, some novelists, you know, write for
money, while others write for immortality. Ahem!
Those who write for money keep to the point, maintain
the interest from chapter to chapter, in short, are business-
like in their methods, ahem! Those who strive for im-
mortality, and—ahem ! never gain it—indulge in what
they term fine writing, long descriptive passages, flam-
boyant adjectives, and—soul. Beware of soul, my dear;
beware of soul ; ahem ! Now, I just want you to tell me
your story like the business novelist—no soul, no fine—
writing—ahem ! nothing but facts. Be practical and
come to the point. Tell me everything.”


After this Mr. Eustace-Watt leaned back in his office
chair, rubbed his chin, and smiled benignly on the as-
tonished Marie. “ Tell me everything,” he repeated,
“ everything.”
With remarkable power of detail Marie told her story —
of the meeting with Jimmy, the groom ; of her encounter
with Raffa, who had persuaded her to leave him to bring
tucker to Henry Weston ; of all that she knew concerning
Weston’s return, and the wicked lie which had been told
to send him away again from his home and the woman
he loved. But Marie told nothing of her relations with
Raffa.
“ And that’s all I can tell you,” she said, in conclusion.
He eyed her keenly, kindly, for a moment.
“ Everything, eh ? ” he asked.
“ Yes.”
“ Come, come, my dear,” he said. “ I’m old enough
to be your father twice over—ahem! So you need not
be afraid to speak plainly to me. Now, is it not a fact
that you used to see a good deal of Raffa when he used to
go to the city. Ahem! a wine-shop—a Bohemian wine-
shop, eh ? ”
She hesitated. He urged her to speak. “ Come, come,
my dear ! because you were—ahem ! misled and made
a—ahem ! a little mistake, the world is not going to
come to an end. We all make —ahem ! slips, you know ;
we are none of us perfect. The chief thing is to get up
again when we do—ahem! slip. Come, you can trust
me.”
Thus encouraged she made him her confessor.
“ Bad I bad! He was as bad as they make ’em,” he
commented. Then he patted Marie encouragingly on
the arm, and they left the office together.


“Goup to the house,” he said. “ I must see the ser-
geant, and then I have a little business at the bank.”
When she left him, he changed his mind, and paid the
visit to the bank first. He was about twenty minutes
closeted with the manager. When he emerged into the
street again, he looked unusually grave.
“ She is lucky to have anything left. What a damned
scoundrel, and how blind I have been—ahem! ”
The police sergeant came up to him.
“ They’ve found Mister Haifa’s horse,” he explained.
“ The poor brute was ividintly froightined by th’ foire,
an’ rin away towards th’ ranges.”
“ What! ” cried the lawyer. “ How far away did
they find him ? ”
“ Och ! just beyant th’ creek, a moile about.”
Without waiting for further parley, Mr. Eustace Watt
hurried in to the bank again, and called excitedly for the
manager, who came promptly from his inside office.
“ Come, Edmonston,” he cried, “ come to the telegraph
office at once. Wire your head office to stop all cheques
drawn in Stella Sothern’s name. Come, there isn’t a
moment to be lost.”
Then he urged the police sergeant to advise by tele-
gram the Criminal Investigation Department in the city
that a warrant had been taken out for the arrest of Guido
Haifa for forgery.
“ But the man is dead ”
“ No ! ” said the lawyer, “ he is no more dead than
you are. Hurry, man ! I’ll get Miss Sothern to sign
the warrant at once, so everything will be in order. Don’t
you hesitate.”
Manager Edmonston wired to his head office at once ;


and, after some hesitation, only natural in a stolid back-
block’s policeman, the sergeant also did as Mr. Eustace
Watt advised.
“ He’s no more dead than I am,” he explained. “ I
thought over the matterlall night, and had my doubts.
I’ve had two interviews this morning with the women
who are interested in the case, and oh ! I can’t explain
everything. It is partly instinct, partly inspiration, and
I know very well these are not —ahem ! the stock in trade
of a working solicitor, but—ahem! the finding the horse
on the road to the ranges—that, and other things, have
decided me in the belief that he is alive—and in all proba-
bility—making for the city. If


CHAPTER VI.
RAFFA’S FIGHT FOR LIFE.
RAFFA galloped hard towards the ranges. Suddenly
he pulled up short and dismounted. He had
forgotten the horse ! Even at such a time he felt hurt to
realise that it was possible for him, Guido Haifa, to have
made such a stupid blunder. The horse would be missed,
of course, and it would be impossible to kill it, as he had
perforce left his revolver to be found among the ruins.
The carcase would have lain unseen until the crows had
demolished it, had he been able to leave it dead on the
desolate ranges. But that was out of the question. He
thought of braining the poor brute with a club, but his
blood ran cold at the thought. He cared nothing for the
sufferings of his kind, but to beat out the life of his horse
revolted him. Every villain has a particular vein of
sentimentality. Many a murderer has been noted for his
apparent kindness to a pet mouse, or rat. It is by no means
a redeeming feature, as pleasant old ladies of either sex are
apt to imagine when they fall a-moralising; but merely
a psychopathic peculiarity interesting only to the mental
pathologist.
Haifa dismounted, and sat down whilst the horse became
cool. He then turned it in the direction whence he had
ridden, and with a sounding whack on the rump sent it off
towards the township. After it had passed out of sight


he walked on, as fast as he could in the darkness, into the
shadowland of the ranges.
Setting his course by the stars, he pushed on towards the
main line to the city. He knew a late goods train went up
at about one in the morning, and he determined to board
it at one or other of the smaller wayside stations, and,
concealed in a truck, make the journey to the metropolis.
It was a desperate game; but he scorned danger. He
must reach the city and thence escape from the country by
steamer. He knew that there was no definite proof of
his forgeries and defalcations, but enquiry would soon
bring forth evidence sufficiently damnatory. He had for
years sold cattle at ten and twelve pounds per head, but
Stella had been enriched only by seven or eight pounds
per head. The station books being destroyed, and the
false entries with them, he was comparatively safe. But
cheques “ talked,” and there were always the books and
bills of the auctioneers to be referred to. For some time
he had been preparing for flight in the event of Stella
refusing his offer of marriage. He had an office—by
courtesy, in the city. To the safe there, he had, only a
fortnight since, removed from the bank the best part of
his fortune. It was in gold. He locked the safe and the
door of this office, and laughed to think of the sovereigns
so handy to the cracksman, if only that individual knew
the so true story of the Purloined Letter, and learn from
the reading thereof the fact that great valuables are ever
within his reach, if he were only philosopher enough to
realize it!
Raffa had maintained only a small current account in
the Warrawee branch. His fortune had been safe in the
metropolitan office, the removal from which of a large sum
could be effected without particular comment, whereas


the withdrawal or transference of any considerable sura
from a country branch-bank is an event of moment in such
a limited financial world. He knew this, and had acted
accordingly. His one desire was to reach the city, use a
disguise, and leave the country, taking his ill-gotten wealth
with him.
Through the gloom of the thickly timbered ranges he
forced his way. Often he stumbled, and yet he never
despaired. Over grim, yawning chasms, and black ravines,
down pathless gullies and up stern and rocky mountain
sides, guided only by the stars, he struggled dauntlessly
onwards. Long since, the few lights of Warrawee had
faded into the general blackness. The night was unusually
still. The hollow, murmur of the Bush was hushed for the
while. The mopoke made no sound. The curlew and
plover by the creeks' had forgotten their long-drawn
melancholy cries. Occasionally a bull-frog croaked, and
so accentuated the desolateness, the suggestive silentness.
And still Haifa plodded on, a lonely, relentless figure
in the pallid glow of the stars ; a grim,' resolute figure,
fighting for his evil gains ; heedless of the calm glory, the
unutterable majesty of the night, indifferent, careless,
battling on, as though he had power to shape the very
elements to his own ends, forgetful that now as of old, the
Fates are busy with their weaving, and that there is a limit
to the longest rope ...
On the summit of a rise he rested awhile, peering down
into the forbidding depths. He heard the vague murmur
of the river in the valley, as it swirled irresistibly on
Occasionally a star gleamed in the inky water —a suddet
reflection, which only showed for a fitful moment, and then
was gone. That river had to he crossed. The railway line
lay some distance on the south side of it. So far he had


been able to negotiate the creeks that had run across his
path. The long summer had dried them up, except in
pools here and there. But this was a swift and deep stream,
impassable when the winter rains filled it till its banks
were overflowed and the water a fierce storm-driven
torrent; in summer none the less dangerous because of
the snags, which projected from the bed, flinging their cruel
jagged limbs up to the surface ready to grasp and to hold
in their fatal clasp anything which came within their reach.
Descending the side of the hill with difficulty, he reached
the bank of the river. Five miles away was a ford. He
had driven cattle across it once, years ago. But to force a
way through the scrub, and the fierce undergrowth, for
five miles would take two hours, and he could not afford
the time. He cursed himself for a fool, a coward, in not
having stayed and faced Stella and brazened it out. But
regrets were folly. There was nothing for it, now, but to
swim the river and board the goods train. He walked
some distance up and down the riverside, and at last, just
past a bend, he discovered a suitably narrow place for the
attempt. He was strong and hardy, yet he knew he would
need all his vigour to swim across in his clothes. He chose
the spot on the down side of the bend, judging that any
snags and debris which had been brought down the river
by the winter floods would be piled up in the concave of
the bend. He feared these more than the water, though
he was not blind to the danger of swimming in a swift
stream with his clothes on. He understood the magnitude
of such an encumbrance. Like all who live in the back-
blocks, and who are always in the saddle, and the open air,
he was in good form—hard as nails and fit. He expanded
his lungs to the utmost once or twice. Then he took off


his boots, stuffed the ends of his trousers into his socks,
pulled his hat tight on to the back of his head, buttoned his
coat, tied the boots over his shoulders and cautiously
entered the water. He knew better than to plunge in.
The fatal snag might be waiting just beneath the surface.
In the pallid, uncertain light of the stars, he struck out
boldly towards the opposite bank. The water was icy
cold. It swirled around him, making a weird, insistent
seething in his ear, a low, monotonous, rhythmic murmur-
ing. Once, in the centre of the stream, an eddy caught
him and whirled him half round. But he had fixed his
eye on the gaunt figure of a towering white gum on the far
side, and so, in spite of this mishap, he soon righted his
course. How fearfully heavy the clothes were becoming.
The boots over his shoulders were like lead. Still he swam
resolutely on. Was he tiring ? God ! what was that ?
Only a twig with dried leaves on it, floating past, that
tickled him on the neck and made him flounder and lose
his stroke. Then he grazed his arm against the topmost
branch of a sunken tree—one of the awesome snags he
dreaded so deeply. Paralysed with sudden shock, he sank
like a stone. He was not half a minute under the water,
yet it seemed to him an eternity. His. nerve was almost
gone. He saw the weedy growth on the bank he so longed
to reach. Six more strokes and he would be safe. Three,
four, a wild uncertain fifth, and he sank, exhausted, yet
with just strength remaining to clutch a friendly root
projecting from the side, and to haul himself to safety.
Then he saw a host of phantoms advancing on him from
the shadows of the Bush, and a million eyes looking at him,
and he knew no more until he recovered consciousness, and
felt the water lapping against his feet, as it swirled past.
He had raced with Death and had won by a stroke.


CHAPTER VII.
THE ARREST OF RAFFA.
TTE stripped himself and wrung the water out of his
* clothes. He rubbed himself down vigorously, and
dressed again. Then he set off at as brisk a pace as was
possible. Soon his blood began to circulate more freely,
and in spite of the wetting and the danger he had passed
through, he felt a sense of exhilaration, of triumph, as he
pushed sternly on. It was half-past one by his watch,
and he had about a mile yet to accomplish before he reached
the railway line. At last he saw the telegraph poles,
grey against the gloom. Bluegum Station was close at
hand. He drew stealthily into the yard, and saw with
satisfaction that there were three trucks of sheep standing
at the siding. That assured him the train would wait
at the station until the trucks were shunted on to the
main line, and coupled up. Had they been waggons with
timber he might have been in doubt. But live sheep
required immediate delivery at their destination. Before
long he saw the headlights on the approaching engine,
and heard the rumble of a heavy train running at high
speed through the silentness of the night. As he had
anticipated, the driver slowed down as he approached
Bluegum, and pulled up at the station. A porter came
along swinging his lamp, and shunting operations com-
menced.


“ Anything further up ? ” the porter asked.
“Nothing,” the guard answered. “Right through
after this.”
“ You’re in luck.”
“ Yes.”
Raffa chuckled as he heard this. Once on the train,
there would be no stop until the city was reached. It
seemed as though Fate were being kind to him after his
hard experience with the river. He selected an open
truck with timber so loaded that it sloped backwards,
and upwards from the fore part of the truck. He waited
until he saw the porter swinging his lamp with the green
bull’s-eye showing, then in an instant he climbed into his
place of refuge. A short, sharp, screeching whistle, and
the long, heavy train began to move. He bent low as it
passed out of the station. In two minutes he was speeding
towards the city at forty miles an hour. When he knew
that all danger of discovery was over, he began to shiver.
So he took off his wet clothes once more, and held them
over the side of the truck, and the wind rushing by dried
them.
Hour after hour passed by. The day dawned, and the
sun came up fiercely into ft cloudless sky. He had decided
to go right into the Central Railway Station—into the
yard with the train. He would slip over the end of the
truck the moment that it stopped. The terminus would
be reached by 6.3 J. Besides the actual officials who had
to attend to the train, there would not be many people
about. He would have sprung from the truck at some
distance from the city, and taken his chance of a broken
neck, but that would have been merely sensational foolish-
ness. The guard would have seen him, and he would
have lost all his labour, supposing he were not killed.


The sun was becoming intolerable; yet he could not
escape, not for one second, from its direct says.
What a day for a bush fire !
The thought flashed on him, and instantly his evil
mind was busy.
“ Yes ! and if anything happens to me, Til do it, if I
have to wait a dozen years,” he muttered. .
A long, shrill whistle, and he guessed the terminus was
in view. He dared not look over the side. The guard
would see him. Houses flitted past. A long curve,
another prolonged whistle, and the journey was over.
As the brakes creaked and the trucks came to a stand,
he sprang over the end, dodged between the buffers, and
walked leisurely out of the yard.
“Looks as if ’e’d ’ad a night hout, mate.”
“ A fair bloomin’ wreck.”
He overheard the officials’ comments, but he made no
reply. It was too early to think of going to his office.
The building would not be open. If it were, the char-
woman would be all too sure to notice him, a bedraggled
object, at that unnaturally early hour. So he walked as
far as the wharf and sat down on some bags and waited
till the shops began to open. At a pawnbroker’s he pur-
chased a razor and a shaving-brush. Then he went back
to the wharf, walked carelessly aboard one of the inter-
colonial steamers, and' straight to a cabin. There he
shaved off his moustasche, threw the razor and brush out
of the port hole, and returned to the wharf. He passed
one officer, and several sailors who were busy mopping the
decks. Nobody seemed to notice him; at least, to heed
him.


He ate some breakfast in one of the cheap restaurants
in that vicinity, and thence proceeded to his office. He
preferred the stairs to the lift, recognizing that lift boys
have long memories. He unlocked the door and closed
it again after him. Then he opened the safe. There it
was—gold, gold. He felt his own man again at the mere
sight of it. He feasted his eyes on it. He had not lost,
after all. He cared nothing for Stella Sothern. He had
wanted her so that he would be secure, and so that he
could handle her fortune as her husband, with impunity.
Well! she was not for him; and through Marie he was
disgraced in her eyes. What of it ? Warrawee was not
the world ! He had the gold; he would go away to the
great cities of the world; he had had enough of the
country. And full of fine visions of a radiant future, he
threw himself into a chair, and fell asleep. He slumbered
on and on—the sleep of utter physical exhaustion. . From
eleven o’clock the night before, when he had met Marie
in the shadow of the pines, until he had reached the office
in the city, his story was all of fierce excitement and
constant mental and physical strain.
At about one o’clock he was aroused by hearing some-
one trying the door. Then followed a knock. Raffa
made no sound. In a minute the knocking was repeated.
Still he gave no sign. Then he heard:—
“ This can’t be her studio. Let’s try further on.”
“ I thought this was the number. Oh, very well.”
Men’s voices, clear, distinct. He' listened intently.
The footsteps passed into silence as the men, evidently
strangers looking for some lady artist, walked along the
corridor.
Raffa locked the safe. He had decided to take a cab


to one of the shipping offices, book to Launceston, take
the train thence to Hobart,' and there take his passage on
the White Star liner bound in two days’ time for London,
via Durban.
He required clothes, and a strong steel trunk in which
to place his gold. The news of his supposed suicide
would not reach the city for a,day or two. There was no
local correspondent of the city journals at Warrawee.
Nevertheless, he had no desire to be seen about town.
So he decided to board the outgoing Launceston steamer
as soon as possible. He could lie close in his cabin until
the Tasmanian port was reached.
Having determined on a course of action, he opened
the door, and stepped into the passage. As he did so he
was seized from the side, and a pair of handcuffs were
snapped about his wrists.
The gentlemen in search of the lady artist had returned
—after using a little bluff—on tip-toe, and had been
content to wait.
Mr. Eustace Watt had also indulged in “ bluffing.”
He knew that there was not a tittle of actually direct
evidence of Haifa having forged Stella’s name; but the
solicitor realized that unless the suspect was detained
without any delay, he would escape.
Should complications arise after the arrest, the lawyer
meant to bear any difficulties of his own creation ; but he
felt certain that even if Raffa were never proved guilty,
he was far too shrewd a rascal to further tempt fate by
vengefully suing the police for wrongful arrest. The
sergeant at Warrawee had advised the detective office
in the city of a warrant having been taken out for Haifa’s
arrest, and, an hour, after the “ wanted ” man was at the
watch-house.


At his request the officers of the law took him in a cab
to the police station.
“ How did you know to come here ? ” he asked.
“ Well,” said the detective, “ you see if I told you, you’d
know as much as I do, wouldn’t you ? ”
“ Oh ! it’s no matter,” said Raffa, with an effort at
indifference.
Arrested for forgery! The word was an ugly one.
And yet he had his doubts as to the evidence against him.
It troubled him as to how the detectives had found him
at the office, and so quickly. He again asked the detective
the question. .
“ Well,” said the officer, “ well, I don’t mind telling you.
The day, about a fortnight ago, you drew all that gold
from the bank, I happened to be there on my own business.
Now, a clever fellow like you are must know that it is a very
unusual thing for such large sums to be drawn in gold
and actually carried away from the bank. It takes a very
strong man to carry even one thousand sovereigns. You
know that. So you made several trips. I forget how
many ; but I have a note of it in my diary. Well, out of
curiosity—we detectives are very curious, you see—l
followed you every time. Then I made some casual
enquiries at the bank, also at your hotel; also at the
building your office is in. When I learnt that your office
was never used, and that you were only down here occas-
ionally—well, I was suspicious, though, as I learnt you
were a highly respected station-manager, with nothing
in the world against you—well! I just kept you in my
mind and waited. And they say, you know, that every-
thing comes to those that wait.”
Raffa made no comment. He had recovered somewhat


of his accustomed sang jroid. That characteristically
democratic institution the Third Degree would have
proved abortive if applied to him in his present humour.
Seeing that their prisoner was not the desperado they had
imagined, the detectives removed the handcuffs, so when
he entered the watch-house he was serene and smiling.
Yet how he would have enjoyed just five minutes with
Marie in a lonely and sufficiently secluded spot! At the
very thought his fingers twitched and tightened as though
they were gripping a knife!


CHAPTER VIII.
WOMAN’S CURIOSITY.
TOW, my own, you know what you promised. Two
* and two make four; three and one make four.
You see, my dear, I might say four into sixteen is four.”
“ Yes,” said Mr. Eustace Watt, “ certainly you might
say so, but I’m not sure it would be grammatically correct.
So you want to hear all the details, eh ? Very well; just
a little drop of my favourite, and we’ll make ourselves
quite comfortable on the verandah. Phew! how close
it is indoors.”
Stella and Marie had returned to Golden Gully. The
lawyer had - learnt from the police sergeant of Raffa’s
arrest in the city.
“ Raffa is in—ahem ! gaol,” he said, as they sat in
wicker easy chairs to try and become cool. It was still
unbearably hot indoors.
“My goodness ! Now,” Mrs. Eustace Watt returned,
“ I always did suspect that man with his great ogling
eyes, and his underhand way of looking one in the face.”
The lawyer laughed. “ Underhand way of looking one
in the face. My dear, that is excellent. Ha, ha, ha.”
“ Well, perhaps I may not be able to express myself
like a lawyer, but—well! I know what I mean, any-
how,” his wife retorted.


“ But, my love, speech was given to us to try and make
others know what we mean. A certain great personage
in history remarked that speech was given to us to conceal
our thoughts. Perhaps you are a follower of his, eh ? It
was said of General von Moltke that he knew how to keep
silence in seven languages. What a gift, my dear, what
a gift. Fancy a woman keeping silence in seven lan-
guages. Why—l can’t fancy her doing so in one.”
Mr. Eustace Watt sipped his whisky and water.
“No ! ” his spouse replied. “No ! and I can’t fancy a
woman talking a lot about silence and trying to turn the
subject the same way men do when they want to put of!
keeping a promise. Twice two are four, my dear. Now,
like a love, just tell me all the news. Stella told me
a little. Come—l’m really dying to know.”
“ Well,” the lawyer began, “ as I told you, Raffa is
arrested. In connection with that I really can’t give you
any details, because nothing is sure. Constable Innes
has gone to town—went by this evening’s train. He will
bring Raffa back to Warrawee, where he will be brought
before the local'bench, and thence committed to the
City Criminal Court to take his trial. That, of course,
will give us time to work up the evidence for the prose-
cution, and all the details will come out then.”
Mrs. Eustace Watt was disappointed. She was five and
forty, but as she had never had children, she was still as
romantic as—the wife of a lawyer possibly can be.
“ And what about Henry Weston ? ” she asked. “I’m
not interested in Raffa. I thought it all had to do with
Henry and Stella. There is something about that too,
isn’t there ? ”
“ Ahem ! yes,” Mr. Eustace Watt replied, “ there is.
Didn’t Stella tell you that ? ”


P|“ Yes,” she confessed, “ but I thought I should so like
to hear it again from you.”
She spoke quite coaxingly—the sweet, romantic thing!
“ My dear,” said the lawyer, “ you should not have given
me steak and onions for tea if you wished me to be ro-
mantic. No man can be romantic after steak and onions.
You see, onions are such levelling things! They make
all equally smelly. Excuse me, my love, but to talk of
Henry Weston and Stella Sothern’s love story after steak
and onions!—well, I really couldn’t do it.”
His wife rose abruptly.
“ You don’t want to trust me,” she said.
“ My dear,” he returned gravely, “ I trust you fully
where my own private considerations are touched, but
no man has a right to confide, even to his wife, the sacred
trust of another.”
“Oh ! I see.” This with sarcastic emphasis.
“ No, my dear, that is the trouble, you do not see,”
he rejoined. “ You, like the majority of women, think
you have a right to the mind as well as the —ahem! the
rest of the husband. It is a mistake; and a mistake
which causes untold unhappiness. Because two people
are married, it does not follow that they are to lose
their individualities, their personalities, their right to
private and particular judgment, reflection, introspec-
tion ” •
But Mrs. Eustace Watt had fled. She had experienced
her husband in his “ dictionary mood,” as she called it,
before.
He laughed, this naughty man of the law, laughed
silently, and lit his pipe.
Manager Edmonston, of the local bank, came leisurely
up the garden path, smoking his evening cigar.
“Ah ! trying to get cool ? ”


“ Yes ! Come and sit down.”
“ Anything further ? ”
“ You know he’s arrested ? ”
“ Yes.”
“No ! there’s nothing further. Innes has gone to town.”
“ They’ll remand him up here, of course ? ”
“ Oh, yes. He’ll be tried here. I mean, committed
from here to take his trial. That will give us time. Have
you done anything ? ”
“ No,” said the bank manager, “ nothing definite yet.
I’ve got Dowie at work on the books, and he’ll let me
know how things are as soon as he has finished. I think
your idea is good.”
“ What! To write the auctioneers ? I’ve done so
already.”
“Ah ! That’s a good move,” the banker affirmed.
“ Yes, the books will talk. If he has been playing the
game I anticipate, then we can easily compare the amounts
paid into the station account with the sums received for
the sales. If we find one discrepancy that will do. He
has destroyed his books, of course, but we can, with some
trouble, overcome that difficulty. It is not checkmate,
as he evidently imagined.”
“ I wonder,” said Edmonston, “ what brought things
to a climax ? You would have expected a clever fellow
like Haifa to have arranged things so that he could have
got off clean.”
“ The best, rogue miscalculates,” Mr. Eustace Watt
explained. “ You see, they cannot get rid of themselves.”
“ What do you mean ? ”
“ Well,” said the lawyer, “ I mean just this : The rogue
is nearly always an extreme egotist; he arranges to play
on others, to work points and schemes; but he cannot
see himself as others see him ; he forgets to allow for him


self, as it were, and so comes to grief. Now, in this in-
stance, Raffa was plotting to marry Stella Sothern.”
“ What! ”
“No doubt of it. He schemed and waited. He never
doubted but that, in time, she would become his wife.
I have heard a confession this morning from —ahem ! a
certain person —not Miss Sothern, you know —which
proves the fellow to be a cold-blooded, heartless, scoundrel.
I hope to bring him to book, if only because of his bad
treatment of one of the finest little women I’ve ever known.”
It was Marie he meant. He sympathised with the girl-
woman who had been through the whirl of the city ; who
had “ loved and chanced it,” and who, without making
any fuss about her sins and her sufferings, was a silent
heroine in her own way.
“ I wonder,” the banker said, after a few minutes
silence, “ I wonder if anything will ever be heard of Wes-
ton’s fate ? ”
Mr. Eustace Watt made no reply.
“ What do you think ? ” Edmonston asked, after a
pause.
“ Edmonston,” the lawyer replied, “ I have learnt
something to-day which proves that Weston is, or should
be, still living. Sooner or later the story must become
known; so, perhaps after all lam merely a cheap senti-
mentalist in preserving silence. At any rate, you are
actively engaged in the compaign, so it is fit you knew
the details. Have a drop of whisky and cold water from
the bag—ahem! and I’ll tell you the whole miserable
business.”
“ AND ME, TOO ! ”
Mrs. Eustace Watt stepped from the sitting-room on
to the verandah.


“ Certainly, my love,” said the lawyer, politely. What
else could he say under the circumstances ?
Amidst the indignant comments and interjections of
his hearers, Mr. Eustace Watt told the story of Kalla’s
villainous deception.
“ Fancy poor, poor Mister Weston going away broken-
hearted and thinking Stella had married the doctor.
Oh, the villain ; oh ! the black-hearted villain.” Mrs.
Eustace Watt was deeply affected.
“ And Doctor Fairleigh, you say, has gone to the North-
West to look for Weston ? ” Edmonston asked.
“Soit is supposed; or, rather, so Stella supposes,
though, so far, she has had no news,” the lawyer answered.
“ I see it; I see it,” cried the lady : “ the poor doctor
loved Stella, too ”
“ Hush ! ” said Mr. Eustace Watt, gravely, “ we must
not speak of these things.”
Mr. Edmonston rose to go. The men walked to the
gate together.
“ What a damned scoundrel,” the banker said, sternly,
“If you knew all, you’d say so,” Mr. Eustace Watt
replied, with equal severity.
“ All ? is there more ? ”
“ Yes ! but not* concerning Stella, only indirectly.
Don’t ask me; I mustn’t say any more.”
“ When will he be brought back ? ”
“ To-morrow night, probably. They’ll remand him at
the City Court to-morrow morning, and Innes will bring
him down here again by the night train.”
“Ah I Then I’ll sit up for an hour myself with Dowie,
and see if I can arrive at anything. But the auctioneer’s
books will be your best card. Good-night.”


CHAPTER IX.
IN COMMUNE WITH THE STARS.
STELLA, after obeying Mr. Eustace Watt's direc-
tions in regard to the warrant, rode back to Golden
Gully.
She was sick at heart, and longing to be away in search
of her lover. The first overwhelming impulse past, she
realized that she had deluded herself in believing that she,
a woman, could do what Doctor Hugh had found im-
possible. And yet the burning desire to be up and doing
possessed her in spite of her saner judgment. She had
one great solace in the midst of her trouble—she had
never faltered in her faith ; she had been grandly believing.
Yet, as ever and anon, the picture of Henry Weston
riding off into the blank and desolate future arose before
her, she felt that beating of her heart to be almost as un-
bearable as it was uncontrollable.
Action, action ! She felt that she must act or go mad.
Already all hard feelings against Raff a had perished.
He was nothing to her. She cared nothing, at that time,
about vindicating the rights of society. What was society
to her, or she to socitey ? One thought obsessed her to
to the exclusion of all others : Henry must be found,
that he should learn the truth.
In her desire, she went to the stable and asked the


delinquent Jimmy a thousand questions concerning the
Northern Territory. He had lived on cattle runs in
Queensland, and had some acquaintance with the country
to the North-West of the Gulf of Carpentaria.
“ There’s buffaloes and wild blacks, I tell yer, Miss
Steller; an’ there’s Chows, an’ Malays, an’ them there
reptiles; an’ alligators wot eat yer, bones an’ all; an’
mandrakes wot screech out when yer trample on ’em,
so I’ve ’card, anyways.”
Jimmy painted a lurid picture. The more astonished
Stella looked, the more vermillion and orange chrome
he used in his painting. His canvas actually glared with
reds and yellows.
“ Yes, an’ there’s the drought, too; an’ don’t yer
forgit it, Miss Steller. I’ve seen ther sheep in piles, stinkin’
dead, an’ on’y crow’s meat; an’ ther rabbits six foot
’igh agin ther wire fences, starved to death an’ eatin’
one another.”
That settled it. Stella laughed outright.
“ Rabbits don’t eat one another, Jimmy,” she , said.
Jimmy looked hurt. He drew his cuff across his nose,
and grumbled.
“ Well, they oughter; I’ve seen ’em ’ungry enough
up in that gawd-fersaken country, anyways.” -
Jimmy had his reason for this highly-coloured lands-
scape. He imagined that Miss Stella might be thinking
of buying land in that part, and he felt it his duty, as one
who hated the North himself, to warn her, for his own
sake, if not for hers, against such a purchase.
“ I tells yer,” he added, “ I ’eard a priest say oncet
that if he on’y had a choice between there an’ ”
“ Jimmy, you forget yourself,” said Stella, sharply ;


but she had to laugh, in spite of herself, when Jacko, the
magpie took Jimmy’s part in a practical way, and spoke
with convincing earnestness and energy of several things
and places that can only be politely expressed !
disturbed by Jimmy’s raucous voice, and swore accor-
dingly.
“ Saddle Princefoot,” she ordered, “ and bring him
round. I’ll be at the garden gate. And bring your own
hack,” she added.
Grumblingly, Jimmy obeyed. It was sundown, yet he
was still suffering from his spree.
“ Where’ the hot place’s she goin’ ter-night, I wonder,”
he mumbled.
Stella was waiting for him at the gate. She sprang
lightly to the saddle and rode off, followed by the groom
towards the Old Forest Road.
At last she pulled in to an easy ambling stride, and as
they were side by side, she asked Jimmy a sudden question
which nearly upset him, physically as well as mentally.
“ Can you take me to the exact spot where you and
Marie found Mister Weston ? ” she asked. “ Mind I the
exact spot ? ”
“ Strike me pink 1 ”
That was all he could ejaculate.
“ I know all about it, Jimmy. Marie has told me.
Raff a has been arrested. Mr. Eustace Watt sent out
word. I was going straight away from here, but I must
stop a day or so, at least, as I have to go to Court. If
you hadn’t drunk so much yesterday, and been suffering
a recovery all day to-day, you would have heard of the
bad doings at the township. I know everything, Jimmy,
and I’m not going to be hard on you, but but ”


Her voice broke. She could say no more. Jimmy
hung his head, and looked and felt a very guilty wretch.
He had only one consoling reflection amidst a maze of
gloomy thoughts—Haifa was in gaol. That was a mighty
pleasant thing to know. Jimmy was distinctly human,
and revenge, even when not the outcome of direct per-
sonal action, was a great source of satisfaction. He
cordially hated Haifa ; had hated him for years ; but beer
and bad resolutions had kept Jimmy down, and he had
never been fit enough to smite his enemy hip and thigh.
Accordingly he experienced exquisite satisfaction on
learning that someone else had done the smiting for him.
It was a lonely, desolate ride in the starlight. The
moon, a faint crescent, hung aloft over the black ranges.
The stars of the Cross gleamed diamond-like, gems set in
the blue enamel of the sky. She and Henry had plighted
their troth by the light of the summer stars. The Southern
Cross was the emblem of their faith.
They rode slowly on, until Jimmy drew rein and dis-
mounted. He led the way to the spot where he had
killed the adder on the morning when Weston had left
Golden Gully.
“ Here ? ” she asked.
“ Yes, Miss Steller, jist ’ere,” and Jimmy pointed to
the place.
“Go back to the horses,” she said, gently. “ I want
to be alone for a few minutes.”
She watched him as he obeyed her. When his form
was hidden by the scrub, she threw herself on the ground.
Then, with utter abandonment of all thoughts, all feelings
but one, she fixed her mind with passionate earnestness,
intenseness on her lover. With relentless directness she


hypnotised herself ;|| peering at the stars of the Cross,
yet seeing them not; seeing nothing, hearing nothing,
being conscious only of her longing for her lord.
The world passed away in mist. The plaintive, mono-
tonous murmuring of the native bear afar off in the ranges
diminished little by little until it died into nothingness.
Then, as she sat there, a vision came before her. She
saw Doctor Hugh and Henry standing together on a
wharf; a steamer was there, and Henry was about to step
on to the gangway. The scene changed. The steamer
was at sea. It was night, and the passengers were all
snug in their bunks ; but on the deck, alone, stood Henry
Weston. His eyes were raised to the heavens. He gazed
without shifting his position, steadfastly at the Southern
Cross. His lips moved ; and she knew that he had uttered
her name. Then the vision faded, and the world came
out of the mist, and the murmurous complaint of the bear
in the distance increased little by little —crescendo poco
a poco.
Still she lingered there. And as she looked around on
the shadowy bush, and up where in the cloudless sky the
stars shone clear, quite suddenly the pathos of the human
tragedy was impressed upon her. She realized the insig-
nificance of the whole world amidst the infinite millions
of greater worlds, nay—systems which constitute what
man calls the universe. She saw how • poor a thing is
individual life, of which so much unnecessary fuss is made
by its petty mortal possessor, compared to the life of the
whole. The Cross seemed to hang above her as of old,
yet its stars looked down indifferently on her. What
was she, and what her little drama of love to them ?
It was merely her cheap human conceit which had misled


her into imagining that they smiled on her steadfastness ;
encouraged her faith. What was she that the suns and
planets should wax or wane because of her paltry human
desires ? What were her emotions that they should
colour the landscape, change the tones of the sky ?
Faith! What was her faith to anyone, or anything
beyond herself and her lover ? The great machine called
society ground on careless of the cries of the crushed !
And the greater universe moved inexorably, inscrutably
on, heedless of the world—its societies as well as the mere
units thereof. It was an easy, a pleasant belief for man,
that which assured him the sky smiled when he was
gratified; that the trees rejoiced when he was happy;
that the seas and the streams reflected, as in sympathy,
his ever-varying moods. But it was the belief of primitive
man—not fit for the enlightened, thinking being that
man should be, yet seldom is, in the glorious twentieth
century.
Stella had read widely, and had thought. Now, in a
moment, the truth flashed on her. She had laid the
flattering unction to her soul that because she ardently
believed, passionately desired, a certain event, that it
would ultimately happen; that from a nebulous desire
it would develop into a palpable, tangible reality. But
with the scales from her eyes, she saw face to face at last.
Human aspiration was no guarantee of human achieve-
ment. Because man longs for immortality, it by no means
follows that immortality is his certain gift. And yet, in
the hour of enlightenment, when the clear recognition of
human limitation was forced on her, she still was woman
enough to cling to her lover in spite of the contemptuous
indifference of the universe to us poor little phantom


actors and our apparently futile play. She saw that
love can in reality conquer the stars. She knew that
in spite of the inexorableness of the whole in its mighty
onward march towards a goal perhaps no mortal eye shall
ever see, through our acts we become immortal; that
in very truth we become infinitely great in our influence,
though we may be comparatively speaking, infinitesimally
small in ourselves. Love—perfect love and faith between
man and woman ; that could and would be an influence
as immortal as the stars. So, though the unit must
wither and fade and lie neglected and forgotten, love
would not die, but would live on through eternal meta-
morphoses, an influence forever.
So, once more she looked on the Cross, and the stars
once again seemed to give her strength and to speak of
the beauty of truth and the glory of steadfast faith. . .


CHAPTER X.
WESTON VISITS THE PENSION SUISSE.
WHEN Weston reached the Queen City of the South,
he went to an unpretentious hotel in one of the least
frequented quarters. The train for Warrawee left in the
afternoon. He had resolved to go by it to one of the small
stations down the line, and there to procure a horse, and
ride across country to Golden Gully.
Strolling along one of the quiet streets in that vicinity
he came to the Pension Suisse. Loitering a moment by
the entrance, he heard someone singing the “ Flower Song ”
from Faust. He walked in and sat down in the long 1 room
where the artists and their friends foregathered. One
little golden-haired girl, who was so fond of cigarettes and
vermouth and soda, was singing. She seemed to be no
older than when she sang it first—how long ago ? Let us
not enquire too curiously. Caruso was also unchanged.
He approached Weston and asked him if he would take a
glass of wine.
“ Yes ! And ask the others,” he said, carelessly.
He had an hour to waste. He might as well pass it
there as elsewhere. N’importe !
The room, as of old, reeked of garlic and tobacco-smoke.
The same sketches, and some new ones, adorned the walls.
At the end of the bench, in his accustomed place, sat the
old military looking gent—“ the colonel,” and he bowed
grandly to Weston as he mumbled through his blue lips the


inevitable toast: “ May our present good fortune ever
continue.” There was one picture —rather more finished
than the others, which attracted Henry’s attention. It
was a crayon head—a study; and its sinister expression
reminded him of someone. He walked to the wall where
it was tacked, when, on a closer view, he recognised Raffa.
Wilkinson had made this little masterpiece from memory.
Everyone at the Pension knew Marie’s story: and the
artist in a moment of righteous wrath had drawn the
villain of the piece, and drawn him with relentless realism.
“ Who is this ? ” Weston asked,
“ Oh,” said the golden-haired girl, “ that is a man called
Raffa. And a nice beauty he is, too,” she added, con-
temptuously.
“ Ah ! ”
Weston clenched his hands at the name. There was the
grinding of a cab drawn sharply up on the curbstone, and
immediately afterwards a group of students entered the
room, rowdily chaffing and in right merry humour.
“ Hey, Caruso, what do you think ? That beggar
Raffa’s arrested for forgery. Just met detective Sharp,
and he told us all about it. Knew he used to come
here, too. Sharp by name, Sharp by nature. Give us
some claret. Hello, Fairy, sing us the ‘ Flower Song,’ or
something with a chorus.”
Henry Weston approached the speaker—a young fellow
who was studying his art in the best school—life.
“ Did you, excuse me, mean this (pointing to Wilkinson’s
study), this Raffa was arrested ? ” he asked.
“ Yes! . Same chap; a damn rotter, too. Have a
drink ? ”
“ Yes,” said Weston ; “ I’ll have a drink ; or, rather,
you boys have one with me.”


They ordered wine, red and white, and drank Weston’s
eternal good health and infinite prosperity, with much
hilarity. Then they surrounded the golden-haired girl
and sang choruses and were happy. Weston plied his
informant with questions.
“ He used to come here, eh ? ”
“ Yes ! He ruined a little country girl called Marie, one
of the best little pals in the world, I believe. I never met
her, but—Ah ! here’s someone who’ll tell you the whole
story. Hi! Waxy! Come here.”
It was Rosenfeldt. He raised a pince-nez and eyed the
student contemptuously. Waxy ! Waxy !! Why Rosen-
feldt had just written the music of a successful pantomime,
and his portrait was in the programme and in the weekly
papers. Waxy ! eh ? He was dressed and dandified and
resented this familiarity on the part of a callow art-
student.
“ He’s on his dig,” said the young fellow to Weston.
Waxy, indeed, was on his dignity; but he soon became
himself when Jack Winter and Ingleton and some of his
own particular companions happened to join the company.
“ He’ll tell you all about it, or, if he doesn’t, Ingleton
will,” said the youngster, and Weston was left to himself.
After some persuasion Rosenfeldt played some of the
ballet music he had composed for the pantomime.
“ I always thought the beggar couldn’t read music,”
said Winter.
“ He only did that so as to get out of playing girls’
accompaniments,” Ingleton explained. “ Waxy’s a great
kidder, you know.”
Noticing that Henry Weston was sitting apart by him-
self, the friendly artists at once approached him, asked


him to drink with them, and chatted with him in the
happiest way.
“ That is a fine study,” he ventured, at last, looking up
at the chalk drawing of Rafia.
“ A fine study of a damned skunk,” said Ingleton,
sharply.
“ Eh ? ”
“ Yes ! But it wouldn’t interest you.”
Weston took a deep breath to stop the palpitation, and
then said carelessly—
“ What wouldn’t interest me ? ”
“ About that rotter,” Winter returned.
Here the young art-student, overhearing them, inter-
jected : “ Rafia was arrested an hour ago for forgery. I
had it from detective Sharp himself.”
“ Serve him right.”
“ Good enough for him.”
“ Pity help the rotter.”
“ I always said so.”
The comments fast and free showed the estimation in
which Rafia was held by the artists. Ingleton leaned his
lantern jaws on his hands and looked serious.
“ Poor little Marie,” he muttered. Weston heard him.
He saw that Ingleton’s eyes were on a nude drawing at the
end of the room—another of Wilkinson’s “ little master-
pieces” in black and white. He, in turn, regarded this
drawing curiously. It reminded him in a vague way of
someone.
“ Poor little Marie. She was a good little pal,” said
Ingleton; and in an instant Weston recognised that the
drawing was a living likeness of the “ little pal ” who had
brought him the tea and tucker on that eventful morning
when he had left Golden Gully and Stella with the intention


WESTON LOOKED AT THE CHALK DRAWING OF RAFFA.
Stella Sothern. Page 190.


of passing out of her life for ever. It was his little pal.”
How could he learn her story ? On what strange drama
had he so carelessly stumbled. What did it mean that here
in a wine-shop in an obscure part of the city he should
casually happen on the portraits of two of the leading
actors in the tragedy of his own life ?
“ Gentlemen,” he said, “ I am a stranger amongst you,
but I have been made welcome. I’m knocked right out by
coming across here two pictures—one of a damned villain,
as you’ve truly called him ; the other of a good little pal,
both of mine and of yours. I come from the same part of
the country as they do. They have both been mixed up
in the affairs of my life. Raffa, who I hear is arrested,
has through his villainy caused me two years of misery.
Shall I tell you how ? ”
“ Yes! Yes,” they all cried, and crowded round him.
It was an interested and a sympathetic audience. The
golden-haired girl threw her cigarette aside and drew
closer. Caruso stopped wiping glasses, and Madame came
in from the kitchen, drying her face with her apron. The
“ Colonel ” placed his hand to his ear, and strained to miss
no syllable. Weston told his story. A man of a naturally
reserved, somewhat reticent nature, yet he spoke to these
kindly fellows without any restraint. He knew instinc-
tively that these artists were men of heart—natural and
unconventional. He felt an immense relief when he un-
burdened himself before them. Many expressions of
sympathy and bitter contempt were heard as he spoke
of his own suffering—picturing the loneliness, the desolate-
ness of his future as it had loomed before him when Raffa
had lied to him and deceived him—or of Raffa’s scheming
and heartlessness.


“ And now, my friends, I’m wanting to know how it
comes that you’ve Rafia’s portrait here, and the drawing
of my little pal.”
Ingleton at once related all that was known of Marie’s
connection with Raffa.
“ And after her illness, you know, Miss Sothern who was
here ”
“ What,” cried Weston.
“ Oh, yes,” said Waxy. “ Miss Sothern was here with
Elva Roberts, the journalist.”
“ Does Miss Roberts come here ? ” Weston asked.
“ Not so much as she used to,” Waxy returned. “ You
see we don’t come so often. We are too busy, now.”
“ Oh, stow that sort of rot,” said Jack Winter. “ Every-
body hasn’t written a pantomime, Waxy.” Rosenfeldt
raised his pince-nez, but a well-directed apple, fired from
the right flank, knocked the glasses and his dignity down
with a sickening thud !
Ingleton, who had listened with eager interest to Henry
Weston’s story, drew him on one side, and explained how
Stella had come, more out of curiosity than for any other
reason, with Elva Roberts to the Pension. He told how
Marie’s portrait had attracted Stella’s attention ; nor did
he spare any details (for he knew the whole story) of
Stella’s rescue of Marie from the slums, and how she took
the country girl away from the sins and poverty and ill-
health of the city back once more to Golden Gully. . .
“ I wrote to her,” Ingleton said, “ and she answered one
letter, but not the next. It’s just as well, anyhow. But
when you go back, just you tell Marie a chap called Ingleton
was asking after her, and that he’s about given up the
‘ Merry Widow Waltz.’ She’ll understand .... Poor
little Marie. She was always a good little pal ”
H


An hour later, Weston was in the train bound for Golden
Gully. He had, however, only booked to Bluegum, whence
he had resolved to cross the ranges by the old cattle-track
and arrive at Warrawee in the dusk. The train-journey
seemed interminable; and he saw no familiar face all the
way. At Bluegum he hired a hack and rode towards the
mountains. Reaching the very river Raffa had swum the
night before, he dismounted and sat awhile by the bank.
He knew the ford, five miles down stream, and meant to
cross there. He had not been sitting on the bank many
minutes when his quick, trained eye noticed that the
primitive Bush had been intruded on recently by man.
He examined the track, and soon was aware that some man
had had a hard struggle for life in that very spot. The
marks were unmistakable. He could see plainly how
Raffa had dragged himself from the water by means of the
roots of trees growing out from the bank.
“ Strange,” he muttered. “ Had his clothes on, too,
but not his boots. . . . Yes 1 Here are the boot-marks as
he walked away. Carried them over with him, I suppose.
Hello! What’s this?”
It was a small pocket book. He opened it, and started
on seeing the name. “G. Raffa, Golden Gully.”
Guido Raffa!
He examined it carefully. Evidently memoranda of
sales, cattle-purchases, and the like. Henry placed it in
his pocket, mounted his hack and ambled along the river-
bank towards the ford. He had crossed it, and was head-
ing along the old road towards the range which separated
him from Warrawee, when his horse, shying at a large tiger
snake which was crossing the road in the direction of the
water, threw him heavily.


CHAPTER XI.
RAFFA’S ESCAPE.
RAFFA was duly presented before the Warrawee bench
and committed for trial at the assizes to be held at
Cattletown in a month. Bail was allowed, but was not
forthcoming, so he was sent in charge of Constable Innes
to the Cattletown gaol, there being only a single antiquated
cell of logs—a remnant of the old Colonial days—at
Warrawee. On the journey, Haifa chatted gaily and
confidentially with Innes. Many a time had Innes smacked
his lips after a drop of Haifa's special whiskey. He felt
rather sympathetic regarding his prisoner. At Bluegum,
Haifa pleaded hard for a drink. “ All right,” said good-
natured Innes. “Be quick about it.” He went leisurely
into the refreshment-room. Innes walked carelessly to
and fro on the platform, watching the porters loading milk
cans.
Five minutes passed. The whistle was blown. Innes
stepped hurriedly to the bar, Haifa was gone He
Had seen a hack saddled and waiting by the side of the
station master’s house, and having slipped out when
Innes’ back was turned, he had mounted the horse and
galloped off towards the ranges. It was a bold bid for
liberty and—revenge.
Reaching the river, he crossed at the place known as the
Five-mile Ford. The cattle-track through the Bush led


around the ranges, and could be followed for ten miles in
the direction of Warrawee. Then it branched to the
North and South. Raffa pushed on as far as his horse
could go, when dismounting he sent the hack at a gallop
down the South fork, and at once plunged into the Bush,
straight ahead, making across country for Golden Gully.
Constable Innes was a full quarter of an hour before he
procured a horse to follow his fugitive. When he came to
the branching road at the end of the old cattle-track he
saw the recent hoof-marks in the red dust and, as Raffa had
anticipated, he hastened south only to find the abandoned
horse some distance down the road, quietly grazing what
few blades of grass the fierce summer sun had left by the
wayside.
The prisoner had escaped for the time. Innes went
dejectedly back to Bluegum, leading the station-master’s
hack. He realized the futility of following Raffa into the
ranges, where he concluded he would lie hidden until
hunger urged him forth. The constable did not entertain
the possibility of the fugitive having purposely returned
to Warrawee where everybody knew him and cordially
disliked him. Innes did not calculate on the Italian
element in his man ....
Raffa was now dominated by an overwhelming desire to
be revenged on those he hated —Stella and Weston, and
Marie. As he plodded on, making surely towards the Old
Forest Road, he muttered to himself the fateful words he
had spoken in the train on the morning of his adventurous
journey to the city : “ What a day for a hush fire ! ”
The season had been exceptionally dry. The creeks were
merely a succession of shallow water-holes, black with the
decaying gum-leaves which rendered the water useless.
The sheep were already a ghastly array of walking skeletons.
Here and there were patches of nutritive grassland, but for


the most part the country was. starvation-poor. What
grass there was gleamed in the pitiless glare of the sun.
Day after day had passed, while a cloudless sky of bur-
nished blue had looked relentlessly down on a parched and
weary land. The gaunt gums, white in the high light, cast
hard blue shadows on the yellow, ground ; the fences
flashed like hot steel. In the distance the sky and earth
melted into one, a mist of purple over a hard drawn line
of cadmium and white. At the hottest part of the day,
four in the afternoon, the birds fell exhausted from the
trees. The indomitable man struggled on, pausing in the
shadows now and then. By evening he had reached the
Old Forest Road. He stumbled wearily on. When he
reached the cross-roads where the selector Lambert,
Marie’s father lived, he hid until the night came down.
As soon as it was dark, he walked boldly up to the door
of the rudje cottage, and knocked.
“ Give me something to eat, Lambert,” he said. “ I’ve
done you a good turn before to-day.”
The dull-witted settler knew nothing of Raffa’s villainy.
He had heard rumours; but it took him all his time to
attend to his cows. As to his daughter, Marie—he knew
as much about the planetary movements and complication
as about hers. Without any comment, he produced some
cold mutton and some home-baked bread. He boiled a
billy and made some tea. In a few minutes Raffa was
refreshed and reinvigorated.
“ How I wish I had a cigarette,” he said.
“ I’ve a bit of baccy, if yer like,” Lambert returned.
Raffa made a rough cigarette, lit it, and incidentally
pocketed the box of matches. Then he thanked the
elector and hurried off into the shadow of the trees.'


CHAPTER XII.
BURNT TO DEATH.
A SETTLER returning from the stock-sale at Warrawee
'**• found Weston lying in the dust, his hack standing
by, vainly endeavouring to solve the mystery of the man’s
silence and stillness, for the beast knew well that he was
not dead. . . . The settler, after dashing a hat-full of
water in Weston’s face without any perceptible result,
lifted him bodily into his cart, hitched the hack to the tail-
board, and jogged on to his bush home. Fortunately this
was not far from the ford. It was the usual home of the
solitary back-blocks pioneer—a humpy built from the
materials of the primaeval forest, rough but comfortable.
He laid Weston on his own bed—which was made of two
huge slabs of bark with bags of chaff for mattress, and bags
rudely sewn together for covering. From a cupboard
ingeniously contrived from an old packing case, he produced
a quart bottle about half full of whiskey, and proceeded to
his task of reviving the stricken man. But in spite of his
endeavours, Weston remained unconscious for many hours.
Towards the morning, however, he suddenly recovered.
He looked vacantly around.
“ Where am I ? ” he asked.
“ Thank yer lucky stars yer alive,” was the reply.
“ Now, matey, have a pull at this.”


This was not, as might be supposed, ardent liquour,
but it was a pannikin of tea—the bushman’s friend. It
was without milk, but it was not without sugar. Indeed,
it was a saturated solution of brown sugar in tea. Weston
sipped it little by little and sat up. Then he remembered
everything.
“ How long have I been here ? ” he asked.
“ Only since sundown.”
“ I’ll stay till sundown to-night, if you don’t mind.”
“ Stay’s long’s yer like,” was the hearty reply
When about seven in the evening Weston went to his
hack with the intention of riding on his way, he nearly
fainted, swaying to and fro as he walked.
“By George ! that won’t do. Feels like the desert and
that time coming on again. ... I say, mate, I’ll have
to hang out a bit longer. . . but fair’s fair, if I stay, I pay.”
“ As yer like. . . I knowed yer couldn’t face it to-night.
You’ve eat nothink. ... Sit yer down and I’ll make some
broth for yer, and a bit of stoo out of these bones. Take
my tip, and get away—l means when yer ready—first thing
in the mornin’, when it’s not such a scorcher ”
“ Right, 0! ” said Weston. “ Yes ! I’ll do that. I’ll
see how I am in the morning.”
The stew, which was an excellent one, made of sheep’s
trotters, kidneys, ribs, and a rabbit, a la Bush (and there’s no
a la on earth to equal it!) seemed to put new life into Weston.
At anyrate, he was up early, mounted, and on his way . . .
It had been a hot, dry summer. The grass gleamed in
the scorching sun. The undergrowth was withered. As
Henry Weston rode along the tortuous track across the
range, birds, dazed and overcome by the intensity of the
heat, fell at his feet, and lay where they fell. More than


once he sprang to the ground, picked them up and tossed
them aloft, to give them another chance for their lives. . . .
By eight o’clock in the morning it was so fiercely hot that
the sun’s rays struck sharply as he emerged from the
occasional shadow of a tree across the track. He had
gone only about three miles, when the cadaverous croak
of the gang-gang, followed immediately by the wild
shrieking of cockatoos, caused him to suddenly come to a
halt. He knew the awful meaning of that weird music.
The next moment he saw smoke curling upward through
the trees. Then arose the indescribable murmurous
noise of living things instinctively aroused by a sense of
impending disaster, and awakened to the necessity for
flight.
“ The bush on fire, and the wind straight for Stella’s
home.”
That was his first thought. Then he shut his teeth and
rode a race with death; for, a glance showed him that
already the fire had worked around and behind him. The
next moment he heard the crash of falling timber, and the
fearsome roar of the advancing flames. He urged his horse
up the slope, up, up, until he reached the mountain-top,
when a terrifying sight met his gaze. The whole country-
side was blazing, and the ranges for miles were on fire.
Columns of smoke arose to the pitiless sky where the sun
gleamed blood-red through the purple haze. Death was
behind and all around. He must not hesitate. Afar in the
hollow he could see Golden Gully—the white shearing-
sheds shining like glass in the glare. The irresistible
North wind, blowing at the rate of more than a mile a
minute, whipped the flames till they leaped hundreds of
yards at a bound from blazing tree-top to tree-top left
ablaze. A glance was enough—he knew that if Death were


near him, it was nearer Stella, for her place was surrounded
by fire. The fastest horse has no chance whatever against
the bush fire, fanned to indescribable fury by a wind
tearing across the world at express rate. But the ex-
perienced bushman can sometimes outwit the fire. So
away flew Weston down the mountain side, his steed need-
ing no spur or whip. He reached a dam he knew just in
time and rode into it. The flames as they tore past singed
the horse’s mane and Weston’s hair. He saw a woman
carrying a child in her arms and leading another, making
for the dam. She was too late; When the flames had
passed, he looked for her in vain. Then, heading towards
Golden Gully, he pushed on. He took every short cut he
knew. The fire was stopped for half-an-hour by a bend of
the gully along which it burnt with incredible rage. This
gave Weston his chance. He saw in the distance men
advancing from the South towards Stella’s home, and
guessed they were from Warrawee. He knew they would
be too late. Would he be in time ? His horse was already
showing signs of exhaustion. A hundred yards from the
back of the orchard it fell, never to rise. Dashing on
along many a well-remembered path, he rushed into the
homestead.
“Quick, quick,” he cried, “there’s not a moment to
lose.” He drew Stella to him and kissed her, cutting short
her embrace kindly but strongly. “ The whole place is on
fire, and it’s coming this way.”
“ God help us. There’s no fire break on the northern
side,” said Stella.
“No fire-break could stop this,” he cried, “ with the
wind blowing a mile a minute. Come.” ■
There was not a second to be lost. Marie, alert and


strong, was already at work, tugging vainly at a great iron
tank.
“ Yes,” said Weston, looking over his shoulder at' the
advancing flames. “ You’re right.”
So the three, and Mrs. Anderson, who was no help,
dragged the tank out on the ploughed ground between the
dairy and the cowshed, and turned its back to the fire.
Then Henry rushed inside for blankets, and, after soaking
them in an old cask at the side of the house, bundled them
into the tank. By this time the flames were leaping from
hill-top to hill-top, and their roaring was deafening.
Volumes of blinding smoke rolled over the hollow, envel-
oping Stella’s home. A terrific burst of flame followed;
trees fell in all directions, and the fire was upon them.
Two horses which were standing about ten yards from the
tank dropped dead from the unendurable heat. In the
meantime the helpers from Warrawee had arrived on the
scene. By this time the homestead was ablaze. They
vainly chopped down fences to stop the on-rush of the
flames. It was done, too, to give the horses and cattle
about the home paddocks a chance for their lives. But it
was all in vain—the flames were too fast, and the men
had to fly for their lives.
All day the fire continued. Towards evening the wind
veered right round to the East, and the fire burned itself
out along the ranges in that direction and lying to the West
—an awful, a majestic sight, the many-coloured blaze against
the inky blackness of the sky, where, like a globe of blood,
hung aloft the full, round moon. ...
Stella was blinded by the smoke, and had to be led’from
the tank to a rescuer’s buggy. She and Marie were driven
to Warrawee and handed over to Mrs. Eustace Watt’s care.


After a night’s sleep they seemed to recover quickly.
Stella’s first thought was for Henry Weston.
“ Bless you, he’s all right,” was the reassuring reply.
In fact, he had been up early, and with some men from
the township, had ridden over to Golden Gully to learn the
extent of Stella’s loss. Everywhere was desolation and
death. Thousands of sheep had perished; the awful
cremation had been complete.
Weary of the ghastly spectacle, they were about to cut
across country to the township, when one of the party
called out:
“ Come here, Mister Weston, for God’s sake.”
Pinned to the earth by a fallen tree, lay the miserable
Haifa. He had started the fire, but had not calculated
on the North wind, and so had been caught in his own
trap. The tree lay across him. It had smouldered
slowly after it had fallen, being of gigantic thickness and
lying across the direction of the wind. It was still burn-
ing when Weston rode up. There was the sickening odour
of burning flesh, and the awful expression of the wretch’s
face told all the gruesome tragedy.


CONCLUSION.
STELLA was ruined. Raffa’s defalcations and her
losses of stock and the whole of her station properties
were overwhelming. The land itself was a valuable asset,
but it would have required a large fortune to re-fence,
re-build, and re-stock it. Acting on Mr. Eustace Watt’s
advice she offered the whole estate to the Government at
a fair average price per acre. This was accepted, and
Golden Gully was subdivided and sold for closer settlement
purposes. . . .
Henry Weston’s mines proved immensely rich, so that the
partners were soon wealthy men . . .A year sped by, and
it was not without incidents of interest to those who have
played a part in this story of the city and the bush. The
following extracts from the Palmerston Times are eloquent:
BIRTHS.
Weston (nee Stella Sothern). —On the 20th December, at
Palmerston, the wife of Henry Weston, a son.
MARRIAGES.
Faxrleioh — Roberts. —On the 18th inst., at Palmerston Pres-
byterian Church, by the Rev. William Brown, Hugh,
eldest son of the late John Fairleigh, of Sydney, to
Elva, only daughter of James Roberts, of Manly.
On seeing which latter announcement in the paper,
Jimmy, one time groom at Golden Gully, remarked to
Marie, who had become his wife after numberless
rejections :
“ Bli’ me, Marie; we oughter put our weddin’ in the
bloomin’ newspaper, too.”
“ Why,” said Marie, “ doesn’t it seem real enough.”
“ Ya-as, to me it do, anyhow. . . ’cause, Marie, yer
knows I alius loved yer better than that ”
“ Hush,” said Marie.
That was a story that was told.
The End,
