

STEWART & COMPANY’S
School Classics
Greys Elegy and Odes.
Goldsmith’s, the Traveller and
the Deserted Village.
Johnson’s Vanity of Human
Wishes.
WITH INTRODUCTION' AND NOTES.
SYDNEY. N.S.W.
STEWART & COMPANY, The
47 0 GEO R G E STRE E T,
(Opposite the’(Markets).
PRICE SIXPENCE.




STEWART & COMPANY’S
School Classics
Greys Elegy and Odes.
Goldsmith’s, the Traveller and
the Deserted Village.
Johnsons Vanity of Human
Wishes.
WITH INTRODUCTION AND NOTES.
SYDNEY, N.S.W.
STEWART & COMPANY, The Educational Booksellers,
470 GEORGE ST REE T,
(Opposite the Markets).
PRICE SIXPENCE.


CONTKNTS.
PAGE.
Introduction to Gray’s Elegy and Ode ... ... ... 2
„ „ Goldsmith’s, The Traveller and the Deserted
Village ... ... .. ... ... ... 4
Introduction to Johnson’s Vanity of Human Wishes ... (i
o
Gray’s Elegy ... ... ••• ... ... 9
Gray’s Ode ... ... ... ... ... 13
Goldsmith’s, The Traveller ... ... ... ... 16
Goldsmith’s, The Deserted Village ... ... ••• 27
Johnson’s Vanity of Human Wishes ... ... ... 38
NOTES.
Gray's Elegy ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 47
Gray’s Ode .. ... ... ... ••• ••• 47
Goldsmith’s, The Traveller ... ... ... ... 48
Goldsmiths, The Deserted Village ... ... ... 35
Johnson’s Vanity of Human Wishes ... ... ... 63




INTRODUCTION
TO GRAY’S ELEGY & ODES.
Thomas Gray was bom in London, the 26 th December,
1716. His education was carried on at Eton, where an
uncle, a Mr. Antrobus, was at that time an assistant
master. Here he formed the first and most lasting friend-
ships of his life, with Richard West and Horace Walpole.
On the completion of his school studies he removed to Cam-
bridge, intending to devote himself to the study of the
law. The ancient classics, especially the poets, engrossed
his attention almost exclusively, and a journey which lie
undertook to the Continent, in company with his friend Horace
Walpole, led him more decidedly into the paths of literature.
The two friends travelled as far as the south of Italy in
company, where a slight disagreement caused them to part
company, and Gray returned home alone in 1741. Soon
after his return his father died, and Gray retired to Cam-
bridge again, where he composed the ode on “A Distant
Prospect of Eton College,” and the “ Hymn to Adversity,”
in 1742, and began the “ Elegy in a Country Church-
yard.” From this time forward his residence at Cambridge
was permanent, broken only by a journey to the north of
Scotland in 1765, and a tour to the lakes of Cumberland
and Westmoreland in 1768, as well as short visits to his
friends in London and the country. In the latter years
of his life he held the position of professor of modern his-
tory, the only academical office he ever filled. His studies
extended to nearly every department of literature and his-
tory, and many branches of science, and to them his time
was entirely devoted. To this fact, and probably to a


natural timidity which forebade him to court publicity, may
be ascribed the fewness of Ins poetical productions. Few
as these are, the chief characteristics of Gray’s mind find
brilliant expression in them ; his vigorous imagination is
apparent in his choice and treatment of his subjects, his
taste and learning in the working out of the details. His
prose writings are all in the form of letters, chiefly descrip-
tive, addressed to his friends, and rank among the chief
models of epistolary composition in English. An attack
of gout brought on his death on the 80th July, 1771.
Among the longer specimens of lyrical poetry in Eng-
lish, Gray’s Poems will always maintain the first rank. In
the latter part of the seventeenth century Cowley had at-
tempted imitations of the elaborately wrought poems of
Pindar, but had failed on account of a want of directness
and picturesque treatment of liis* subjects. Dryden and
Pope had both written Odes, but both avowedly for the
purpose of being set to music, and less with a view to direct
poetical effect. The models that Gray had in his eye were
the ancient hymns, adapted for the song and dance, and
he adopts many of their characteristics, though with inde-
pendent judgment. The divisions into strophe (turning),
antistrope (return), and epode (after-song), is borrowed
from the Greek lyrical poetry, and originally ' corresponded
to the movements of the chorus round the altar.


INTRODUCTION
TO GOLDSMITH’S THE TRAVELLER,
AND THE DESERTED VILLAGE.
Oliver Goldsmith was born on the lOtli of November,
1728, at Pallas, in the county of Longford, in Ireland.
His father, the Rev. Charles Goldsmith, was the clergyman
of the parish. His infancy was spent in the village of
Lissoy, in the county of Meath, where he received the rudi-
ments of his education. Through the kindness of an uncle
Goldsmith was enabled to go to Trinity College, Dublin, in
1745, where he stayed till 1749. For several reasons his
college course was not happy, and Goldsmith returned
home, to spend the next two years in forming plans for his
future life. Resolving to study medicine, he went to Edin-
burgh. and attended lectures there, from 1752 to 1754.
After this he repaired to the University of Leyden, in the
summer of 1754, but only remained there till the beginning
of next year, when he undertook a walking tour over Hol-
land, France, Switzerland, and Italy. His adventures on
this journey supplied him with materials for his subsequent
writings. In February, 175 G, he returned to England,
and naturally betook himself to London. After having
been successively a druggist’s assistant, a reader to the
press, and an usher in a school, he finally got his introduc-
tion to what was to be the real business of his life—author-
ship. A bookseller, named Griffiths, who was proprietor
of a periodical of the time called the Monthly Review , en-
gaged him as a regular contributor to it. After some
months of work on this magazine, Goldsmith left it, unable
any longer to bear the brutal treatment of his employer.
All his writing at this time was anonymous, and was
wretchedly paid. His first original work was An Inquiry
into the Present State of Polite Learning in Europe (1759).
Through this essay the name of Goldsmith became better
known, and his contributions were sought after. Some of
the papers written about this time were collected by Gold-
smith himself ; those contributed to the Bee were especially
popular. An introduction to Smollett led to Goldsmith’s
contributing to the pages of the British Magazine , of
which Smollett was editor. In another periodical, the


Public Ledger, began the series of letters afterwards col-
lected under the title of The Citizen of the World. About
this time Goldsmith’s circumstances improved, and an in
troduction to Johnson laid the foundations of a life-long
friendship between the two. As yet, however, Goldsmith
was employed chiefly in hack-work for the booksellers, such
as The Life of Richard. Nash (1762), and a History of
England in Letters (1764). He became a member of the
famous Literary Club, of which Johnson, Reynolds, and
Burke were the chief. The year 1764 was an important
one in his life. A manuscript, entitled the Vicar of Wake-
field was sold by .Johnson for him to a bookseller, and in
the same year the Traveller was published. Its success
from the first was decided, and its author was placed among
the very foremost writers of the day. The Vicar of Wake-
field was published two years later, and received no less ap-
plause.
The stage next attracted Goldsmith’s attention. A
comedy called the Good-Natured Han was put into the
hands of Column, the manager of Covent Garden. There
it was brought out in January, 1768. Although it was
opposed to the reigning taste for sentimental comedy—a
taste that Goldsmith was afterwards completely to over-
throw —the piece had a fair share of success, and brought
the author a considerable sum of money. Among other
pieces of work done to order may be mentioned a Life of
Parnell , a Roman History , and a History of England. In
1769 he engaged to write a History of the Earth and of
Animated Nature , which only appeared after his death.
The year following (1770) his second long poem, the De-
serted Village, was published. A Haunch of Venison and
Retaliation, two poetical pieces, were not printed till after
his death. For some time he had been engaged in writing
another comedy, also aimed at the prevailing false taste of
the day. It was brought out at Covent Garden in March,
1773, with the title She Stoops to Conquer, or the Mistakes
of a Night. It took the town by storm, and was soon pub-
lished, with a dedication to Dr. Johnson. The last year of
his life was spent in compiling his Animated Nature, and
finishing some other tasks of the same kind. At the end
of March, 1774, Goldsmith was laid up by an attack of
fever ; on the 4th of April, he died. He was interred in
the burying ground of the Temple Church.


INTRODUCTION
TO JOHNSON’S VANITY OF HUMAN
WISHES.
The “ Vanity of Human Wishes” is avowedly an imita-
tion of the well-known Tenth Satire of Juvenal. Johnson
had produced his “ London,” an imitation of Juvenal’s
Third Satire, in 1738 ; and that work had been his first
literary success. The practice of writing in heroic verse
was at this time highly fashionable at the Universities, es-
pecially Oxford, and throughout the literary world ; and it
became common to take some well known extract from the
Latin classics and to give it a new and interesting shape by
substituting modern names and incidents. For this exer-
cise the satirists afford unusual facilities. Boileau had set
the fashion in France : and he was successfully followed in
this country by Oldham and Pope. Johnson’s poem
should be compared not only with Juvenal, but with
Dry den's spirited translation. Substantially, however, he
has borrowed but little from either, and his poem is con-
structed on the bare outlines of the original work, which he
has undoubtedly surpassed in gravity, pathos, and repose,
though he comes short" of it in life, picturesqueness, and
variety.
The date of this poem might be nearly ascertained with-
out going farther than the first fifty lines, even if it were
not well known that Johnson published it in January,
1749, with the view of drawing attention to his Irene,”
which was produced at Drury Lane in February. The in-
cidents of the descent of the Pretender, the fall of Walpole,
the War of the Austrian Succession, and the death of Swift
were evidently fresh in the public memory ; while there is
no allusion to the Seven Year’s War (1756), and Fred-
erick Prince of Wales (died 1751) was still living. The
political sentiments with which the poem abounds are those


of the advanced Tories, a party weakened and exasperated
by continual defeat and misfortune. They had been
recently cheated of the reward of a long and honourable
opposition by the selfishness of their leaders, Pulteney and
Carteret, and the Whig party had returned to power under
Mr. Pelham. But the fierce Tory spirit of the poem, like
its literary form, belongs in fact to a bygone generation.
Johnson’s mind dwelt habitually in the immediate past ;
and the general character of the work belongs to the reign
of Anne rather than George 11. This is especially true of
the Satire in its literary aspect. It is the last expression
of the school of Dryden, Pope and Prior : of that extinct
poetry in which strong versification, sonority and majesty
of diction, and manliness of sentiment, were the essence of
the work, and it was sought to combine all these qualities
with the order and exactness of prose. The condensation
of Johnson recalls that of Pope : but he is more given to
inversion, and to the habit of repeating an epigrammatic
phrase in other words, so as to gain the effect of an anti-
thesis. The desire to strike by brevity, the economy of
force which rather hints at than displays his images, and
the attraction of classical models, often lead him into ob-
scurity : and Garrick thought this poem, compared with
“ London,” “as hard as Greek.” If the author had pro-
duced a third imitation of Juvenal, he jocosely predicted
that it would be “as hard as Hebrew.” On the other hand
the poem does not contain a single couplet that falls flat
upon the ear ; the march of the lines is easy, bold, and
rapid ; and few compositions of any sort display a richer in-
fusion of hearty mother-English.
Philosophy, in the oldest sense of the word, as the science
of human nature and social life, leavens most of the poetry
of the time : and no subject was thought worthy of serious
attention which had not a serious cast. Young’s “Night
Thoughts” are the best known expression of a sentiment
which lias no parallel in any other literature, and is refer-
able, according to the critics, to the temperament of the
nation which produced it. Johnson’s grave and sonorous
couplets were formed in his mind by thirty or forty at a
time before they were committed to paper, a circumstance
which favored freedom of treatment, and accounts for his
frequently very wide divergence from his model. The topics


were favorite objects of his meditation, and the poem, re-
garded as a finished whole, is as happy as most intellectual
efforts which have been wrought out with that accuracy
and patience which keen sympathy with the subject alone
inspires and sustains. Few poems have been more popular
among the thoughtful and refined, than “ The Vanity of
Human Wishes.” It was the favourite poem of Sir Walter
Scott,. and the last line which he sent to the press was a
quotation from it. “ Its deep and pathetic morality,” he
says, “ has often extracted tears from those whose eyes
wander dry over pages professedly sentimental.” “It is
not easy,” says Lord Macauley, “to say whether tiie palm
belongs to the ancient or the modern poet ... It must be
owned that in the concluding passage the Christian moralist
has not made the most of his advantages, and has decidedly
fallen short of the sublimity of his Pagan model. On the
other hand, Juvenal's Hannibal must yield to Johnson’s
Charles : and Johnson’s vigorous and pathetic enumeration
of the miseries of a literary life must be allowed to be
superior to Juvenal’s lamentation over the fate of Demos-
thenes and Cicero.”


GRAY’S-ELEGY
WRITTEN IN A COUNTRY CHURCHYARD.
The Curfew tolls the knell of parting day,
The lowing herd wind slowly o’er the lea,
The plowman homeward plods his weary way,
And leaves the world to darkness and to me.
Now fades the glimmering landscape on the sight, 5
And all the air a solemn stillness holds ;
Save where the beetle wheels his droning flight,
And drowsy tinklings lull the distant folds ;
Save that from yonder ivy-mantled tower,
The mopeing owl does to the moon complain 10
Of such, as wand’ring near her secret bower,
Molest her ancient solitary reign.
Beneath those rugged elms, that yew-tree’s shade,
Where heaves the turf in many a mould’ring heap,
Each in his narrow cell for ever laid, 15
The rude Forefathers of the hamlet sleep.
The breezy call of incense-breathing Morn,
The swallow twitt’ring from the straw-built shed,
The cock’s shrill clarion, or the echoing horn,
No more shall rouse them from their lowly bed. 20
For them no more the blazing hearth shall burn.
Or busy housewife ply her evening care :
No children run to lisp their sire’s return,
Or climb his knees the envied kiss to share.
Oft did the harvest to their sickle yield, 25
Their furrow, oft the stubborn glebe lias broke,
How jocund did they drive their team afield !
How bow’d the woods beneath their sturdy stroke !


Let not Ambition mock their useful toil.
Their homely joys, and destiny obscure ; 30
- Nor Grandeur hear with a disdainful smile,
The short and simple annals of the poor.
The boast of heraldry, the pomp of pow’r,
And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gave,
Await alike th’ inevitable hour. 35
The paths of glory lead but to the grave.
Nor you. ye Proud, impute to These the fault.
If Memory o’er their tomb no trophies raise,
Where thro’ the long-drawn isle and fretted vault
The pealing anthem swells the note of praise. 40
Can storied urn or animated bust
Back to its mansion call the fleeting breath ?
Can Honour’s voice provoke the silent dust,
Or Flatt’ry sooth the dull cold ear of Death ?
Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid 45
Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire ;
Hands, that the rod of empire might have sway’d,
Or wak’d to extasy the living lyre.
But Knowledge to their eyes her ample page
Rich with the spoils of time did ne’er unroll ; 50
Chill Penury repress’d their noble rage,
And froze the genial current of the soul.
From many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark unfatliom’d caves of ocean bear ;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen, 55
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
Some village-Hampden, that with dauntless breast
The little Tyrant of his fields withstood ;
Some mute inglorious Milton here may rest,
Some Cromwell guiltless of his country’s blood. 60
Th’ applause of list’ning senates to command,
The threats of pain and ruin to despise,
To scatter plenty o’er a smiling land,
And read their hist’ry in a nation’s eyes, 6-5


Their lot forbade ; nor circumscrib'd alone
Their growing virtues, but their crimes confin'd ;
Forbade to wade through slaughter to a throne,
And shut the gates of merfy on mankind.
The struggling pangs of conscious truth to hide,
To quench the blushes of ingenuous shame, 70
Or heap the shrine of Luxury and Pride
With incense kindled at the Muse’s flame.
Far from the maddening crowd’s ignoble strife,
Their sober wishes never learn’d to stray ; ,
Along the cool sequester’d vale of life 75
They kept the noiseless tenor of their way.
Yet ev'n these bones from insult to protect,
Some frail memorial still erected nigh,
With uncoittli rliimes and shapeless sculpture deck’d,
Implores the passing tribute of a sigh. 80
Their name, their years, spelt by th’ unletter’d muse,
The place of fame and elegy supply :
And many a holy text around she strews,
That teach the rustic moralist to die.
For who to dumb Forgetfulness a pray, . 85
This pleasing anxious being e’er resign’d,
Left the warm precincts of the cheerful day,
Nor cast one longing ling’ring look behind ?
On some fond breast the parting soul relies,
Some pious drops the closing eye requires ; 90
Ev’n from the tomb the voice of Nature cries,
Ev’n in our Ashes live their wonted Fires.
For thee, wlio mindful of tli’ unhonour’d Dead
Dost in these lines their artless tale relate :
If chance, by lonely Contemplation led, 95
Some kindred Spirit shall inquire thy fate,
Haply some hoary-headed Swain may say,
‘ Oft have we seen him at the peep of dawn
‘ Brushing with hasty steps the dews away
‘ To meet the sun upon the upland lawn. 100


‘ There at the foot of yonder nodding beech
‘ That wreathes its old fantastic roots so high,
‘ His listless length at noontide would he stretch,
-* And pore upon the brook that babbles by.
‘ Hard by yon wood, now smilling as in scorn. 105
‘ Mutt’ring his wayward fancies he would rove ;
‘ Now drooping, woeful wan, like one forlorn,
‘ Or craz’d with care, or cross’d in hopeless lore.
‘ One|morn I miss’d him on the custom’d hill,
‘Along the heath and near his fav’rite tree ! 110
‘ Another came ; nor yet beside the rill,
Nor up the lawn, nor at the wood was he ;
‘ The next with dirges due in sad array
‘ Slow thro’ the church-way path we saw him born.
‘ Approach and read (for thou can’st read) the lay, 115
‘ Grav’d on the stone beneath yon aged thorn.’
THE EPITAPH.
Here rests his head upon the lap of Earth
A Youth to Fortune and to Fame unknown :
Fair Science frown’d not on his humble birth,
And Melancholy mark’d him for her own. 120
Large was his bounty, and his soul sincere,
Heav’n did a recompence as largely send :
He gave to Mis’ry all he had, a tear,
He gain’d from Heav’n (’twas all he wish’d) a friend.
No farther seek his merits to disclose, 125
■Or draw his frailties from their dread abode,
{There they alike in trembling hope repose,)
The bosom of his Father and his God.


ODE, ON
A DISTANT PROSPECT OF ETON COLLEGE.
Ye distant spires, ye antique towers,
That crown the wat’ry glade,
Where grateful Science still adores
Her Henry’s holy Shade ;
And ye, that from the stately brow 5>
Of Windsor’s heights th’ expanse below
Of grove, of lawn, of mead survey.
Whose turf, whose shade, whose flowers among
Wanders the hoary Thames along
His silver-winding way. 10
Ah happy hills, ah pleasing shade,
Ah fields beloved in vain,
Where once my careless childhood strayed,
A stranger yet to pain !
I feel the gales, that from ye blow, 15
A momentary bliss bestow,
As waving fresh their gladsome wing,
Mv weary soul they seem to sooth,
And, redolent of joy and youth,
To breathe a second spring. 20
Say, Father Thames, for thou hast seen
Full many a sprightly race
Disporting on thy margent green
The paths of pleasure trace,
Who foremost now delight to cleave 25
With pliant arm thy glassy wave ?
The captive linnet which enthral ?
What idle progeny succeed
To chase the rolling circle’s speed,
Or urge the flying ball ? 30'


While some on earnest business bent
Their murm’ring labours ply
’Gainst graver hours, that bring constraint
To sweeten liberty :
Some bold adventurers disdain 3d
The limits of their little reign,
And unknown regions dare descry :
Still as they run they look behind,
They hear a voice in every wind,
And snatch a fearful joy. 40
Gay hope is theirs by fancy fed,
Less pleasing when p^ssest;
The tear forget as soon as shed,
The sunshine of the breast :
Theirs buxom health and rosy hue, 45
Wild wit. invention ever-new,
And lively cheer of vigour born ;
The thoughtless day, the easy night,
The spirits pure, the slumbers light,
That fly th’ approach of morn. 50
Alas, regardless of their doom,
The little victims play !
No sense have they of ills to come,
Nor care beyond to-day :
Yet see how all around ’em wait 55
The Ministers of human fate,
And black Misfortune’s baleful train !
Ah, shew them where in ambush stand
To seize their prey the murd’rous band !
Ah, tell them, they are men ! 00
These shall the fury Passions tear,
The vultures of the mind,
Disdainful Anger, pallid Fear,
And Shame that skulks behind ;
Or pineing Love shall waste their youth, 65
Or Jealousy with rankling tooth,
That inly gnaws the secret heart,
And envy wan, and faded Care,
Grim-visaged comfortless Despair,
And Sorrow’s piercing dart. 70


Ambition this shall tempt to rise,
Then whirl the wretch from high,
To bitter Scorn a sacrifice,
And grinning Infamy.
The stings of Falsehood those shall try, 75
And hard Unkindness’ unalter’d eye,
That mocks the tear it forc’d to flow ;
And keen Remorse with blood defil’d,
And moody Madness laughing wild
Amid severest woe. 80
Lo, in the vale of years beneath
A grisely troop are seen,
The painful family of Death,
More hideous than their Queen :
This racks the joints, this fires the veins, 85
That every labouring sinew strains,
Those in the deeper vitals rage :
Lo, Poverty, to fill the band,
That numbs the soul with icy hand,
And slow-consuming Age. 90
To each his suff’rings : all are men,
Condemn’d alike to groan ;
The tender for another’s pain,
Th’ unfeeling for his own.
Yet ah ! why should they know their fate ? 95
Since sorrow never comes too late,
And happiness too swiftly flies.
Thought would destroy their paradise.
No more ; where ignorance is bliss,
’Tis folly to be wise. 100


GOLDSMITH’S; THE TRAVELLER,
AND THE DESERTED VILLAGE;
OR A PROSPECT OF SOCIETY.
Remote, unfriended, melancholy, slow,
Or by the lazy Scheld or wandering Po ;
Or, onward, where the rude Corinthian boor
Against the houseless stranger shuts the door ;
Or where Campania’s plain forsaken lies, 5
A weary waste expanding to the skies ;
Where’er I roam, whatever realms to see,
My heart untravell’d fondly turns to thee ;
Still to my brother turns, with ceaseless pain,
And drags at each remove a lengthening chain. 10
Eternal blessings crown my earliest friend,
And round his dwelling guardian saints attend :
Blest be that spot where cheerful guests retire
To pause from toil, and trim their ev’ning fire :
Blest that abode where want and pain repair 15
And every stranger finds a ready chair :
Blest be those feasts, with simple plenty crown’d,
Where all the ruddy family around
Laugh at the jests or pranks that never fail,
Or sigh with pity at some mournful tale’; 20
Or press the bashful stranger to his food,
And learn the luxury of doing good.
But me, not destin’d such delights to share,
My prime of life in wand’ring spent and care ;
Impell’d, with steps unceasing, to pursue 25
Some fleeting good that mocks me with the view ;
That, like the circle bounding earth and skies,
Allures from far, yet, as I follow, flies ;
My fortune leads to traverse realms alone,
And find no spot of all the world my own. 80


Even now, where Alpine solitudes ascend,
I sit me down a pensive hour to spend !
And plac’d on high above the storm’s career,
Look downward where an hundred realms appear ;
Lakes, forests, cities, plains extending wide, 35
The pomp of kings, the shepherd’s humbler pride.
When thus Creation’s charms around combine,
Amidst the store should thankless pride repine ?
Say, should the philosophic mind disdain
That good which makes each humbler bosom vain ? 40
Let school-taught pride dissemble all it can,
These little things are great to little man ;
And wiser he, whose sympathetic mind
Exults in all the good of all mankind.
Ye glitt’ring towns, with wealth and splendour crown’d; 45
Ye fields, where summer spreads profusion round ;
Ye lakes, whose vessels catch the busy gale ;
Ye bending swains, that dress the flow’ry vale ;
For me your tributary stores combine :
Creation’s heir, the world, the world is mine. 50
As some lone miser, visiting his store,
Bends at his treasure, counts, recounts it o’er ;
Hoards after hoards his rising raptures fill,
Yet still he sighs, for hoards are wanting still :
Thus to my breast alternate passion rise, 55
Pleas’d with each good that Heaven to man supplies :
Yet oft a sigh prevails, and sorrows fall,
To see the hoard of human bliss so small ;
And oft I wish amidst the scene to find
Some spot to real happiness consign’d, 60
Where my worn soul, each wand’ring hope at rest,
May gather bliss to see my fellows blest.
But where to find that happiest spot below
Who can direct, when all pretend to know ?
The shudd’ring tenant of the frigid zone 65
Boldly proclaims that happiest spot his own ;
Extols the treasures of his stormy seas,
And his long nights of revelry and ease :
The naked negro, panting at the line,
Boasts of his golden sands and palmy wine, 70
Basks in the glare, or stems the tepid wave,


And thanks his gods for all the good they gave.
Such is the patriot’s boast where’er we roam ;
His first, best country ever is at home.
And yet, perhaps, if countries we compare, 75
And estimate the blessings which they share,
Tho’ patriots flatter, still shall wisdom find
An equal portion dealt to all mankind ;
As different good, by Art or Nature given,
To different nations makes their blessings even. 80
Nature, a mother kind alike to all,
Still grants her bliss at Labour’s earnest call :
With food as well the peasant is supply’d
On Idra’s cliffs as Arno’s slielvy side ;
And though the rocky crested summits frown, 85
These rocks by custom turn to beds of down.
From Art more various are the blessings sent;
Wealth, commerce, honour, liberty, content.
Yet these each other’s power so strong contest,
That either seems destructive of the rest. _ 90
Where wealth and freedom reign, contentment fails
And honour sinks where commerce long prevails.
Hence every state, to one lov’d blessing prone,
Conforms and models life to that alone.
Each to the favorite happiness attends, 95
And spurns the plan that aims at other ends :
’Till carried to excess in each domain,
This fav’rite good begets peculiar pain.
But let us try these truths with closer eyes,
And trace them through this prospect as it lies : 10©
Here for a while my proper cares resign’d,
Here let me sit in sorrow for mankind ;
Like yon neglected shrub at random cast,
That shades the steep, and sighs at every blast.
Far to the right, where Apennine ascends, 105
Bright as the summer, Italy extends :
Its uplands sloping deck the mountain’s side,
Woods over woods in gay theatric pride ;
While oft some temple’s mould’ring tops between
With venerable grandeur mark the scene. 110
Could Nature’s bounty satisfy the breast,
The sons of Italy were surely blest.


Whatever fruits in different climes were found,
That proudly rise, or humbly court the ground ;
Whatever blooms in torrid tracts appear, 115
Whose bright succession decks the varied year ;
Whatever sweets salute the northern sky
With vernal lives, that blossom but to die ;
These, here disporting, own the kindred soil,
Nor ask luxuriance from the planter’s toil; 120
While sea-born gales their gelid wings expand
To winnow fragrance round the smiling land.
But small the bliss that sense alone bestows,
And sensual bliss is all the nation knows.
In florid beauty groves and fields appear : 125
Man seems the only growth that dwindles here.
Contrasted faults through all his manners reign :
Though poor, luxurious ; though submissive, vain ;
Though grave, yet trifling ; zealous, yet untrue ;
And ev’n in penance planning sins anew. 130
All evils here contaminate the mind
That opulence departed leaves behind ;
For wealth was theirs, not far remov’d the date
When commerce proudly flourish’d through the state ;
At her command the palace learnt to rise, 135
Again the long-fallen column sought the skies,
The canvas glow’d, beyond e’en nature warm,
The pregnant quarry teem’d with human form ;
Till, more unsteady than the southern gale,
Commerce on other shores display’d her sail; 140
While nought remain’d of all that riches gave,
But towns unmann’d, and lords without a slave :
And late the nation found with fruitless skill
Its former strength was but plethoric ill.
Yet still the loss of wealth is here supplied 145
By arts, the splendid wrecks of former pride ;
From these the feeble heart and long-fall’n mind
An easy compensation seem to find.
Here may be seen, in bloodless pomp array’d,
The paste-board triumph and the cavalcade, 150
Processions form’d for piety and love,
A mistress or a saint in every grove.
By sports like these are all their cares beguil’d ;


The sports of children satisfy the child.
Each nobler aim, represt by long control, 15&
Now sinks at last, or feebly mans the soul ;
While low delights, succeeding fast behind,
In happier meanness occupy the mind :
As in those domes where Caesars once bore sway,
Defac’d by time and tottering in decay, 160
There in the ruin, heedless of the dead,
The shelter-seeking peasant builds his shed ; _
And, wond’ring man could want the larger pile,
Exults, and owns his cottage with a smile.
My soul, turn from them, turn we to survey, 165
Where rougher climes a nobler race display ;
Where the bleak Swiss their stormy mansions tread,
And force a churlish soil for scanty bread.
No product here the barren hills afford,
But man and steel, the soldier and his sword : 170
No vernal blooms their torpid rocks array,
But winter ling’ring chills the lap of May :
No Zephyr fondly sues the mountain’s breast,
But meteors glare, and stormy glooms invest.
Yet, still, even here content can spread a charm, 175
Redress the clime, and all its rage disarm.
Though poor the peasant’s hut, his feasts tho’ small,
He sees his little lot the lot of all ;
Sees no contiguous palace rear its head
To shame the meanness of his humble shed ; 180
No costly lord the sumptuous banquet deal
To make him loath his vegetable meal ;
But calm, and bred in ignorance and toil,
Each wish contracting fits him to the soil.
Chearful at morn he wakes from short repose, 185
Breathes the keen air, and carrols as he goes;
With patient angle trolls the finny deep ;
Or drives his venturous plow-share to the steep ;
Or seeks the den where snow-tracks mark the way,
And drags the struggling savage into day. 190'
At night returning, every labour sped,
He sits him down the monarch of a shed ;
Smiles by his cheerful fire, and round surveys
His children’s looks, that brighten at the blaze ;


While his lov’d partner, boastful of her hoard, 195
Displays her cleanly platter on the board :
And haply too some pilgrim, thither led,
With many a tale repays the nightly bed.
Thus every good his native wilds impart
Imprints the patriot passion on his heart ; 200
And e’en those ills that round his mansion rise
Enhance the bliss his scanty fund supplies.
Dear is that shed to which his soul conforms,
And dear that hill which lifts him to the storms ;
And as a child, when scaring sounds molest, 205
Clings close and closer to the mother’s breast,
So the loud torrent and the whirlwind’s roar
But bind him to his native mountains more.
Such are the charms to barren states assign’d ;
Their wants but few, their wishes all confin’d. 210
Yet let them only share the praises due :
If few their wants, their pleasures are but few ;
For every want that stimulates the breast
Becomes a source of pleasure when redrest;
Whence from such lands each pleasing science flies 215
That first excites desire, and then supplies ;
Unknown to them, when sensual pleasures cloy,
To fill the languid pause with finer joy ;
Unknown those powers that raise the soul to flame,
Catch every nerve, and vibrate through the frame. 220
Their level life is but a smould’ring fire,
Unquench’d by want, unfann’d by strong desire ;
Unfit for raptures, or, if raptures cheer
On some high festival of once a year,
In wild excess the vulgar breast takes fire, 225
Till, buried in debauch, the bliss expires.
But not their joys alone thus coarsely flow :
Their morals, like their pleasures, are but low ;
For, as refinement stops, from sire to son
Unalter’d, unimprov’d, the manners run, 230
And love’s and friendship’s finely-pointed dart
Fall blunted from each indurated heart.
Some sterner virtues o’er the mountain’s breast
May sit, like falcons, cow’ring on the nest ;
But all the gentler morals, such as play 235


Thro’ life’s more cultur’d walks, and charm the way,
These, far dispers’d, on timorous pinions fly.
To sport and flutter in a kinder sky.
To kinder skies, where gentler manners reign,
I turn ; and France displays her bright domain. 240
Gay, sprightly land of mirth and social ease.
Pleas’d with thyself, whom all the world can please,
How often have I led thy sportive choir,
With tuneless pipe, beside the murmuring Loire ?
Where shading elms along the margin grew, 245
And freshen’d from the wave the Zephyr flew ;
And haply, though my harsh touch, faltering still,
But mocked all tune, and marr’d the dancer’s skill,
Yet would the village praise my wonderous power,
And dance, forgetful of the noon-tide hour. 250
Alike all ages. Dames of ancient days
Have led their children through the mirthful maze,
And the gay grandsire, skill’d in gestic lore,
Has frisk’d beneath the burthen of threescore.
So blest a life these thoughtless realms display ; 255
Thus idly busy rolls their world away ;
Theirs are those arts that mind to mind endear,
For honor forms the social temper here.
Honour, that praise which real merit gains,
Or even imaginary worth obtains, 260
Here passes current : paid from hand to hand,
It shifts in splendid traffic round the land :
From courts to camps, to cottages, it strays,
And all are taught an avarice of praise.
They please, are pleas’d ; they give to get esteem ; 265
Till, seeming blest, they grow to what they seem.
But while this softer art their bliss supplies,
It gives their follies also room to rise ;
For praise too dearly lov’d, or warmly sought,
Enfeebles all internal strength of thought, 270
And the weak soul, within itself unblest,
Leans for all pleasure on another’s breast.
Hence ostentation here, with tawdry art,
Pants for the vulgar praise which fools impart ;
Here vanity assumes her pert grimace, 275


And trims her robes of frize with copper lace ;
Here beggar pride defrauds her daily cheer,
To boast one splendid banquet once a year ;
The mind still turns where shifting fashion draws,
Nor weighs the solid worth of self-applause. 280
To men of other minds my fancy flies,
Embosom'd in the deep where Holland lies.
Methinks her patient sons before me stand,
Where the broad ocean leans against the land,
And, sedulous to stop the coming tide, 285
Lift the tall rampire’s artificial pride.
Onward, methinks, and diligently slow,
The firm connected bulwark seems to grow ;
Spreads its long arms amidst the watry roar,
Scoops out an empire, and usurps the shore. 290
While the pent ocean, rising o’er the pile,
Sees an amphibious world beneath him smile :
The slow canal, the yellow blossom d vale,
The willow tufted bank, the gliding sail,
The crowded mart, the cultivated plain, — 295
A new creation rescu'd from his reign.
Thus, while around the wave-subjected soil
Impels the native to repeated toil.
Industrious habits in each bosom reign,
And industry begets a love of gain. 300
Hence all the good from opulence that springs,
With all those ills superfluous treasure brings,
Are here display’d. Their mucli-lovd wealth imparts
Convenience, plenty, elegance, and arts :
But view them closer, craft and fraud appear ; 305
E’en liberty itself is barter’d here.
At gold’s superior charms all freedom flies ;
The needy sell it, and the rich man buys ;
A land of tyrants, and a den of slaves,
Here wretches seek dishonourable graves, 310
And calmly bent, to servitude conform,
Dull as their lakes that slumber in the storm.
Heavens ! how unlike their Belgic sires of old
Rough, poor, content, ungovernably bold ;
War in each breast, and freedom on each brow : 315
How much unlike the sons of Britain now !


Fir’d at the sound, my genius spreads her wing,
And flies where Britain courts the western spring ;
Where lawns extend that scorn Arcadian pride,
And brighter streams than fam’d Hydaspis glide 320
There all around the gentlest breezes stray ;
There gentle music melts on every spray ;
Creation’s mildest charms are there combin’d,
Extremes are only in the master’s mind !
Stern o’er each bosom Reason holds her state, 325
With daring aims irregularly great ;
Pride in their port, defiance in their eye,
I see the lords of human kind pass by ;
Intent on high designs, a thoughtful band,
By forms unfashion’d, fresh from Nature’s hand, 330
Fierce in their native hardiness of soul,
True to imagin’d right, above control,
While even the peasant boasts these rights to scan,
And learns to venerate himself as man.
Thine, Freedom, thine the blessings pictur’d here ; 335
Thine are those charms that dazzle and endear :
To blest indeed, were such without alloy :
But foster’d even by Freedom ills annoy ;
That independence Britons prize too high
Keeps man from man, and breaks the social tie ; 340
The self-dependent lordlings stand alone,
All claims that bind and sweeten life unknown.
Here, by the bonds of nature feebly held,
Minds combat minds, repelling and repell’d ;
Ferments arise, imprison’d factions roar, 345
Represt ambition struggles round her shore,
Till over-wrought, the general system feels
Its motions stop, or phrenzy fire the wheels.
Nor this the worst. As nature’s ties decay,
As duty, love, and honour fail to sway, 350
Fictitious bonds, the bonds of wealth and law,
Still gather strength, and force unwilling awe.
Hence all obedience bows to these alone,
And talent sinks, and merit weeps unknown :
Till time may come, when, strip’d of all her charms, 355
The land of scholars and the nurse of arms,
Where noble stems transmit the patriot flame,


Where kings have toil’d and poets wrote tor fame,
One sink of level avarice shall lie,
And scholars, soldiers, kings unhonour’d die. 360
Yet think not, thus when Freedom’s ills I state,
I mean to flatter kings, or court the great :
Ye powers of truth that bid my soul aspire,
Far from my bosom drive the low desire,
And thou, fair Freedom, taught alike to feel 365
The rabble’s rage and tyrant’s angry steel ;
Thou transitory flower, alike undone .
By proud contempt or favour’s fostering sun,
Still may thy blooms the changeful clime endure !
I only would repress them to secure : o7@
For just experience tells, in every soil,
That those who think must govern those that toil ;
And all that Freedom’s highest aims can reach
Is but to lay proportion’d loads on each.
Hence, should one order disproportion’d grow, 375
Its double weight must ruin all below.
0 then how blind to all that truth requires,
Who think it freedom when a part aspires !
Calm is my soul, nor apt to rise in arms,
Except when fast approaching danger warns ; 380
But when contending chiefs blockade the throne,
Contracting regal power to stretch their own,
When I behold a factious band agree
To call it freedom when themselves are free,
Each wanton judge new penal statutes draw, 385
Laws grind the poor, and rich men rule the law,
The wealth of climes where savage nations roam
Pillag’d from slaves to purchase slaves at home,
Fear, pity, justice, indignation start,
Tear off reserve, and bare my swelling heart ; 390
’Till half a patriot, half a coward grown,
I fly from petty tyrants to the throne.
Yes, brother, curse with me that baleful hour
When first ambition struck at regal power ;
And thus polluting honour in its source, 395
■Gave wealth to sway the mind with double force.
Have we not seen, round Britain’s peopled shore,
Her useful sons exchanged for useless ore,


Seen all her triumphs but destruction haste,
Like flaring tapers brightening as they waste ? 400
Seen opulence, her grandeur to maintain,
Lead stern depopulation in her train,
And over fields where scattered hamlets rose
In barren solitary pomp repose ?
Have we not seen at pleasure’s lordly call 405
The smiling long-frequented village fall ?
Beheld the duteous son, the sire decay’d,
The modest matron, and the blushing maid,
Forc'd from their homes, a melancholy train,
To traverse climes beyond the western main ; 410
Where wild Oswego spreads her swamps around,
And Niagara stuns with tliund’ring sound ?
Even now, perhaps, as there some pilgrim strays
Through tangled forests and through dangerous ways,
Where beasts with man divided empire claim, 415
And the brown Indian marks with murderous aim ;
There, while above the giddy tempest flies,
And all around distressful yells arise,
The pensive exile, bending with his woe,
To stop too fearful, and too faint to go, 420
Casts a long look where England’s glories shine,
And bids his bosom sympathise with mine.
Vain, very vain, my weary search to find
That bliss which only centers in the mind :
Why have I stray’d from pleasure and repose, 425
To seek a good each government bestows ?
In every government, though terrors reign,
Though tyrant kings or tyrant laws restrain,
How small, of all that human hearts endure,
That part which laws or kings can cause or cure ; 430
Still to ourselves in every place consign’d,
Our own felicity we make or find :
With secret course, which no loud storms annoy,
Glides the smooth current of domestic joy.
The lifted axe, the agonising wheel, 435
Luke’s iron crown, and Damien’s bed of steel,
To men remote from power but rarely known,
Leave reason, faith, and conscience all our own. 436


GOLDSMITH'S
THE DESERTED VILLAGE.
Sweet Auburn ! loveliest village of the plain ;
Where health and plenty cheered the labouring swain,
Where smiling spring its earliest visit paid,
And parting summer’s lingering blooms delayed :
Dear lovely bowers of innocence and ease, 5-
Seats of my youth, when every sport could please,
How often have I loitered o'er thy green.
Where humble happiness endeared each scene !
How often have I paused on every charm,
The sheltered cot, the cultivated farm, 10
The never-failing brook, the busy mill,
The decent church that topt the neighbouring hill,
The hawthorn bush, with seats beneath the shade,
For talking age and whispering lovers made !
How often have I blest the coming day, 15*
When toil remitting lent its turn to play,
And all the village train from labour free,
Led up their sports beneath the spreading tree,
While many a pastime circled in the shade,
The young contending as the old surveyed ; 20
And many a gambol frolicked o’er the ground,
And sleights of art and feats of strength went round.
And still, as each repeated pleasure tired,
Succeeding sports the mirthful band inspired ;
The dancing pair that simply sought renown 25
By holding out to tire each other down ;
The swain mistrustless of his smutted face,
While secret laughter tittered round the place ;
The bashful virgin’s side-long looks of love,
The matron’s glance that would those looks reprove. oO
These were thy charms, sweet village ! sports like these,
With sweet succession, taught even toil to please :
These round thy bowers their cheerful influence shed .
These were thy charms— but all these charms are fled.


Sweet smiling village, loveliest of the lawn, 35
Thy sports are fled, and all thy charms withdrawn ;
Amidst thy bowers the tyrant’s hand is seen.
And desolation saddens all thy green :
One only master grasps the whole domain,
And half a tillage stints thy smiling plain. 40
No more thy glassy brook reflects the day,
But, choaked with sedges, works its weedy way
Along thy glades, a solitary guest,
The hollow sounding bittern guards its nest;
Amidst thy desert walks the lapwing flies, 45
And tires their echoes with unvaried cries ;
Sunk are thy bowers in shapeless ruin all,
And the long grass o’ertops the mouldering wall;
And trembling, shrinking from the spoiler’s hand,
Far, far away thy children leave the land. 50
111 fares the land, to hastening ills a prey,
Where wealth accumulates, and men decay :
Princes and lords may flourish, or may fade ;
A breath can make them, as a breath has made :
But a bold peasantry, their country’s pride, 55
When once destroyed, can never be supplied.
A time there was, ere England’s grief’s began,
When every rood of ground maintained its man ;
For him light labour spread her wholesome store,
Just gave what life required, but gave no more : 60
His best companions, innocence and health ;
And his best riches, ignorance of wealth.
But times are altered ; trade’s unfeeling train
Usurp the land and dispossess the swain ;
Along the lawn, where scattered hamlets rose, 65
Unweildv wealth and cumbrous pomp repose,
And every want to opulence allied,
And every pang that folly pays to pride.
These gentle hours that planty bade to bloom,
Those calm desires that asked but little room, 70
Those healthful sports that graced the peaceful scene,
Lived in each look, and brightened all the green ;
These, far departing, seek a kinder shore,
And rural mirth and manners are no more.


Sweet Auburn ! parent of the blissful hour, 75-
Thy glades forlorn confess the tyrant’s power.
Here, as I take my solitary rounds
Amidst thy tangling walks and ruined grounds,
And, many a year elapsed, return to view
Where once the cottage stood, the hawthorn grew, 80
Remembrance wakes with all her busy train,
Swells at my breast, and turns the past to pain.
In all my wanderings round this world of care,
In all my griefs—and God has given my share —
I still had hopes, my latest hours to crown, 85 •
Amidst these humble bowers to lay me down ;
To husband out life’s taper at the close,
And keep the flame from wasting by repose :
I still had hopes, for pride attends us still,
Amidst the swains to show my book-learned skill, 90 •
Around my fire an evening groupe to draw,
And tell of all I felt, and all I saw ;
And as a hare whom hounds and horns pursue
Pants to the place from whence at first she flew,
I still had hopes, my long vexations past, 95'
Here to return —and die at home at last.
0 blest retirement, friend to life’s decline,
Retreats from care, that never must be mine,
How happy he who crowns in shades like these
A youth of labour with an age of ease ; 100 ■
Who quits a world where strong temptations try,
And, since ’tis hard to combat, learns to fly !
For him no wretches, born to work and weep,
Explore the mine, or tempt’ the dangerous deep ;
No surly porter stands in guilty state, 105 ■
To spurn imploring famine from the gate ;
But on he moves to meet his latter end,
Angels around befriending Virtue’s friend ;
Bends to the grave with unperceived decay,
While resignation gently slopes the way ; 110
And, all his prospects brightening to the last,
His heaven commences ere the world be past!
Sweet was the sound, when oft at evening s close
Up yonder hill the village murmer rose.
There,, as I passed with careless steps and slow, 115


The mingling notes came softened from below ;
The swain responsive as the milk-maid sung,
The sober herd that lowed to meet their young.
The noisy geese that gabbled o’er the pool,
The playful children just let loose from school, 120
The watch-dog’s voice that bayed the whispering wind,
And the loud laugh that spoke the vacant mind ;
These all in sweet confusion sought the shade,
And filled each pause the nightingale had made.
But now the sounds of population fail, 125
No cheerful murmurs fluctuate in the gale,
No busy steps the grass-grown foot-way tread,
For all the bloomy flush of life is fled.
All but yon widowed, solitary thing.
That feebly bends beside the plashy spring : 130
She wretched matron, forced in age, for bread,
To strip the brook with mantling cresses spread,
To pick her wintry faggot from the thorn,
To seek her nightly shed, and weep till morn ;
She only left of all the harmless train, 135
The sad historian of the pensive plain.
Near yonder copse, where once the garden smiled ,
And still where many a garden flower grows wild ;
There, where a few torn shrubs the place disclose,
The village preacher’s modest mansion rose. 140
A man he was to all the country dear,
And passing rich with forty pounds a year ;
Remote from towns he ran his godly race,
Nor e’er had changed, nor wished to change his place ;
Unpractised he to fawn, or seek for power, 145
By doctrines fashioned to the varying hour ;
Far other aims his heart had learned to prize,
More skilled to raise the wretched than to rise.
His house was known to all the vagrant train ;
He chid their wanderings but relieved their pain : 150
The long remembered beggar was liis guest,
Whose beard descending swept his aged breast ;
The ruined spendthrift, now no longer proud,
Claimed kindred there, and had his claims allowed ;
The broken soldier, kindly bade to stay, 155
Sat by bis fire, and talked the night away,


Wept o’er his wounds or tales of sorrow done,
Shouldered his crutch and shewed how fields were won.
Pleased with his guests, the good man learned to glow,
And quite forgot their vices in their woe; 160
Careless their merits or their faults to scan,
His pity gave ere charity began.
Thus to relieve the wretched was his pride,
And e’en his failings leaned to Virtue’s side ;
But in his duty prompt at every call,
He watched and wept, he prayed and felt for all;
And, as a bird each fond endearment tries
To tempt its new-fledged offspring to the skies,
He tried each art, reproved each dull delay,
Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way. 170
Beside the bed where parting life was laid,
And sorrow, guilt, and pain by turns dismayed,
The reverend champion stood. At his control
Despair and anguish fled the struggling soul ;
Comfort came down the trembling wretch to raise, 175
And his last faltering accents whispered praise.
At church, with meek and unaffected grace,
His looks adorned the venerable place ;
Truth from his lips prevailed with double sway,
And fools, who came to scoff, remained to pray. 180
The service past, around the pious man,
With steady zeal, each honest rustic ran ;
Even children followed with endearing wile,
And plucked his gown to share the good man’s smile.
His ready smile a parent’s warmth exprest ; 185
Their welfare pleased him, and their cares distrest :
To them, his heart, his love, his griefs were given,
But all his serious thoughts had rest in heaven.
As some tall cliff that lifts its awful form,
Swells from the vale, and midway leaves the storm, 190
Tho’ round its breast the rolling clouds are spread,
Eternal sunshine settles on its head.
Beside yon straggling fence that skirts the way,
With blossom’d furze unprofitably gay,
There, in his noisy mansion, skill’d to rule, 195
The village master taught his little school.


A man severe he was, and stern to view ;
I knew him well, and every truant knew ;
Well had the boding tremblers learned to trace
The day’s disasters in his morning face ; 200
Full well they laughed with counterfeited glee
At all its jokes, for many a joke had he ;
Full well the busy whisper circling round
Conveyed the dismal tidings when he frowned.
Yet he was kind, or, if severe in aught, 205
The love he bore to learning was in fault;
The village all declared how much he knew ;
’Twas certain he could write, and cypher too ;
Lands he could measure, terms and tides presage,
And even the story ran that he could guage ; 210
In arguing, too, the parson owned his skill,
For, even tho’ vanquished, he could argue still ;
While words of learned length and thundering sound
Amazed the gazing rustics ranged around ;
And still they gazed, and still the wonder grew, 215
That one small head could carry all he knew.
But past is all his fame. The very spot
Where many a time he triumphed is forgot.
Near yonder thorn, that lifts its head on high,
Where once the sign-post caught the passing eye, 220
Low lies that house where nut-brown draughts inspired,
Where grey-beard mirth and smiling toil retired,
Where village statesmen talked with looks profound,
And news much older than their ale went round.
Imagination fondly stoops to trace 225
The parlour splendours of that festive place :
The white-washed wall, the nicely sanded floor,
The varnished clock that clicked behind the door ;
The chest contrived a double debt to pay,
A bed by night, a chest of drawers by day ; 230
The pictures placed for ornament and use,
The twelve good rules, the royal game of goose ;
The hearth, except when winter chill’d the day,
With aspen boughs and flowers and fennel gay ;
While broken tea-cups, wisely kept for shew, 235
Ranged o’er the chimney, glistened in a row.
Vain transitory splendours ! could not all
Reprieve the tottering mansion from its fall ?


Obscure it sinks, nor shall it more impart
An hour’s importance to the poor man’s heart. 240
Thither no more the peasant shall repair
To sweet oblivion of his daily care ;
No more the farmer’s news, the barber’s tale,
No more the wood-man’s ballad shall prevail ;
No more the smith his dusky brow shall clear, 245
Relax his ponderous strength, and lean to hear ;
The host himself no longer shall be found
Careful to see the mantling bliss go round ;
Nor the coy maid, half willing to be prest,
'Shall kiss the cup to pass it to the rest. 250
Yes ! let the rich deride, the proud disdain,
These simple blessings of the lowly train;
To me more dear, congenial to my heart,
One native charm, than all the gloss of art ;
Spontaneous joys, where Nature has its play, 255
The soul adopts, and owns their first born sway ;
Lightly they frolic o’er the vacant mind,
Unenvied, unmolested, unconfined.
But the long pomp, the midnight masquerade,
With all the freaks of wanton wealtli arrayed— 260
In these, ere trifles half their wish obtain,
The toiling pleasure sickens into pain ;
And, e’en while fashion’s brightest arts decoy,
The heart distrusting asks if this be joy.
Ye friends to truth, ye statesman who survey 265
The rich man’s joys encrease, the poor’s decay,
Tis yours to judge, how wide the limits stand
Between a splendid and an happy land.
Proud swells the tide with loads of freighted ore,
And shouting Folly hails them from her shore ; 270
Hoards e’en beyond the miser’s wish abound,
And rich men flock from all the world around.
Yet count our gains. This wealth is but a name
That leaves our useful products still the same.
Not so the loss. The man of wealth and pride 275
Takes up a space that many poor supplied ;
Space for his lake, his park’s extended bounds,
Space for his horses, equipage, and hounds :
The robe that wraps his limbs in silken sloth


Has robbed the neighboring fields of half their growth ; 280
His seat, where solitary spots are seen,
Indignant spurns the cottage from the green :
Around the world each needful product flies,
For all the luxuries the world supplies ;
While thus the land adorned for pleasure all 285
In barren splendour feebly waits the fall.
As some fair female unadorned and plain,
Secure to please while youth confirms her reign,
Slights every bori'owed charm that dress supplies,
Nor shares with art the triumph of her eyes ; 290
But when those charms are past, for charms are frail,
When time advances, and when lovers fail,
She then shines forth, sollicitous to bless,
In all the glaring impotence of dress.
Thus fares the land by luxury betrayed : 295
In nature’s simplest charms at first arrayed,
But verging to decline, its splendours rise:
Its vistus strike, its palaces surprize ;
While, scourged by famine from the smiling land,
The mournful peasant leads his humble band, 800
And while he sinks, without one arm to save,
The country blooms—a garden and a grave.
Where then, ah ! where, shall poverty reside,
To scape the pressure of contiguous pride ?
If to some common’s fenceless limits strayed 305
He drives his flock to pick the scanty blade,
Those fenceless fields the sons of wealth divide,
And even the bare-worn common is denied.
If to the city sped —what waits him there ?
To see profusion that he must not share ; 310
To see ten thousand baneful arts combined
To pamper luxury, and thin mankind ;
To see those joys the sons of pleasure know
Extorted from his fellow-creature’s woe.
Here while the courtier glitters in brocade, 315
There the pale artist plies the sickly trade ;
Here while the proud their long drawn pomps display,
There the black gibbet glooms beside the way.
The dome where pleasure holds her midnight reign
Here, richly deckt. admits the gorgeous train : 320


Tumultuous grandeur crowds the blazing square,
The rattling chariots clash, the torches glare.
Sure scenes like these no troubles e’er annoy !
Sure these denote one universal joy !
Are these thy serious thoughts ?—Ah, turn thine eyes 325
Where the poor houseless shivering female lies.
She once, perhaps, in village plenty blest,
Has wept at tales of innocence distrest ;
Her modest looks the cottage might adorn,
Sweet as the primrose peeps beneath the thorn : 330
How lost to all ; her friends, her virtue fled,
Hear her betrayer’s door she lays her head,
And, pinch’d with cold, and shrinking from the shower,
With heavy heart deplores that luckless hour,
When idly first, ambitious of the town, 335
She left her wheel and robes of country brown.
Ho thine, sweet Auburn, —thine, the loveliest train, —
Ho thy fair tribes participate her pain ?
Even now, perhaps, by cold and hunger led,
At proud men’s doors they ask a little bread ! 340
Ah, no ! To distant climes, a dreary scene,
Where half the convex world intrudes between,
Through torrid tracts with fainting steps they go,
Where wild Altama murmurs to their woe.
Far different there from all that charm’d before 345
The various terrors of that horrid shore ;
Those blazing suns that dart a downward ray,
And fiercely shed intolerable day ;
Those matted woods, where birds forget to sing,
But silent bats in drowsy clusters cling ; 350
Those poisonous fields with rank luxuriance erowned,
Where the dark scorpion gathers death around ;
Where at each step the stranger fears to wake
The rattling terrors of the vengeful snake ;
Where crouching tigers wait their hapless prey, 355
And savage men more murderous still than they ;
While oft in whirls the mad tornado flies,
Mingling the ravaged landschape with the skies.
Far different these from every former scene,
The cooling brook, the grassy vested green, 360


The breezy covert of the warbling grove,
The only sheltered thefts of harmless love.
Good Heaven ! what sorrows gloom’d that parting day,
That called them from their native walks away ;
When the poor exiles, every pleasure past, . 365
Hung round the bowers, and fondly looked their last,
And took a long farewell, and wished in vain
For seats like these beyond the western main,
And shuddering still to face the distant deep,
Returned and wept, and still returned to weep. 370
The good old sire the first prepared to go
To new found worlds, and wept for others’ woe ;
But for himself, in conscious virtue brave,
He only wished for worlds beyond the grave.
His lovely daughter, lovelier in her tears, 375
The fond companion of his helpless years,
Silent went next, neglectful of her charms,
And left a lover’s for a father’s arms,
With louder plaints the mother spoke her woes,
And blest the cot where every pleasure rose, 380
And kist her thoughtless babes with many a tear,
And elapsed them close, in sorrow doubly dear,
Whilst her fond husband strove to lend relief
In all the silent manliness of grief.
0 luxury ! thou curst by Heaven’s decree, 385
How ill exchanged are things like these for thee !
How do thy potions, with insidious joy,
Diffuse their pleasure only to destroy !
Kingdoms by thee, to sicldy greatness grown,
Boast of a florid vigour not their own. 390
At every draught more large and large they grow,
A bloated mass of rank unwieldy woe ;
Till sapped their strength, and every part unsound,
Down, down they sink, and spread a ruin round.
Even now the devastation is begun, 395
And half the business of destruction done ;
Even now, methinks, as pondering here I stand,
I see the rural virtues leave the land.
Down where yon anchoring vessel spreads the sail,
That idly waiting flaps with every gale, 400
Downward they move, a melancholy band,


Pass from the shore, and darken all the strand.
Contented toil, and hospitable care,
And kind connubial tenderness are there ;
And piety with wishes placed above, 450
And steady loyalty, and faithful love.
And thou, sweet Poetry, thou loveliest maid,
Still first to fly where sensual joys invade ;
Unfit in these degenerate times of shame
To catch the heart, or strike for honest fame ; 410
Dear charming nymph, neglected and decried,
My shame in crowds, my solitary pride ;
Thou source of all my bliss, and all my woe,
That found’st me poor at first, and keep’st me so ,
Thou guide by which the nobler arts excel, 415
Thou nurse of every virtue, fare thee well !
Farewell, and 0 ! where’er thy voice be tried,
On Torno’s cliffs, or Pambamarca’s side,
Whether where equinoctial fervours glow,
Or winter wraps the polar world in snow, 420
Still let thy voice, prevailing over time,
Redress the rigours of the inclement clime ;
Aid slighted truth with thy persuasive strain ;
Teach erring man to spurn the rage of gain ;
Teach him, that states, of native strength possest, 425
Tho’ very poor, may still be very blest;
That trade’s proud empire hastes to swift decay,
As ocean sweeps the laboured mole away :
While self-dependent power can time defy,
As rocks resist the billows and the sky. 430


JOHNSON’S
VANITY OF HUMAN WISHES.
THE TENTH SATIRE OF JUVENAL, IMITATED BY
SAMUEL JOHNSON.
Let Observation, with extensive view,
Survey mankind from China to Peru ;
Remark each anxious toil, each eager strife,
And watch the busy scenes of crowded life ;
Then say how hope and fear, desire and hate, 5
O’erspread with snares the crowded maze of fate,
Where wav’ring man, betray’d by vent’rous pride
To tread the dreary paths without a guide,
As treach’rous phantoms in the mist delude,
Shuns fancied ills, or chases airy good : 10
How rarely reason guides the stubborn choice,
Rules the bold hand, or prompts the suppliant voice :
How nations sink, by darling schemes oppress’d,
When vengeance listens to the fool’s request.
Fate wings with ev’ry wish th’ afflictive dart, 15
Each gift of nature, and each grace of art :
With fatal heat impetuous courage glows,
With fatal sweetness elocution flows ;
Impeachment stops the speaker’s pow’rful breath,
And restless fire precipitates on death. 20
But, scarce observ’d, the knowing and the bold
Fall in the gen’ral massacre of gold ;
Wide-wasting pest! that rages unconfin’d,
And crowds with crimes the records of mankind.
For gold his sword the hireling ruffian draws, 25
For gold the hireling judge distorts the laws ;
Wealth heap’d on wealth nor truth nor safety buys,
The dangers gather as the treasures rise.


Let liist’ry tell, where rival kings command,
And dubious title shakes the madded land, 30
When statutes glean the refuse of the sword,
How much more safe the vassal than the lord.
Low skulks the hind beneath the rage of pow’r
And leaves the wealthy traitor in the Tow’r ;
Untouch’d his cottage, and his slumbers sound, 35
Tho’ confiscation’s vultures hover round.
The needy traveller, serene and gay,
Walks the wild heath, and sings his toil away.
Does envy seize thee ? Crush th’ upbraiding joy ;
Increase his riches, and his peace destroy. 40
Now fears in dire vicissitude invade,
The rustling brake alarms, and quiv’ring shade ;
Nor light nor darkness bring his pain relief,
One shows the plunder, and one hides the thief.
Yet still one gen’ral cry the skies assails, 45
And gain and grandeur load the tainted gales ;
Few know the toiling statesman’s fear or care,
Th’ insidious rival and the gaping heir.
Once more, Democritus, arise on earth,
With cheerful wisdom and instructive mirth : 50
See motley life in modern trappings dress d,
And feed with varied fools th’ eternal jest.
Thou who could’st laugh, where want enchain’d caprice,
Toil crush’d conceit, and man was of a piece ;
Where wealth, unlov’d, without a mourner dy’d, 55
And scarce a sycophant was fed by pride ;
Where ne’er was known the form of mock debate,
Or seen a new-made mayor’s unweildy state ;
Where change of fav’rites made no change of laws,
And senates heard before they judg’d a cause ; 60
How would’st thou shake at Britain’s modish tribe,
Dark the quick taunt, and edge the piercing gibe,
Attentive truth and nature to descry,
And pierce each scene with philosophic eye !
To thee were solemn toys, or empty show, 65
The robes of pleasure and the veils of woe :
All aid the farce, and all thy mirth maintain,
Whose joys are causeless, or whose griefs are vain.
Such was the scorn that fill’d the sage’s mind,
Renew’d at ev’ry glance on humankind ; 70


How.just that scorn ere vet thy voice declare,
Search ev’ry state, and canvass ev’ry prav’r.
Unnumber’d suppliants crowd Preferment’s gate,
Athirst for wealth, and burning to be great ;
Delusive Fortune hears th’ incessant call. 75
They mount, they shine, evaporate, and fall.
On ev’ry stage the foes of peace attend,
Hate dogs their flight, and insult mocks their end.
Love ends with hope, the sinking statesman’s door
Pours in the morning worshipper no more ; 80
For growing names the weekly scribbler lies,
To growing wealth the dedicator flies.
From ev’ry room descends the painted face,
That hung the bright palladium of the place ;
And, smok’d in kitchens, or in auctions sold, 85
To better features yields the frame of gold :
For now no more we trace in ev’ry line
Heroic worth, benevolence divine :
The form distorted justifies the fall.
And detestation rids th’ indignant wall. 90
But will not Britain hear the last appeal,
Sign her foe’s doom, or guard her fav’rite’s zeal ?
Thro’ Freedom’s sons no more remonstrance rings,
Degrading nobles, and controlling kings :
Our supple tribes repress their patriot throats, 95
And ask no questions but the price of votes ;
With weekly libels and septennial ale.
Their wish is full, to riot and to rail.
In full-blown dignity, see Wolsey stand,
Law in his voice, and fortune in his hand : 100*
To him the church, the realm, their pow'rs consign,
Thro’ him the rays of regal bounty shine,
Turn'd by his nod the stream of honour flows,
His smile alone security bestows.
Still to new heights his restless wishes tow’r, 105
Claim leads to claim, and pow’r advances pow’r :
Till conquest unresisted ceas'd to please.
And rights submitted left him none to seize.
At length his sov'reign frowns—the train of state
Mark the keen glance, and watch the sign to hate. 110
W here er he turns, he meets a stranger's eye,
His suppliants scorn him. and his followers fly :


o »An xxx yj » nui'iAii m iojijju, -*-•*•
Now drops at once the pride of awful state,
The golden canopy, the glitt’ring plate,
The regal palace, the luxurious board, 11 ! 5
The liv’ried army, and the menial lord.
With age, with cares, with maladies oppress’d,
He seeks the refuge of monastic rest ;
Grief aids disease, remember’d folly stings,
And his last sighs reproach the faith of kings. 120'
Speak thou whose thoughts at humble peace repine,
Shall Wolsey’s wealth, with Wolsey’s end, be thine ?
Or liv’st thou now, with safer pride content,
The wisest justice on the banks of Trent ?
For why did Wolsey, near the steeps of fate, 125
On weak foundations raise th’ enormous weight ?
Why, but to sink beneath misfortune’s blow,
With louder ruin to the gulfs below ?
What gave great Villiers to th’ assassin’s knife,
And fix’d disease on Harley’s closing life ? 130
What murder’d \\ entworth, and what exil d Hyde,
By kings protected, and to kings ally’d ?
What but their wish indulg’d in courts to shine,
And pow’r too great to keep or to resign ?
When first the college rolls receive his name, 105
The young enthusiast quits his ease for fame ;
Thro’ all his veins the fever of renown
Burns from the strong contagion of the gown :
O’er Bodley’s dome his future labours spread,
And Bacon’s mansion trembles o’er his head. 140
Are these thy views ? Proceed, illustrious youth,
And Virtue guard thee to the throne of Truth !
Yet should thy soul indulge the gen’rous heat
Till captive Science yields her last retreat ;
Should Reason guide thee with her brightest ray, 145‘
And pour on misty doubt resistless day ; .
Should no false kindness lure to loose delight,
Nor praise relax, nor difficulty fright;
Should tempting Novelty thy cell refrain,
And Sloth effuse her opiate fumes in vain ; 15u
Should Beauty blunt on fops her fatal dart,
Nor claim the triumph of a letter’d heart :
Should no disease thy torpid veins invade,
Nor Melancholy’s phantoms haunt thy shade ;


Yet hope not life from grief or danger free, 155
Nor think the doom of man revers’d for thee.
Deign on the passing world to turn thine eyes,
And pause awhile from letters to be wise ;
There mark what ills the scholar’s life assail,
Toil, envy, want, the patron, and the jail. 160
See nations, slowly wise and meanly just.
To buried merit raise the tardy bust.
If dreams yet flatter, once again attend,
Hear Lydiat’s life, and Galileo’s end.
Nor, deem, when Learning her last prize bestows, 165
The glitt’ring eminence exempt from foes ;
See, when the vulgar ’scape, despis’d or aw’d,
Rebellion’s vengeful talons seize on Laud.
From meaner minds tho’ smaller fines content,
The plunder’d palace, or sequester’d rent, 170
Mark’d out by dang’rous parts, he meets the shock,
And fatal learning leads him to the block :
Around his tomb let Art and Genius weep,
But hear his death, ye blockheads, hear and sleep.
The festal blazes, the triumphal show, 175
The ravish’d standard, and the captive foe,
The senate’s thanks, the gazette’s pompous tale,
With force resistless o’er the brave prevail.
Such bribes the rapid Greek o’er Asia whirl’d,
For such the steady Romans shook the world ; 180
For such in distant lands the Britons shine,
And stain with blood the Danube or the Rhine ;
This pow’r has praise, that virtue scarce can warm
Till fame supplies the universal charm.
Yet reason frown’s on war’s unequal game, 185
Where wasted nations raise a single name ;
And mortgag’d states their grandsires’ wreaths regret,
From age to age in everlasting debt ;
Wreaths which at last the dear-bought right convey
To rust on medals or on stones decay. 190
On what foundation stands the warrior’s pride,
How just his hopes, let Swedish Charles decide.
A frame of adamant, a soul of fire,
No dangers fright him, and no labours tire ;
O’er love, o’er fear, extends his wide domain, 195
Unconquer’d lord of pleasure and of pain ;
No joys to him pacific sceptres yield,


War sounds the trump, he rushes to the field.
Behold surrounding kings their pow’rs combine,
And one capitulate, and one resign : 200
Peace courts his hand, but spreads her charms in vain ;
Think nothing gain’d, he cries, ‘ till nought remain.
On Moscow’s walls till Gothic standards fly,
And all be mine beneath the polar sky.’
The march begins, in military state, 205
And nations on his eye suspended wait;
Stern Famine guards the solitary coast,
And Winter barricades the realms of Frost ;
He comes, nor want nor cold his course delay !
Hide, blushing glory, hide Pultowa’s day : 210
The vanquish’d hero leaves his broken bands,
And shows his miseries in distant lands ;
■Condemn’d a needy supplicant to wait,
While ladies interpose, and slaves debate.
But did not Chance at length her error mend ? 215
Did no subverted empire mark his end 7
Did rival nronarchs give the fatal wound ?
Or hostile millions press him to the ground ?
His fall was destin’d to a barren strand,
A petty fortress, and a dubious hand ; 220
He left the name at which the world grew pale,
To point a moral, or adorn a tale.
All times their scenes of pompous woes afford,
From Persia’s tyrant to Bavaria’s lord.
In gay hostility, and barb’rous pride, 225
With half mankind embattled at his side,
'Great Xerxes comes to seize the certain prey,
And starves exhausted regions in his way.
Attendant flatt’ry counts his myriads o’er,
Till counted myriads soothe his pride no more. 230
Fresh praise is try’d till madness fires his mind,
The waves he lashes, and enchains the wind ;
New pow’rs are claim’d, new pow’rs are still bestow’d,
Till rude resistance lops the spreading god ;
The daring Greeks deride the martial show, 235
And heap their valleys with the gaudy foe.
Th’ insulted sea with humbler thoughts he gains,
A single skiff to speed his flight remains ;
Th’ encumber’d oar scarce leaves the dreaded coast


Thro’ purple billows and a floating liost. 240
The bold Bavarian, in a luckless hour.
Tries the dread summits of C cesarean pnw'r ;
With unexpected legions bursts away,
And sees defenceless realms receive his sway.
Short sway ! fair Austria spreads her mournful charms,
The queen, the beauty, sets the world in arms ; 246
From hill to hill the beacon’s rousing blaze
Spreads wide the hope of plunder and of praise ;
The fierce Croatian, and the wild Hussar,
With all the sons of ravage, crowd the war : 250
The baffled prince, in honour’s flatt’ring bloom
Of hasty greatness, finds the fatal doom ;
His foes’ derision and his subjects’ blame,
And steals to death from anguish and from shame.
‘ Enlarge my life with multitude of days ! 255
In health, in sickness, thus the suppliant prays :
Hides from himself his state, and shuns to know
That life protracted is protracted woe.
Time hovers o’er, impatient to destroy,
And shuts up all the passages of joy : 260
In vain their gifts the bounteous seasons pour,
The fruit autumnal, and the vernal flow’r :
With listless eyes the dotard views the store.
He views, and wonders that they please no more ;
How pall the tasteless meats and joyless wines, 265
And Luxury with sighs her slave resigns.
Approach, ye minstrels, try the soothing strain,
Diffuse the tuneful lenitives of pain :
Ho sounds, alas ! would touch the impervious ear,
Though dancing mountains witness'd Orpheus near ; 270
Hor lute nor lyre his feeble pow’rs attend,
Hor sweeter music of a virtuous friend.
But everlasting dictates crowd his tongue.
Perversely grave, or positively wrong :
The still returning tale, and ling’ring jest, 275
Perplex the fawning niece and pamper’d guest,
While growing hopes scarce awe the gath ring sneer,
And scarce a legacy can bribe to hear :
The watchful guests still hint the last offence,
The daughter’s petulance, the son’s expense, 280
Improve his heady rage with treach’rous skill.
And mould his passions till they make his will.


Unnumber’d maladies liis joints invade,
Lay siege to life, and press the dire blockade ;
But unextinguish’d av’rice still remains,
And dreaded losses aggrevate his pains
He turns with anxious heart and crippled hands,
His bonds of debt, and mortages of lands ;
Or views his coffers with suspicious eyes,
Unlocks his gold, and counts it till he dies. 2'90
But grant, the virtues of a temp rate prime
Bless with an age exempt from scorn or crime ;
An age that melts with unperceiv’d decay,
And glides in modest innocence away ;
Whose peaceful day benevolence endears, 295
Whose night congratulating conscience cheers ;
The gen’ral fav’rite, as the gen’ral friend :
Such age there is, and who shall wish its end !
Yet ev’n on this her load Misfortune flings,
To press the weary minutes’ flagging wings ; 300
New sorrow rises as the day returns,
A sister sickens, or a daughter mourns.
Now kindred merit fills the sable bier,
Now lacerated friendship claims a tear.
Year chases year, decay pursues decay,
Still drops some joys from with’ring life away ;
New forms arise, and diff’rent views engage,
Superfluous lags the vet’ran on the stage,
Till pitying nature signs the last release,
And bids afflicted worth retire to peace. _ 310
But few there are whom hours like these await,
Who set unclouded in the gulfs of fate.
From Lydia’s monarch should the search descend,
By Solan caution’d to regard his end,
In life’s last scene what prodigies surprise, 015
Fears of the brave and follies of the wise !
From Marlb’rough’s eyes the streams of dotage now,
And swift expires the driv’ler and a show.
The teeming mother, anxious for her race,
Begs for each birth the fortune of a face ; _
Yet Vane could tell what ills from beauty spring,
And Sedley curs’d the form that pleas d a king.
Ye nymphs of rosy lips and radiant eyes,
Whom pleasure keeps too busy to be wise,
Whom joys with soft varieties invite,


By day the frolic, and the dance by night ;
Who frown with vanity, who smile with art,
And ask the latest fashion of the heart ;
What care, what rules, your heedless charms shall save,
Each nympth your rival, and each youth your slave ? 330
Against your fame with fondness hate combines.
The rival batters, and the lover mines.
With distant voice neglected Virtue calls,
Less heard, and less, the faint remonstrance falls ;
Tir'd with contempt, she quits the slipp’ry reign, 335
And Pride and Prudence take her seat in vain.
In crowd at once, where none the pass defend,
The harmless freedom and the private friend :
The guardians yield, by force superior ply’d,
To Int’rest, Prudence ; and to Flatt’ry, Pride. 340
Here beauty falls, betray’d, despis’d, distress’d,
And hissing Infamy proclaims the rest.
Where then shall hope and fear their objects find ?
Must dull suspense corrupt the stagnant mind ?
Must helpless man, in ignorance sedate, 345
Roll darkling down the torrent of his fate ?
Must no dislike alarm, no wishes rise,
Ho cries invoke the mercies of the skies ?
Inquirer, cease : petitions yet remain,
Which Heav’n may hear : nor deem religion vain. 350
Still raise for good the supplicating voice,
But leave to Heav’n the measure and the choice.
Safe in his pow’r, whose eyes discern afar
The secret ambush of a specious pray’r,
Implore his aid, in his decisions rest, 355
Secure, whate’er he gives, he gives the best.
Yet when the sense of sacred presence fires,
And strong devotion to the skies aspires,
Pour forth thy fervours for a healthful mind,
Obedient passions, and a will resign’d ; 360
For love, which scarce collective man can fill ;
For patience, sov’reign o’er transmuted ill;
For faith, that, panting for a happier seat,
Counts death kind Nature's signal of retreat.
These goods for man the laws of Heav’n ordain, 365
These goods he grants, who grants the pow’r to gain ;
With these celestial Wisdom calms the mind,
And makes the happiness she does not find.


NOTES ON GRAY’S-ELEGY.
1, Curfew (Fr. couvre, cover ; feu, fire) at a synod held at Caen,
in Normandy, in 1061, it was ordained that a bell should be
rung every evening for prayer, and that after it all people
should get within their houses and shut the doors. Here it
means simply the evening bell.
7. Shakespeare’s Macbeth, iii, 2. “ The shard-borne beetle with
his drowsy hum.
19, Clarion —trumpet with shrill note. Lat. clams, clear.
39. Aide —sometimes spelt aisle, but better as here, since it is
from Lat. ala, a wing, hence a side division of a church.
57. Hampden, John, born 1594, died 1643.
60. Cromwell, Oliver, Lord Protector of England, born 1599, died
1658.
76. Tenour —often now spelt tenor, though colour, honour.
84, Teach —ought strictly to be teaches, as the antecedent to the
relative is singular.
92. Chaucer prologue to Reeves Tale. “ Yet in our ashen old is
fire i-reke.”
109. )
110. ( Notice the careful choice of the appropriate prepositions,
111. ( on, along, near, beside, up, and art.
112. )
NOTES ON GRAY’S-ODE.
4. King Henry VI founded Eton College in 1440. For the
epithet holy, compare Shakespeare’s Richard 111, v, 1.
“ Holy King Henry.”
19. Redolent of —breathing forth. Compare Dryden’s transla-
tion of Ovid's Metamorphoses, bk. xv—
“ While kine to pails distended udders bring,
And bees their honey redolent of spring.”
23. Margent green —from Milton's Comus, 232. -1 By slow
Maeanders margent green.” The forms marge and margent
are common in old writers : from Latin, mar go, marginis, the
border.


25. Glassy 'wave —again from Milton's Comm, 1. 861. “ Under
the glassy cool translucent wave,” where the context suffi-
ciently explains the force of the word.
28. Succeed —note the plural in- connection with the noun of
multitude, progeny.
30. Urge the ball —urge, here in its literal application, force on,
impel. So Pope, Dunciad, iv, 592. “ The senator at cricket
urge the ball.”
32. Murmuring labours— the tasks which they are preparing half
aloud.
33. ’ Gainst —in provision for, to meet, a common use of this
word in the older writers.
44. Sunshine of the mind —from Pope's Eloisa, 209. " Eternal
sunshine of the spotless mind.”
45. Buxom —gay, lively ; originally meant pliable, flexible, from
the same root as bow. Old English, buhsum, the termination
being the same as in light-some.
50. All the substantives in the stanza are nominatives to the
verb, is (or with plural nouns, are) supplied from the flrst
line (41).
55. 1 Bin —this form printed as a contraction of them stands re-
lated to the old English heom, hem, the real plural forms of
the demonstrative pronoun of the third person.
57. Baleful —destructive, from old English, bealu, hard calamity.
61. Fury Passions —from Pope’s Essay on Man, iii, 167. “The
fury Passions from that flood began.”
69. Comfortless Despair —from Shakespeare’s Comedy of Errors,
v, 1. “ Grim and comfortless Despair.”
79. Moody —furious, raging, from A.S., mod, spirit, temper, but
narrowed in signification to a particular phase of mind.
81. Vale of years —Shakespeare’s Othello, iii, 3. “ Declined into
the vale of years.”
82. Griesly —hideous, frightful ; A.S., an-gryslie, with same
meaning, dgrisan, to be terrified.
NOTES ON GOLDSMITH’S THE TRAVELLER.
1. [Describe the course of the Schdd. Why is it called lazy.']
Slow. See Boswell’s Johnson, chap, lxiii.
2. Wandering iV.=the ancient Lat. Pad us, Ligurian Boden-
cus, Greek Eridanus. Vergil refers to its terrible floods ;. See
Georg, i. 481, iv. 872.
3. [Where is Carinthia ?]
(5. [Explain expanding to the shies.~\


11. [What part of the verb is crown 1
13. Comp. Bes. Vill. 149—1(42.
17. crown’d. Comp. Psalm xlv. 11.
19. yrra/?/«'=Welsh pranc. a frolic.
21. There are many negligences of style in this poem, as
always in Goldsmith’s writings. The echo of the word stranger
in 1. 16 has scarcely died out of the reader’s ear before here it
occurs again. So bending and bend in 11. 48 and 52. Comp, the
double recurrence of the word ill in Bes. Vill. 1. 51 :
“ 111 fares the land to hastening ills a prey,”
where the fact that in the former case it is an advb., in the latter
a subst., rather makes matters worse.
23. Cowper must have had this passage, consciously or uncon-
sciously, in his ear when he wrote 1. 100 et seq. in his lines On the
receipt of my Mother's Picture out of Norfolk.
2j . [Explain the circle bounding earth and skies.]
32. me. See note to L'Alley. 25.
33. [Why is the d in plac'd pronounced as t ?]
34. an hundred. See note on Be-s. Vill. 93.
35. [What part of the sentence is cities ?]
41. [Explain dissemble ?]
[How would you analyse all it can ?]
42. these little things. Seel. 40.
45—49. See 34—36.
48. [Explain bending.]
swains. Swain was the poet’s word for peasant in the
last century. It is of Teutonic origin, and means properly a
young man, then a servant; cf. pais, garcon, knave, &c.
[What does he mean by dress here ?]
50. [What part of a sentence is creation's heir ?]
52. As if the reckoning of his treasure was his work.
53. [What is meant b y fill here ?]
55. [How would you explain to here ?]
57. sorrows fall. so7'rows=sigas of sorrow, i.e., tears.
64. [What is the government of to find here?]
72. See Alex. Feast, 88.
74. [What is meant by his here?]
77. [What difference in the meaning would will, instead of
shall, make ?] *
84. A/ra= klria in Carniola, a town amidst mountains on the
river Idria. Near it are the famous quicksilver mines.
84. Shelvy = gently sloping. See Merry W. of W. 111. v. 15
85. rocky crested is really one word.
, 87. With the use of the word Art here comp. Johnson’s first
definition : “ The power of doing something not taught by nature
°i’ instinct.” In 11. 146 and 304 arts = the Fine Arts.
90. either is not very accurately used here ; the ther is
properly dual. It is as if uterque should be used for quisque,
(Greek : ,l ekateros ” for “ ekostos ”). But this careless use of
t f^" cr is not so unfrequent : thus Bacon apud Johnson : “ Henry
V III, Francis I. and Charles V. were so provident as scarce a palm


of ground could be gotten by cither of the three but that the
other two would set the balance of Europe upright again,” &c. So
Wither, &c. So neither in the Auth. V. of Rom. viii. 38, &c. But
perhaps either may be justified here by supposing the “ blessings ”
just enumerated, to be considered as divided into a two-fold
manner : (i.) the one prevailing, (ii.) the others, which are cast
in the shade by that prevailing one.
95. the favourite happiness. Comp. Pope on Ruling Passion,
Moral Essays , 1.
98. peculiar pain = its proper pain, the pain that especially
results from that " fav’rite good.”
108. in gay theatric pride. The stage often borrows similes
and metaphors from nature ; here nature is made indebted to the
stage !
109. [What “part of speech," and what part of sentence is
between here ? ]
111. See Virgil’s splendid panegyric on his Italy in the second
Georqic, 136—176. . , _ ..
113. Thus cherries ( Pruni Cerasi) were imported by Lucuilus,
Sic., &c.
114. Comp. Tusc Disp. V. xiii. 37 : “arboreset vites et ea
qufe sunt humiliora neque se toll ere a terra altius possunt.
115. [blooms. Explain this word here.]
119. the kindred sail. Obs. the proleptic use of the adj. So
often in Greek and Latin ; as Soph. Antig. 881, ed. Dindorf :
“ ton d' enon totnon ddaksuton oudeis pit on stenazei."
120. [Explain this line. Which is the emphatic word ?]
122. winnow here = waft, blow, with no notion of separ-
ating and sifting as commonly. Of course the word is
directly connected with wind. Obs. the use of this verb in Par.
Lost, v. 269:
“ then with quick fan
Winnows the buxom air ; ”
i.e. strikes the air as if winnowing, in a winnowing or fanning
manner. Ultimately, fan and winnow are connected.
127. manners in the sense of the Lat. mores.
132. Genoa and Venice and Florence reached their commercial
prime about the close of the Middle Ages.
135—138. [Of what architects, painters, sculptors, is he
thinking ?] .
139. Two of the main causes, certainly, of the decay of Italian
commerce were the discovery of America, and that of the sea-route
to India.
143. [What is meant by shill here ?]
144. [What is meant by plethoric ill ?]
167. bleak and black are primitively identical words. The
radical notion is pale. Bleach =to make bleak. Here bleak has
jts secondary meaning of chill, cheerless.
170. From the loth century downwards the Swiss were the
chief mercenary soldiers of Europe. See Hamlet, VI. v. 97.
178. [What part of the sentence is the lot of all . ? ]
181. [Explain deal here.]


182. loath. See note to London. ■4O.
187. trolls. One of Johnson’s definition of troll is : “to fish
for a pike with a rod which has a pulley towards the bottom,
which 1 suppose gives occasion to the term.” He quotes from
Gray :
“ Nor drain l ponds the golden carp to take.
Nor trouble for pikes, dispeoplers of the lake.”
The word is akin to thrill, drill, Germ, trollen, Fr. troler, &c.
187. finny. See Rape of the Loch , 174. This application of
the word to the sea itself is bold, and perhaps unique ; as if
squamigerum or squamosum should be applied to the sea !
190. savage. We now confine this word as a substantive to
members to the human species.
191. [What part of the sentence is every labour sped ? Parse
sped. What does the word mean ?
193. him. See me, 1. 32.
Comp. Burns’ Cotter's Sat. Night.
196. platter is of course derived from plate.
198. nightly. See note on Hymn Nat. 179.
202. enhance. Lit. forward, put forward. The stem is the
Lat. ante.
206, close and closer. Perhaps = close and closer ; but the
former comparative inflection is omitted for euphony’s, or for the
metre’s sake, just as one adverbial inflection is omitted in “ safe
and nicely,” King Lear, V. iii., “ fair and softly,” John Gilpin , &c.
216. supplies satisfies.
221. [What is the force of level here ?]
224. The of serves to make once a year adjectival to festival.
It has the force of ly in yearly. Once is treated as a snbst. one
occurence.
232. [ Can fall be justified here ? What lead him to write so ?J
235. Such “ morals ” as “ play ” in the Tatler and Spectator.
243. Compare 'Tristram Shandy , end of Book 7.
244. tuneless. See below, 11. 247, 248.
253. Gestic is cognate with gesture, gesticulate, gest (origin-
ally gest in Spencer’s F. Q. Scott speak's of the “ gestic art i
Peverill of the Peak, chap. xxx.
256. [Explain their world.']
259. Obs. this definition of what is here called honour.
262. traffic, derived ultimately from Lat. tram, and facto, is
said to mean originally “ something done beyond,” i.e. beyond
the seas. With the use here comp. “ commercing with the skies,”
11 Pens. 39, where see note.
264. Comp. Horace of the Greeks, (Lp. ad Pis. 324) :
“ Piaster laudem nullius avaris.”
273. tawdry. This word is said to be derived from Saint
Audrey (= Saint Ethelreda), at the fairs held on those days gay
hnery, especially laces, was sold. In Spenser’s Shepherds Calen-
dar, April, it has scarcely acquired its depreciatory sense :
Binde your fillets faste,
And gird in your waste,
For more finenesse, with a tawdric lace.”


277. [What is the meaning of cheer here? What other mean-
ings has the word ?]
285. See Andrew Marvell’s bitter satirical description of
Holland in his Character of Holland. He most unjustly taunts
the Dutch with what they might and may well be proud of —the
vigour and industry which rescued and protected their country
from the sea.
286. vampire = the old French form ram-par. This form
occurs often, if not generally, in the Elizabethan writers. So in
Tim. of Ath. Y. iv. 47. Our rampired gates.” So Chapman,.
&c. Holland, in his translation of Pliny, writes rampiar. Milton
uses the form rampart (Par. Lost. i. 678).
288. Indie ark etymologically, bole-work, that a rampart
made of tree-trunks. Boulevard is but a corrupted form of hul-
icark. " Les boulevards de Paris n'etaient sous Louis XIY. que
Penceinte meme [=le terre-plein des ramparts] de Paris
Brachet’s Diet. Btym.').
291. “Astranger can have a full impression of this [the
critical condition of certain parts of the provinces] only when he
walks at the foot of one of those vast dykes, and hears the roar of
the waves on the outside. 16 or 20 feet higher than his head.
(Murry’s Handbook to North Germany, Holland, See.")
302. [ls are defensible here ?]
304. What is meant here by convenience ?]
405. See what the Yicar says on the dangers of a commercial
community, in .of W akcfield , Chap. xix.
312. [What lakes are there in Holland?]
313. The Roman Bely tea included a vast number of various
tribes, lying between theSequana (Seine) and Matrona (Marne)
in the West and the Rhine in the East. That tribe, which was
settled nearest the Holland of Goldsmith's and our day, was the
Batavi. a branch of the Chatti. It was settled between the two
great branches of the Rhine. Lucan speaks of its furious warlike
ardour (i. 431) :
“ Batavique truces quos sere recurvo
Stridentes acuere tubas.”
It was a Teutonic race, as were other tribes comprised in Belgica
According to Tacitus’ account, North-western Germania was occu-
pied by the Ingsevones. The “ Belgic sires ” of the text is there-
fore a somewhat loose phrase.
316. now. In the 16th century they had fought stoutly
against the same domineering enemy as England had withstood ;
in the 17th they had contested with England the queenship of the
seas. But perhaps Goldsmith here refers to the fact that the
Dutch are our nearest kinsmen. They belong to the same Low
German race as ourselves. Their language and our own resemble
each other very closely. They are our brothers : the Germans and
the Danes are but cousins.
318. [What does he mean by courts the western spring ? ]
319. Arcadian pride. Arcadia, perhaps most noted in the
Greek and Latin writers for the stupidity of its inhabitants (see
Juv. vii. 160, and Mayor’s note), was about the time of the revival


-of learning adopted as the ideal of rural beauty. It became the
favourite scene ” with pastoral poets and romancists, as with
Sanazzaro, Sidney. &c.
320. Hydaspes. The name is a corruption of the Sanscrit
Vitasta, “ which is probably preserved in that of one of its modern
titles, Behat. Its present most usual name is Jelum.” (Smith’s
Diet. G. Sf R. Gear/.') This river was reached by Alexander, it
was the subject of many wild tales ; hence Horace’s “ fabulosus ”
( Od. I. xxii. 8). One was that it ran gold and gems.
320. Brightest streams, &c. In Goldsmith’s time there was
still a touch of silver in the Thames at London, as it now may be
hoped there may be yet again.
324. That is, the extremes of climate cannot be palpably
realized there by the happy proprietor; they can only be
imagined.
325. [What “ part of speech ” is stern here ?]
327. pert. So lion-port ”in Gray’s Bard, 117.
333. boasts these rights to scan = boasts that he scans these
rights, that he takes his part in the discussion of public questions.
345. It was just at the time of the publication of The Tra-
veller that Wilkes was issuing the North Briton.
346. [What is meant here by round her shore ?]
348. [Parse.77-re here.] »
351. fictitious. We should rather use factitious in this
■sense.
[What is the sense ?]
358. wrote. It may often seem as if the pret. of strong verbs
was used as the past part. ; but in fact the pret. seemingly so used
is the past part, with its proper ending cut off. Thus the part.
found, bound, drunk, &c., identical in form with the pret. of the
verbs to which they belong, are in reality curtailed forms of
fonnden, bounded, drunken, &c. Broke, spoke, &c., as past part.,
are defensible ; being merely shortened from broken, spoken, &c.
Oi unite the more common form of the part, was written, as in
Chaucer’s Cant. Tales, 12052 :
“ Sche never cessed, as I writtentynde,
Of hire prayer.”
Writ would be correct enough. See Shakespere passim (with
whom writ is the favourite form of the pret. also). So icrete in
Bom. of Partenay, ed. Skeat, 6401. So ywrite. For the form
wrote, and similar forms, they are probably the result of a false
anology. Asfind makes pret. found, part found, write, &c., has
been conjugated similarly. Shakespere uses wrote in Ant. and
Cleop. 111. v. 11, and Cyuib. 111, v. 2; and also thou hast fell”
{Bing Lear, IV. vi. 54); “ has took ” ( Pericles I. iii. 35). Sterne
has “ had rose ” ; see the Death of Le Fevre in Tristram
Shandy.
362. the great. This was a very favourite phrase about
Goldsmith’s time. See for instance [Hume’s essay on The Middle
Station of Life, Johnson’s Letter to the Earl of Chesterfield, &c.
The Greeks and Piomans used to speak of the good, the best in the
■same sense.


365. The literature of the last century abounds with apos-
trophes to Liberty. That theme was the great common-place of
the time. Goldsmith has his laugh at it in the Vicar of Wakefield,
chap. xix. See Cowper’s Task,\.
375. Hear the Vicar on Monarchy, V. of W., chap. xix.
380. [Read carefully the history of England about the time
of the accession of George 111., and illustrate this paragraph.]
386. See V. of W., chap. xix. : “ What they may then ex-
pect may be seen by turning our eyes to Holland, Genoa, or
Venice, where the laws govern the poor, and the rich govern
the law.”
391. These are precisely the views enunciated by the Vicar;
see the above-cited chapter.
patriot. See note on London 33.
394. Perhaps he is thinking of Oliver Cromwell ; see note on
Gray’s Elegy.
401. See the Deserted Village, Passim.
411; Oswego. This river runs between Lakes Oneida and
Ontario, as Niagara between Ontario and Erie.
412. It is said that the thunder of Niagara may be heard for
20 miles.
416. [What is meant by Indian here ! Explain how the
word comes to have that meaning.]
431. Comp. Par Lost, i. 234—7.
436. Luke's iron crown. Goldsmith " dormitates ” here. Of
two brothers, Luke and George Dosa, who were engaged together
in a desperate peasant war in Hungary in 1514, it was George, not
Luke, who suffered the torture of the iron crown. See Nares’
Glossary ; and Boswell’s Johnson,, chap. xix.
iron crown. “ The putting on a crown of iron, heated
red hot, was occasionally the punishment of regicides and rebels.’
See Pick. 111. IV. i. 59. See Nares ; and Boswell’s Johnson,
chap. xix.
Damiens was executed with frightful tortures for his
attempt on the life of Louis XV., 1757. His limbs were torn with
red-hot pincers, kc. See Hist. France.


NOTES ON GOLDSMITH’S
THE DESERTED VILLAGE
1. Auburn. There is a village of this'name, sometimes spelt
Albourne, in Wiltshire (some 8 miles N.E. of Marlborough.) which
some Gazetteers identify with the scene of this poem, quite fanci-
fully.
2. swain. A. favourite word in the Poetic Diction of the last
century.
4'.” parting. Seethe Elegy 1.
9. [Explain the use of on.']
12. [What is here meant by decent, ?]
13. See Cotter's Sat. Night , 81.
16. remitting. In the same absolute way the Greek word
aninui is used by Attic writers and by Herodotus ; e.g. Soph.
Philoct. 764 :
cos one
to pern a touto tes noson to nun paron."
[What is the force of lent here ?]
17. train. A most frequent word in Goldsmith's poems.
18. [Explain led, up.]
19. circled. Comp, went round in 1. 22. So circle and cir-
culate of the wine-cup.
21. gambol is connected with Fr. garni). Ital. gamba, Low
Lat. gamba. Gammon is a congener. For the form, it is perhaps
due to the Fr .' gambiller, to kick about.
25. [What is meant by simply here ? What is the common
meaning now?]
27. smutted. See note on motley.
■ 29. sidelong. Sidney uses “ siclew T ard” (Arcad. iii.) Holin-
shed has the form sidling wise. Probably the long is a corruption
of the adverbial termination ling, which yet survives in groveling
and darkling. So Jlatlong, headlong , endlong. Comp, noseling.
In oldest English the term occurs in the forms ling a or lunga ;
thus bceclinga—bdick wards, handlvnga=h&nd to hand. In Low r-
land Scotch the form is lins, as in liafflins (Cotter's Sat. Night
62). aiblins (Twa Dogs , 147), darklins, bachlins. &c. See a paper
.by Dr. Morris in Philol. Soc. Transactions for 1862-3.
34. were. Comp, the famous fuimtjs, Trees, fuit Ilium
(Mn. ii. 318.)
35. the lawn. See Gray’s Elegy, 100.
40. stints thy smiling plain—deprives thy plain of the beauty
and luxuriance which once characterized it. A various form of
stint is stunt.


42. Obs. the alliteration here.
43. glades. Glade, ultimately connected with glitter, denotes
a break or open space in a wood, where the light shines.
44. hollow sounding. Goldsmith does not hyphen or link to-
gether the parts of his compounds ; see below, 360 ; Traveller. 85.
bittern. See Isaiah xiv. 23, xxxiv. 11.
45. lapwing. Lap=jlap.
51. fares the land. So below, 295.
52. [What does he mean by men decay. That they decay
morally or numerically. See the following lines.]
53. See Cotter's Sat. Night , 165 :
“ Princes and lords are but the breath of kings.”
Comp. For a ’ that and a ’ that :
“ A prince can mak a belted knight,
A marquis, duke, and a’ that ; *
But an honest man’s aboon his might.
Guid faith, he mauna fa’ that.”
57. Perhaps it was most nearly so in the 15 and 16th cen-
turies.
58. rood is but another form of rod, which to begin with de-
noted the pole used in land-measuring. So perch is properly a
measuring pole (of less length than the rod). In ecclesiastical
language Rood == the Cross. i(So there is no idea of any trans-
versity in the Greek rtansos .) Hence Ilolyrood rood- loft, by the
holy rood (Rich. 111. 111. ii.) It,ood.ee (at Chester), &c.
60. [Why herl ]
66. unwieldy. Spenser uses weeldlesse in F. Q. IV, iii.
Wieldly, obsolute now, occurs in Chaucer’s Trail, and Cress.
74. manners =Lat. mores. See Trav. 230.
76. forlorn. See note in Hymn Nat. 196. lorn is connected
with lose. Comp, rear and raise, chair and chaise, &c.
84. [What part of the sentence is my latest hours to crown ?~\
92. [What part of sentence is 1 feltX\
93. an hare. Our present rule that a rather than an is
to be used before a word beginning with a consonant or a
sounded his of comparatively modern date. ! n Oldest English
(what is commonly called A.S.) the shortened form does not occur.
In Medieval writers an is the more common form thus in the
Ormulum we find an man, in Mandeville’s Travels, an hors, &c.
(Stratmann) ; but a also is found. The distinction between the
numeral and the article was only then completely forming. In
Chaucer’s writings it seems fairly formed ; he has 00, non, on for
the former ; a and an, as now for the latter. Before hhe com-
monly prefers the form an, as an hare (C.T. 686), an holy man
(lb. 5637). an housbond (lb. 5736) Ac. This was perhaps due to
French influence. In the Authorized Version of the Bible we have
an house (i Kings ii. 24, and often elsewhere), an husband ( Nun.
xxx. 6, &c.), but also a husband elsewhere, an hundred, again and
again, an host. Psalm xxvii. 3. nn hair an habitation, an hand,
an hymn, &c., but a horse. It must be remembered that the
language of the A. V. is older than the time of James I. : it be-


longs rather to the age of Henry VTII., in some points perhaps to
a still older age. as the Wickcliffite translation had much in-
fluence on all succeeding versions. Shakspere’s usage is pretty
much that which is now followed ; as “ a hauke, a horse, or a hus-
band.” Much A. about X. 111., Fol. of 1623, —" a hare,” I Tien.
IV. I iii. But with regard to many words custom fluctuated. In
the case of the word hare perhaps euphony would seem to favour
the fuller form of the article.
95. [What part of the sentence is my laity vexations past 1
Translate the phrase into Latin and Greek.]
100. [What does aye mean here ?]
hounds and horns. Titus Andr. II iii. 27.
105. surly is probably cognate with sour.
106. spurn is connected with spur, which means radically a
foot-mark. In the primative sense of to push away with
the foot, spurn is common in Shakspere, as K. John , 11. i. 24, &c.
107. latter end. A common Bible phrase, e.y. Prov. xix. 20.
109. Comp. Vanity of 11. W. 293.
115. careless = Lat, securus, and old Eng. secure. See Van. of
11. W. 355.
118. [What part of the sentence is to meet their young i 3 ] •
121. hayed,. Bay is from the old French abayer aboyer,
■“de ad. baubari. De la le subst. abois, proprement extremite oil est
reduit le cerf, le Sanglier, sur les fins, lorsque les chiens l’entour-
ent en aboyant ” (Burguv).
122. th" raoani mind. So Shaksp.
The wretched slave
Who .with a body fill’d and vacant mind
Gets him to rest,” &c.
Comp. Lat. vacuus.
[Give other instances of this use of spoke.~\
124. pause , is used technically of “ a stop or intermission in
music ” (Johnson). It is often employed in our older writers in
this sense of the nightingale’s singing.
126. fluctuate in the gale. Comp, the common use of float ,
which is ultimately connected with fluctuate, flow, &c.
. 128. bloomy is used also by Milton and Dryden.
130. plashy = puddle-like. Comp, the Dutch plas, and our
splash.
132. [ln what other senses is mantling used?]
135. [What part of the sentence is she here ?]
137. Copse coppice = old Fr. copeiz, which is derived from
couper , which is derived from the Lat. colophus a first-blow,
(Brachet).
[ The garden. Why the .?]
139. [What is meant by the place disclose ?] Comp. Words-
worth’s To a Highland Girl at Imersmaid: " These trees —a
veil just half withdrawn.”
140. mansion— the Dowland Scotch manse ; but last century
poets use it in a general sense. Mansi o was properly the house of
the lord of the manor.


14!. See the Traveller, 10—22. Comp. Chaucer’s Prologue,
479 —530. —Crabbe sketches the opposite sort of parson in his Vil-
lage, Book I :
“ And doth not he, the pious man, appear,
He ’passing rich, with forty pounds a year ?
Ah ! no ; a shepherd of a different stock,
And far unlike him, feed this little flock,” &c.
142. Forty pounds seems to have commonly been a curate’s
income about the middle of the last century. Churchill, when a
curate at Kainham, “ prayed and starved on forty pounds a year,”
to use his own words.
[Explain pasting here;]
143. See licit, xii. I.
Remote from towns, fye. See London, 6, &c.
144. place, not village or place of abode, but = post, position.
The word was especially used of political appointment ; comp.
place-man, place-seeker, &c.
146. Like the famous Vicar of Bray.
[Explain to here ?]
148. [What part of the sentence is this line ?]
155. The broken soldier. Comp, ‘’fracti bello,” Hln. ii. 13,
“infractos adverso Marte,” vEn. xii. I ; see also Hor. Sat. 1. i. 5. —
Campbell’s Soldier's Bream :
“ And fain was their war-broken soldier to stay.”
bade. Bidden and Bid (as Merck of V. 11. v. ii) are
the common, and the correct forms. See note on the Traveller 358.
156. talked, the night away. Comp, the exquisite phrase in
Callimachus’ Epigram (in the Greek usage Af the word) on hear-
ing of the death of his friend Heracleitus :
emnesthen d' o'ssa'kis a'mpotcroi
e'lion e'n ic'sxe katedu'samen.
157. [What is the force of done here ?]
159. "What is meant by glow here ?]
162. "What is the precise meaning of charity here ?]
171. parting. See Gray’s Elegy, 89.
172. dismayed = strictly, deprived of might, un-strengthened.
174. fled the struggling soul. See V. of 11. W. 149.
181. [What part of the sentence is the service part ?]
189. [Explain cliff here ?]
201 —4. These two couplets furnished Webster with mottoes,
and something more, for his two excellent pictures.
205. a,ugh 7=simply, a-whit ; as awhile=a-while. another=
an-other, &c.
207. The Village all, &c. So Ovid uses ricinia for r/icini :.
Fast. 655 :
“ conveniunt celebrantque dapes vicinia supplex.”
Comp. Twa dogs, 125 :
“ When rural life, o’ every station,
Unite in common recreation.”


208. cypher and zero are probably various corruptions of one
and the same word, bee Max Muller’s Chips from a German
Workshop.
209. tides=here times, seasons ; as in King John, 111. 85 :
“Among the high tides in the Calendar,” &c.
“ Christ-tule, I pray you,” says Ananias in the Alchemist, when
Face talks of Christmas. We still speak of Whitsuntide ; and
have a proverb that “ time and tide wait for no man,” when
perhaps tide has the secondary meaning of opportunity. Tide is
cognate with Germ. Zeit. What is now the common meaning of
the word —a meaning derived from the primitive sense—would
scarcely be pertinent here.
[What is meant by terms here ?]
210. gauge— measure the capacities of vessels. Ganger has
acquired the special meaning of one who so measures vessels con-
taining excisable liquors.
221. nut-brown draughts. As if we should say “ pale
draughts” for “draughts of pale ale.”
226. Etymologically parlour belongs to the same group with
parliament, parlance, parley, and parole. The common stem is
the Low Lat. parabolare. —Parlour originally denoted the speak-
ing room of a monastery, that is, the room where conversation
was allowed, called also locutorium. The word seems now to be
beginning to fall out of use, superseded by dining-room and
hreakfast-rsom.
[What is meant by the parlour splendours, &c. ?]
Of this department of village life Goldsmith could write
from abundant experience. See the account of his early days
given by Irving and by Forster. He had certainly often made
one in such a company as he depicts at the Three Pigeons in She
Stoops to Conquer.
229. [What is the sense of debt here ?]
232. the twelve good rules. See Crabbe’s Parish Register,
Part i. of the pictures possessed by “ the industrious swain ” :
“ There is King Charles and all his golden rules
Who proved Misfortune’s was the best of schools.”
These rules were : 1. Urge no healths. 2. Profane no divine or-
dinances. 3. Touch no state matters. 4. Reveal no secrets. 5.
Pick no quarrels. 6. Make no companions. 7. Maintain no ill
opinions. 8. Keep no bad company. 9. Encourage no vice. 10.
Make no long meals. 11. Repeat no grievances. 12. Lay no
wagers. Jonson wrote rules for the Devil Tavern (close by
Temple Bar on the river side.)
the royal game at goose= perhaps, ,the game of the Fox
and the Geese, but why called royal ?
235. chimney nere=fire-place. See note to L'Alley. 111.
239. [What part of the sentence is obscure.']
241. Comp. Horace’s “ addit cornua pauperis” of the wine-
jar ( Od. 111. xxi. 18.) See Tam o Slianter, 57.
243. The farmer's news. The farmer’s necessary visits to the
neighbouring market town would naturally make him the news-
man.


The barber's tale. The endless garrulity of barbers who
at least in the country, practised as surgeons also, is a perpetual
matter of joke or disgust with the novelists of George ll.’s time.
So too in the Arabian Nights. &c.
214. woodman. Now=a tree-feller, once=sportsman. hunter ;
as in Merry IF. of IF, V. v : “Am I a woodman , ha ? speak I like
Herne the hunter ?” So Meas.for Mens. IV. iii, 170. Cymb. 111.
vi. 28, Comus, &c.
the woodman s ballad=&om.Q praise of the greenwood, or
perhaps some tale of Robin Hood, the hero of foresters. Perhaps
it was not till after the middle of the last century that Ballad
acquired what is now its general meaning, viz., a narrative piece.
Tohnson in his Diet, gives no special sense. Formerly it denoted
a song of any kind, as in . Is You Bike It. 11. vii. 148 :
“ And then the lover
Sighing like furnace, with a woeful ballad
Made to his Mistress’ eyebrow.”
Older writers call Solomons Song the Ballet of Ballettes. Chaucer
speaks of the birds singing ballads and lay ex (Dream-el).
24(5. lean to hear. Comp. Wordsworth’s exquisite lines of a
far other listening:
“ And she shall lean her ear
In many a secret place
Where rivulets dance their wayward round” &c.
248. [Explain the mantling bliss.']
250. Comp. Jonson’s “ 0 leave a kiss but in the cup,” kc. It
was also a Greek custom ; see Bekker’s Charades, Sc. ii.
254. gloss is probably from the same root as glass. This
gloss is quite distinct from the gloss which means an explanatory
note.
258. Comp. Par. Lost, V. 899, Hamlet, v. 77.
266. See Introduction.
268. an happy land. See note to “an hare,” above, 93.
269. [Explain freighted. ]
276. [What part of the sentence is pour ?]
277. Comp. Hor. Od. 11. xv.
280. Comp. 1. 40.
281. But “sports” are not always “solitary” in the Squire’s
park ! See the introduction to The Princess, &c., &c.
283. He seems to mean that the country does not keep back
the amount of its own products that is needed for its own con-
sumption, but exports and barters away what is necessary it
should retain for what is altogether superfluous.
284. for, i.e., to be exchanged for.
285. [Explain all here.]
286. [What is the force of the fall, as compared with its
fall ?]
288. [What is meant by secure to please ?]
295. What does he mean by bless here ?]
296. [What part of the sentence is this line ?]
298. vistas— orig., views, prospects, sights, from the Lat.
video.


305. The enclosure of Commons, a measure by no means
always dictated by mere greed, but sometimes in the highest
degree prudential and considerate, has always been an extreme
popular grievance. See Latimer's Last Sermon Preached before
Xing Edward VI., Ballads on the condition of Eng. in Hen.
VIII. reign. &c., Part I. ed. Furnivall, p. 54, &c., &c. Some 1600
or 1700 inclosure Acts are said to have been passed before the
beginning of the present century. Goldsmith ignores the fact
that " half a tillage stinted the plains,” where the old Commons
lay extended. If the enclosure were made without proper com-
pensation to the Commoners, then assuredly nothing can be more
shameful.
316. arti*t= here our artisan. Contrariously artisan was
formerly used somewhat in the sense of our artist ; as in the
Guardian :
“ Best and happiest artisan
Best of painters, if you can.
With your many-colour’d art
Draw the mistress of my heart.”
“What are the most judicious artisans but the mimicks of
nature?” Wotton’s Architect , apud Johnson’s Diet. See also
Trench’s Sel Gloss.
319. dome. See note to London, 199.
336. she left her wheel. - See Mrs. Browning’s A year's Spin-
ning. Burns’ Bessie is wiser ; see his lines Bessie and her Spinhin
Wheel.
344. Altama= the Altamaha or Altamha m Georgia, U.S.
Bancroft mentions a settlement made on it near Darien by certain
Gaels ; see Hist. United States, 11. 1008, 12mo. ed. 1861.
to. See note to Hymn Nat. 132.
345. He seems to forget that there are other parts of America
besides the Tropical. For a description of the Hew World made
in a very different spirit, see Kingsley s Westward Ho.
346. [What part of the sentence is terrors ?]
352. [What does he mean by gathers death here ?]
355. “ This is a poetical licence ; the American tiger, or
jaguar, being unknown on the banks of the Alatamha.” Mitford
357. tornado and the Eng. turn are ultimately from the same
root.
358. landschape. The oldest English form is landscipe. The
second syllable is cognate with shape , ship, scoop , skiff, the Greek
shapto, &c.
360. grassy rested green. Comp “ short-grassed green,” in
Tempest, IV. i. 83.
367. thefts of harmless lore. So Lat .furta, as Catull. lxviii.
140, of Juno’s wrath :
“ Noscens omnivoli plurima furta Jovis.”
And Georg. IV. 345, of Cyrene’s attendant Nymphs down in the
sea-depths :
“ Inter quas curam Clymene narrabat inanem
Vulcani Martisque dolos et dulcia furta "


363. (/loom'd. See 318.
368. seats— Lat. sedes. See 6.
378. Was the lover never able to go too ?
386. [What does he mean by things like them!]
39-1. [Parse sapped their strength .?]
399. anchoring— lying at anchor, not in the act of anchoring.
402. He seems to distinguish between shore and strand,
making strand mean the beach, the shore in the most limited
sense of the word. Shore and shores are often used very loosely ;
as 14 He left his native shore”=he left his native land. &c. There
is no etymological reason for any such distinction. Shore is ulti-
mately connected with shear, shears, shire, share. Strand is the
Oldest Eng. strand a margin or border.
413. Comp Wither’s fine lines to his Muse from the Shepherd's
Hunting :
“ And though for her sake I’m crost,
Though my best hopes I have lost,
And knew she would make my trouble
Ten times more than ten times double,
1 should love and keep her too
Spite of all the world could do.
* % % ?i«
She doth tell me where to borrow
Comfort in the midst of sorrow,
Makes the desolatest place
To her presence be a grace,” &c., &c.
418. Tor-no's Cliffs. The heights around Lake Tornea in the
extreme N of Sweden !
Pambamarca. A mountain in South America, near
Quito.
422 Comp. Progress of Poesy, 54—62.
426. Very blest. The common English rule is to use the adv.
very with other advs. and with adjs., the adv. much with part.
Blest here may be regarded rather as an adj. than a part.
429. [What does he mean by self-dependent power.


NOTES ON JOHNSON’S
VANITY OF HUMAN WISHES.
1. Byron thought the first line ‘ heavy and useless. The poem
certainly might have begun with the second. Dryden s opening
couplet has the same rhyme, and Johnson, unable to rival him in
terseness, strove to surpass him in weight. A double tautology
has been charged on the couplet, which is said to be = ’ Let obser-
vation, with extensive observation , observe mankind.’ &c. For
the first, the critic has not noticed that ' Observation is personi-
fied, after the manner of the age. For the second, ‘ survey ’ aug-
ments'the original idea by implying comparison. There is no
tautology. The personification is copied from Savage’s ‘ Wan-
derer ’ :
‘ Come, Contemplation, whose unbounded gaze
Swift in a glance the course of thing survey.’
China to Peru. A suggestion from a contemporary :
‘ The wonders of each region view,
From frozen Lapland to Peru.’
(Soame Jenyns, Ep, to Lord Lovelace, 1735.)
6. snares . . . clouded maze. The images, which were cur-
rent commonplaces, are to be taken literally. Man is pictured as
wandering in a mist through an artificial maze or labyrinth,
the tortuous paths of which are full of pitfalls. Prior :
‘ No more, with fruitless care and cheated strife
Chase fleeting pleasure through this maze of life.’
10. airy = imaginary. A favourite epithet with Johnson.
Cp. Young :
‘ And chase we still the phantom through the fire,
O’er bog, and brake, and precipice, ’till death
18. nations sink . . . darling schemes. Holland, England,
and France had suffered severely in their financial condition
about thirty years before, owing to the collapse of great commer-
cial speculations, the principle of which were the English South-
Sea scheme and the French Mississippi scheme.
14. the fool's request = the prayer, for riches,
15. afflictive. Johnson, even in his prose, generally uses an
adjective in this form instead of the participle.
17. impetuous corerage. Anticipating the instance of Charles
XII. 191.
18. fatal sweetness. Alluding to Villiers, Harley, &c., 119.


19. Impeachment. Harley. Wentworth, and Hyde, were all
impeached.
20. restless fire. Reverts to 17, the order in which the con-
sequences are presented being inverted.
21. knowing. In the old sense = ‘wise,’ ‘ experienced.’ Now
only ironical. The transition from the previous lines is abrupt.
Sense —‘ But, setting aside cases in which talent and courage have
directly wrought the ruin of their possessors, they afford no pro-
tection against general fraud and aggression.’
22. massacre of gold, i.e. plunder of the wealthy.
29. rival kings. Johnson here partly evinces his Jacobite
principles, and admits the right of the Pretender to strike a blow
for the kindom in 1745.
31. statutes, Acts of Attainder. glean the refuse of the
sword. From Addison’s ‘ Campaign ’:
‘ The few surviving foes disperst in flight.
Refuse of swords, and gleanings of a fight,’ &c.
38. Walks. To travel on foot was a sign of poverty. The
pedestrian was safe from the highwayman.'
39. crush tli ’ upbraiding joy; i.e. surround him with the
belongings of wealth, and thereby destroy his cheerfulness, which
upbraids or reproaches you as he sings.
44. shows the plunder. A chariot or post-chaise was the
symbol of wealth, and showed the highwayman his game.
45, 46. general cry . . . load the tainted gales. ‘ Tainted ’
mere = scented. The image is from the hunting field. The cry
of men for gain and grandeur is compared to the cry of a pack
of hounds scenting their game. Johnson is again indebted to
Addison's ‘ Campaign,’ where the British army is the subject of
the comparison :
‘ So the stanch hound the trembling deer pursues,
And smells his footsteps in the tainted dews,’ &c.
48. gaping heir. Alluding to Frederick Prince of Wales, who
had a petty court and policy of his own opposed to the king and
his ministers. “ Gaping ’ = waiting with open mouth for the
crown.
49. Democritus. Democritus and Heraclitus, the laughing
and the weeping philosopher, are introduced by Juvenal. John-
son remembered Prior’s lines : ‘ Democritus, dear droll, revisit
earth,’ &c.
53. where want enchain'd caprice; i.e. in an obscure pro-
vincial town of Greece where poverty levelled the intellectual
and social condition of all.
54. crush'd conceit, &c. The uniformity of Greek character
contrasts with the variety found in modern life, of a piece = l oi
one character or colour,’ in contrast to the ‘ motley ’ colours of
modern life (51).
55. wealth unlov'd ; i.e. where the wealthy man was not
loved for his wealth, nor his death ostentatiously lamented, as in
modern times.
57. modi debate. Debates on a foregone conclusion, frequent
in parliament during the reign of the Whigs.


58. mayor's unwieldy state. The cumbrous and antiquated
pageant called the Lord Mayor’s Show.
59. far'rite s, of the people, i.e. ministers.
60. senates heard, &c. Johnson recurs to the subject of 57.
61. modish fashionable modern.
62. edge sharpen.
68. Sense —‘Attentive to descry truth,’ &c.
66. Sense—‘ The robes of pleasure and the veils of woe were
solemn toys, Ac., to thee.’ solemn toys: like Prior's ‘serious
bagatelles.’
67. maintain feed, supply with materials.
71. Sense—‘Ere yet thy voice declare how just was that
scorn.’
72. .state. Not ‘ kingdom,’ but ‘ state of life.’ canvass
=to sift, examine.
74. great = persons of wealth and consideration.
76. they mount, fe. The metaphor, which, with great skill,
is abruptly introduced, is from the sky-rocket. evaporate = dis-
perse into air : fall, like the stick of the rocket.
77. ev'ry stage, of their flight or ascent (next line).
79. sinking statesman. The allusion is especially to the fall
of Sir Robert Walpole, 1742.
80. pours ion, Ac. Alluding to the minister’s levees.
83. painted face, The patron’s portrait.
84. bright, i.e. in its glittering frame. palladium. Cher-
ished as a tutelary deity’s effigy, like that of Pallas in Troy. *
85. smoked in kitchens. Exiled to the smoky air of the,
kitchen.
90. rids = frees. indignant wall that seems to spurn its
former occupant.
91. Britain, i.e. the nation at large.
93, As in the preceding century.
95. tribes. Allluding to the ‘ tribes ’of the Roman republic
which, together with the ‘ centuries,’ answered to our ‘ constit-
uents.’ The poets of the time often trick out Britain with Roman
belongings, as lictors, fasces, consuls, &c- throats voices.
Pope : — 1 The linnet pours his throat.’
97. weekly libels. Political journals, which were eagerly read
throughout the country, septennial ale. Brewed of extra
strength for the elections, which took place at least once in seven
years. The British Parliaments are still septennial.
98. full = satisfied.
109. frowns, Ac. See the scene in Shakspere (Henry VIII,
3. 2) where the King leaves the ante-chamber ‘ frowning upon the
Cardinal : the nobles throng after him, smiling and whispering.’
112. fly. active, = fly him.
117. With age, Ac. Alluding to his reception at Leicester
Abbey :
‘ An old man, broken with the storms of state,
Is come to lay his weary bones among ye,’ Ac,


120. his last sighs, Shakspere introduces his last words
where Wolsej leaves the scene at the end of Act iii :
1 Had I but serv’d my God with half the zeal
I served my king, he would not in mine age
Have left me naked to mine enemies.’
121. Speak thou, &c. Apostrophe. Johnson, following
Juvenal in addressing some country friend, seems to fix upon one
residing near Lichfield, his birthplace. The allusion is perhaps
to Dr, Walmesley,
126, enormous weight , The image anticipates the fall of the
edifice. Dryden:
1 Rais’d a topheavy tower, of monstrous height,
Which, mouldering, crushed him uuderneath the weight,’
129. Villiers, Duke of Buckingham, the favourite of James 1
and Charles I, assassinated by Felton, at Portsmouth, in 1628,
130. Harley, Earl of Oxford, the Tory minister of Queen
Anne, died 1724. He was stabbed, impeached, and imprisoned.
The last two years of his life were years of continual bodily
suffering.
131. Wentworth, Earl of Strafford, beheaded in 1641. John-
son, a consistent Troy, describes his execution as a judical
murder. Hyde. Lord Clarendon, banished by act of Parlia-
ment in 1667,
132. The first part of the line refers to Wentworth, the second
to Hyde, to kings allied, Hyde’s daughter was married to the
king’s brother, afterwards James 11.
134, Sense—‘ What but the indulgence of their wish to shine
in courts, and the possession of a power so great that it was
equally dangerous to keep or to resign it.’
135. The interest of these lines is enhanced by their auto-
biographical character. Johnson, when once reading his poem
aloud in the Thrale family circle, burst into tears when he came
to them.
139, Bodleys dome. The University library at Oxford.
‘ Dome’ is commonly used by contemporary poets for any large
building.
140, Bacon's mansion. Friar Bacon’s tower, which formerly
stood on the bridge over the Iris, at Oxford. The legend went
that it would fall whenever a greater man than Bacon should pass
under it.
154, shade darkness.
161. These fine lines allude to the bust erected to Milton in
Westminster Abbey, 1737. ‘ Merit ’ alludes to Milton’s literary
celebrity, not to his political character : and the erection of the
monument, like Johnson’s lines, marked the gradual softening of
political animosity. The lines were suggested by Savage :
‘ Scornful he points—there, o’er his sacred dust,
Arise the sculptur’d tomb, and labour’d bust.
Vain pomp ! bestow’d by ostentatious pride,
Who to a life of want relief denied,’


Together with the same poet’s lines to his’mother :
‘ Perhaps been poorly rich, and meanly great.”
The trick of style in Pope’s, who describes Caesar as ‘ Ignobly rain,
and impotently great’; Voiture as ‘Wisely careless, innocently
gay’ ; and man in general as ‘ A being darkly wise and rudely
great.’ The allusion applies equally to Butler, to whom a monu-
ment was erected in Poets’ Corner sixty years after his death.
1(14. Thomas Lydiat (1572-1646), who in his time ranked
with Bacon for his labours in the investigation of nature, was
Fellow of New College, Oxford, and Rector of Okerton, near
Banbury. Though patronised by Usher and Laud, he lived in
great poverty. The Society of New College in 1669 laid a stone
over his grave, and erected a monument to him in the college
cloisters. Galileo (1564-1642). His old age was full of troubles.
In 1634 he lost a favourite daughter, and in 1639 became totally
blind. He died of a lingering malady.
166. glitt'ring eminence . The Primacy of England.
168. In Johnson’s Life of Waller, Hampden is styled ‘ the
zealot of rebellion.’ Cp. the Lives of Cowley and Milton. Laud
possessed both parts and leaning, but it is false to represent cither
as bringing him to the scaffold.
169. fines penalties, content, i.e. satisfy the persecutor.
170. palace = Bishop’s official residence. sequester'd =
sequestrated, confiscated. The spoliation was carried out by the
famous Court of Sequestrators.
175. show = procession.
177. gazette. Accent the penultimate. So accented by Pope
and Dryden ; Oldham uses the word with the modern accent.
179. Gree’i. Alexander.
180. Britons. Alluding to the campaigns in Germany in
1742-1747.
183. Sense —‘ Praise has such power, that virtue is insufficient
to inspire to great deeds, without the hope of fame added.’
185. unequal, through the disproportion of the means to the
end.
186. toasted nations . . . single name, e- g. Marlborough.
The next couplet alludes to the funding system, by which the
European wars were supported.
191. The example of Charles XII has been generally thought
the best section of the poem. The glowing and pompous picture
of his glory is sharply contrasted with the pathetic description of
his reverses and death,
193. A frame, Sfc. Johnson closely follows the character as
traced by Voltaire.
199. surrounding kings, Charles IV of Denmark ; Augustus
II of Poland ; and Peter the Great of Russia.
200. capitulate. The King of Denmark, who sued for peace
in 1700. resign. The King of Poland, whom Charles replaced
by Stanislas Leczinski,
202. The ‘ Nil actum ’ of Juvenal reminds Johnson of Lucan’s
description of Julius Caesar (Phars. ii. 657)-, which he translates :
‘ Nil actum credens, dum quid superesset agendum.’


203, Gothic .standards. ‘ Gothic ’in the last century gener-
ally ----- ‘ Teutonic. But the Swedes thought themselves Goths in
the special sense, and south Sweden is still called Gothland.
Gibbon —‘ The Swedes, who might well be satisfied with their own
fame in arms, have in every age claimed the kindred glory of the
Goths. In a moment of discontent against the Court of Borne,
Charles XI I insinuated that his victorious troops were not degener-
ated from their brave ancestors, who had already subdued the
mistress of the world.
210. His march upon Moscow was checked by the arrival of
Peter at Poltowa with 70,000 men Charles suffered a signal de-
feat, and lied to Bender, in the Sultan’s dominions.
213. The parallel with Hannibal. Juvenal’s example, is
striking.
214. Charles’ efforts were defeated by the intrigues of the
Czar.
215. Chance = Fortune, supplicant. Endeavouring to ex-
cite the Sultan to make war on the Czar.
219. barren strand, Norway, pretty fortress, Frederikshall,
which lie was besieging.
220. dubious hand Alluding to the question whether the
bullet which struck him came from the enemy or from his own
camp.
222. adorn a tale. Alluding to the spirited narrative of
Voltaire, by which Charles was even then, as now, ehieily remem-
bered.
224. Persia's try ant. Xerxes and Democritus only, of
Juvenal’s examples, are introduced by Johnson.
228. The multitude of his army was so great that the pro-
visions of the land traversed by it often failed.
229, Alluding to the numbering of the expedition.
232. Johnson reverses the alleged facts. Dryden :
4 Who whipt the winds, and made the sea his slave.’
The winds being contrary, and the Hellespont stormy, Xerxes is
said to have solemnly chastised the atmosphere, and thrown chains
into the sea.
233. Alluding to the submission of all country north of Ther-
mopylae.
236. gaudy. Alluding to the showy dress of the Persians.
238. Dryden :
‘ln a poor skiff he passed the bloody main,
Chok’d with the slaughter’d bodies of his train.’
241. bold Bavarian. Charles Albert, Elector of Bavaria, and
Pretender to the Imperial Crown.
243. unexpected legions. The allied troops of Spain, and
especially of France, at the head of which he took the field against
Austria in 1741.
244. defenceless realms. Bohemia. He was crowned at
Prague, 1741, and in 1742 Emperor at Frankfort, by his brother
the Elector of Colonge.


VAN!
245. fair Austria. Maria Theresa. The allusion is to her
famous appeal to the Hungarian Diet at Pressburg, 1741. The
young queen, then only twenty-four years of age, addressed the
nobles of Hungary attired in the Hungarian national dress, with
the sacred crown on her head, and the sabre girded at her side,
lladiant with beauty and spirit, she adjured them, by their duty
as cavaliers, to embrace her cause. Fired with enthusiasm, they
drew their swords and exclaimed with one voice, ‘Moriemur pro
regc nostro, Maria Theresa!’ (‘ We will die for our King, Maria
Theresa !’) They took the field at the head of their serfs,
joined by 30,000 cavalry and wild hordes of Pandours and
Croats. Leaving the French at Prague, they moved at once upon
Bavaria.
247. beacon alarm-lire. Pronounce beckon.
219. Hussar. Light Hun garian cavalry, first generally known
through this war, and introduced into the British army by Pitt in
1
250. ravage == havoc. Addison (Cato) :
‘ Heavens! would one think ’tvvere possible for love
To make such ravage in a noble soul V
254. steals to death. Charles Albert died broken-hearted in
1745. These stirring events were quite fresh in public memory.
200. passages of jog. The senses.
271. attend— hear.
274. positirely= dogmatically.
275. still—ever.
281. Im yowc=foster, increase. The phrase is Addison's
(Lines to Dryden) :
‘ And Juvenal, instructed in thy page,
Edges his satire, and improves his rage.’
288. bonds of debt. Securities for debts due to him.
291. y;W/«c=youth.
292. an age exempt, Sfc. The lines allude to the author's
mother. Sec Mrs. Piozzi’s Anecdotes of Johnson, p. 8.
293. A reminiscence of Blair, ‘ The Grave’ (publ. 1747) :
‘ Behold him in the evening time of life ...
By unperceiv’d degrees he wears away.
Yet like the sun seems larger at his setting.’
300. /i7V.y.y=load, retard.
300. Still—ewe r. The image is from a withering flower.
307. /mv«.y=modes of life views— aims, objects.
308 Allusion from Prior :
‘ The man in graver tragic known,
Though his best part long since was done,
Still on the stage desires to tarry ;
And he who played the Harlequin
After the jest still loads the scene,
Unwilling to retire, though weary.’
312. set unclouded. The image is from the setting sun. See
note to 293.
313. Lydia's monarch. Croesus. While displaying his
wealth, Solon, the Athenian statesman and philosopher, cautioned


him to ‘ consider the end of his career, descend, i. e. to our own
times.
315. last scene. Perhaps an allusion to the famous Ages of
Man in Shakspere’s ‘ As You Like It.’
316. The former hemistich relates to Marlborough, the latter
to Swift.
317. Marlborough. Died in 1722, aged 73.
318. Swift. Died in 1715, aged 78. His memory failed in
1736, and during the last years of his life he sank into complete
idiotcy.
320. birth— child.
321. vane. According to Malone, not Lady Vane, the subject
of Smollett’s ‘Memoirs of a Lady of Quality,” but Anne Yane, the
mistress of Frederick Prince of Wales, known to the reading
public by the name of Vanella. She died in 1736, shortly before
Johnson settled in London.
322. Sedley. Catherine, daughter of Sir Charles Sedley, and
mistress of James 11, who on ascending the throne created her
Countess of Dorchester. The examples of Vane and Sedley have
been said to be ill-chosen, and “ Shore” and “Valliere” have been
suggested. The poem would not, on the whole, gain by any alter-
ation ; and the name of the discarded mistress of Louis XIV will
not fall into the line without disregarding accent.
328. ask, i.e. of others.
331. falls, not=‘ ceases,’ but ‘ falls on the ear.’
335. si i/7/ry=slipping from her power.
315. in ignorance sedate. ‘ Sedate’=quiet, composed, happy
in his ignorance. Idea perhaps from Prior :
“ Seeing aright, we see our woes:
Then what avails it to have eyes ?
From ignorance our comfort flows :
The only wretched are the wise.”
Gray’s imitation of this is well-known.
316. darkling— in darkness. Not a participle, but a rare
kind of adverb, like ‘ Sidelong.’ Frior :
“ We erring still excuse for error find,
And darkling grope, not knowing we arc blind.”
351. secret ambush, &c. Sense—‘ The secret ills which lurk
in a seeming good.’
361. collective man= all mankind.
362. Sense—‘Able to conquer ill by transmutting it (into
good.)’










THE
CENTENNIAL
COPY BOOKS,
Wth Headlined & Slain Saner,
Z&&Z 000 o C <S* 05V- Jl
ill
AS REQUIRED BY
The Regulations for the Fourth and Fifth Classes under the
Department of Public Instruction.
PRINTED & PUBLISHED BY
STEWART & COMPANY, The Educational Booksellers,
and Stationer,
4 7 0 GEORGE STREET,
(Opposite the Markets.)
SYDNEY.
