

A Story of Progress


Stirling Henry ltd.
[1924-1 947 J
SPINNERS, WEAVERS, KNITTERS, DYERS AND BLEACHERS.
MANUFACTURERS OF UNDERWEAR, SPORTSWEAR AND
INDUSTRIAL CLOTHING.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS 1946-47.
H. R. Bowker Chairman
Lister Stirling Henry 1 T ■ * ,
> Joint Managing Directors
Hudson Henry
F. A. Johns General Manager
I. E. Carr
Secretary: E. Hoile
Registered Office: The Crescent, Flemington, N.S.W.


Foundations
THE COMPANY OF Stirling Henry Ltd. was
established on March 15, 1924. Up to this
time, the late Managing Director, Robert Stirling
Henry, was engaged in the importing and
indenting of knitted garments from overseas. In
that year the Australian Government placed
heavy tariffs on garments of this type and Mr.
Henry decided to meet the situation by importing
knitted fabric direct. The next step was the
installation, in a room in premises in Wentworth
Avenue, Sydney, of a small sewing plant to make
the cloth into garments. This sewing plant was
afterwards moved to Wembley House, George
Street, where 28 machinists were employed.
Shortly after the new Company was launched
a fresh difficulty had to be faced —the imposition
of customs tariffs on the cloth itself. Again Mr.
Henry showed his foresight and business acumen.
Realising new possibilities, in 1927 he bought a
knitting plant, installing it in a rented building
at Summer Hill, together with the necessary
dyeing and finishing machinery. The yarns used
for knitting were at first imported, but in a short
while were procurable from the newly-established
cotton spinners in Australia. The sewing plant
was also established in this building, but later on
was substantially increased and transferred to
Parramatta Road, Camperdown, thus making
room for additional knitting plant to be installed
at Summer Hill.
The Company continued to expand even
during the depression years of 1929 to 1933
under the inspiring leadership of Robert Stirling
Henry. Additional plant in both knitting and
spinning departments was installed and sales
continued to grow. Then in 1936 the Company
made a big step forward. Finding difficulty in
procuring a sufficient supply of cotton yarn from
the local spinners, Mr. Henry decided to make
the Company independent in this respect. With
his customary vigor and organising ability he
secured the freehold of a site at Flemington
comprising 4| acres, purchased the plant in
England, installed it and had it in production
within four months. This achievement made
the Company a complete unit for the production
of knitted garments from the raw cotton onwards.
The Company also transferred the knitting plant
to Flemington during this year. Subsequently
the Company acquired additional adjoining land
apd the area now totals 27 acres.
Continuing its progressive policy, the
Company in 1938 erected the first section of its
modern premises—the Cotton Weaving Mill—on


The late Robert Stirling Henry.
its freehold at Flemington. The latest types of
automatic looms, together with complete dyeing
and finishing machinery and equipment, were
purchased in England and installed early in 1939.
With the operation of these an entirely new line
of production of woven cotton fabrics was
introduced into the Company’s sales programme.
The Company was now in a position to absorb
most of the yarn produced by its spinning plant.
During the year 1940 further progress was
made by the addition of a new' building at
Flemington to house the sewing plant and to form
the administrative block, which were then
transferred from Camperdown, All the productive
activities of the Company are now located in the
one area on the Company’s own property. A
modern cafeteria was erected in 1942 to provide
meal services to the Company’s employees, and
production was increased still further by extensive
additions to the w'eaving mill. Expansion was
made during this year also by the provision of
a new building and extensive plant to enable the
Company to cope promptly and efficiently with
its engineering problems, in the maintenance of
plant, machinery and buildings.
An important new department was opened
up in May, 1946, when the erection of a modern
factory building of 24,000 square feet was
completed. The latest types of machinery for
the manufacture of industrial clothing etc,, from
the Company’s own woven cotton fabrics was
installed. During this year also the Knitting
Mil! was extended to house new plant to the
value of £15,000.
Thus has the Company of Stirling Henry
Ltd. grown during a short period of 23 years.
The range of production has been extended and
expanded, extensive freehold property has been
acquired, new buildings have been erected,
valuable and modern plant has been installed,
and the payroll has increased from 28
employees to more than 1000. Behind this
amazing achievement lies the vision, courage and
organising genius of the founder, the late Robert
Stirling Henry. Unexpectedly in July, 1943,
he died. The present management, trained under
his personal supervision, are proud to know that
they are continuing that tradition of progressive
expansion and service to the community which
has always been linked with the name of Stirling
Henry Ltd.
ions


Fully matured cotton.
King Cotton


OVER THE CENTURIES cotton has justly
earned its title of KING COTTON. The
use of it for clothing and materials antedates by
many hundreds of years the Christian era. It
is known that Alexander the Great found it in
general use in India during his conquest of that
country. The writings of Herodotus and Pliny
tell us that the excellence of its fibre was known
to the ancient Greeks and Romans, and Herodotus
wrote circa 425 8.C.: "There are trees which
grow wild in India the fruit of which is wool
exceeding in beauty and goodness that of sheep”.
Columbus found it worn by the natives of the
New World, and in the conquests of Peru and
Mexico cotton cloth was noted as being in general
use.
The first reference to cotton in England has
been traced to the Wardrobe Act of 1212, when
the price of candle wicks was stated therein at
12 pence. Despite the thriving textile industry
existing in England from the twelfth century
onwards, cotton was of little importance for many
years. Manufacturers concentrated on wool,
and high tariffs were placed on the importation
of cotton to prevent its competing against the
established woollen industry.
With the invention of the "Spinning Jenny”
by Hargreaves, and the spinning frame by
Arkwright, an extraordinary fillip was given to the
spinning and manufacture of cotton and the
industry rapidly became one of the most
important in the country. These inventions
were closely guarded, their exportation was
prohibited and penalties were even imposed on
the emigration of textile artisans. England soon
grew to be the largest producer of cotton goods
in the world and still holds a position of
predominance in many respects amongst the
world’s cotton manufacturing nations.
Cotton has been a leading product of the
U.S.A. since the foundation of the English
colonies in America. When Elias Whitney
patented his Cotton Gin in 1794 a vastly improved
method of separating the cotton fibres from the
seed was put into practice, and this enabled mills
to secure much more efficient results in processing
and manufacture. A very great increase in the
demand for cotton goods resulted, which in turn
called for an increase in cotton acreage, and
U.S.A. quickly developed into the world’s largest
grower of cotton.
The cotton plant is a sub-tropical one and
the names of 61 countries are included in a list
of the world’s cotton-growing areas. U.S.A.
produces 40 per cent., and India 18 per cent., of
the world’s crop, these two countries being the
largest producers. Substantial quantities are
also grown in the U.S.S.R., China, Brazil,
and Egypt, and cotton growing has also been
established in the British Empire areas of Sudan,
Kenya and Uganda.
Cotton was first grown in Australia during
the years of the American Civil War, when the
blockade of the Southern States, which were most
important growers of cotton, prevented the great
Lancashire mills receiving the raw material which
formed their life-blood. The crop reached some
importance for a few years and substantial
quantities were grown and exported.
ion


However, due to cheap labour conditions in
foreign countries, this attempt to establish
cotton growing in Australia was short-lived.
After the First World War cotton growing was
resumed in Queensland in 1920 and yearly crops
have been produced since. In the 1927 season
4,824 bales were grown. The largest crop
harvested in Australia was 17,47! bales in 1934,
and the crop in 1939 was 12,447 bales. Since
then a fall in production has occurred, due to
manpower shortages.
The Queensland Land Investigation Bureau
is conducting an extensive survey into cotton
growing, with special emphasis on the question
of irrigation, and should this prove fruitful it
would appear that a large increase in the
production of raw cotton in Australia could be
effected. The whole of the Australian-grown
cotton crop is absorbed by Australian spinning
mills, and it has been estimated that this provides
a little less than 4 per cent, of the country’s
actual consumption of raw cotton.
In addition to its use as a fibre for
manufacture into textile fabrics, cotton is a most
important source of supply for many articles of
everyday use. Amongst these can be named
edible oils, medicinal preparations, cosmetics,
washing powders, soap, candles, insulating
materials, protein stock foods, fertiliser, stuffing
materials for mattresses, upholstery, etc., surgical
dressings, paper, explosives, plastics, lacquers and
enamels, cordage, twines, tyre fabrics, etc.
The cotton industry is the largest single
industry in the world in regard to the number
of people employed, monetary value, agricultural,
manufacturing and commercial importance.
About 90 million acres of cotton are grown and
harvested annually, and world production in 1939
was 31 million bales. At the termination of the
First World War the world’s crop was 20 million
bales, and this very considerable increase of over
50 per cent, during the 20-year period was
achieved in competition with an amazing
expansion of synthetic fibre production from a
negligible quantity in 1919 to a world output of
five million bales in 1940. So King Cotton still
more than holds its own and remains the
predominant textile fibre throughout the world.
Aerial view of the Queensland Cotton Board’s ginnery and cotton seed oil mill.


f rom Bale to Box
An aerial view of Stirling Henry
Ltd. Cotton Mills, at Flemington,
New South Wales.
THE COTTON MILL of Stirling Henry Ltd,
produces cotton yarns of different counts,
cotton fabrics of various textures and a wide range
of garments in underwear, lingerie, sportswear,
industrial clothing, shorts, play overalls and
shirts, complete from the raw material to the
finished garment. Thus the use of the term from
"Bale to Box” is descriptive of the Company’s
activities. In the case of industrial clothing,
shorts, play overalls and shirts, this is unique in
Australia and, it is believed, throughout the
industrial world.
To accomplish all this the raw cotton
has to go through many processes involving
a high degree of technical skill and the
employment of much valuable machinery.
The bale of cotton as received at the mill is in
a very compressed state, and contains much dirt
and foreign matter. Moreover, quality materially
varies from bale to bale. To overcome this,
small quantities are taken from each of several
bales, thus obtaining a mix which can be
repeated and which will enable the mill to produce
a uniform product over a long period.


'J’HE FIRST machining operation takes place in
the "blow room”. A standard mix of raw
cotton is fed into a machine consisting of six
different units. This machine pulls apart large
bunches of compressed cotton into small tufts,
beats the cotton about within an enclosure,
condenses the fibres from the air blowing it
through, removes dirt, etc., and delivers the cotton
in a continuous roll or sheet termed a "lap” for
the next operation in the card room.
'J’HE OBJECTS of the carding process are to
open the cotton more completely, to remove
any accompanying foreign matter, to separate the
very short fibres from the main portion of the
cotton and to produce a continuous end termed a
"sliver”. The "lap” from the blow room is
broken up by hardened tempered steel wire
"clothing”, a vibrating comb strips the fibres
gently from the surface, and the wide sheet of
fibres is passed through a funnel-shaped opening
forming a "sliver”. This is delivered loosely
coiled into a can for easy conveyance to the next
machine.
'J’HE "SLIVER” is now taken to the drawing
frame, the purpose being to straighten the
fibres and to reduce the size of the strand which
they compose. This is important because it
arranges the fibres more nearly parallel to each
other and to the direction of the strand, which
helps to produce uniform, strong and smooth
yarn. The cotton now goes to the "slubber” and
then into the intermediate, or roving, frame.
These machines reduce the strand to a suitable
size, slightly twist it to give it strength, arrange
the coils of each layer regularly side by side and
wind it in regulated layers on bobbins of suitable
size and shape. The strand thus achieved is
termed a roving.
A section of the blow room.
The carding process.
A “slubber" in action.
b


A modern spinning frame.
Beaming a warp for weaving.
Sizing the warp.
'PHE OPERATION of the spinning frame may
be divided into three essential steps: —
1. The reduction of "roving” to the
required final size or count.
2. The twisting of this strand to give
strength.
3. The winding of this yarn on a suitable
package for the purpose required.
For generations each of these processes was
done by hand, but the modern spinning frame
accomplishes all of them continuously and
simultaneously. The yarn thus completed may
be delivered as yarn against orders from other
knitting or weaving firms, or may be routed
through the Stirling Henry Mill to the knitting
or weaving sections.
•
JTOLLOWING the cotton first through the
weaving mill, the next process is that of
warping. The object of this is to assemble the
cones of yarn on a creel and with uniform tension
gather a predetermined number, say, 350-600
ends, together into a horizontal sheet of yarn
in which the threads are equally spaced at a width
desired and all of a specified length. The result
is a "beam” containing what will eventually form
the warp of the fabric to be woven.
•
gIZING or "slashing” is now necessary for at
least three reasons common to all cotton
fabrics: Firstly to give tensile strength,
secondly to avoid friction during weaving, thirdly
to give an acceptable handle or feel to the fabric.
The warp is passed through the size box
containing the prepared sizing preparation,
through squeeze rollers, through the cylinder
drying enclosure, over a series of separating rods,
through an expansion comb, round a large roller,
over another roller down to the "beam” ready
for the weaving process.
| from afe to ox


An automatie loom weaving cotton drin
THE PROCESS OF WEAVING transforms
cotton yarn into cloth. It consists of
interlacing two sets of threads —the warp and
the weft —in a machine known as a "loom”.
This may be accomplished in many ways to
provide different types of cloth, patterns, etc.
The beam of sized warp yarn is placed on
the loom and the warp threads are "drawn in ’
through the "harness heddles” and "reeds” in
accordance with a prearranged pattern prepared
by the designer.
With the loom in operation, it will be seen
there are three primary motions: —
(a) The dividing of the warp threads into
two groups, upper and lower.
(b) The passing of the shuttle containing
the weft yarn across the loom, inserting
a weft thread between the upper and
lower warp threads.
(c) The pushing of the loose weft thread
by the "reed” up next to the previous
weft thread.
The dyehouse receives the "greige” goods
from the weaving mill for what is known in the
trade as "wet processing”. Here piece goods are
de-sized, bleached or dyed as required or
"developed” into khaki. In addition to
processing the products of the weaving mill, the
dyehouse dyes and bleaches large quantities of
cotton piece goods for trade customers of the
Company. It is a far cry from the hit-or-miss
methods of former times to the modern dyehouse.
A view in the weaving dyehouse.


A batch of circular knitting machines.
JN THE KNITTING MILL both rayon and
woollen yarns are introduced, in addition to
the cotton yarns produced by the Company and
other cotton yarns imported from overseas. At
present the rayon yarns used are exclusively
British from the world-famous firm of Courtaulds,
and the woollen yarns are from local spinners. The
knitting mill is divided into two sections, in one
of which circular cotton and woollen fabrics are
produced, and in the other rayon fabrics of both
circular and warp loom construction such as
locknit milanese and swami are knitted.
Knitting is the art of constructing a fabric
on needles, by the interlooping of one or more
yarns in several series of connected loops hanging
on and supporting each other. Considerable
variety in pattern can be achieved by the use of
differing stitches such as rib, plain or purl and
by a combination or modification of these to
produce other stitches or fancy effects. Texture
also can be varied by the use of finer yarns and
machines. In addition to producing knitted
fabrics for the Company’s own use, the Knitting
Mill provides other firms making up knitted
goods with fabrics suitable for their purposes.
Top : A modern development —warp loom knitting.
Bottom: Dyeing knitted fabrics.
An additional dyehouse is attached to the
knitting mill to give the production of knitted
fabrics the special treatment required. Here
woollen, cotton, rayon and union fabrics are
bleached or dyed as required, dried in special
drying rooms, calendered, and finished ready for
despatch to the underwear factory or to trade
customers, as the case may be.
B B


r | I HH UNDERWEAR factory is the oldest unit
of the Stirling Henry Company. It dates back
to a small room in Wentworth Ave., Sydney, with
28 employees. To-day it can provide employment
for approximately 350 operatives, and produces a
full range of underwear and of sports shirts and
pullovers for all ages and both sexes. Here the
fabric received from the knitting mill is cut and
sewn to make the finished garment. This
involves many operations in which a variety of
specialised sewing machines are necessary. The
Company has kept well abreast of the latest
developments in this branch of the industry by
providing the most modern machinery obtainable.
The factory produces in the region of 2,000,000
garments per year, providing an integral and
important part of the story of "From Bale to
Box",
Portion of the new industrial clothing factory.
Main warekouse and despatch room.
Underwear cutting and sewing room.
yHE INDUSTRIAL clothing factory is the
lusty baby of the mill. Commencing in its
modern factory building a little over 12 months
ago, with a nucleus of 96 operatives transferred
from the underwear factory, it now employs 135.
Production has increased 31 times to a current
rate of half-a-million garments per annum. Here
the woven cloth received from the weaving mill
is cut and sewn to form the finished garment.
A great variety of specialised sewing machines
is also required in this department, with
operatives specially trained in their use. The
Company may again claim to have provided this
department with the latest and most modern
equipment of its type in Australia.
r pHH WAREHOUSE and despatch room
provides the last link in the chain of
operations forming the story of "From Bale to
Box"’. Here the goods are received from the
various production departments for despatch to
the Company’s customers throughout the length
and breadth of Australia. During the year the
despatch room sent out approximately 2,500,000
garments of various types, 1,000,000 yards of
woven fabrics, 750,000 lbs, of knitted fabrics,
and 1,500,000 yards of dyed materials-
rfHUS is the saga of "From Bale to Box"
completed. I his unique industrial achievement
bears witness to the efficiency and loyalty of the
Company’s employees. Ihe management is
pleased to have the opportunity of expressing its
appreciation of the co-operation which has always
been forthcoming from every member of the
organisation throughoist its history.
b


Merchandising
gINCE ITS INCEPTION the sales of Stirling
Henry products have continued to increase
substantially. Manufacturing cotton goods and
garments that are to a great extent essential articles
of everyday use, the Company has always been able
to merchandise its products to a large and
growing clientele. Its history reveals that even
during the depression years of the early ’thirties
production and sales expanded, showing that
there is a consistent demand for the Company’s
goods.
Stirling Henry garments are distributed
throughout the length and breadth of Australia
on a basis that has built up a valuable connection
with a long list of satisfied customers. Owing to
existing shortages of cotton goods in this country
after the years of war, the Company is following
the policy of "Australia First” and has
consequently been unable to accept the many
large orders offered from overseas. However,
first-class connections have been established in
the export trade and the Sales Department is in
a position to take full advantage of all
opportunities in this direction when the
production position permits.
Sales for the year ended 1947 showed a 20%
increase on the previous record year. The
management looks forward with confidence to a
continuance of its policy of progressive expansion
and of service to the community through its
customers in the trade.
A selection of Stirling Henry
garments. Top right: Terry
cloth pullover. Centre: Men’s
combination overalls. Below
left: Men’s sports shirt,
track shirt and short under-
pants. Below right: Swami
lingerie, vest and knickers.


Employee Relationship
Left: Qualified
Sister with patient
in First-aid room.
Below: Lunchtime
recreations.
gINCE ITS FOUNDATION one of the primary
objectives of the Company has been to make Stirling
Henry Ltd. Colton Mills a good place in which ro
work. Wherever possible, earnings are based on an
incentive system, so that each worker may be paid in
accordance with the effort put forth by him or her.
In this connection, it is a Company policy, as far as
possible, to maintain the purchasing power level of wages
on the highest scale, consistent with sound financial
management.
Recognising that contentment of mind, agreeable
surroundings, a sense of security and mutual respect
between employer and employee are important elements
m the job, the Company has provided, and wall continue
to provide, all possible amenities for its staff. The cafe,
situated in beautiful park-like grounds, provides hot
meals as well as buffet service for ail employees at much
less than city prices. It is organised, controlled and
financed by the Company for the service of its employees,
and all profits derived from this activity are transferred
entirely to the credit of The Stirling Henry Ltd.
Employees' Welfare Fund. A Committee consisting of
a representative from each department reports on and
makes recommendations to the Trustees concerning all
applications for assistance from this fund.
In the later additions to the mill buildings the
most modern factory construction has been adopted,
together with the provision of the most up-to-date
machines. Hot and cold showers, footbaths, fluorescent
lighting, sun-verandah, large windows, etc., have been
installed and. constant attention is always being paid
to modern improvements,
'pHE COMPANY has in operation a non-contributing
Superannuation bund which becomes available free
to all employees on attainment of five years' service. A
Group insurance Plan, of which many of the older
employees are members, is also in operation and is
subsidised by the Company, The health of employees
receives every possible attention. A qualified Sister, with
a well-equipped First Aid Room, is in full-time
attendance, ready ro give assistance and advice at all
nines, Regular programmes of "Music While You
Work ! relieve the pressure of the daily job, and games
provide healthful relaxation m the lunch-time recess.
The Social Services Department has the special duty
of organising for the welfare and promoting the general
happiness of all employees.
Cricket, tennis and cricko teams have been formed
and with social functions such as dances, picture
evenings, hiking outings, sporting tournaments, etc., are
playing their part in this way. The "Stirling News" is
published monthly as a House Newspaper and its chatty
news of the doings and personalities in the various
departments, as well as some well chosen instructional
articles, provide interest and entertainment for ail
employees. One ot the major factors in the success of
Stirling Henry Ltd. is the loyalty and co-operation which
the Company has always received from its employees.
It is a basic belief that there exists a real and viral
responsibility of the Company to its employees as well as
a responsibility of the employees to the Company.
The modern factory cafeteria is surrounded by lawns and gardens.


W ar Eff ort
DURING WORLD WAR TWO the Company
played its part splendidly in meeting the
demands made on industry by the needs of the
Australian war programme. Essential supplies
were provided for both the Australian and U.S.A.
Army, Navy and Air Forces. These consisted
of cotton and wool and cotton underwear of
various types, anti-flash helmets, khaki and jungle
green shorts, trousers and combination overalls,
drill cloth and cotton gauze for bandages.
JN ADDITION, the Company supplied yarns
and fabrics to other companies to enable them
to complete essential defence contracts. With
the demand for jungle green clothing for the
armed forces in Malaya, New Guinea, etc., the
Company’s dyehouse re.dyed large quantities of
khaki garments and drill into jungle green for
the troops, and treated a wide variety of materials
ranging from mosquito-netting to duck and
canvas by rot-proofing and mildew-proofing for
tropical service. On the entry of Japan into
the war, 4000 shirts and 4000 trousers in khaki
were received at the mill from the Defence
Department on a Saturday afternoon, were dyed
jungle green and placed on planes for New
Guinea by mid-day on Monday. Not being
equipped for garment dyeing, improvised
methods had to be employed which made this a
notable effort.
the assistance of Manpower Directorate,
the Company maintained a 24-hour
production schedule, three full shifts being
worked. At times war service production
reached 95 '/ of total mill output, it being
necessary, at the desire of the authorities, to
keep a small proportion to meet essential civil
requirements.
CONTINUING its service to the country, the
Company cut many bales of material for the
purposes of the Australian Red Cross Society,
and the employees donated a motor ambulance
for the Society’s work, in addition to many
other patriotic efforts-


Subsudiaru Company
JN 1941 the Company established in Auckland,
New Zealand, the Auckland Knitting Mills
Ltd. This Mill specialises in the production of
knitted fabrics for the manufacture of underwear
and sportswear. This subsidiary of Stirling
Henry Ltd. has carried on successfully since its
inception and provides a useful unit in the
industrial economy of our sister Dominion.
Tomorrow
'J'HE Company’s Management looks forward
with confidence to a successful continuance
of a policy of progressive expansion. In the
year 1943-44 the Australian Cotton Industry as
a whole manufactured 17,000,000 square yards
of cotton cloth, whilst 133,000,000 square yards
were imported from various overseas sources.
There is a big leeway to be made up by local
production to meet the local demand and many
types of cotton goods are not yet manufactured
in Australia.
The Company has prepared plans for the
purchase of additional plant and the erection
of buildings to house same, which will be carried
into effect as time and opportunity permit. A
commencement has been made with the building
of a modern factory in Brisbane, the first portion
of which is expected to be in operation by the
end of 1947. In view of the great possibilities
in front of the cotton industry in Australia and
with an energetic and progressive management,
Stirling Henry Ltd. can look forward to an
assured future of sound commercial expansion.
This young and vigorous Company will most
assuredly play an important part in the industrial
growth of Australia and, by providing an
essential service to its people, help greatly to
’build up the welfare of the community in general.
Architect’s sketch of proposed new plant for Stirling Henry Ltd. at Brisbane, Queensland, as it will appear when completed.


Produced by
OSWALD L. ZIEGLER
- for
STIRLING HENRY LTD.
Design by CERT SELLHEIM
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by W. E. Smith Ltd., Sydney
