

l (j lir/f
STONE IMPLEMENTS OP THE ABORIGINES OF
AUSTRALIA AND SOME OTHER COUNTRIES.
BY THE
Eev. peter macpiierson, m.a.




Stone Implements of the Aborigines of Australia
and some other countries.
By the Res 7. Peter MacPiierson, M.A.
[Read before the Royal Society of N.S, W., 4 November, 1885.]
r^/3?X
The following is a list of the stone implements of aboriginal
tribes exhibited to-night by the writer on the table of the Society.
New South Wales.
18 hatchets from the Bogan, the Hunter, the Paterson, the
Williams, Lake Macquarie, Tilligerry Creek, and the Coast.
1 chisel from the Coast.
1 knife, Lake Macquarie.
1 sharpening-stone, the Bogan.
1 pounding-stone, the Bogan.
3 water-worn stones, which appear to have been partially
wrought for hatchets—two from theßouchel Brook, near Aberdeen,
and one from Taree, on the Manning River.
1 water-worn stone from the channel of the Hunter.
Victoria.
1 hatchet, chipped ; neither ground nor polished.
Also some flakes from aboriginal quarries.
Tasmania.
Number of flakes and clippings.
New Hebrides.
9 hatchets from Erromanga.
O
General Remarks.
A few remarks may be made on these implements. A select
class of four of the hatchets may be picked out as forming very
serviceable instruments. They are of close-grained stone, and take
on a fine polish. Two of them are of a deep black colour ; the other
two are green ; they are from the Bogan, the Hunter, the Williams,
and the Coast. The one composed of black material, received by
the writer from “ Bony, King of Meggala,” is perhaps the most
complete instrument in the collection ;it is inches in length,
inches in breadth, and 1J inch in thickness. It weighs 13jt
ounces. One of the greenstone composition is the smallest in the
5 h 13—85


list of hatchets. It measures 3| x x inches. It weighs
ounces. The cutting edge of the implement from the Bogan
presents a beautifully elegant curve. It seems not to have been
used since it was last ground and polished. These instruments are
evidently quite fit for the work of cutting through small branches
for making shelters, sharpening stakes for uprights or supports of
shelters, for disengaging the bark from knots and angular points
of trees in order to make primitive tubs for holding water, for
cutting rectangular pieces of bark in order to stretch out opossum
skins, and for a variety of purposes, not forgetting the advan-
tage of their combined lightness and sharpness for cutting notches
in the bark to facilitate the aboriginal method of climbing trees.
It may be mentioned in a sentence that in sharp cutting edges the
stone implement is very far behind as compared with an ordinary
iron axe. If the angle subtended by the sides of the latter be set
down at about twenty-five degrees, in the case of the sharpest of
the stone hatchets the angle rises to sixty or seventy degrees.
A second class may be regarded as including five hatchets of
much inferior character as cutting instruments. They come from
the Bogan, the Paterson Hiver, Tilligerry Creek, near Port
Stephens, and Lake Macquarie. None of them take on so fine a
polish as the first class. One is merely roughly ground.
A third class may be formed of the nine remaining hatchets,
which are distinguished from the others by their large size. They
are from the Paterson, the Williams, and Tilligerry Creek. Fixing
handles to these unwieldy instruments must have been attended
with difficulty, and numerous dints, abrasions, and scratches are
strongly suggestive of the device of driving stone pegs between the
handle and the hatchet for the purpose of tightening the handle.
Two of these implements are distinguished by being grooved as if
for the purpose of facilitating the work of fixing on a handle.
In one case the grooving is very conspicuous, though not so
much so in the other. In ancient relics of human workmanship
found in Europe stone implements occur which are grooved all
round at the middle. These are understood to have been used as
sinkers for nets. In the present case, the grooving being much
nearer one end than the other, as well as the formed cutting edge,
leaves no doubt that they were used as hatchets. Still, as they
were both found at Tilligerry Creek, close to Port Stephens, which
was much frequented by the aborigines, it is not at all impossible
that they might have been also serviceable as sinkers. One of
them measures 5| x3fx 2| inches, and weighs 2 lb. 11 oz. The
other measures x4lx 1| inches, and weighs 3 lb. oz.
Three of the third or class of large hatchets are distinguished
by another peculiarity: they have a piece knocked out of one
corner so as to fit to the broad part of the thumb where it spreads
out into the hand. They could thus be used without a handle, or


when it came off; and as to the work to be done in this way, there
was the process of cutting through the hark of trees, low down,
quite close to the ground, and then ripping up the hark as far as
the operator could tear it off, to make shelters. But although the
convenience described indicates an intention to adjust the instru-
ment to the human hand, still the dints and abrasions also indicate
that clumsy and unwieldy as were these implements there was
the attempt to fix handles to them, and to tighten these handles
by driving in hard pieces of stone at right angles to the handle.
The largest of the three measures 6 x 4 x If inches, and weighs
2 R). 7| oz.
The largest implement in the collection partakes somewhat of
the same nature as the three now described ; but its size is sug-
gestive of its having been used as a wedge for splitting. It is a
most unwieldy instrument, measuring Bfxs|xl-|- inches, and
weighing 4 lb. 7 oz. It was found on the Paterson. There is
an appearance about the edge of this instrument which gives the
idea of its having been forced through hard wood. The same
appearance is very noticeable on the large round-headed hatchet
with the deep groove already described.
Another of the large hatchets, of speckled green colour and
good cutting edge, may be noticed on account of a fine example
which it supplies of the skill of some operator to strike off a large
flake. The point of impact is made very plain by the converging
rays over a space of 3 inches by 4 ; moreover, the flaked surface is
nearly flat, and so differs from the conchoidal fracture occurring in
other cases, and so conspicuous where kerosene shale is concerned.
Before leaving the hatchets, notice may be taken of three
specimens of what appear to be half-formed implements for
cutting. Two of them were found by the writer in the Rouchel
Brook district. They were some hundreds of feet above the level
of the brook itself, and, being water-worn, they must have been
carried to the place where they were found, near sheltering rocks,
such as might well be frequented by aborigines. The farmer
occupying this ground had in his possession a remarkably fine
specimen of hatchet. It was more finished, in the matter of work-
manship, than any of those now exhibited. One of the specimens
presents very plain marks of having been operated upon by human
hands, though the evidence is not so plain in the other case. The
third specimen was picked up by the writer at Taree, on the
Manning River. It is a water-worn piece of stone, and was found
at some distance from the channel of the river, so that it must have
been carried away. That flakes have been designedly chipped off
it is plain on inspection, but the instrument seems to have been
lost or rejected before it was finished. Along with these three
half-finished specimens may be noticed the water-worn flat piece of
stone picked up by the writer in the channel of the Hunter, It


is exhibited as showing that many water-worn flat pieces of stone
require very little work in the way of grinding and polishing to
convert them into aboriginal hatchets.
As regards the remaining implements from New South Wales,
there is the chisel, of green-stone, well ground and polished ;
there is the knife, from Lake Macquarie, broad, and three-sided,
like a fragment of a hay-knife. Its greasy appearance may be a
true index of the use to which it was applied. There is the
sharpening-stone, red in colour, apparently of sandstone forma-
tion, and well adapted for its purpose. The effect of rubbing some
hard substance systematically upon it is quite evident from the
grooved surface on each side of the thin fragment itself. The pound-
ing-stone is also of red colour, and very heavy, being well fitted to
pound up seeds or crack bones of large animals for the marrow.
These two specimens last noticed are from the Bogan.
Going now across the border, there is the one hatchet from
Victoria, about which some remarks may be made. It has all the
appearance of having been a water-worn piece of volcanic rock
called “ blue-stone” commonly in Victoria. It has been skilfully
chipped, so that the whole of the smooth surface on one side has
been chipped off. The cutting edge has the appearance of having
been frequently used, on account of the notches, which tell their
own tale. It has also been chipped at the sides so as to form a
bedding for a handle. Scratches and dints on the remaining
smooth side seem to indicate that pegs of hard stone were used to
tighten the handle. It has obviously never been either ground
or polished. The chipping, however, must have been very skil-
fully effected. A false stroke would have either broken the
implement in pieces, or have struck off a flake from the wrong
side. It was found halfway between Ballarat and Geelong, between
the Leigh River and the Moorabool. It has a specific gravity of
about two and a half, the same as that of the volcanic rock in the
neighbourhood, while a close-grained hatchet found in the same
district has a specific gravity of three.
The sharp flakes exhibited from Victoria were picked up by the
writer at one of the quarries of the aborigines. The quarry was
not a depression formed by the removal of tons of stone. In fact it
was a little knoll where very hard flinty and quartzy rock cropped
up, and appeared in blocks. The space for a quarter of an acre was
more or less covered with thousands of chips broken off the rock.
The Tasmanian chippings were picked up by the writer at a place
called Bellerive, opposite Hobart, on the left bank of the Derwent.
The hatchets from the New Hebrides were obtained by the
writer at Dillon’s Bay in Erromanga. The largest is 61 x 2| xll
inches, and weighs 1 lb. 1 oz. The smallest broadens from a point
to 2|- inches. The length from the point to the centre of the cut-
ting edge is 3 inches and an eighth. It weighs 6 ounces, The


difference of shape presented hy the whole of the hatchets from
Erromanga, as compared with the Australian, is very marked.
Sharpening and rounding the implements to a point at one end is
in decided contrast to the general character of the Australian
hatchets. One advantage evidently afforded by the Erromangan
shape is in regard to the very practical matter of the handle.
When once fastened on in a satisfactory manner, the more the
implement was used the more tightly the handle became fastened
to the broadening sides of the hatchet.
An inspection of the Australian, the New Hebridean, and the
Danish hatchets, proves that there are very marked differences
between them all. The style of workmanship and the shape of
the Danish instruments are greatly superior to what appears in
the others. Indeed, the European implements suggest the idea
that the first men who had to turn their hand to forming flint
hatchets and other such articles in Denmark must have passed
through countries in which they saw axes and various instruments
formed of metal.
Antiquity of the Stone Implements,
There is a point of enduring interest connected with aboriginal
implements of stone to which attention may be turned for a few
moments. It is the question—how far do these instruments, in
themselves or by reason of association, supply evidence as to the
antiquity of the people who used them 1 Thus some of these relics
might be found associated with the remains of extinct animals, as
the gigantic wombat, or lion kangaroo, or other animals, in such
circumstances as to lead to the conclusion that the aborigines and
these animals had in former ages been living during the same
time. But, so far as the writer knows, none of the implements now
exhibited were found in such a connection as to afford any means
of reaching conclusions on the subject. Also, the chemical process
which produces dendrites has been urged in connection with some
European relics as affording evidence of the great age of the
implements or objects on which the dendritic process had taken
place. Nothing of this kind has been observed in any of the
implements exhibited.
Another direction in which evidence of antiquity may be
sought is in regard to the depth in the soil at which objects of
human workmanship may be found. The Hunter River District
has sometimes been referred to as supplying evidence that traces
of the presence of an aboriginal race have been found 30 feet
below the surface ; but the mere depth, apart from other consider-
ations, is in this case of very little significance as proving great
antiquity. After a flood some of the flats have been covered for
acres with new deposit reaching the uppermost rail of a three-rail
fence, or about 4 feet. A fanner near East Maitland, in the


locality called Phoenix Park, has pointed out to the writer a mass
of soil 10 feet in thickness all of which had accumulated during
the eighteen years between 1857 and 1875. The writer also saw
that at one place the deposit of new soil had been so great that a
fence having been completely covered out of sight a new one had
been put up above it. A little examination of the circumstances
brings out plainly before the inquirer the evidence that objects of
various kinds might in the course of a few years be buried to
great depths. The banks of the Hunter are often steep, and lay
bare as much as 30 feet of soil which has been deposited by the
river itself. Owing to the windings of the stream an inundation
from time to time occasions the forming of a new channel, and the
blocking up of an old one. Acres of soil are removed from one
place and deposited in another. Also in time of flood, where a
tree or a snag has been in the way, eddies have been formed, and
these scoop out numerous holes 5 or 6 feet deep ; these holes and
the old channels are in the course of time filled up, covering over
and burying such objects as may have found their way into them.
There is still another agency at work by which stone hatchets
might quite easily be buried 50 or 60 feet deep. This was
forcibly impressed upon the writer as an intelligent and educated
settler accompanied him from Tilligerry Creek, near Raymond Ter-
race, to Port Stephens, and explained what he had witnessed during
previous years. For about 2 miles the ride was over successive
waves of sand-hills, on which, however, scrub was growing and
trees of a very rotten-wooded species of eucalyptus. At one place the
settler pointed out where a great wave of sand, presenting a rather
steep front and CO feet in height was steadily invading a secluded
marsh. By the constant action of the wind the sand wave had en-
croached by the space of 20 yards on the level space in the course
of nine years. Now, this whole district was much frequented by
aborigines. Some of the more remarkable of the stone implements
now exhibited were obtained from the settler at Tilligerry Creek,
who accompanied the writer on this expedition. If, then, in the
days of Captain Cook, a stone hatchet had been dropped at the
base of the wall of moving sand described above it would now be
upwards of 200 yards away, and GO feet deep in the heart of
the great-sand drift extending for some miles back from the ocean.
Thus a man sinking a pit or well in such drift, and finding a
hatchet 60 feet deep, might claim 100,000 years for its antiquity,
while 100 would be nearer the correct figure for the duration of
time required to explain the discovery.
For phenomena of the same kind we have only to visit some of
the suburbs of Sydney. Bourke-street and Dowling-street run into
a sand dune, out in the direction of Botany. Not long ago the
roof of a cottage was to be seen sticking out of this sand dune.
The writer has often stepped off the sand on to the shingles of the


roof of the buried habitation. Some out-houses were completely
buried under sand di’ift to a depth of 10 or 12 feet. The writer
ascertained that the cottage had been actually inhabited three
years before. The cottage has now disappeared, very large quan-
tities of the sand dune being carted away every day.
While dealing with materials of this kind perhaps another
experience may be recorded. It was that of a miner. He was a
sedate and devout Highlander, and his tale is very simple. He had
penetrated for some yards through surface accumulation when he
came to gravel; there, to his amazement, some 10 or 12 feet down,
and apparently in a place where the soil had been undisturbed
since the geological epoch at which it was deposited, he found—
not a hatchet with dendrites upon it, not a half-fossilized boome-
rang, but a genuine, a veritable pipe—the clay pipe of commerce
used for smoking. Now, for a moment, this might seem very
perplexing, but only for a moment. For if the floods in the
Hunter have been teaching us what may happen in the way of
rapidly burying objects to great depths, so also the droughts have
been supplying evidence of some strange things that may happen
in connection with them. For the explanation of the incident
connected with the clay pipe was supplied through certain well-
known phenomena attending droughts. The earth cracks right
down in thousands of places. The pipe has dropped into one of
these cracks and found its way to the gravel, which, naturally
enough, formed a break in the continuity of the rent, at least
sufficient to intercept an object like a pipe from falling farther.
But the drought ends, the rains come, the fissures are completely
obliterated, and to all appearance, excepting the clay pipe, the
whole soil has lain undisturbed for a geologic epoch. Up to date,
direct evidence for a geologic antiquity on behalf of the Australian
aborigines seems to be very scanty. Special attention to this
subject was directed by Mr. B, Brough Smyth, while making very
extensive inquiries from the most competent authorities through-
out the Colony of Victoria. After many years of labour in collect-
ing materials, the result is given in words which may be quoted
from the work prepared by Mr. Smyth. He says—“ It is remark-
able that no stone hatchet, chip of basalt, or stone knife has been
found anywhere in Victoria, except on the surface of the ground
or a few inches beneath the surface,” Again he says—“ If only
small portions of the alluvia in Victoria had been excavated—if the
country had not been occupied for twenty years by many thousands
of miners who have washed the gravels down to the bed-rock in
innumerable shallow gullies—the non-discovery of relics might
easily have been accounted for; but in this country the spots most
likely to conceal them have been laid bare.” —Aborigines of Vic
toria, vol. 1, pp. 364-5.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBBs.




P. MAC PH ERSON,
1. Stone hatchet. 2. Knife. 3. Chisel.
4. Large hatchet grooved for handle.
ABORIGINAL STONE IMPLEMENTS, N.S.W.
5. Very large hatchet or wedge.
6. Sharpening stone.
Scale, 1-4 linear.
Jour. Roy. Soe. N.S.W., 1888.




P. MACPHE RSON.
7. Large square hatchet adjusted for hand.
8. Oblong hatchet, very thick.
9. Finely curved edge. 10. Oval shape.
NEW HEBRIDES, DILLON’S BAY.—Nos. 11, 12, 13.
Scale, 1-4 linear.
Joup. Roy. Soe. N.S.W., 188 S.




P MACPHERSON
1. Bark cut with stone hatchet and torn upwards. 1-60 linear.
2. Cutting into trunk of tree for opossum, 1-60.
3. Bark removed in pursuit of caterpillars. 1-40.
4. Hollow piece of bark cut off for holding water. 1 -40.
5. Bark cut off for pegging hoards. 6. Effect on tree. 1-30.
7. Bark cut off for making shelters. 8. Effect on tree. 1-40.
Jour. Roy. Soe. N.S.W., 1888


