

STOPPAGE OF THE HEART
IN DEATH FROM VIOLENCE
TYMPANITIC ABDOMEN
WITH FLUID
BY
W. RAMSAY SMITH, M.B., C.M., B.Sc.




STOPPAGE OF THE HEART IN DEATH FROM VIOLENCE.
BY W. RAMSAY SMITH, M. B., C.M., B.Sc. (EDIN.), ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
President of the Central Board of Health for South Australia.
Recently in reading Dr. Inman on the Theory and Practice of
Medicine, I came across the following passage: 1
“After death the heart ceases to act at all, and is simply a fleshy
bag. But it is to be noted that if an animal is killed in the midst of
perfect health, and the heart is immediately separated from the
body, it will continue to pulsate for a considerable period. We infer
that it is the same in man. Now, if we examine the heart so circum-
stanced, and watch the gradual diminution of its beats, we shall find
them irregular before they cease finally, and that, when they have
apparently ceased entirely, they may be reproduced by direct irrita-
tion or stimulation. Hence we infer that one of the phenomena
attending the process of dying in the heart is irregularity of its
action; and as we know that a dead heart cannot propel blood
at all, so we have reason to believe that, during the gradual
loss of its vitality, there must be a diminution in the force of its
contraction.
“The duration of time between the period when the heart is in
full health and when it is entirely dead probably varies in different
animals or individuals; but in the majority of instances it is suffi-
ciently long to enable us to prove that loss of power generally, if not
universally, precedes irregularity of action; and there is reason to
believe, in many instances, that when there is deficiency of cardiac
power the amount of the first irregularity is such as to be incompat-
ible with continued life. Hence, in our own species, we not
infrequently have diminished circulating power, as the only sign
shown by a dying or debilitated heart.”
This passage brought to my mind some observations I had made
of a death from hanging on July io, 1897, I now transcribe the
notes I recorded on that occasion, when it was my duty as medical
officer to her majesty’s jail to attend a criminal on the scaffold and
certify to the execution.
The subject was a medium-sized, thick-set, well built man,
aged 40 years, accustomed to outdoor life, in good health, and with
no abnormality of the heart. On the lever being pulled by the
executioner, he dropped without a sound and hung without a tremor.
1 “Foundation for a New Theory and Practice of Medicine,” by Thomas Inman, M.D
Fond., Physician to the Fiverpool Royal Infirmary. 2d edn., Fondon, 1861; p. 192.


The knot was on the left side of the neck, between the ear and the
occiput.
At two minutes after, the heart was beating at the rate of 160
per minute, and with an irregular systolic murmur in the mitral
area.
At three minutes after, the heart was beating strongly at
120 to the minute, every third beat being reduplicated, thus:
i i ti i i ii, etc. •
At eight minutes after, the heart was beating at the rate of 60
per minute, and both the heart and the pulse at wrist were intermit-
tent, every fourth beat being omitted, thus: i i i o i i i o, etc.
At eleven minutes after, the heart was beating at the same rate,
but was irregularly intermittent, as was also the pulse.
At fourteen minutes and forty-five seconds after, the heart
entirely stopped.
The body was taken down fifty minutes after the execution. A
rush of air from the air-passages occurred when it was lowered.
There was no muscular rigidity. The neck was discolored around
the rope mark. The tongue was swollen and protruded. The face
was congested, but became white on pressure. The pupils were
intermediate between contraction and dilatation. The surface of
the chest was not congested. The penis was enlarged but not erect,
and there was a clear discharge from it, like prostatic fluid.
The heart was auscultated by the bare ear against the chest out-
side the clothing; and the beats were unusually distinct on account
of the total absence of respiratory accompaniment.


TYMPANITIC ABDOMEN WITH FLUID.
BY W. RAMSAY SMITH, M. B., C.M., B.Sc. (EDIN.), ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
President of the Central Board of Health for South Australia,
Prof. J. M. Anders, 1 of Philadelphia, has recorded a very
instructive case of abdominal distention due primarily to cancer of
the liver, in which, much to his own and Professor La Place’s sur-
prise, the tympanitic abdomen, which was thought to be caused by
intestinal obstruction, proved to contain several gallons of serous
liquid. In this case the liver was found to be cancerous.
Since I first read Dr. Anders’s account of his case, I have seen
two cases in my own practice which are deserving of record. The
first was a Chinaman 42 years of age, who died in my wards in the
hospital the day after admission. The abdomen was very much
distended, and was everywhere tympanitic. On cutting into it, post
mortem, several gallons of bloody fluid escaped, the peritoneal
cavity being filled underneath the distended intestines. The liver
weighed 10% pounds, and was studded throughout its whole sub-
stance with cancerous nodules. Near the cardiac opening of the
stomach there was an ulcerated surface with a hard margin. The
kidneys were small. All other organs were healthy.
The second case was one I was called to see in consultation, a
man aged 37 years. The diagnosis during life was cancer of the
stomach. The abdomen was enormously distended, the distention
appearing all the greater on account of the extreme general emacia-
tion of the patient. It was tympanitic all over, in every position in
which the patient was placed. The heart sounds were conducted,
and were very clearly heard, in the right hypochondriac and lumbar
regions, a phenomenon I have observed several times in cases of
peritonitis. Post mortem there was found cancer of the pylorus.
The omentum was a ribbon-shaped mass of cancerous tissue. There
were nodules on the parietal peritoneum in the region of the round
ligament of the liver. The abdomen was more than half full of
jaundiced fluid. There was peritonitis in both iliac regions, with
soft adhesions just separable. The gall-bladder was nearly full, but
not distended. The liver was dark in color and not healthy.
It is to be noted that in these two cases, as in Dr. Anders’s case,
the quantity of fluid was very great, the distention on palpation was
enormous, and the resonance on percussion was universal. In these
circumstances the difficulties attending diagnosis are sufficiently
1 International Clinics, second series, vol. iii, p. 88.


great to make one cautious in such cases in diagnosing definitely the
absence of ascites; and instances of this sort make one even readier
than ever to admit that the abdomen, as regards diagnosis and
exploratory operation, is “very much a lucky-bag.”




MEDICINE
A Monthly Journal of Medicine and Surgery
HAROLD N. MOYER, M.D.
EDITOR
editorial Office, 103 State St.. Chicago
Joseph McFarland, m.d.
ASSOCIATE EDITOR
Medlco-Chlrarglcal College, Philadelphia
FEBRUARY. 1902.
CONTENTS.
ORIGINAL ARTICLES.
VALVULAR HEART DIBEABE IN RELATION TO PREONANCY AND LABOR. By J. Clarence WEB-
STER, M.D
THE RECOGNITION OF BUTYRIC ACID IN STOMACH CONTENTS. Br J. H. Salisbury, A.M., M.D.... 101
LATENT DIFFUSE GANGRENE OF THE LUNG WITH RUPTURE AND FETID PLEURISY. Br Jamb
M. Anders, M.D., and Joseph McFarland, M.D 106
CHEMIC ASPECTS OF COCAINE UNTOWARD EFFECTS IN SPINAL ANESTHESIA. Br 0. 8. N. Hall-
biro, Ph.G HO
A BPECIMEN OF BOTHRIOCEPHALUB LATUB. Bt David Riesman, M.D.. 118
STOPPAGE OF THE HEART IN DEATH FROM VIOLENCE. Br W. Ramsay Smith, MR, C.M., 8.80.
(Edik.) HI
BOOK REVIEWS.
Btodibb in the Psycholooy op Brx: Bkxcal Inversion. By Havelock EUla. 118
Clinical Hematoloot. By John C. Da Cotta. Jr.. M.D 180
The Microscope and rrs Revelations. By William B. Carpenter. 0.8., M.D., LL.D., F.R.B. I*l
The Principles or Hyoienb. By D. H. Bergey. A.M., M.D 181
A Text-booe or Physiolooical Chemistry. By Charles E. 81mon. M.D 188
The Buroical Treatment or Distiodrements and Deformities or the Face. By John B. Roberts, A.M., M.D. 188
Traltato oi Psicbiatria (Text-booe or Psychutry). By Leonardo Blanchl, M.D 188
Atlas and Principles or Bacteriolooy. By Prof Dr. K. B. Lehmann and R. O. Neumann. Dr. Phil, and Med. lx*
A Text-booe or Embryology. By John O. Heialsr, M.D 18*
Nervous and Mental Diseases. By Archibald Church, M.D., and Frederick Peterson, M.D 188
LEADINO ARTICLES.
Tubercular Peritonitis 184 The Treatment or Cancer 188
3 Trional. 136 A Second Antitoxin Epi
e Standpoint or Health. 189
Arsenical or Alooholic Neuritis...
... Ptyptlcm In Uterine Hemorrhage 104
«<— «• «•» B * re ““ >«
e Effect of Electric Currents and X-rays on Bac-
Scierouc Cardltb
e Blood of Typhoid Fever Patterns...
l Modlflcatlon of Nelassr’s Test for the Diphtheria
Bacillus 1
meal Significance of the Klebs-Loeffler Bacillus..
Hair Tumor R*-mi
Surgical Diagnosis by the Roentgen Ray I
Treatment of Imperfectly Descended Testicle...
A Cnee of Strangulation of the Stomach—
Dermoid Cyst of the Testicle
Anterocolpocellotomy
Sterilization of Catheters.
Ocular Massage In Retinal Embolism 164
Ptypticin In Uterine Hemorrhage 105
The Roentgen Rays in Sarcoma 166
Bulpbur io the Treatment of dysentery 166
Hydrobromate of Hyoeclne In Chorea 167
The Internal Administration of suprarenal Extract
e Treatment of Hemorrhage 167
OBSTETRICS. GYNECOLOGY, AND PEDIATRICS.
The DlagnosUv>f Biliary Obstruction 161
SURGERY.
Acute Dilatation of the Btomach .
Pediatric Praotlos..
Pretention of Asphyxia In Breech Presentation.
Tubal Pregnancy with Double Pyosalplm
The Treatment of Raw Peritoneal Surfaces m
Toreton of Both Pedicles in Double Pyosalplnx 17*
. 169 Medical Ee»jdld<
e from Carbolic A
. . J Case of Acetanllld Poisoning I'4
. 160 Nutmeg Poisoning 174
The Sensation Produced by the Passage of a Strong
Elecu-lo Current .. 175
The Right of Recovery foe Operation 175
Poisoning with Oil of Cedar 176
COPYRIGHT 190 s
WILLIAM M. WARREN, Publisher'
DETROIT, MICH.
Entered at the Post-offloe at Detroit. Mich., as second-oiass matter.
