

IMp
STORIES £174-6)
FOR CHILDREN
Helen Dowker




Stories
For Children
r /
HELEN' 1 DOWKER


Work and Play
Play away', play awav..
Your morning lessons done:
Perhaps you’re rather sorry
That it wasn't just all fun.
Days go by, minutes fly,
And every hour you need
To learn the precious things of life.
So listen and take heed.
H.D.


Helen Dowker,


N. LApC >K — f/'
U f £m oX
A
\
Paddy in his Aeroplane.


The Fairy Aeroplane
CHAPTER I.
There once lived a healthy little Australian
boy named Paddy Malone: he was six years of
age. with auburn hair and deep blue eyes. The
poor little fellow was an orphan, and so lived
with h ; s maiden aunt. Lutita, in a suburban
house a few miles from Perth, having a few
acres attached enabling them to have a cow and
a few chicks. His aunt was a good honest
woman, and did all she could to make Paddy’s
childish days happy. His uncle Bert lived in a
pretty cottage a street further down. Little Paddy
was quite busy in his own way. Every Satur-
day morning he just loved to go down to uncle
Bert, his duty being to tidy up the fowlhouse,
and go for errands, and he always came home
with a bright sixpence, and he was proud of it,
too. but he did not spend it in lollie-shops on
the way home like most little girls and boys do,
but in the money-box it went all but a penny.


CHAPTER 11.
The Dream.
Little Paddy seemed very tired one Saturday
evening. He was thinking of that surprise pro-
mised by Uncle Bert on his seventh birthday,
which was to-morrow so he went to bed feeling
very happy. Aunt Lutitia tucked him up in
bed. and with a parting kiss and prayer, bid him
good-night.
It was not long before the dustman came,
and Paddy was in the land of dreams, and a
wonderful dream he dreamt. First of all, he was
gazing at the sky. and there he saw thousands
of bright sixpences falling like rain from the
clouds; there was no end of them. He had to
keep on blinking his eyes, as the coins appeared
brighter and brighter. Then, all at once, they
turned into sweet. little golden fairies, and they
were blowing silver trumpets and were driving
aeroplanes. Suddenly Paddy heard a tap at the
window, and a soft voice called out. “Come
along. little boy. and we will take you right up
in our aeroplane. You need not be frightened,
we will take care of you and bring you to the
king of aeroplanes.’’


Paddy jumped up as quick as lightning, and
was out of bed flying with the magic fairies.
They made him change his pyjamas into an
airman’s uniform, and a very gorgeous one it
was. of grey satin trimmed with pearls, with
pearl cap to match. Then, alas! it was not
long before Paddy felt very giddy, and a sickly
feeling crept over him.
Never mind, little fellow, said one of the
fairies, who was the chief; her name was Starry.
“We are nearly at our journey's end. Can’t you
see that bright light ahead, that is the king’s
palace, where we live. - '
Sure enough the fairy aeroplanes were soon
flying round the king’s palace, and Paddy found
himself lifted out of the aeroplane.
“Come,'’ whispered the chief fairy, “follow
me.”
They entered the hall of shining gold. It
seemed miles long to Paddy. There were two
mats made of pearls; the fairy stood on one,
and Paddy on the other as he was bid to do.
Then they went sliding down the hall as if by
magic until they came to a huge door made of
thousands of silver sixpences. The fairy opened
the door with a huge key, and she beckoned
Paddy to follow. A few seconds more and
Starry was kneeling before the King.
Will it please your gracious Majesty to


welcome this .little stranger —a new member of
the air force?"
Paddy’s knees began to tremble, and he began
to run away when the King said. "Stay! my
son; be brave. I wish to present you with
that great surprise Uncle Bert has promised you
for your birthday." and he held out his hand
to Paddy, with a welcoming smile.
Paddy soon forgot his fears when the King
blew a silver trumpet, and six tiny little men
came up from a trap door, all dressed in red
velvet, and they carried the loveliest golden
aeroplane on their shoulders that anyone could
wish to see.
Paddy stared with wonder and admiration.
Oh! that can't be for me." he exclaimed.
"Oh!" said the King, "it is indeed for a
good little boy who saves up his sixpences’
And just then Paddy awoke from his dream:
he still felt he was flying. He rubbed his eyes,
and what do you think he saw 5 The golden
toy aeroplane, his birthday surprise from
"Uncle Bert."
HELEN DOWKER.


The Fairy Birthday Cake
CHAPTER I
There was once a pretty little girl, an immi-
grant, who had travelled on one of the big
Boats to W.A.
She certainly possessed a wonderful pair of
blue-grey eyes, and her hair was a pretty golden
brown. Betty had one little fault: whenever
she was given anything, no matter how much
or how little, she would always grumble and
plead for more. Her mother tried so many times
to break her of the habit—Took how con-
tented Sybil is next door: do try to be more
like her. darling." but Betty did not take much
heed of her mother's words. She would soon
be five-years-old. and. of course, she coaxed her
mother to promise to buy one of those big icing
birthday cakes with all those delightful coloured
■candles on top. and her name written in pretty
pink letters.
Anyhow, one Saturday morning Betty was
playing in the front garden with the kittens,
when her mother called out to her; "Come
along, dear. I am going to take you to Perth in


a bus.” Of course, Betty soon forgot the kit-
tens. and clapped her hands with glee. She was
dressed in her dainty pink muslin frock with
wide black silk sash, and dainty black silk
bonnet trimmed with daisies and rosebuds, but
Betty wanted to wear her blue silk dress, her
very best, and she cried and screamed to have her
own way, and her mother had to threaten to
leave her behind.
“Now. just look at your red eyes! Nobody
will want to look at you, you naughty girl
So Betty dried her eyes, for she knew it was
of no use worrying about the blue dress any
more. The 'bus soon brought them to Perth,
and it was not long before Betty reminded her
mother that she had promised to let her see all
the birthday cakes in the shop windows, and
poor mother was dragged to every cake shop
window in town.
Mrs. Bird was not very rich, but she thought
she could afford to buy a good cake for Bs. 6d.
She noticed one in Miss Brown’s window that
would just do. Betty had quite decided in her
own mind the one she would choose: it was a
large cake all covered with pink icing, with
the sweetest little silver fairies stuck on top,
priced 12s. 6d.
“Oh. Mum. do look. Can’t I have that one.’
pointing her dainty finger at the birthday cake.
We will see. dear, how much mother can
save up by next Saturday. You know it is not


Peggy goes shopping.


your birthday till then. How about this pretty
one?” meaning the Bs. 6d. one.
‘No! No! I want the biggest one”—but
she did not get her wish, as you will presently
sec.
Betty crept into her mother s bed the next
morning Her little face wore a troubled ex-
pression. and her eyes were wet with tears.
“What is the matter with my little girl ’”
“Oh! Mummy, I had such a horrid dream
A bad. wicked, fairy frightened me so.” and
Betty told all about her dream, with her arms
folded tight round her mother's neck.


CHAPTER 11.
The Dream.
Betty dreamt she was going out to a party,
and she was dressed in that pretty pale blue
frock, her very best! but her mother was sick in
bed, so she had to go alone. The way to the
house was through a very narrow, dark lane,
but she had been that way before with her big
brother. Ben.
As she hurried on she heard steps approach-
ing. Poor little Betty began to feel afraid and
her legs began to tremble, as someone came
towards her, holding a little red light.
"What are you doing here at this hour?” It
was the voice of a woman, and as Betty came
closer she could see the stranger was not an
ordinary woman. She wore a scarlet cloak, her
hair was flowing in long golden curls down to
her knees, and she wore scarlet sandals adorned
with pretty coloured beads. Betty also noticed
a big diamond star hanging on a silver chain
around her neck, and it glittered wonderfully
in the dark!
"If you will come and follow me, little maid,
I will show you the way.”


jMa
u/\
**“****! L^J
The Fairy Birthday Cake


So onward they went, and at last reached
the top of the lane. “Now,” said the wicked
fairy (for that was what she was),‘as she slip-
ped off her cloak Betty saw two shining wings,
“if you will just climb up on my wings, I will
take you to a fairy cake party, but you must
promise to obey me.”
“Oh!” said Betty, “how kind you are. I
love fairy cakes, too.”
It was splendid flying through the air, when
all at once the fairy flew into a huge cave, all
lit with pretty coloured lanterns. Betty slid
off the fairy's wings, and then the fairy told her
she was to walk on alone until she came to a
big. silver bell, and she was told to ring it as
hard as she could.
So Betty, feeling rather nervous, obeyed,
walking on until she came to the silver bell;
yes. there it was. placed inside a large glass
case. So Betty put her hand inside and lifted
the bell off the ground, and whatever do you
think appeared underneath but the very same
birthday cake that she had seen and admired
most of all in that shop window—the one with
the silver fairies placed on top! Oh, oh! what
a surprise. She forgot the fairies command to
ring the bell. All she could do was to gaze at
rhe cake. If she could only have a piece of it,
and looking more closely spied a little silver
knife stuck in the side of it. She bent down,
and carefully cut a nice big slice, and was about


Lo eat it when a big fat beetle crawled out of
the cake. Betty screamed with horror, and
dropped the slice of cake on the ground Ughl
there were dozens and dozens of these nasty
black creatures crawling out. Then Betty, all
at once, remembered she had not rung the bell
as she was told, so she had to pick her way
among the beetles to ring the bell. I am sure
all you little boys and girls feel glad you were
not there, too!
Poor Betty, although still crying, she was
brave enough to ring the bell, and immediately
the beetles disappeared, and a dainty fairy
dressed in green leaves and buttercups stepped
out of the glass case.
"Don’t cry, dear child. There is nothing to
be afraid of. Just come with me. and I will
show you a better cake than the one you have
just seen.”
"Oh. yes, please do,” and Betty brushed her
tears away.
The fairy stepped back into the glass case,
bidding Betty to follow, and she had to bend
down to make herself very small, so as to
squeeze in. Then Bella (the fairy) pressed a
tiny bell, and the floor slowly moved down
vith them, just like a lift. As soon as they
reached the bottom, a dozen little fairies came
dancing towards them, and all of them were
playing harps or flutes. Then two elves, dressed
in blue satin with diamond buttons on their


pink waistcoats, held a beautiful silver tray
between them, and placed on it was a cake with
lovely icing, and Betty read her name printed on
the top in bright pink and gold letters.
"Why." she thought, "that is the very one
Mother chose in Miss Brown’s shop window,”
and you may be sure how glad she was that
Mrs. Bird did not let her have her own choice.
Betty never forgot her dream and those crawl-
ing beetles, and she often told the dream to
other little boys and girls when she was
grown up.
(The End.)
Bv HELEN DOWKER.


The Musical Easter Egg
It was Easter morn, a day of happy sunshine
for the girl twins of Mr. and Mrs. Spencer.
They had reached that interesting age—-two
years old. Mr. Spencer was an eye specialist
at Brighton; his wife was away on a visit to
her sister Constance, who was residing in
London. Mrs. Spencer was anxious to be home
for her twins’ birthday, which happened to fall
on Easter Day.
Marian, who had full charge of the girl
twins. Jean and Joan, with careful hands chose
the daintiest silk and lace garments to adorn
them, in readiness for the home-coming of their
mother. Mrs. Spencer, who was expected at
noon, Easter Day. motoring from London with
Auntie Constance. Dear little Jean and Joan
toddled along to their daddy’s study to be ad-
mired in their birthday dresses. 'Ook, Dad.
at our pretty desses!”
“You two vain little creatures, give me a nice
Easter kiss.” and there was quite a struggle
between the two mites to get there first.
It wasn't long before the door-bell rang, and
in came the graceful figure of Mrs. Spencer,
tastefully attired in grey silk and furs, followed
by her charming sister Constance. The twins
were soon being hugged and kissed.


“Now. go along, dears, and get ready for
luncheon. I have an Easter Egg waiting to be
broken.” and Mr. Spencer smiled happily at
his wife and sister-in-law. Jean and Joan were
allowed to be present at the luncheon party, but
they were seated at a little table for two. daintily
decorated with birds and flowers, and some kind
fairy had placed a golden Easter Egg on each of
the twins’ plates with “Jean” and “Joan”
written in gold lettering. So they had a little
Easter party in a corner all to themselves, while
the grown-ups enjoyed a champagne luncheon,
and amused themselves watching the twins.
Mr. Spencer presented his wife with a very
beautiful Easter Egg. hand painted by himself,
and to open it one had to turn a wee key and
a door flew open, and sounds of Angel's voices
came forth. The music had a wonderful effect
on all present, and as the sounds died softly
away. Jean and Joan were holding their golden
Easter Eggs close to their ears, and I am sure
they believed music came from them. That
night they went to sleep with the golden eggs
held tight in their dimpled hands.


Ben Black the Cripple
CHAPTER I.
There once lived a wicked old man called
Ben Black; he was a cripple, and had no legs.
Of course everybody felt sorry for him. but
nobody liked him. because he was in the habit
of using very bad language. He lived in a
country town in Western Australia, and kept
a small shop stocked with a little of ‘’all sorts.”
Ben Black owned a dog. a black and tan. who.
poor beast, was generally kept chained by the
door. It was out of pity for the old cripple
which brought customers to him. Ben was
always in his chair, and could wheel himself
about from place to place. At 12 o clock every
day someone would send him a nice hot lunch,
but who that "someone” was he never knew.
The Vicar of the Parish never passed a day
without calling in to say a few cheery words
to him. Sometimes Ben would be in a nasty
mood, and would break out into oaths and evil
words, thrashing the dog savagely with a stick,


and often the Vicar would hear the dog whining
as he was passing on his way home.
“My good fellow,’’ he would say. “what has
upset you to-day. Why vent your ill-humour
on your best friend, Toby. Must he share your
misfortune?”
“Yes!” answered the cripple, sharply. “No
body else will!”
“Ah! surely you forget there is One Above
who knows and shares all your trials and
suffering, so remember, my friend. ' don’t let
me hear you say that again.”
The Vicar turned away, looking a little
pained, and Ben. for the first time, felt ashamed
of himself. That night he could not go to sleep.
The Vicar's words kept ringing in his ears;
“There is One Above ... The poor fellow
tried to sit up in bed. for his heart ached. He
pictured all the good folks around him, and
the kindly deeds they had done for him, but he
had cursed everybody and everything in return.
He had been so blind and ungrateful that he had
seen no good in himself or in anyone else. The
Vicar’s words still kept ringing in his ears—
“ There is One Above . . .”
Then a great sadness crept over him, but it
passed away, and his soul was filled with joy
and peace. He sank slowly down on the
pillows and fell into a blessed sleep, ne’er to
awake again.


CHAPTER II
T he little shop was never open again. Toby
barked and scratched at the door until a passer-
by was attracted by the sound, and that was
none other than the Vicar on his way to early
service. He opened the door, and hurried
through the shop to look for Ben. and he came
across him lying in bed. with a piece of paper
held between the lifeless fingers. The Vicar
bent carefully over the body and extracted the
paper, and these few words he read, written in
the cripple's own handwriting: “You were
right. Sir: 'there is One Above’ . .
(The End.)
HELEN DOWKER


The Smile4ess King
There once lived, a very long time ago, a very
crabby old King. He lived very unlike a King,
for we all like to see our King in wealth and
splendour. None of his servants of the Castle
would dare look at him. or utter a word before
lunch time. This poor King was never known
to smile since the day he was born. In fact, a
talc is told that his Mother brought him up on
sour milk, and sour grapes. Can you believe
that, dear children? Well, this King s breakfast
consisted of one pint of sour milk and one
pound of sour grapes, and he would roar like a
lion for some food three times a day. No
wonder he was crabby with everyone and suf-
fered with the Little Mary-ache. Everyone in
the Castle thought the grapes and sour milk
must have gone to his head, which caused his
bad temper and smileless face. One day in the
month of March the Castle was severely shaken
by an earthquake.
Now, of course, we all know grapes do not
bear fruit all the year round, so the cook whose
duty it was to preserve the fruits had to bottle
jars and jars of the grapes when in season; and,
just imagine, children, no sugar! The King had


these dozens of jars of grapes locked up in a
cupboard in his room, also bottles of sour milk.
Now, I will tell you what happened when the
crabby King found himself in the middle of the
night hurled out of his bed. and everyone of the
fruit jars were smashed and all the sour milk
scattered and spilt all over the floor! Oh! what
a mess! But good things come out of evil, they
say. The earthquake shock had such a great
effect on the King that he laughed from morning
till night, and from that day to this he was
known as the Smiling King; and he smiled upon
everyone, and was soon beloved by everyone
near and far.
HELEN DOWKER.


The Christmas Tree
at the Zoo
Christmas Eve was a busy one at the Zoo.
Mr. and Mrs. Lion, the proud parents of the
twin cubs, saf together, quietly discussing the
Xmas Tree which was being prepared by their
kind keepers in readiness for Xmas Day. It
was laden with all the good things that would
please the appetites of the Zoo animals. The
Xmas Tree stood twelve feet high, right in the
middle of the open exercise yard, and a barbed
wire fence was securely fastened round the tree:
much to the disgust of Mr. and Mrs. Lion, who
were still watching preparations. ‘Oh,”
Thought Mr. Lion. "I hope Mr. Tiger is not
going to be one of the party, or Mrs. Leopard:
otherwise we shall have to be content with a
very small share.”
"Oh. you must give and take at this festive
season." growled Mrs. Lion, wisely shaking her
head.
"That's all very well,” snarled Mr. Lion,
"but pity on those who try to grab my share!”


The keepers were as busy as bees unpacking
all the good things, and hooking them carefully
on the Xmas Tree. There were joints of
mutton and beef, whole livers, sucking pigs,
fowls, ducks, turkeys, rabbits, then further up
the tree were buns, biscuits, plum puddings for
Jumbo and the bear family: and. higher still,
were all kinds of nuts and fruit for the baboons
and monkeys. Oh! what a feast. I forgot to
mention that the twin cubs were to receive a
Xmas Stocking each, and what do you think
they were filled with’ Lovely fresh kidneys
and sweetbreads.
CHAPTER 11.
Christmas Day.
All the children who lived in South Perth
were invited to see the Xmas 1 ree. and how
■excited they were. A special stand had been
erected for them to sit and look on at the fun.
At last this was Xmas Day. and feeding time
1.30.
Mr. and Mrs. Lion and family were the first
to enter the yard, and they lost no time in
receiving their Xmas tucker. The keepers
were safe inside the barbed wire, and they threw
a leg of mutton to both parents, while the lion
cubs received their Xmas Stockings.


Mr. Tiger was the next on the list: he
received a large leg of beef, and a liver! Then
three young lionesses were let loose, and they
received a sucking pig each. . Then Mrs.
Leopard came prancing out, and she received
a shoulder of mutton and a nice fat turkey.
Nat. the Hippo, didn't seem in much of a hurry
and couldn’t find the Xmas Tree, so turned
away with its mouth wide open, and the
children showered buns into it. so that it would
not be disappointed. Then Jumbo arrived in
his stately fashion, his beady eyes twinkled as
he saw the lovely lot of buns, biscuits and cakes
displayed. The bears followed, the little black
one, who climbs the pole so cleverly, had no
trouble in catching his share. Old Mrs. Bruin
looked enviously at the little black bear, who
received a few nasty nips from Mr. and Mrs.
Bruin. The children all shouted as a host of
monkeys came tearing up the tree, and Jumbo
had a game with them. He took them one by
one in his trunk, and swung them round and
round by their tails, and dropped them on the
keepers’ heads. The children screamed with
laughter.
J hen all at once something went bizz-bang!
The young, mischievous monkeys found a big
box of crackers, and they were pulling them
like fun. Then, last, but not least, in came the
grotesque Chimp., the children’s favourite.
Why, he had almost been forgotten. He was
dressed up for the festive occasion as Father
Xmas. There was a white beard stuck on his


chin, and a white wig. his robes of red satin,
trimmed with white fur, looked quite the thing.
As he came stumping in. all the animals took
fright and ran back to their cages. Our friend
the Chimp., after much stumping and rolling
about managed to find his way to the Xmas
Tree. Then he bowed to the audience, and at
the same time tore off beard, wig. and robes,
and with a wave of the hand, climbed up the
tree! He must have felt like a prisoner in that
get-up, and he wanted to get free to enjoy all
the good things. So he was the lucky last, as
he had the Xmas Tree all to himself, and he
cracked nuts until he was cracked himself.
Before the fun was over. Mr. Chimp, snatched
the last box of crackers off the tree. He sprang
down, and held them between the bars for the
children to pull with him. And he threw a
whole lot of nuts and fruit to the audience, and
wished them a very happy Xmas.
(The End.)
HELEN DOWKER.


A Christmas Dream
Last night I dreamt as plain could be
That I was up the Christmas Tree;
And Santa Claus with numerous toys
Was there to give you. girls and boys.
He held them up for me to place
Upon the Christmas tree in haste;
The tree was loaded high and low.
With colored candles all aglow.
Before my eyes a Christmas cake.
Exactly like my Mother’s make;
Stood high in robes of pink and gold,
With “Happy Christmas’’ written bold.
And Father Christmas with delight
Was cutting it with all his might;
And little children swarmed like bees,
“A piece of cake, dear Daddy, please.’’
I took a bite of mine just then
And did not find it pleasant when;
Between my teeth, oh! something stuck,
A silver charm that means “Good Luck
But I wakened with a start!
To find that I was in the dark!
HELEN DOWKER


The Starved Kitten
How did she get there? And how far had
she travelled ? Was the thoughts of Rosina. as
she stood at the corner of the street gazing piti-
fully at the half-starved, lame kitten, too weak
to move. The little girl very gently patted the
kitten’s head. Passers-by gazed with sympathy
at the poor helpless creature, but it was
tender-hearted little Rosina who came to its
rescue. She sharply picked it up and placed it
with loving care in her dainty white and blue
shopping basket. She turned round, meaning to
go home as quickly as possible to get the poor
thing a saucer full of nice warm milk—her
brothers and sisters all loved animals —and then,
without any warning, a tug at her elbow, a
rough voice shouted in her ear, "Here, young
miss, just you drop that kitten, you have no
right to it, it belongs to me. Now give it up.”
You can imagine how pale and frightened
Rosina became, when she perceived the scowling
face of a boy in tattered clothes, who dared to
approach her so rudely. Rosina all at once
screwed up courage, and took a firmer hold of
her basket. “Please let me pass, you rude boy.
I shall take the kitten home, not you. Oh.


will you, indeed, yelled the boy, roughly push-
ing her off the pavement, making a grab at the
basket. Luckily, a policeman standing a little
way off had noticed the scene. Poor Rosina was
now in tears; the boy had grabbed the kitten by
the neck and quickly hid it under his coat.
“Now then, what’s all the noise about, you
young scamp, pushing this little lady into the
road. What’s your name, and what’s that
hidden under your coat?’’ 7'hc policeman had
come up unawares, taking a firm grip of the
boy s arm. “Nothing much, sir; only a few old
newspapers.”
Rosina had now become quite calm, but
■appeared very shocked when she heard the lie
that had escaped the boy s lips. She looked up
earnestly into the young policeman’s face. “Oh!
Don’t believe him, sir. the kitten is under his
coat. I was just going to take it home because
it is starving, but he says it belongs to him.
Does it, sir?”
The policeman smiled and looked rather puz-
zled. and then he spoke sternly to the lad. “You
had better tell me the truth, young man. or I’ll
have you locked up! Hand over that kitten.
What s your name? "Alf Johnson, sir,” and
he obediently handed the starving kitten over at
the same time. It lay dead to all appearances in
the policeman’s broad hand.
You ve killed it, it s dead, cried Rosina, in
sobs; “You horrid cruel boy.” “There, never


'» \J 1 '• p| /
A% !
; - m>^. 5 ’
• •■ r ; - n/A 4 "
Rosina rtscues the Starved Kitten.


mind, little girl, run along home and forget all
about it. As for you. you young rascal, you
deserve a sound thrashing. This time I will let
you off. but remember I shall keep a watchful
eye on you in future. Here you are. take this
unfortunate animal home with you and bury
it.”


CHAPTER 11.
The day ended happily for Alf. He ran all
the way home, arriving hot and hungry. His
first thoughts were to bury the kitten. He put
the kitten down on the hearth-rug while he
hunted round for his father's spade, to dig the
kitten s grave. He found it at last, and the next
thing he did was to choose a shady place for
the grave, and when he dug a hole large enough
to his liking he returned to fetch the dead kitten.
But. to his amazement, he found the rug but
not the kitten. It was nowhere to be seen. Alf
looked into cupboards, under chairs, sofas, in
the coal box. and when he had almost given up
hope, he noticed something black moving, and
a faint mew came to his ears. Ah! there it was.
alive and kicking, with its head stuck in the
milk jug.
Alf didn't care if all the milk was drunk that
his mother put aside for tea. for he was sc. over-
joyed to see the kitten come back to life; and I
am sure you little girls and boys would have
laughed to see how Alf hugged and kissed it,
took it up with him to bed. tucked it up in one
of his dad's socks. Alf was very happy, and
smiled in bed as he thought how glad and de-
lighted Rosina would be when she heard the
good news.
(The End.)
H. DOWKER.




V— The Associated Printers,
819 Lennox Street,
p Richmond, Victoria.
u Phone J3951. II
r~h Sept., 1933.
V7H-U -+ 0


■


