

pjyjp
iii /iv' v H
wg* iV ' \ \ A Y N ■’
\ '*F li I
J llQv ipr ■
\ / / />/
■


■ 1 ‘ I-'!’■ W > {C ■ • - ■ • .
in
| ? K -v^
V * ■ t V tS
*
-
C| &"/ Imp
<p£<w. \<yL*~
, \ *' * v


f
MCE upon a time there lived in a town in the Far
East a poor tailor named Mustapha. He and his wife had
only one child, a boy named Aladdin, whom they had spoiled
by letting him always have his own way. When he grew
older he would not work, but played all day in the streets
with the idle town boys. In vain his father advised him, but
when he took a stick to punish him, the bad lad would run
away, laughing
At last, sad and weary, the
poor man died, and Aladdin’s
mother had to spin to get their
daily bread. One day as
Aladdin was leading a band of
noisy boys through the streets,
a stranger stood looking at him,
and by-and-by came up, and


took hold of him and kissed him, saying, “My dear lad, I am
your uncle just come back from Africa; go to your mother and
tell her, and take her these coins," and he gave the boy some
money. The man’s story was not true, for he really was a
magician, who wanted the boy s help.
Aladdin, delighted, took the money to his mother, and told
her what the stranger had said. But she could not understand
it, for she said Aladdin had no uncle. Next day the magician
called and made her believe that he was her husband’s brother.
Then he brought Aladdin fine clothes, and took him for a walk.
They went outside the town for many miles till they came to a
mountain.
Here the magician made a fire, threw some herbs on to it, and
said some strange words. Then the earth opened, and Aladdin
saw a stone with a ring in it.
“Lift up that stone," said the magician.
The boy did so and saw a flight of steps.
“Go down those steps,’’ said the magician; “at the bottom


The magician in a fury, threw same herbs on the fire.
is a great hall; go through it, and you will come to a garden
where you will see a lighted lamp. Blow out the light and
bring the lamp to me. You may gather the fruit in the garden.
Take this ring; it will keep you safe.”


I I \ I V\ A f I
’ *UJ \ I \ \ y ill M pQ ■ '. "
H II \| \
They went outside the town for many miles till they came to a mountain .
Aladdin obeyed, and when he came to the lamp he blew
it out and put it inside his coat. He picked some fruit from
the trees, filled his pockets with it, and went up the steps, but
his pockets were so full that he could not get out, and he
asked his uncle to help him.
“Give me the lamp first,” said the magician.


i <f V /
\ v ift V- V^C
U VA \ ynr -<■ K __.
|pw yflR®. w 7 sJjw ■ INI^hfffw .
The Sultan tat on his throne, listening to the appeals of his people.
“1 cannot till I get out,” said Aladdin
His uncle was in a great rage.
“Give me the lamp,” he roared
But Aladdin was not frightened; he, too, got angry, and
refused. Then the magician in a fury threw some herbs on to
the fire, repeated the spell, and the stone fell again, imprison-


ing the poor boy underground. For two days he had no food
and water. He could not eat the fruit, for it was all diamonds,
rubies and emeralds; and Aladdin, thinking he would die,
clasped his hands in prayer to God. In doing this he rubbed
the ring (which the magician had forgotten) and instantly a
great genie stood before him and said:
“What do you wish me to do? I am the slave of the ring.”
“Take me out of this place,” said Aladdin, and at once he
found himself outside.
He made haste home, and he and his mother were very
glad to meet. He had had time to think and be sorry for his
bad conduct to her. The next day he told her all the story,
and then he asked for some breakfast.
“Ah,” she said, “my poor boy, you ate up all the food 1
had last night.”
“Well,” said Aladdin, “1 can sell the lamp.”
“Clean it first,” said his mother.


Aladdin had given it only one rub when a giant genie
stood before him, and asked:
“What do you wish? I and the other slaves of the lamp
will obey you.”
The widow fainted from fear, but Aladdin said boldly
“Bring me food.”
The genie vanished, but came back in a moment with a
silver tray holding twelve silver dishes full of food. He put the
tray on the table and disappeared. By that time the widow
had recovered, and was amazed by the feast before her. When
Aladdin and his mother had eaten all the food, Aladdin sold
the silver tray for a good sum, and afterwards the dishes, and
they lived for some years on the money thus gained.
Aladdin never forgot his good resolutions in the magic
garden. He was very good to his mother. One day as he
was going down the street, he met a grand procession, in
which the Princess Badroul, the daughter of the Sultan, was
passing. The wind just at that moment blew aside her veil.


f/■ ■ _ , ■'. e I
A procession of white and black flares started out for the Palace.
Aladdin saw her face, and she was so beautiful that he at once
fell in love with her. He went home, and was sitting by
himself, very thoughtful and very sorrowful, when his mother
came and asked him what was the matter. He told her, and
said that she must go to the Sultan and ask him to give his
daughter to her son for a wife.


i'. - ' K" \ /// f/rffi ; r^’
/ y i i/*IS I
/ In >'
Jfe’ * • jp®^’ 1 ' 1 «-" s ’ \ | J»A <% VffS* ,<-' IjP*^?
“What da you wishT I and the other dares of the lamp will obey you."


At first she laughed at the idea. He, a tailor’s son, marry
the Princess! But at last he persuaded her, and she consented
to go.
Aladdin had by this time learned the true value of the fruit
he had found in the magic garden, so he filled a china dish
with the magnificent jewels, and his mother carried them to
the palace, where the Sultan sat on his throne, listening to
the appeals of his people.
When the widow’s turn came she told him at once that
her son was in love with the Princess, and that, though she
thought him mad, she had brought his gift. She uncovered
the dish, and the Sultan could hardly believe his eyes, when
he saw jewels that would buy up all his kingdoms.
He turned to the Vizier, and, after consulting with him,
said:
“Your son must send me forty basins of gold full of such
jewels, borne by forty black slaves, and as many white ones,
all splendidly dressed; 1 will then give him my daughter.”


'■ -
The widow took this message home to her son. Aladdin
at once rubbed the lamp, and when the genie appeared, he
ordered him to bring the slaves and the basins of jewels, and
a splendid dress for the widow.
The genie at once obeyed, and soon the great procession
of white and black slaves started out for the palace.
When they arrived there, the widow presented them to the
Sultan, who was delighted and amazed. He told the widow
to go and tell her son that he was quite ready to give him his
daughter.
Then Aladdin called the genie, asked for a splendid dress,
a beautiful horse and forty slaves to attend him, and then
went at once to the palace, the slaves throwing handfuls of
gold to the people as they passed. The Sultan received him
affectionately, and there was a grand feast. The Sultan wished
that the marriage should take place at once, but Aladdin
begged him to wait until the next day, when he hoped to
have a palace ready for his wife.


“New lamps for old ones”
As soon as he reached home, he rubbed the lamp, and
ordered the genie to build a palace near that of the Sultan,
only far more magnificent. The genie obeyed, and when the
Sultan looked out of his windows the next day, he saw a
palace of alabaster with golden ornaments standing near his
own. Then the marriage was celebrated. Aladdin took his
royal bride to her home-not forgetting to take also the magic
lamp.


Meanwhile the wicked false uncle had believed that
Aladdin must have died in the garden, but on returning to
the town he heard the story of Aladdin, and knew the truth.
Then he resolved to get back the lamp. So he bought a
great number of pretty new lamps, and went through the
streets crying:
“New lamps for old ones.”
Aladdin had gone out hunting, and one of the maids came
to the Princess and said:
“There is an old lamp in
the Prince’s room; we may
as well change it for a new
>»
one.
“Very well,’’ said the
Princess. Thus the magi-
cian got the lamp, and as
soon as he had it, he bade
the genie cany the palace
as it stood, and the lady in
it, to Africa. Of course he
was obeyed, and when
Aladdin came home he
found his palace and his


wife gone. The Sultan was very angry at the disappearance
of his daughter, and at once commanded that Aladdin should
be seized and brought before him.
But Aladdin assured him that this was not due to treachery
on his part and begged him to be patient whilst he tried to
find his wife. He rubbed his ring, and when the genie came
he told his storv to him. The genie gave Aladdin a powder
that, sprinkled on a pillow, would make anyone who used
that pillow sleep for two days; then he took him up and put
him under the Princess’s window in Africa.
Aladdin called her name. She knew his voice at once
and ran to the window. Her joy at seeing her beloved
husband again was so great that she broke into tears and at
once sent her woman to let him in by the private door.
Sobbing in his arms, she told him how terrified she had been
of the magician, and, when her husband was able to question
her, she explained how she had exchanged the magic lamp.
She knew this must be the cause of their misfortune, because
the magician kept it under his pillow when he slept and never
let it out of his sight


If you will help me, Princess,”
said Aladdin, I will soon carry
you back to your father’s land. Can
you sprinkle this powder on the
magician’s pillow?”
The Princess was able to do as
Aladdin asked, and when the
magician was sleeping soundly she
crept silently into the bedroom and
took the lamp from under his
pillow and brought it to her husband
Telling the Princess to trust him, he took the lamp into the
gardens, and, summoning the genie, commanded him to
transport the palace and all it
contained back to where it had first
stood. This was instantly done.
When the next morning the
Sultan saw the palace in its old
place, his astonishment was as
great as his delight, and he at once
mounted his horse and rode to see
his daughter.
Aladdin related to him
the


|K8Wl^^WjUJWt r .!_■__ . ■ ■-'-'-
whole story. His Majesty wished to cut off the magician’s
head, but Aladdin persuaded the Sultan to banish him to a
desert island instead.
Aladdin and his Princess lived happily ever after.


ROBIN HOOD
The hiding pi ace of Robin Hood and his merry men was
Sherwood Forest—in a large dry cave. Before the cave was
a green sward, shaded in summer time by the leafy
branches of wide-spreading oak trees. Here they would sit
on the grass in fine weather and feast on the flesh of the
King’s deer.
At first the country people in the neighbourhood of the
forest feared the outlaws. But when they found that the
archers were really their good friends, they began to feel a
great affection for Robin Hood.
A number of summer days had passed by and Robin,
tired of inaction, sauntered forth to the edge of the forest,
He had his bow and quiver on his back, his sword by his side.
His way led him to a stream where the only bridge
spanning the water was only wide enough for one person to
cross at a time.
Just as he stepped on to the bridge at one end, a stranger
stepped on the other to cross to Robin’s side. Neither would
give way to the other. Robin, leader of his band, was accus-
tomed to deference, and liked his own way. He expected
the stranger —who was seven feet high, broad-shouldered,
strong, and well made —to let him pass. But the stranger
held his ground.
“Give place, fellow,’’ shouted Robin.
‘‘Not I,” said the other. “I give way only to a better
man.”


“Then,’’ cried Robin, “I shall soon show you that I am the
better man.”
“I am not so sure of that,” replied the other. That
remains to be seen.”
Robin, at this, fitted an arrow to his bow, and, pointing
it at the stranger’s breast, said, ’lf you do not give place J
will cleave your heart with this arrow.”
“Nay, that were a coward’s trick,” replied the other.
“You are armed with a bow and arrow, and I with only a
quarter-staff. It is no true trial of strength or skill.”
“You call me coward!” cried Robin angrily. “I will soon
show you that I am none. Stand at your end of the bridge,
while I cut me a quarter-staff, and then let us fight the
question out fairly.”
“Agreed,” answered the other. “I shall not take a step
until you are ready.”
So Robin selected a branch for a quarter-staff from a
grove nearby, trimmed it to his liking and returned to the
bridge. Then, he and the stranger advanced to meet each
other.
Soon they were at it, fast and furious. Robin was the
more skilful, but the stranger was the stronger. Crack,
crack, whack, whack! The forest rang with the noise. The
combatants often stumbled as if about to fall off the narrow
bridge into the water, but quickly regained their footing, and
fought on cheerfully. The tall man puffed and panted like an
angry bull. He stepped forward to deliver a mighty blow to
end the conflict, when Robin suddenly smote him on the side
and caused him to lower his quarter-staff, and stagger for a
foothold on the narrow bridge.
Robin lowered his staff, too, expecting to see the other
fall into the water. But the stranger was as nimble as he was
strong. Robin was caught off his guard. His opponent
steadied himself in a moment, and smote Robin a mighty
blow on the head. Robin dropped his staff and fell into the
stream. The cold water soon brought him to his senses.
The stranger stood on the bridge shaking his broad sides
with laughter.
“Where are you now, good fellow?” he called.
“Where you would have been if we had fought a bit
longer,” returned Robin, with a cheerful laugh.


At this, the stranger ran to the brook side, held out his
quarter-staff for Robin to grasp, and drew him panting to
the bank.
Robin, dripping wet, and still dizzy, sat with his back
against a tree, and gently feeling his broken head, said,
“Good friend, you have beaten me in fair fight, it is now time
we knew each other better.”
So saying, he seized his bugle and blew three clear notes.
Out came his men who had been interested spectators of
the great fight.
“What is the matter, good master?” said Will Stutely,
one of his leaders. “You look like a drowned rat. Shall we
put this stranger in the stream and cool him too?”
“No,” replied Robin. “He has beaten me in fair fight.
He is a good fellow. I would fain know more about him.”
And 1 about you, * exclaimed the other. “What is your
name?”
Why, said Robin, “they call me Robin Hood, the
outlaw, and these good men are outlaws too.”


“Then lam sorry I broke your head, said the other, for
I set out to find you, and to seek to join your band. I fear that
you will not, now, have me for a comrade.
“On the contrary,” cried Robin eagerly, I like you
better since you have proved yourself a good fair fighter.
But you have not yet told us your name.
“Men call me John Little,” said the stranger.
At once Will Stutely cried, “John Little! Indeed! Your
new name in Sherwood Forest shall be Little John, and at
this jest the archers laughed heartily.
Little John then proceeded to show Robin his prowess
with the long-bow.
“You have beaten me with the staff,” said Robin, ‘ let me
see if I can beat you with the bow.” So saying, he cut a
willow wand the thickness of a man s thumb, peeled it and
stuck it in the ground in front of a tree stem about seventy
paces away.
Little John selected a bow and a straight arrow from one
of Robin’s men, took careful aim and let fly at the wand.
The arrow split the wand and lodged quivering there.
“Can you mend that shot, Robin Hood?” asked John.
“I cannot mend it, for it is perfect,” answered Robin,
“but I can split your arrow in two.”
Putting a new string on his bow, he carefully selected an
arrow and let fly the shaft. John’s arrow was fairly split in
two.
“That,”’ said John, “is a better shot than mine. Now I
am ready to serve the best archer in England.”
All the archers welcomed this speech and the band
moved into the forest to return to the cave.
* * * *
One day, Robin and Little John went on a jaunt to search
for passing travellers to relieve them of their gold. They
chanced upon a young fop, standing over a dead fawn, which
he had just shot. He was dressed in scarlet in the height of
fashion, and had a scarlet feather in his cap.
“Who gave thee the right to shoot deer in this forest-
demanded Robin.
“Who gave thee the right to question me?” replied the
other.
Nettled, Robin drew his sword, which the other did like-


wise. In a few moments they were at it in earnest. But Robin
discovered that this beautifully dressed young man was more
than a match for him for he shortly received a gaping cut in
the head and fell to the ground.
, t Stay thy hand, young swordsman,” cried Robin.
Thou shouldst be in the band of Robin Hood.”
, Robin Hood? replied the other, “it is he whom I seek.”
He is my cousin and I am Will Gamwell with whom he used
we were boys together.”
My cousin Will! cried Robin. * Why seekest thou me.
an J, glad to see thee again.”
I have come on evil days, said Will. ”1 killed my
father s steward and am now outlaw.”
Then thou shalt join my band of merry men whom you
shall now meet, and Robin blew three blasts upon his horn.
In a moment his men surrounded them and with three hearty
cheers renamed him Will Scarlet, the newest member of
the band.
* *


One day Little John hung a dead sauirrel to a bough of a
tree about a hundred yards away. Then, taking careful aim,
he sent an arrow right through the squirrel s body.
“Well done, Little John,” cried Robin Hood. “1 would
gladly walk a hundred miles to see anyone who could beat
you with the long-bow!
At this remark Will Scarlet laughed loudly.
“I know one who can beat Little John, he said. Cio to
Fountains Abbey. There you will find a friar with a shaven
crown who can beat both Will and yourself with either bow
or broadsword.” i • c i j
Robin, who was known as the best archer in t-ngland,
did not like the idea of taking second place.
‘Then neither food nor drink will I touch, said Kobm,
“until I have seen this friar and tested his skill. Therefore,
let us go and find him.
Robin buckled on a vest of chain armour, and armed
himself with sword, buckler, and bow and arrows.
Just before noon the three outlaws came to a strearn
near the Abbey. There was no bridge by which to cross, and
Robin hesitated to rust his fine coat of mail by plunging into
the stream. ..
He bade the other two to stay in hiding and to await his
call. He sat on the bank of the stream to await events.
Presently he heard a merry song and there appeared through
the trees a short, stout, jolly looking man in a friar s dress.
On his head was a knight’s helmet, at his side a sword and
dagger; and in his hands he bore a large meat pie and a
leathern bottle of wine. .
He sat down in a shady spot and took off his helmet,
settled himself against a willow tree, and set to work on the
pie and leathern bottle.
This made Robin feel very hungry so he came from his
hiding place, an arrow fitted to his bow, and pointing this
at the friar, called out: “Hey! Holy friar! Carry me across
the stream or you shall have this arrow.”
The other jumped at the call and replied: Put down
your bow, archer, I will carry you across.”
So, tucking up his robe, he took Robin on his back and
waded across the stream to the further bank. Robin stepped
out briskly in the direction of the Abbey to look for Friar


Tuck. Not so fast, said the other, one good turn deserves
another. I have left my book and my belt on the other side of
the stream, and I must get them again. I pray you, carry me
across.”
Before Robin had time to reply, he found the friar's
sword pointing at his throat. He had no time to unsling his
bow or unsheath his own sword. He knew that it would
be death to make a move to do so, so he replied, “Why, good
father. I shall get my feet wet if I do.”
“Well, what about my feet?” said the friar. ‘‘Are they
not as good as yours. Come, pick me up quickly!”
Thereupon, Robin bent his back and taking up the friar,
stepped into the water. The stones were slippery in the
stream bed and his heavy load kept digging both heels into
his sides. At last he staggered to the bank and dropped his
load with a sigh of relief.
No sooner was he free from his burden than he drew his
sword and said, Now, holy friar, it’s my turn once more.
Carry me back again, or I run you through.”
‘‘All right,” said the friar.
So, Robin, with his sword in his hand, got on the friar’s
back and began to spur him with his heels as the friar had
done to him. When they reached the middle of the brook the
friar gave a mighty heave and shot Robin over his head into
the water.
"Qiere, my fine fellow, choose whether you sink or
swim,” said the holy man, wading ashore, laughing loudly as
Robin tried to find his feet and recover his sword. At last he
managed to get to the bank, and dropping his sword, he
seized his bow and let fly shaft after shaft at short range at


the friar. But the other nimbly parried each arrow with his
buckler, and laughed aloud each time Robin drew his bow.
When all his arrows were sped, he shouted, You villain!
Come near my sword arm, and if I do not carve some of the
brawn off your fat cheeks, by Saint Dunstan, I 11 never touch
sword again.”
“Be not so hasty,” returned the friar quite calmly, taking
up his own sword. “Now, my young cockerel, crowing so
loudly, I’ll clip both your comb and your spurs.”
Thereupon they rushed at each other, and bright sparks
flashed from their crashing swords. The fight waged from
noon till four o’clock and both would have been badly
wounded, but for the fact that each wore chain mail beneath
his robe.
At last, Robin’s foot slipped on a stone and down he fell
on his knee, but, to his surprise, the other waited his
recovery.
“Now, by my faith,” cried Robin, “you are indeed a
generous swordsman. I would ask a boon of you. Give me
leave to blow’ on my horn.”
“Blow till your breath fails, for all I care, said the friar.
So Robin blew and Little John and Will Scarlet came
running up. The friar then asked Robin: Give me leave to
whistle three times?” The friar whistled when Robin
granted his request, and three great dogs came bounding up,
barking loudly, and rushing and snapping at Robin, who
hastily climbed a tree beyond their reach. Little John shot
arrows at the dogs from across the stream, but as each arrow
whizzed at a dog the animal nimbly leaped aside and
snatched at the flying shaft with his teeth and bit it in two.
Will Scarlet had waded the stream by this time and
called to the dogs, who fawned and gambolled round him
like old friends.
“Good Friar Tuck,” said Will. This stout yeoman
roosting in the tree is my cousin, Robin Hood.”
“Robin Hood!” exclaimed the friar. “Had 1 known
before who you were, 1 would have carried you over the


1 ' i ——- —-—— ZaaSMJk'
z^BHSF — _ _
stream willingly, and
shared my pasty with you.
In faith, you are the best
fighter I have ever met.”
‘‘l would like you to join
our band,” said Robin.
"We will build you a
chapel and you shall keep
us all in order with good
counsel. Will you come?”
‘‘Yea. I will come with a
right good will,” replied
the friar.
So, Friar Tuck became
one of Robin Hood’s
Merrie Men.
One sunny day, Robin
Hood, disguised, was
strolling through the
Forest when he met a
youth, armed with sword
and long-bow.
‘‘What doest thou in this
forest?” said Robin in a
gruff voice.
‘‘By what right dost thou
ask?” returned the youth.
‘‘Stand aside, ere I spit
thee on my sword.”
‘‘Not so fast, young sir-
rah,” cried Robin.
Soon the woods re-
sounded with the clash of
arms. The youth showed
prowess with his steel,
and it was not long before
Robin received a nasty cut
across the wrist.
‘‘Hold, enough,” Robin


called out. “Thou hast a pretty sword, young boy. He
spoke in his natural voice, and the youth recognised him.
“Thou art Robin Hood, whom I have come to seek, said
the youth. Robin also knew then, that the youth was no boy
but none other than the girl of his dreams, Maid Marion.
“I have come on evil times and my father told me to
search for you in this forest and give myself to your care.
What shall I do?”
“You will marry me, sweet maid,” said Robin.
So he took her to the outlaws’ bower, and a few days
after Friar Tuck made them man and wife, under the shade
of the greenwood tree.
Richard, the Lion Heart, King of England, had returned
from a Crusade. He had stormed the Castle of Nottingham,
which was held by his brother John’s soldiers. John had
raised a rebellion to make himself King, but had failed.
Richard asked the Sheriff of Nottingham as to whether
there were any other enemies to punish before he moved
elsewhere. The Sheriff told him about the band of outlaws in
Sherwood Forest, who flouted his authority, killed the King’s
deer, robbed wayfayers, and were enemies of both Church
and State. King Richard was intrigued. He remembered his
mother, some years before, had considered Robin Hood
worthy of an invitation to take part in a great archery match
at Finsbury Field; and he determined to go in disguise to
Sherwood Forest and see for himself what kind of a man this
Robin Hood was.
One cold, wet evening, as Friar Tuck sat by a cheerful
fire that glowed on the earthern floor of his cell at Fountains
Abbey, he heard a loud knock on his door. His three dogs,
lying asleep, sprang to their feet.
“Now, by St. Dunstan,’’ said the Friar aloud, “who
comes at this late hour to disturb my rest? Pass on your
wa y ” . _ ...
“Open at once! Open, I say!” an angry voice replied.
“Depart in peace,’’ shouted back the Friar. “This is the


home of a poor Friar.”
‘‘l do not know the road,
nor do I intend to go a step
further,” stormed the
stranger. “Let me in.”
“If you break in the
door,” roared the Friar,
“my dogs will tear you to
pieces.”
“I have a sword which
will make short work of
your dogs,” shouted back
the other.
So Friar Tuck locked
up the dogs and unbarred
the door. Outside, he saw
a tall knight in a black
coat of mail. The Friar
said, “Come in, Sir Knight,
and share my fire and
food.”
The Knight entered the
cell, and Friar Tuck took
his horse and tethered it
on the sheltered side of his
dwelling.
On his return, with a
roguish twinkle, he went
to a cupboard, whence he
took a large venison
pasty, and a capacious
leathern bottle of ale. He
placed these on the table
and they both fell to eating
and drinking like hungry
men.
When supper was over,
the Knight told many
stories of his travels in
Eastern lands, where he
had fought with the
Crusaders.


Next morning, Friar Tuck said, “I have greatly enjoyed
your company. Is there anything else I can do to speed you
on your way?”
‘‘Yes, there is one thing. Tell me where I can find Robin
Hood. I sought him all yesterday in vain.”
‘‘Do you not know,” said the Friar, ‘‘that Robin Hood
is an outlaw?”
“Yes,” returned the Black Knight, ‘‘that I know full well
But 1 seek not to harm him. I desire only to see what manner
of man he is.”
‘‘ln that case,” said the Friar, ‘‘l can guide you to his
bower.”
As they went along, the Friar with his dogs, the Knight
riding, a man in Lincoln green stepped out of the bushes. It
was Robin himself. He took hold of the horse’s bridle, and
said, ‘‘Stay, the Knight who enters this forest has to pay toll
to me, so hand over your purse.”
‘‘Who are } ju that bids me pay toll?” replied the Knight
very quietly. ‘‘l may yield to force, but never to one man.”
“Then you shall yield to numbers,” said Robin, and blew
three notes on his horn. Out stepped twenty men from the
bushes.
‘‘l am a messenger from the King,” said the Black
Knight. ‘‘l have come to have speech with you.”
‘‘God save the King,” cried Robin, taking off his cap,
“the King has no more loyal subjects than we, outlaws
though we are. My war is not against the King, but against
those greedy nobles who are the King’s enemies, and conspire
against his rule. But come with me and you shall see
greater things.”
He led the way to the bower and again blew his horn. At
the sound, one hundred and fifty men came forward, armed
and silent.
” ’Tis our hour for dinner,” said Robin to the Knight.
‘‘Dismount and join us, we can talk of other things later.”
So they all sat down to a feast of good things—venison
and fish, and game, and cakes and ale.
After the feast, Robin said, ‘‘You shall see what manner of
men my archers are, and then you can report to the King.”
So, at Robin’s signal, the men rose and stood ready for
practice with the bows and arrows. The Knight was


astonished to see that the only targets were willow wands
crowned with a garland of flowers. Whoever failed to send
his arrow through the garland was to suffer a buffet on the
head from the brawny arm of Friar Tuck.
One after another the archers shot their arrows clean
through the garlands, while the Knight looked on with
astonishment at their skill.
At last it came to Robin’s turn. He aimed carefully, but
the arrow had been badly feathered, and it swerved and
missed the garland. It was not often that Robin missed his
mark. He was angry at his failure, and to show his real skill
to the Knight, sent three arrows quickly, one after another,
through the garland.
The Black Knight exclaimed: “By Saint George, never
have I seen such skill with the bow.”
But Will Scarlet came up to Robin, and keeping a solemn
face, said, “You have to pay forfeit for that bad shot, so come
and take your blessing like the rest of us.”


“Not so,” cried Robin. “Friar Tuck is one of my band
and must not lay hands on me, your leader. 1 own the King
only as my master.” “You, Sir Knight, stand for the King.
I will take my buffet from you.”
“As you wish,” said the Knight. He took off his gauntlet
and rolled up his sleeve. The next moment Robin was
sprawling on the grass.
“No man has ever felled me before” he said. I did not
think anyone short of King Richard himself could knock me
down with a blow.”
At these words the Black Knight took off his helmet and
Robin recognized the King.
Falling on his knee, cap in hand, Robin cried, My Liege
Lord, King Richard. I know you now. I ask pardon for
myself and all my men. We are loyal subjects and will gladly
serve you in any way you direct.”
“My good outlaw,” said the King. “I grant your prayer
on one condition: —You and your band shall serve me as the
Royal Archers, and I could not wish for better subjects or
braver soldiers.”
“1 make my vow,” answered Robin, that I and my men
will serve you henceforth, loyally, truly, and obediently unto
our lives’ end.”
And this is how the outlaws left Sherwood Forest and
became the Royal Archers.
On King Richard leaving England once again to fight on
foreign lands, Prince John sought to put an end to the Royal
Archers by casting Robin Hood into prison.


Will Stutely summoned the band of Royal Archers, and
told them of their loved master’s imprisonment. They
marched in a body to the Tower, over-powered the guard at
the gate, and forced the Warden to open the cell and set Robin
free. Right glad he was to see his old comrades again. But
there was no time to be lost. Sherwood Forest was calling
them, and thither the archers marched, none daring to hinder
them.
Then, with Robin in the middle, and his men in a circle
around, they all renounced their allegiance to Prince John,
and agreed to live in the greenwood again as outlaws until
King Richard should return and do them justice.
But King Richard came not again. He died as the result
of a wound received in a petty quarrel with one of his vassals
in Normandy, and Prince John, his brother, became King of
England. One of the first things John set out to do now he
had kingly power, was to put an end to the hated outlaws in
Sherwood Forest.
Their stronghold was attacked by the King’s men again
and again, but Robin kept his enemies at bay for a year
or more.
By this time the King had withdrawn his forces for a
season, as he needed them elsewhere.
One day, as Robin rode on horseback near Kirkley Abbey,
his head began to throb so painfully that he could go no further.
The remedy for most sicknesses in those days was blood-
letting, and Robin dismounted and knocked feebly at an
abbey door. Now, the abbess was none other than the
daughter of the Sheriff of Nottingham, who had always hated
Robin. Grown old, she had entered the Abbey of Kirkley,
and was now the abbess.
When she found that her old enemy was in sore distress,
she was wicked enough to determine to kill him.
She opened a lancet, and cutting deeply into an artery,
left the cell, locking the door behind her.
With the first loss of blood, Robin fell into a faint; but,
after a time he revived, and finding how fast his blood was
ebbing away, managed with failing strength to bind up his
arm.
He called for help as well as he could, and happily Little
John was not far away, for he had followed his dear master,


anxious for Kis safety. When he heard the faint calls, he said
to himself, “I fear my master is near dead, he calls so wearily.
Almost beside himself with rage, he looked about him for
some means of breaking in the door; and spying a log of
wood nearby, lifted it up in his strong arms, and battered his
way in. He found his master almost spent.
“Little John, dear and faithful comrade, I have but a short
time left. Give me my longbow in my hand, that through this
window I may send one arrow. Where the arrow falls on the
green grass, near the spreading oaks, there dig my grave.
Then, with one last effort, held up to the window by Little
John, Robin Hood sped his last shaft towards the trees.
Straight it flew until it struck the stem of a great oak tree,
and then it fell on the grass beneath.
“O sweet music of my bow,” murmured the dying man.
“It lulls me to sleep. I ask a boon. Lay my long-bow by my
side in the grave, and place a stone above, so that men may
say, *Here lies the bold Robin Hood.
So Robin breathed his last. Little John carried the body
out of the abbey and laid it by the arrow. Then he and his
weeping companions dug the grave, and placed the long-bow
by the side of their dear master.
On the stone were graven the words: —
“Here underneath this little stone
Lies Robert, Earl of Huntingdon;
Never archer as he so good,
And people called him Robin Hood
Such outlaws as he and his men
Will England never see again.”


STRONG
HANS
There was once upon a time a man and his wife who
had but one child, and they lived in a solitary valley
all alone. Once it happened that the woman went
into the forest to collect firewood, and took with her the little
Hans, who was just turned two years of age. It was the
beginning of spring, and the child took great delight in the
various flowers which were then blooming; and, running
from one to another, Hans and his mother strayed far into
the forest.
Hans had gathered a lot of daisies and brought them to
his mother, who said:
“A daisy stands for innocence, Hans.”
“And ’is, what is ’is,” laughed little Hans
“That is for love,” said the mother, taking the wild rose
held out to her.
And then she showed him how to make a daisy-chain and
when it was finished, she put it round his neck. Hans then
gathered more daisies, and in no time he had four daisy-
chains round his neck.
The further they went into the forest the prettier were
the flowers and they found many kinds that the mother had
never before seen or even heard of. When the day was
drawing to a close Hans’ mother turned for home, but was


dismayed to find she had lost her way and after many more
weary miles sat down to rest.
“What is that noise, I wonder, Hans, in the thicket some
distance back in the woods. It was as if a very large wild
animal were crawling slowly through the brushwood.” Fear
was in the mother’s eyes.
When Hans’ mother had rested she started her weary
journey again but only went deeper and deeper into the forest.
Hans’ father in the meantime discovered the disappear-
ance of his wife and child and searched the valley from end
to end but could not find his family and with despair went
home to weep over the loss of his dear wife and only son.
Suddenly two robbers jumped up out of a thicket, and,
seizing the mother and child, carried them deep into the black
wood, where from year to year nobody ever penetrated.
The poor woman begged the robbers earnestly to let her and
her child go home; but their hearts were of stone, and they
paid no attention to her weeping and prayers, but only used
force to drive her on farther. After they had thus travelled
many miles, through thorns and bushes, they came to a
rock in which was a door, whereat the robbers knocked, and
immediately it opened of itself.
They told the woman to go inside ahead of them, but she
only replied with tears, and on her knees, asked to be allowed
to return to her husband. Their reply was to grasp her by the
arms and drag her and the boy through the doorway.
Then they had to pass through a long gloomy passage,
and came at length to a great cave, lighted by a fire which
was burning on the hearth. On the wall were hanging
swords, sabres, and other weapons, which shone in the light;


and in the middle of the cave was a black table, at which
the robbers sat down to play, and at the head sat the Captain.
The latter as soon as he saw the woman enter, came up to
her and said:
“If you take everything quietly we will do you no harm.”
“But I want to go home to my husband,” cried the
woman.
“We want you here,” said the Captain, “we require
someone who can look after our household.”
The woman began to see that protesting was useless and
quietened down in her weeping.


“What do you wish me to do,” she said.
“The Captain replied, “You will have to keep this cave
clean and wholesome. We want you to cook all our meals for
us and if you are a good cook and do everything to our liking
you will be well treated.”
So saying, he gave Hans and her something to eat, and
showed her to her bed.
“This is where you will sleep with your child and no one
will molest you. You should very soon forget the outside
world and will in time become very happy.”
The mother set herself to do all the jobs around the
robber’s camp, realising that if she worked hard the band of
robbers may give her some inkling of the situation of their
camp and some day Hans and she might find some way to
escape.
She did not realise that for many years neither she nor
her son would see the light of the sun or any of the beauties
of the outside world.
The woman remained many years with these robbers,
and Hans grew big and strong. His mother told him tales
and taught him to read from an old book of chivalry, which
she found in the cave. When Hans was nine years old, he
made himself a staff out of the branch of a fir-tree, and hiding
it behind the bed, he went and said to his mother, “Dear
mother, do tell me who my father is; I must and will know.”
But his mother was silent, and would not tell him lest
he became homesick.
“One of these days I will tell you, my child,” she said
sadly.
“But mother I want to know now,” said Hans, “I have


spent seven long years in his cave in the darkness, it seems.
And I do so want to know who my father is and where he is.”
The mother knew the wicked robbers would never allow
Hans to escape, and she did want Hans to see his father
again.
“One day you will meet your father again, dear boy,” she
said. It would have broken her heart had she thought Hans
would never see his father again.
That night, when the robbers returned from their day’s
plundering, Hans fetched out his cudgel, and placing himself
before the Captain, said to him, “I must know now who is
my father, and if you will not tell me I will knock you


down!” But the Captain only laughed at him, and gave him
a box on the ears, so that he rolled under the table. Hans
soon got up, but held his tongue, thinking, ‘‘l will wait a year
longer, and then try; perhaps I shall manage better.”
He said nothing to his mother about the affray, but when
he was in bed that night he thought:
“I will do everything in my power to make myself strong.
‘‘l will grow as fast as I can and perhaps at the end of the
year I shall be able to give the Captain more than he gave
9 9
me.
During that long year Hans practiced the use of his cudgel
and strengthened his body and felt that at last he was strong
enough to deal the robbers a good hiding and so when the
year was up, he fetched his cudgel again, sharpened its point,
and congratulated himself that it was a trusty and strong
weapon. At night the robbers returned, and began to drink
wine, one bottle after another, till their heads dropped on the
table. Then Hans took his cudgel, and stationing himself
before the Captain, asked him again, ‘‘Who is my father?
The Captain dealt him a box on the ear by way of answer,
which knocked him under the table; but Hans was soon up
again, and beat the Captain and his comrades so forcibly
about the legs and arms that they could not stir.
He had grown very strong and as he finished off the band
he said.
“That will teach you all a lesson for holding my mother
and me prisoners here for all these years. We have been tied
up in this hole and have never seen the light of day, but now
I shall find out who my father is.”
The mother meanwhile remained in a corner, astonished


at her son’s bravery and strength; but as soon as he had
finished his work he came to her and said, “You see now
that lam in earnest, so tell me who is my father?” “Dear
Hans,” she replied, “let us go and seek till we find him.”
She said to Hans, “Whilst I make search for the key of
the door so that we may be free, you gather together as much
of the wealth you are able to carry in a sack.”
So saying, she robbed the Captain of the key of the outer
door, and Hans, fetching a large meal-sack, crammed it full
of gold, silver, and all the valuables he could find, and then
threw it over his back. They left the cave; but imagine what
was the astonishment of Hans, when he emerged from
darkness into the light of day, and saw the green trees, the
flowers, the birds, and the morning sun shining over all in the
clear sky! He stood still and gazed all around him, quite
bewildered, till his mother began to look for the road to her
home, where they happily arrived, after hours of walking,
and found it still in the solitary valley.
It was a wonderful homecoming after all the years that
had gone by. And Hans could not realise all the beauties he
had seen on his way through the forest. Sun, birds, flowers,
trees and above all the wonderful feeling of freedom.
At the door sat the father, who wept for joy when he


recognised his wife, and heard that Hans was his son, whom
he had long ago believed to be dead. But Hans, although
only twelve years of age, was already a head taller than his
father; and they all went together into the house, where
Hans put down his sack upon the chimney-corner. As soon
as he did so, the house began to crack; and presently the
chimney-seat gave way, and then the floor, so that the heavy
sack fell quite down into the cellar. “Heaven protect us!“
exclaimed the father. “What is that? Why, you have
broken our house down!”
“Pray don’t let your grey hairs grow on that account,
my dear father,” replied Hans, “there is in that sack much
more than will build a house. We will pull this house down
altogether and build another one of great beauty and
strength. And should we run short of wealth there is much
more where that came from.”
And the father marvelled at the strength of this young
son of his. He could pull anything a horse could pull and lift
any heavy weight.
So, soon after, the father and son began to erect a new
cottage, and to buy cattle and land, and go to market. Hans
ploughed their fields; and when he went behind the plough
and pushed it through the soil, the oxen had no need to draw
at all. Hie following spring, Hans said, “Father, bestow
some money on me, and let me make an exceedingly heavy
walking-stick, that I may go into strange lands.” When this
staff was ready, Hans left his father’s house, and walked off,
till he came to a large dense forest.
There he heard something crackling and crashing, and,
looking around, saw a fir-tree, which was coiled round from
top to bottom like a rope. And, as he lifted his eyes, he
perceived a great fellow who had caught hold of the tree,


and was twisting it round like a reed. “Hello!” cried Hans,
“what are you doing there?” “I have plucked up two fir-
stems,” replied the fellow, “and am about to make a rope of
them for my own use.” “He has got some strength,” thought
Hans to himself: “I might find him useful.” And then he
called out, “Let them be and come with me.”
Thereupon the fellow descended the tree, and walked
with Hans, than whom he was a head taller, though Hans
was by no means little. “You shall be called ‘Fir-Twister’,”
said Hans to him. As they walked on, they heard somebody
knocking and hammering so hard that at every blow the
ground shook; and presently they came to a great rock,


before which a giant was standing, knocking off great pieces
with his fist.
When Hans asked him what he was about, he replied,
“When I want to go to sleep at night, there come bears, and
wolves, and all creatures of that kind, who snuff and prowl
around me and prevent me from sleeping, so now I want to
build myself a house to rest in.”
“Ah, very well, I can use you, too,” thought Hans; and
said to the giant, “Come with me, leave your house-building,
and you shall be called ‘Rock-Splitter’.”
The man consented, and the three strode along through
the forest, and wherever they came the wild beasts fled away
from them, terrified. At evening time they came to an old
deserted castle, into which they stepped, and lay down to
sleep in the hall. The following morning Hans went into
the garden, and found it quite a wilderness, and full of thorns
and weeds. As he walked about, a wild boar suddenly
sprang out at him, but he gave it such a blow with his staff
that it fell down at his feet dead; so he threw it over his
shoulder, and, taking it home, put it on a spit to roast, and
chuckled over the treat it would be.
And when he reached the castle there was great rejoicing.
They spitted and roasted the carcase and “Rock-Splitter”
said, “This is very good pig and there should be many more
good pigs in the woods nearby.”
“More than good pigs,” roared “Fir-Twister.”
“Yes,” said Hans, “And they only need hunting and
killing.”
Afterwards, the three agreed that every day they should
take it by turns —two to go out and hunt, and the third


to remain at home and cook for each nine pounds of meat.
The first day the Fir-Twister remained at home; and Hans
and the Rock-Splitter went out hunting. While the Fir-
Twister was busy at home with his cooking, there came to
the castle gate a shrivelled-up little old man, who asked for
meat.
“Take yourself off, you sneak I” replied the cook; “you
want no meat!” But scarcely had he said these words than,
to his great surprise, the little insignificant old man sprang
upon him and thrashed him so with his fists, that he could not
protect himself from the blows, but was at last forced to drop
down, gasping for breath. The little man did not leave till he
had fully wreaked his vengeance; but when the other two
returned from hunting, the Fir-Twister said nothing to them
of the old man or his blows, for he thought, when they
remained at home, they might as well have a trial with the
fellow; and the bare thought of it pleased him very much.
The following day, accordingly, the Rock-Splitter
stopped at home, and it happened to him just as it had done
to the Fir-Twister; the old man beat him unmercifully
because he would give him no meat. When the others came
home at evening, the Fir-Twister perceived at once what had
happened; but both held their tongues, thinking that Hans
should also taste of the supper.


Hans, whose turn it now was to stay at home, did his
work in the kitchen as he thought fit, and, just as he was
about to polish the kettle, the little man came and demanded,
without ceremony, a piece of meat. “This is a poor fellow,
thought Hans; “I will give him some of my share, that the
others may not come short; and he handed him a piece of
meat. The Dwarf soon devoured it, and demanded another
piece, which the good-natured Hans gave him, and said it was
such a fine piece he ought to be contented with it. But the
Dwarf asked a third time for more meat. “You ought to
be ashamed of yourself,” said Hans, and gave him nothing.
Thereupon the ill-tempered Dwarf tried to spring on him,
and serve him as he had done the Fir-Twister and the Rock-
Splitter; but he had come at an unlucky moment, and Hans
gave him a couple of blows which made the Dwarf jump
down the castle steps.
Hans would then have pursued him, but he was so tall
that he actually fell over him, and when he got up again the
Dwarf was off. Hans hurried after him into the forest, and
saw him slip into a rocky hole; after which he returned home,
first marking the place. But the two others, when they came
back, wondered to see Hans so merry, and when he told
them all that had passed in their absence, they also concealed
no longer the tale of their adventures. Hans laughed at them,
and said, “You were served quite right, you should not have
been so grudging with your meat; but it is a shame that two
such big fellows as you should have allowed yourselves to be
beaten by a Dwarf.”
After their dinner they took a basket and some cord, and
all three went to the rocky hole, into which the Dwarf had
crept, and let Hans down in the basket, staff in hand. As
soon as he came to the bottom he found a door, on opening
which he saw a Maiden more beautiful than I can describe,
and near her sat the Dwarf, who grinned at Hans like a


sea-cat. But the Maiden was bound by chains, and looked so
sadly at Hans that he felt a great compassion for her, and
thought to himself, “You must be delivered from the power
of this wicked Dwarf;” and he gave the fellow a blow with
his staff, which killed him outright.
Immediately the chains fell off the Maiden, and Hans was
enchanted with her beauty. She told him she was a Princess,
whom a rebellious Count had stolen away from her home,
and concealed in a cave, because she would not listen to his
offers of marriage. The Dwarf had been placed there by the
Count as watchman, and he had caused her daily vexation
and trouble. Thereupon Hans placed the Maiden in the
basket, and caused her to be drawn up; but when the basket
came down again Hans would not trust his two companions,
for he thought they had already shown themselves false in
not telling about the Dwarf before, and nobody could tell
what design they might have now. So he laid his staff in the
basket, and it was very lucky he did so, for as soon as the
basket was half-way up, the two men let it fall again, and
Hans, had he been really in it, would have met with his death.
But Hans now did not know how he should make his way
out of the cave, and although he considered for a long while,
he could come to no decision. While he walked up and down


he came again to the chamber where the Maiden had been
sitting, and saw that the Dwarf had a ring on his finger which
shone and glittered. This he pulled off and put on, and as
soon as it pressed his finger, he heard suddenly some rustling
over his head. He looked up, and saw two Spirits fluttering
about in the air.
“Who art thou,” Hans cried in astonishment.
“Thou art our master, dear sir,” they replied, “Command
us and thou shalt receive anything that thou should want.
We will do anything that thou wouldst have us do for thee.”
Hans was at first astonished but at last he came to his
senses and said, “Two comrades of mine have proved them-
selves to be treacherous and vile. They have left me in this
underground cave alone with no means of getting out of it. I
wish to be borne back to earth. In a moment they obeyed,
and he seemed as if he was flying up; but when they set him
down on the ground he saw nobody standing about, and
when he went into the castle he could find nobody there
either.
The Fir-Twister and the Rock-Splitter had made their
escape, and carried away with them the beautiful Maiden.
Hans, however, pressed the ring, and the Spirits came at
once, and said the two false comrades were gone off to sea.
“After all I have done for them, they are ungrateful
monsters. 1 must pursue them and rescue from their hands
the beautiful princess.” “We will immediately do every-
thing we can for thee, dear master,” said the spirits. Hans
thereupon hastened as fast as he could to the seashore, and
there he perceived far out at sea the ship in which his
perfidious friends had embarked. In his passionate haste he
actually jumped into the sea, staff in hand, and began to


swim; but the tremendous weight of his staff prevented him
from keeping his head up.
He was just beginning to sink when he bethought himself
of his ring, and immediately the Spirits appeared, and carried
him on board the ship with the speed of lightning. As soon
as he was safely set down, Hans swung his staff round, and
gave the wicked traitors their well-merited reward; after
which he threw them into the sea! Then he steered the vessel
home to the father and mother of the Princess, who had
been in the greatest terror while in the hands of the
two giants, and from whom he had happily saved her for the
second time.
It was a great homecoming. The King and Queen had


spent a most unhappy time when their daughter had been
stolen from them and dreaded her fate.
She told her father of the terrible time she had spent in
the cave with the horrible little dwarf. She also told him of
the wonderful way she had been rescued.
When the king heard from Hans of the wonderful ring he
possessed and how he could receive anything that he desired
by merely pressing the ring, he was astonished.
Hans stayed with them at the court for a long time.
His enchantment for the princess grew greater and
greater. Very soon afterwards he was married to the Prin-
cess amidst great rejoicing. Their wedding was one of the
most lavish and beautiful the land had ever seen.
Hans gave his old father and mother a beautiful home
in the new land he had adopted, and they lived in comfort
and ease for the rest of their lives. After the king died, the
people proclaimed Hans King. He made a very good king
and looked after his people well. Whenever he desired
something good for his country he would always call to his
side his two Spirits, who did whatever he commanded. His
country became wealthy and the people happy and
prosperous.
Published by the W. H. Honey Publishing Co., 31 Cunningham Street, Sydney


3 1508 00000151 6
* x. , _ ■*,


■
-
■
JJ • ..IV . r** ■ * .
$ < a
; t
! ’ ' * |
- , ' -**» * i a .. . «f
‘ f
