





W fl v ' \
•J, Ao224**S/,e (4.<M£OC
YOU could hardly have found in the whole wide world
a snugger, warmer, or more comfortable home. It
stood in a sandbank under the gnarled roots of a great
eech tree. Right before the windows lay a wide forest
where one could pick up the most beautiful nuts, or have a
?ood game with the squirrels when tired of ordinary rabbits.
Hie house was cool in summer and warm in winter. It had
he advantage of a back entrance which quickly led to
lowhere, so that if any unpleasant visitor came to the front
door it was easy to be “not at home” in next to no time.
The house would be seen at its best on some pouring


wet day in winter. Then, while everything around was
sodden and spongy, and raindrops raced one another down
the roots of the beech tree, the cottage of Mrs. Brownie-
Bunnett was as dry as the middle of a well-made haystack.
The youngsters could stand at the window and pity the poor
birds who had only nests in which to shelter, and wonder
what the squirrels were playing at in their hollow tree trunks.
The cottage was wonderfully cosy too in the winter
evenings. Mrs. Brownie-Bunnett was a hard working person,
and she kept that cottage as clean as a new pm. Goodness!
how she worked, to be sure. With her apron tucked round
her waist and her sleeves rolled up to the elbow, she would
scrub the floor till it shone like white marble. But she was
a sensible old soul; directly tea-time came she dropped work
for the day, and after the tea things had been washed, and
Mr. Brownie-Bunnett’s meal placed ready by the fire to keep


hot, she would put on her spectacles and read to her three
young rabbits.
They were charming children, clean, well-behaved
and so neatly dressed. Rubby and Dubby were little girl
rabbits; so, of course, they wore frocks and aprons and
played with dolls. Mrs. Brownie-Bunnett used to remark
with pride that she was so glad to have daughters. “They
will be useful about the house, my dear, in a few years; and
girls are so much more docile than boys, you know!”
Hanky Panky was a boy rabbit, and up to the time
when our story commences he, too, had cherished his


GEK1CS? u


parents’ guidance and obeyed in all things. But for some
little time past there had been signs of a change in Hanky
Panky. “I cannot quite say what it is, my love,” Mrs.
Brownie-Bunnett had said to her husband, “but the child
seems altered. I was quite shocked this morning when he
said, ‘Drat it.’
“‘Hanky,’ I cried, ‘pray don’t use such expressions!’


‘Well, Ma,’ he shouted, ‘1 hate these stiff white collars, and
I won’t wear them!’ So very different from Rubby and
Dubby!”
Mr. Brownie-Bunnett said something about “boys will
be boys;” but his wife did not seem convinced.
In the past, when Mrs. Brownie-Bunnett read to the
three young rabbits, they had all listened very attentively,
but lately Hanky Panky had grown fidgety and often had
to be reproved. He sat on a stool with his paws folded in
his lap, and turned up his nose to such an extent that his
ears flapped over his shoulders. So Mr. Brownie-Bunnett
prepared stories of a different kind. He went to the nearest
library and took out a book of thrilling tales of rabbit life,
called “Nobbs the Nibbler.” It gave a full and glowing
account of the startling adventures of a rabbit who grew up
to be a highwayman.


It was a sight to see Mrs. Brownie-Bunnett reading
these stirring adventures to the three youngsters. Rubby and
Dubby seemed puzzled but to Hanky the stories came like
good wine to an invalid. He drank them in and asked for
more. The following night Mrs. Brownie-Bunnett said, as
she was putting her hair in curl-rags, “I think, dear, that
Hanky Panky has improved a little these last two days.”
“I’m very pleased to hear it,” said Mr. Brownie-Bunnett
But, alas! the seed so sown soon grew up and bore
fruit. Hanky Panky, full of new ideas, went out after
breakfast seeking adventure. “If Nobbs could do such things,
why should not I,” he thought.


He had not long to seek. Old Bully Bunting, the
market gardener, was raking over the top surface for some
young turnips he was going to plant. His back was turned,
and he was hard at work. Hanky Panky caught sight of a
rich and juicy lettuce on the path. “HI have that,” he
thought, and crept stealthily up the path with the intention
of taking the lettuce. Of course, this was very wrong, and
he forgot, moreover, that a fairly long shadow stretched
before him. Old Bully, hard at his raking, saw this shadow
creep past. He bent as though to pick up a stone and out of
the corner of his eye, saw just what was happening. First,
Hanky artfully picked up a watering can and pretended to
examine it. Then, thinking he was still unobserved, he


I * j »" |M *
fc^'^T^atr — -~ j W O
r / I // / vHlw ,| J^^Sk
r u j I ft \*r
I VS? / I if ) |\\ j ' r ' rV If
boldly took the lettuce. “Hi!” shouted Bully, in a loud, gruff
voice, “just drop that; it’s mine!” Letting his rake fall to the
ground, he gripped the youngster’s collar, marched him back
to the cottage in the sandbank and told all he had to tell.
When Mr. Brownie-Bunnie arrived home that night, Hanky
was waiting in the comer, and Rubby and Dubby were
sobbing in their little beds.


It will be better, perhaps, not to say exactly what
happened next, but Hanky was made to understand that he
had been trying to steal and had done a very wrong deed.
Now Hanky had a chum named Budge, and they spent
much time together. Hanky used to re-tell the stories he had
heard the night before to Budge, whose mother was not of
the reading sort. Budge always listened with ears erect and
tail beating time in a stumpy sort of fashion. Soon after
Hanky’s adventure, the story was about a desperate
happening on the great north road where Nibbler the
highwayman had stopped and robbed a wealthy old hare.
“You be the Hare,” said Hanky, “and I’ll be Nibbler!”
“Right you are,” cried Budge, “But we must have some
horses.” “Of course we must” said Hanky, “our big wooden
horses are just the very thing!” “Capital,” agreed Budge,
and each ran to fetch his fiery steed.
They soon returned, and Budge, now Alderman Hare,


came gravely down the road on his mare sorrel. He was
wearing top boots and a riding coat and made a splendid
appearance. His thoughts seemed to be of golden coins,
Turtle soup and the honour of Knighthood.
Then, suddenly, from a bank which sloped to the very
edge of the road appeared a startling figure which made
Alderman Hare’s blood run cold. A huge and powerful
horse, bearing an undoubted highwayman, came crashing
down upon him and a threatening voice cried, “Your money
or your life!”
The alderman backed his steed just in time. With a
dash, the mettled Bayard swept by, reared his forelegs in the
air, then flung its rider head foremost to the stony road.
When Hanky Panky got up his head was laid open, and
warm rabbit blood poured from an ugly gaping wound. A
piece of skin hung down over his left eye, and Budge had
much ado to get him home.


Doctor Squirrel came, stitched up the wound and said:
“Mrs. Brownie-Bunnett, it has been a narrow escape. I must
impress upon you the need of care. Keep him in bed and
perfectly quiet for a fortnight at least! My charge is five
large filberts; but you can pay me any time you like.”
Poor Mrs. Brownie-Bunnett. She and her husband


s' '1 M] i
•*"*** O^
Had a long talk that evening, but they came to no conclusion.
The next day she put on her shawl to do her shopping and
get the filberts for the doctor’s fee. Mrs. Cobb, who kept
the nut shop, was told all about the troubles at home. She
was a wise old soul, much older and more experienced than
Mrs. Brownie-Bunnett, for she had brought up a large family
of squirrels, some of whom were now doing very well indeed.


“Dear me,” said Mrs. Cobb, as she picked out the
largest filberts she could find. “Have you tried sending him
to school?”
“School!” echoed Mrs. Brownie-Bunnett. “No, 1 never
thought of that. Yes, to be sure. Can you recommend me
a good school, Mrs. Cobb?”
“Yes, I can,” said the greengrocer squirrel. “There’s a
splendid one in Larch Grove, and it’s kept by Doctor Owl.
His fees are very reasonable and he only uses the birch
when really necessary.”
Three weeks later, when Budge came up to see how
Hanky Panky was getting on, a strange sight met his eyes.
There was his chum dressed very neatly in dark trousers,
well cleaned boots, a coat made out of Mr. Brownie-Bunnett’s
old golf jacket, a striped muffler around his neck and a satchel,
if you please, over his shoulder.


Dubby was looking on with an admiring glance.
“Here,” cried Budge, as Hanky walked in a strangely steady
step past the barn. “Here, Hanky Panky, I want you. What’s
up?” Hanky turned round and looked sorrowfully at Budge.
“I’m going to school,” he said, and walked on. Yes, that was
the true explanation. Hanky Panky, like most other young
rabbits was doomed to grow older and feel the need of
discipline. Neither of his parents had seen clearly what was
happening. He himself certainly did not understand his own
needs. It had required the cleverness of Mrs. Cobb to find out
what was wanted. So Hanky’s life underwent a change, and
will you believe it? before two days had gone by he was heard
to cry: “Mother, hurry up with dinner.” “Why, Hanky?” “Oh,
I want to get back to school as fast as I can. Dr. Owl is
going to tell us the best way to store acorns.”


U - A Vi
pi- 7 r \ i \ f.) \|] * \ 4 41
-~ v ~^
Mrs. Brownie-Bunnett smiled wisely to herself and spent
the afternoon quietly teaching Rubby and Dubby a new
pattern of crochet.
THE END.


NOAH’S ABKC,/ NONSENSE
NOAH'S ARKL/ NONSENSE
With heavy black clouds the sky was so dark;
Old Noah cried out, “Come into the Ark,
“Come all ye creatures on land and in sea,
“And save your lives, where’er ye may be,
“For forty days it is going to rain,
“And we will drift aimlessly o’er the main,
“No land will we sight for ever so long,
“So come to my Ark which is stout and strong.”


The rabbit, who heard him call, came along
Chanting a ditty, a very queer song.
He sang, “Id better speed fast o’er the ground,
“Its better to go than stay and be drowned.”


—— agM—mBM
'*v- .; 1*4& J^' 5b ’ : >- T- , ’ -
••*r. * 1 * j$r “ /■*
x JjTv
v iT
Then ten tiny turtles came together
They didn’t much like the look of the weather
One of them skidded and fell on his back
Twas hard for them all to keep on the track.


mn iv
iMm Ik
bmw 4
life Y
VKMp/1/
Along hopped in haste a big
kangaroo,
In her pouch she brought her
little one too.
The news reached (he ’possum
up a tall tree,
“I will pack up at once and
go,” said he.


The wise old owl winked his weather eye,
And hooted at people as he passed by,
Dressed up like a dandy with cane and spats,
He certainly wore the queerest of hats.


tmmmm
Two toads came along with a can of tar
They came from a watery pond afar.
They thought that they would be useful to “chips
As they’d had lessons on “how to paint ships.”


w
Three tiny tomtits twittered with glee.
They sat high up on the branch of a tree.
Their shrill little notes through the tree-tops rang,
“We will all be saved,” they joyfully sang.


Hly,, ' j
' 1
A fantaii was hopping his way to the ark,
He thought that the cruise should be quite a lark.
He glanced with scorn at five foolish flies,
Who fluttered and flew with fear in their eyes.


j V / \ o^
And down the road from the far off south pole,
Dressed in his best, looking very top hole,
His valet ahead with a bag of toothpicks,
Came the seal with his wonderful balancing tricks.


Six little stickle-backs sipped up their soup
As they sat in their armchairs on the poop
They were shocked beyond words as seven squirrels sang
Wicked sea-shanties which through the Ark rang.


The bees drove down to the Ark in stale,
They were very afraid that they'd be late.
They'd polished and harnessed their funny old hive,
It's a wonder they reached the Ark alive.


Four friendly frogs, who thought they could cook,
■
Were tickled, and had a very pleased look
When Noah suggested that they should make lunch,
For him and his wife and all of the bunch.


W -i ■% vv- /}//' *y\ /tji w \m
. iSfe -W (*rT W - \^F»^E
1 f v \ I W^
I . v. ) jJ /
A — jJ ~T J
The wombat came munching a carroway bun,
Very much thrilled. He thought it great fun.
Said he, “On the road an ant I just met
“Who looked most forlorn and very upset.”


> <>\ V .
-• '
f * 1 " **■ < A ± 'N
~' J °' = djjj^T
The duck like a jack tar from
Devon was dressed,
He quacked, “As a sailor I’ve
passed my test.”
The tortoise hurried in case he
was late —
He did not wish to be left to
his fate.


'L / L^|
■*&-■#** t~% "a, j\ ( .
Eight heavy elephants joined in
the band
Of seafarers, streaming on ev’ry
hand,
Whilst nine naughty neddies
noisily neighed,
And sang out to Noah, “The
anchor’s weighed.”


So Noah, his wife and his famous crew,
For weeks of dry land had never a view,
And when at last the rain did stop
The Ark came to rest on a mountain top.
They came out of the door, all on the run,
Glad to be out in the warmth of the sun:
It wasn’t so long before they were home
And Noah and his wife were left all alone.


‘ PIG
* WONT CIT OVER
mi sun


■gS&ei
J*-'' xJMoffiEiFtty
jgffr jIT^^
Once upon a time there was an old woman who
went to market and bought a large fat pig.
As she was driving the pig homewards in front of
her they came to a stile.
When he caught sight of the stile, Mr. Pig sat down
in the middle of the road and just refused to move. In
vain the old woman pleaded with the pig to get over
the stile—he only sat there and grunted.


So presently the old woman got tired of asking the
pig politely to get over the stile, and she started to look
about her for some means of making him move.
She walked a little way up the road until she came
upon a brown dog.
And to the dog she said:
“Dog, dog! Bite pig; pig won’t get over the stile,
and 1 shan’t get home to-night.
“Indeed I won’t,” said the dog; “for Pig never did
me any harm.”


So the old woman
walked a little further and
she came to a stick.
To the stick she said:
“Stick, stick 1 Beat dog;
dog won’t bite pig; pig won’t
get over the stile, and I shan’t
get home to-night I’’
“Indeed I won’t,” said the stick;
“for Dog and Pig never did me any
harm.’’


I
Jp
So the old woman
walked a little further
and she came to a fire
brightly burning.
To the fire she
said:
“Fire, firel Burn
stick; stick won’t beat dog; dog won’t bite pig; pig won’t
get over the stile, and I shan’t get home to-night!
“Indeed I won’t,’’ said the fire; for the stick and dog
and pig never did me any harm.”


So the old woman walked a little further and she
came to a bucket of water.
To the bucket of water she said:
“Water, water! Quench fire; fire won’t burn stick;
stick won’t beat dog; dog won’t bite pig; pig won’t get
over the stile, and I shan’t get home to-night!’’
“Indeed 1 won’t,’’ said the bucket of water; “for
the fire and the stick and the dog and the pig never did
me any harm.”


So the old woman walked a little further and she
came to an ox.
To the ox she said:
“Ox, ox I Drink water; water won’t quench fire;
fire won’t burn stick; stick won’t beat dog; dog won’t
bite pig; pig won’t get over the stile, and 1 shan t get
home to-night!’’
“Indeed 1 won’t,” said the ox; “for the water, the
fire, the stick, the dog and the pig never did me any
harm.”


So the old woman
walked on a little
further and she came
to a butcher.
To the butcher
she said:
“Butcher, butcher!
Kill ox; ox won t drink
water; water won t
quench fire; fire won’t
burn stick; stick won’t
beat dog; dog won’t
bite pig; pig won’t get
over the stile, and I
shan’t get home to-
night!’’
Indeed I won’t,’’ said the butcher; “for the ox, the
water, the fire, the stick, the dog and the pig never did me
any harm.’’


So the old woman walked on a little further and she
came to a rope.
To the rope she said:
“Rope, rope! Hang butcher: butcher won’t kill ox; ox
won’t drink water;
water won’t quench
fire; fire won’t bum
stick; stick won’t beat
dog; dog won’t bite
pig; pig won’t get over
the stile, and 1 shan t
get home to-night!”
“Indeed I won’t,”
said the rope; “for the
butcher, the ox, the
water, the fire, the
stick, the dog and the
pig never did me any
harm.”


So the old woman walked on a little further and
she came to a rat.
To the rat she said:
“Rat, rat! Gnaw rope;
butcher won’t kill ox; ox
won’t quench fire; fire won
dog; dog won’t bite pig; pig
I shan’t get home to-night!’’
rope won’t hang butcher;
won’t drink water; water
t burn stick; stick won’t beat
won’t get over the stile, and
“Indeed I won’t,’’ said the rat; “for the rope, the
butcher, the ox, the water, the fire, the stick, the dog
and the pig never did me any harm.”


So the old woman walked on a little further and she
came to a fat black cat sitting by the roadside and
washing his left ear with his paw.
And to the cat the old woman said
“Oh, cat, cat! Eat rat; rat won’t gnaw rope; rope
won’t hang butcher; butcher won’t kill ox; ox won t drink
water; water won’t quench fire; fire won t burn stick;
stick won’t beat dog; dog won t bite pig; pig won t get
over the stile, and I shan t get home to-night!
“Most certainly! That 1 will!” cried the cat; “for
1 hate the thought of all rats!’’
And almost before you could wink


The cat was after the rat
The rat to the rope


The rope to the butcher
The butcher to the ox


The ox to the water
The water to the fire


The fire to the stick
The stick to the dog
The dog to the pig


c; V A (
® 8 Hy
The pig to the stile
And the pig and the
dog and the stick and the
fire, and the water and the
ox and the butcher, and
the rope and the rat and
the cat all jumped over
the stile together; so the
old woman got home in
time for supper after all 1
THE END
Published by the
W. H. Honey Publiehing Company, 31 Cunningham Street, Sydney


| I "hS 1 8 H SiBb IBI M 1 1 I


