

• O' st




STORY OF RICHARD FALCONER.*
WAS born at Bruton, a market-town in Somersetshire,
of parents in tolerably good circumstances. My mother
having died while I was very young, I was left entirely
to the charge of my father, who had been a great
traveller in his youth, and frequently related his adven-
tures abroad. This roused a desire in my mind to follow his steps.
I often begged he would let me go to sea with some captain of his
acquaintance; but he would reply : ‘ Stay where you are; you know
not the hazards and dangers that attend a sea-life; think no more
of going to sea, for I know it is only the desire of youth, prone to
change: and if I should give you leave, one week’s voyage would
make you wish to be at home again.’ It was with me as with
many other heedless lads ; I disregarded my father’s advice, and
used all the arguments I could think of to move him from his opposi-
tion, but without effect. At length, in consequence of certain family
misfortunes, my father gave his consent to my departure. I now
proceeded to Bristol, and by the recommendation of my parent to
* This narrative is reprinted, with some slight alterations, from a rare old work, now little
known, but which was a favourite with Sir Walter Scott in his younger days,- as appears
from the following observations made by him on the blank-leaf of a copy which had been in
his possession: ‘ This book I read in early youth. I am ignorant whether it is altogether
fictitious, and written upon Defoe’s plan, which it generally resembles, or whether it is
only an exaggerated account of the adventures of a real person. It is very scarce; for,
endeavouring to add it to the other favourites of my infancy, I think I looked for it ten
years to no purpose, and at last owed it to the active kindness of Mr Terry: yet
Richard Falconet’s Adventures seem to have passed through several editions.’
45 i


a Captain Pultney, was put on board the Albion frigate, Captain
Wase commander; it was a trader bound to Jamaica, and set sail
with a fair wind on the 2d of May 1699. The vessel reached its
destination in safety after a stormy, and to me far from pleasant
voyage.
Finding our affairs would detain us here about half a year, I
obtained leave of the captain to go in a sloop, with some of my
acquaintances, to seek logwood on the South American coast, at the
Bay of Campeachy; and on the 25th of September we set sail on
this expedition. The manner of getting this wood is as follows:
A company of desperate fellows go together in a sloop, well armed,
and land by stealth, to avoid an encounter with the Spaniards, to
whom the country at that time belonged; but in case of any resist-
ance, the whole crew attend on the cutters ready armed, to defend
them. We sailed merrily on our course for six days together, with
a fair wind towards the bay; but on the seventh, the clouds
darkened, and the welkin seemed all on fire with lightning, and
the thunder roared louder than ever I heard it in my life. In short,
a dreadful hurricane approached. The sailors had furled their sails,
and lowered their topmasts, waiting for it under a double-reefed
foresail. At length it came with extreme violence, which lasted
three hours, until it insensibly abated, and brought on a dead calm.
We then loosed our sails in expectation of the wind, which stole out
again in about half an hour. About six in the evening, we saw a
waterspout, an aerial cloud that draws up the salt water of the sea,
and distils it into fresh showers of rain. This cloud comes down
in the form of a pipe of lead, of a vast thickness, and, by the force
of the sun, sucks up a great quantity of water. I stood an hour
to observe it. After it had continued about half an hour in the
water, it drew up insensibly, by degrees, till it was lost in the
clouds; but in closing, it shut out some of the water, which fell
into the sea again with a noise like that of thunder, and occasioned
a thick mist, that continued for a considerable time.
October the 6th, we anchored at Triste Island, in the Bay of
Campeachy, and sent our men ashore at Logwood Creek, to seek for
the logwood cutters, who immediately came on board. The bargain
was soon struck; and in exchange for our rum and sugar, and a
little money, we got in our lading in eight days, and set sail for
Jamaica on the 15th day of October. Now, getting up to Jamaica
again generally takes up two months, because we are obliged to ply
it all the way to windward. I one day went down into the hold
to bottle off a small parcel of wine I had there; coming upon deck
again, I wanted to wash myself, but did not care to go into the
water, so went into the boat astern that we had hoisted out in the
morning to look after a wreck. Having washed and dressed myself,
I took a book out of my pocket, and sat reading in the boat; when,
before I was aware, a storm began to rise, so that I could not get


up the ship’s side as usual, but called for the ladder of ropes that
hangs over the ship’s quarter, in order to get up that way. Whether
it broke through rottenness, as being seldom used, I cannot tell,
but down I fell into the sea ; and though the ship tacked about to
take me up, yet I lost sight of them through the duskiness of the
evening and the storm. I had the most dismal fears that could ever
possess any one in my condition. I was forced to drive with the
wind, which, by good-fortune, set in with the current; and having
kept myself above water, as near as I could guess in this fright, four
hours, I felt my feet every now and then touch the ground; and at
last, by a great wave, I was thrown and left upon the sand. Yet, it
being dark, I knew not what to do; but I got up and walked as well
as my tired limbs would let me, and every now and then was over-
taken by the waves, which were not high enough to wash me away.
When I had got far enough, as I thought, to be out of danger,
I could not discover anything of land, and I immediately conjectured
that it was but some bank of sand that the sea would overflow at
high tide; whereupon I sat down to rest my weary limbs, and fit
myself for death; for that was all I could expect, in my own opinion.
Then all my sins came flying in my face. I offered up fervent
prayers, not for my safety, because I did not expect any such thing,
but for all my past offences; and I may really say I expected my
dissolution with a calmness that led me to hope I had made my
peace with Heaven. At last I fell asleep, though I tried all I could
against it, by getting up and walking, till I was obliged, through
weariness, to lie down again.
When I awoke in the morning, I was amazed to find myself
among four or five very low sandy islands, separated half a mile or
more, as I guessed, by the sea. With that I began to be a little
cheerful, and walked about to see if I could find anything that was
eatable; but, to my great grief, I found nothing but a few eggs, which
I was obliged to eat raw. The fear of starving seemed to me to be
worse than that of drowning ; and often did I wish that the sea had
swallowed me, rather than thrown me on this desolate island ; for I
could perceive, by the evenness of them, that they were not inhab-
ited, either by man or beast, or anything else but rats, and several
sorts of fowl. Upon this island there were some bushes of a wood
they call burton-wood, which used to be my shelter at night; but,
to complete my misery, there was not to be found one drop of fresh
water anywhere, so that I was forced to drink sea-water for two
or three days, which made my skin come off like the peel of a
broiled codling. At last my misery so increased that I often was in
the mind of terminating my life, but desisted, from the expectation I
had that some alligator or other voracious creature would come and
do it for me.
I had lived a week upon eggs only, when, by good-fortune, I dis-
covered a bird called a booby sitting upon a bush. I ran immediately,


as fast as I could, and knocked it down with a stick. I never
considered whether it was proper food, but sucked the blood and
ate the flesh with such a pleasure as none can express but those
who have felt the pain of hunger to the same degree as myself.
After I had devoured this banquet, I walked about and discovered
many more of these birds, which I killed. My stomach being now
pretty well appeased, I began to consider whether I could not with
two sticks make a fire, as I had seen the blacks do in Jamaica. I
tried with all the wood I could get, and at last happily accomplished
it. This done, I gathered some more sticks, and made a fire, picked
several of my boobies, and broiled them as well as I could; and now
I resolved to come to an allowance.
At night, I and my fellow-inhabitants endured a great storm of
rain and thunder, with the reddest lightning I had ever seen, which
well washed us all, I believe. As for myself my clothes, which were
only a pair of thin shoes and thread stockings, and a canvas waist-
coat and breeches, were soundly wet; but I had the happiness to
find in the morning several cavities of rain-water, which put in my
head a thought of making a deep well, or hollow place, that I might
have water continually by me, which I brought to perfection in this
manner : I took a piece of wood, and pitched upon a place under a
burton-tree, where, with my hands and the stick together, I dug a
hole, or well, big enough to contain a hogshead of water; then I put
in stones, and paved it, and got in and stamped them down hard all
round, and with my sticks beat the sides close, so that I made it
capable of holding water. But the difficulty was how to get the
water there, which I at length effected by means of a sort of bucket
made from a part of my clothing. I now felt greatly cheered with
my prospects, and thought I should not be very badly off for a
while ; for, besides the water for my drink, I had ready broiled forty
boobies, designing to allow myself half a one a day. I had a small
Ovid, printed by Elzevir, which was in my trousers-pocket when
I was going up the ladder of ropes; and, by being pressed close,
was not quite spoiled, but only the cover off, and a little stained
with the wet. This was a great mitigation of my misfortune ; for I
could entertain myself with this book under a burton-bush till I fell
asleep. I remained always in good health, only a little troubled
with the headache, for want of a hat, which I lost in the water in
falling down from the ladder of ropes. But I remedied this as
well as I could by gathering a parcel of chick-weed, which grows
there in plenty, and strewing it over the burton-bushes under which
I sat. Nay, at last finding my time might be longer there than I
expected, I tore off one of the sleeves of my shirt, and lined a cap
that I had made of green sprigs, twisted with the green bark that I
peeled off.
I had been here a month by my reckoning, and in that time my
skin looked as if it had been rubbed over with walnut-shells. I


several times thought to have swum to one of the other islands ; but
as they looked only like heaps of sand, I believed I had got the best
berth, so contented myself with my present station. Of boobies 1
could get enough, which built on the ground, and another bird that
lays eggs, which I used to eat, but I never ventured to taste the eggs.
I was so well satisfied with my boobies that I did not care to try
experiments. The island which I was upon seemed to me to be
about two miles in circumference, and was almost round. On the
west side, there was a good anchoring-place, the water being very
deep within two fathoms of the shore. God forgive me ! but I often
wished to have had companions in my misfortune, and hoped every
day either to have seen some vessel come that way, or a wreck,
where, perhaps, I might have found some necessaries which I
wanted. I used to fancy that if I should be forced to stay there
long, I should forget my speech; so I used to talk aloud, ask myself
questions, and answer them. But if anybody had been by to have
heard me, they would certainly have thought me bewitched, I often
asked myself such odd questions. All this while, I could not inform
myself where I was, nor how near any inhabited place.
One morning, which I took to be the Bth of November, a violent
storm arose, which continued till noon. In the meantime, I discerned
a bark labouring with the waves for several hours ; and at last, with
the violence of the tempest, perfectly thrown out of the water upon
the shore, within a quarter of a mile from the place where I observed
it. I ran to see if there were anybody I could assist, when I
found four men (being all there were in the vessel) busy about saving
what they could. When I came up with them, and hailed them in
English, they seemed mightily surprised. They asked me how 1
came there, and how long I had been there. When I told them
my story, they were concerned for themselves as well as for me, for
they found there was no possibility of getting their bark off the
sands, the wind having forced her so far. With that we began to
bemoan one another’s misfortunes; but I must confess to you,
without lying, I was never more rejoiced in my whole life, for they
had on board plenty of everything for a twelvemonth, and not an
article spoiled. Their lading, which was logwood, they had thrown
overboard to lighten the ship, which was the occasion of the wind
forcing her so far. Had they kept in their lading, they would have
bulged in the sands half a quarter of a mile from the place where
they did ; and the sea, flying over them, would not only have spoiled
their provisions, but perhaps have been the death of them all. By
these men, I understood to what place I had got —namely, one of the
islands of the Alcranes, which are five islands, or rather large banks
of sand, for there is not a tree or bush upon any but that on which
we were. They lie in the latitude of 22° N., twenty-five leagues from
Yucatan, and about sixty from Campeachy town. We worked as
fast as we could, and got at everything that would be useful to us


before night. We had six barrels of salt beef, three of pork, two of
biscuit, a small copper and iron pot, some wearing-clothes, and a
spare hat, which I wanted mightily. We had, besides, several kegs
of rum, and one of brandy, and a chest of sugar, with many other
things of use, some gunpowder, and one fowling-piece. We took off
the sails from the yards, and, with some pieces of timber, raised a
hut big enough to hold twenty men, under which we put their beds
that we got from the bark. It is true we had no shelter from the
wind, for the trees were so low they were of no use. I now thought
myself in a palace, and was as merry as if I had been at Jamaica, or
even at home in my own country. In short, when we had been
there some time, we began to be very easy, and to wait contentedly
till Providence should fetch us out of this island. The bark lay
upon the sands, fifty yards from the water when at the highest, so
that I used to lie in her cabin, by reason there were no more beds
ashore than were for my four companions—namely, Thomas Randal of
Cork, in Ireland, whose bed was largest, which he did me the favour
to spare a part of now and then, when the wind was high, and I did
not care to lie on board ; Richard White; William Musgrave of
Kingston, in Jamaica; and Ralph Middleton of Cowes, in the Isle of
Wight. These men, with eight others, set out of Port Royal about
a month after us, bound for the same place; but the latter lying
ashore, and wandering too far up the country, were met, as it is
supposed, by some Spaniards and Indians, who set upon them in
great numbers. Yet, nevertheless, by all appearance, they fought
desperately; for when Mr Randal and Mr Middleton went to seek
for them, they found all the eight dead, with fifteen Indians and two
Spaniards. All the Englishmen had several cuts in their heads,
arms, breasts, &c., that made it very plainly appear they had sold
their lives dearly. They were too far up in the country to bring
down their dead, so they were obliged to dig a hole in the earth, and
put them in as they lay, in their clothes. As for the Indians and
Spaniards, they stripped them, and left them above ground as they
found them, and made all the haste they could to embark, for fear
of any other unlucky accident that might happen. They set sail as
soon as they came on board, and made the best of their way for
Jamaica, till they were overtaken by the storm that shipwrecked
them on Make-shift Island, as I had named it.
Now, we had all manner of fishing-tackle with us, but we wanted
a boat to go a little way from shore to catch fish; therefore, we set
our wits to work, in order to make some manner of float, and at last
we pitched upon this odd project: We took six casks, and tarred
them all over, then stopped up the bungs with corks, and nailed
them close down with a piece of tarred canvas. These six casks we
tied together with some of the cordage of the vessel, and upon them
we placed the scuttles of the deck, and fixed them, and made it so
strong that two men might sit upon them; but for fear a storm
6


should happen, we tied to one end of her a coil or two of small rope,
of five hundred fathoms long, which we fixed to a small stake on the
shore. Then two of them went out (as for my part, I was no fisher-
man) in order to see what success they should have, but returned
with only one nurse, a fish so called, about two feet long, something
like a shark, only its skin is very rough, and when dry will do the
same office as a seal-skin. The same, boiled in lemon-juice, is the
only remedy in the world for the scurvy, by applying pieces of the
skin to the calves of your legs, and rubbing your body with some of
the liquor once or twice. We sent out our fishermen the next day
again, and they returned with two old wives, and a young shark
about two feet long, which were dressed for dinner, and they proved
excellent eating. In the morning following, we killed a young seal
with our fowling-piece. This we salted, and it ate very well after
lying two or three days in the brine.
We passed our time in this Make-shift Island as well as we could,
and invented several games to divert ourselves. One day, when
we had been merry, sorrow, as after gaiety often happens, stole
insensibly on us all. I, as being the youngest, began to reflect on
my sad condition, spending my youth on a barren land, without
hopes of being ever redeemed. Whereupon, Mr Randal, who was
a man of great experience, and had come through many sufferings,
gave me considerable comfort in my affliction, both by a narrative
of his own mishaps, and by a plan he laid before us of a means of
getting off the island. ‘Mr Falconer, and my fellow-sufferers,’ said
he; ‘ but it is to you,’ pointing to me, ‘ that I chiefly address myself,
as you seem to despair of a safe removal from this place more than
any other. Is not your condition much better now than you could
have expected it to be a month ago ? There is a virtue in manly
suffering; as to repine seems to doubt of the all-seeing Power
which regulates our actions. Our bark is strong and firm; and,
by degrees, I do not doubt but with time and much labour to get her
into the water again. I have been aboard her this morning when
you were all asleep, and examined her carefully inside and out, and
fancy our liberty may soon be effected. I only wonder we have
never thought before of clearing the sand from our vessel, which,
once done, I believe we may launch her out into deep water.’
Having spent the night in reflection on what had passed, the next
morning we went to work to clear the sand from our vessel, which
we continued working on for sixteen days together, resting only
on Sunday, which at last we effected. The next thing we had to
do was to get poles to put under our vessel to launch her out;
which we got from the burton-wood, but with much difficulty, as we
were forced to cut a great many before we could get them that were
fit for our purpose. After we had done this, we returned God thanks
for our success hitherto ; and on the day following, resolved to thrust
off our vessel into the water; but we were prevented by Mr Randal


being taken ill of a fever, occasioned, as we supposed, by his great
fatigue in working to free our ship from the sand, wherein he spared
no pains to encourage us, as much by his actions as his words, even
beyond his strength. The concern we were all in upon this
occasioned our delay in not getting our vessel out. Besides, one
hand out of five was a weakening of our strength. Mr Randal never
thought of his instruments till now, when he wanted to let himself
blood; but not feeling them about his clothes, we supposed they
might have been overlooked in the vessel: so I ran immediately
to see if I could find them; and, getting up the side, my very weight
pulled her down to the sand, which had certainly bruised me to
death if I had not sunk into the hollow that we had made by
throwing the sand from the ship. I crept out in a great fright, and
ran to my companions, who, with much ado, got her upright;
and afterwards we fixed some spare oars on each side, to keep her
from falling again; for the pieces of wood that were placed under
her were greased, to facilitate her slipping into the water, and we
had dug the sand so entirely from her, that she rested only on them,
which occasioned her leaning to one side with my weight only.
When we were entered into the vessel, and our endeavours to find
the box of instruments were fruitless, we were all mightily concerned,
for we verily believed that bleeding would have cured him; nay,
even he himself said that if he could be let blood, he was certain
his fever would abate, and he should be easier; yet to see with what
a perfect resignation he submitted to the will of Heaven, would have
inspired one with a true knowledge of the state good men enjoy after
a dissolution from this painful life. He grew still worse and worse,
but yet so patient in his sufferings, that it perfectly amazed us all.
He continued in this manner a whole week, at the end of which
time he expired. After our sorrow for his death was somewhat
abated, we consulted how to bury him, and at last agreed on com-
mitting his body to the hole in the sand which I had dug for my
well. After fulfilling this melancholy duty, the whole of our thoughts
were bent on our vessel, and the means of escape from the island.
On Monday, the 31st of December, we launched our vessel out
into the sea, and designed to set sail the next day from the island
upon which we had been so long confined. After we had fixed
her fast with two anchors and a hawser on shore, we went on board
to dine and make ourselves merry, which we did very heartily; and,
to add to our mirth, we made a large can of punch, which we never
attempted to do before, as we had but one bottle of lime-juice in
all, which was what indeed we designed for this occasion. In short,
the punch ran down so merrily, that we were all in a drunken
condition. When it was gone, we resolved to go to rest; but all I
could do would not persuade them to lie on board that night in
their cabins, yet without a bed: they would venture, though they
were obliged to swim a hundred yards before they could wade to
8


shore; but, however, they got safe, which I knew by their hallooing
and rejoicing.
Having brought my bed on board, I went to rest very contentedly,
which I did till next morning; but, O horror! when' I had dressed
myself, and gone on deck to call my companions to come on board
to breakfast, which was intended overnight, and afterwards to go
on shore and bring our sails and yards on board, and make to sea
as fast as we could, I could not see any land! The vessel had
driven from the shore, and was now on the broad ocean. The
sudden shock of this catastrophe so overcame me, that I sank down
on the deck without sense or motion. How long I continued so,
I cannot tell, but I awoke full of the sense of my melancholy
condition; and ten thousand times, in spite of my resolution to
forbear, cursed my unhappy fate that had brought me to that deplor-
able state. Instead of coming on board to be frolicsome and merry,
we should have given thanks to Him who gave us the blessing of
thinking we were no longer subject to such hardships as we might
probably have undergone if we had been detained longer on that
island. I had no compass, neither was I of myself capable of
ruling the vessel in a calm, much less in a storm, should it happen—
a case not infrequent in this climate.
After I had vented my grief in a torrent of words and tears, I
began to think how the vessel could have got to sea without my
knowledge. By remembrance of the matter the night before, I found,
by our eagerness and fatal carelessness, we had forgotten to fasten
our cables to the gears; and, pulling up the hawser which we had
fastened to one of the burton-trees on shore, I perceived that the
force of the vessel had pulled the tree out of the earth. Then I, too
late, found that a hurricane had risen when I was sound asleep and
stupefied with too much liquor. When I began to be something
better contented in my mind, and thought of sustaining nature,
almost spent with fatigue and grieving, one great comfort I had on
my side, which my poor wretched companions wanted, was pro-
vision in plenty and fresh water; so that, when I began to consider
coolly, I found I had not that cause to complain which they had,
for they were left on a barren island without any other provision
than that very same diet which I was forced to take up with when
first thrown on shore.
I remained tossed upon the sea for a fortnight without discovering
land; for the weather continued very calm, but yet so hazy that I
could not perceive the sun for several days. One day, searching for
some linen that I had dropped under the sacking of my bed, for I
did not lie in a hammock, I found a glove with seventy-five pieces
of eight in it, which I took and sewed in the waistband of my
trousers, for fear I should want it some time or other. I made no
scruple in taking it, for I was well assured it had belonged to poor
Mr Randal. Besides, I had heard the other people say that they


were sure that he had money somewhere ; and, after his death, we
searched for it, but could not find any. January the 20th, 1700, I
discovered a sail near me, but she bore away so fast, that there was
not any hope of succour from her, and I had not anything to dis-
tinguish me. I supposed, though I could see them, yet they could
not see me, by reason of my want of sail, which would have made
me the more conspicuous. The next day I discovered land, about
six leagues to the south-west of me, which, I observed, my vessel did
not come nigh, but coasted along shore. I was well assured it was
the province of Yucatan, belonging to the Spaniards, and was the
place we came from. Now, all my fear was that I should fall into
their hands, who would make me do the work of a slave ; but even
that, I thought, was better than to live in continual fear of storms,
and tempests, or shipwreck.
I coasted along in this manner for two or three days, and at last
discovered land right ahead, which I was very glad of, but yet
mixed with fear, in not knowing what treatment I should have.
On January the 30th, I made the bay and town of Francisco di
Campeachy, as it proved afterwards, and was almost upon it before
I was met by anything of a ship or a boat; but at last two canoes
came on board, with one Spaniard and six Indians, who were much
surprised when they learned my condition, by speaking broken
French, which the Spaniard understood. They immediately carried
me on shore, and thence to the governor, who was at dinner. They
would have made me stay till he had dined; but he, hearing of me,
commanded me to come in where he was at dinner with several
gentlemen and two ladies ; and though it is very rare any one sees
the women in these countries, yet they did not offer to veil them-
selves. I was ordered to sit down by myself at a little table, placed
for that purpose, where I had sent me of what composed their
dinner, which was some fish and fowls, and excellent wine of several
sorts.
After they had feasted me for two or three days, they sent me
about, with several officers appointed by the governor, to make a
gathering, which was done with success, for in three days we had
got seven hundred and odd pieces of eight; and two merchants
there were at the charge of fitting up my bark, in order to send it
for my poor companions, to hearten us up; as some bottles of fine
wines, two bottles of citron-water for a cordial, chocolate, and
several other useful things ; but the difficulty was to get seamen to
go with me. At last they remembered they had five Englishmen
that were prisoners there, and taken in the Bay of Campeachy upon
suspicion of piracy, but nothing could be proved against them,
whom they freed without any ransom. I indeed received as much
humanity among them as could be expected from any of the most
civilised nations.
All things being prepared, on the 15th of February 1700 we set
20


sail from Campeachy Bay, after paying my acknowledgments to
the generous governor; but having nothing to present him worth
acceptance but my Ovid, I gave him that, which he took very kindly,
and said he would prize it mightily, not only in the esteem he had
for that author, but in remembrance of me and my misfortunes. We
plied it to windward very briskly, and in fifteen days discovered the
isles of the Alcranes; but we durst not go in within the shoals,
because we were all ignorant of the channel. So we cast anchor,
and hoisted out our boat, with two men and myself, and made to
shore, where we found my three companions, but in a miserable con-
dition, and Mr Musgrave so faint and weak, that they expected he
would not live long.
They mentioned to me, that when they awoke, after I had driven
off in the vessel in the dark from the island, they were all in despair
to find the ship gone, which they perceived was occasioned by a
hurricane, that they were assured was violent, because it had blown
down their tent, though without awaking them. When they began
to consider they had no food, and but very little fresh water, which
was left in a barrel without a head in the tent, their despair increased.
As no passion, however, can last long that is violent, it wore off with
their care for sustenance, which they diligently searched for; and
not finding any quantity of eggs or boobies, the dreadful fear of
starving came into their minds, with all its horrid attendants. They
had been five days without eating or drinking, for the boobies were
retired, out of fear or custom, to some other place; neither could
they find one egg more ; and weakness came so fast upon them,
with hunger and drought, that they were hardly able to crawl, so
they thought of nothing but dying; when at last they remembered
the body of good Mr Randal, that had been buried a week, which
they dug up without being putrefied; and that poor wretch, that
helped to support our misfortunes, when alive, with his sage advice,
now was a means of preserving their life, though dead. We arrived
in time to save them from continuing this horrid cannibalism; and
having seen the remains of my old friend once more consigned to
the tomb, we all got on board our vessel, in order to sail as soon as
the wind would rise, it being perfectly calm, and continued so for
two days. At last it blew a little, and we weighed anchor, and stood
out to sea, but made but little way.
I was now master or captain of a ship, and began to act accord-
ingly. We were nine men, all English ; that is, myself first, Richard
White, W. Musgrave, and Ralph Middleton, my old companions ;
John Stone, W. Keater, Francis Hood, W. Warren, and Joseph
Meadows (all of England), the five men given me by Don Antonio,
who, as I said before, were taken on suspicion of piracy; whereupon
a thought came into my head that had escaped me before. I
considered if these were really pirates, being five to four, they might
be too powerful for us, and perhaps murder us. One day we all


dined together upon deck under our awning, it being very calm
weather. I then asked the five men what was the reason that they
were taken by the Spaniards for pirates. Upon this they seemed
considerably at a loss ; but Warren soon recovered himself, as well
as all the rest, and spoke for the others in this manner; ‘We
embarked on board the ship Boiiaventure in the Thames, bound for
Jamaica, whither we made a prosperous voyage; but after taking
in our lading, on our way home we were overtaken by a storm, in
which our ship was lost, and all the men perished, except myself
and four companions, who were saved in the long-boat. But the
reason we were taken for pirates was, that, going on shore to save
ourselves, we saw a bark riding at anchor without the port of
Campeachy, which we made to, in order to inquire whereabouts we
were, and to beg some provisions, our own being gone. On entering
the vessel, we found but two people in it; the third, jumping into
the water, swam on shore, and brought three boats filled with
Spanish soldiers, who came on board before we could make off.’
‘ Make off !’ said I. ‘What! did you design to run away with the
vessel?’
‘No,’ answered Warren with some confusion ; ‘but we did design
to weigh anchor, and go further inshore, that we might land in the
morning, it being late at night.’
I must confess I did not like the fellow hesitating now and then,
as if not knowing what to say; but, upon consideration, thought it
might be for want of words to express himself better; so for that
time I took no more notice, not weighing it in my mind; but in the
evening Mr Middleton came to me with a face of concern, and told
me he did not like these fellows’tale. ‘Why so?’said I. ‘Because
I observe they herd together,’ answered he, ‘and are always
whispering and speaking low to one another. If a foreboding heart
may speak, I am sure we shall suffer something from these fellows
that will be of danger to us,’
Upon this I began to stagger in my opinion of their honesty, and
therefore we resolved to stand upon our guard. We took no notice
of our conference then to our other two companions, but resolved to
stay till night, having a better opportunity then, as we lay together
irf the cabin aft. When we were to go to supper, we called one
another to come; but five of the sailors excused themselves by
saying they had dined so lately that they had no stomach yet;
whereupon we had an opportunity sooner to converse together than
we designed; for, being at supper, we opened the matter to our
other two companions, and they agreed immediately that we were in
some danger; so we resolved in the middle watch of the night to
seize them in their sleep. We were to have the first watch, which
we set at eight o’clock; then they were to watch till twelve ; and
then, in their third watch, between one and two, we had concluded
to seize upon them as they slept; that is, four of them; for one of


them watched with us, which was Frank Hood, the cook, whom
we agreed to seize and bind fast towards the latter end of the
watch, and to threaten him with death if he offered to make the
least noise.
As soon as ever our first watch was set, we sent Mr Musgrave to
prepare our arms. In about half an hour, or thereabouts, Warren
called to Hood upon deck (they lying below) to get him a little
water, for he was very dry, he said; whereupon the other went down
immediately with some water in a can to him. As soon as he was
gone down, I had the curiosity to draw as near the scuttle as I
could, to hear the discourse. Now, you must know Hood our cook
had been employed that day in examining our provisions, our beef-
casks and pork, to see what quantity we had, that we might know
how long it could last; so that the others had not an opportunity to
disclose the design to him. As soon as he had got down, I could
hear Will Warren say to him ; ‘Hark ye, Frank, we had liked to
have been smoked to-day; and though we had contrived the story
that I told you, yet I was a little surprised at their asking me,
because then I did not expect it; but we design to be even with
them in a very little time; for, hark ye ’ said he, and spoke so
low that I could not hear him.
Upon which the other said : ‘There is no difficulty in the matter ;
but we need not be in such haste, for you know, as we ply it to
windward, a day or two can break no squares, and we can soon
(after effecting our design) bear down to leeward to our comrades
that we left on shore; for I fancy,’ added he, ‘ that they have some
small suspicion of you now, which in time will sleep, and may be on
their guard; therefore, it is better to wait a day or two.’
‘ No ; we’ll do it to-night when they are asleep,’ replied Warren ;
whereupon there were many arguments pro and con., as I fancied.
A little while after, Hood came up again ; and after walking up
and down, and fixing his eyes often upon me, who in the meantime
was provided with a couple of pistols under my watch-coat, and
which, indeed, were their own, that we had hung up ready charged
in our cabin (which was one reason of their design to attack us in
our sleep)—Hood, as I said before, seemed to fix his eyes frequently
on me, for, till now, I never watched in the night. At last, said he
very softly: ‘lf you please, Mr Falconer, I have a word or two to
say to you that much concerns you all.’
‘What is it?’ said I.
‘Why,’ answered he, ‘I would have the rest of your companions
ear-witnesses too.’ With that I called them together. -But,’ said
he, ‘ let us retire as far from the scuttle as we can, that we may not
be heard by any below deck.’ So we went into the cabin, and
opened the scuttle above, that Mr Musgrave, who steered, might
hear what was said.
When we had sat down upon the floor, Hood began as follows :


*My four companions below have a wicked design upon you; that
is, to seize you, and put you into the boat, and run away with the
vessel; but I think it is an inhuman action, not only to any one, but
to you in particular, that have been the means of their freedom.’
Upon this (finding his sincerity), I told him that we were provided
against it already; and, with the consent of my companions, I told
him of our design of seizing them in the third watch.
‘ But,’ said he, ‘ they intend to put their project in practice their
next watch; therefore, I think ’twill be more proper for us to counter-
plot them, and seize them at once.’
‘As they have no arms,’ said I, ‘ and we have, we need not fear
them.’
We had several debates about this, which took up too much time,
to our sorrow; for Warren, mistrusting Hood, it seems, got up and
listened; and when he found that we retired, all of us, to the cabin,
he got upon deck, and, stealing softly, came so close that he over-
heard everything we said, which, as soon as he understood, he went
immediately to his companions, who waited impatiently, as they
told us afterwards, and let them know all our discourse ; whereupon,
without pausing, they resolved to attack us immediately in the midst
of our consultation ; which was no sooner resolved upon than done ;
for we were immediately surprised with their seizing us, which they
did with that quickness, and so unperceivable, that we were all
confounded and amazed : they had got off two pistols in our con-
sternation, which they clapped to our breasts. In this confusion, I
had forgotten mine that were at my girdle (or else we might have
been hard enough for them); neither did I remember them till they
found them about me. They shut the cabin-door on the inside till
they had bound us, and never heeded Mr Musgrave’s knocking and
making a noise, till they had secured us ; which done, they opened
the door and seized him, who came to know what the matter was,
for we had no candle in the cabin ; and he, hearing a noise amongst
us, thought we were seizing Hood, and called to us to forbear (as he
said afterwards), and make haste, for he was going to tack about,
though we did not hear him ; on which he clapped the helm alee,
and came down to fetch us out to haul off the sheets, &c. and was
Seized; and the sails fluttered in the wind, by reason she was veering
round when the helm was alee.
After they had fixed the vessel, and it was broad day, they came
and unbound our legs, and gave us leave to walk upon deck ; where-
upon I began to expostulate with them, particularly Warren, as he
seemed to have a sort of command over the others. ‘ And what,’
said I to him, ‘do you design to do with us, now you have your
desire?’
‘Do with you! Why, by and by we design to put you into the boat,
and turn you adrift; but for that Hood, we’ll murder him without
mercy ! A dog to betray us ! But as you have not so much injured
14


us, we ’ll put you immediately into the boat, with a week’s provision
and a small sail, and you shall seek your fortune, as I suppose you
would have done by us.’
‘ No,’ answered I; ‘we only designed to confine 'you till we came
to Jamaica, and there to have given you your liberty to go where
you had thought fit. Put us ashore at any land that belongs to the
English, and we will think you have not done us an injury.’
‘No,’ said he; ‘we must go to meet our captain and fifty men
upon the mainland of Yucatan, where our vessel was stranded, not
to be gotten off. Our first design, when we were taken in our boat,
was to get us a vessel to go a-bucaniering, which we had done at
Campeachy, if it had not been for the Indian that swam on shore,
unknown to us, and brought succours too soon.’
When they had got everything ready—that is to say, a barrel of
biscuit, another of water, about half-a-dozen pieces of beef, and as
much pork, a small kettle, and a tinder-box—we were better pro-
vided than we expected, by much : besides, they granted us four
cutlasses and a fowling-piece, with about four pounds of powder, and
a sufficient quantity of shot; together with all poor Mr Randal’s
journals, after their perusing them, and finding them of no use.
When this was done, Warren ordered them to tie Hood to the mast
of the vessel, and was charging a pistol to shoot him through the
head, not considering it was charged before ; for it was one of them
I had at my girdle, and which they took from me; but in his
eagerness and heat of passion, he did not mind it. We all entreated
for the poor fellow; and he himself fell upon his knees, and begged,
with all the eloquence he had, to spare him, and let him go with us ;
but Warren swore bitterly nothing should save him. With that he
cocked his pistol, and levelled it at Hood; but firing, it split into
several pieces, and one struck Warren into the skull so deep that it
almost killed him on the spot. One of the bullets grazed the side
of my temple, and did but just break the skin. As for Hood, he
was not hurt, but, with the fright and noise of the pistol (as we
supposed), laboured with such an agony of spirit that he broke the
cords that tied him by the arms, though as thick as a middle finger,
and fell down, but rose immediately; and not finding himself hurt,
ran to us, and unbound our arms, unperceived by the other two, who
were busy about the unfortunate Warren; and though they were
called to by the man that steered (who ran immediately to prevent
it), yet they did not mind it, they were so concerned about Warren.
Before he that steered came, Hood had unbound me, and stopped
the fellow (Meadows) by giving him a blow with his fist that knocked
him down. In the meantime I had unbound White, Musgrave, and
Middleton, and we went and seized upon the other two pirates, as
now we called them nothing else.
After we had bound them in our turn, we went to see what
assistance could be given to Warren, when we found that a piece of


the barrel of the pistol had sunk into his skull, and that he was just
expiring; but yet he sat up with great resolution. ‘You have over-
powered us/ said he, ‘ and I likewise see the hand of Heaven is in
it. I was born of good honest parents, whose steps, if I had followed,
would have made my conscience easy to me at this time ; but I
forsook all religion; and now, too late, I find that to dally with
Heaven is fooling one’s self; but yet, in this one moment of my life
that is left, I heartily repent of all my past crimes, and rely upon the
Saviour of the world, that died for our sins, to pardon mine.’ With
that he crossed himself, and expired. I must confess I was very
sorry for the unhappy accident of his death, but yet glad that we
were at liberty, and felt something easy that the poor soul repented
before his expiring.
After we had secured the others, we threw Warren overboard, and
bore to the wind; for after our first tacking about in the morning,
when the bustle happened, they bore away with tack at cat-head, as
being for their purpose. The three men that were left desired us
to let them have the boat, and go seek their companions, which we
refused, not having hands enough to carry our vessel to Jamaica.
But we promised them, if they would freely work in the voyage, they
should have their entire liberty to go where they thought fit, without
any complaints against them. Upon this we began to be a little
sociable, as before; and they all declared that what they did was at
the instigation of Warren.
The next day we discovered a ship to windward of us, that bore
down upon us with crowded sails. We filled all the sails we had,
and endeavoured to get away from her as fast as we could, but all
to no purpose. We saw they gained upon us every moment; and
therefore, seeing it was not possible for us to escape, we backed our
sails, and lay by for them, that they might be more civil if they
were enemies. As soon as ever they came up with us, they hailed
us, and ordered us to come on board, which we durst not deny;
when Mr Musgrave and I, with Hood and White for rowers, went
on board them. We found by Hood’s knowing them that they were
his captain and comrades. Now, as Hood said, we did not know
how we should behave ourselves, or what we should say about
Warren; but we only told the captain how we met with his men,
and that they were redeemed upon my account. He never asked
particularly for Warren, but how they all did; and when they sent
on board to search our vessel, they soon came to the truth, for the
other three told them the story, though not with aggravated circum-
stances ; upon which poor Hood was tied to the mainmast, lashed
with a cat-o’-nine-tails most abominably, and, after that, pickled in
brine, which was more pain than the whipping; but it kept his
back from festering, which it might otherwise have done, because
they flay the skin at every stroke, and then wash it with brine,
which is called whipping and tickling. After this, they would not
16


keep him among them, but sent for the other three men from our
vessel, and ordered us all on board, with another of their men,
who was ill of a dangerous fever, which they feared might prove
infectious. They did not take anything from us,' as we expected at
first; only gave us this sick man to look after, which we were very
contented with; so we parted with them very well satisfied, but
much better when we were out of sight, fearing they had forgotten
themselves, and would send for us back, and take our provisions
from us, or one mischief or another; for pirates do not often use to
be so courteous.
Two nights after we had parted from the pirate, we encountered a
dreadful storm, that lasted two days without abating; and our poor
bark, which was none of the best, was tumbled and tossed about like
a tennis-ball; yet we received no damage, but that she would not
answer the helm; so we were obliged to let her go before the
tempest, and trust to the mercy of Heaven for relief. We in the
middle of the storm discovered land right ahead, which put us all
in a panic. We endeavoured to bring our vessel to bear up to
the wind, but all to no purpose; for she still drove nearer the
shore, where we discovered several tokens of a shipwreck, as pieces
of broken masts and barrels swimming on the water, and a little
farther, men’s hats. Then we began to think that we certainly
should run the same fate—when, as soon as thought, our bark
was driven on shore in a smooth sandy bay, where we had oppor-
tunity to quit her; which was happy for us, for the sea washed over
her with such violence, that we had not any hopes of her escaping
the storm, and thought, of course, we should be torn to pieces.
When we were ashore, we all concluded it could be no other land
but the south of Cuba island, belonging to the Spaniards. We were
then in a terrible fright lest we were near any place that belonged
to the Indians; for Musgrave assured me that Indians dwelt in some
parts of the south side of Cuba, in spite of the Spaniards, and
massacred them wherever they encountered them, or any other
whites. We remained all night in great fear; and though we found
the storm abated, or rather a calm succeeded, yet we durst not stir
till the moon rose, and then we walked towards our vessel, which we
found all on one side; but, by good-fortune, most of our provisions
were dry, which mightily rejoiced us. But all the vessel’s rigging
and masts were shattered and torn to pieces, and some part of her
quarter wrung off, so that she could not be of any use to us if we
could have got her upright. We took out all our provisions and
our arms, with two barrels of gunpowder that were dry, the rest being
damaged with water and sand that had got in. We had arms
enough, as having those that belonged to the three sailors that were
taken in the pirate, which we supposed they had forgotten; so we
were six men well armed, with each a musket, a case of pistols,
and a bayonet, besides two cutlasses, if we should need them. By


the time we had taken everything out, day approached, and then we
designed all together, well armed, to go and view the country, John
Rouse was very well recovered of his fever, but a little weak; yet
his heart was as good as the best of us; so we resolved, if we were
set upon by Indians, to defend ourselves to the last drop of blood,
choosing rather to die by their hands in fight than to be tortured
after their usual manner.
When we had placed our provisions and other necessaries safe
behind a tuft of trees that grew close by the water-side, we fixed our
arms, and ventured to walk up into the country, which we did almost
every way that day, four or five miles, but could not discover any
living creature, nor any sign of inhabitants; only in one place the
grass seemed to be lately trodden, but whether by man or beast
we could not discover; so, being tired, we went back again to our
station, where we ate heartily, and at night we laid ourselves upon the
grass, and fell asleep; for we durst not lie upon the sails we had got
for that purpose, as they were not dry, though spread all day long.
I was awakened the next morning by a company of lizards
creeping over me, which is an animal frightful enough to look at,
but very harmless, and great lovers of mankind. They say that
these creatures (if any person lie asleep, and any voracious beast, or
the alligator, which comes on shore often, is approaching the place
where you lie) will crawl to you as fast as they can, and, with their
forked tongues, tickle you till you awake, that you may avoid, by
their timely notice, the coming danger. I got up, being roused by
these animals, and looked about me, but saw nothing except an
odd kind of snake, about two feet long, having a head something like
a weasel, and eyes fiery like a cat. As soon as it spied me, it ran
away, and my dog after it, but he did not kill it.
We now resolved on another walk to discover what inhabitants
were our neighbours, whether Indians or Spaniards; if Indians, we
designed to patch up our boat, which had several holes in it, and
make off as fast as we could, and row northward, till we came to
some place inhabited by Spaniards; but if we found the latter, to
beg protection, and some means to get to Jamaica; whereupon we
ventured out with these resolutions.
We had not gone far before my dog began to bark, when turning
my head on one side, I beheld a black approaching us; and
being startled at the sight, I cocked my piece and resolved to fire
at him; but he called to me in English, and told me he did not come
to do me any harm, but was a poor distressed Englishman that
wanted food, and was almost starved, having eaten nothing but
wild fruit for four days. Upon that I let him come near, when he
was soon known by Rouse to be William Plymouth, the black
trumpeter to the captain that commanded the pirate-ship. Upon
this, knowing him, we sat down and gave him some provision, which
we had brought with us, because we designed to be out all day.
18


After he had refreshed himself a little, we asked him how he came
into this island; to which he answered: ‘We were cruising about
Cuba, in hopes of some Spanish prize, when a storm arose, and
drove us upon a rock, where our ship was beaten'to pieces, and not
above eighteen men saved, beside the captain.’
‘And did that wicked wretch escape the shipwreck?’ said I.
‘Yes,’ answered Plymouth, ‘but to undergo a more violent death;
for as soon as ever we landed, we wandered up the country to seek
for some food, without any weapons but a few cutlasses, having lost
our firearms; but, however, we all got something or other to defend
ourselves on shore, as long clubs, which we took from the trees
we found in our walks. Our captain resolved, if he met with any
Indian or Spanish huts, he would murder all that he found in them,
for fear they should make their escape and bring more upon us.
Thus he encouraged his men to follow him with their clubs. “We
will walk,” said he, “ till we find some beaten path, and there lie hid
till night, when we may go on to some house, and come upon them
undiscovered, by which means we may get provision and other
arms;” for the Indians of Cuba use firearms as well as the Spaniards,
and are fully as dexterous in using them as any Europeans. After
travelling about ten miles to the north-west, we discovered a path,
upon which a halt was commanded; and we retired into the woods
again till night, and dined upon what fruits we could get on the
trees.
‘ About two hours before night, a dog smelled us out, and, running
away from us, barked most furiously. Upon that, we were afraid of
being discovered, which fear proved true; for in half an hour, or
thereabouts, after the dog left us, we were saluted with several arrows
and musket-shot, that killed three men and wounded me in the foot;
but it proved the means of saving my life ; for as soon as our men
perceived what had happened, they ran as hard as they could to
meet the danger, knowing they could do no good till they came to
handy blows. I, in endeavouring to follow them, found my hurt,
which prevented me keeping up with the rest; but I could hear and
see them at it. About two hundred Indians set upon our men, and
in half an hour killed them every one. I saw the captain lay about
him desperately, but at last he fell, being run through the throat
with a wooden stake. As soon as ever the Indians had conquered,
or rather murdered them, they fell to stripping them as fast as they
could, and carried them off, together with their own dead, which
were many; for the English sold their lives very dearly.
‘ After they were gone, I ventured to steal out from behind a row
of bushes where I had placed myself to see what had happened. I
went to the place of battle, where I found two of our men that they
had left, with all their arms ; so I took up one of their best muskets
and a cutlass, and made farther into the wood, for fear of being
caught, which I had certainly been if I had staid a quarter of


an hour longer; for I soon heard them whooping, screaming, and
hallooing back, to fetch the other two bodies and their arms, as I
conjectured.
‘ I walked as far as my injured foot would let me that night, and
out of the danger of the Indians, as I thought; and then laid me
down to sleep as well as I could, being very hungry and sadly tired,
and slept very well till morning, when I proceeded forward in my
painful journey, and directed my course north-east, thinking that
was the best way to avoid the Indians, and probably to meet with
some Spaniards, who, I knew, inhabited towards the north; the
Havana, the capital city of the whole island, being seated there.
I wandered for four days, eating nothing but fruit, in the woods;
but, laying myself down about an hour ago to rest myself a little, I
thought I heard the tongues of Englishmen, which, to my great joy,
proved true. I left my musket behind the bushes, for fear of alarming
you; but now, after returning God and you thanks for this timely
nourishment, I ’ll go and fetch itwhich he did, and it might be
easily known to be an Indian piece, for it was rudely carved all over
with several figures of birds and beasts.
‘ Now,’ said I to my companions, ‘you see the reward of wicked-
ness. The pirate was not suffered to go on long in his crimes ;
for though Justice has leaden feet, yet they always find she has iron
hands.’
After poor Plymouth had refreshed himself, we set forward, and
walked along till we came to a road that seemed to be the main road
of the island. Here we consulted what we should do —whether we
should go on, or return for more provision. We resolved to go a
little distance from the road, for fear we should meet with more of
the Indians, and run the same fate with the other Englishmen. But
Plymouth told us we were a great way from the place where his
countrymen were killed (for Plymouth, though born in Guinea, would
always call himself an Englishman, being brought over very yeung);
so we resolved one and all to venture.
We sent up prayers to the Almighty for our safety, and went on
with an idea that we should come off with success ; but we had not
gone far when we heard the reports of several muskets, and shouting
in a barbarous manner behind us. Looking that way, we saw a
mulatto riding as fast as his mule could carry him. When he came
up to us he stopped, and cried in Spanish : ‘ Make haste! run ! —the
Indians are coming upon you; they have killed several Spaniards
already, and are fighting with them! ’ Mr Musgrave, who under-
stood Spanish very well, interpreted what he said to us, and asked
how far they were off. He answered: ‘Just by;’ and hearing
another shout, put spurs to his mule, and left us in an instant. We
found, by the shouting and the firing, that they would be immediately
upon us; so we retired out of the road, to let them pass, and lay
down upon the ground, that they might not discover us. Immediately


came by about twenty Spaniards on horseback, pursued by nearly a
hundred Indians. Just as they came by us, one Spaniard dropped,
and crept into a bush on the other side of the road; and presently
the Indians followed, shouting in a horrid manner, and overtook the
Spaniards again, who, being very swift of foot, outran an ordinary
horse; and they had thrown away their firearms, to make them
the lighter to run, as we supposed. The Spaniards knew they would
soon overtake them, so only ran to charge their pistols, and staid
till they came up ; then discharged them to put them in confusion,
and then ran again to prolong the time, in hopes of some aid. All
this we understood from the Spaniard who crept into the bush
undiscovered by the Indians, he being the foremost in the flight.
He told us, moreover, that, about three leagues farther, there was a
fort belonging to the Spaniards, to stop the Indians, they using to
make inroads, before that fort was built, even to the gates of the city
of Havana. Upon this we consulted, and resolved to follow on
the edge of the road, to see if we could be useful. We soon came
even with them, for they were in a narrow place, and the Spaniards
kept them at bay pretty well. By good-fortune there was a high
hedge, made by trees, all along as we went, which hindered us from
being discovered. Here we resolved to fire upon them all together,
and then run farther up, and, if possible, get out into the road and
face them.
Accordingly, we agreed to fire four and three, and the first four to
charge again immediately. Mr Musgrave, Mr Middleton, Mr White,
and myself agreed to fire first; then Hood, Rouse, and Plymouth ;
which, as soon as we had taken good aim, we did; and firing at
their backs, killed four downright, and wounded several; for I had
ordered them to put two bullets into each piece. As soon as we
had fired our muskets, we let fly one pistol each, and then the other
three fired their guns. After a good deal of fighting and skirmishing,
we put the savages completely to the rout. However, we took four
of them prisoners, and tying their hands behind them, fastened
them to two of our foremost horses, the rest following after, that
they might not get loose.
We were met on the road by twenty Spanish horse, each with a
foot-soldier behind, upon the full gallop to our assistance, having
been alarmed by the mulatto that rode by; but I believe some
were glad they came too late. The officers and the rest saluted
us very courteously when they heard how luckily we came to their
assistance; but they fell a-whipping the poor naked Indians so
barbarously, that, though they deserved it, I could not bear to see
it done; and though the blood followed eveiy lash, yet they never
cried out.
We were well entertained at a gentleman’s house at dinner, with
provision dressed after the English way, and all manner of sweet-
meats and cool wines. As soon as we had dined, we were obliged


to get upon horseback, and away for the Havana, which we reached
about six o’clock in the evening. We had rooms allotted us ; and
several Englishmen and Irishmen who lived there came to see us.
I met there with a priest, who, I am sure, harboured nothing of
cruelty in his breast, for he came to see us every day, and in such a
friendly manner that charmed us all. He was always sending one
good thing or other, and would take us, to divert us, abroad. He
understood Latin very well, and some English. On the Sunday, he
preached an excellent sermon in Spanish, in order to excite charity
in the auditors, and let us have what was necessary for carrying us
to Jamaica. The next day he brought us to the value of ,£SO in
Spanish dollars, which were collected at the church-doors for us.
There was a small vessel upon the stocks, that was bought of the
owners for us, and a collection made in the town for money to pay
for it. This was very agreeable news, and we were told our vessel
was ready, and therefore might be going when we pleased. It was
as neat a one as ever was built by the Spaniards, and carried
between thirteen and fourteen tons. We had all sorts of provisions
sent on board for half a year or more, so that we only staid for the
wind to rise, it being quite a calm. While we remained there, the
four unfortunate Indians were executed in the midst of the parade.
When all was over, Father Antonio took us home to his lodgings,
to give us a small collation for the last time, as the next day we all
designed to lie on board, in expectation of the wind rising. In the
morning, we paid our hearty acknowledgments to all our benefac-
tors, and went on board, where we had not been a quarter of an
hour, before an extraordinary message came from the governor for
Plymouth, our black, who went with them without any hesitation,
and returned with a present from the governor of several bottles of
rack, Spanish wines, fowls, rice, and brandy, with twenty pieces of
Spanish gold, as the messenger told us, in recompense for the loss
of our companion ; for the governor had sent for Plymouth to know
if he would serve him in quality of his trumpeter, and a pension
should be settled on him for life. Plymouth thought fit to accept of
it, as having no master, nor knowing when he should have one ; but
he-got leave to come on board to bid us farewell, which he did in a
very affectionate manner; so we parted with Plymouth, and with
hearty thanks commended ourselves to Father Antonio for all his
favours. Plymouth had a trumpet given him by the governor as
soon as he came on shore, which he brought with him, and so
sounded all the way in the boat as he went back again, to oblige us ;
for really he sounded extraordinarily well, and had learned on several
other instruments, having a tolerable knowledge of music. The wind
rising, we weighed anchor, and left port with three huzzas and a
volley of small-arms (having no cannon), and in two days lost sight
of the island of Cuba.
The weather continued favourable, so that we arrived at Jamaica


without meeting anything remarkable in our passage. As soon as
we had cast anchor, I ordered the boat to be made ready to carry
me on board my own ship, which I saw riding there. But when I
got up the ship’s side, I found my clothes selling at the mast at
‘ Who bids more?’ which is the method as soon as a person is dead
or killed : the first harbour they anchor in, the clothes of the
deceased are brought upon the deck and sold by auction, the money
to be paid when they come to England; for it generally happens
that sailors have not any till they come home again.
They were at the last article when I came up to the ship’s side,
which was a pair of black worsted stockings, that cost, I believe,
about 4J - ., which went off at 12 s. 6 d., though they had been worn.
As soon as I was seen by them, some cried out: ‘ A ghost! a
ghost! ’ and others ran away to secure the clothes they had bought,
suspecting that now I would have them again. When they were
satisfied of my being alive, and were told my story, they were all
rejoiced at my good-fortune; but none could be prevailed upon to
let me have my clothes again ; so I took up the slop-book, and cast
up what they were sold for, and found what cost me about £2O were
sold for four times the money. When I was satisfied in that, I
caljed every person, one by one, that had bought any of my clothes,
and struck a bargain with them for ready money, and bought
them for about £lO ; but the ready money pleased them mightily.
Captain Wase being sick ashore, I went to pay him a visit: he
was exceedingly glad to see me, believing that I had perished. He
told me that the vessel hung lights out for several hours, that I
might know where to swim, and lay by as long as the wind would
permit; as the crew acquainted him when they came into harbour.
The captain told me that he did not think he should live long,
therefore was extremely glad I was come to take charge of the ship,
which would have sailed before, if he had been in a condition to
bear the sea. From thence I went on board my new bark, and
settled my affairs there with my new companions, who were very
sorry to think of parting from me. Hood and Rouse desired they
might be received on board as sailors, and go to England with
us; for Hood was an Englishman, and Rouse had friends there.
Besides, it was as easy to go from England to Bermudas as from
Jamaica. So I spoke to the captain, who was very well pleased to
receive them, as he had lost five men by the distemper of the country.
Captain Wase died in a week after my coming, and left me executor
for his wife, who lived at Bristol.
As soon as we had buried him, I went on board with my two men,
designing to sail in three days at farthest; which I would have done
before, but that I was hindered by wanting a chapman for our
bark, as we had shares to dispose of. When I came on board, the
master told me he had no occasion for the two men, to add to their
charge.


‘That is as I shall think fit,’ said I ; ‘for the power is in my hands
now.’
4 And who put that power into your hands?’ said the master.
4 He that had power so to do,’ said I: ‘ the captain ; ’ whereupon
I shewed him his writing. He told me it did not signify anything,
and that I should find not one of the sailors would obey a boy
incapable of steering a vessel. ‘lt would be a fine thing,’ added he,
‘ for my mate to become my captain ; and as I was designed by the
captain to have the command of the vessel before you came, so I
intend to keep it’
4 But,’ said I, ‘this paper, signed by his own hand, is but of two
days’ date, and you cannot shew anything for the command, as you
pretend to ; therefore, I ’ll make my complaint to the governor, and
he shall right me.’
‘Ay, ay, do so,’ said he. ‘l’ll stand to anything he shall
command.’
Whereupon, Rouse, Hood, and myself went into the boat again,
and rowed immediately on shore ; but the governor was six miles up
in the country ; and as it was pretty late, we designed to wait for
his coming home, which, we were told, would be in the morning
early : so I went on board the bark, and lay there all night, the ship
lying beyond the quays, two leagues from the harbour, in order to
sail. The next morning, getting up with an intent to wait upon the
governor, and looking towards the place where the ship lay over-
night, I found she was gone ; and casting my eyes towards the sea,
saw a ship four or five leagues distant from us, which we supposed
to be ours. I immediately went on shore, and found the governor
had just come to town, and made my complaint. He told me there
was no remedy but to send immediately to Blewfield Bay, where he
supposed they would stop to get wood, which was usual with our
ships that were bound for England: whereupon there was a mess-
enger ordered for Blewfield, whom I accompanied, to give instruc-
tions to the officer that commanded at the fort to seize the master
of the ship, and order him before the governor at Port Royal; so we
got on horseback, and reached it in three days, it being almost a
hundred miles. When we came there, we found several ships in the
harbour, but none that we wanted ; so we waited a week, all to no
purpose ; for she passed the bay, as mistrusting our design. Upon
this, we were obliged to return with heavy hearts, and tell the
governor of our ill success, who pitied me, and told me he would
see me shipped in the first vessel bound for England: so I went on
board my own bark, where they were all glad to see me, though
sorry I was so disappointed. Now, I was very glad that I had not
disposed of my bark, for I thought it might be of use to me. We
consulted together to know what it was best to do ; at last I made
a bargain with them, if they would venture with me in our bark to
England. Upon this we agreed; and, with what money I had, I


began to lade my vessel with things to traffic with. I bought a
good quantity of indigo, some cotton, sugar, and rum; in short, I
laid out the best part of my money; and on the Ist of June 1700,
set sail with a fair wind, and steered our course to England.
We put in at Blewfield Bay for the convenience of obtaining wood
and water, and when we were provided, steered our course onward
as fast as possible; but as soon as we came within ten leagues of
the Havana, a Spanish man-of-war of forty guns came up with us,
and commanded us to strike our sails, which we did immediately;
and coming on board us, were surprised to find us all Englishmen,
not expecting other than Spaniards, from the build of our vessel;
whereupon they made us all prisoners, and sent fifteen men on
board to carry the vessel into the Havana. Telling them how we
came by the vessel, did not signify anything, for they said we were
pirates, and had seized it; and our pass which we had from the
governor of Havana not being to be found, made things appear
so different from what they really'were, that it had on the face of it
a very suspicious appearance. We were very much afraid we should
find a great number of difficulties in obtaining our liberty, especially
if they proceeded to their station, which was St Jago. But it hap-
pened much better than we had any reason to expect; for she pro-
ceeded directly to the Havana, where we knew everything would
be placed in a true light again. When we were anchored, and the
people could come on board us, we were soon known, and the captain
going to the governor, was informed of the matter; so we were
released immediately, and had a visit made us from Father Antonio
and honest Plymouth, who were mightily rejoiced to see us. We
were detained two days before we could get away; and then we set
sail with a brisk gale, first saluting the town.
In two days after our sailing, we made Cape Florida, and entered
the gulf which bears the same name, and passed it without danger.
But here a sudden calm overtook us, as frequently happens when
you are past the gulf, and the current set strong to westward,
occasioned, as we supposed, by the opening of the land upon that
coast. The calm lasting for four days, we were insensibly carried
within half a league of the shore; but a little breeze rising from
land, helped us farther out again. Still, our danger increased; for
we soon perceived three large canoes making towards us, full of
armed Indians.
We had not much time to consult what to do, for they gained
upon us every moment. Now, death, or something worse than
death, stared us in the face; and most of us thought this the last
day we had to live. ‘ Come, friends/ said I, ‘if we must die, let us
die bravely, like Englishmen.’ We charged our four guns with
double and round, and our patteraroes with musket-balls ; the rest
of our arms we got in readiness, and resolved to die fighting, and
not suffer ourselves to be taken to be miserably butchered, as all the


Indians of Florida do when they get any whites in their power. We
resolved to fire our six muskets upon them as soon as they came
within reach ; so we took our aim, two at each canoe, and fired upon
them, which did them some damage, for they stopped upon it.
Whereupon we made the best of our way ; but they soon pursued us
with loud and rude shouts.
By this time we had charged our pieces the third time, which we
fired as before, but did more execution, as they were nearer to us ;
and now we charged them the fourth time, and laid them along the
deck for a further occasion.
Looking towards the shore, we saw eight more of their canoes
standing towards us. This put us upon making all the sail we
could; and the sea-breeze being now pretty strong, we had good
way. Being anxious to avoid killing the poor and ignorant creatures,
we made all the sail we could, and as they could not keep up with
ns, we soon left them far behind. And so we sailed on with a
prosperous gale, and met with no incident worth recording till
Thursday, the 15th of July, when we discovered land, which amazed
us all. for we did not think of falling in with any land till we saw
England. We went to consult our charts, and saw we were near
Newfoundland ; and finding that we steered directly into St John’s
harbour, which is the most commodious in the island, and the capital
of that part of Newfoundland which belongs to the English, we were
very well pleased.
After being there two days, we set sail, and made our course to
England, July 25, 1700. We met with no extraordinary incident in
our passage till we discovered the Land’s End, on the 21st of
August. How rejoiced I was to see my native country, let them
judge that have been placed in the same condition that I have, I
may with truth say, that the transports I felt on first seeing the
white cliffs of the island that gave me birth, exceeded the joy I
received when I was delivered from the most imminent danger.
BYRON’S NARRATIVE OF THE LOSS OF THE WAGER.
ON the 18th of September 1740, the Wager , one of five ships of
war under the command of Commodore Anson, sailed with its
consorts from St Helen’s, being intended for service against the
Spaniards in the Southern Pacific Ocean. The Wager was the least
effective of all the vessels of the squadron, being an old Indiaman,
recently fitted out as a man-of-war, and the crew being formed of
men pressed from other services ; while all the land-force on board
consisted of a detachment of invalids, or men but partially con-
valescent, from Chelsea Hospital. Besides being intended to act as
a store-ship, the Wager was heavily laden with military and other
2 6


stores for the use of the squadron. All these circumstances con-
spired to render the vessel more than usually hazardous, from the
very commencement of its long voyage.
The Wager rounded Cape Horn, with the other ships in company,
about the beginning of April 1741, and soon after, the distresses of
the ship began. The weather became tempestuous, and the mizzen-
mast was carried away by a heavy sea, all the chain-plates to wind-
ward being also broken. The best bower-anchor had next to be
cut away, and the ship lost sight of its companions. The men were
seized with sickness and scurvy, and one evil followed another, till,
on the 14th of May, about four in the morning, the ship struck on a
sunken rock, and was laid on her beam-ends, with the sea breaking
dreadfully over her. All who could stir, flew to the deck; but some
poor creatures who could not leave their hammocks were immediately
drowned. For some time, until day broke, the crew of the Wager
saw nothing before or around them but breakers, and imagined that
every moment would be their last.
When daylight came, land was seen not far off, and the thoughts
of all were turned to the immediate leaving of the ship, and saving
of their lives. With the help of the boats, the crew, with the excep-
tion of a few who were either drunk or thought the ship safe for a
time, got on shore ; but the prospect before them was still a dreadful
one. ‘ Whichever way we looked, a scene of horror presented itself;
on one side, the wreck (in which was all that we had in the world
to support and subsist us), together with a boisterous sea; on the
other, the land did not wear a much more favourable appearance ;
desolate and barren, without sign of culture, we could hope to
receive little other benefit from it than the preservation it afforded
us from the sea. We had wet, cold, and hunger to struggle with, and
no visible remedy against any of those evils.’ The land on which
the crew had been cast was unknown to them, excepting in so far
as they were aware of its being an island near, or a part of, the
western coast of South America, about a hundred leagues north of
the Strait of Magellan. In all, the shipwrecked party amounted to
about a hundred and forty, exclusive of the few on board. The first
night was passed in an old Indian hut, and the discovery of some
lances in a corner of it bred a new source of alarm —namely, from
the natives. For some days afterwards, the men were busied in the
attempt to get beef-casks and other things from the wreck, which
did not go entirely to pieces for a considerable time, although all
the articles on deck were washed ashore one by one. After great
difficulty, the men who remained on board, and who indulged there
in great disorder, were persuaded to come on shore. With materials
got from the wreck, or cast ashore, tents were got up, and a common
store-tent erected for all the food or casks of liquor got from the ship
in the same way. This place was watched incessantly ; for the
allowance was of course a very short or small one, and the men


could scarcely pick up a morsel of fish, flesh, or fowl on the coast
for themselves. The weather also continued wet and cold.
‘ 111-humour and discontent, from the difficulties we laboured under
in procuring sustenance, and the little prospect there was of any
amendment in our condition, were now breaking out apace.’ Some
men separated themselves from the others, and ten of the hardiest
of these seceders resolved to desert altogether. They got a canoe
made, ‘ went away up one of the lagoons, and were never heard of
more !’ The spirit of discord was much aggravated by an accident
that occurred on the loth of May. A midshipman named Cozens,
who had roused the anger of Captain Cheap by various acts and
words, was finally shot by his superior’s hand. The act was a rash
one, but the captain had cause to imagine at the moment that
Cozens had openly mutinied, or was about to'mutiny. This act
made an unfortunate impression on the minds of the men, who
found food every day growing more scarce. A few Indians, men
and women, of small stature, and very swarthy, visited the party,
and were of service in procuring food; but the seamen affronted
their wives, and they all went away. ‘ The Indians having left us,
and the weather continuing tempestuous and rainy, the distresses of
the people for want of food became insupportable. Our number,
which was at first one hundred and forty-five, was now reduced to
one hundred,, and chiefly by famine. The pressing calls of hunger
drove our men to their wits’ end, and put them on a variety of
devices to satisfy it. Among the ingenious this way, one Phipps, a
boatswain’s mate, having got a water-puncheon, scuttled it; then
lashing two logs, one on each side, set out in quest of adventures in
this extraordinary and original piece of embarkation.’ He often got
shell-fish and wild-fowl, but had to venture out far from land, and on
one occasion was cast upon a rock, and remained there two days.
A poor Indian dog belonging to Mr Byron, and which had become
much attached to him, was taken by the men and devoured; and
three weeks after, its owner was glad to search for the paws, which
had been thrown aside, and of which, though rotten, he made a hearty
meal.
Till the 24th of September, the party continued in this condition
of continually augmenting wretchedness, with only one hope of relief
before them, and this resting on the long-boat, which the carpenter
was incessantly working at, to bring it into a strong and safe condi-
tion. On the day mentioned, the long-boat being nearly finished, Mr
Byron and a small party were sent to explore the coast to the south-
ward, almost the whole crew being resolute to make for Magellan’s
Strait, although the captain wished to go along the coast to the north-
ward. In a day or two, the party returned to the island (for such was
the land on which the wreck had taken place), and the long-boat was
immediately afterwards launched, with the cutter and barge, all of
which boats had been saved at first. Eighty-one men entered these
28


boats, being the whole survivors of the party, with the exception of
Captain Cheap and two companions, who remained voluntarily, and
for whose use another boat, the yawl, was left. The leaving of the
captain was a thing unexpected by Byron and some others; and when
a necessity occurred for sending back the barge to the island for
some left canvas, these parties seized the chance of going in the
boat'to rejoin the captain and share his fate. On the 21st of
October the final separation took place between the shore-party and
those in the long-boat, who sailed for the south. Captain Cheap
and those who came to him were joined by a small party who had
originally seceded from the main body; and the whole of this united
band, amounting to twenty men, set sail in the barge and the yawl
towards the north, on the 15th of December. Up to that time, they
contrived, with almost unheard-of difficulty, to subsist on what they
could pick up. * A weed called slaugh, fried in the tallow of some
candles we had saved, and wild celery, were our only fare, by which
our strength was so much impaired that we could scarcely crawl.’
One fine day, the hull of the Wager, still sticking together, was
exposed, and by visiting her, the party got three small casks of beef
hooked up. This soon restored to them sufficient strength for their
enterprise, which they undertook on the day mentioned, in the barge
and yawl. Unhappily, the sea grew very tempestuous, and ‘the
men in the boats were obliged to sit as close as possible, to receive
the seas on their backs, and prevent their filling us. We were
obliged to throw everything overboard to lighten the boats, all our
beef, and even the grapnel, to prevent sinking. Night was coming
on, and we were fast running on a lee shore, where the sea broke
in a frightful manner.’ Just as every man thought certain death
approaching, an opening was seen in the rocks, the boats ran into
it, and found a haven as ‘ smooth as a mill-pond !’
The party remained here four days, suffering much from their old
enemy, hunger. In passing further along the coast, which they did
at continual risk, they were reduced to such distress as to ‘ eat the
shoes off’ their feet, these shoes being of raw sealskin. They never
knew what it was to have a dry thread about them, and the climate
was very cold. During the first few weeks of their course, the yawl
was lost, and one man drowned; but what was a more distressing
consequence, they were obliged to leave four men on shore, as the
barge could not carry all. The men did not object to being left;
they were wearied of their lives. When the poor fellows were left,
‘they stood upon the beach, giving us three cheers, and called out
God bless the king! ’ They were never heard of more ; and it is
but too probable, as Byron says, that they met a miserable end.
But, indeed, every one had now given up hope of ultimate escape,
and this was shewn by the resolution taken almost immediately
afterwards, to ‘go back to Wager’s Island (the place of ship-
wreck), there to linger out a miserable life.’ Eating nothing but


sea-weed and tangle by the way, the poor mariners again reached
the island. They were here no better off. The weather was
wretchedly wet, and ‘ wild celery was all we could procure, which
raked our stomachs instead of assuaging our hunger. That dreadful
and last resource of men in not much worse circumstances than
ours, of consigning one man to death for the support of the rest,
began to be mentioned in whispers.’ Fortunately, one man found
some rotten pieces of beef on the sea-shore, and with a degree of
generosity only to be appreciated by persons so placed, he shared it
fairly with the rest.
This supply sustained the whole till the arrival of some Indians,
accompanied by a chief or cacique from the island of Chiloe, which
lies in 40° 42' of south latitude. This cacique could speak a little
Spanish, and he agreed to conduct the party in the barge to the
nearest Spanish settlement, being to receive the barge and all its
contents for his trouble. Fourteen in number, the wrecked sailors
again put to sea, and were conducted by their guide to the mouth of
a river, which he proposed to ascend. But after toiling one whole
day, the attempt to go up against the current was given over, and
they were forced to try the coast again. The severe day’s work,
conjoined with hunger, caused the death of one of the strongest men
of the party, although it was thought that he might have been
preserved but for the inhumanity of Captain Cheap, who alone had
food at the moment (got from the Indians), but would not give a
morsel to the dying man. This roused the indignation of the
others, and the consequence was, that, while others sought food
on shore, ‘six of the men seized the boat, put off, and left us, to
return no more. And now all the difficulties we had hitherto
encountered seemed light in comparison of what we expected to
suffer from the treachery of our men, who, with the boat, had taken
away everything that might be the means of preserving our lives.
Yet under these dismal and forlorn appearances was our delivery
now preparing.’
Mr Byron was now taken, with Captain Cheap, by the Indian
guide to a native village, whence he expected to get more assistance
in conducting the party, who, if they could not recover the barge for
him, were to give a musket and some other articles as a reward.
On coming in the evening to the Indian wigwams, after two days’
travel, Mr Byron was neglected, and left alone. Urged by want
and cold, he crept into a wigwam upon chance, and found there
two women, one young and the other old, whose conduct amply
corroborates the well-known and beautiful eulogium passed by
Ledyard upon the kindness of that sex everywhere to poor travellers.
They saw the young seaman wet and shivering, and made him a
fire. They brought out their only food, a large fish, and broiled it
for him. When he lay down upon some dry boughs, he found, on
awaking a few hours after, that the women had gently covered him


with warm clothes, at the expense of enduring the cold themselves.
When he had made signs that his appetite was not appeased, ‘ they
both went out, taking with them a couple of dogs, which they train
to assist them in fishing. After an hour’s absence, they came in
trembling with cold, and their hair streaming with water, and
brought two fish, which having broiled, they gave me the largest
share.’ For a poor stranger they had just gone out in the middle of
the night, plunged into the cold sea, and, with the aid of their nets
or other apparatus, had got him food. These kind creatures were
the wives of an old Indian, who was then absent, but who on his
return struck them with brutal violence for their hospitality, Mr
Byron looking on with impotent rage and indignation. The return
of this Indian and his companions enabled the native guide of
Captain Cheap and Byron to make an arrangement for conducting
the shipwrecked party northward as they wished. The captain and
Byron then left the wigwams to go back to their companions, being
joined soon after by a body of Indian guides.
It was the middle of March 1742, ere this journey to the north-
ward was begun. Various Indian canoes conveyed the whole party
day after day along the sea-coast; shell-fish, eggs from the rocks, and
sea-weed, being the food of the band, and even this being procurable
in such miserable quantities as barely to sustain life. The condition
of the captain in this respect was better than the others, for the
Indians thought their reward safe if they attended to the chief of
the whites alone, and he cruelly encouraged the notion. But what
but selfishness could be expected from one in the following state:
‘ I could compare Captain Cheap’s body to nothing but an ant-hill,
with thousands of vermin crawling over about it; for he was now
past attempting to rid himself in the least from this torment, as
he had quite lost himself, not recollecting our names that were
about him, or even his own. His beard was as long as a hermit’s,
that and his face being covered with train-oil and dirt, from his
sleeping, to secure them, upon pieces of stinking seal. His legs were
as big as mill-posts, though his body appeared to be nothing but skin
and bone.’ The rest were little better, and Mr Byron had often to
strip himself in the midst of hail and snow, and beat his clothes with
stones, to kill the insects that swarmed about him. At length, how-
ever, after one of them had sunk under his sufferings, the party
got to the island of Chiloe, a place at the south extremity of the
province of Chili, and under the rule of the Spaniards. Being a
remote corner, Chiloe had only a few Spaniards in it, and these
chiefly Jesuit priests; but the Indian inhabitants were comparatively
civilised. The troubles of the party may be said to have ended here,
for the natives pitied them much, and supplied them with abundance
of food; fortunately, the quantity taken did not prove injurious.
Even after staying on the island for a considerable time, and being
conveyed to the mainland to the town of Chaco, where a Spanish


governor resided, the eating of the famished mariners continued
to be enormous. ‘Every house was open to us; and though it was
but an hour after we had dined, they always spread a table, thinking
we could never eat enough after what we had suffered, and we were
much of the same opinion.’ Mr Byron made friends with the
governor’s cook, and so carried his pockets always full to his apart-
ment, there to feed at leisure. They were in all four in number
now; namely, Captain Cheap, Messrs Byron, Hamilton, and Camp-
bell. From Chaco, they were taken to the larger town of Castro, and
remained there for some months in the condition of prisoners at
large, poorly clad, but decently lodged and well fed. On the 2d of
January 1743, their case having become known to the authorities
of Chili, they were put on board a ship to be conveyed to the city
of St Jago. Here they remained two years as prisoners, but not
in confinement. Fortunately for them, a Scotch physician, who
bore the name of Don Patricio Ged, entreated the governor to
allow the captives to stay with him; and for two years this generous
man maintained them like brothers, nearly at his own expense.
In December following, Captain Cheap and Messrs Byron and
Hamilton were put on board a French vessel, to be conveyed to
Europe: Mr Campbell, having become a Catholic, remained in
Chili. They reached France safely, and after some detention there,
were permitted to go to Britain by an order from Spain. Their
friends were much surprised to see them, having long given them
up for lost. Their term of absence exceeded five years.
The six men who cruelly made off with the barge, appear never to
have been heard of again, and perished, doubtless, on the coast.
The fate of the more numerous body who went off to the south in
the long-boat, is known from the narrative of John Bulkely, gunner,
one of the survivors. This band actually succeeded in rounding
South America through the Strait of Magellan, and reached the
Portuguese territory of Rio Janeiro, after hardships equal to those
of the other party, and which reduced their number from nearly
eighty to thirty. They reached the Rio Grande in January 1742.
All of the thirty, however, probably did not see Britain. On coming
to the Portuguese colony, they found food, friends, and countrymen,
and separated from one another, Bulkely and two others reached
England on the Ist of January 1743.
The members of this expedition went out with the hope of
gathering gold at will among the Spanish colonies. What a
different fate befell the unhappy crew of the Wager!
32




