



I
I


Main Totalisator Building in Saddling Paddock at the Australian Jockey Club’s Racecourse, Sydney, Australia.




STRAIGHT BETTING
EVERY day the belief is growing stronger in the public mind
that many of the abuses at present attached to racing can
be either abolished or very much minimised by the introduction of
the Totalisator, and that “straight betting” is surer on the Totalisator
machine than under the old-fashioned system of with the
Bookmaker. So we find that the most popular system of betting in
Australia and New Zealand to-day is through the medium of the
Totalisator.
In New Zealand and South Australia betting by machine having
proved not only that it is absolutely reliable, but, while it improves
the sport of racing, it at the same time benefits the country, the
betting public;, and the horse owners, and all attempts to reinstate
the Bookmaker, who is not permitted by law to carry on his opera-
tions, have been completely frustrated.
The great benefit resulting to horse racing from the introduction
of the Totalisator into these countries is strikingly exemplified by
the liberal stakes provided by the race clubs. In 1895 the only
£lOOO race in New Zealand was the New Zealand Cup, and the
amount of money added by one club (The Auckland Race Club)
was £8550. For the season 1921-1922 this club alone gave in stakes
£73,100 for eleven days’ racing, there being included in this total
no less than twenty-five races on which the added money was £lOOO
or more. All the clubs in New Zealand have increased their prizes
proportionately, and all acknowledge this to be the result of the
introduction of the Totalisator. In South Australia, where, as in New
Zealand, the only legalised form of betting is now by medium of the
Totalisator, stakes have been nearly doubled during the last few years.
Page Three
New South Wales, Queensland and Western Australia still allow
the ringmen to call the odds which have been liberalised through
the operation alongside them of the machine which gives the true
price, according to public opinion, about each horse’s chance.
Every day, however, the Totalisator is growing in popularity. Ihe
racing public recognises that the machine returns the scientifically
correct odds against each horse’s chance according to the measure of
public favor bestowed upon it. The absolute fairness of this
mechanical bookmaker appeals to the spirit of fairness which
animates all true sportsmen.
Australia is not the original home of the Totalisator, but no sooner
had the pari-muteul system of betting been introduced into the
country than the inventive genius of the Australian was challenged
to produce a mechanical contrivance, the manipulation of which
would depend as little as possible on human agency and which would
do its work speedily and with absolute accuracy. The old-fashioned
and crude method of selling tickets from boxes, one for each horse
in a race, was soon discarded in favor of a machine. The inventive-
ness of the Australian, once set to work, gradually improved the
machines which were first used until we now have the Premier
Totalisator. It can truly be claimed that this triumph of mechanism
is perfect. It has been proved on many of the leading Australasian
racecourses, and nowhere more thoroughly than at Randwick,
Sydney, N.S.W., the premier racing centre in the Southern Hemi-
sphere. There, in a single day over £120,000 has been handled by
the machine with marvellous celerity and without the semblance of
a growl or a grumble from one of its myriad clients.




Perfection of Mechanism,
THE Premier Totalisator does the work of dozens of brains and
does it with infallible accuracy. It accomplishes marvels in
calculation which are almost beyond conception, not taking minutes
to achieve its sub-totals and grand-totals, but'giving in a flash
additions which ordinarily would take many minutes to produce.
It is human to err, and an aggregation of brains might make a
mistake, but this wondrous machine cannot tell a lie.
The Premier Totalisator possesses the implicit confidence of the
public, and it has gained that by what may be termed its unswerving
rectitude. Obviously human hands must handle the money which
passes in and out of the Totalisator, but they have nothing to do
with the subsequent all-important calculations, which are a purely
mechanical operation. A mistake cannot be made.
The Premier Totalisator being a complete machine, that is, one
on which the registration is the direct result of the selling of the
ticket, the registration of every transaction is instantaneous, and final
results are known immediately the last ticket is sold. Hence there
is no delay either in the start of a race or in commencing to pay
dividends at the conclusion of a race. In New Zealand, where a
race must not start until the Totalisator figures are balanced, it was
the usual thing, before the introduction of the Premier Totalisator,
to have the start delayed twenty minutes and over waiting for advice
from the Totalisator official. As the horses had to be at the starting
post at the advertised time for starting, it can be imagined the
detrimental effect this delay had on a highly-strung horse. No
doubt many a good horse has had any chance of winning utterly
spoilt by this delay. The installation of the Premier Totalisator
STRAIGHT BETTING
Page Five
obviates this cause of delay, because figures are final on the locking
of the machine. We understand that in Paris where the “Pari
MutueP system is still in use, dividends are often not declared till as
much as thirty minutes after a race has been run. If the Premier
Totalisator were in use, dividends could be declared immediately it
was known that the jockeys had finished weighing in, and all divi-
dends could be paid away in less time than it now takes to declare
the amount of the dividend.
Simplicity of Operation
THE machine has excited the wonder and admiration of every-
body who has watched it operate. It all seems so absurdly
simple. As fast as money is poured through the windows for
investment on various horses in a race just so fast each new amount
is recorded in full view of everybody, on each horse, and at the
same moment the grand total of the investments on the race is
brought right up-to-date. Each separate operation is completed
with the speed of thought. The clerk in pressing a tiny lever to
release the ticket which acknowledges the transaction by the same
simple act registers it. Nothing could be quicker or more simple.
It is all so much easier for investors than rushing about among the
excited crowd which gather around the bookmakers’ stands. There
is no bustle, no crowding, no argument, just a business transaction
done without fuss or bother.
Is it any wonder then that the racing public appreciate the Premier
Totalisator and that it is constantly being installed in new centres?




In a Nutshell.
Before proceeding to describe in detail the working of the machine,
it will be as well to put in a nutshell its manifold advantages;
1. It can be used either for straight-out betting or betting for
places as may be desired.
2. It receives the amounts invested on each horse as fast as
they can be handed to clerks who operate the machines.
3. It instantly records each investment on the total standing
to the credit of each horse on a huge indicator, and at the
same instant shows above all these details the grand total
of all the investments on each race. Therefore, investors
can tell at a glance the dividend any horse is likely to
pay.
4. In two minutes after the race has been run the machine posts
dividends on first, second and third horses.
5. Subsidiary ticket-selling machines connected ivith the main
Totalisator may be installed at various parts of the
Course, and, where necessary, subsidiary recorders can
be erected, recording synchronously with the main
Totalisator and so displaying the progress of the betting
at any point of the Course.
6. The precautions against fraud are absolute.
The Premier Totalisator
THE perfect machine must show the odds on each and every horse
at any instant; that is to say, it must show, as fast as tickets
are issued, the total number issued by all Tote Clerks on each
STRAIGHT BETTING
Page Seven
individual horse and the grand total issued on all horses starling in
any one race.
All this is done absolutely and unfailingly by the Premier Totali-
sator. No matter how many tickets may be issued, whether by any
or all of the Tote Clerks, on different horses, or simultaneously on
the same horse, the “Premier” instantly records them. Each clerk’s
operations are recorded independently so that if fifty clerks issue
at the same instant tickets on the same horse the record is shown
that same instant, both on the individual horse counter and the
Grand-Total counter.
Prevention of f raud
THE perfect Totalisator must infallibly guard against the possi-
bility of fraud by the issue of tickets by the Tote staff after a
race has started. It must make it possible to absolutely lock
the operation of the counters as well as the issuing of tickets; and
this again makes it necessary that the issue of tickets and registration
of same are simultaneous, so that tickets may be sold up to the
exact time of the start of the race.
The Premier Totalisator is absolutely locked against both the
issuing of tickets and registration of counters by the operation of
a lever placed in the Judge’s box or wherever else may be desirable.
As the operation of issuing a ticket is automatically and instantly
registered, both on the “Horse” counters and the “Grand Total,
the locking does not interfere with the registration of any
ticket or tickets which have been issued the instant before. It is
impossible for a Tote Clerk to issue a ticket to himself without
registering it, and so making himself responsible for the value of
the ticket, and it is impossible for such a clerk to issue a ticket to
himself after the machine has been locked by the Judge.




Every Horse from Every
Window.
IN the “Premier,” tickets on every horse can be obtained at every
window. This not only prevents an inconvenient rush on a few
windows but enables the work to be done by a minimum number
of clerks. As the press buttons are coupled up with the Counters,
the operation requires no special work nor skill on the part of the
Tote Clerk, and the whole cycle takes place on the pressure of the
button and independently of how the tickets are issued or whether
one or more Tote Clerks are issuing tickets on the same horse at
the same instant. The operating mechanism is entirely positive in
its action, and a ticket cannot be issued without being instantly
registered on the “Horse” Counter and the “Grand Total” Counter.
The Tickets.
NO previously printed tickets are used in connection with the
“Premier” machine. The tickets are printed by the Ticket-issuer
machines from a roll of blank paper. The pressure of a button
corresponding with the number of horse on which a ticket is required
prints the ticket, stamps the number of each horse on it, and in-
stantly records the sale on the “Horse” Counter and the “Grand
Total” Counter.
A ticket cannot be issued in any way other than by pressing the
button. This operation records the value of sale of said ticket
against the operator, and said operator is responsible for cash agree-
ing with the number of tickets issued by him.
STRAIGHT BETTING
Official Control
Page Nine
If an operator wishes to issue a ticket to himself (and this on
most courses is prohibited) he can only do so by pressing the button,
and this operation records the sale of a ticket which he has to
account for in his cash at the end of the race, thus placing himself
in a similar position to one of the betting public.
The ticket cannot be issued without recording its sale on the
“Horse” Counter and “Grand Total,” and a ticket cannot be recorded
on the “Horse” Counter or “Grand Total” without same being issued,
thus doing away with any possibility of fraud on the part of the
ticket seller.
THE machine is closed when the race starts by the operation of
a switch in the Judge’s box, or in any other position decided
on by the club. The fact of pressing over this switch immediately
cu"s the current off from the machine. No more tickets can then
be recorded on the “Horse” Counters until the Judge puts the switch
back after the race. This makes it impossible for anyone to issue
any tickets or make any registrations on the machine after the race
is started.
An important feature of the machine is the provision for estab-
lishing separate booths for the selling of tickets. Such booths
consisting of a nest of selling windows can be erected at various
points of the course and at any desired distance from the main
building and arranged so that all sales will be immediately recorded
and displayed on the machine. Should any of these booths be so
far from the principal building that the results cannot be seen from
that portion of the course, indicators working synchronously with
and displaying identical figures as the main machine can be installed.
By the use of these indicators investors all over a racecourse can be
kept fully informed as to how the betting is going.




The Premier Totalisator
explained.
f I ''HE “Premier” Totalisator is capable of receiving electrical im-
pulses from any number of selling machines, or ticket issuers,
or similar appliances, and of instantly totalling such issues, irrespec-
tive of the value of the tickets sold, and of the rate at which sales
are effected.
The Totalisator records the total sales from instant to instant on
each horse, and also at the same time, the grand total of the sales
on all horses. Usually and preferably, it is installed to record the
equivalent number of tickets of the lowest denominations; thus, if
the machine is to be operated to record sales of, say, 10/-, £l, £5
and £lO, then each 10/- ticket sold adds one to the total recorded
on the particular horse, and, at the same instant, one to the grand
total. Similarly, each £1 ticket sold, automatically adds two to the
horse counter and to the grand total, each £5 ticket adds 10 to the
horse register and the grand total, and each £lO ticket adds 20.
The machine can be installed to record the sales of tickets of any
value, but the lowest ticket of high value, such as the £5 ticket in
the above example, should be 10 times, or a multiple of 10 times
the unit ticket, that is, the ticket of lowest value; e.g., one £5 ticket
equals ten 10/- tickets.
The recording mechanism can be constructed with four drums, to
read up to a maximum of 9999 on each horse, five drums to read
99,999, or more, to meet the requirements of the betting.
STRAIGHT BETTING
Page Eleven
The whole machine is automatic in operation, being controlled
entirely by the issue of tickets, there being no human element be-
tween the “issue” of the tickets and the “recording” of such “issue.”
Further, also, the machine is capable of instantly recording all sales
on any horse, even if the whole of the selling windows or the ticket-
issuing machines happen to issue tickets on the same horse at the
same instant.
There is no time limitation in the operation of the ticket-issuers,
that is to say, a ticket can be issued from any ticket-issuing machine
at any instant on any horse, and its sale recorded on the horse
counter and on the grand total, quite irrespective of what may be
happening on all other ticket-issuing machines.
In order that the various horse counters and the grand-total
counter in the Totalisator may be capable of quickly recording sales,
no matter whether the majority of the sales are on one horse or
divided amongst a number, each recording counter is equipped with
a variable speed gear, controlled by a relay device, which auto-
matically adjusts itself to the speed of betting, thereby getting over
the difficulty of sudden stopping or starting of the large counter
wheels, and thus ensuring that each counter can meet the demands
of the betting quietly, and without shock, within the limits of the
speeds for which it has been designed and installed.
The smallest machines will allow of the recording of unit bets up
to a rate of 1000 a minute on any horse, and machines can he
installed to allow of betting up to 200,000 a minute on any horse,
or even more, should such be required.
A machine has been manufactured and shown in Sydney that
records bets up to 250,000 per minute.


FROM THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
JOCKEY CLUB.
[Copy.]
Dear Sir
I am directed to inform you that after a
twelve months’ trial the Committee are
very satisfied with the working and smooth
running of the Premier Totalisator which
your Company installed for this Club at
Morphettville. The machine has fully
demonstrated its capability to do all the
work that was claimed for it. On Adelaide
Cup Day, the second time it was in use,
the machine handled £36,668, and on the
Cup itself £7,213/5/- was invested, both
records for any one machine operating in
this State.
Since the installation of the Premier
Totalisator in May of 1921, 13 race meet-
ings have been held at Morphettville and
£253.120/10/- has passed through the
machine.
Yours faithfully,
(Sgd.) ARTHUR V. KEWNEY,
Secretary.
[Since the above was written the record
investment, £9,319/10/- for one event, was
made on the Adelaide Cup, May, 1922.]
Page Twelve
r,
m
I ■
, •» i
Interior View of a section of the Selling House in Saddling Paddock
The Secretary,
Automatic Totalisators Limited,
[Copy.]
Dear Sir,
Australian Jockey Club,
6 Bligh Street, Sydney,
22nd July, 1922.
10 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
I have pleasure in stating that the “Premier” Automatic Totalisator
Machines, which were installed at Randwick Racecourse and are operated by
your Company on contract under the supervision of the Club, and which were


showing Selling Clerks paying in at the finish of the betting on a race.
first used at the Club’s Spring Meeting, 1917, have, since their installation,
given complete satisfaction. Their accuracy is unquestionable and the rapidity
with which tickets are issued by the experienced operators leaves nothing to
be desired.
You will remember that during the last twelve months the ticket issuers
in the Saddling Paddock Totalisator have been replaced with the latest
model, and the capacity of the machinery re-modelled to operate 100 machines
—73 of which are now in operation, giving the most satisfactory results.
Yours faithfully,
{Sgd.) C. W. CROPPER,
Secretary.
FROM THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
JOCKEY CLUB.
[Copy.]
Dear Sir,
I am very pleased indeed to be able to
report to you that during the three days’
Autumn Meeting of the Club, the Premier
Totalisator was running well and afforded
the greatest satisfaction to the Committee
and to the public. I cannot speak too
highly of the earnest and unsparing efforts
of the Company’s officials to attain this end.
Yours faithfully,
(Sgd.) ARTHUR V. KEWNEY,
Secretary.
Page 1 hirteen


View on Lawn at Randwick, showing the Selling House (on right) and Pay-out House (on left).
The mechanism is so arranged that unit tickets, that is, 10/- and
£1 tickets, are recorded on the unit wheel of each counter, transfer-
ring to the 10’s, 100’s and 1000’s drums, etc., in the ordinary way
as required. The £5 tickets are registered direct on the 10’s wheel
of the counters, but such registration interferes in no way with the
transmission of bets from the unit drum to the 10’s drum, and so on.
Similarly, if the machine is equipped with a ticket-issuing machine
for the sale of £5O tickets, that is, of tickets equal to 100 unit tickets,
the sale of such is recorded direct on the 100’s drum of each counter,
without in any way interfering with the correct registration of the
hundreds coming forward from the sale of tickets of lower denomin-
ations.
To allow of the gradual acceleration and retardation of the counter
wheels to meet the demands of the betting, each counter is equipped
with a storage or “balancer” arrangement which stores up the record
of the issue of tickets to a pre-determined limit, thus allowing time
for the counter to be accelerated up to the required speed, and thus
Page Fourteen
also allowing the machine automatically to come quietly to rest
when betting has stopped, the gear being so arranged that all bets
so stored up in the balancer or storage gear are automatically
recorded on the counter before it comes to rest.
Assuming that at the time betting ceases any counter was then
running at its maximum speed, the time taken to record the whole
of the bets then stored up in the mechanism, and to bring the counter
to rest, does not exceed ten seconds. The machine may therefore,
within the limits of practice, be considered as instantaneous in its
action, the ten seconds margin only being required because it would
be practically impossible to suddenly accelerate or suddenly stop
the counters without excessive shock.
Each counter, as before stated, is capable of receiving impulses
from any number of ticket-issuing or selling machines, and such
selling machines may be arranged in any way so far as values are
concerned, that is to say, there may be any required number of 10/'
issuing machines, and, similarly, of 20/-, £5, £2O, and so on.


Such selling windows may also be located anywhere, as required.
They can be placed in the building which contains the Totalisator,
or may be a mile, or ten miles away. The only limitation to the
location of issuers at a distance from the Totalisator itself is the
question of minimising the amount of electrical wire required. The
normal voltage used in all these machines is 110 volts, direct current,
and the wire used to connect the selling machines with the Totalisa-
tor is 1/18, 600 Megohm grade insulated wire.
The group of horse counters and the grand-total counter, which
together constitute the Totalisator, are driven by one electrical
motor, the size of such motor depending upon the size of the instal-
lation. This motor in a forty horse equipment is usually about
5-h.p. capacity, and, in a thirty horse equipment 4-h.p. capacity. In
very large installations in which the adding machine, or Totalisator
proper, is located in a special room and not visible to the public,
they being kept informed as to the betting by independent recorders
at various points on the course, the Totalisator would require a
2-h.p. motor and each complete registering equipment a 4-h.p. motor.
The Totalisator requires no attention during its operation, as it
records the sale of all tickets automatically, both on the horse
counters and on the grand total, and such also applies to the
“register” equipments in large installations. Each horse counter
and the grand-total counter is also equipped with an automatic
device which instantly and absolutely stops the sale of tickets on any
horse should the recording gear on that particular horse be unable
to record the sale of further tickets by reason of a failure of the
driving power to that counter.
When this automatic gear comes into operation, it prevents the
issue of tickets on that horse only, at all the selling windows, but
in no way interferes with the selling and issuing of tickets on any
STRAIGHT BETTING
Page Fifteen
other horse, unless it should have been the driving gear to the grand
total which has failed, in which case the sale of tickets at every
window on every horse is instantly and automatically stopped.
Whilst in the operation of the many machines of this type which
are now in use, this automatic lock has never been called into use,
yet it is considered essential to fit each equipment with this gear,
so that if, through carelessness or malice or accident, there should
be any interruption in the driving power to any counter, then there
can be no further issue of tickets on that particular horse until the
defect is remedied. Such defect, if it ever occurred, would almost
certainly be the breaking of one of the driving belts, and the
machine is so designed that any belt can be replaced in five seconds,
there being a bell and indicator which at once draws the attention
of the Totalisator attendant to the fact that there is a stoppage on
any particular horse counter.
Beyond the possibility of a failure to the driving belts, there is no
other possible cause of failure, except the complete cutting off of the
electrical power supply. The machine is so arranged that such a
failure instantly locks the ticket-issuing machine and prevents the
further issue of tickets, and all the Totalisators on this system which
are now running are installed with a “Stand-by” power unit which
is always running and which, within two seconds, can be thrown in
circuit, thereby limiting the period of stoppage to a maximum
period of two seconds, whilst also preventing the sale of tickets
during that two seconds, and thereby ensuring the correctness of
the records.
The spring gear which operates the electro-magnetic escapements
which receive the electrical impulses from the various ticket-issuing
machines is so designed as to be entirely out of reach of accidental
damage, and the spring itself is arranged to run in an oil bath and




to be so lightly loaded that there is no risk of breakage. Even if
a break did occur the automatic lock, previously mentioned, would
immediately come into operation and instantly stop the sale of
tickets and registrations on the particular horse affected. It may he
mentioned that in the many machines now operating of this type,
there has never been any failure in this driving gear.
The electro-magnetic escapements above referred to, which record
the impulses received from the selling machines, are connected to
these selling machines by insulated wire, and there is a fuse in each
circuit which prevents overloading of any of the electro magnets.
The machines are so arranged, however, that should there be any
interruption in the circuit between any particular issuer, or group
of issuers, and any particular horse counter, whether such interrup-
tion is caused by the blowing of a fuse, or the breakage of a wire,
or the failure of a connection, then such ticket issuer, or group of
ticket issuers, are instantly and automatically locked against the
sale of any more tickets on that particular horse, and remain so
locked until the circuit is put right again.
It must be remembered, however, that as each ticket issuer is
capable of issuing tickets upon each and every horse, the failure of
a circuit from any issuer to any particular horse would not cause
material inconvenience, as it would not in any way interfere with
the sale of tickets on that particular horse from any of the other
issuers.
The whole of the mechanism of the various horse counters and
of the grand-total counter is carefully and strongly built, with ample
provision for lubrication and for adjustment, and the parts have
very ample strength for the work which they have to perform.
STRAIGHT BETTING
Page Seventeen
Each counter, with the whole of its mechanism, is so designed
that it can be attached, by two bolts only, to the front of the building
through which the numbers are being exposed, and no elaborate
framing of any sort is required.
One line of shaft between the two rows of counters constituting
the Totalisator serves to operate the whole of the counters and also
the grand total, and such line of shaft is driven by one electrical
motor of small power, there usually being a second stand-by motor
coupled up ready should the first motor fail.
The counters are so arranged that they can be quickly re-set to
‘ zero” after the close of the betting on one race, so as to be ready
for the start of the betting on the next race, and the_whole of the
counters on a Totalisator installed to record the betting on forty
horses can be re*set to zero by two men within five minutes, and
quicker if more men are available.
Each Totalisator equipment is controlled by a switchboard
adjacent to the machine, this switchboard being equipped with the
necessary controlling and protective devices, and also with automatic
signals, etc., for the guidance of those running the machine as to
when to re-set, etc.
Each horse counter is also equipped with a trip switch for cutting
that horse out of operation in the event of it being scratched, and
the circuits are so arranged that when any horse is so cut out, all
the ticket-issuing machines are thereby automatically locked against
the sale of tickets on that horse, so that, even if such tickets are
applied for, they cannot be issued.


Australian Jockey Club’s Course at Randwick, showing Lawns
Official and Grand Stands, and the Totalisator Building on the Flat.
Ticket-Issuing Machines
Club, and the date or name of the Meeting, and also a numeral or
letter designing the issuing machine from which it has been issued.
THESE machines are designed to print and issue tickets quickly
on any horse as required, recording within the issuing machine
itself the sale of each ticket so issued, and also transmitting the
necessary electrical impulses to the Totalisator, and so “recording”
upon the horse counter and the grand-total counter the issue of
every ticket.
The operation of each issuer is controlled by a single handle,
which, when pressed into a particular hole in a quadrant plate
bearing the “number” of the horse for which the ticket is required,
thereby correctly places the type, prints and issues the ticket, and
records its sale within the issuer itself, and transmits the necessary
impulse to the Totalisator.
During the printing operation the handle is automatically locked
so that it is impossible for the operator to interfere with the opera-
tion of the machine until the then-being-printed ticket is ejected.
The type is inked automatically, and the inking process is so
arranged that one selected “type,” and that “type" only, is inked
just prior to the paper passing over it, thus preventing any accumu-
lation of ink on any type, and thereby keeping the whole of the
type clean.
The issuing machines draw their paper from a roll which is
changed after each race for a roll of a different color. The machine
automatically prints upon the ticket the value of the ticket, the
number of the race and the number of the horse for which the
ticket has been issued, and prints both the value of the ticket and
the number of the horse in words and also in numerals to minimise
the risk of fraud. It also prints on the ticket the name of the Race
Page Eighteen


General View in the Paddock Enclosure at Randwick
showing Main Totalisator with Pay-out House at the back.
The printing gear is arranged also that the movement of one
small handle instantly changes the type which prints the race num-
ber on the ticket, so that after the machine has stopped the issue
of tickets on one race, such type can be shifted and the paper
changed ready for the issue of tickets on the next race, and this
change of paper and change of type occupies a maximum of fifteen
seconds. The changing of the paper also can be effected at any
time during betting should the roll of paper become exhausted, or
for any other reason, and such change can be made in five seconds.
The machine is “governed” by the operation of the Totalisator to
the extent that any failure in the mechanism of any horse counter in
the Totalisator instantly and automatically locks the ticket issuer
against the issue of any ticket on that horse, as before described.
Page Nineteen
Similarly, the ticket issuers are so arranged that they can be locked
against the issue of any tickets for any period of time during which
betting is not to take place, thereby limiting the issue of the tickets
to within the prescribed times.
The ticket issuers are designed to be power driven with a suitable
small electric motor for driving a number of issuers, each issuer
taking approximately l/24th h.p. The machines are so arranged
also that should any such motor fail, the machine can be operated
by hand without causing any delay, and the issuers are designed so
that the operators, that is, those issuing and selling tickets, cannot
get access to the mechanism; but, when necessary, anyone authoiised
to do so can completely and quickly expose the whole of the
mechanism for lubrication, adjustment or repairs.


The machines are suitable for operation by one operator who
both operates the machine and issues the ticket to the purchaser, or
they may be so installed that the machine itself is controlled bv one
operator, discharging tickets to two sellers, with a suitable deflector,
so that the ticket may be delivered to either one of the sellers as
required. This is possible because the speed at which the machine
will print and issue tickets is considerably more than double the
speed at which the public can be handled at any selling window.
Size and Arrangement of
Machines.
TOTALISATORS and Ticket Issuers can be supplied to meet any
requirements, the smallest size at present built being capable
of serving ten selling windows, selling tickets on twenty horses.
There is no practical limit to the size of the equipment, and
machines can be supplied to sell tickets at 1000 selling windows,
and to record such sales at speeds up to 230,000 unit bets per minute.
In all such equipments the “movement" of the Totalisator in no
way interferes with the operation of the ticket issuer, the issuers
being ready at any instant to issue a ticket on any horse, without
reference to the position, or timing, or movement, either of other
issuers or of the Totalisator.
Where the installation is small, it is desirable to instal a machine
in such a position that the Totalisator itself is situated upon the
STRAIGHT BETTING
Page Twenty
dividing line between the Paddock and Leger Reserves on the Race-
course, with a suitable number of selling windows in each of such
reserves, the whole of the selling windows on each side recording
upon the one Totalisator.
In larger installations, a separate Totalisator may be installed in
each or any of the racecourse Reserves, or one Totalisator may be
installed with selling windows located anywhere upon the racecourse,
and with, if necessary, subsidiary recording devices for recording
the total on the various horses and on the grand total, at more than
one place on the racecourse. In very large installations it is imprac-
ticable to bring the public to one spot to read the different counters,
and in such cases the main Totalisator would be installed where
most suitable, and subsidiary “ recorders ” also installed at other suit-
able places on the Course, such recorders being automatically con-
trolled from the main Totalisator and automatically and instantly
recording the issue of tickets on each horse and on the grand total.
Such subsidiary recorders are not equipped with adding gear, as all
the necessary adding gear is located on the main Totalisator.
There is no practical limit to the number of such subsidiary
recorders that may be installed, and they may be of any size, and
would probably be located above each large group of selling win-
dows.
The size of the numbers on the counters as usually installed is
approximately 4| inches in height by inches in breadth on the
horse counters, and approximately 6 inches in height by 44 inches
in breadth on the grand-total counters, and the numbers on the
horse counters are found to be readily legible at a distance of over
100 yards.


The numbers are embossed on the surface of the counter wheels
and are white on a black background, this arrangement having
proved to be the most effective.
It may he mentioned that in large installations the adding machine,
or Totalisator proper, which is totally enclosed in a room and not
visible to the public, is, however, so designed that it accurately
records every bet made on the racecourse, so that the calculations
of the dividends can be made direct from this machine, such calcu-
lations requiring only the deduction of the legal percentage from
the total investments, the division of such balance into percentages
payable to first, second and third horses, if such is required, and
the division of such amounts by the actual number of unit tickets
registered as being sold on the first, second and third horses.
In a straight-out machine, where payment is made on the winner
only, the second calculation above described is not required.
It has been found in practice that in a place-betting machine on
first, second and third horses, the whole of the calculations to obtain
the dividend upon placed horses can be determined and checked
within two minutes of the numbers of these first, second and third
horses being declared. This is possible because the Premier Totalisa-
tor instantly records on one machine all bets made, wherever such
bets may have been made on the racecourse, and therefore there are
no preliminary calculations necessary, nor is there any collection
of records.
Whilst a race is being run the totals registered on the adding
machine on each horse and on the grand total are entered up in a
book for record purposes, the necessary percentage deduction is
made from the grand total, and the balance divided into the agreed
upon percentage to be paid to the first, second and third horses,
STRAIGHT BETTING
Page Twenty-one
and all calculations are completed before the race is finished. It
then only remains, as soon as the placed horses are declared, to
divide the above calculated amounts by the number of tickets sold
on each of these three placed horses, which at once gives the divi-
dend, and each of these final calculations can be made and checked
very easily within two minutes after the declaration of the winner.
During such time also, the wheels of the main Totalisator and of
the subsidiary recorders can he re-set to zero, so that within a
maximum time of five minutes from the starting of one race, that
is to say, from the time that the machine has stopped betting on
that race, the machine can be ready to commence betting on the
next race, with all calculations completed and dividends declared,
and also with the record of the sale made by each selling machine
recorder from these machines.
Pre-Race Betting
TN very large installations it is sometimes thought desirable to
allow the recording of bets upon races before the Totalisator
itself is actually opened for receiving bets on such races. Thus,
should there be, say, six races on a day’s programme, of which, say,
No. 4 race is most important, and the one upon which pre-racing
betting is to be allowed, in such a case special accommodation can
be provided for the public, and special issuing machines provided
at which they can record their bets, such machines storing up the
record of their bets until the beginning of the betting on that
particular race; when the time is reached these bets are then trans-
ferred immediately to the Totalisator, generally before the actual


CEYLON TURF CLUB COLOMBO.
These machines are the first installations of the small type to be installed by the
Company and were used for the Ceylon Turf Club’s meetings held in August, 1922.
The Secretary of the Club, on 16th August, 1922, writes; “I have pleasure in inform-
ing you that the Electric Totalisator win and place machines have been duly
installed, and they gave complete satisfaction during the four days’ meeting which
we have just concluded.”
Page Twenty-two


ordinary betting on the race is started. This transfer is effected in
less than one a minute, quite irrespective of the amount of money so
recorded. In this way pre-race betting can be carried on in, say,
an office away from the Racecourse, and if necessary days or weeks
before the race day, the special issuers being kept locked and sealed
and their record transferred to the main Totalisator just before the
ordinary betting on the particular race is started. *
The foregoing facts briefly and clearly define the general
principles upon which the Premier 1 otalisator equipment is
operated, and its very great capacity, which makes it capable of
easily meeting the demands of the heaviest betting anywhere in
the world.
In practice the machines have been found reliable and easily
operated. Each machine is inspected and tested the day before each
race meeting by trained mechanics and by the engineer in charge.
At this time also the necessary new type is fitted to the ticket-
issuing machines and tested under a rigid supervision, such machines
then being kept locked and sealed until the race meeting is started,
to prevent any fraud through the pre-issue of tickets.
During the meeting two men are required on each Totalisator and
on each subsidiary recorder, and one mechanic also attends to
approximately thirty issuing machines during the betting. Immedi-
ately after the close of the meeting the Totalisators are wiped down
and covered up; the type is removed from the issuing machines, and
within an hour after the close of the meeting the whole equipment
is cleaned and covered up and does not require further attention or
opening up until the day before the next race meeting.
STRAIGHT BETTING
Page Twenty-three
In its operation the machine affords the greatest opportunity for
carefully checking all the sales of tickets. Each ticket-issuer auto-
matically records the number of tickets sold on each race, so that
the money taken by the operators can be checked with the tickets
they have sold. Further, also, the totals of the sales effected by
all the ticket issuers can be checked against the grand total of sales
effected as registered on the grand total.
Each ticket-issuer also marks on each ticket issued therefrom a
number or letter which enables every ticket to be traced back to the
issuer machine from which it was issued, which might be necessary
should a fraud be suspected upon the part of any of the ticket-issuer
operators.
On the Totalisator itself the equipment automatically records the
sales on the horse itself and on the grand total, and the total of all
sales on the horses so recorded can by simple addition be quickly
checked with the grand total register. In this way, with a minimum
of calculation and with a total elimination of the human element in
the recording of the tickets sold, a complete and automatic check
is obtained, and the results of the betting known and the dividends
declared within two minutes of the termination of a race, whilst,
at the same time, throughout the betting on every race, the public
are kept exactly informed of the state of the betting on each horse
and of the total investments on the machine, and are thereby
materially assisted in determining their bets.
The use of subsidiary recorders and of subsidiary issuing machines
at various points on the course entirely eliminates all crowding, and
offers the public the greatest convenience in making their bets, as
no matter where they may be located on a racecourse, they can be kept
informed from second to second of exactly the state of the betting.


pt>mm .D-orPkL*
'7*l
ss a n
/\ o 2 L/k
I Z. > fO . LoO
With Compliments of
AUTOMATIC TOTALISATORS LTD.
10 CASTLEREAGH STREET
SYDNEY
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA




