

BTRIO TIXJ RES
UPON THE
REY. WILLIAM THORN’S
PAMPHLET,
ENTITLED
DIPPING NOT BAPTIZING.
ANOPOHOS.
A NT HR,CPC*J>
“To thorn shall leave in charge
To teach all nations what of Him they learned
And His salvation; them who shall believe
Baptizing in the pertinent stream —the sign
Of washing them from guilt of sin, to life
Bure; and in mind prepared, if so befall
For death like that which his Redeemer died.
Milton.
MELBOURNE:
WILSON & MACKINNON, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
78, COLLINS STREET, EAST.
1861.


PREFACE.
The “ Strictures” upon Mr. Thorn’s pamphlet may be thought
by some Christian readers severe. But when it is remembered
that he dogmatically asserts that “ Dipping ” is not “ Baptism,”
a thing no Psedobaptist I know of ever did before ; when he
declares that sprinkling is alone Baptism—necessitating all im-
mersed persons to be sprinkled; when, with an amount of
egotism possessed by few, he says—“ My volume, ‘ Modern Im-
mersion not Scriptural Baptism,’ recommended by leading
Reviews, remains unanswered by our opponents, who are pained
and soured by arguments they cannot refutewhile his argu-
ments, though all second hand, were examined and replied to by
Dr. Carson, who says—“ As a defender of sprinkling it is fortu-
nate for Mr. Thorn that he has no acquaintance with the philosophy
of language. Where a ‘ Porsori would fail, a * Thorn' would
triumph.” There is no science in his criticism, and I leave my
readers to say if truth upholds all his assertions.
I would far rather have been employed in writing upon the
love of Jesus to men, than upon the love of Mr. Thorn for
sprinkling. But duty called, and I trust the approval of the
Most High will attend this attempt to remove from Mr. Thorn’s
mind that trifling with solemn things in which he indulges, and
from his final account the guilt of causing some men to regard
all religion as vain.


bo
10
STEICTUEES
ON THE REV. WILLIAM THORN’S PAMPHLET.
The pamphlet upon which I offer the following criticism is
called—“ A brief Analysis of a volume entitled, ‘ Modern Im-
mersion not Scriptural Baptism,’ ” Of which the author says—
“lt has remained to the present time unanswered and adds, of
himself, “ I may be supposed, at least, intellectually qualified to
assist the reader in arriving at a just conclusion on the subject.”
The same may be supposed of many persons, but it is one thing
to be intellectually , and quite another thing to be morally qualified,
to unfold Divine Truth. The pamphlet in question, in my
opinion, has an immoral tendency, by presenting pictures of
“ nalced men and ivomen"—caricaturing what is attended to by a
large portion of the Church of Christ as a divine ordinance—
placing stumbling blocks in the ways of men, and, above all,
gratifying a vitiated taste. Ido not say such were the intentions
of the author in writing it, or of the person who had it re-
printed in Adelaide, and circulated gratuitously in South Aus-
tralia ; but I say such are the results of its existence here, and
but for which it should have remained unnoticed by me, though
for awhile the “ thorns' ’ may choke the good seed.
The pamphlet is divided into two parts. In the fii’st part the
writer says :—•
“ I shall proceed to state and refute all the material arguments
of the Baptists in defence of Dipping exclusively.”
In the second part he says :
“ I shall adduce all the leading arguments of Psedobaptists in
support of pouring or sprinkling, or applying the element to the
object.”
Thus we have before us the work the author undertakes to ac-
complish. The arguments of the Baptists, he says, are “ eight
in number. Ist. That ordinary readers of the New Testament are
of themselves competent to understand this question. 2nd.
The concessions of certain Psedobatists in defence of their mode.
3rd. The history of the church. 4th. The meaning of the
Greek verb f}airr%w. sth. The prepositions eV, els, eic. 6th.
The places selected by John for Baptising. 7th. The allusions
to Baptism as a burial. Bth. A positive institution of the New
Testament.” Then he adds, “ I have fully and fairly stated every


material argument of the Baptists in defence of “ Dipping.” I
may be mistaken, but I am of opinion that the Baptists use as a
“ material argument ” in favor of their views, the subjects of
baptism, or the persons baptized by the Apostles, “ men and
women,” believers in Christ. Now this argument is not stated in
the pamphlet, consequently all the arguments of the Baptists
have not been “ fully and fairly stated and refuted.” Baptists do
not consider the positive institution of Baptism as Mr. Thorn
does. He regards, “Anoint the sick,” and “Wash ye one
another’s feet,” as positive institutions, equal to “ Be ye baptized.”
Yet he neglects them ; for surely sprinkling the head is not the
same as washing the feet. I mention this to show the unreason-
ableness of condemning Baptists for attending to what in one
case they consider a positive institution, and for neglecting what
.in another case they do not consider such.
Without further remark at present upon the “ fairness and
fulness with which Baptist arguments have been stated and
refuted,” let us turn our attention to the material arguments
advanced by Pajdobaptists in favor of their views, which we may
reasonably suppose have been “ fairly and fully stated.” They
are eight in number, consequently equal to the Baptist argu-
ments in that particular:—“lst. The perplexities of the Baptists
in defending their system! 2nd. The word used in
connections which prove that to render it by pouring or sprinkl-
ing will in no degree violate its current application. 3rd. The
mode of Baptism among the Jews copied by John. 4th, Several
instances of Christian baptism noticed in the New Testament.
sth, The numbers baptized by John and the Apostles present
insuperable obstacles to the system of dipping. 6th. The re-
presentations of the baptism of the Holy Ghost prove pouring or
sprinkling. 7th. The difficulties attending dipping plainly
indicate sprinkling in the primitive churches. Bth. The dangers
attending immersion afford evidence that sprinkling must have
been the original mode of baptism.”
These are in substance the arguments advanced against im-
mersion. I shall not undertake to “ refute,” these arguments
seriatim or individually, because four of them come under one
head, viz., the first, fifth, seventh, and eighth. The first being on
“perplexities ,” the second “obstacles,” the third “difficulties,” and
the fourth “ dangers ßy this arrangement I lessen the number
of arguments against immersion, and now lessen their weight.
Ist. Perplexities. That good men are the subjects of “ doubts
and fears,” “ perplexities and anxieties,” I admit. That Paedo-
baptists have their fair share of perplexities on many subjects,
and especially on the subject of baptism, I infer, from the writ-
ings of “ Ewing,” “ Wardlaw,” “ Halley,” and others. Mr.
Thom says the “ great difficulty in the Baptist’s way is water.”


This is a gulf he cannot pass over. The Jordan is too deep for
him, the Kedron too filthy, Siloam too much engaged, and Enon
too shallow. Can you wonder, then, at the Baptists being per-
plexed ? But hear his own words. “ The Jordan was six or seven feet
deep at the baptizing spot, and unless men and women in John's time
icere twice as tall as at present, I contend that dipping persons in the
Jordan was altogether impracticable, and unhesitatingly conclude that
they were only sprinkled." Of course the Jordan was six or seven
feet deep at the “ edge," all the way from the sea of Galilee to the
Dead Sea, and at all seasons of the year too ? There was no ford
at Bethabara; no way for the children of Keuben and Gad to
reach Jerusalem but by passing through seven feet of water; no
place where John could by any chance immerse one less than a
“ giant" and as men were not giants in those days, it follows men
were not immersed ! Hasten, then, to the Kedron, the brook
“ Shiloh” drink of by the way—the brook He often crossed when
going to Gethsemane—will this do for baptizing? No ! “this is
the common sewer of the city,” and, in defiance of natural laws, the
“ filth” ran up the stream as well as down, polluting its whole
course! “ Siloam was only a spring without the walls, and
the pools supplied by its puny streams were used for washing
sheep.” So sheep washing was a perpetual thing in Palestine !
Let us go then to Enon, there is “ much water there,” or “ many
waters there." “ No,” says Mr. Thorn, “ Enon is nothing more
than a well or place for drawing water.” Thus, Jordan being too
deep and rapid, Kedron too unclean, Enon too small, and Siloam in
constant use, the Baptist is fixed on the horns of a dilemma, and
to get off he “ draws largely on the inventive faculties, and finds
great waters where, for aught he knew, there were scarcely any, erects
baths, borrows the brazen sea, and so on, almost without end.”
This is a beautiful passage, and true, of course, for witnesses
are called to prove it—“ Volney, who says, * The Jordan, between
the principal lakes, in few places exceeds 60 or 80 feet in breadth,
its depth is about 10 or 12.’ Thompson —* It is exceeding deep,
even at the edge.’ Monro —‘ The river at the baptizing spot forms
an angle, the stream x'apid, the bank steep.’ ” Mr- Monro should
have said, the supposed baptizing spot. Dr. Kitto supposes “ the
true site of this interesting event is not known.” But grant that
Mr. Monro did know, see, and measure the very place where
John baptized, does it follow that the river was in every respect
the same when John used it, as it was when Mr. Monro saw it ?
Have eighteen hundred years wrought no changes upon it?
Does not experience teach us that rivers are always changing?
The witnesses called by Mr. Thorn help him not, they only say
what the Jordan was like when they saw it, not what it was when
John baptized in it. But if such evidence is admissible, then
I give the following :—The Rev. Pliny Fisk says, “ Between tb^


two principal lakes the river bends often, and varies much in
width, perhaps from 30 to 100 yards. It is so shallow in many
places that cattle and asses were fording it without difficulty.”
Mr. Buckingham describes several fords, and says of one sup-
posed to be the ford where the Israelites crossed the river, “ at
this season it is little more than twenty-five yards in breadth, and
so shallow as to be easily forded by horses. The banks are thickly
lined with tall rushes, oleander, and willows.” Dr. Kitto says,
“ the place supposed, or fixed upon, where Christ received
baptism from the hands of John, is that which for ages has
engaged the interest of the Catholic and Oriental Christians,
and which has been frequented more than any other part of the
river. Indeed the spot has from the most remote times until
now been a place of annual pilgrimage to thousands of Christians
from all parts of the world.” Then follows an account given by
Mr. Elliot of 5,000 pilgrims coming to the river, in which the
following passage occurs :—“ The sun rose above the mountains
of Moab just as we reached the Jordan, instantly the pilgrims,
young and old, rich and poor, sick and sound, men and women,
plunged into the stream. All were clad in their winding-sheets,
or, to speak more correctly, all carried with them, attached in
some way to the body, the piece of cloth they wish to be en-
veloped in after death.” Another quotation. It is from the pen-
of Capt. W. T. Lynch, U. S, N., Commander of the Expedition
to the Eiver Jordan and the Dead Sea, 1847-1860. “We arrived
at ‘EI Meshea,’ the bathing place of the Christian pilgrims.
The ford is consecrated by tradition as the place where the
Israelites passed over with the Ark, and where our Saviour was
baptized. My first impulse was to bathe in the consecrated
stream—directly before me is Jericho—over against this is no
doubt the Bethabara of the New Testament, or a place of passage
over .” Then he describes a place of meeting of pilgrims, “ men,
women, and children, from all parts of the world, and of every
age and condition.” “ They seemed to be absorbed by one impul-
sive feeling, and perfectly regardless of the observation of others.
Each one plunged himself or was dipped by another three times below
the surface , in honor of the Trinity. In an hour they began
to disappear, and in less than three hours the trodden surface of
the lately crowded bank reflected no human shadow. The im-
mense crowd of human beings was estimated at 8,000.” With
such testimony as to the ease with which multitudes of per-
sons of all countries, ages, and conditions can immerse themselves
or be immersed without accident of any kind, as Mr, Lynch states,
in addition to the testimony of scripture, which says John
baptized many in Jordan, he must be more bold than wise who
writes, “ I contend that dipping persons in the Jordan was
altogether impracticable, and unhesitatingly conclude that they


were only sprinkled.” The objection to immersion, founded on
the difficulty of finding suitable places in the Jordan, designated
* a material argument,' too, is as like original trifling or sheer
nonsense as anything I ever heard. “ But,” adds Mr. Thorn,
“ had the river Jordan been ever so nicely adapted for dipping,
the vast multitudes said to have been baptized, make dipping
impossible; suppose them all sprinkled, and every difficulty
vanishes in a moment.” The obstacles rendering dipping im-
possible are two —Ist. John’s want of physical strength. “He
required the strength of fifty men to immei’se the number
purified by him, which could be little less than two millions .”
2nd. The want of time. “ John was engaged in this work only
six months; to dip all was impossible, to sprinkle easy.” Now
the difficulties attending any particular thing do not disprove
the thing itself. There are many difficulties in the way of a
holy life ; is a holy life then impossible ? There were difficulties
in the way of Samson slaying a thousand men with the jaw bone
of an ass ; it was therefore impossible. There are difficulties
in the way of believing a whale swallowed Jonah ; therefore it
was impossible. And there were difficulties in the way of John
immersing the multitudes; therefore it was impossible? He
only sprinkled them. To him that believeth all things are possible.
What are difficulties to one man are not to another, and this
holds good in physical, mental, and moral science. But pray,
Mr. Thorn, who told you “ John was only engaged in this work
six months ?” Are you ignorant of the chronology which assigns
two years to the ministry of John? Or are you ignorant of the
word of God, which shews that his ministry extended much
longer than six months. John began his ministry in the fifteenth
year of the reign Tiberias, and was in the 29th year of his age
when he came preaching; whether in the beginning, middle, or
end of the year is unknown. We may suppose any part of it. To
make his ministry as short as possible—suppose he left the
Wilderness in time to reach the Jordan, and commence his
ministry on his 30th birthday. He was six months older than
Jesus, and as Jesus was about 30 years of age when he came to
John, and was baptized, it follows that John had been at least six
months engaged in this work when Jesus was led by the spirit
into the wilderness as soon as he was baptized, where he re-
mained 40 days. Leaving the wilderness he repaired to Betha-
bara, beyond Jordan, where he found John engaged in his
ministry. How long he remained with John we cannot say.
John recognised Jesus among the multitude, and said, “ there
standeth one among you whom ye know not.” “ The next day
John saw Jesus and said, behold the Lamb of God!” “ Again
the next day John saw Jesus coming to him, and pointed him
out to two of his own disciples, who left John, and went to Jesus.”


The day following “ Jesus would go into Galilee.” The journey
to Cana occupied three days. There he wrought his first miracle.
He then went to Carpernaum, “ and continued there not many
days." Then he returned to Jerusalem, and was there during the
Passover. “ After this came Jesus and his disciples into the land
of Judea, and there he tarried with them, and baptized." How
long he tarried there we know not, but we are informed that
“ Jesus made and baptized more disciples than John.” So that if
John and his disciples required six months to baptize the people,
Jesus and his disciples would require more! While Jesus
was baptizing in Jordan, “ John was also baptizing in Enon, for
John was not yet cast into prison.” Jesus went away again into
Galilee, and while there heard that John was cast into prison.
Now, putting all these circumstances together, it is quite certain
that John’s ministry extended over a period of at least nine or ten
months. “ Neander and Kitto"&ve of opinion that John’s ministry ex-
ceeded twelve months, and I concur in this opinion. So much, then,
for the time John had to baptize, “ rendering dipping impossible.”
But I should like to know the exact time required for sprinkling
a person ? If done reverently, and in the name of the Trinity,
would it not require as long to sprinkle a person a& it would to
immerse one ? especially as the sprinkler had to stoop down and
fill his hand or a measure (the usual way, Mr. T. says), and then
pour it over the head (which a small power would find difficulty
in doing in some cases), the time required in one case would be
as great as in the other. If, therefore, it was impossible for
John to immerse the multitudes because of the time required, it
was equally impossible for him to sprinkle them individually.
This objection Mr. Thorn saw, and to meet it he says, “ The
element might not actually come in contact with one in a hundred of
them, still this would really he baptizing them, all giving as an in-
stance the High Priest purifying the people. Now we read,
Hebrews ix. 19, that the High Priest “ sprinkled all the people,"
not one in every hundred. Do Psedobaptists consider valid baptism
sprinkling one in a hundred ? How true that “ figs are not to be
got from ‘ thorns,' ” or consistency from all called ministers.
Next consider the numbers said to have been baptized by John,
“ Two millions, says Mr. Thorn on the best calculation.”
Where did they come from ? Palestine is not much larger than
Wales, with a population little over one million. But suppose
the population was as great in the days of John, as it was in the
days of David, though we know to the contrary, the population
never being after the captivity what it was before. Two millions
of adults would give four or five millions to the whole population,
this would include the population of Galilee and Samaria as well
as of Judea. Now we are told that “ they of Jerusalem, Judea, and.
the region round Jordan ivent out to John and were baptized of him


yet, only a portion of them were baptized. “ The Scribes and
Pharisees rejected the counsel of God against themselves, not being
baptized by John." Jesus too baptized in the same district and
more than John baptized, which shows plainly that John did not
baptize all the inhabitants even of the country around Jerusalem.
John came to prepare a people for the Lord, and if he prepared
two millions he prepared the whole adult population of Judea,
Samaria, and Galilee, which we know was not the case. So much
then for the numbers said to be baptized by John “ overwhelming
the strength and vigor of a giant.” Mr. Thorn must have been
“ in nubibus ” when he made his “ calculations.”
Before leaving this part of the subject, I have a remark to make
upon the character of John. Mr. Thom says “John copied his
baptism from the Jews, and as they sprinkled he did so.” Where
is the proof? Did God not send John to baptize ? Did John not
say, he sent me to baptize with water ?” As God sent John and told
him to baptize in water, it is probable He told him, how to
baptize, without copying. But John not only copied the Jews, he
copied the horse also, for “he and the people went down into the
Jordan as a horse goes down into the water to drink, they went six
inches or ande deep into the water, and were sprinkled .” Thus,
“ every difficulty vanishes in a moment.” Not so fast, if you
please ! “ The Jordan was six or seven feet deep at the edge, close
to the shore, and the bank was steep." How then did John and
the people go down into the water only six inches deep or to the
ancles? “Happy is the man that condemneth not himself.”
But such happiness is not the portion of the Rev. William
Thorn.
Leaving John, the Jordan, and the two millions, we come to
Jerusalem and the “ three thousand ” baptized on the day of
Pentecost.
Mr. Thorn says, “ In Jerusalem there was neither river nor foun-
tain of water, consequently no means of baptizing the three
thousand except by sprinkling them.” The man who can make
such an assertion as this affirms that he has no belief in history,
and history alone can decide the point. “ Tacitus knew of a
perennial source of water below the temple.” (Hist, 5—12.)
“Aristeas in describing the ancient temple informs us that the
supply of water was unfailing, inasmuch as there was an abun-
dant natural fountain flowing in the interior. The existence of
a perennial source of water under the temple has always been
admitted ” — Cyc. Bib. Lit. —(except by Mr. Thorn). In the
accounts of the siege of Jerusalem by Pompey, Strabo says, “ the
town was well provided with water within the walls.” (Geog. 16
2, 40.) In the narratives of all the sieges of Jerusalem, we never
read of the besieged suffering from thirst, although driven to the
most dreadful extremities by hunger. The agonies of thirst


sustained by the first crusaders in their siege of Jerusalem will
be remembered by those who have read the accounts of it pub-
lished by Tasso or William of Tyre. Yet, when the city was
taken plenty of water was found within it, ingentes copias aqua.
It is difficult to prove where this copious supply of water came
from. Solomon’s aqueducts do not solve the mystery, for they
might have been cut off by any besieging army. Still there is
the fact that Jerusalem was well supplied with water. And when
we remember that the male population of the country assembled
three times a year in Jerusalem, the water reqxiired for ordinary
and extraordinary purposes must have been very great. Professor
Robinson says, “ Almost every private house in Jerusalem has at
least one or more cisterns connected with it.” “ The house Mr.
Lennean resided in had four cisterns, and as these are but a
specimen of the manner in which all the better class of houses
are supplied, I subjoin the dimensions: —Ist. 15 ft. long, Bft.
broad, 13 ft. deep. 2nd. 8 ft. long, 4ft broad, 15 ft. deep. 3rd. 10
ft. long, 10 ft. broad, 15 ft. deep. 4th. 30 ft. long, 30 ft. broad, 20
ft. deep,” That Jerusalem was always well supplied with water no
one can doubt. And as some of the followers of Jesus were
persons of influence and affluence in the city, and as some of the
three thousand, if not all, probably belonged to the city, can
a reasonable man imagine that there existed any difficulty in
finding suitable places to baptize in even by immersion ? Yes,
some will doubt and “ though one rose from the dead and
declared it unto them they would not believe.”
With regard to the difficulty of immersing three thousand in
one day : Some regard “ molehills as mountains.” A minister
in Jamaica, without haste or difficulty, immersed one hundred and
twenty-nine persons in forty minutes ; so that if the Apostles
alone baptized, the whole could have been done in less than two
hours. Thus the “ insuperable difficulties” vanish like the
crackling of thorns under a pot. How the three thousand were
added to the church we are not told; I suppose some form of
admission was observed. Where they were baptized, or by
whom, we are not informed ; we are simply told that Peter
preached—they that gladly heard the W T ord repented, believed,
were baptized, and the same day were added— to the Lord—l pre-
sume (to them) not being in the original.
Next we come to the Samaritans: Mr. T. says “That they
were also baptized by sprinkling will hardly admit of a reasona-
ble doubt; they had no river or fountain of water in the city or imme-
diate neighbourhood. What was required for domestic purposes was
fetched from Jacob's Well. Now Jacob’s Well feet
deep, with fifteen feet of water in it—(Maundrell’s Journey). It
was also between seven and eight miles distant from the city of
Samaria, where Philip preached the Word, and where men and


women believed and were baptized.” Can any sane man suppose
that this well exclusively supplied the inhabitants of the city of
Samaria with water, and the inhabitants of Sychar also, to
whom it belonged, and was near their city? No ! it must be in
frolic Mr. Thorn informs us that Samaria was supplied from
Jacob’s Well with water. Perhaps in ignorance. Yet this
cannot be, for he distinctly says, “ there was no river or fountain
of water in the city or neighbourhood.” How then was Samaria
supplied with water during its long sieges ? Well, we read in
the Ency. Brit. (Art. Samaria) that “John Hyrcanus took Sa-
maria and ruined it in such a manner that he made the river run
through its ruins, and it continued in this condition until Aulus
Gabinius rebuilt it.” We also read in Josephus B. xiii., chap.
10, —“ When Hyrcanus had taken the city of Samaria, which
was not done until after a year’s siege, he was not contented with
doing that only, but he demolished it entirely, and brought rivu-
lets to it to drown it, and dug such hollows as might let the waters
run under it.” Thus we have rivulets, waters, and rivers men-
tioned by Josephus in and near Samaria ; and the map of Pales-
tine presents to us two rivers anciently called “ Zarka and
Kivah,” The sources of these rivers are in the hills of Sa-
maria ; they pass one on the right and the other on the left
of the city—uniting about twelve miles below the city of
Samaria, and running into the Mediterranean about three
miles north of the ruins of Caesarea.” From this it will be
seen that Samaria was not quite so destitute of water as Mr.
Thorn would lead us to suppose. Indeed, there may have been
many more rivers than we have any knowledge of. The Old
Testament does not mention either the Sea of Galilee or the
Dead Sea. The New Testament does not once mention the
Dead Sea. Are we to infer from such silence that the Lake of
Tiberias and the Dead Sea existed not ?—Far from it. There-
fore Mr. Thorn, in writing what is calculated to deceive when he
had the means of writing otherwise, has done violence to truth
for party purposes, and I do not envy the head or the heart of the
man who could so act.
The person who says “ the city of Samaria had no existence
in the days of Christ had belter read Jos. Antiq. 15, 8, 6 ; De
Bell, i. 2, 2 ; Strabo, 16 2, 13, and he will learn what Samaria,
was in the days of Christ. Augustus bestowed Samaria on
Herod, who rebuilt the city with great magnificence, and gave
it the name of Sebaste, which is the Greek translation of
the Latin name or epithet Augustus, in honour of that Em-
peror, Herod planted a colony of 6000 persons in the city and
enlarged it, and left a sacred place of a stadi and a half, splen-
didly decorated. He also erected a temple to Augustus, cele-
brated for its magnitude and beauty. The whole city was


greatly ornamented, and became a strong fortress.” Such was
the Samaria of the New Testament when Philip preached there,
Acts viii. 6—9. Benjamin of TJudda describes Samaiia as for-
merly a very strong city, in a fine country, richly watered, and
surrounded by gardens, vineyards, orchards, and olive groves.
But, perhaps, Mr. Thorn means that Sychar, and not Samaria,
was the city which had “ no river or fountains of pure water in it
or in its immediate neighbourhood, what was required for domes-
tic purposes being fetched from Jacob’s Well, which was distant
and deep.” If this is Mr. Thorn’s meaning, then he says what
is not true, for Jacob’s Well was not “ distant ” but “ near," see
John iv. 5, 6. Shall we believe God or man? “No river or
fountain of pure water in the city or immediate neighbourhood.”
There is no reason to question that the present town occupies
the site of the ancient Shechem, or Sychar. The fertility and
beauty of the deep and narrow valley in which the town stands
have been much admired by travellers. The valley is not more
than 500 yards wide at the town, which stands directly upon its
watershed. The streams upon the eastern part flowing off east
into the plain and so towards the Jordan—while the fountains
on the western side send off a pretty brook down the valley north-
west, towards the Mediterranean. The streets of the town are
narrow ; the houses high, and in the main sti’eet, through the
whole length of tv Inch a stream of clear water rushes down. Bob.
Pal. ii. 94 ; Lord Nugent’s Lands Classic and Sacred, ii. 172
180; Narr. of Scotch Hep., p. 208—218 ; Olin’s Travels, 339
—365. If such testimony is not conclusion, as to the existence
of rivers and fountains of clear water in Samaria and its neigh-
bourhood, and in Sychar and its neighbourhood, then I add the
following:—“ The Shechem of the Old Testament and the Sychar
of the New Testament stands in a long narrow valley, and so
abundantly is this valley watered, that it is said to be enriched
by 365 springs.” Kitto’s Phys. Pal. Samaria possessed the
three elements of fertility— water, warmth, and soil —see Piet. Pal.
Turning from Samaria, let us consider the indi-
vidual cases mentioned by Mr. Thorn : He says—Whether the
converts were three or three thousand, there were no removals or
delays ; the rite was invariably performed upon them immediately,
and on the spot. How does he know that ? According to this
dictum, Cornelius was baptized immediately and on the spot.
There is such a thing as being “ wise above what is written,”
and here is an instance, for we are not told that Cornelius ever
was baptized. Peter commanded him to be baptized; and the in-
ference is that he obeyed the command, but we are not told that
he did. Peter’s question, “ Can any man forbid water ? ” is said
to teach that water was to be “ brought” in, that Cornelius
might be baptized “ immediately and on the spot." Peter probably


addressed the words; Can any one “ debar from the water ?” (in-
dicative of believers), to the brethren who accompanied him from
Joppa, called “ certain of the circumcision.” He wished their
opinion : Cornelius was a Gentile, and no Gentile had as yet
been admitted into the church. It was therefore natural for Peter
to ask his brethren if they had any objection, and when he found
by their silence they had none, he commanded them to be bap-
tized. But when or by whom Cornelius and his house were bap-
tized, we are not informed. To suppose that the question, can
any man “ forbid ” i.e., “ debar from the water,” teaches that water
was to be brought in that Cornelius might be sprinkled, is equal
to supposing Peter was filled with new wine, or mad, knowing
not what he said.
Paul also was baptized immediately and on the spot, yea, “in
the very room where he was sitting.” Now, by comparing the
accounts of Paul’s conversion, given in Acts ix. 12—20, and xxii,
12-16, any one will see that a considerable time elapsed between
Paul’s receiving sight and being baptized, which was occupied
by Ananias in instructing him respecting the “ will of God,”
of which baptism formed a part; and as Paul “ tarried ” or
delayed, Ananias said to him “Why tarriest thou?—without
delay have thyself baptized.” (De Wittt) What resemblance
there is between sprinkling and washing I know not: Have
thyself immersed, Paul, and wash away thy sins, does give sense
to the passage. Conybeare and Howson, in their Life of Paul, say
“He was baptized, and the rivers of Damascus became to him
more than all the waters of Judah.” But Mr, Thorn adheres to
the notion that Paul was sprinkled immediately, and on the
spot!
The eunuch, he adds, “ was certainly baptized in the same
way: Was it likely this black gentleman could shift his clothes
in his open carriage before Philip and his servants, or be dipped
naked, or ride on his way rejoicing, dripping with water ? For
an old Minister of the Gospel to ask such questions in such lan-
guage, is strange, “ passing strange !” Was the eunuch a black
gentleman ? He is considered by many scholars to have been of
the seed of Abraham. Had he servants with him ? We are not told
he had ; but if he had, and was ashamed to be immersed in obe-
dience to God’s command before them, probably he politely requested
them as a favour to move on, and not to “ gaze” at him! As for
dressing before Philip, it was unnecessary ; for “ when they were
come out of the water the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip,
and the eunuch saw him no more,” —consequently he had this
desert place to dress in, without “ a curious friend gazing at him."
The case of the jailer is also commented upon. “ His house
means himself, his wife and children ! To take a delicate wife,
with little babes, out of bed at midnight, and plunge them in


cold water in the dark, is too difficult of belief.” If so, it is not
required! Was it a common thing for Roman prisons to present
such pictures of domestic bliss as wives and babies? No! the
jailers generally belonged to a class dispensing with marriage—a
low, rough, unfeeling set of men, their natures qualifying them
for their office. That the Philippian jailer was not over kind,
we learn by the manner in which he treated Paul and Silas—
Acts xvi. 24, The prison contained prisoners in addition to Paul
and Silas, and it is reasonable to suppose more than one man was
required to look after them. The jailer’s household may have
consisted of prison-keepers, who, like their overseer, would rush out
of the house, and so hear the word spoken by Paul. But, admit
the existence of wife and children, it was the earthquake that
called them out of their bed at midnight, and out of their house
also ; and, as Paul and Silas had been brought out of prison,
they all heard the wox’d, believed it, were baptized, and returned
to the house rejoicing. “ Philippi was founded by Alexander, in
a place called, from its numerous streams, the place of fountains.”
I have no doubt but there was abundance of water within and
without the prison, in addition to the bath and well mentioned
by “ Alford.”
This part of the pa*nphlet is an appeal—not to the reason or
to the conscience of man, but to the flesh. The writer says—
"lt would have been anything hut humane and Christianlike to have
immersed Paul after three day’s fasting.” Why this only shows
the importance of baptism as a part of Christianity, which is for
the crucifying of the flesh. I fear this part of Christianity is not
understood by Mr. Thorn ; and if he walks after the flesh he will
reap corruption,
OtSr Lord’s Baptism.—Mr. Thorn says—“ Our blessed Re-
deemer was undoubtedly baptized by sprinkling .” Why ? “As
our Lord does not appear to have had a second suit of apparel!"
Had dipping been the mode, he must have been dipped either
naked before the multitude, or in his clothes ; exposing his sacred
person to the public gaze, or retiring from the scene dripping
with the waters of the Jordan, Putting all these circumstances
together, it is manifest that Christ was not baptized by dipping,
but simply by pouring or sprinkling.” Conclusive reasoning,
upon imaginary premises ! I meet it thus : Ist. —No multi-
tude was present when our Lord was baptized. John and he
were alone, as far as Scripture teaches; and the man who adds to
the word of God shall have the plagues of the book added to
him, 2nd. —As soon as he ascended out of the water, he was led
by the Spirit into the wilderness, the dripping scene not being
open to public gaze. 3rd.—Every Jew had two suits of apparel, a
tunic, and an outer garment — see “ Jahn’s Arch. Bib.” Our
Lord had a second suit of apparel. “ The soldiers took his gar-


merits and parted them, and cast lots for his vesture.” 4th.—Our
Lord’s sacred person was exposed to public gaze upon the cross.
His friends and his foes gazed upon him,, but he “ despised the
shame.” “To the pure all things are pure ; to the unbelieving
there is nothing pure : their minds and consciences are defiled.”
The grand argument is reserved for the end, and is as follows
—“We have not the slightest intimation in the New Testament
history that the baptizer ever laid hold of or even touched a single
candidate for Baptism.” Be it so; we have not the slightest
intimation in the New Testament history that the crucifiers of
Christ and the malefactors ever laid hold of or even touched one of
them —therefore they were not crucified. This is Winchester
logic—the new style of reasoning! “ They crucified Christ,” is
intimation enough to men of common sense that some
persons laid hands on Him. And they immersed men
and women in obedience to Christ, is intimation enough to
those who wish to obey Him that hands were laid upon them.
To follow Mr. Thorn through all his indecent and copied ob-
jections (for he has taken the most of them from Mr. Ewing,
only using language more offensive) I cannot afford time. I
must therefore unite them. He asks if it is likely the multi-
tudes would walk from the Jordan to Jerusalem, 25 miles, in
their wet clothes, dripping all the way ? I answer no ; it is not
likely, unless they immersed themselves half a dozen times on
the way to keep their clothes wet. In this they might pos-
sibly have reached Jerusalem “ dripping .” Again he speaks of
persons catching colds and coughs walking in their wet clothes.
I have heard of persons catching cold sitting in—not walking in
—wet clothes. Again, he speaks of the cruelty and danger of
immersing persons having a tendency of blood to the
have always considered the heart the proper place for the blood
to tend to. “ The most serious physical mischief attends immer-
sion.” Indeed, immersion is the cause of all the ills flesh is heir
to —death included !
Then there are the difficulties connected with suits of clothes,
shifting clothes and robing-rooms. “ These are insuperable objec-
tions to the dipping system .” But were there no “ willows by the
water-courses?—no reeds?—no rushes? Mr. Thorn resembles
Gibbon, who, when he visited the Holy Land and saw the bar-
renness thereof, denied the Scripture account of its fruitfulness.
I can only recommend Mr. Thorn and all who think as he does,
to read “ Bayard’s Nineveh,” and they may learn a few things
respecting immersions, and the chaste though simple customs of
the East. That the banks of streams are thickly wooded with
oleander, pine trees, olives, almonds, tall and waving reeds,
fifteen feet high, may be learnt from Mr. Buckingham and
others.


I have dwelt far too long on this part of the subject; but as it
is Mr. Thorn’s stronghold against immersion and believers’
baptism, I considered it necessary for the sake of those who are
influenced by such objections, to examine them more fully than
they deserve. I trust my candid readers will admit that the
“ insuperable difficulties ” against immersion, as far as examined,
have been removed.
We now turn to the more important part of the subject, viz.—
the Theological part; under which we may consider :
Ist. The command to be Baptized.
2nd. What is signified by being Baptized ?
3rd. Who are at liberty to be Baptized ?
4th. What is derived by being Baptized ?
Now, before entering upon these topics, I beg to accept of Mr,
Thorn’s terms, which are : That if the Baptists can establish the
fact, by any kind of evidence, that but one person was immersed,
I am prepared to admit that all were baptized in the same
manner.
Take the Baptism of our Lord : “ Jesus came from Galilee unto
Jordan, to John, to be baptized of him." And Jesus was baptized by
John in Jordan. And Jesus when he was baptized, went up straight-
way out of the water. Now Mr. Thorn admits that the word
means to immerse, only he contends that it is also used
in the sense of sprinkle. I offer the following as a correct
rendering of the Greek. Mark i, 9, 10, 11; And it came to pass in
those days Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee, and was immersed
by John in the Jordan ; and immediately rising up out of the water
(as a fish out of the sea) or (as seed out of the ground.) These
are senses given by Prof. Robinson in which the word
is ulfed. To ascend is the general sense, as the Lord ascended
from Olivet. “ Jesus was immersed by John in the Jordan, and
immediately rising up out of the water ” (as a fish rises up or is
brought up,) Rob. Lex, —“ he beheld the Heavens parted, and
the Spirit like a Dove descending upon Him. And there came a
voice from Heaven saying, Thou art my beloved Son, in whom
lam well pleased. And immediately the Spirit sendeth Him
forth into the desert.” A legitimate idea from the passage, I
think, is that Jesus rose up out of the water, probably without
touching the bank, and was led or driven by the Spirit into the
wilderness. Whether this idea be admitted or not, the obvious
meaning is that Jesus was placed under the surface of the water,
and rose up, coming out of the water. Our Lord’s baptism
I regard as one clear case that baptism was by immersion ;
and. I trust “ my intelligent and candid readers will think so too.”
As Christ was baptized, i. e. immersed in Jordan, and came up out
of the water to receive the Holy Ghost, so let believers do like-
wise. To suppose Christ poured upon standing in the Jordan,


does not remove the “ dripping clothes difficulty," while it creates
a class of difficulties Mr, Thorn’s “ round-about logic labour ” could
never remove. Immersion solves any difficulty of a real
character.
First. —The command to be baptized ; Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature ; he that believeth
and is baptized shall be saved. In addition to this the living
command embodied in the life of Christ calls upon us to fulfil
all righteousness. The command given to the Apostles was im-
perative and explanatory. “Go ye into all the world—preach
the Gospel to every creatui’e.” This is imperative. “He that
believes the Gospel and is baptized according to it, shall be
saved.” This is explanatory.
There is no dispute amongst Christians on the subject of be-
lieving the Gospel, but on the subject of being baptized on be-
lieving there is. To decide this point it is necessary to understand
the meaning of the terms employed in the commission, “Go
preach, make disciples, baptize them, teach them to observe all
things whatsoever I have commanded you,” and you shall have my
presence always. The word used by our Lord to describe His will
in the matter of Baptism, is in one or other of its de-
rivatives. It is not to be supposed the Lord would use a word
the disciples understood not; their practice therefore will decide
the true meaning of it. Now their practice was to immerse : this
ought in all fairness to be admitted. The Church of Christ now
may not follow the Apostolic Church in everything pertaining to
faith and practice, and it may assign good reasons for some
changes; but it is the part of candour to admit that the Apostles
baptized by immersing. “ Samuel Taylor Coleridge, a theologian
and poet, and a philosopher of the highest order, cheerfully con-
ceded this point. Professor Charles Anthon, one of the most
distinguished Greek scholars in America, does the same. Philip
Doddridge, and many equally good men, have admitted that an-
ciently baptism was by immersion.” I have no space for giving
quotations largely, and so must refer the searcher after truth to
such works as Carson’s, Stovel’s, and Campbell’s, but espe-
cially to the Word of God itself, which is able to make all wise.
The Old Testament was given to man in Hebrew—a small part of
it in Chaldee. The New Testament was given to man in Greek
a small part of it in Hebrew, some suppose. We have then to
do with the Hebrew and the Greek.
Mr. Thorn takes the word bnto Tobol, and says in five Hebrew
Lexicons it is defined by ten distinct terms, none of which
have the idea of sprinkle in them. Remember ! according to
his own showing—yet he describes “ Naaman” as sprinkling a
diseased part of his body with the water of the Jordan. This is cer-
tainly open to some criticism, if on no other ground, on this—


that it contradicts the correctness of our English translation of
2 Kings, iv. 14, which reads, “ Then went he down and dipped
himself seven times in Jordan, according to the saying of the
Man of God.” This translation is correct, and every Hebrew
scholar admits it. I refer the reader to “ Gesenius’s Heb. Lex.”
He translates 2 Kings iv. 14, and gives a list of passages in
which Tabal occurs, and gives as the only meanings of the word
“to dip, to dip in, to immerse. The word im Zabah, used
in the case of Nebuchadnezzar mentioned by Mr. Thorn, means
first to dip in, to immerse, to dye, to tinge”; in the Ithpael,
to be wet, moistened, in the sense of changing the thing
wet or moistened, which was certainly the case with the Baby-
lonian King—see Dan, iv., 33.
Mr. Thorn says the Baptists give forty-two meanings to the
word /3 the correctness of which I question ? However,
only one of the forty-two is to sprinkle; and this one he takes as
the true meaning, leaving the forty-one, which have more or
less of the idea of immerse in them. As regards the meaning of
in classic usage, in all instances where an examination
has been made by competent scholars who have not been
biassed by a creed, the result has been uniformly in favor of
immerse, dip, or dip into. The general agreement among lexico-
graphers such as Scapula, Stephens, S nicer, Schrevellius,
Hedericus, Greenfield, Bretschneider, Robinson, and Liddle
and Scott, prove that /3utttw and pam mean to immerse.
in thirty-six ancient and modern versions of the Scrip-
tures, has been rendered by words equivalent to immerse. Six
of these versions belong to the second and third centuries.
Ten of them were completed before the close of the 9th century,
and twenty since. Thus, in thirty-six spoken and different
languages into which the word of God has been translated, the
word used in place of y3«7rT<'t> means to immerse or dip. See
Camp.
The most distinguished Reformers, such as Luther, Calvin,
Beza, Melancthon, and Tyndale, have expressed their unhesi-
tating belief in favor of immerse being the true meaning of the
word baptize. Calvin says : “ The word baptize signifies to im-
merse and it is certain immersion was the practice of the early
Church.” Institutes 6,4, 6,15, I could mention among scholars
the names Witsius, L’Enfant, Piscator, Zanchius, Abp. Seeker,
Stackhouse, Burkitt, Wesley, Taylor, Grotius, Castalis, Usher,
G. Campbell, Macknight, and many others, who all say, that
anciently, baptism was administered by immersion.
To sum up this class of evidence I will quote the words of
Professor Stuart of Andover. He says Bapto and Baptize mean
to dip, plunge, or immerge “ All lexiogrciphers and critics of any
note are agreed in this.” Bib. Rep. 1833, p. 298. Some may say,


how is it that so many among those great and learned men lived
and died without being immersed. I cannot answer why ; still
there is the fact, that many know the Master’s will who do it not.
To Him they shall give an account. I know Mr. Ewing of
Glasgow said, “ Baptism in its primary and radical sense is to
cover with water, to plunge ; yet he wrote against believers being
covered with water. How can Pmdobaptists account for this ? and
how is it so many in the present day know and do not ?
The use of certain prepositions is referred to by Mr. Thorn,
but as he really seems to have no respect for prepositions it is
not worth while arguing their merits with him. He says there
are two modes of baptizing observed in this country (England).
Ist Dipping the person under water, and 2nd applying water to
the person, and adds, being in the water and under it are different
things. Quite so ! To be in Christ and to be under Him are
different things, and to be in a pulpit, and to be under it are
different things, so to be in water and under it are different things.
The Baptist dips in water not under it. Mr. T. may say, oh !
I meant under the surface of the water. Of course you did, and
you should have said so. I only mention this to shew the
precision with which you use prepositions, and how vain it is to
discuss their merits with you.
Again he speaks about the modes of baptizing, and says to
sprinkle is to baptize. And pray what is the mode of sprinkle?
the thing has no mode, it expresses itself; and so with immer-
sion, its mode is in itself.
Church History. Under this head, Mr. Thorn says, there is no
proof of dipping in a single instance for a great number of years
after the death of the latest apostle. Was there any before ?
Neither does it appear that dipping was deemed essential to
Christian Baptism during the first four centuries or at any
subsequent period. A citation or two will prove this, “ Justin
Martyr, about the year 130, distinctly compares the sprinklings of the
Gentiles with Christian Baptism .” The thing insinuated here is
that Justin considered the sprinklings of the Gentiles equal to
Christian Baptism, which is not the fact. The passage runs
thus, “He who has been enlightened is immersed by the
authority of Jesus Christ, who was crucified by the command of
Pontius Pilate and on the authority of the Holy Ghost, who
through the Prophets and Apostles proclaimed all the things that
relate to Jesus, And observe, this same immersion the demons
(gods) having heard proclaimed, procured (commanded) that
those entering their temples should sprinkle themselves and
those approaching them should perform libations and offerings of
incense, but they also procured that departing they should be
perfectly trashed or immersed before they entered to sit down at
the sacred rites within.” This is the passage referred to, does


it teach that Justin considered the sprinkling of the worshippers
of idols equal to immersion ? But if it does, it also teaches that
the gods did not, for when they heard of immersion they gave up
sprinkling and commanded their worshippers to be immersed.
Again I quote from Justin’s writings;—“But the manner, we
having been made anew through Christ, devote ourselves to God,
I will narrate. If such there be as believe the things spoken
and taught by us are true, obey them and profess that they will
live as these things require, they fast and pray and beseech from
God pardon of all their sins, we fasting and praying with them.
After that they are led by us to where there is water, and are born
again in that kind of new birth by which we ourselves were born
again. For upon the name of God the Father and Lord of all,
and of Jesus Christ our Saviour, and of the Holy Ghost, the im-
mersion in water is performed, because the Christ hath also said
except a man be born again he cannot enter into the kingdom of
heaven.”—Justin Martyr’s Works — Paris Ed., page 93, 94.
Cyprian is next introduced, and made to say “ that sprinkling
is sufficient instead of immersion.” This shows that immersion
was considered the true baptism in his time, and that he only
thought sprinkling sufficient instead of immersion. This may
be truth, but it is not the whole truth. Cyprian said “in the
case of sick children and penitents in affliction sprinkling is suf-
ficient instead of immersion that they may not perish.” Cyprian
believed that the Holy Spirit was conveyed in baptism, hence his
anxiety about sickly children and afflicted persons.
Augustine is quoted as saying, “ the person to be baptized is
sprinkled with water, or dipped in it,” i. e. “ if sickly, sprinkled ;
if well, dipped.” How the citations given by Mr. T. prove that
dipping was not deemed essential to Christian baptism during the
first four centuries or at any subsequent period, I leave men’s
common sense to say.
The Eev. William Thorn writes under the idea, that his
readers are either too ignorant or too idle to examine the author-
ities and statements he so daringly adduces and makes. The
testimony of the church as far as it goes, is in favor of immersion.
Tertullian, Cyprian’s master, says “ The person to be baptized is
let down into the water, and with a few words said, is dipped."
Speaking to some who wished to be baptized in the Jordan, he
says, “ there is no difference between those whom John dipped
in the Jordan and those whom Peter dipped in the Tiber. In aqua
mergimur .” We are immersed in the water, pool, river, or fountain.
Neander His. Chr. Bel. 9. “ Baptism was originally administered
by immersion. An exception was made only in the case of sick
persons.”—“ Moshiem’s Eccl. Hist," Ist century. “The sacra-
ment of baptism was administered in places appointed and pre-
pared for the purpose, and was performed by immersion of the


whole body.”—Waddington’s Hist, of the Church.” “ The
ceremony of immersion the oldest form of baptism was performed in
the name of the Trinity.” I could go on adding similar testi-
mony, ad infinitum, but the above may suffice to show that the
history of the church is (not) “ in favor of the uninterrupted
baptism of infants or of sprinkling.” Here I charge Mr. Thorn
with unfaithfulness. He has misrepresented Justin Martyr and
Cyprian, making them say what they never meant or believed.
He has shown his ignorance of geography, history, and the Word of
God, and shall such an one be heard further ? No.
But 2nd, what is signified by baptism ? The apostle Peter calls
baptism a figure. What does it figure ? Ist Purity. Cleansed
by the washing of water through the Word. 2nd. Death. As
many of you as were baptized into Christ were baptized into his
death. 3rd. A Burial. Buried with Him by baptism. 4th. A
Resurrection. Raised again to walk in newness of life.
Under the doctrinal part of the subject—for, as faith is a doc-
trine of the heart, baptism is of the life—Mr. Thorn triumphs
somewhat, and says : —“ The persons to whom Paul wrote did
not bury their dead, but burnt them to ashes ; hence the entire
argument founded on these passages, in favour of dipping,
vanishes in a moment.” Look at the fallacy here. The Romans
and the Colossians are represented as burning their dead to
ashes. Account then for the catacombs, Mr. Thorn ? They are
also represented as having no knowledge of any kind of burial
save their own. Did they not know of Christ’s burial. If not,
how could they be saints ? The burial of Christ is part of the
Gospel—and it is of Christ’s burial Paul draws his analogy.
Then Mr. Thorn adds, but the reference is defective, for his
precious body was “ carried into a room, hewn out of a rock, and
laid upon a side bench!" Paedobaptists never draw upon the
imagination? No, not even to the contradiction of Scripture
truth. The “ Son of Man shall be three days and three nights
in the heart of the earth.” Christ died, according to the Scrip-
tures, and was buried, according to the Scriptures, and he who
denies the burial of Christ, denies the Gospel. Christ came out
of the grave as he came out of the water. “ God raised him up."
He did not step down from a side bench. “ Dorcas was carried
up stairs and laid upon a bed ; ” was that her last resting place?
Had the Jews no burial grounds? Abraham bought no field to
bury his dead in ? No Potter’s field was bought to bury strangers
in ? He must be sadly at a loss for valid evidence in aid of
sprinkling who seizes on such allusions (illusions) to uphold his
practice. We are crucified with Christ, and we are buried with
him in a similar sense. Why sprinkle then ? “We are crucified
with Christ.” Admitted —“ but not by baptism.” “We are dead


with him by baptism,”—“ we are buried with him by baptism,”
—“ we are risen with him by baptism,”—but we are never said
to be crucified with him by baptism. We are crucified with him
by the law. I, through the law, am crucified with Christ. The
law was the cause of his crucifixion, or death ; it was also the
cause of mine. “1 am dead to the law, I live, but not I, Christ
liveth in me.” I am crucified, dead through the law. This
“ crucified ” argument against baptism is unworthy the attention
of thoughtful men.
The Baptism in the Red Sea. This is understood literally by
some Baptists and Psedobaptists, one saying they were enveloped
in the cloud and in the sea, the other saying they were sprinkled
by the spray. But Paul is speaking about spiritual things, spi-
ritual meat and spiritual drink, and spiritual baptism. Of course
there was literal meat—“the manna,” —literal drink from the
rock—and literal baptism. But these were figures of good things
to come—not the very image of the things—but as near as figures
could make them. It is well known to what the bread refers
and the water also. The baptism was the baptism of obedience
unto Moses. Before this, any Jew could easily have turned again
into Egypt, but when once he passed the lied Sea a great diffi-
culty was put in the way of his returning to the flesh pots of
Egypt. With Moses as his leader he must go on unto obedience.
Is there no figure to Christian baptism here? No point in which
they agree? No putting on Christ by baptism, and rising out of
the water to keep all his commands, and walk in newness of life ?
I may be mistaken, but I think I can se'e “ whereunto the like
figure immersion saves us from turning again to the weak and
beggarly elements of the world.”
The Baptism of the Holy Spirit. “ The Holy Spirit is said to
be poured out, hence baptism is by pouring'' This argument
takes greatly with some persons, because it is specious. Well,
the Holy Spirit is said to come upon every one born again as the
blowing of the wind, hence baptism is by blowing. The Holy
Spirit is said to be a well of water springing up, hence baptism is
by springing up. The Holy Spirit is said to be like a dove, a river,
fire ; hence baptism is like a dove, river, fire. Can any man,
except under a cloud of thick mental darkness, affirm that the
Holy Spirit is really any one, or all of these things ? A great
error lurks here. The Spirit of God is not material, and the
pouring out is not literal. The language is figurative, and just
as men understand the figures do they comprehend the thing
figured. Material baptism is baptism in water. Spiritual bap-
tism is baptism in the Spirit. The body immersed in water
represents the soul immersed in the Spirit—the body subject to the
influence of water, the soul subject to the influence of the Spirit—


the whole outer man is possessed by the water—the whole inner
man possessed by the Spirit, filled by the Spirit as a vessel is
filled by immersing it in water.
In concluding my remarks upon the pamphlet under review,
I have one or two matters to note.
Mr. Thorn pleases himself with the idea that the majority of
persons decide against the dipping system by adopting the oppo-
site mode. Well, truth does not always lie on the side of the majo-
rity. But if, as he says, he has read all that has been written on the
side of immersion, how is it that he makes such a statement, when
Mr. Campbell has shown by a series of calculations that during the
ages of Christianity for every one sprinkled, seven have been im-
mersed. This argument is not urged in proof of immersion, but
only to show that it stands good sevenfold against the sprinkling
system. Again, can three persons, or even two, in every five
belonging to the Peedobaptist section of the Church of Christ,
prove by valid evidence that they have been sprinkled ? Taking
the statistics furnished by City Missions, Churches' Registers, and
Census returns, and comparing them together, it will appear that
multitudes are never sprinkled. It is uncharitable to suppose that
they are all lost, and unreasonable that all the saved from among
them, join Baptist churches only, and as Psedobaptists seldom
sprinkle any but the children of Baptists and converted Jews in
manhood, it is but too evident that many persons are in churches
who have never been baptized in any way. My own experience
has taught me that comparatively few can show that they have
been sprinkled. I mention this, that ministers believing that
baptism is a Divine ordinance may look into this matter when
admitting members into their churches.
The language of Mr. Thorn’s pamphlet is very unbecoming
sacred subjects. He speaks of the indelicacy and indecency of
immersion ; represents its advocates as enemies to public health,
as placing human life in the most imminent peril ; and then asks,
“if it is conceivable that the blessed and benevolent Jehovah should
have instituted such an ordinance for ‘ high-born ladies,' and persons
of all ranks, sexes, and lands ?” This is mere trifling and
unworthy of notice. Is Mr. Thorn aware that under the Old
Testament dispensation the ordinance of circumcision was
observed ?
In the foregoing, I have not dwelt upon the fact that the Greek
Church, with its many millions, lias never given up the practice
of immersion, nor that the Koran enjoins it; nor have I enume-
rated the many conveniences there were for practising immersion
in the brook Kedron and the pool of Bethesda, as mentioned by
Maundrell : nor to the public baths all over Judea, nor to
the baptistries of ancient renown ; not even that at St. Sophia,
or the famous Lateran, or the Baptistry of Ravenna, or of Floi’ence;


nor to the Kings and Queens that have been immersed, from
Elizabeth back to Constantine, nor to Poets such as Milton, or
Christians such as Bunyan. Nor have I mentioned reviews such
as the Edinburgh, or appealed to “ Tholuck” to establish the well-
known fact that the candidate in the primitive Church was im-
mersed.
Nor have I drawn offensive pictures of baby sprinklings. No, I
have left all these. I now advise my Christian friends to read
the History of Infant Sprinkling, which, by the way, is not to be
found in the Bible from Genesis to Revelation. There, no case
of sprinkling with water is found. True, clean water is men-
tioned, but clean water was— “ Water-blood and the ashes of a
heifer, which sprinkling the unclean cleansed ceremonially.
There were many cleansings under the law, many baptisms.
But under the Gospel there is but one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism. Although some may have Lords many, and Bap-
tisms many, they find them not in the perfect law. It is
strange that if men, women and children were baptized by
the Apostles, no mention should be made of the children. This
cannot be an accidental omission, for the Apostles wrote under
the direction of the Holy Spirit; it is therefore intentional, and
teaches that no children were baptized by them. As no authority
for Infant baptism or sprinkling is found in the Bible—where is it
found ? In the writings of men. “ The first law for sprinkling
was obtained from Pope Stephen 11., a.d. 753, by the monks of
Cressy. In 1311, a Council held at Ravenna, the Pope’s license
was obtained to sprinkle—after which it became general.
Sprinkling was introduced into Scotland by Knox, on his return
from Geneva. From Scotland it made its way into England, in
the days of Elizabeth. The council of Trent decreed that who-
soever should say “ the Church of Rome has not the true doctrine
of Baptism, let him be accursed.” And it was enacted in 1662
“ that all persons refusing to have their children baptized by a
“ lawful minister,” —a minister appointed by law—shall be amerced
(fined) in two thousand pounds of tobacco. This statute made
sprinkling orthodox and popular I! Since Acts of Councils, and
Licenses of Popes, made sprinkling scriptural!—the Baptists
have been “ cursed,” everywhere spoken against, but their
“ Martyrology ” proclaims “ there is a future for them,”
3rd. Who are at liberty to attend to the “ one Baptism ? ”
Believers only ! “If thou believest with all thine heart thou
mayest.” “Without faith it is impossible to please God.”
“ Whatsoever is not of faith is sin.” In Christianity everything
is intensely personal—no one believes by proxy. Infant baptism
imposes a religion upon the subjects of it before they know any-
thing of its character, deprives them of the privilege of examining
and choosing for themselves how they should show their alle-


giance to their Maker. Thus the right of private judgment is
taken away—at least it is only after the thing is done, its right-
ness, or wrongness, can be considered by the subject. There is
a species of despotism in this. To force a religion on young or
old, however good, and that by physical force, is the very essence
of popery. The principle is—what the parents believe the chil-
dren shall do, be it right or wrong in itself. Hence Psedobaptist
churches have their increase. Yet Mr. Thom says “ the children
of Baptists are mostly the pious abettors of the system practised
by their beloved parents .” If they are—it is from choice, not by
compulsion—Christianity is a reasonable service—a reason may
be given for every part of it. What reason can be given for
sprinkling infants ?—valid reason ? None. Hence it is no part
of Christianity. What reason can Calvinistic Predobaptists, who
believe in an “ election according to grace,” give for indiscrimi-
nate and universal sprinkling ? None! The most that can be
said in its favour is, that it is prudential,—that in a professedly
Christian country some service shall be observed in relation to
children. Well then—do as Hannah did, pray for your children,
train them up in the right way, and God will bless your labours
in the salvation of your youth.
Fourthly, the good derived through baptism.
Ist, Knowledge. “If any man will do his will, he shall know
of the doctrine.”
2nd, Peace. “ The answer of a good conscience towards God,”
which is great peace,
3rd, Eeward. “In keeping His commandments there is great
reward.”
4th, Friendship with Christ. “Ye are my friends if ye do
whatsoever I command you.” And, as his commands are right
concerning all things, they are esteemed so by the loving Chris-
tian. Be he “ High born,” or low born, his language is—
“ Through floods and flames if Jesus lead
I’ll follow where he goes,
‘ Hinder me not ’ shall he my cry,
Though Earth and Hell oppose.”
I have no space left for discussing the subject of circumcision,
“Those who desire to be under the law ” may be assured “that
Christ shall profit them nothing.”
The arguments for infant sprinkling founded upon the repre-
sentations of Baptisms on the vestibules and domes of ancient
churches may be considered weighty by some persons, and I
cheerfully accord to them the whole weight, which is nothing,
there not being a single representation of a “baby baptism .”
Most of them are representations of Christ standing in the
Jordan receiving baptism from John by pouring water out of a
shell on his head. One represents Constantine the Great being


immersed in a hath. Another represents a Heathen King and
Queen in a bath at Chigi, with a Priest standing as if taking aim
at the King's head with a pitcher.
Such testimony comes hundreds of years too late to be of any
weight as to Apostolic Baptism.
Will the candid reader consider the following questions:—
Ist. Is Baptism an act of religious worship ? Yes, for it is a
Divine appointment.
2nd. How is acceptable worship performed ? “In spirit and
in truth.”
3rd. What is the necessary qualification for all parts of
worship ? Faith, “ without faith it is impossible to please God.”
4th. Can infants worship God 1 No, they have no faith,
“ how can they believe in Him of whom they have not heard.”
6th. If infants are entitled to baptism, are they not also
entitled to partake of the Lord’s Supper ? Yes.
6th. Is Baptism performed on infants according to the
expressed will of God ? No, the Israelites “ caused their
children to pass through the fire to Moloch,” a thing God never
commanded, and persons now cause children to be sprinkled,
a thing God never commanded.
I have no personal acquaintance with the Eev. W. Thorn.
His pamphlet having sown discord among brethren under my
care, and for the present terminating a good work, I have been
urged by a sense of duty to answer it. He speaks of his “ Bap-
tist brethren (whom he most highly esteems for their many
Christian virtues,”) one of which is to deny the depravity of human
nature —“ the doctrine of immersion baptism ” being “ directly
adverse to the dreadful depravity of human nature.” Such a
species of compliment I decline, and, in return, desire that “ the
baptism of repentance ” may be given to him, that the above and
all other calumnies may be forgiven him.
“ Christian Friends, have you been born again ? Have you
dedicated yourselves by baptism to Him whose you are and
whom you ought to serve ? Then hold fast the beginning of
your confidence, firm unto the end.”
Wilson & Mackinnon, Printers, 78, Collins Street East.
26
