

STRING, AND OTHER FORMS OF STRAND:
BASKETRY-, WOVEN BAG-, AND NET-WORK.
1901.
QUEENSLAND.
HOME SECRETARY’S DEPARTMENT, BRISBANE.
NORTH QUEENSLAND ETHNOGRAPHY:
Bulletin No . I.
JANUARY, 1901.
BY
WALTER E. ROTH , B.A., M.R.C.S., Etc.,
(Late Demy of Magdalen College, Oxford)
THE NORTHERN PROTECTOR OF ABORIGINALS, QUEENSLAND.
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT BY COMMAND.
BRISBANE:
BY AUTHORITY: EDMUND GREGORY, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.
1901.
C. A. 11—1901.




PREFACE.
Owing to the rapidly-increasing .quantity of scientific material which, in accordance with the Home
Secretary’s instructions, has been collected since ray appointment as Northern of Aboriginals,
it has been deemed advisable to publish, in the form of Bulletins, those of my reports which may be
considered fairly complete in themselves and up to date so far as the subject matter with which
they deal.
By the issue of two or three such Bulletins annually, I trust that within the next eight or ten
years the ethnography and anthropography of the North Queensland aboriginal will be a little better
understood by the general public than they are at present.
1 am deeply indebted to the Hon. J. F. Gr. Foxton for all the kindly encouragement invariably
received from him during the prosecution of my scientific labours : it is due to his wishes, as
Ministerial head of the Department, that these researches of mine are thus now being made available to
the public.
In this present'article, when dealing with Basketry, I have been obliged to introduce certain
W oven Bag-work coming from Southern Queensland, at Stradbroke Island, etc. This inclusion has been
rendered imperative in order the better to explain the progressive stages in the origin of manufacture of
the Northern articles.
WALTER E. ROTH
Cooktown, Ist January, 1901.




INDEX.
Section. Page.
1. String, etc., derived from Animal Products ... ... ... ... ... ... 7
2,3. Manufacture of Human-Hair Twine ... ... ... ... ... ••• 7
4. Opossum- and Kangaroo-Hair Twine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
5. Kangaroo, etc., Tendon ... ... ... ... ... ••• ... ••• 8
6. String, etc.,derived from Vegetable Products ... ... ... ... ... ... 8-10
7. Manufacture of Fibre-Twine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 10
8. Methods of Preserving Continuity in the Twine, etc. ... ... ... ... ... 10,11
9. Colouration of the Twine, etc. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
10. Procedures in which String, etc., is employed:—... ... ... ... ... ... 11
11. Plait-work ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... H
12. Chain-work ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11,12
13. “Over-knotting” ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
14. Fringing ... ... .... ... ... ••• ... ... ... ... 12
15. Winding ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
16. Lacing ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
17. Top-stitching, Over-casting ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12
18. Basketry-, Woven Bag-, and Net-work;— ... ... ... ... ... ... 12,13
19. (a) Made with One Continuous Strand: ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
Basal Strand, straight ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
20. i. “ Simple loop” pattern ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
21. ii. “Loop and Twist” pattern ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
22. iii. “ Hour-glass” pattern ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 13
23. iv. “Netting-stitch” pattern ... ... ... ... ... ... 13,14
24. Basal Strand, circular ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
25. i. “ Simple loop ” pattern ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
26. ii. “Netting-stitch” pattern ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
27. (b) Made with Two Continuous Strands: ... ... ... ... ... ... 14
No Basal Strand. “Simple loop” Pattern ... ... ... ... 14
28. One Basal Strand, circular. “ Simple loop” Pattern ... ... ... 14
29. Several Basal Strands, straight. “ Chain-twist,” “ Warp and Weft” ... 14,16
30. (c) Made with One Continuous and One Non-Continuous Strand ... ... 15
31. (d) Made with One Non-Continuous Strand ... ... ... ... ... 16




STRING, AND OTHER FORMS OF STRAND: BASKETRY-,
WOVEN BAG-, AND NET-WORK.
1. String, etc., derived from Animal Products.— The binding and tying materials
derived from animal products include human-, opossum-, and kangaroo- hair twine: kangaroo-tail,
snake-neck, and emu-leg tendon.
2. The manufacture of human-hair twine as practised on the Murehead and Musgrave
rivers, where the article is known as menangan, may be described as follows : —The spindle ( ng-gdi-aja )
is about 8 in. long, and made from a piece of grass-stem, etc., for “handle,” a “hook” of similar
material being attached to its extremity by a piece of string, the “ spindle-string,” the free end of which
passes over the fork (PI. 1.1). The hair, which has been cut off short, goes through no preparatory
processes, beyond having been packed up tightly and kept dry: it is now teased out, and —as large a
bundle as can comfortably be held there —enclosed in the palm of the left hand. The operator, usually but
not invariably a. woman, sits in the ordinary (for the female) squatting position. To make a commence-
ment, the thumb and forefinger of the left hand entwine the free end of the spindle-string with a small
pinch of hair stretched away (but not off) from the bundle in the palm. The fingers of the right hand
next roll the handle end of the spindle backwards, along the outer side of the lower thigh, at the same
time that the left-hand thumb rolls the free end of the spindle-string together with its entwined portion
of hair (stretched away from the bundle) forwards onto the forefinger. The idea of this rolling into
opposite directions is to increase the torsion of the newly-made strand as soon as the spindle-string and
hair are twisted into continuity. The correspondingly simultaneous movements of either hand, though
of course rapidly executed in the reality, may be analysed into their components parts as follows in the
accompanying illustrations. PI. 1.2 represents the positions assumed by the handle and spindle at
commencement of the roll; PI. I. 3 the positions, etc., at its conclusion ; while PI. 1.4 shows the thumb
and forefinger lifting up the needle-handle in order to place it in suitable position to re-commence with.
As the piece of hair between the left thumb and forefinger is thus used up, another pinch is again
stretched away from (but not off) the bundle which thus acts as “ feeder” to the newly-made hair-strand
that is always maintained in as taut a position as possible. It thus happens that, as the right hand keeps
on “ rolling,” and the left hand continues “ feeding,” the newly-made piece of hair-strand gets gradually
longer, while at the same time the pinch of hair held between the left thumb and forefinger becomes
correspondingly larger and “lumpier.” To prevent this latter contingency, the “lump” is every now and
again carefully stretched out into the required shape, the handle of the spindle, during this process,
being firmly gripped in the bend at the back of the knee : at the same time, to prevent the hair-strand
slipping off the spindle-tip onto which, owing to increase in length it has been wound, it is always
secured in the spindle-fork. The illustration PI. I. 5 shows the operator in the act of reducing the
“lump.” A succee ling length of hair-strand is similarly manufactured, wound, and similarly fixed on
the spindle until a sufficient, total length results, and here, wound round the spindle-tip in more or less
of a ball, it is temporarily left. A second spindle is now taken, and a second length of hair-strand
similarly manufacturod, wound, and fixed on it. These two strands are next intertwined to form the
permanent piece of hair-twine. By taking the free extremity of the hair-strand between the left thumb
and forefinger it is unwound from the one spindle, but at the same time tightly re-wound onto the left
wrist (PI. 1. 0), its spindle-string extremity being finally tied onto the free end of the hair-strand on the
other spindle. Where these two ends are knotted, the strand is looped once or twice round a stick planted
firmly into the ground (PI. I. 7), and the operator walks slowly backwards, unwinding, as she recedes, the
one hair-strand from her left wrist, and the other hair-strand from the spindle in her right hand As soon
as these two strands are finally unwound, their two ends are tied together so as to form what is now
practically one endless string. She next squats down, and taking the last-tied extremities fixes them by
means of the spindle-string onto her spindle, which she rolls, as at first, along the outer thigh with her
right hand, at the same time that she stretches bit by bit, directs and rolls in an opposite direction (/.<?.,
to that of the spindle), the two strands with her left. As the finished hair-twine is thus gradually brought
to a completion and corrcsp nidingly tightly wound onto the spindle-tip, she, of course, progressively
shifts her position forwards towards the stick. Prom off the spindle-tip it is ultimately unwound into a
tight ball. The two strands composing the completed hair-twine, thus twisted into similar direction, give
rise to great elasticity : on the other hand, this method of procedure, in conjunction with the short lengths
of hair employed, gives the twine a very rugged appearance. Hair-twine is employed here solely for
tying on or over the affected parts in case of sickness: e.g., headache, stomach-ache, etc.
3. At Boulia, Headingly, etc., the hair is cut off, throm by throm, cleaned, and teased out very
much after the manner of horse-hair for a cushion : in this condition it is loosely wound round a stick,
the whole then moistened, and when dry the “ skein” removed and put aside. It is then wound, bit by
bit, onto a spindle-fork which is not as yet rolled on the thigh, but twirled between the thumb and fore-
finger of the one hand raised, the other hand acting as “ feeder ” : from this spindle it is subsequently
unwound into the form of a tight ball. Two such balls are now taken and put into a vessel containing
water, and the extremities of each fixed onto a spindle-fork : these two hair-strands are guided over the
first and third fingers to between the tips of the third finger and thumb of the left hand (PI. I. 8), while
the spindle is rolled with the right hand, on the outer thigh, as already described. The resulting double-
twist hair-twine is now ready for use and putting up in skeins. The spindle as used here (the mmgko of
the Pitta-Pitta blacks) is a fine thin stick about 1 foot long and ■£in. diameter, with a short wooden barb
attached to its lower extremity by means of cement. Hair-twine in this district is made by men, and used
principally for their waist-belts.


4. Opossum and Kangaroo Hair-twine. — On the middle Palmer river, where the soft
down from the belly of the animal is employed, I watched a man making some opossum-twine with a spindle
on exactly the same lines as that already described with human-hair twine-manufacture on the Musgrave,
except that the motion of the spindle on the right thigh was reversed — i.e., instead of rolling the spindle
backwards, it was roiled forwards. These Koko-minni blacks speak of both opossum- and kangaroo- hair
twine as aln-jo : they u#e it for apron-belts, waist-belts, and a few other things. Opossum-string in the
Western dtstricts is, with very rare exceptions, both greased and raddled; the former material appears
to preserve it from the ravages of minute vermin,
5. Kangaroo-tendon is obtained from the freshly-killed animal : indeed, so much so, that,
other things equal, this is the first economic use to which the kangaroo is put A nick is cut, or a bite
made, as close as possible to the tip of the tail, and this portion steadily but firmly pulled off, the
tendinous threads or films coming away with it. These are dried, and so carried about (the piece of bone
with attached tendon may be seen often wrapped up in tea-tree bark for trade or ordinary transport
purposes) ; when required for use, the tendon is moistened in the lips. Very commonly used throughout
the North: especially for fixing the peg to the blade of the wommera, and for strengthening the morticing
of the spear-shaft into the butt, etc.
Snake-neck and emu-leg tendon is used in the Boulia districts.
6. String, etc., derived from Vegetable Products.—This is made from the stems
or complete plants, from the leaves, or from the bark.
As examples of the first series may be mentioned the Spinifex hirsufis made into the sieve-bags of
the middle Palmer, etc., the Panicum semialafum of the Pennefather baskets, and the Schoenus
melanostachys composing the Logan and Stradbroke Island dilly-bags. The Atherton wallaby-traps and
Cairns, etc., baskets are made from lengths of the split stems of the Onlamus, by a procedure somewhat as
follows: —A convenient portion of the stem, after being rubbed all round with a stick to remove the
“ prickles,” is clutched with the left hand : the adjoining ring of leaves is pulled sharply downwards and
simultaneously twisted with the right hand, the result being that both leaves and cortical layer of stem
are removed. More and more cane is thus dragged down and correspondingly cleaned. When a length
of some 12 or 14 feet has been so treated, it is cut away and split, the splitting being effected by biting
through with the teeth and pulling apart with the hands. Finer lengths may be split with the thumb-
nail, mussel-shell, etc.
The second series includes the JELoemodorum coccineum, the split leaves of which compose the basket
dilly-bags of Cooktown, etc. On the Bloomfield are to be met sieve-bags manufactured with fibre-strands
obtained from the perfoliate bases of the leaf-petioles of the Drymophlaeus Normanbyi, each fibre-stand
being pulled out separately and cleaned by being passed through the thumb- and finger- nails. Cabbage-
tree palm fibre-twine is made from the leaf-cortex of the Livisfona.
Coming to the third category, that derived from bark, string, etc., can be obtained from its
outer or inner portions. In the former class may bn mentioned the strips of tea-tree bark ( Melaleuca
sp.) used everywhere for binding, and of the Enfada scandens, for climbing purposes, at Mapoon. The
inner bark, however, generally from the trunk, occasionally from the roots, is that from which most of
the aboriginal fibre-twines are manufactured.
The following list comprises some of the plants whence string, strands, and cognate materials are
obtained : they have been identified for me by the Colonial Botanist, Mr. F. M. Bailey. Where known
to me, the native names are given.
N.B.—The abbreviations used may be represented thus :
Bid. = Bloomfield River. B’s H. = Butcher’s Hill (Boggy Creek).
C. Bd. = Cape Bedford. C. Gr. = Cape Grafton,
Ckn. = Cooktown. Penn. R. = Pennefather (Coen) River.
KYE = Koko-yellanji blacks to be found at B’s H. Bid.
KMI = Koko-minni ~ (Middle) Palmer River.
KUN = Kundara ~ Coast between mouths of Staaten and Nassau Rivers.
KYI = Koko-yimidir ~ Ckn., C. Bd., etc.
KRA = Koko-rarmul
KWA = Koko-wara
KLA = Koko-lama-lama
blacks Hinterland and coast of Princess Charlotte Bay.
KTJG = Kungganji blacks C. Gr.
NGG = Nggerikudi ~ Pennefather and Batavia Rivers.
NGI = Ngaikungo
NGA = Ngatchan
CHI = Chirpal
~ ... ... ... ... .. Atherton, etc.
MAL = Mallanpara ~ Lower Tully River.
Ahutilon otocarpnm, F. v. M.—The bark is peeled off and scraped clean with mussel-shells, used for
making strong netting for game. Cloncurrj. (E. Palmer.)
Acacia Jlavescens , A. Cunn.—Fibre employed for the twine used in making dilly-bags (Cape Bedford).
Manufactured from the bark (of the young trees), which is put into salt or brackish water for a
couple of hours, or rather until such time as it gets quite red, and then placed in the sun to dry.
It is next split into the necessary lengths and thicknesses required, and finally rolled. This fibre
is either employed wholly to weave the bag, or else (especially in the hour-glass patterns) woven
alternately with Malaisia or Sterculia fibre to produce a horizontally striped pattern. KYI,
C. Bd., dun-dul ; Ckn., tun-jol.
Acacia laiifolia , Benth.— Its fibre (see sect. 7) is used both for fishing-nets (Musgrave, etc.) and dilly-
bags. In the latter case, may be employed in conjunction with Livisfona, Malaisia, or Sterculia
fibre. KRA, be-wal; KWA, yii-a-bal; KYI, C. Bd,, dun-dul.
Acacia leptocarpa , A. Cunn.—Fibre obtained from the inner bark, which is washed in water before
being dried in the sun. KMI, i-w&-wal.


Acacia lysiphloea, P. y. M.—Made up in the dry from the inner bark, KMI, r-te.
Barringtonia racemosa, Gaudich.—Apron-belts are made of this material on the Musgrave, dilly-bags at
Cooktown.
Calamus australis, Mart. —“ Large lawyer-cane.” The stems are split for wallaby and fish traps, etc., in
the Cairns District.
Calamus caryotoides. Mart. —“ Small lawyer-cane.” Stems split for dilly-bags in Cairns District.
Careya australis, P. y. M.—The middle Palmer, Kokominni, blacks make from it the twine for tying up
the corpses in the troughs, the mourning strings, and the tassels of the women’s apron-belts. The
Pennefather R. aboriginals use it for fish-nets and women’s apron-belts.
Cochlospermum Oillivrcei, Benth.—Bark used by the Atherton blacks for making fibre-rope with. N GI,
CHI, Ath., pu-kuru ; NGA, Ath., ke-wan ; KMI, po-ata ; KUN, unggal.
Drymophloeus Normanbyi, P. v. M. —“ Black palm.” Por sieve-bags on the Bloomfield.
Entadn s n andens, Benth.—Bark strips for tree-climbing at Mapoon.
Ficus Cunninghamii, Miq.—A reddish twine, for the dilly-bags, made from the dried inner bark of the
roots: on the Pennefather.
Ficus fasciculata, F. v. M.—The twine is manufactured just like the Macaranga, and made into dilly-bags
on the Morehead and Starcke Rivers.
Ficus hispida, Linn. —From the inner bark. MAL, wo-o.
Ficus nitida. —Made in the dry, a white twine, for dilly-bags. NGG, ddrtalama.
Ficus orbicularis (var.).—lnner bark (dried) made into white string for the dilly-bags on the Pennefather
River.
Ficus platypoda, A. Cunu.—Fibre for dilly-bags.
Seemedorum coccineum, R. Br.—“ Blood-root.” The dried leaves are moistened just before use, when
they are split into thin strips with the finger-nails. Made up into dilly-bags, sieve-bag*. KRA,
timpar ; KYI, tan-dai; KMI, anto ; NGG, le-ana ; KYE, Bid., ma-tun.
Hardenhergia refusa, Benth. —At Cape Bedford the blacks skin the roots : they then bite and suck these
skins until they are dry, and ready for being unravelled, twisted, and rolled,
Seleocharis sphacelate, R. Br. —Stems are split for making the dilly-bags (mbai-a) on the Pennefather
River: in the same district the stems are employed whole for making mats.
Hibiscus panduriformis, Bunn.—The bark is peeled off, cleaned, and twisted into twine, and into bags
for carrying roots, game, etc. Mitchell R. (E. Palmer.)
Hibiscus tiliaceus, Linn. —Inner bark for making the ropes for the turtle-harpoon on the Pennefather
River, for fibre-twine at Cooktown. NGG, kornbrana ; KY"!, Ckn., maiu indur ; MA L, mancha —
for fishing lines, and tying bait on honks.
Imperata arundinacea, Cyr.—At Cape Bedford, the long leaves, dried in the sun, are put into fresh
water, and split. These lengths are made up into dilly-bags, which are called dirnbur, the name
of the plant itself. KYI, C. Bd., dirnbur.
Livistona australis, Mart. —At Princess Charlotte Bay, the young as-yet unopened leaf shoot is cut off as
low down and as cleanly as possible, and then smartly tapped upon a piece of log: the shoot thus
becomes unfolded, and can then be conveniently split along its natural folds. The outer cortex is
next stripped off from each septum of leaf by means of a finely-pointed ironwood pointer or pin, or
else with a sharp kangaroo-bone drill : these cortical strippings are, by a process to be subsequently
described, rolled in the dry, after exposure to the sun, neither sputum nor water being used.
Por fish-nets and dilly-bags, Princess Charlotte Bay and North generally.
Macaranga tanarius, Muell. Arg.—(See sect. 7.) Twine for dilly-bags, on the Musgrave. KRA,
do-angal.
Malaisia tortuosa, Blanco. —Pibre-twine (see sect. 7) for folding-purse nets among the Kokolamalama,
fishing-lines on the Pennefather River, for dilly-bags, apron-belts, and mops. Por native name,
see Mops.
Melaleuca leucadendron, Linn., and other species.—Strips of the bark for binding with—a very common
material for this.
Pandanus aguaticus, P. v. M. — The young leaves are split and woven into dilly-bags, sometimes after
steeping a little in water. (E. Palmer,)
Fandanus, sp. —Leaves split into various widths for armlets (plaited or plain), for plaitwork (Musgrave,
Cape Bedford, etc.), for dilly-bag handles (Pennefather, Moreton, etc.), for sieve-bags (Middle
Palmer Rner), for smoothing over the gum-cement attaching the barb to the spear (Cooktown),
for mat-cloaks (Pennefather River), etc.
Panicum leucophceum, 11. B. et K. —The fibrous under-part of the leaf is peeled off when young, and
twisted with the fingers as it is drawn off into a thread, and used to make twine. Cloncurry.
(E. Palmer.)
Panicum semialatum, R. Br.—Stalks used entire for baskets on the Pennefather River. NGG, 10-thi.
Panicum trachyrachis, Benth.—The fibre is peeled from the under surface of the leaf, by breaking it in
the middle across with a sudden jerk while held between the fingers, and drawing the threads
away. They are twisted up at once into twine. iMitchell R. (E, Palmer.)
Psoralea archerii, P. v. M.—The plant is pulled, soaked some hours in water, and left to dry, when the
bark peels and is kept for use, for cordage and strong twine. Cloncurry. (E. Palmer.)
Psoralea patens, A- Cunn. —The plant is collected into thick bundles, each tied round with string, the
whole being then immersed in water for several days, with rocks or stones on top to prevent them
being washed away. Its fine outer cortex is next stripped off the stems, one at a time, and beaten
up and teased out until such time as it becomes quite soft, when it is sun-dried and rolled into
skeins. The halo of the Pitta-Pitta (Boulia) natives.


Schoenus melanostachyus, R. Br. — Stems for the dilly-bags of Stradbroke Island.
Spinifex Tiirsutis, Labill. —Stems for dilly-bags on the Starcke River.
Sterculia caudata, Hew. —Fibre-twine from the bark is used for dilly-bags or (nu the Princess Charlotte
Bay coast, among the Koko-lamalama) for fish-nets.
Sterculia diversifolia, Gr. Don.—Fibre-twine made from the inner bark, dried in the sun, and drawn into
shi’eds, for dilly-bags. KMl,kalan.
Sterculia qundrifida , R. Br. —Fibre-twine used for the largo kangaroo-nets at Atherton. NGT, CHI,
Ath., pu-kuru ; NGA, A'h., ke-wan same names as the CocJdospermum.
Sterculia rupesfris, Benth.—Fihrc-twine for the Rockhampton fish-nets. (A. Thozct.)
Sterculia rupesfris , Bcnlh. —Fibre made into nets. (A. Thozet.)
JCerotes longifcilia, R. Br. —A narrow leaved form of this is used on the Starcke River and on Bloomfield
for making dilly-bags. KYI (Starcke River), bai-jin, the same name given at Cooktown to the
Spinifex Tiirsutis ; KYI, Ckn., tan-dai, same name applied here to the Hcemodorum coccineum ;
KYE, Bid., tan-di; MAL, chindirigan.
JCerofes multiflora , R. Br. —For dilly-bags. KYE, Bid. (young sp.), tan-di; KYE, Bid. (old sp.), mau-u.
7. The Manufacture of Fibre-twine consists of two processes: The actual preparation
of the fibre-shred, and its subsequent manipulation into twine.
(a) The former can be best explained by taking, at random, some three or four plants, as
follows; —
(i.) Macaranga tanarius. —A fairly smooth switch is cut down, aud stripped of its bark
envelope. The strip is next sharply broken at an angle (PI. 11. 1), the process enabling
the immediately-underlying “ fibre” to be separated (Pi. 11. 2) from its pigmentary
covering, which is removed and cast aside. The shreds of fibre, in quantity* as may be
required, are washed and rinsed for a few minutes “ to make milk come out” —tin; water
turning cloudv —and then dried in the sun. When fully desiccated, each shred is
finally split with the nails until the desired fineness is obtained (Pi. 11. 3) ; each comes
out ultimately to a length of 8 to 10 in. and more.
(ii.) Malaisia tortuosa produces a greenish-coloured twine when freshly manufactured. The
thin outermost covering of bark is scraped off with a sharp mussel-shell (or glass, when
obtainable), and the underlying greenish fibrous layer stripped off in narrow lengths of
from to 2 feet. Each green strip is next put into the mouth and chewed, the verdant
spittle being expectorated : the chewing-process, which requires some two or three
minutes for its completion, renders the strip suitable for immediate splitting with the
nails into the shreds of particular fineness required.
(iii.) Acacia latifalia.— k reddish twine when fresh. Here, the inner bark, after removal,
is soaked in water all the morning, during which process it becomes red : it is subse-
quently dried in the sun before being split into shreds.
(iv.) Barringtonia racemosa. —The roots only are used. The thick rough cortical layer is
sliced off in strips from the under surface of which the white shreddy fibre is pulled off;
the latter is washed and rubbed for a few minutes in water (which becomes quite
milky), and then dried in the sun. As soon as it becomes dry, it is split into the required
shreds, and is ready to use.
(v.) Livisfona australis. —The method of obtaining the fibre-shred from the cortex of the leaf
has already been described (sect. 6).
(h) The subsequent manipulation of the fibre-shred into twine can now be explained. The shred
of fibre (PI. 11. 3) from any one of the above plants having been at last obtained, it is rolled with the
open hand (right) forwards upon the outer side of the thigh—the operator seated in the usual
“ squatting” position. This movement produces a slight tension, increases its strength, minimises all
irregularities, and produces (PI. 11. 4) what may' now be spoken of as the strand. The strand is next
folded in two (PI. 11. 5) and the “bend” held between the (left) thumb and forefinger: its remainder is
rolled, under considerable pressure, with the (right) palm once comparatively-slowly forwards (PI. II (5,)
and, without removing the pressure, once somewhat-sharply backwards (PI. 11. 7). During the former
movement, pressure is exerted specially upon the outer (i.e., thumb) side of the palm : during the hitter,
upon the inner side. The result of the forwards-movement is to roll the strand into one uniform twist
(PI. 11. 8) : the result of the combined forwards-and-backwards movement is to roll ihe strand into two
twists (PI. 11. 9) of an opposite direction with a “ break” in between. The removal of this “ break” is
effected by holding the portion just above it between the (left) thumb and forefinger (to prevent the
twine already manufactured from becoming untwisted) and inserting in it (PJ. 11. 10) the (right)
forefinger which is pulled firmly but carefully outwards, thus at the same lime treeing the two extremities
of strand. While the left hand retains its present position, the two extremities of strand are again rolled
once forwards, and once backwards, the “ break” removed as before, and the process thus repeated again
and again. All fibre-twines are thus made of two plies. It is hardly necessary to point out that the
presence of the “break” prevents the twine already manufactured from becoming untwisted each time
the left hand shifts its position onwards. As soon ns one of the extremities of strand under consideration
has been reached, another strand is fixed to it (PI. 11. 11) by a simple rolling-forwards: this composite-
one is then rolled into the other as before.
8. Methods of Preserving Continuity in the Twine, etc.~To effect this purpose,
various devices are resorted to, viz. :
(a) Super-position (Pi. 111. I, 2). Seen in the bo ly or handles of certain dilly-bags, etc.
( h ) Splicing, etc. Opening the plies at the extremity of a piece of twine, and rolling it in,
as part and parcel. Identical with the process adopted in the manufacture of fibre-
twine, at the insertion of each new strand.


(c) Looping (PI. 111. 3). The method adopted in fastening the tendon, twine, etc., round the
butt-end of a wommera-spear, the mortice of “ compound ” spears ( i.e ., those formed of
shaft and butt), etc.
( d ) Knotting—
(i.) “ G-ranny,” which is extremely common, and a good example of which is to be
met with on the inside of the simple kind of Pandanus leaf armlet (PI. IY. 5).
(ii.) “ Button,” as seen in the kangaroo-twine waist-belts of the Middle Palmer,
where each is made of two plies and one end knotted : the latter forms the “button,”
the other extremity the “ button-hole” (PI. 111. 4). It will be noticed that the
tighter the belt is stretched, the narrower and firmer becomes the “ button-hole.”
(iii.) “Complex” knot of the Logan and Stradbroke Island dilly-bags (PI. XVIII.
and XIX.)
(iv.) “Slip” knot of the Keppel Island, etc., fishing-net (Pi. XIII. 3), and that used
with the lawyer-cane by the Lower Tully River blacks (PI. 111. 5).
[Notwithstanding very careful examination, I have never come across an example of
“ reef ” knot].
(e) Splitting. This procedure can be observed in the Pandanus simple-armlets of Cape
Bedford, the Musgrave and Morehead, (Middle) Palmer Rivers, Maytown, etc.
The strip of Pandanus leaf (PI. IV. 1) is cut vertically at one extremity, but
obtusely at the other, its width tapering gradually from the former to the latter. The
obtuse end is then split into four, six, or more “ tags ”to a uniform vertical depth. The
vertical end is now rolled over the hand (PI. TY. 2) from two to three times—varying
with its length—then removed as it is, and held between the thumb and forefinger (Pi. IY.
3), when, with a sharpened stick, some small holes, depending upon the number of
tags, are pierced through its two or three thicknesses. Each tag is now pulled through
its respective aperture (PI. IY. 4), —a process that has been facilitated by cutting the
main strip obliquely originally so as to give a fine point to the tags —each pair then
knotted underneath (PI. IY. o) in a “ granny,” and their ends cut.
{f) Cement-substance, beeswax, etc., is often employed not only to fix two strands when
super-imposed, but also to strengthen the union when otherwise put into continuity.
9. Colouration of the Twine, etc. — While some fibre-twines, when newly-manufactured
are distinctly red ( e.g ., Acacia Jlavescens , /atifolia , and leptocarpa, Ficus Cunningham ii) , green {e.g.,
Malaisia tortuosa ), or whitish {e.g , Ficus orbicularis, Licislona australis), others may be coloured by
mechanical means. This is effected either by staining or by pigmentation. In the former process, the
Hoemodorum coccineum is employed on the Bloomfield, the Morinda reticulata on the Pennefather River;
in both cases, it is the roots which are utilised. In the latter, the basis is either water, sputum, wax, or
grease. Out in the Boulia district all opossum-twine articles (with but rare exceptions) are greased with
“ raddle.’ ’
10. Procedures in which string and other forms of strand are employed
include plait-work, chain-work, over-knotting, fringing, winding, lacing, top-stitching or over-casting,
basketry-, woven bag'-, and net-work.
11. Plait-WOrk has been met with on the Morehead and Musgrave Rivers, and at Cape
Bedford. At the former, it is practised by females only in the making of necklaces (al-vviira) : at the
latter, it appears to be considered rather as a pastime or plaything for the boys, the girls there not
engaging in it. In the dilly-bags obtained from the Kmbley River, IVloreton, etc., the handles are made of
three-strand plaits. In the case of the necklaces and playthings, according to the width of plait required,
from three to five strands are brought into requisition. Thin strips from the leaf of the screw-palm
( Pandanus ) constitute the material usually employed, though at Cape Bedford I obtained one specimen
made of the folded blades of the blood-root { flee nodorum coccineum, R. Br.), When the Pandanus is
used, the leaf is dried in the sun to make it firmer, though to save time (and the alternative is almost as
good) it is more often heated for a few minutes over a fire. At the commencement of operations, the
strands are either continuous (PI. Y. 1,2), or free (PI. Y. 3,4) : the four-plait is sometimes made of
two strands folded over at their centres (PI. Y. 3). At Cape Bedford, the strands may be tied into a
bundle by one of their own number (PJ, Y.. 4). When this flat-plaited hand is at length completed in
order to make a necklace, a string of some sort is attached at either extremity, and by this means it is fixed
at the back of the neck: in the case of playthings, the extremity may be tied upon itself in a knot. The
actual length of these plaits is up to 8 to 9 in. in the case of necklaces, while in the “ playthings” it
may run to 18 in.; its uniform width varies proportionately from f in. to 1 in. and more. Plait-work is
also employed by aboriginals in making the Pandanus compound-armlet on the Embley River, at the
Moreton, and on the higher reaches of the Batavia River. No opportunity was afforded me of watching
its manufacture, but by unpicking a specimen I found it to be constructed on the following lines
(PI. V. 5). A broadish band or strip {a) of Pandanus leaf forms the basis upon which three smaller strips
(b) are laid, these being fixed in position by the web (c) working in and out as in the diagram.
12. Chain-work is to be found amongst the Cooktown, Cape Bedford, and Princess Charlotte
Bay aboriginals in the mourning-strings (PI. VI. 1) worn by male and female mourners crossways over
one shoulder and under the opposite arm-pit. These “ chains,” so to speak, may be several yards in
length, each link about -Jin. long, but smaller in the more northern specimens ; they are made of fibre-
twine. The initial loop is fixed either into a knot (a) at the commencement of the siring, or in between
its two component plies ( h ) : the knot at the extremity (z.) locks the entire chain. Another form of
chain-work is seen in the orchid-cortex belt of the blacks on (Lower) Batavia and Embley Rivers : it
is made by overcasting two strands stretched between two sticks, or between one stick and the big toe:
ab the overcasting thread works undoe and ovar, it alternately pawcs over and under the atrip of cortex.


In diagram, its manufacture would be represented somewhat as in PI. VI. 2. In the (Lower) Tully
River lawyer-cane armlets, two more varieties of chain-work are met with. In the former (PI. VI. 3)
the pattern covers the whole circumference of ornament; in the latter (PI. VI. 4), the chain, which is
formed of a series of loops, occupies but a portion of the armlet.
13. “Over-knotting”: there is no other adequate term to describe this. Examples were
seen by me in old camps at the Starcke River, and on the Princess Charlotte Bay coast, close to the
mouth of the Normanby. Both of them were cases of old leaf-scale troughs which, having commenced
to split, had been mended as follows : —Through the six (in one case) pairs of holes punctured on either
side of the split (PI. VII. 1), a corresponding number of strands had been knotted on the outer surface.
These knots were of the “granny” type, but, evidently to prevent them loosening, the free ends of each
strand had been fixed by the knot immediately succeeding. The appearance of the inner surface is shown
in PL VII. 2. In a Starcke River example, the strand was made from the split leaves of the Haemodorum
coccinenm.
14. Fringing. — Fringes are met with on all apron-belts and certain necklets. There are
three stages in the construction of an apron-belt —the making of the top-string, the formation of the
loops, and the rolling of each loop upon the outer thigh to form a tassel. At Cape Bedford, the details of its
construction are represented in Plate VII. Eig. 3 shows the method of holding the circular band over
the two knees; 4, the formation of the loops; and 5, the rolling of each loop into a tassel. At the
present juncture it is only the formation of the loops, ultimately constituting the fringe, which concerns
us, this method of fixation onto the top-string being identical with that met with at Cooktown, Maytown,
Princess Charlotte Bay, (Middle) Palmer River, etc. At Boulia, on the other hand, the loops are fixed in
a somewhat different manner (PL VII. G).
15. Winding.— Examples of this are to be found in the mourning-strings of Maytown, (Middle)
Palmer River, etc., the belt portion of very many apron-belts, in the circlets and armlets of Boulia, etc.,
in the rope-belts of Cloncurry, etc. (PL VII. 7). The core may be single or multiple, and formed of
human- or opposum- hair, fibre-twme, etc.
16. Lacing.— This is well illustrated in the bark water- and honey- bags of the Atherton, Cairns,
etc., Districts (PL VII. 8). Also in the bark-troughs when enclosing a corpse at the Musgrave, Coen,
Cooktown, etc.
17. Top-stitching, or Over-casting. — In the finishing-off of the mouth of many dilly-bags.
See PL X. 5, PL XVI. 10, etc.
18. Basketry-, Woven bag-, and Net-work. — It has been deemed advisable to place ail
the articles comprised under the above heading in one category, for the reason that, from a constructive
point of view, they are all woven on one or other of identical lines. Inflexible baskets formed of withes
are found exactly reproduced in flexible bags composed of fibre-twine: fishing-nets, in their primitive
form, are really netted bags, the condition in which they may still be found.
The special meanings to be attached to the three terms “strand,” “ continuous,” “non-continuous,”
and “ basal ” may be defined as follows :
“Strand,” as a matter of convenience in this and subsequent sections, will be employed to denote
collectively the many different materials — e.g., hair, fibre, leaf-blade, withe—of which these articles are
woven, netted, etc.
“ Continuous” is used in the sense that when the extremity of the strand has been reached another
piece is entwined, super-imposed, or otherwise affixed in such a manner that the various component pieces
ultimately constitute one apparently continuous length.
In a “Non-Continuous” strand there is a break in the continuity purposely made —a special kind of
knot—for decorative, perhaps other, purposes (Plates XVIII. and XIX.).
“ Basal ” strand is that which constitutes the basis of operations, and is either in the form of a
cross-tie stretched between two sticks (with its Equivalents) or in the form of a circlet: hence,
we can distinguish a “ straight ” from a “circular” basal strand. [The Koko-yitnidir blacks of Cape
Bedford, etc., speak of the basal strand as the “father”— cf. our “foundation.”] The sticks used
in connection with the cross-tie are fixed firmly into the ground at a distance apart of from a few
inches (in the case of some dilly-bags) to as much as five or six feet (in certain fish-nets), and are
correspondingly smaller and larger. In some of the patterns the straight basal strand may be ultimately
withdrawn. The circular basal strand is identical with the “stirrup” of the European netter, and is
either fixed, like it, to some support, or else held in position by passing the leg, big toe, etc., through it :
it usually remains as it is, part and parcel of the manufactured article.
To preserve uniformity in the diagrams illustrating this section, these abbreviations will be used
throughout— YZ, the two sticks ; CS, the continuous strand, of which there may be one or two; NC, the
non-continuous strand; SB, the straight basal strand ; CB, the circular basal strand.
According to the process of construction, the following classification of basketry-, woven bag-, and
net-work may prove satisfactory :
A. Made with one continuous strand.
(a) basal strand, straight.
Var. i. Simple loop.
ii. Loop and twist.
iii. Hour-glass (double loop.)
ir. Netting-stitch.
(J) basal strand, circular.
Var. i. Simple loop,
ii. Netting-stitch.


B. Made with two continuous strands.
(«) no basal strand. Yar. Simple loop.
( b ) one basal strand, circular. Yar. Simple loop.
( c ) several basal strands, straight, Yar. Chain-twist.
C. Made with one continous and one non-continuous strand,
(a) basal strand, circular,
D. Made with one non-continuous strand.
(a) basal strand, circular.
Upon this basis the manufacture of each will now be detailed. It should be noted that the
examples met with under C and D, coming from the Logan and Stradbroke Island, do not strictly belong
to a work on North Queensland Ethnography; on the other hand, they form important links in the
history of basketry, and, as their manufacture in the original form is rapidly being lost, their inclusion
here has been determined upon.
19. Made with one continuous strand: basal strand straight.—This includes
four varieties, according to the nature of the mesh, which may consist of a simple loop, a loop with twist,
a double loop (“ hour-glass”), or of the ordinary European netting-stitch.
20. The first variety, that of the “ simple loop” pattern, is met with in dilly-bags
manufactured at Boulia, Morehead and Musgrave Rivers, Rockhampton. The operator, squatting in the
ordinary position, fixes the continuous strand on the extreme left of the straight basal strand, and,
working always from left to right, starts as in PI. VIII. 1. So soon as the right-hand limit of the basal
strand has been reached, the continuous strand is fixed in a loop. Then either the sticks are taken up
bodily (PI. YIII. 2), with the attached cross-tie, and turned right round — i.e ., the right one made the
left and vice versa; or the sticks are left in position, while the basal strand is slipped off, and tied on
again in the reverse position. In either case the same object is attained —viz., the operator can, without
shifting her position, start again from left to right at the point where (he or, usually) she had just left
off (PI. YIII. 3), these two rows ultimately constituting the bottom of the bag. When the operator
again reaches the extreme right-hand limit of the basal strand, this or the sticks are again reversed, and
thus, by a continuous repetition of the process, the weaving of the one continuous strand into the
horizontal row of loops immediately above may be continued until the desired depth of bag is attained.
The basal strand is ultimately withdrawn. The finished pattern is shown in PI. YIII. 4. [ln the making
of modern lace, I am informed that this mesh is known as the “ Point de Bruxelles” or “ single net-
stitch worked in rows.”]
21. The second variety, that of the “ loop and twist ” mesh, is seen in dilly-bags made at
Laura, May town, Highbury, Musgrave, Coen, Gilbert River, Delta, Normanton. These bags are manu-
factured on lines similar to the preceding, PI. IX. 1, 2 : the completed pattern [said to be similar to the
foundation of modern “ Point de Tulle”] is seen in PI. IX. 3.
22. The “ hour-glass,” or “ double loop,” the third variety of pattern, is met with in
dilly-bags and fishing-nets. The former come from Normanton, Delta, Grilbert River, Cooktown, Cape
Bedford, Cape Melville, Morehead, Musgrave, and Middle Palmer Rivers, Bloomfield, perhaps Rock-
hampton : the latter from Laura, May town, Palmerville, Morehead and Musgrave Rivers, Pennefather,
Embley, and Batavia Rivers. Manufactured as before (PI. X. 1,2) : the completed pattern is shown in
PI. X. 8. In the case of dilly-bags, at least two methods may be adopted for “ finishing off” purposes :
these are indicated in PI. X. 4, 5.
23. The “netting-stitch,” or fourth variety of mesh, is observable in dilly-bags made at
Normanton, Delta, Grilbert River, Musgrave and Morehead Rivers, Cape Melville, Middle Palmer River,
Rockhampton, Teppoon : in the folding-purse fishing-nets of Princess Charlotte Bay : in the fishing-nets of
Boulia, Cloncurry, and Normanton: in the false head-net or hair-cap of Boulia and Upper Georgina
River: in the forehead-nets of the same districts : in the kangaroo-nets of Atherton: in the emu-nets
of Boulia, etc.
The dilly-bags (as well as the other articles in the category) are woven on lines similar to the
preceding examples (PI. XI. 1,2, 3), but with this modification that the initial extremity of the continuous
strand is not attached to the basal strand when operations are commenced. A start is made at some
distance away (PI. XI. I), the proximal portion alone passing over the basal strand onto which, when the
extreme right-hand limit has been reached, it is ultimately fixed (PI. XI. 2).
The folding-purse fishing-net of Princess Charlotte Bay is made on exactly identical plan and
pattern as the dilly-bags, but of course on much larger scale.
The fishing-nets of Boulia, Cloncurry, Normanton, etc., have a still further modification in that,
after completion of the first row of meshes, they are worked on the flat (PI. XI. 4) into the shape of a
rectangular parallelogram. [On the Tully River, the first row of meshes may be woven on a stirrup, a
circular basal strand ; but when completed, the row is invariably removed, put on a lawyer-cane fixed
horizontally, and worked in the usual way from left to right.] In some of the Normanton, etc., fishing-
nets, increased depth of net is obtained by top-stitching certain portions of the edges, the portions so
attached being shown with corresponding numbers in PI. XI. 5.
The “ false” head-net or hair-cap of Boulia and the Upper Georgina is made out of the rectangular
piece of net-length by top-stitching the two smaller edges and inserting a running string through the
meshes of the long edge, which, by this means, is now tightened up (PI. XI. 6,7).
The forehead-net of Boulia and Upper Georgina is woven on lines identical with the fishing-nets of
Boulia, Cloncurry, Normanton, etc., i.e., on the flat. The only difference is that the loops constituting
the initial and final rows are comparatively much longer than those occupying the body of the net
(PI. XII. 1). After removal from the straight basal strand, the loops of these initial and final rows
may each be rolled into a tassel before being ultimately threaded (PI. XII. 2) : or they may be threaded
as they are (PI. XII. 3).


With regard to the large kangaroo- and emu- nets, I have seen part of the manufacture of a
specimen at Boulia. No true needle whatever was used, both this and the mesh-stick being substituted
as follows:—The former was replaced by the thick cord being I’olled as required upon a twig or two
about 18 in. long ; the place of the latter was taken by the maker’s foot, which kept each successive
mesh, as it was netted, perfectly firm and regular by pulling on it with the back of the ankle.
24. Made with one continuous strand: basal strand circular.— This form of
manufacture is adopted with two varieties of mesh, the “ simple loop ” and the netting-Stitch.
25. The “ simple loop” variety is to be seen in the dilly-bags from Boulia, the Upper Georgina
River, and Camooweal, and in the “ true” head-net or hair-cap of the Boulia district blacks. With the
bags (PI. XIII. i), the first row of meshes constitutes the mouth of the article, the last manufactured
ones being stitched together to form the bottom : a reversal from the processes already described. In
the “ true ” head-net, the loops in the first row are made much longer than all the succeeding ones;
each loop, of this same row, is subsequently removed from the circular basal strand, rolled like a fringe
tassel, and then restrung (PI. XIII. 2).
26- The “ netting Stitch. ” variety is met with in the fishing-nets of Keppel Island, Rock-
hampton, etc. There is an initial row of slip-knots onto the loops of which the pattern proper is worked
(PI. XIII. 3). South of Rockhampton, e.g., Gladstone and Miriam Yale, I noticed the fish-nets in the
blacks’ camps to be made with a stirrup, a circular basal strand, without the initial row of slip-knots :
i.e., on identical lines as a European fish-net.
27. Made with two continuous strands: no basal strand.— The only variety so
far met with,in the dilly-bags of the central coastal districts from Gladstone to Broadsound, is of the
“ simple loop” mesh. The proximal extremity of the larger and less pliable strand (CSi.) is bent
round upon itself, and held in position by the smaller and more pliable one (CSii.) woven around it
(PI. XIV. 1). This smaller one, as the manufacture of the bag progresses, supports the spirally
concentric coils of the larger in its loops (PI. XIV. 2). To prevent the completed pattern assuming and
maintaining a flattened surface, a small wooden pin (£) is fixed through the initial coils of the larger
strand, and the desired convexity thereby insured. With the gradually increasing size of coils, the
width of each succeeding loop would proportionately increase, and to guard against this “ weakness”
the loop of the smaller strand is here and there not fixed around the coil immediately above, but
around the second or third beyond (Z).
28. Made with two continuous strands: one basal strand, circular.—in the
dilly- and pituri- bags of the North-West Central (Boulia) district: all of the “ simple loop” variety
of mesh, and mostly of a navicular shape.
The circular basal strand, the “ stirrup,” ultimately forms the mouth of the bag. After a row (or
two) of simple-loop meshes have been woven with the one continuous strand (CSi.), a second one is
affixed (CSii.), and the wallet thus woven round and round (PI. XV. I), mostly becoming larger and larger
as it progresses, the free edges of the last manufactured row being ultimately stitched, etc., together to
form the bottom of the bag. The completed pattern is seen in PI. XV. 2. Attached to the mouth of these
bags is sometimes an arrangement of peculiar loops whereby, with the aid of a running string, the
aperture can be more or less closed. These loops are inserted as follows (PI. XY- 3) : —Starting from a
point k on the circular basal strand, and working from left to right, the new strand is carried right round
the mouth of the bag in a series of simple loops to Z, where it is fixed : thence, with a series of longer
loops, each with a double turn, it is again carried right round, and finally knotted. The free extremity
of each of these longer loops is now twisted (PI. XY. 4) —the torsion simultaneously tightening up the
row of smaller loops—and each fixed in its new position by means of the running string m.
29. Made with two continuous strands: several basal strands, straight.—
A variety which may be spoken of as the “ chain-twist ” formed by the twisting into a chain of the
two continuous strands. Occasionally, in place of these two being separate and distinct, and tied with a
knot, the one strand is bent on itself, the flexure replacing the knot, and the two halves the two continuous
strands (PI. XVI. 1, G, 7). The straight basal strands are not attached to any sticks, etc., but their ends
left free; they constitute the “warp” of modern basket-work, the chain-twist representing the “weft.”
[Amongst the Koko-yimidir blacks of Cape Bedford, etc., this form of warp is spoken of as the “beard,”
and the weft as the “back-bone.”] This method of construction is met with in dilly-bags from various
parts of North Queensland, in the mats of the Batavia and Pennefather Rivers, and in the fish- and wallaby-
traps of Atherton, Cairns, etc. The bags here referred to are generally non-pliable, i.e., modern basket-
type; but they may occasionally be made of pliable fibre-twine. Variations in the pattern differ in the
main amongst themselves only in the methods by which the base of the receptacle is commenced, i.e., the
initial fixation of the basal strands.
In the dilly-bags from the Starcke, Middle Morehead, and Middle Palmer Rivers, the two continuous
strands are knotted together at-some distance from their extremities, and held between the left thumb
and forefinger. One basal strand, at about its middle, is placed in the fork of the knot, the two continuous
ones twisted round it and pressed in the fingers: another basal strand is fixed as before, and so on.
(PI. XVI. 2.) A certain number of basal strands having been included, working all the time of course from
left to right, the two horizontal strands make a sharp double twist round the last inserted basal one, which
is simultaneously bent into more or less of an acute angle. The length, so far manufactured, is then
turned round so that the extremity furthest removed from the knot is held in the operator’s left thumb and
forefinger, while the second row of the chain-twist is made by picking up from left to right each basal
strand in regular rotation: the operation is thus continued and repeated (PI. XVI. 3).


The “ half-moon” shaped dilly-bags of the Cairns, Atherton, etc , districts are constructed on
similar lines save that the basal strands extend the entire width of the base (PI. XVI. 4), this portion
being fixed into a curved shape by moans of a piece of split lawyer-cane (with its extremities strung like a
bow) attached by top-stitching to its inner surface. These same dilly-bags are in addition strengthened
(as their manufacture proceeds) by rings of cane similarly attached on the inside.
In the round baskets from Hughenden, Charters Towers, the Tully River, etc , the chain-twist of
two continuous strands surrounds a bundle of three or four basal strands to start with, the gradual
development of their commencing radiation being shown in PI. XVI. o, 6, 7. As in the other forms of
this chain-twist pattern, where the intervening spaces between the warp becomes too large, extra pieces are
put in to preserve the shape required. In the articles from these districts, i.e., Hughenden, Charters
Towers, and the Tully, the rows of chain-twist are very close together as compared with those
manufactured in other localities.
In the dilly-bags from the Bloomfield, Cooktown, Cape Bedford, and the Middle Palmer, and the
back of Princess Charlotte Bay, the basal strands are tied into a sort of bundle (PI. XVI. 8).
Methods in vogue for finishing off these basket dilly-bags are:—
(a) Searing in the ashes, common (PI. XYL 9) ;
(J) Over-casting, common (PI. XYI. 10);
(c) Doubling-over and fixing with a chain-twist (Pennefather, Batavia, and Embley Rivera)
(PI. XVI. 11).
In the manufacture of the Cairns, Atherton, etc., fish- and wallaby-traps or cages, the operator,
after having sorted the lawyer-cane strips into similar lengths, commences by flexing three or four of the
basal strands very acutely (forming ultimately the pointed extremity of the “cage”), and then fixing
them by “wattling” the two continuous cane-strands in and out — i.e., by a chain-twist (PI. XYII. 1).
This latter, thus being continued, gives rise to a pretty spiral, terminating at the mouth, additional basal
strands being added in as required. In the Atherton, etc., fish-traps, when the mouth of the “cage” is
finally reached, the free ends of the basal strands are cut at equal lengths, and bent outwards
(PI. XYI 1. 2). In the wallaby-traps (PI. XYIJ. 3) of the corresponding districts, the basal strands
projecting from beyond the lower portion of the mouth are cut off short and firmlv bound, while those
of the top and sides are trimmed off in such a way as to form a projecting funnel or hood, tin's being-
supported and edged by an extra withe attached along the inner surface. These traps take between
three and four hours to make.
30. Made with one continuous and one non-continuous strand.— ln the dilly-
bags of Stradbroke Island, adopted from the mainland Logan blacks [see section 18]. Here, the non-
continuous strand is formed of component pieces of equal lengths, attached by means of a very
interesting knot (PI. XYIII. 1). To make a start,the piece of non-continuous strand is fixed at a point
just to the left of the ordinary knot joining the two ends of the circular basal Strand
(PI. XVIII. 2), through which the leg is passed, and woven on it in the form of “simple loops” to
its full length. The next piece of non-continuous strand is attached to the previous piece and to the
“stirrup”—circular basal strand—by the knot already depicted, a process which is repeated as each
length of non-continuous strand is utilised. In this particular case it requires three lengths of
non-continuous strand to form the first row of loops. The continuous strand is now run in, and that
also looped up just like the pattern of mesh described in section 28. Each length of non continuous
strand, however, is so arranged that its peculiar terminal knot is made on the loop immediately to the left
of the corresponding knot in the row just above, with the result that the dilly-bag ultimately shows a
pattern of three diagonal rows of knots. The bag is thus made somewhat after the shape of a broad
napkin-ring, the initial edges of which are subsequently top-stitched to form the bottom of the bag,
handles being attached to the final rim (PI. XVIII. 3,4).
31. Made with one non-continuous strand. —Observable in the dilly-bags which
my friend, Mr. (reorge Watkins, of Brisbane, tells me were made by the women of Stradbroke Island
[speaking Tchandi and Mundan] : he says that they were manufactured from swamp-i-ushes which were
cleaned, soaked in water for a little time, subsequently dried, and then toughened over hot ashes The
mode of construction, into a “broad napkin-ring” (PI. XIX. 3,4), is similar to that of the pattern just
described : i.e., on a circular basal strand. Each horizontal row is constituted of four lengths
of non-continuous strand woven on the “simple-loop” pattern, but the loops in this case are
markedly drawn to one side, so as to produce a vertical appearance (PI. XIX. 1). Each length of
non-continuous strand is attached to its lateral neighbour by means of a terminal knot identical with
that met with in the previous pattern, and, like it, enclosing the loop above (Pi. XIX. 2) : the placing
of these knots diagonally is also similar. In the specimen under consideration the two final rows
(ultimately forming the top of the bag) alone are devoid of knot, these being woven on the same pattern
of mesh as described in section 28.
j Price B.v.’
J3y Authority : Edmund Gregory, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane.


Plate I. The Manufacture of Human-hair Twine;


Plate II. The Manufacture of Fibre-twine.


Plate III. Methods of preserving Continuity.
Plate IV. The Manufacture of the Pandanus Simple Armlet.


Plate V. Plait-work.




Plate VII. Over-knotting, Fringing, Winding, Lacing, Top-Stitching.


Plate VIII. Basketry, &c,— Made with one continuous strand: basal strand straight: simple-loop pattern.


Plate IX. Basketry, &c. —Made with one continuous strand: basal strand straight: loop-and-twist pattern.


W.E.Roth. del
Plate X. Basketry, &c.—Made with one continuous strand: basal strand straight: hour-glass double-loop pattern.


Plate XI. Basketry, &c.—Made with one continuous strand: basal strand, straight: netting-stitch pattern-


Plate XII. Basketry, &c.—The Manufacture of the Forehead-net.


Plate X III. Basketry, &c.—Made with one continuous strand: basal strand circular: simple-loop and
netting-stitch Patterns.


Plate XIV. Basketry, &c.—Made with two continuous strands: no basal strand.


Plate XV. Basketry, &c.—Made with two continuous strands: one basal strand, circular.


Plate XVI. Basketry, &c.—Made with two continuous strands: several basal strands, straight.


Plate XVII. Basketry, &c Manufacture of Wallaby and Tish Traps.


Plate XVIII. Basketry, &c.—Made with one continuous and one non-continuous strand: basal strand
circular: simple-loop pattern.


Plate XIX. Basketry, &c— Made with one non-continuous strand: basal strand circular: simple-loop pattern.


