

STUDIES ON
GIBBERELLA FUJIKUROI VAR. SUBGLUTINANS
THE HITHERTO UNDESCRIBED ASCIGEROUS STAGE OF
FUSARIUM MONILIFORME VAR. SUBGLUTINANS
AND ON ITS PATHOGENICITY ON MAIZE
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
New South Wales
Science Bulletin No. 49
December, 1935
E. T. EDWARDS, M.Sc. Agr.
Assistant Biologist
Workers in the respective branches of Economic Science covered by this series of Science Bulletins
will receive such of them as may be of use in their special branches of study upon application
to the Under Secretary, Department of Agriculture, Box 36A G.P.O., Sydney.
Sydney: Alfred James Kent, I.S.O., Government Printer— l935.
178665—A




STUDIES ON
GIBBERELLA FUJIKUROI VAR. SUBGLUTINANS
THE HITHERTO UNDESCRIBED ASCIGEROUS STAGE OF
FUSARIUM MONILIFORME VAR. SUBGLUTINANS
AND ON ITS PATHOGENICITY ON MAIZE
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
New South Wales
Science Bulletin No. 49
December, 1935
E. T. EDWARDS, M.Sc. Agr.
Assistant Biologist
Thesis submitted to the Faculty of Agriculture, University of Sydney,
in fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Master of
Science in Agriculture
Sydney: Alfred James Kent, 1.5.0., Government Printer —1935.
1 78665—A




Contents.
PAGE.
Introduction ..." ... ... ... 5
Acknowledgments ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 6
History of the Fungus ... 6
•Occurrence of the Fungus in New South Wales 8
Economic Importance of the Fungus in New South Wales 8
Biological Examination of Maize Seed Samples— 10
General ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 10
Materials and Methods ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... H
The Nature and Extent of Internal Seed-borne Infection 11
■Cultural Studies on Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans— 13
Materials and methods ... ... ... ... ... ... ... •• • 13
Cultural characters of the Bathurst and Grafton isolates ... ... ... 15
Discussion of cultural studies ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 20
Comparison of cultural characters with previous descriptions ... ... ... 21
Temperature Studies — 25
Materials and methods ... ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 25
Growth rates at different temperatures ... ... ... ... ••• ••• 25
Cultural characters at different temperatures ... 2(5
Discussion of cultural studies ... ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 29
Longevity of the Fungus ... 29
Morphology of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans — 29
1. The Conidial Stage—
General description ... ... ... •• • •• • •• • •• • •■• "9
Conidial measurements determined by other investigators... ... ... 31
Conidial measurements of the Bathurst and Grafton isolates ... ... 32
2. The Ascigerous Stage—
General description ... ... ... • • • • ■ • • • • • • • • • •
Ascospore measurements of the Bathurst and Grafton isolates ... ... 37
Perithecial production ...
Taxonomic Relationships of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans ... 40
Technical Description of the Fungus ... 41
The Pathogenicity of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans— 42
Materials and methods
1. 1932-33 Infection Experiments—
Seedling inoculation *!
Soil inoculation ... ... ... •• • •• • •• • •• • ■• • •" *
Stalk inoculation
Ear inoculation ... ... ... •• • •• • •• • •• • '• ■ . Q
(1) Silk spray ; - n
(2) Husk incision plus atomised spore suspension ™
(3) Husk incision plus agar culture insertion 50
2. 1933-34 Infection Experiments— j
Soil inoculation
Ear inoculation —
Methods— . . , . nn
(1) Agar culture insertion in shank ~~
(2) Agar culture insertion at tip of ear 5L
(3) Agar culture insertion at base of ear
(4) Hypodermic injection of spore suspension ° y
Field infection experiment —
Material and methods ... ... ••• ••• ••• ”*
Experiment results ... ••• ••• ••• ••• "*
Discussion of Infection Studies
The Possible Production of a Growth Stimulatory Substance by Gibberella
FUJIKUROI VAR. SUBGLUTINANS
65
Summary
References -




STUDIES ON
GIBBERELLA FUJIKUROI VAR. SUBGLUTINANS
THE HITHERTO UNDESCRIBED ASCIGEROUS STAGE OF
FUSARIUM MONILIFORME VAR. SUBGLUTINANS
AND ON ITS PATHOGENICITY ON MAIZE
IN NEW SOUTH WALES
DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE
New South Wales
Science Bulletin No. 49
INTRODUCTION.
Gibberella saubinetii (Mont.) Sacc. and Gibberella moniliformis (Sheld.)
Wineland are common pathogens of maize, Zea mays L., under New South
Wales conditions. The perithecia of Gibberella saubinetii develop abun-
dantly on diseased material in the field, and it was thought that a careful
examination of perithecial material might demonstrate the natural occur-
rence of the perithecia of Gibberella moniliformis, as only the conidial
stage, Fusarium moniliforme Sheld, was known to occur under local con-
ditions.
Wineland 13 first described the ascigerous stage of this organism in 1924,
the mature perithecia being obtained in artificial culture by growing two
strains of Fusarium moniliforme on the same agar slant. Although
Fusarium moniliforme is a common parasite of maize in various countries,
at the time these investigations were commenced the ascigerous stage of
the fungus had not been recorded on this host under natural conditions in
the field. Subsequently, at the twenty-third annual meeting of the Ameri-
can Phytopathological Society in December, 1931, Voorhees and Eddins
reported that the perithecia of Gibberella moniliformis had been found
occurring naturally on corn leaf sheaths in Florida, U.S.A. A oorhees
later published a full account of this occurrence and gave a detailed
description of the conidial and ascigerous stages of the fungus.
In May, 1932, specimens of old maize stalks showing abundant. peri-
thecial formation were received for examination from Grafton Experiment
Farm, New South Wales. Microscopic examination showed that the bulk
of this perithecial material consisted of Gibberella saubinetii, but in addi-
tion a number of the stalks were bearing perithecia containing straight,
usuallv one-septate ascospores with more or less rounded ends, which con-
trasted sharply with the typically curved three-septate ascopores of Gtb-
berella saubinetii, and which seemed to correspond with Wineland s
description of the ascospores of Gibberella moniliformis. In June, 1. ,
similar material was collected by the writer in an old maize e at
Bathurst Experiment Farm, N.S.W.


A number of single ascospore isolations was made from each lot of
material, and preliminary observations indicated that the conidial stage
of the organism was distinct from Fusarium moniliforme. Comparative
cultural and morphological studies of the single ascospore cultures with a
local isolate of Fusarium moniliforme from maize, and a single ascospore
culture of Gibberella moniliformis kindly supplied bv Dr. Voorhees of
Florida, showed clearly that the Bathurst and Grafton isolates were not
identical with Fusarium moniliforme Sheld.
The main point of differentiation was the manner of production of the
microconidia, which never occurred in chains, but were invariably borne
m clusters or loose heads at the ends of short conidiophores. This con-
stant morphological feature, together with the general cultural characters,
ie or^ andSrn had close affinities with Fusarium moniliforme
(Sheld.) var subglutinans Wr. and Eg., but as the ascigerous stage of this
organism was unknown, the identity of the fungus was in doubt,
. 1 ascospore cultures and specimens of peritheeial material were sub-
mitted for final identification to Dr. H. W. Wollenweber, of the Biologische
■Keichsanstalt fur Land und Fortwsirtchaft, Berlin-Dahlem, Germanv. Dr.
Wollenweber identified the conidial stage as Fusarium moniliforme
' ' \ ai ' Wr. and Eg., and suggested that the peritheeial
™- r d - not P revi °usly been recorded, should be designated
Lnbberella fujilcurpi (Saw.) Wr. var. subglutinans nov. comb.
A survey of the literature indicated that Fusarium moniliforme var. sub-
glutinans had not been recorded as a parasite of maize, and the present
studies were then initiated in order to test the pathogenicity of the
organism to determine its cultural and morphological characters and to
cl escribe its hitherto unrecorded ascigerous stage.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS.
fft , K * *!*>
biometrical work •toMrW TT n \’ \ • ’ assis^ance with the
Experiment Farm NS V r ’ Assistant Plant Breeder, Grafton
material- to Mr S T M * j° r Awarding specimens of perithecial
E^and
conduct of the flplrl f‘rv -e + • ’ - .0.W., tor providing assistance for the
Branch! tt“ Biological
rfr? k
examination P en * of Agriculture, who forwarded seed samples for
HISTORY OF THE FUNGUS.
w2wr r T„d 7 te™kin™« S: HnanS ™ S fi " St descr!bed “ 1925 ’ *
relation of Finjnrio + ? owmg an investigation concerning the
organism ? Van ° US ba "f na diseases ™ Central America. The
oanism ua» found to occur on the decaying leaves and pseudostem; in


the vascular bundles and exterior of living pseudostem of banana, Musa
sapientum L.; and in the air. Reinking 30 , 1926, reported that in Honduras
the organism was commonly associated with living and decaying banana
plants, and also with plants affected with Colorado disease. Inoculation
experiments, however, failed to demonstrate its pathogenicity.
In addition to recording the occurrence of Fusarium moniliforme var.
subglutinans on banana plants in Central America, Wollenweber 45 , 1931,
states that the fungus has also been found associated w r ith the rotting fruit
of the pineapple, Ananas sativus. He further states that the organism
has occasionally been found to occur on grains of maize ( Zea mays) in
Europe, and in Germany it has been found associated with the larvae of the
European corn borer, Pyrausta nubilaUs Hb.
Wardlaw 41 , 1933, in Trinidad, commonly isolated Fusarium moniliforme
var. subglutinans from a tip rot condition of immature Cavendish banana
fruit, but inoculation experiments failed to establish pathogenicity. The
same author 42 , 1934, drew attention to a severe tip rot condition of the
young unfolded central leaf of a seedling banana at Trinidad. The rotting
of the leaf was accompanied by severe blackening of the tissues which later
developed into a malodorous soft rot, which extended downwards into the
pseudo-stem and finally rotted the apical tissues of the corm. It is stated
that the condition was apparently due to the joint action of Fusarium
moniliforme var. subglutinans and a small unidentified rod-shaped bac-
terium which was consistently isolated from diseased tissues at all stages
of infection.
Martin 21 in Hawaii, found that symptoms of pokkah-boeng were readily
induced in rapidly-growing sugar cane by inoculating the spindle with
spores from pure cultures of a fungus tentatively identified as Fusarium
moniliforme var. subglutinans. Roldan 33 reports that the so-called pokkah-
boeng disease of sugar cane in the Philippine Islands has been found to be
due to a species of Fusarium, differing from Fusarium moniliforme in
the capitate arrangement of its conidia. As this feature is the main
morphological difference between Fusarium moniliforme and Fusarium
moniliforme var. subglutinans, it seems probable that the fungus belonged
to the latter species.
McDonald 22 states that one of the commonest fungi associated with root,
stalk and ear rot diseases of maize in Kenya was identified by I)r. Doidge,
of Pretoria, as Fusarium moniliforme Sheld. var. conglutinans Mr. and
Rg. Reference to the work of Wollenweber and Reinking failed to estab-
lish any authority for this variety, and it was considered that probably
a typographical error had been made in recording the name of tie
organism. In correspondence concerning this diagnosis, Dr. Doidge states.
‘‘There is obviously an unfortunate error in recording the name of the
species of Fusarium on maize in Kenya, but it is difficult to say. how it
arose. The fungus sent to me from Kenya was Fusarium moniliforme
(Sheld) var. subglutinans Wr. and Rg., and this determination .was con-
firmed by Wollenweber. This organism occurs very commonly in South
Africa in connection with ear-rot of maize, and has also been isolated from
other parts of the plant.”
Ocfemia and Mendiola 28 in the Philippines, found Fusarium moniliforme
var. subglutinans associated with certain cases of heart rot of a aca y usa
textilis Kee), following infection with bunchy top. Infection experiments
showed that the fungus was weakly parasitic and only capable of infecting
the tender tissues of abaca under very moist conditions. Similar results
with an isolate from abaca were obtained by Ramos.


In 1933 the writer 1 ’ published a preliminary note on the pathogenicity of
Fusarium moniliforme var. subglutinans on maize in New South Wales, and
recorded the occurrence of its hitherto unknown ascigerous stage, Gibber-
ella fujikuroi Saw. Wr. var. subglutinans nov. comb.
THE OCCURRENCE OF THE FUNGUS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans has not been recorded locally on
any host other than maize. The perithecial stage has been found to occur
naturally on old maize stalks at Grafton, Bathurst, Gundagai, and Albion
Park. Mature perithecia have also been produced at the Botanic Gardens,
Sydney, on maize plants artificially inoculated with pure cultures of the
conidial stage.
The fusarial stage has been isolated a number of times from root rot
lesions, from badly rotted stalk tissues, and from ears affected with cob
and grain rot. It has been found commonly associated with seedling blight,
and frequently has been the only organism isolated from the typical brown
water-soaked mesocotyl lesions of this disease.
The fungus is widely distributed as an internal seed-borne organism, and
isolations from fifty seed samples from the principal maize-growing areas
have shown that the organism was present in twenty-nine instances. Isola-
tions were made from 100 surface-sterilised grains of each sample, and the
maximum degree of internal infection with Gibberella fujikuroi var. sub-
glutinans in any sample wrns found to be 70 per cent. Six of the twenty-
nine samples in which the organism occurred yielded infection figures in
excess of 30 per cent., and three of these gave readings in excess of 50 per
cent. Of the remaining samples, nineteen gave figures of less than 10 per
cent., and four ranged from 10 per cent, to 20 per cent. The average per-
centage infection of the twenty-nine samples was 13.7 per cent., and the
total percentage for all grain examined was 7.9 per cent.
ECONOMIC IMPORTANCE OF THE FUNGUS IN NEW SOUTH WALES.
Comparatively little detailed information is available on the economic
importance of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans as a parasite of maize
under New South Wales conditions. Observations have shown that the
fungus is commonly associated with seedling blight conditions and, in addi-
tion, is responsible for a certain amount of ear, stalk, and root rot. In-
fection experiments have shown that the organism is capable of causing
..erious injury to various parts of the maize plant, and under field con-
ditions it has been shown that the fungus is capable of causing a con-
siderable reduction in the stand and subsequent grain yield of the crop.
In the early part of the 1934-35 maize season valuable data were obtained
from two maize-growing areas which show clearly that’ under certain con-
ditions the organism will cause serious economic losses. In November, 1934,
an inspection was made of an area of 60 acres of Hickory King maize
at Camden, which had failed to germinate satisfactorily. A detailed in-
spection of the field showed that less than 50 per cent, of the grain had
germinated ; the crop was very patchy in appearance, and there were marked
variations in seedling vigour. (Fig. 1.) Examination of a number of
seedlings showed that seedling blight lesions were commonly present on the
mesocotyl, and in some cases extensive rotting of the basal stem tissues
had occurred. (Fig. 2.)


An examination of the grain which had failed to germinate showed that
invariably it was markedly discoloured and showed the reddish blotches
and streaks characteristic of grain heavily infected with one or other of
several species of Gibberella. In many cases the grain had rotted more
or less completely, and superficial mycelial wefts of Fusarium spp. were
present on the rotted tissues. In some cases the grains had germinated, but
the coleoptiles had been killed by fungous invasion before emergence had
occurred. Isolations from a number of affected seedlings and rotted grains
showed that in the majority of cases the injury was due to Gibberella
fujiJcuroi var. subglutinans.
Fig. 1. —Faulty germination and variation in seedling vigour of Hickory King maize, due to sowing
internally infected grain in a poorly prepared seed-bed. Thirty per cent, of the seed used was
infected with Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
Camden, N.S.W., Nov., 1934.
Examination of the grain which had been used for seed purposes showed
that in many cases the kernels were markedly discoloured, and in a number
of instances partial rotting of the kernels had occurred. Isolations from
a 100 grain sample of the seed taken at random showed that—
-30 per cent, of the grain was infected with Gibberella fujiJcuroi var.
subglutinans.
10 per cent, of the grain was infected with Gibberella saubinetii.
9 per cent, of the grain was infected with Penicillium sp.
6 per cent, of the grain was infected with Diplodia zeae.
2 per cent, of the grain was infected with Cephalosporium acie-
monium.
1 per cent, of the grain was infected with bacteria.
42 per cent, of the grain remained sterile.
In addition to the unsatisfactory quality of the seed, it was found that
the land had received poor preparation, and sowing had been done under
conditions which were not favourable for rapid germination and vigorous
seedling growth. Such conditions are ideal for the development of seedling
blight. In the present instance severe injury to the crop resulted, and the
organism found to be principally responsible was Gibberella fujiJcuroi var.
subglutinans.
In November, 1934, again, it was reported that the majority of maize
crops in the Bega district had failed to germinate satisfactorily, and that
in many instances replanting had been found necessary. A number of the


crops were inspected in mid-December, and the observations made were of
particular interest, because in several instances the seed used had previ-
ously been subjected to biological examination and was known to be heavily
infected internally with Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
The conditions generally throughout the Bega district had been very
favourable for the development of pre-emergence and seedling blight
diseases. In the majority of cases flood waters had prevented the early
preparation of the land, and,
in addition, the deposition of
from 3 to 4 inches of silt had
adversely affected the physical
condition of the soil. More-
over, cool weather prevailed at
planting and during the early
stages of seedling growth.
The crops sown with grain
infected with Gibberella fuji-
kuroi var. subglutinans were
found to be very uneven, and
were characterised by many
misses where the grain had
failed to germinate. Examina-
tion showed that the non-ger-
minated grains were partially
rotted and showed the charac-
teristic reddish markings of
Gibberella infection. In many
cases there was an abundant
development of mycelium on
the rotted grains. In addition,
many of the seedlings were
found to be showing true seed-
ling blight lesions on the meso-
cotyls, and the affected plants
could commonly be detected by
their lack of vigour combined
with slight evidence of chloro-
sis. Isolations from the rot-
Fig. 2. —Seedling of Hickory King maize, showing
rotting of brace roots, mesocotyl, and basal stem
tissues resulting from seed-borne infection with
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
Camden, N.S.W., Nov., 1934.
ting ungerminated grains and from, seedling blight lesions yielded Gibberella
fujikuroi var. subglutinans in practically all cases.
The field evidence obtained during the early part of the 1934-35 season
has shown clearly that under certain conditions Gibberella fujikuroi var.
subglutinans is capable of causing serious damage to young maize crops
in New South Wales.
BIOLOGICAL EXAMINATION OF MAIZE SEED SAMPLES.
General.
A number of workers, including Valleau' 8 , Manns and Adams 20 , Edgerton
and Kidder 5 and Branstetter" and 3 , have shown that various organisms
such as Fusarium moniliforme, Diplodia zeae, C ephalosporium acre-
monium, etc., commonly occur internally in seed maize under American
conditions. There is no record of any similar Australian work, and
it was considered that a biological survey of seed samples from the


Organism.
No. of
Samples
Infected.
Average
Infection.
Maximum
Infection in
any Sample.
Average
Infection in
all Samples.
Gibberella moniliformis
29
per cent.
15-4
per cent.
86
per cent.
8-9
Gibberella fujilcuroi var. subglutinans
29
13-7
70
7-9
6-8
Penicillium spp.
39
8-7
38
Cephalosporium acremonium
21
12-8
68
5-3
Diplodia zeae
8
3*5
6
0*5
Gibberella saubinetii
6
4-1
10
0*5
Bacteria
33
7-8
54
5*2
Unidentified and unclassified fungi (in-
cluding Macrosporium sp., Cladospor-
ium sp., Aspergillus sp., Mucor sp.) ...
17
3-8
ii
1-3
principal maize-growing districts of New South Wales would furnish use-
ful information of a general type, and, in addition, would provide specific
data concerning’ Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans, as this fungus had
not previously been recorded as a seed-borne organism.
Materials and Methods.
The biological examination of local maize has been carried out over two
seasons, and in all cases has been restricted to grain samples which were
intended for seed purposes. Samples were obtained from the principal seed-
growers in each maize-producing district, and also from the various experi-
ment farms which supply maize for seed purposes.
The survey is based on the results of isolations made from one hundred
grains selected at random from each of fifty samples. In all cases the
grains were surface sterilised in alcohol and mercuric chloride, and, after
rinsing thoroughly in sterile water, the tip portions were removed asepti-
cally with a sterile scalpel and transferred to petri dishes containing 20 c.c.
of potato dextrose agar.
Branstetter 3 , in making a similar survey of maize grain in Missouri,
found that it was unnecessary to plate the whole grain. He was able to
show experimentally that in any infected grain the organism was always
present in the tip or embryo end, irrespective of whether it occurred in
other parts of the kernel or not. The grain was divided into five approxi-
mately equal portions by removing the tip one-fifth and then dividing the
remainder into four equal parts by means of a horizontal and vertical
incision. The five pieces of kernel were then arranged on the medium so
that the tip portion was in the centre of the plate and the other portions
equidistant around the edges. Invariably where the kernel was infected,
fungous growth occurred from the tip portion, but in no case did growth
occur from the other portions if the tip remained sterile. Preliminary
isolation experiments carried out by the writer with a number of single
grains from infected cobs confirmed Branstetter’s finding in every instance,
and in all subsequent isolation work both with seed samples and with
grain from inoculated ears, the tip one-fifth of the grain was used
exclusively for plating purposes.
The Nature and Extent of Internal Seed-borne Infection.
The results of the seed survey work carried out with grain derived from
the 1932-33 and 1933-34 maize crops in New South Wales are given in
Table 1.
Table 1. —The nature and frequency of internal seed-borne infection in
fifty samples of seed maize from the 1932-33 and 1933-34 crops in New
South Wales, based on the results of isolations from 100 grains of each
sample. _____


Unless actual rotting occurs on the ears there are usually no external
symptoms by which grain internally infected with Gibberella moniliformis
or Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans can be recognised. During the pro-
cess of germination, however, the infected grains commonly show varying
degrees of discolouration accompanied by a certain amount of mycelial
development. In germination tests with seed infected internally with
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans, and which showed no external evi-
dence of infection, it has been found that within a few days pronounced
reddish or reddish-purple streaks and blotches develop on the caryopsis, and
later mycelial development occurs at the tip of the grain (Fig. 3).
Fig. 3.-Germinating grains of Hickory King maize, showing pronounced
reddish-pur pie discolouration resulting from heavy internal infection with
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
Bega, N.S.W., 1934.
liar infection with Gibberella saubinetii can usually he detected by the
presence of mycelium, or by the discoloured and partly rotted nature of the
grains, and it is very rare for this fungus to be present without producing
definite symptoms of infection, which in careful seed selection work causes
the ear to be discarded immediately. In selected seed, therefore, Gibberella
saubinetii does not occur to any appreciable extent, and in the seed survey
work it was found that the fungus occurred in six samples only. In three
cases its frequency was limited to 1 per cent., whilst in the other instances
it was 4 per cent., 8 per eent., and 10 per cent., respectively. The samples
showing percentage infections of 8 per cent, and 10 per cent, contained
many mouldy and partially rotted grains, which showed the characteristic
reddish weft of mycelium, and had obviously not been subjected to any
method of seed selection.


American experience with Gibberella saubinetii as a seed-borne organism
is largely in agreement with the local work. Melchers and Johnston" state
that, although over 95 per cent, of the ears tested in Kansas were infected
with Fusarium momliforme, it was only rarely that Gibberella saubinetii
occurred on the germinator. Branstetter 2 , 1922, in determining the degree
of internal infection of seed corn in Missouri, states that. Gibberella
.saubinetii was obtained only once from more than 1,600 platings. In a
later publication the same author 3 , 1927, states that many pure culture
isolations have been made nearly every year since the previous work was
done, but there has apparently been no increase m the amount
infection by Gibberella saubinetii. Manns and Adams , m making a sim
lar survey of corn in Delaware, found that 'Gibberella saub ™
present in 5.95 per cent, of the gram examined but state that it is muc
less common both in Delaware, and throughout L.S.A. t
■Cephalosporium or Fusarium moniliforme.
The seed survey has shown clearly that Gibberella
fujikuroi var. mbgUtimms, Cephalosponum acremomurn and
spp are commonly present as internal seed-borne organisms in maize in
New South Wales. Diplodia zeae, and Gibberella saubinetii do not occur
fo lny appreciable extent. The finding of CepMosponu^acreno «
of definite interest, as the presence of this organism in New South Wales
was hitherto unsuspected. This fungus is the causal agentof the bllack
bundle disease of maize, and although it has been commonly isolated from
.grain, the disease itself has not yet been recorded locally.
CULTURAL STUDIES ON GIBBERELLA FUJIKUROI
VAR. SUBGLUTINANS.
Materials and Methods.
Twentv single ascospore isolations of Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglu
J«re made from the Bathurst peritheeial nratenal r^
number of such isolations was also made from the Grafton material,
difficulty was experienced in the isolation of single ascospoies, as .
re®tTvefy7arge ln size and the mature asci and spores were readtly liberated
;ten the were subjected to slight pressure
transferred to potato dextrose agar slants.
Isolations were made from a
material and >V™ ;^u tfcharacmr This was also the case with the
SS fsda“s Pleli" observations, however, indicated that there
were appreciable cultural differences between the two sets of cultures.
None of the single a— cult™ £
froteS >orof Perithecia, ma r ia, was sefected and
readily when spore dilution


cultures were made on corn meal agar, or when ordinary mycelial transfers
SZtlTt* hard The Grafton isolate, on the ofher hand con
stentJy failed to react m this manner. A normal culture of this isolate
cuTtuTes fro“m the'f “°h h " d T f bj maWng 3 ™»1« of dilution
cultures from the colonies showing the greatest tendency towards snore
Sherbakoff et & S°* meth ° d recom mended by Wollenweber,
d 7 CultUral char fters of the Bathurst and Grafton isolates,
media A 1 W °% Var m ? 9luhn<in * w ere studied on nine different
on b A transfer ? °! inoculum were made from normal macroconidia
on each mpd agar ’ an^, triph f te subcultures of each isolate were established
on each medium. The media used throughout the cultural studies nrin-
ClP \ Hst°f f I f! ed ° f - h ° Se USG i d bj Bennettl or recommended by Sherbakoff 36 .
- of the various media used m these studies, together with their
hereunder aOCOlmt ° f ™ th ° ds » f are gfyen
1. Corn meal agar.
2. Meat extract agar.
d. Oat hard agar.
4. Potato agar.
5. Potato dextrose agar.
6. Potato agar plus 5 per cent, dextrose.
7. Salts glycerine agar.
8. Steamed maize grains.
9. Sterilised lucerne stems.
r 1; ™ eal war.— 3o grams whole maize meal, stirred in 400 ec of
tainedat^n^ 11 UP t 0 1° deg * Cent in a Water bath and main ~
a**' u * or ° ne W; filtered throu gh cheese cloth, 7.5
Sterilised b d t ed> medl r ade UP t 0 500 c * c - and steamed until dissolved,
e lhsed by steaming for thirty minutes on three successive days.
2. Meat extract agar.— Prepared according to standard method—
Lemco —3 grams.
Peptone—s grams.
Tap water —1,000 c.c.
Agar—2 per cent.
3. Oat hard agar.— so grams finely ground oats, prepared as in case of
corn meal agar, but 15 grams of agar used for each 500 c.c. of medium.
4. Potato agar. 100 grams of old potatoes, peeled and sliced; 300 c.c. cold
tap water added, and cooked in water bath for 40 minutes without distinteg-
raVnf tbe po ] tato ’ Altered through fourfold cheese cloth; 10 grams agar
addedand medium made up to 500 c.c. and steamed until dissolved; sterilised
at 10 lb. pressure for 20 minutes.
o. Potato dextrose agar.— loo grams peeled and sliced potatoes. Steamed
m 25C c.c. of water for 1 hour; filtered through cotton wool and restored to
original volume; 10 grams agar and 10 grams dextrose dissolved in 250>
c.c water and added to potato extract. Steamed 1 hour; filtered through
cotton wool and sterilised at 15 lb. pressure for 20 minutes.
6. Potato agar plus 5 per cent, dextrose.— Prepared as potato dextrose
agar, but o per cent, dextrose added instead of 2 per cent.


Medium.
Bathurst Isolate.
Grafton Isolate.
Corn Meal Agar ...
Aerial mycelium white, scanty.
Substratum dark purple drab
to purple drab in colour.
Microconidia abundant on aer-
ial mycelium. Large ochra-
ceous salmon sporodochia pre-
sent at point of inoculation and
bearing an abundance of nor-
mal macroconidia, 3, 4, 5, and
6-septate; 3 and 4 septate
spores predominant.
Mycelium sparsely developed,
principally submerged with
trace of white aerial mycelium.
Substratum unevenly dis-
coloured ranging from dark
perilla purple to dark slate
violet. Microconidia preval
ent on aerial mycelium. Small
spore masses at point of inocu-
lation, macroconidia princip-
ally 3 septate, swollen and
abnormal in appearance.
7. Salts glycerine agar. —
Sodium nitrate —2 grams.
Di potassium hydrogen phosphate—l gram.
Magnesium sulphate—o.s gram.
Potassium chloride —0.5 gram.
Ferrous sulphate—o.ol gram.
Salts dissolved in distilled water; 30 grams glycerine and 15 grams of agar
added; steamed until dissolved, then volume made up to 1,000 c.c. with
distilled water at 60 deg. Cent. Adjusted with sodium hydrate to pH 6.6.
Sterilised at 10 lb. pressure for 20 minutes.
8. Steamed maize grains. —Small quantity of maize grain placed in wide
test tubes and covered with cold water. Warmed up to 60 deg. Cent, and
held at this temperature for 6-12 hours. Free water poured off and tubes
plugged and sterilised by steaming for 20 minutes on three successive days.
9. Sterilised' lucerne stems. —Short lengths of green lucerne stems placed
on saturated cotton wool plugs in tubes containing small quantity of water,
and sterilised at 15 lb. pressure for 20 minutes.
The triplicate cultures of each isolate on all media were maintained at
25 deg. Cent, until the first description was made at the end of fourteen
days, but thereafter the cultures remained at room temperature. The cul-
tural characters of each isolate were described in detail fourteen days after
inoculation (Table 2) and again when the cultures were ten weeks old
(Table 3). , f ,
In addition to the cultural studies with triplicate tube cultures of each
isolate on the nine media, further observations on the Bathurst isolate were
made in plate cultures, and further observations on the Grafton isolate
were made in tube cultures of the various media, which had been inocu-
lated directly in each case with a single germinating ascospore. Sterilised
lucerne stems were not used in either case, and steamed maize gram was
•omitted from the plate culture studies of the Bathurst isolate..
The plate cultures were inoculated in the centre by pricking with a needle
hearing normal macroconidia from sporodochia on oat hard agar. I his
'series was examined and described when sixteen days old (Table 4) and
the single ascospore cultures of the Grafton isolate were treated similarly
when eighteen days old (Table 5). In each case the cultures were main-
tained at 25 deg. Cent, until the time of examination. _
The terms used throughout the cultural studies to designate colours were
In all cases derived from Ridgway 82 .
Cultural Characters of the Bathurst and Grafton Isolates.
Table 2. —The cultural characters of fourteen-days-old cultures of the
Bathurst and Grafton isolates of Gibberella fujikurot var. subglu-
tinans on various media.


Medium.
Bathurst Isolate.
Grafton Isolate.
Meat Extract Aga
r Mycelium principally submerget
gelatinous, aerial mvceliui
scantily developed, white i
colour. No colour produced i
substratum. Microconidi
prevalent, hyphae very var
able in size with swollen an
distorted cells. Abnormal
septate macroconidia occasion
ally present.
1, Mycelium principally submerged,,
n gelatinous; aerial mycelium
a scantily developed, white in
n colour. No colour produced in
a substratum. Similar in appear-
ance to Bathurst culture.
:1 Microconidia prevalent, hyphae
3 variable, with swollen and dis-
torted cells. Abnormal macro-
conidia occasionally present.
Oat Hard Agar
• Aerial mycelium well developed
dense, white to pale flesh ii
colour. Flesh to pinkish-buf
tinge present in substratum
Microconidia abundant on aer
ial mycelium Normal macro
conidia abundantly developec
in prominent sporodochia at
point of inoculation, 3,4, 5 anc
6-septate spores present, 3 and
4 septate forms predominant.
, Aerial mycelium well developed,
i dense, woolly in appearance,
shell pink to pale pinkish-buff
in colour. Substratum a dark
perilla purple to purplish-grey
in colour. Microconidia abun-
dant on aerial mycelium.
Sporodochia not formed at
point of inoculation. Macro-
conidia not prevalent; 3 sep-
tate; normal.
Potato Agar
Aerial mycelium fairly well de-
veloped, short, loose, cob-
webby, white in colour. No
colour in substratum. Micro-
conidia abundant; macro-
conidia produced abundantly
in light ochraceous salmon
coloured spore masses at point
of inoculation ; 3 and 4 sep-
tate spores predominant.
Mycelium sparsely developed;
principally submerged. Aerial
mycelium scanty, white,
restricted to upper portion of
slant. No colour in substra-
tum. Microconidia prevalent.
Macroconidia rare. No spore
masses at point of inoculation.
Potato Dextrose
Agar.
Mycelium well developed, dense,
varying from dull Indian purple
to pale greyish vinaceous in
colour. Substratum a dark
purple drab to anthracene
purple. Droplets of vinaceous
purple coloured moisture
present on aerial mycelium.
Microconidia abundant. Sep-
tate spores swollen. Macro-
conidia rare, swollen and
abnormal.
Mycelium well developed, dense,
white to pale pinkish cinnamon
in colour. No uniform dis-
colouration of substratum but
dark medici blue flecks and
spots developing in the upper
half of the slope. Micro-
conidia abundant, macro-
conidia rare; 3 septate,swollen
and abnormal.
Potato Agar, plus
5 per cent. Dex-
trose.
Mycelium well developed, loose,
cobwebby, with a dark vin-
aceous tinge. Substratum
violet carmine in colour.
Hyphae granular, irregular and
swollen. Microconidia abun-
dant. Macroconidia rare; 3
septate, swollen and abnormal.
Mycelium well developed, cob-
webby, white in colour. Sub-
stratum violet carmine n
colour. Hyphae irregular.
Microconidia abundant. Mac-
roconidia rare ; 3 septate,
swollen and abnormal.


Medium.
Bathurst Isolate.
Graf tor. Isolate.
Salts
Agar.
Glycerine
Mycelium principally submerged,
gelatinous, pale pinkish cinna-
mon in colour and forming a
slimy growth over surface of
slant. Trace of white aerial
mycelium at top of slant.
Microconidia abundant, prin-
cipally non-septate. Ochra-
ceous salmon coloured spore
masses developed at point of
inoculation, bearing swollen
abnormal 3 and 4 septate
macroconidia.
Mycelium principally submerged,,
gelatinous with light o eh ra-
ce o us salmon coloured slimy
more or less continuous spore
masses developed over the
surface of the slant. Traces of
short powdery aerial mycelium
at top of slant and round
margins of media. Spore
masses principally consist of
microconidia, with a few
swollen, abnormal 3 septate
macroconidia. Dusky green
blue flecks present along the
edges and across the surface
of the media.
Steamed
Grains.
Maize
Mycelium white, short, dense,
woolly in appearance and
irregularly developed on in-
dividual grains. Flesh pink
spore masses present on some
grains, consisting of normal
macroconidia principally 3 and
4 septate. Microconidia abun-
dant on aerial mycelium. Por-
tions of individual grains dis-
coloured a violet carmine to
Corinthian purple.
Appearance and type of growth
similar to the Bathurst isolate*
but the flesh pink spore masses
consist principally of micro-
conidia, and typical 3 and 4
septate macroconidia not so
abundantly developed.
Sterilised
Stems.
Lucerne
Mycelium sparsely developed,
short, white in colour. Light
pinkish cinnamon closely asso-
ciated sporodochia or pionnotes
of normal macroconidia abun-
dantly developed over surface
of stems.
Mycelium profusely developed*
white in colour and forming a
thick, dense mycelial weft
covering extensively developed
slimy pionnotal spore masses
on the surface of the stems.
Spores principally consist of
normal macroconidia which
show a marked tendency to
anastomose and lose normality
Medium.
Bathurst Isolate.
Grafton Isolate.
Corn Meal Agar ...
Substratum purplish - grey in
colour. Small bluish-black
groups of sclerotia sparsely
developed on slant.
Substratum showing colours of
violet slate to heliotrope slate.
Sparse development of bluish-
black groups of sclerotia.
Meat Extract Agar
No change in appearance of cul-
tures since previous examina-
tion.
No change in appearance of cul-
tures since previous examina-
tion.
Table 3. —The cultural characters of ten-weeks-old cultures of the.Bathurst
and Grafton isolates of Gibberella fujiJcuroi var. sub glut inans on
various media.


Medium.
Bathurst Isolate.
Grafton Isolate.
"Oat Hard Agar
.. Light ochraceous salmon colour*
waxy sporodochia abundant
developed along the sides ar
towards the base of tl
medium. Substratum lig]
pinkish cinnamon in colour.
>d No evidence of sporodochial pro-
y duction. Substratum showing
d pronounced discolouration of
ie Quaker drab, purplish-grey and
it blue violet black.
Potato Agar
.. Small light ochraceous salmo
coloured sporodochia occasior
ally present and bearing no:
mal macroconidia. No colou
produced in medium.
n No change in appearance of cul-
i- tures since previous examina-
“- tion.
r
Potato Dextros
Agar.
e Mycelium dark heliotrope grey t
vinaceous slate. Substratun
for the most part coloured blu
black violet. Normal 3 septat
macroconidia present on aeria
mycelium. Small dark globoic
sclerotia developed in uppe
J half of slant.
o No marked change in appearance
a of cultures since previous
e examination, but the dark
e medici blue flecks were more
1 pronounced and more exten-
i sively developed in upper part
of slant. No general dis-
colouration of substratum.
Potato Agar, 5 per
cent. Dextrose.
Mycelium Corinthian purple in
colour. Substratum very
deeply coloured, almost black.
At top and around edges of
slant violet carmine to pansy
purple in colour.
I Mycelium dark vinaceous purple.
Culture very similar in appear-
ance to Bathurst isolate. Sub-
stratum very dark, almost
black, but showing blackish-
red purple, and violet carmine
along sides and top of slant.
Salts Glycerine
Agar.
,
Trace only of aerial mycelium.
Upper portion of slant covered
with slimy light pinkish cinna-
mon pionnotes. Light ochra-
ceous salmon coloured sporo-
dochia developed at point of
inoculation. A few dusky dull
bluish green globoid sclerotia
developed in upper portion of
slant. The lower half of slant
markedly discoloured and
varying between Saccardo’s
slate and dark Payne’s grey.
The light ochraceous salmon
colour of the pionnotes pre-
viously described has been
replaced by an almost uniform
dark discolouration varying
from Saccardo’s slate at top
to a dark violet slate over the
greater part of the slant.
Sclerotia not present.
Steamed Maize
Grain.
Mycelium abundantly developed.
Light ochraceous salmon
coloured sporodochia preva-
lent, consisting principally of
normal 3 and 4 septate macro-
conidia. Individual grains
showing localised areas of
violet carmine or Corinthian
purple.
Mycelium abundantly developed.
Vinaceous cinnamon coloured
spore masses prevalent, prin-
cipally composed of 0 and 1
septate spores ; 3 septate
macroconidia not prevalent.
Individual grains showing areas
of dark perilla purple.
Sterilised Lucerne !
Stems.
Vo change in appearance of cul- ]
tures since previous examina-
tion.
Vo change in appearance of cul-
tures since previous examina-
tion.


Table 4. —The cultural characters of sixteen days old plate cultures of the
Bathurst isolate of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans on various
media.
Corn Meal Agar. —Aerial mycelium not abundant, short white and
powdery in appearance. Microconidia abundant on aerial mycelium, prin-
cipally non-septate. Pionnotes developed over surface of medium contain-
ing principally 0, 1 and 2-septate microconidia. Macroconidia rare, h-4
septate, swollen and abnormal. Hyphae commonly anastomosed. Sub-
stratum discoloured faint purple drab.
Meat Extract A gar. —Mycelium principally submerged; aerial mycelium
scanty, short, white and powdery in appearance. Pionnotal spore masses on
surface of medium, principally consisting of microconidia. Hyphae very
irregular, often coarse and densely granular, many cells swollen and more
or less rounded in appearance. Ho colour production in substratum.
Oat Hard Agar. —Aerial mycelium fairly well developed, short, not dense,
white to pale salmon in colour, and bearing abundant microconidia. Hyphae
irregular in size and appearance, many cells being densely granular.
Masses of microconidia produced on surface of medium. Macroconidia
rare and abnormal. No definite colouration of substratum, but a pale purple
drab tinge evident towards margin of plate.
Potato Agar. —Aerial mycelium sparsely developed, short, white, loose and
bearing abundant microconidia. Macroconidia plentiful on surface of
medium, but abnormal. No colour produced in substratum.
Potato Dextrose Agar— Aerial mycelium well developed, loose cobwebby,
white to purple grey in colour and bearing abundant microconidia. Pion-
notes present on surface of medium, principally containing microconidia
but also many swollen abnormal 3-4 septate macroconidia. Hyphae variable
in size and often densely granular, cells often swollen and distorted, bub
stratum purple drab in colour.
Potato Agar plus 5 per cent. Dextrose— Aerial mycelium well developed,
loose, cobwebby, approximating to livid brown in colour, and bearing abun-
dant microconidia. Spore masses present over surface of medium princi-
pally consisting of microconidia; macroconidia not prevalent, swollen and
abnormal. Hyphae variable and cells often swollen and distorted. Sub-
stratum deeply discoloured, Amaranth purple to Bordeaux m transmitted
g Salts Glycerine Agar.— Mycelium principally submerged, slimy, pale
pinkish cinnamon in colour. Hyphae irregular and frequently anastomosed;
cells granular and often swollen. Aerial mycelium scanty, very short and
poorly developed. Microconidia present. Slimy pionnotal spore masses
developed over surface of medium, and principally consisting of micio
conidia. Macroconidia rare, swollen and abnormal. Substratum showing
same colour as submerged mycelium—pale pinkish cinnamon.
Table s—The5 —The cultural characters of eighteen days old individual ascospoie
cultures of the Grafton isolate of Gibberella fujtkurox var. subglutmans
on various media.
Corn Meal Agar.— Aerial mycelium sparsely developed, short, white, cob-
forming a definite weft over surface of slant and Wing abun-
dant microconidia. Slight pionnotes over surface of medium. Macro
conidia not prevalent, but regular and normal m appearance. Hyphae
fairly regular with a strong tendency to anastomose m parallel stra .
pronounced or regular discolouration of substratum, but a light purple grey
colour preTenl towards base of slant. At the top of slant where the medium
was thin, small areas of dark maroon purple and greenish shades developed.


Extraci A 9ar.— Aerial mycelium very short, scanty, white; very
ittle evidence of submerged mycelium. Microconidia abundant. Hyphae
strTtum egUlar Wltl SWOI 611 VaCUolate cells - No «>lour produced in sub-
toi?of S mycel i um well developed, short and woolly at
I ant, but thick, dense and cottony elsewhere, principally white in
colour hut traces of livid pink in the short mycelium at top of slant.
_ crocon idia abundant on aerial mycelium, and normal 3 and 4 septate
macroconidia abundant m pionnotes on surface of medium. Hyphae
regular. Colour of substratum varying from perilla purple at top o/sknt
to vinaceous slate at the base.
Potato Agar.— Aerial mycelium fairly dense, short, woolly, white in
° <ll j l- Microconidia abundant. Macroconidia not prevalent. Hyphae
regular with occasional swollen cells. Ho colour produced in substratum.
potato Dextrose Agar.—Aerial mycelium well developed, fairly short,
thick, varying from white to livid pink or purplish grey in colour/ Micro-
conidia prevalent; macroconidia rare, swollen and abnormal. Hyphae
ai, ttnt,tv granulate, with strong tendency towards anastomosis.
Substratum not markedly discoloured, light mouse-grey towards base of
of medium medlCl bUe beeks P resent at to P of slant and along margins
Potato Agar plus 5 per cent. Dextrose.— Aerial mycelium fairly well de-
V f 01> ] ’ f . tj cobwebby, white to purplish vinaceous in colour, and bearing
abundant microconidia. Macroconidia not prevalent, swollen and abnormal.
ypiial anastomosis fairly common. Substratum violet carmine to blackish
red purple m colour.
Salts Glycerine Agar.— Aerial mycelium scanty, short, woolly and white in
colour. Basal portion of slant covered with slimy pale pinkish buff pion-
notes, consisting principally of microconidia. Macroconidia rare, swollen
und abnormal. Minute dusky bluish green sclerotia prevalent on the
surface o± the slant. No discolouration of substratum apart from the
colour given by the pionnotes.
Steamed Maize Grain.— Mycelium short, woolly, principally white
although traces of pinkish shade sometimes occurred. Microconidia very
abundant. Macroconidia also prevalent, majority of spores normal.
Drams unevenly discoloured and showing localised areas of violet carmine
and dark perilla purple.
Discussion of Cultural Studies.
d lie cultural studies have shown that Gibberella fujikuroi var. sub-
gtutinans grows satisfactorily on a number of different media. The type of
growth and the colour produced in the substratum varied considerably
according to the nature of the medium. Dextrose was found to have a very
marked effect on the intensity of colour production. In the media made
ria P°tato extract, no colour developed in the absence of dextrose, but the
addition of 5 per cent, dextrose produced very pronounced discolouration,
whilst the addition of 2 per cent, dextrose was responsible for somewhat
lighter colours. In addition to its effect on colour production dextrose also
influenced the development of aerial mycelium, which was usually more
profuse at the higher concentrations.


Medium.
Author.
Description.
Oat or Oatmeal
Agar.
Reinking and Wollen-
weber 31 .
Ocfemia and Men-
diola 28 .
Month old cultures characterised by a
medium dense, twisted, woolly, pale
pinkish cinnamon growth with deep slate
blue and dusky slate blue mycelium.
Spots of dusky slate violet, bluish slate
black, deep hyssop violet and light vina-
ceous cinnamon present in places.
Cultures seven days old characterised by
submerged slimy, white and pale pinkish
buff growth, with scanty, short, woolly an
dirty white aerial mycelium, substratum
light mauve and pale hortense violet.
With age the growth becomes thin and
light Amparo purple in colour, the sub-
stratum turns Mathews’ purple an(
Bradley’s violet in colour, and later deep
hyssop violet and deep dull bluish violet (3).
The type of medium also had a pronounced effect on sporulation. In all
cases microconidia were abundantly produced, but normal macroconidia
were only produced on oat hard agar, sterilised lucerne stems and, to a lesser
extent, on corn meal agar, potato agar and steamed maize grain, t hree
septate macroconidia were commonly produced on other media, but were
swollen and abnormal.
ITyphal fusion and conidial anastomosis occurred on a number of media,
and in most cases was followed by the production of small globoid sclerotia,
which usually occurred in groups or clusters. This phenomenon, however,
has been discussed elsewhere in this paper. Swollen, more or less rounded,
cells were commonly found in the hyphae, but chlamydospores were not
formed on any medium.
The cultural studies have shown clearly that the Bathurst and Grafton
isolates were culturally distinct, as they varied considerably in type of
mycelial growth, sporulation and colour production, and apparently repre-
sented distinct biologic strains of the organism.
Comparison of Cultural Characters with Previous Descriptions.
The cultural characters of Fusarium moniliforme var. subglutinans have
previously been described by Reinking and Wollenweber *\ Ocfemia and
Mendiola 28 and Ramos 29 . In a number of cases it was found that the same
type of medium had been used by all or some of these authors, and where
these types corresponded with the media used by the writer it has been
possible to make a comparison of the results obtained (fable b). me
comparison of cultural characters has been based principally on the nature
and colour of the mycelium and the colour produced m the substratum. .
It was shown by Sideris 37 that the development of pigment by Fusaria
was controlled mainly by the hydrogen ion concentration of the culture
medium. No evidence was available to show that the media used by any
of these authors were adjusted to any definite hydrogen ion concentration.
Apart, therefore, from possible differences in colour production due to
biologic strains, or the source from which the isolates were obtained 1
was to be expected that variations in the degree of colour production would
be found to occur.
Table 6.—Comparison of previous descriptions _of certain cultural char-
acters of Fusarium moniliforme var. subglutinans with the correspond-
ing characters observed in the Bathurst and Grafton isolates of
Gibberella fujilcuroi var. subglutinans.


Medium.
Author.
Description.
Oat or Oatme<
Agar.
il Ramos 29
Edwards (present in
vestigation).
.. At 4 day’s growth, submerged slimy, white
and pale pinkish buff, with scanty short
woolly and dirty white aerial mycelium!
•Substratum light mauve and pale Amparo
At 7 days light mauve and pale hortense
violet, the colour finally changing to
Mathews purple and Bradley’s violet.
Bathurst isolate.— 15 days—Aerial mycelium
well developed dense, white to pale flesh
in colour. Flesh to pinkish buff tinge in
substratum. At 10 weeks, substratum
light pinkish cinnamon.
Grafton isolate.— \5 days—Aerial mycelium
well developed, dense, woolly, shell pink
to pale pinkish buff in colour. Sub-
stratum dark perilla purple to purplish
grey in colour. At 10 weeks—Substratum
Quaker s drab, purplish grey and blue
violet black.
Corn Meal Agar. ...
Reinking and Wollen
weber.
Ocfemia and Men-
diola.
Ramos
Edwards
1 Medium not used.
Submerged, slimy, thin colourless growth.
Scanty short aerial mycelium developing
later. No colour produced in sub-
stratum.
At 4 days submerged slimy, deep lavender
to dark violet and blackish purple growth
with short, woolly, purple lilac aerial
mycelium. At 7 days, substratum
Bishops purple and Rood’s violet and
finally Mathew’s purple to Bradley’s violet.
Bathurst isolate. —15 days—Aerial mycelium
white, scanty, substratum purple drab
to dark purple drab. At 10 weeks sub-
tratum purplish grey.
Grafton isolate. —15 days—Mycelium princi-
pally submerged, substratum dark perilla
purple to dark slate violet. At 10 weeks
substratum violet slate to heliotrope slate!
Inboth isolates as the cultures aged small
bluish black globoid sclerotia developed
on slants.
Hard Potato Agar.,
or Potato Agar.
Reinking and Wollen-
weber.
2-14 days Growth not profuse, mycelium
cartridge buff, shell pink, vinaceous pink,
and sometimes rosalane purple. Tawny
olive and Saccardo’s umber colouration
occasionally produced. Cultures up to
3 months old have matted, dense, felty,
shell pink, rosalane purple or light pinkish
cinnamon growth at top of slant, and at the
base a Corinthian red, cinnamon brown,
slate purple and dusky green blue (2)
growth. Pionnotes, light vinaceous cinna-
mon or pale ochraceous buff.


Medium.
Author.
Description.
Hard Potato Agar.,
or Potato Agar.—
Ocfemia and Men-
diola.
Medium not used.
contd.
Ramos
4 days —Scanty, short, pale cinnamon pink
aerial mycelium, substratum transparent.
7 days—Substratum sea-shell pink. 20
days—Substratum light buff and light
ochraceous buff.
Edwards
Bathurst isolate. —15 days—Aerial mycelium
fairly well developed, short, loose, and
white in colour. No discolouration of
substratum. 10 weeks —No discoloura-
tion of substratum. Light ochraceous
salmon sporodochia sparingly developed.
Grafton isolate. —15 days—Mycelium princi-
pally submerged, gelatinous. Aerial
mycelium scanty, white in colour and
restricted to upper portion of slant. No
discolouration of substratum. 10 weeks—
No change in appearance of cultures.
Potato Dextrose
Agar (2 per cent.
Reinking and Wollen-
weber.
Medium not used.
Dextrose).
Ocfemia and Men-
diola.
7 days—Aerial mycelium scarce, woolly,
pale lavender violet in colour. Sub-
stratum Mathews’ purple and light
lavender violet. 22 days Aerial
mycelium, pale flesh and a few blackish
violet pionnotes present. Substratum
fluorite violet. 37 days—Aerial mycelium
lavender in colour and fairly well
developed. Substratum dusky dull violet
(2) and dusky dull violet (1).
Ramos
7 days—Aerial mycelium scanty, pale
lavender violet; substratum lavender
violet to Mathews’ purple. 12 days—
Aerial mycelium pale flesh; substratum
petunia violet; pionnotes of the same
colour also present. 20 days—No change
in growth characters but substratum dark
violet in colour.
Edwards
Bathurst isolate. —15 days—Aerial mycelium
well developed, dense, dull Indian purple
to pale greyish vinaceous; substratum
dark purple drab to anthracene purple.
10 weeks —Mycelium dark heliotrope
grey to vinaceous slate; substratum blue
black violet.
Grafton isolate. —15 days—Aerial mycelium
well developed, dense, white to pale
pinkish cinnamon; no uniform discoloura-
tion of substratum, but dark medici blue
flecks and spots present in upper portion
of slant. 10 weeks —No marked change
in appearance of culture; no general dis-
colouration of substratum, but dark
medici blue flecks more pronounced and
more extensively developed.


*
Medium.
Author.
Description.
Potato Agar plus
per cent. Dej
trose.
5 Reinking and Woller
c- weber.
i- Plate culture. At 1 month aerial mycelium
scanty, pale greyish vinaceous. Mycelium
in substratum burnt lake.
(Medium used b
Ocfemia an!
Mendiola con
tained 4 per cent
Dextrose.)
V Ocfemia and Men
i diola.
7 days Aerial mycelium scanty, twisted
and mauvette in colour; substratum
Mathews purple. 12 days—Aerial
mycelium medium dense, short, woolly
and deep vinaceous lilac; the whole growth
appeared deep purplish vinaceous. 22
days—Aerial mycelium pansy purple;
substratum violet carmine and blackish
purple; blackish red purple pionnotes
present. 37 days—Aerial mycelium
perilla purple; substratum perilla purple
to dark naphthalene violet.
Ramos
Medium not used. Potato agar plus 10 per
cent, dextrose was used and description of
culture agrees almost entirely with that
given by Ocfemia and Mendiola for the
4 per cent, dextrose medium.
Edwards
Bathurst isolate. — 15 days—Aerial mycelium
well developed, loose, with a dark vinace-
ous tinge; substratum violet carmine.
10 weeks—Aerial mycelium Corinthian
purple; substratum very deeply coloured,
almost black; at top and around edges of
slant medium violet carmine and pansy
purple.
Grafton isolate. —15 days—Aerial mycelium
well developed, white in colour; sub-
stratum violet carmine. 10 weeks—
Aerial mycelium dark vinaceous purple;
substratum very dark, almost black at
top and around edges of slant; medium
blackish red purple and violet carmine.
A critical examination of the data concerning- colour production in the
a~ U fA aS Sh °T t i la s’- despite minor differences, there is substantial
g ement between the findings of the various authors.
On oat or oatmeal agar the final colours, with one exception, were found
to be various tints or shades of violet and purple. The Bathurst isolate
was the exceptional culture, as the deepest colour produced in the sub-
stratum was light pinkish cinnamon. Colours of pale pinkish cinnamon
and light vmaceous cinnamon were also recorded on this medium hv
ein king and Wollenweber \ although they were not the deepest colours
produced On corn meal agar Ocfemia and Mendiola 28 found that no sub-
stratum discolouration occurred, whilst Kamos 29 and the writer have re-
corded various purple and violet colours.
On potato agar neither of the local isolates produced any discolouration,
Kamos observed colours of light buff and light ochraceous buff, whereas
emkmg and Wollenweber obtained much deeper discolouration of the


Bathurst Isolate.
Grafton Isolate.
Temperature of
Period of Growth.
Period of Growth.
Growth.
2 days.
4 days.
6 days.
2 days.
4 days.
6 days.
Degrees Cent.
5
mm.
0
mm.
0
mm.
0
mm.
0
mm.
0
mm.
0
10
2
14
27
2
13
25
15
4
16
29
3
24
28
20
13
31
56
11
33
57
25
19
51
84
18
52
84
30
23
58
90
23
56
84
37
5
6
7
5
10
13
37 to 40
3
4
5
0
1
2
substratum. All cultures, with the exception of the Grafton isolate, were
found to produce violet colours on potato dextrose agar, the colour produc-
tion in the exceptional case being restricted to dark medici blue flecks
throughout the medium.
In all cases, however, the addition of a larger quantity of dextrose
greatly increased the intensity of the substratum discolouration. The
results obtained on potato agar with a higher dextrose content were of
particular interest, since, according to Sherbakoff 0 ' 1 , a potato hard agar plus
5 to 10 per cent, dextrose provided an excellent medium for the study of
colour production in the Fusaria. The dextrose content of the media
used by the various authors ranged from 4to 10 per cent. The principal
substratum colours recorded were burnt lake, violet carmine, pansy purple,
blackish purple and blackish red purple, and reference to Ridgway" has
shown that these colours were very similar to one another.
TEMPERATURE STUDIES.
Material and Methods
No information was available concerning the temperature relationships
of the organism, and controlled temperature studies were conducted to
determine the optimum temperature for mycelial growth, and to study the
cultural characters of the fungus at temperatures ranging from 5 to 40
deg. Cent.
The studies were carried out in specially selected uniform petri dishes,
each containing 12 c.c. of potato agar plus 5 per cent, dextrose. This
medium was selected as it was known to favour the production of abundant
aerial mycelium and to be highly satisfactory for the study of colour pro-
duction. In each case the plates were inoculated in the centre of the
medium by a minute drop of a sterile water suspension of normal macro-
conidia obtained from oat hard agar cultures. Duplicate cultures of the
Bathurst and Grafton isolates were maintained at each of eight tempera-
tures.
The growth rate at each temperature was determined by measuring the
diameter of the mycelial growth in the duplicate plates of each isolate, and
then recording the mean for each set of duplicates (Table 7). Measure-
ments were taken regularly at forty-eight hour intervals, until the most
rapidly g’rowing colony had reached the sides of the plate.
Growth Rates at Different Temperatures.
Table 7.—The diameter growth rates at different temperatures of plate
cultures of the Bathurst and Grafton isolates of GibberellcL fujikuroi
var. subglutinans on potato agar plus 5 per cent, dextrose.


Tempera-
ture.
Bathurst Isolate.
Grafton Isloate.
Deg. Cent.
5
Although there was not sufficient growth to be evident, microscopic examina-
tion showed that in both cases spore germination had occurred and a
trace of fine mycelial growth had been produced. A few microconidia
were present, but no discolouration of the substratum occurred.
id
Mycelium white, granular, principally
submerged. A fringe of aerial
mycelium present at the outer
margins of the colony. No dis-
colouration of substratum.
Mycelium white, densely granular,
totally submerged. No fringe of
aerial mycelium. No discoloura-
tion of substratum.
15
Culture similar to culture at 10 deg.
Cent,, but marginal fringe of
aerial mycelium more pronounced.
No discolouration of substratum.
Culture similar to culture at 10 deg.
Cent. Mycelium totally sub-
merged. No fringe of aerial myce-
lium. No discolouration of sub-
stratum.
The most rapid mycelial growth of each isolate occurred at 30 deg. Cent.
The optimum temperature for the growth of the fungus lies between ?5
and 30 deg. Cent., and the results indicate that the true optimum is closer
to 30 deg. Cent, than it is to the lower figure. The optimum temperature for
the mycelial growth of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans has not been
determined previously, hut for the closely related fungus Gibberella fuji-
kuroi, Kurosawa , 1929, has stated that the optimum temperature lies
between 25 and 30 deg. 'Cent., with a minimum and maximum at 2 and
40 deg. Cent, respectively. Seto 35 has found the optimum for this organism
to be 2:5 deg. Cent., whereas Nisikado, Matsumoto, and Yamauti 27 have
given the optimum as 27 deg. Cent.
Cultural Characters at Different Temperatures.
During the course of the growth rate studies the Bathurst and Grafton
isolates showed marked cultural differences, particularly in regard to
mycelial type and intensity of colour production in the substratum. In
addition, it was found that each isolate showed considerable variation in
mycelial type and intensity of colour production at the different tempera-
tures. In both cases, however, it was found that the deepest colouration
of the medium occurred at 25 deg. Cent.
The variations in the appearance of the cultures at different temperatures
were so striking that after the final growth rate measurements had been
taken it was decided to maintain all cultures at their respective tempera-
tures to enable detailed observations to be made on the cultural variations.
I he cultural characters of each isolate at each temperature were described
in detail eight days (Table 8) and four weeks (Table 9) respectively, after
inoculation.
Table 8. —Cultural characters at different temperatures of eight-days-old
plate cultures of the Bathurst and Grafton isolates of Gibberella fuji-
kuroi var. subglutinans on potato agar plus 5 per cent, dextrose.


Tempera-
ture.
Bathurst Isolate.
Grafton Isolate*
Deg. Cent.
20
Mycelium submerged in central por-
tion of colony for a radial distance
of about 7 mm. from point of inocu-
lation. Central submerged myce-
lium surrounded by abundant
development of loose, short, white
aerial mycelium, extending over
the greater part of medium. Sub-
stratum showing a perilla purple
discolouration for a radial distance
of 1 -5 cm. from point of inoculation.
Mycelium principally submerged with
a slight surrounding fringe of white
aerial mycelium. Substratum uni-
formly discoloured pale pinkish
buff. The mycelial characters and
the colour of the substratum were
in marked contrast to the corres-
ponding Bathurst isolate.
25
No evidence of submerged mycelium.
Plates uniformly covered with a
moderately thick weft of short
white aerial mycelium. Consider-
ably more colour production than
at 20 deg. Cent. Substratum
dahlia carmine to Corinthian
purple for a radial distance of 2J
cm. from point of inoculation.
Small area of submerged mycelium
surrounding the point of inocula-
tion. Remainder of plate covered
with short, white aerial mycelium.
Substratum for the most part pale
pinkish buff, as at 20 deg. Cent.
In one plate two sectors were
present which had produced a
perilla purple discolouration of the
substratum.
30
Plates uniformly covered with thick
weft of short white aerial mycelium.
Substratum discolouration lighter
in colour than at 25 deg. Cent.,
approximating to light perilla
purple or vinaceous purple.
Plates uniformly covered with thick
weft of short white aerial mycelium.
Substratum pale pinkish buff, as
at 25 deg. Cent., but discolouration
more widespread.
37 to 40
At temperatures of 37 to 40 deg. Cent, there were no apparent cultural
differences between the two isolates, but the type of growth produced was
quite distinct from that occurring at lower temperatures. In each case
small raised, waxy ochraceous-salmon colonies were formed, which con-
sisted of very short hyphae covered with a very sparse development of
aerial mycelium. There was no discolouration of the substratum.
Deg. Cent.
5
Colony 22 mm. in diameter. Mycelium
principally gelatinous and sub-
merged, with a distinct fringe of
white aerial mycelium about 2 mm.
wide. Gelatinous mycelium show-
ing traces of pale pinkish buff. A
raised, light ochraceous salmon
gelatinous spore mass present in
centre of colony at point of inocu-
lation. Spores swollen, distorted
and abnormal.
Colony 18 mm. in diameter. Mycelium
white, scanty, principally gelatin-
ous and submerged. No fringe of
aerial mycelium. Raised pale
ochraceous buff gelatinous spore
mass present in centre of colony.
Table 9. —Cultural characters at different temperatures of one-month-old
plate cultures of the Bathurst and Grafton isolates of Gibberella fuji-
Jcuroi var. sub glut mans on potato agar plus 5 per cent, dextrose.


Tem-
perature
1
Bathurst Isolate.
Grafton Isolate.
Deg. Cen
10
t.
Colony developed over whole plat
Submerged gelatinous slim
mycelium developed for a radi,
distance of 11 to 12 mm. from poir
of inoculation. Medium otherwis
covered with white aerial myceliun
cottony and not very dense. Sul
stratum intermediate in colou
between Spinel red and India
I lake.
e. Colony developed over whole plate,
y Mycelium totally submerged, gela-
d tinous and slimy. No evidence of
it aerial mycelium. Mycelium
e faintly tinged with light ochraceous
i, salmon, otherwise no discoloura-
tion of substratum,
r
n
15
Submerged gelatinous, slim 1
mycelium developed over a radia
distance of 11 to 12 mm. fror
point of inoculation. Submergei
mycelium surrounded by a pro
nounced raised growth of whit<
aerial mycelium which extendec
over remainder of plate. Sub
stratum dahlia carmine.
V Mycelium principally submerged,
1 gelatinous and slimy, with traces
) of short, scanty aerial mycelium
1 developing thinly over the medium.
No marked colouration of sub-
! stratum, but mycelium showing a
slight tinge of pale ochraceous buff,
with traces of perilla purple.
20
No submerged gelatinous mycelium
aerial mycelium well developed
fairly dense, cobwebby in appear-
ance and white in colour, sub-
stratum very deeply coloured in
reflected light, slightly darker than
blackish red purple, and in trans-
mitted light amaranth purple or
Bordeaux.
No gelatinous mycelium, aerial
mycelium white in colour and
scantily developed, and much
shorter than in the Bathurst
isolate. Substratum very deeply
coloured and similar in appearance
to the Bathurst isolate.
25
Aerial mycelium well developed,
dense, cottony and white in colour.
Substratum very deeply coloured,
similar in appearance to the culture
at 20 deg. Cent.
Aerial mycelium not so profusely
developed as in the Bathurst
isolate. Substratum not so deeplv
coloured, approximating to Van-
dyke red.
30 1
Aerial mycelium well developed but
shorter and not so profuse as at
25 deg. Cent. Substratum very
dark in colour, almost black in
reflected light, pansy purple to
blackish red purple in transmitted
light.
Aerial mycelium fairly well developed,,
short and not so profuse as the
Bathurst isolate. Colour of sub-
stratum much lighter than Bathurst
isolate, Vandyke red to dark
vinaceous purple in reflected light,
and deep purplish vinaceous in
transmitted light.
35
Colony only 5 mm. in diameter,
forming a raised thick mat-like
growth, light ochraceous salmon in
colour. No evidence of aerial
mycelium. Substratum showing
same colour as colony.
Colony 20 mm. in diameter, forming
a raised thick mat-like growth,
sea-shell pink in colour. Slight
trace of very short aerial mycelium
over surface of colony. Sub-
stratum light buff.
37
to 40
Colony only 3 to 4 mm. in diameter.
Type of growth and colours pro-
duced similar to culture at 35 dee.
Cent.
Colony 6 mm. in diameter with a
slight fringe of prostrate gelatinous
submerged mycelium around the
raised central portion of colony.
Colours similar to those at 35 dee.
Cent.


Discussion of Temperature Studies.
In addition to determining the optimum temperature for the mycelial
growth of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans, the temperature studies
have again shown clearly that there are definite cultural differences be-
tween the Bathurst and Grafton isolates. The differences in growth charac-
ters were most pronounced at the lower temperatures, and tended to become
less evident as the optimum growth temperature was approached. The
differences in colour production were usually evident at all temperatures.
The studies have also shown clearly that with each isolate temperature
was an important factor in determining the intensity of colour production
in the medium. The results have also indicated that the temperature of
maximum colour production does not necessarily correspond with the
optimum temperature for mycelial growth.
LONGEVITY OF THE FUNGUS.
It has been shown by Maneval 19 that, at a temperature of approximately
10 deg. Cent., cultures of certain species of Fusarium retained viability
for eight years.
Ito and Kimura 9 , 1931, stated that the hyphae of Gibberella fujikuroi were
found to be viable after three years desiccation in the laboratory, and the
conidia remained alive for two years or more under dry conditions indoors.
Macroconidia and mycelium of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans
from sterilised lucerne stems and oat hard agar cultures made in June,
1932, persistently failed to grow in March, 1935, but, in three instances,
cultures of the same age on steamed maize grain were found to be viable.
Cultures on a number of media made in September, 1933, readily grew
when transferred in March, 1935.
All of the above cultures were stored in the laboratory at ordinary room
tGiupGr&turG.
The fungus was also readily isolated in December, 1934, from pots of
soil inoculated in September, 1933. Ascospores derived from penthecia
material collected in June, 1932, and stored in boxes, to which paradich or-
henzene was periodically added, failed to germinate m March, 1935,_ but
ascospores up to eighteen months old, stored under the same conditions,
have been found to germinate readily.
MORPHOLOGY OF GIBBERELLA FUJIKUROI VAR. SUBGLUTINANS.
1. The Conidial Stage.
General Description.
In cultural work little difficulty has been experienced in distinguishing
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans from Gibberella moniliformis by mac-
roscopic examination. The aerial mycelium of the former fungus is generally
more loose in appearance than that of ' Gibberella moniliformis and, in
addition, there are certain differences in colour production m the sub
stratum which are useful aids to identification. Microscopically, the two
organisms are readily distinguishable, as the manner 0 P ro * on °.
microconidia is invariably distinct. In Gibberella moniliformis the micro-
conidia are either produced in chains or in clusters at the ends of the
conidiophores. The degree of chain formation varies m different isolates
but invariably some, at least, of the microconidia will be found adhering to
form the characteristic chains.
The microconidia of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans were never
produced in chains, hut always occurred either singly or m clusters at the
ends of short, simple, or branched conidiophores which arose later, y


from the mycelium (Fig. 4). The typical manner of production was in
clusters, and it was only rarely that they occurred singly. The micro-
conidia are hyaline, ovoid, or slightly elongate and typically non-septate.
One and two septate forms also occurred, but were not abundant. The
microconidia were produced abundantly on the aerial mycelium, and
occurred to a lesser extent in the pionnotes and sporodochia.
Ihe maeroconidia occurred on the mycelium, in sporodochia and in
pionnotes. In all isolates on potato dextrose agar the maeroconidia were
swollen, densely granular and abnormal, with atypical basal and apical cells.
In normal cultures developed on oat hard agar, corn meal agar and steril-
ised lucerne stems, pionnotes or sporodochia were usually produced, and the
Fig. 4. —Photomicrograph of aerial mycelium of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans,
showing conidiophores and the typical manner of production of the microconidia. x 205.
maeroconidia were slender, sickle-shaped, attenuate and pedicillate. They
were principally three-septate, but one-, two-, four- and five-septate forms
were commonly present, whilst an occasional six- or seven-septate spore
was found (Figs. 5 and 6). On certain media fusion and anastomosis of
the maeroconidia were commonly observed.
In abnormal cultures the mycelium was, generally, for the most part
submerged, the hyphae were swollen, irregular in size and densely granular,
and hyphal fusion and anastomosis were common. In normal cultures the
aerial mycelium was well developed, the hyphae were hyaline, septate,
regular in size and appearance, and frequently branched. The aerial
mycelium was typically loose in appearance and showed various colours as
previously described in the cultural studies. Swollen hyphal cells com-
monly occurred, but true chlamydospores were never produced. On certain
media small dark bluish-black globoid sclerotia were produced. These
bodies commonly occurred in clusters, and were produced as a result of
eonidial and hyphal anastomosis. In external structures they were very
similar to perithecia, but were considerably smaller and regularly failed to
produce spores.


Conidial Measurements Determined by Other Investigators.
In the original description of Fusarium moniliforme var. subglutinans-
by Wollenweber and Reinking 4 '' it was stated that “The fungus differs from
the type principally in having the microconidia not borne in chains; micro-
conidia unicellular 6-15 x 2.0-3.5 microns; macroconidia, mostly 3-septate
21-38 x 3.0-3.5 (18-50 x 2.75-4.0) u; fewer 1-septate, 10-25 x 2.5-3.5 u;
4-septate, 27-50 x 3.25-4.0 u; sometime 5-septate, 43-55 x 3.25-4.0 1 u; 6-or 7-
septate, 48-57 x 3.25-4.0 u; chlamydospores absent; sclerotia dark blue.’’
Fig. 5. —Drawing* of conidia of the Bathurst isolate of Gibberella fujikvroi var. subglutinans,
developed in sporodochia on oat hard agar. x 1,000.
Fig. 6.— Drawing of conidia of the Grafton isolate of Gibberellu fujikuroi var. subglutinans,
developed in pionnotes on oat hard agar, x 1,000.
Reinking and Wollonweber 31 made measurements of pionnotal conidia
produced in hard potato agar cultures, eleven, thirty and forty-four days
old in one-month-old cultures on melilotus stems, and in ten ays o (
cultures on green bean pods. The frequency, mean dimensions, and range
» All drawings were made with a right angle prism projection apparatus similar to that described by
Colley, R. H., Phytopath. 24 • 424-426, 19z4.


o*. the three , four- and five-septate macroconidia obtained under all con-
ditions were given, but the corresponding figures for the non-, one- and two-
septate spores were not determined from the measurements obtained.
1 hese determinations were made by the writer from the measurements
recorded by the authors and have been set out hereunder, together wi tli the
ngure given for the macroconidia:—
0-septate 24 per cent. 10.6 x 2.8 (6-15 x 1.75-3.5) microns.
1- 32 per cent. 17.5 x 2.9 (10-25 x 2.25-3.5) microns.
2- 8 per cent. 20.8 x 3.2 (16-23 x 3.25-3.5) microns.
3- 31 per cent. 32 x 3.5 (18-50 x 2.75-4) microns.
4- 2 per cent. 38 x 3.5 (27-50 x 3.25-4) microns.
5- 2 per cent. 50 x 3.5 (43-55 x 3.25-4) microns.
According to a later description given by Wollenweber 45 , 1931: “The
ungus. differs from the type principally in having the microconidia not
borne m chains. Microconidia, unicellular or falsely septate. Macro-
conidia, mostly 3-septate, occasionally 1-2-septate, less frequently 4-or 5-
septate, and very rarely 6- or 7-septate.
0-septate 9 x 2.7 mostly 7-12 x 2-3.5 (6-15 x 1.7-3.5) microns.
1-septate 17 x 2.9 mostly 15-19 x 2.5-3 (10-25 x 2.2-3.5) microns
3-septate 32 x 3.5 mostly 25-38 x 3.5 (18-50 x 2.7-4.5) microns,
o-septate 50 x 3.5 mostly 43-53 x 3.2-4 (40-55 x 3-4.5) microns.
6- /-septate 48-57 x 3.25-4.5 microns.
Chlamydospores absent; sclerotia dark blue.”
Ocfemia and Mendiola found the range and average measurements of
conidia produced on a number of different media to be: —•
0-septate 10.1-31.5 x 2.7-4.2; average 15.5 x 3.5 microns.
1- 16.0-33.4 x 3.1-4.5; average 23.2 x 3.9 microns.
2- 20.7-34-3 x 3.2-5.6; average 26.2 x 4.2 microns.
3- 28.6-38.5 x 3.4-4.3; average 31.2 x 4.1 microns.
4- 30.2-49.8' x 3.6-3.7; average 40.0 x 3.6 microns.
5- 51.7-69.0 x 3.6-4.2; average 60.3 x 3.9 microns.
The four- and five-septate macroconidia were stated to be rare and found
only in cultures. The four-septate spores occurred on steamed rice and
oatmeal agar, but the five-septate spores occurred only on the latter
medium.
Ihe spore measurements obtained by Ramos 29 were in very close agree-
ment with those obtained by Ocfemia and Mendiola 28 , and were as
follow: —
0-septate 6.6-21.8 x 2.4-4.7 microns; average 14.1 x 3.4 u.
1- 16.7-29.5 x 3.3-5.1 microns; average 22.6 x 3.7 u.
2- 22.5-33.5 x 3.3-4.7 microns; average 27.0 x 4.1 u.
3- 26.6-41.3 x 3.8 -5.1 microns; average 31.8 x 4.3 u.
4- 35.8-43.4 x 3.6-4.0 microns; average 40.1 x 3.9 u.
5- 57.9-70.7 x 3.5-4.4 microns; average 60.7 x 4.1 u.
Conidial Measurements of the Bathurst and Grafton Isolates.
None of the previous authors stated the number of measurements on
which the conidial dimensions were based. The writer has attempted to
define the spore dimensions of the Bathurst and Grafton isolates as accu-
rately as possible, and conidia of both isolates have been measured from


Septation
Class.
Frequency.
Range.
Modal Class.
Mean.
0
1
2
3
4
5*
per cent.
21
7
2-5
59-3
9-7
0-4
microns.
6-3-15 0 x 2-5-4 4
13-8-22-5 x 31-4-4
17-8-25-0 x 3-3-5 0
22-5-47-5 x 3-8-5 0
37-5-50-0 x 3-8-5 0
40-0-55-0 x 4-4-5 0
microns.
7-5-12-5 x 31-3-8
15-0-20-0 x 3 8-4-4
20-0-22-5 x 3 8-4-4
37-5-42-5 x 3 8-4-4
40-0-45-0 x 4-4-5 0
microns.
10-1 x 3-3
17-0 x 3-9
21-8 x 4-1
38-0 x 4-3
43-3 x 4-5
47-5 x 4-9
Septation
Class.
Frequency.
Range.
Modal Class.
Mean.
0
1
per cent.
32-8
18-6
5-0
microns.
7-5-12-5 x 2-5-3-8
12-5-21-3 x 31-4-4
17-5-25 0 x 3 1-4-4
microns.
10 0-11-2 x 31-3-8
15-0-17-5 x 31-3-8
18-8-20-0 x S-8-4-4
microns.
10-5 x 3-3
15-9 x 3-6
19-9 x 3-9
33-4 x 4-2
41-2 x 4-4
44-6 x 4-3
3
4
5
36-8
60
0-8
22-5-40 0 x 3 1-5-0
35 0-50 0 x 3-8-5 0
41-3-50-0 x 3-8-5 0
32-5-37-5 x 3-8-4 4
40-0-42-5 x 4-4
42-5-47-5 x 3-8-4 4
cultures on several types of media. In each case fifty spores of every
septation class were measured from each medium. The spore dimensions
given for each isolate on any medium are thus based on the actual measure-
ments of 250-300 conidia. The number was slightly variable, as the fre-
quency of the septation classes varied to some extent on different media,
and it was not always possible to obtain fifty conidia of each class. All
measurements were made from normal cultures and, with the exception
of one series of microconidia taken from the aerial mycelium of the
Bathurst isolate, all conidia were obtained either from sporodochia or
pionnotes.
In addition to determining spore size on the various media, the relative
frequency of each septation class was ascertained by classifying about
500 conidia in twenty-five to thirty fields on a number of slides. Conidial
measurements of the Bathurst isolate were made from sporodochia on
sterilised lucerne stems (Table 10), oat hard agar (fable 11), corn meal
agar (Table 12), and also from aerial mycelium on the latter medium
(Table 13). In the case of the Grafton isolate, measurements were made
of conidia from sporodochia on sterilised lucerne stems (Table 14) and
pionnotes on oat hard agar (Table 15). In each table the frequency, range
modal class and mean of each septation class have been given. On oat hard
agar cultures of the Grafton isolate it was necessary to make measurements
a few days after spore production, as the macroconidia in older cultures
anastomosed freely and were unsuitable for measurement. ISTo measure-
ments of the Grafton isolate were made from corn meal agar, as normal
macroconidia were not produced on this medium.
Table 10.—Measurements of sporodochial conidia produced on sterilised
lucerne stems in eleven days’ old cultures of the Bathurst isolate ot
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
T\ble 11.—Measurements of sporodochial conidia produced on oat hard
agar in eight weeks old cultures of the Bathurst isolate of Gibberella
fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
Two 6-septate spores measured —42-5 x 3-8 ; 55-0 x 4-4.
f 78665 —B
* Only 5 spores measured.


Septation
Class.
Frequency.
Range.
Modal Class.
Mean.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6 j
per cent.
microns.
microns.
10-0-11-3 x 3-1
15-0-17-5 x 31-3-8
20-0-21-3 x 3 8-4-4
32-5—37-5 x 4-4
40-0-45 0 x 4-4
42-5-47-5 x 4-4-5-0
15-4
11-4
6-4
42-0
20-8
3-4
0-3
7-5-15 0 x 2-5-3-8
12-5-22-5 x 31-4-4
16-3-25 0 x 3 1-5 0
25-0-42-5 x 3-8-5-0
35- x 3-8-5 0
36- x 3-8-5-0
45-0-50-0 x 4-4-5 0
microns.
10-7 x 3-1
15-5 x 3-6
20-6 x 4-0
35-6 x 4-4
42-1 x 4-5
44-3 x 4-5
49-0 x 4-8
—
J
■
One 8-septate spore measured 67-5 x a -fi
Septation
Class.
Frequency.
Range.
Modal Class.
Mean.
0
1
2*
per cent.
88-2
11-2
0-6
microns.
7-5—13-8 x 2 5-4-4
11-3-20 0 x 3 1-4-4
17-5-20-0 x 3-8-5-0
microns.
10-0-12-5 x 31-3-8
12-5-16-3 x 3-8-4-4
microns.
10-8 x 3-3
15-2 x 3-8
18-7 x 4-1
Class.
Frequency.
Range.
Modal Class.
Mean.
0
1
2*
3
4f
5J
per cent.
20-7
10-9
1-6
65-4
1-4
microns.
7-5-15 0 x 2-5-3-8
12-5-25-0 x 2-5-4-4
20-0-30-0 x 3-1-4-4
27-5-55-0 x 3 1-4-4
45-0-56-3 x 3-8-5-0
45-0-52-5 x 3-8-4 4
microns.
10 0-12-5 x 3-1
15-0-20 0 x 3 1-3-8
22-5-25 0 x 3 1-3-7
35-0-47-5 x 3-8-4-4
47-5—52-5 x 4-4
microns.
11-2 x 3-0
17-8 x 3-3
23-9 x 3-6
40-5 x 3-9
49-9 x 4-1
48-3 x 4-3
.Nineteen spores. + Twentv-two S nnr Pa + m,
Septation
Class.
Frequency.
Range.
Modal Class.
Mean.
0
1
2
per cent.
13-
14-
3-8
microns.
10 0-17-5 x 2 5-3-8
16-3-27-5 x 2-5-4 4
22-5-30-0 x 3 1-4-4
microns.
12-5-15-0 x 3-1-3-8
17-5—22-5 x 3-8
25-0-27-5 x 3-8
microns.
13-2 x 3-2
20-7 x 3-6
26-7 x 3-9
.5
4 i
5*
60-6
30-0-56-3 x 3-8-5-0
42-5-50-0 x 3-8-4-4
7-0
10
47-5-60-0 x 3-8-5-0
53-5-62-5 x 3-8-5-0
52-5-57-5 x 4-4
54-1 x 4-2
56-2 x 4-4
agar in rf'douhures °’! COrn , meal
ierella fujikuroi var. LglutiZm S ‘ IS ° la * e ° f oii '
One 8-septate spore measured 67-5 x 5-6.
’rSSSrSS^WMafi
TA Tuce™rt e emsTClv 0 /7" od ?l hial , °° nidia produwd ® bilked
rihi* oJ7 ?-7 dayS ° ld cultures of the Grafton isolate of
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
Table 15. Measurements of pionnotal eonidia produced on hard oat aa-ar
of the Grafton iso,ate of aibMU ***■«*
* Only 5 spores measured.
* Nineteen spores.
t Twenty-two spores.
t Three spores.
* Only 6 spores measured—one 9-septate abnormal spore 87-5 x 5-0.


Septation
Class.
Bathurst Isolate.
Grafton Isolate.
Sterilised
Lucerne Stems.
Oat Hard
Agar.
Corn Meal
Agar.
Sterilized
Lucerne Stems.
Oat Hard
Agar.
0
microns.
101 x 3-3
microns.
10-5 x 3-3
microns.
10-7 x 31
microns.
11-2 x 3 0
microns.
13-2 x 3-2
1
17 0 x 3-9
15-9 x 3-6
15-5 x 3-6
17-8 x 3-3
20-7 x 3-6
2
21-8 x 41
19-9 x 3-9
20 0 x 4-0
23-9 x 3-6
26-7 x 3-9
3
38 0 x 4-3
33-4 x 4-2
35-0 x 4-4
40-5 x 3-9
45-3 x 4-2
4
43-3 x 4-5
41-2 x 4-4
421 x 4-5
49-9 x 4-1
541 x 4-2
5
47-5 x 4-9
44-6 x 4-3
44-3 x 4-5
48-3 x 3 0
56-2 x 4-4
.
Septation
Class.
Reinking and
Wollenweber: 31
Wollenweber 45
Ocfemia and
Mendiola 28 .
Ramos 29 .
Bathurst
Isolate.
Grafton
Isolate.
0
1
2
3
4
5
microns.
10-6 x 2-8
17-5 x 2-9
20-8 x 3-2
32 0 x 3-5
38 0 x 3-5
50 0 x 3-5
microns.
9-0 x 2-7
17-0 x 2-9
32 0 x 3-5
50 0 x 3-5
microns.
15-5 x 3-5
23-2 x 3-9
26-2 x 4-2
31-2 x 41
40 0 x 3-6
60-3 x 3-9
microns.
141 x 3-4
22-6 x 3-7
27 0 x 4 1
31-8 x 4-3
401 x 3-9
60-7 x 41
microns.
10-5 x 3-3
15-9 x 3-7
20-3 x 4-0
35-6 x 4-3
42-2 x 4-5
45-5 x 4-6
microns.
12-2 x 3-1
19-3 x 3-5
25-3 x 3-8
42-9 x 3-6
52-0 x 4-2
52-3 x 4-3
The spore measurements have indicated slight morphological differences
between the conidia of the Bathurst and Grafton isolates, the spores of the
latter being, on the average, slightly longer than the corresponding spores
of the Bathurst isolate.
It was pointed out by Wollenweber, Sherbakoff et al 4 ‘ that differences in
size and shape of conidia were likely to occur when Fusaria were grown
on different media or under different conditions, and it was emphasised
that comparisons must be made only of conidia produced under comparable
conditions and derived from comparable fructifications. A critical exam-
ination of the conidial measurements has shown that on the three media
used there was little variation in the spore dimensions of the Bathurst
isolate. In the case of the Grafton isolate it was found that the spores
produced on oat hard agar were somewhat longer than those produced on
sterilised lucerne stems. The mean mensurements of each septation class
of sporodochial and pionnotal conidia produced on the various media by
the Bathurst and Grafton isolates have been summarised in Table 16.
Table 16. —The mean measurements of sporodochial and pionnotal conidia
produced on certain media by the Bathurst and Grafton isolates of
Gibberella fujilcuroi var. subglutinans.
The mean conidial measurements of the fungus on all media as deter-
mined by several previous authors have been compared with the mean
values determined for the Bathurst and Grafton isolates (Table 17).
It was found that in general the spore dimensions of the local cultures were
in substantial agreement with those obtained . by other investigators,
although the three- and four-septate macroconidia of the Bathurst and
Grafton isolates had mean length measurements m excess of those deter-
mined for the corresponding conidia by previous authors.
Table 17.— Comparison of the mean conidial measurements of Gibberella
fujilcuroi var. subglutinans determined by other investigators wit
those determined for the Bathurst and Grafton isolates.


2. The Ascigerous Stage.
General Description.
The perithecia of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans occur naturally
on maize stalks m New South Wales, and are commonly produced in great
abundance at the nodes. (Fig. 7.) In addition, they have been found on
the mternodal tissues, and on the leaf sheaths which remain adherent to
the stalks.
They are dark in colour, globoid to subconical in shape, and are
come free on the surface of the substrate, with a slight mycelial weft or
s roma at the base. The peridial cells are fairly uniform in size and in
transmitted light are bluish-black in colour. The outer wall is slightly
verrucose, and the perithecia commonly show an extensive, deep indenta-
tion or invagination of the peridium. In some cases several depressions
oi this type occur on the same perithecium. The perithecia occur either
sing y or m clusters, the largest, groups usually being found in the vicinity
the odes - They are occasionally intermixed with the perithecia of
Gibberella saubmetii, and, although the perithecia of this organism are
considerably smaller than those of Gibberella fujikuroi var subglutinans,
it is usually not possible to distinguish them by macroscopic examination.
Fig. 7. —Perithecia of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans on the nodal tissues of maize stalk, x 2.
Botanic Gardens, Sydney, Sept., 1934.
The perithecia of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans vary consider-
ably in size, and measurements of fifty have shown that the mean size was
336 x 305 microns, with a range of 261-392 x 247-363 microns. Each
perithecium contains a large number of asci which at maturity have a
mean size of 95 x 8.8 microns with a range of 85-110 x 8-10 microns.
Paraphyses are present, but are not abundant. Typically, each ascus
contains eight spores, but occasionally only six spores are produced.
The ascospores are usually arranged somewhat obliquely, and are not
placed regularly in the ascus. (Eig. 8.) They may occur in a single row,
or the basal spores may occur singly with the upper spores arranged irre-
gularly in two rows, the second row consisting of one, two, or three
spores. They are principally one-septate and commonly the septum divides


the spore into cells of unequal size. Two- and three-septate spores occur,
but are rare. The ascospores are typically straight, with blunt rounded
ends, and are normally constricted at the septa (Figs. 9 and 10). Im-
mature spores are slender with pointed ends, and frequently the septa
cannot be distinguished.
Mature ascospores germinate readily in tap
water within a few hours at room tempera-
ture. The germ tubes are usually produced
terminally, and may arise from either or
both cells of the spore, but in the majority
of cases only one cell germinates. The tubes
are very fine, and may be simple or
branched. One tube only is produced from
each spore cell, and it has been found that
within fifteen hours in tap water at ordinary
room temperature the germ tube reaches a
length which is thirty to forty times greater
than the length of the spore. Ascosporc
germination has been observed to occur
occasionally in the perithecia.
Ascospore Measurements of the Bathurst
and Grafton Isolates.
The ascospore dimensions of Gibberella
f ujikuroi var. subglutinans were determined
by measuring one hundred one-septate
spores from the Bathurst perithecial mate-
rial and the same number from the Grafton
material; in addition, measurements were
made of all one- and two-septate spores
found. The spores were derived from ap-
proximately twenty perithecia in each in-
stance, and the frequency of each septation
class was determined by classifying some
500 ascospores from each lot of material.
Fig. 8. —Drawing of a mature
ascus of Gibberella fujikuroi var.
subglutinans, showing arrangement
of ascospores. x 1,000.
Bathurst, N.S.W., June, 1932.
Fig, 9. —Drawing of ascospores of Gibberella
fujikuroi var. subglutinans. x 1,000.
Bathurst perithecial material, Aug., 1932.
Fig. 10. —Drawing of ascospores of Gibberella
fujikuroi var, subglutinans. x 1,000.
Grafton perithecial material, Aug., 1932.


Septation
Class.
Frequency.
Range.
Modal Class.
Mean.
1
per cent.
99
microns.
13-8-25-0 x 4-4-6-3
microns.
17-5-20-0 x 5-0-5-6
microns.
19-0 x 5-3
2
3
20-0-27-5 x 6-3-6-8
27-5 x 6-8
23-8 x 6-6
Septation
Class.
Frequency.
Range.
Modal Class.
Mean.
per cent.
microns.
microns.
microns.
1
97
13-8-20 0 x 4-4-6 3
16-0-18-8 x 5-0-5-6
17-1 x 5-3
2
3
17-5-22-5 x 5-0-6-3
17-5-20-0 x 5 6-6-3
19-2 x 5-9
3
0-8
17-5-20 0 x 6-3
19-1 x 6-3
Table 18. —Ascospore measurements of the Bathurst perithecial material
(Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans).
Seventy-four per cent, of the one-septate ascospores belonged to the modal class. Only two 2-septate
and one 3-septate spores were seen.
Table 19. —Ascospore measurements of the Grafton perithecial material
(Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans).
Seventy-two per cent, of the 1-septate ascospores belonged to the modal class. The dimensions of the
and 3-septate spores were based on the measurements of 12 and 3 ascospores, respectively.
Perithecial Production.
The perithecia of Gibberella fujilcuroi var. subglutinans develop freely on
maize under natural conditions in New South Wales. They have also been
produced in abundance by allowing inoculated stalks to remain on the
ground over winter in the infection plot at the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
It has not been possible, however, to produce mature perithecia in pure
culture on any medium.
Bennett 1 described a method which was successfully adopted to produce
mature perithecia of Gibberella saubinetii from the conidial stage. The
method consisted of inoculating sterilised wheat grains in wide test tubes
with aerial mycelium from oat agar cultures. The grain was kept at room
temperature until well covered with fungal growth, and was then trans-
ferred to sterilised soil in pots and spread in the surface soil. The pots
were placed in the greenhouse, the soil was covered over with petri dish
lids and kept moist by absorption of water from pot saucers. Mature
perithecia were produced in this manner in about six weeks.
Following Bennett’s method, but using sterilised maize grain instead of
wheat, the writer inoculated a number of pots with Gibberella saubinetii
and Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans. As found by Bennett, the
former organism produced mature perithecia in six to eight weeks, but no
perithecia were formed by either the Bathurst or Grafton isolates of
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
Although mature perithecia of this organism have not been produced in
pure culture, bluish-black globoid sclerotia have occurred on a number of
media, including potato dextrose agar, corn meal agar, and salts glycerine
agar. The latter medium was included in the cultural studies, as Bennett'
found it favoured the production of perithecia of Gibberella saubinetii,
although ascospores were not produced.


Conidial Anastomosis.
Detailed observations on the initial stages of sclerotial formation in pure
cultures of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans have shown that in all
cases it was preceded by fusion and anastomosis of conidia and hyphal cells.
During the process of anastomosis the conidia became swollen and distorted
in appearance, the cell contents became granular, and finally germ-tube-like
processes were sent out which fused with a cell of an adjacent spore (Fig.
11). Commonly, mo:: than one process was sent out by each spore, and a
thick mass of false tissue was formed as a result of the fusion of the
conidia. Hyphal cells were also frequently involved in the fusion, and,
together with the conidia, were eventually responsible for the production
of the sclerotia, which in appearance and external structure were very
Fig. 11. —Drawing showing fusion of macroconidia of the Grafton isolate of
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans. x 1,000.
Fifteen days old culture on oat hard agar.
similar to minute perithecia. It was not within the scope of the present
investigation to study the nuclear changes associated with the cell lusion
and anastomosis of the conidia, but it was considered hig 1 y pro a e ia
the phenomenon was a sexual conjugation.
Observations made on the initial stages of perithecial formation on maize
stalks inoculated with Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutmans nave snown
definitely that perithecial formation was preceded by the fusion and anasto-
mosis of the conidia, which were commonly present m salmon-coloured
spore masses on the leaf sheaths and nodes of the inoculated plants.
The anastomosis of conidia of Fusarium myutinoM s
on oatmeal agar was observed by Ocfemia and Mendiola who +ound
up to twelve conidia might become linked together by hyaline tubes
Wollenweber 44 , 1914, stated that conidia of the genus Gibberella were s.


Septation
Class.
Range.
Modal Class.
Mean.
0
microns.
7-23 x 2-0-4 0
microns.
9-12 x 2 5-3-5
microns.
Il l x 3-0
1
11-27 x 2-5-4-0
13-16 x 2-5-3-0
15-7 x 2-9
2
18-31 x 2-5-4-0
21-25 x 3 0-3-5
23-6 x 3-0
3
21-51 x 2-5-4-5
27-43 x 3 0-3-5
35-4 x 3-3
4
33-57 x 3-0-4-5
41-50 x 3-5-4 0
45-5 x 3-5
5
41-61 x 3-0-4-5
44-51 x 3-5
48-8 x 3-6
independent than those of other species, and frequently anastomosed by
germ tubes to form the basis for the ascigerous stroma, thus practically
losing their existence as a conidial stage. A similar type of macroconidial
conjugation was observed by Zeller 4S in the conidial or Cglindrocarpon
stage of Nectria sanguinea (Sibth.) Fries. The phenomenon of macro-
conidial fusion and anastomosis was also observed by Cayley 4 in the case of
Nectria galligena, and it was stated that as the perithecia were produced on
the same sporodochium as the macrospores it was possible that the fusion
was a sexual process, although definite proof was lacking.
TAXONOMIC RELATIONSHIPS OF GIBBERELLA FUJIKUROI
VAR. SUBGLUTINANS.
Fusarium moniliforme var. subglutinans was differentiated from Fusa-
riurn moniliforme by Wollenweber and Reinking 46 principally owing to the
manner in which the microconidia were produced. The fungus belongs
to the section Liseola, —Wollenweber, Sherbakoff et al 47 . As the ascigerous
stage, Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans had not previously been de-
scribed, it was considered desirable to discuss briefly its taxonomy.
The type species Gibberella fujikuroi (Saw.) Wr. was first described from
Japan by Sawada 34 in 1917 under the name Lisea fujikuroi, the fungus
having been obtained from rice plants ( Oryza sativa L.) affected with
the “bakanae” disease. The organism was stated to produce one-septate
ascospores only, which ranged in size from 8-21 x 4-8 microns and averaged
13 x 5 microns. Kurosawa 14 , 1928, published a more detailed account of the
fungus and its conidial stage. The microconidia were stated to be produced
in chains and varied in size according to the source from which derived.
The sickle-shaped macroconidia occurred on the plant in salmon-coloured
or red sporodochia, and were usually 3-5 septate. The spore dimensions
were found to be as follow: —
The perithecia were produced either singly or in groups on the sheath
or at the nodes. They were round to ovoid in shape and ranged in size
from (188-392) x (157-392) microns, with a modal class of (250-330) x
(220-280) microns. The asci were cylindrical or club-shaped, and ranged
from (66-129) x (7-14) with modal class of (90-102) x (7-9) microns. At
maturity each ascus usually contained 4-6 ascospores and, less frequently,
8 spores. The ascospores were principally one-septate and had the following
measurements: —
Range (11-24) x (5-9) microns;
Modal class (15-18) x (6-7) microns;
Mean 16.5 x 6.4 microns;
Club-shaped septate paraphyses were present and ranged in size from
(84-150) x (9-18) microns, with a modal class of (120-135) x 15 microns.


Wollenweber 45 , 1931, as a result of detailed examination of authentic
pure cultures of the “bakanae” fungus ( Lisea fujikuroi Saw.), concluded
that the conidial stage was identical with Fusarium moniliforme Sheld.
var. majus Wr. & Kg. It was further considered that as the ascospores of
the organism were sometimes more than one-septate, it was desirable on
morphological grounds to transfer the organism to the genus Gibberella as
Gibberella fujikuroi (Saw.) Wr. n. comb.
Nisikado 20 conducted comparative infection experiments on rice and maize
seedlings with Lisea fujikuroi Saw., Fusarium moniliforme Sheld. var.
majus Wr. & Kg., and Gibberella moniliformis (Sheld.) Wineland. He con-
cluded that the results supported Wollenweber’s view that the conidial
stage of Lisea fujikuroi Saw. was identical with Fusarium moniliforme
Sheld. var. majus W T r. & Kg., and he stated that he was in agreement with
the change of nomenclature made by Wollenweber 4 . He further considere
that his results showed clearly that on the basis of pathogenicity Gibberella
fujikuroi (Saw.) Wr. was quite distinct from Gibberella moniliformis
(Sheld.) Wineland.
Nisikado and Matsumoto 20 conducted more comprehensive infection ex-
periments with different strains of these fungi on a wider range of hosts,
and concluded that on the basis of pathogenicity there was no reliable
evidence to show that Fusarium moniliforme var. majus was more closely
related to Gibberella fujikuroi than it was to Gibberella monilifoi mis.
On a morphological basis, however, no difficulty should be experienced
in distinguishing between Gibberella fujikuroi (Saw.) Wr and Gibberella
moniliformis (Sheld.) Wineland. The macroconidia of the former organism
are considerably longer than those of Gibberella moniliformis, the asci are
typicallv four- to six-spored, whilst in the latter organism they are typica y
eight-spored. Moreover, paraphyses are present in the former organism,
but are lacking in the latter, according to both Wineland and \ oorhees .
Gibberella fujikuroi (Saw.) Wr. var. subglutinans n. comb, is readily
differentiated from Gibberella moniliformis (Sheld.) Wineland owing to
the manner in which the microconidia are produced, and also by the pre-
sence of paraphyses. It differs from Gibberella fujikuroi (Saw) Wr. in that
the asci are generally eight-spored instead of four- to six-spored, the
ascospores are slightly thinner, the microconidia are not produced m chains,
and the macroconidia are smaller and less septate.
TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION OF THE FUNGUS.
Gibberella fujikuroi (Saw.) Wr. var. subglutinans n. comb, ascigerous
stage of Fusarium moniliforme (Sheld.) var. subglutinans Wr. and Kg.
Perithecial Stage.- Perithecia scattered or in clusters,
conical, typically borne free on substrate with slight stroma at base ostio
late peridium commonly invaginated m one or more places 261-392 x
247-363 microns, mean measurement 336 x 305 microns; peridial cells fairly
uniform in size, slightly verrucose, blue-black in colour; paraphyses pre
Zt but not abundant; asci abundant 85-110 x 8-10 microns, mean measure-
ment 95 x 8.8 microns, club-shaped, elongated; ascospores 6 to 8, pnnci
pally 8, arranged obliquely in single row, or irregularly in two rows, practi
cally straight, robust with blunt rounded ends, generally constricted at
septa, immature spores slender, fusiform and without septa, mature sp
1- to 3-septate, 97 to 99 per cent. 1-septate cells often unequa l m .ue , 1
septate spores 13.8-25.0 x 4.1-6.3, principally 17.5-20.0 x 5.0-5.6, --septate
20.0-27.5 x 5.0-6.8, 3-septate 17.5-27.5 x 6.3-6.8 microns.


Conidial Stage. —Microconidi a in clusters or heads, borne terminally on
short, simple or^ branched conidiophores obovoid to ellipsoid, principally
non-septate 6.3-17.5 x 2.5-4.4 microns, mean measurements 11.4 x 3.2; macro-
conidia slender, sickle-shaped, attenuate, pedicillate, produced on aerial
mycelium, in sporodochia or pionnotes, 3 to 6 septate, 3-septate predo-
minant 22.5-56.3 x 3.1-5.0 microns, mean measurement 39.3 x 3.9 microns;
4-septate 35.0-60.0 x 3.8-5.0 microns, mean measurements 47.1 x 4.4; 5-
septate 36.8-62.5 x 3.8-5.0 microns, mean measurements 48.9 x 4.5 microns;
sporodochia and pionnotes ochraceous salmon, light ochraceous salmon,
light pinkish cinnamon, and pale pinkish buff 1 '; mycelium submerged,
slimy, or well developed, loose, cottony, or medium dense woolly, and show-
ing colours such as white, pale flesh, shell pink, pinkish buff, pale pinkish
cinnamon, dull Indian purple, dark vinaceous purple, Corinthian purple,
pale greyish vinaceous and dark heliotrope grey 32 ; substratum often markedly
discoloured, showing such colours as flesh, pinkish buff, light pinkish cinna-
mon, purplish grey, Quaker’s drab, purple drab, dark purple drab, perilla
purple, dark perilla purple, violet slate, dark slate violet, heliotrope slate,
anthracene purple, pansy purple, violet carmine, dahlia carmine, amaranth
purple, Bordeaux, spinel red, Indian lake, Vandyke red, blackish red-
purple 12 ; sclerotia gregarious dark blue to bluish black, externally resembling
minute perithecia.
Habitat. —Perithecial stage on stalks of maize (Zea mays L.) in New
South Wales. Conidial stage commonly present internally in grains of
maize, and has been isolated from roots, stalks and ears. Fungus is com-
monly responsible for defective germination and seedling blight, also causes
cob and grain rot, and is less commonly responsible for root and basal
stalk rot. The conidial stage previously reported on maize in Europe 43 and
in Kenya”; elsewhere it has been found associated with rotting of various
parts of the banana ( Musa sapientum ) 3 ", 41 , 42 , 4 "; with a heart rot condition
of abaca (Musa textilis) 2 * , 29 ; with the rotting fruit of the pineapple
(Anansa sativus)*” ; with the pokkah-boeng disease of sugarcane (Sac-
charum officinarum ) 21 , 33 ; and in the air 31 , 40 .
THE PATHOGENICITY OF GIBBERELLA FUJIKUROI
VAR. SUBGLUTINANS.
Materials and Methods.
Infection studies were commenced in 1932, when the preliminary cul-
tural and morphological studies had shown that the single ascospore
isolates were distinct from Gibberella moniliformis (Sheld.) Wineland.
The infection experiments were carried out in the laboratory, in the glass-
house and plot at the Botanic Gardens, Sydney, and at the Hew England
Experiment Farm, Glen Innes. The infection studies involved seedling,
stalk and ear inoculations, and in a number of cases comparative infection
experiments with Gibberella saubinetii and Gibberella moniliformis were
conducted in order to determine the relative pathogenicity of these organ-
isms. All infection experiments thus far conducted have been restricted to
maize. In all infection experiments both the Bathurst and Grafton isolates
were used independently, the cultures being identical with those used for
the cultural and morphological studies.
Seedlings were inoculated by direct methods, by growing in sterilised soil
inoculated with pure cultures of the organism and by immersion of the
grain in an aqueous spore suspension, according to the method adopted by


Koehler, Dickson and Holbert 12 for seedling infections with Gibberella
saubinetii. Stalk inoculations were done by introducing fragments of agar
cultures directly into the tissues, by means of a small hole made in the
stalk with a cork borer. This method had been used previously by Limber
for Gibberella moniliformis.
The ear inoculations were designed for the dual purpose of determining
the method by which internal seed-borne infection became established, and
to test the ability of the organism to produce cob and gram rot. the
methods of inoculation varied considerably, and consisted of (1) spraying
the silks shortly after emergence with an aqueous spore suspension, t )
cutting the husk and spraying the young grain with an aqueous spore
suspension; (3) injecting an aqueous spore suspension into the young ears
by means of a hypodermic syringe; (4) cutting the husk and mseitmg g
ments of agar cultures, at the tip end, and at the base of the ear; (5) in-
serting pieces of agar cultures into the shank attachment of the ear.
Method (1) had previously been used by Limber" and Mendiola in in-
fection experiments with Gibberella moniliformis .. Method (2) was also
u*ed by Limber 18 , and method (4) was a modification of one used by the
same author. Method (3) had previously been used by Koehler , and
method (5) was a modification of Koehler’s method of meeting a.spore
suspension into the shank, the insertion of agar cultures being sub
stituted.
Fig. 12.-Stalk of young maiza seedling showing severe necrosis of the tissues, accompanied
by considerable mycelial development, four days aiter inoculation by insertion in stem
incision of agar culture of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
The field infection experiment conducted at Glen Innes was designed to
determine the effect upon stand and yield of maize under normal field
coSons of soil inoculation with Gibberella fujikurnj ar. subglutmans
Gibberella saubinetii and Gibberella moniliformis
sultant effects of seed and soil inoculation with the Bathurst and
isolates of the former organism.
1. 1932-33 Infection Experiments.
Seedling Inoculation.
The first infection eXl^ treated with uspulun
we U r e U S ™n?n each of twelve pots of £nl*d w- ta^f
at 25 deg. until a * . + dextrose agar cultur© m a small
lated by placing a fragment of potato dextrose aga


stem incision made some little distance above soil level with a sterile
scalpel; 16 seedlings were inoculated with the Bathurst isolate- 16 seed-
lings were inoculated with the Grafton isolate; 16 seedlings were arranged
as controls, with fragments of sterile potato dextrose agar inserted in the
with a large beii - jar and "^
Ihree days later all the inoculated seedlings showed a marked brownish
X* ** ™“ ,n * ° f «» tissues around the incisions, and in some ™es
tufts of white mycelium were protruding from the incisions (Fig. 12)
W ithin a week the majority of the stems had more or less rotted through,
and a number of the seedlings had collapsed and broken over at the point
o mocu a ion. ie lotted tissues in all cases had a characteristic light
brown water-soaked appearance. Where inoculation had occurred in the
Fig. 13.-Maize seedling infection experiment by agar culture insertion in stalk.
Left.-Control seedlings.
Right.-Seedlings inoeulated with Gibberella fujikuroi var. subgtinans, showing stunting,
distortion and necrosis of the tissues.
a icinity of the growing point the seedlings were very stunted, the leaves
failed to unfurl normally, and showed extensive brown watersoaked
lesions, on which the mycelium and microconidia of the fungus had com-
monly developed (Fig. 13).
There were no apparent differences in the pathogenicity of the Bathurst
and Grafton isolates. . Pure cultures of Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglu-
tinans were obtained in all cases from the leaf and stem lesions. None
of the control plants showed any evidence of infection, but occasionally
slight browning of the stem tissues occurred around the margins of the
incisions, and in a number of cases the leaves were split longitudinally
where the scalpel had cut through them before unfurling.


A more extensive series of seedling infection experiments was carried
out in the Biological Branch glasshouse at the Botanic Gardens, Sydney,
in October, 1932. The seedlings were grown in pots of sterilised soil, the
grain having been treated previously with uspulun. Four methods of inocu-
lation were used: —
(1) An aqueous suspension of normal macroconidia w r as atomised on to
the foliage, which was passed lightly between the fingers in order
to wet the surfaces thoroughly.
(2) A fragment of potato dextrose agar culture was dropped into the
funnel of unfurling leaves without injury to the foliage.
(3) A fragment of potato dextrose agar culture placed between the
first leaf sheath and the stem, in the vicinity of the ligule.
(4) Fragment of potato dextrose agar culture inserted in small inoi
sion in stem about half an inch above soil level.
Twenty seedlings were inoculated by each method, and in each case
half were inoculated with the Bathurst isolate and half with the Grafton
isolate. Forty seedlings were arranged as controls, ten of them were
spraved with sterile water, and the remainder, in lots of ten, were treated
witli sterile potato dextrose agar in the appropriate manner. All pots
were kept in moist chambers for twenty-four hours prior to inoculation,
and for three days subsequently, when detailed observations were made
and the pots were transferred to benches in the glasshouse. The results
obtained by each method of inoculation were as follow .
1. All plants showed extensive necrosis of the foliage, large brownish
water-soaked lesions were abundantly developed, and in manj cases
had involved more than 50 per cent, of the surface of indi-
vidual leaves. Faint wefts of white mycelium were common over
the surfaces of the lesions. The tips of the affected leaves were
often curled and distorted. In addition to the large well-defined
lesions small chlorotic flecks were abundantly developed on the
foliage’; these flecks were found to be the initial symptoms of
infection, and in many cases had turned brown and were becoming
water-soaked in appearance. The controls were all normal,. healthy
and vigorous, and showed no evidence of injury of any kind.
2. In the majority of cases the inoculum had been carried up by the
elongation of the leaves and was usually found adhering to the
upper surface about midway along the leaf. Positive infection
was obtained in every instance, and large brown water-soaked
lesions had developed wherever the inoculum had been placed.
Frequently distinct mycelial wefts occurred on the lower leaf sur-
faces where the fungus had grown through the tissues In a
number of instances, where the inoculum had been placed in the
vicinitv of the midrib, the leaves had broken over as a result ot
the necrosis of the tissues. Faint chlorotic flecks were present on
many leaves. In the control seedlings the agar had been carried
up by the elongation of the leaves, and was .still adhering to the
upper leaf surfaces, but in all cases the foliage was normal and
healthy in appearance.
S. Positive infection in every case. Brownish water-soaked lesions
were present at the base of each leaf where the inoculum bad been
placed. In many instances the mycelium had grown through t
tissues and formed a weft on the lower leaf surface. In one ease


the tissues had split longitudinally along the midrib and a linear
brown water-soaked lesion extended up the leaf for about two-
iin hes. Ihe control plants were all normal and showed no evidence
of injury.
4. I ositive infection in all cases. 1 ypical brown water-soaked lesions
were invariably present surrounding the point of inoculation. In
a number of instances the incision had cut through the young
unfurled leaves, and these now showed longitudinal slits with
biown water-soaked margins, and in a few cases the marginal
necrosis had spread to the surrounding tissues and the typical
lesions were produced. In a few seedlings marked brownish streaks
extended up and down the vasular strands for about half-an-
inch in each direction from the point of inoculation. In a number
of the control seedlings the incision had cut through the unfurled
leaves, but in all cases the margins of the longitudinal slits were
clean and without any trace of browning. The margins of the
stem incisions were also clean and healthy in appearance, and
none of the plants showed any evidence of infection.
Isolations from the brown water-soaked leaf and stem lesions produced in
each series invariably yielded pure cultures of Gibb&rella fujiluroi var.
subglutinans.
1 he ability of the fungus to produce necrosis of the leaf tissues was of
definite interest, but the evidence suggests that this type of injury only
occurs under conditions of high humidity. When the infected seedlings
were removed from moist chambers and allowed to remain under ordinary
glasshouse conditions, no further development of foliage lesions occurred.
This finding was in agreement with the results obtained by Ocfemia and
Mendiola" s in infection experiments on abaca seedlings witn the conidial
stage of the fungus. Invariably brownish water-soaked lesions were pro-
duced on the leaves under moist chamber conditions but, when the seedlings
were taken out of doors, the authors stated that fungous invasion of the
tissues ceased and the plants recovered.
Soil Inoculation.
Soil infection experiments with the Bathurst and Grafton isolates were
commenced at the glasshouse, Botanic Gardens, Sydney, in October, 1932.
A number of pots of sterilised soil were inoculated w r ith cultures prepared
on steamed maize grain and a week later surface sterilised grains v r ere
sown in each pot. A number of uninoculated control pots were also sown
wdth the same seed.
Germination in all cases was excellent, and although the seedlings were
kept under close observation, no evidence of infection was seen and no
significant growth differences were apparent between the inoculated and
control series. A month after sowing the seedlings were removed from the
pots and subjected to detailed examination. A few small brownish water-
soaked lesions were observed on a number of the roots, and in one case a
similar lesion was observed on the mesocotyl. The root lesions were com-
paratively rare, but isolations from those which were observed in all cases
yielded pure cultures of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
This experiment was repeated early in December, the pots being placed
outside the glasshouse under natural conditions. Again there were no-
perceptible growth differences between the inoculated and control series, and
an examination of the roots showed that with the exception of an occa-
sional small brownish lesion there was no evidence of infection.


Leonian" in testing the pathogenicity of a number of strains of Gib-
berella moniliformis found that a convenient method of inoculating young
maize seedlings was to remove the soil from the base of the plant, woun
the exposed region with a scalpel and then apply a generous amount of lice
culture in which the fungus was growing luxuriantly.
In December, 1932, sixty maize seedlings were inoculated in this manner
with potato dextrose agar cultures of either the Bathurst or Grafton isolate
of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans. Controls were arranged by
similarly treating a number of seedlings with sterile potato dextrose agar.
Half the plants were maintained in the glasshouse and the remainder were
placed outside under natural conditions. All plants were kept under obser-
vation for a month, but no disease symptoms developed, and a careiul
examination of the root and crown tissues failed to show any evidence of
infection.
Glasshouse temperatures during October and outside temperatures during
November and December, 1932, were relatively high, and it was considered
that failure to obtain satisfactory infection might be due to this factor.
No further soil infection experiments were conducted until the early spring
of 1933, as it was considered probable that the lower temperatures prevai -
ing at this period would be more favourable for infection.
Stalk Inoculation.
Stalk inoculations with the Bathurst and Grafton isolates oi Gibberella
fujikuroi var. subglutinans, with an isolate of Gibberella saubmetii from
a severe stalk rot condition, and with an isolate of Gibberella moniliformis
from a mesocotyl lesion of a plant affected with seedling blight were carried
out in the plot at the Botanic Gardens, Sydney, m December, 1932.
A small circular hole about half an inch deep was cut obliquely into eacli
stalk with a cork borer, about two and a half feet above ground level. A
fragment of potato dextrose agar culture was then inserted fhe cavity
and the aperture plugged with cotton wool soaked m sterile water Control
plantswere treated similarly, but sterile medium was inserted instead of
alar cultures. At the time of inoculation the plants were eight weeks old
and the stalks were succulent and vigorous. The experiment involved a
total of one hundred and fifty plants, thirty stalks being inoculated with
.each isolate and the same number being arranged as controls.
At regular intervals representative stalks of each series were split open
iongitudlnally : mid examined carefully. It was found that each organism
produced severe and extensive necrosis of the interna sta d
extended in both directions from the point of inoculation The rotted
tissues were brown in colour, and it was commonly found that the fib
vascufar strands were discoloured for some drs beyond
SBSgiSs
Totting of the surrounding tissues. • possible to differentiate
was produced by each organism and it was not possib e from
.as inoculum.


Fig. 14. —Internal stalk necrosis and discolouration of the fibro-
vascular strands in maize stalk inoculated by insertion of agar
culture of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
Left : Internode of inoculation.
Central and Right: First internode above that of inoculation.
Six weeks after inoculation three representative plants of each series
were split open longitudinally and carefully examined to determine how
far the vascular discolouration had extended from the point of inoculation.
The maximum measurements obtained from any plant in each series were
as follow:
Gibberella moniliformis —18 inches above and 12 inches below point
of inoculation.
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans (Grafton isolate) —4 inches
above and 8 inches below point of inoculation.
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans (Bathurst isolate) —5 inches
above and 6 inches below point of inoculation.
Gibberella saubinetii —6 inches above and 4 inches below point of
inoculation.
In each case the presence of the fungus in the distal end of the dis-
coloured strand was confirmed by removing pieces of affected tissue asepti-
cally and plating on potato dextrose agar.


In the later stages of growth many of the inoculated plants exhibited a
certain amount of premature dying of the foliage, and m a few instances
a severe top rot condition developed. At maturity, penthecia of Gibb ere a
saubinetii were present around the margins of the wounds on the stalks
inoculated with this fungus, and small penthecia -like bodies or sclerotia
were sparingly deyeloped in a similar position on the stalks inoculated w h
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans. There was no evidence of penthecia
or sclerotia on the stalks inoculated with Gibberella moniliformis. Tin
control plants remained healthy and normal in appearance, and no mterna
stalk necrosis developed, although many of the plants showed slight biown-
ing of the tissues surrounding the wounds m the stalks.
Ear Inoculation.
Portion of the plot in which the stalk inoculations were carried out was
reserved for ear inoculation experiments.
Gibberella saubinetii, Gibberella moniliformis and the Bathurst and
Grafton isolates of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans again being ..
as inoculum. Three methods of inoculation were uset .
(1) The silks were thoroughly sprayed shortly after emergence with an
aqueous spore suspension.
(2) The husks were cut and the young ears were thoroughly sprayci
with an aqueous spore suspension.
(3) The husks were cut and a fragment of potato dextrose agar culture
C was inserted and pressed against the developing grains
Fach method of inoculation was used for the isolates of Gi e.
Tuacn meuiuu M_ f yir>d n wa s not used tor
ella fujikuroi var. subglutinans. + ) uB ed for
Gibberella moniliformis, and method (3) was tne on y
Gibberella saubinetii. _ . .
The ears were inoculated in January. 1988 when the gram wasi princi-
pally at the early milk stage. All modulations a pad 0 f
was^
- fOT *^ ht
hours, even though day temperatures were hi„h.
Appropriate controls were Taler” an°d
silks or young grain being spra. g i ns tead of agar cultures,
potato dextrose agar being mser e m oist in the same manner as the
obtained by each method of inoculation
were as follows:- iso i ate of Gibberella
(1) Silk Spray.- Tenears ■” cul \ t s ed ; ” clllated with Grafton isolate of
1 ~ , , T , , lkB
No pronounced rotting of were
were commonly matted together and occasmn y normal in appear-
evident on the tips of the cobs, but a 8 ofL composite sample taken at
ance. Isolations from one hundred gans ot c 1 isolate sho „ e d that
with the fungus.


I lie control ears were all normal in appearance, and isolations from a
' ai , g . ram sa / | np ! e sll °wed that (hbberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans
•occurred internally m 6 per cent of the grain. This small degree of infec-
tion probably resulted from chance wind-blown spores, as the rows of
control plants were m close proximity to the infection plot.
( ■>) Husk incision plus atomised spore suspension.— Twelve ears inocu-
ated wfaGibberdia moniliformis; ten ears inoculated with Bathurst iso-
ate of Gioberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans; ten ears inoculated with
(rrafton isolate of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans; ten control ears.
Variable results were obtained. In the majority of cases the husk tissues
shoved considerable localised browning around the margins of the in-
cisions I ifteen of the twenty ears inoculated with Gibberella fujikuroi
var. subglutinans and ten of the ears inoculated with Gibberella monili-
formis showed discolouration and rotting of localised grain or groups of
gram. I here was no profuse development of mycelium, and none of the
cobs showed the typical symptom of Fusarium ear rot produced under
natural field conditions. The remainder of the cobs showed no evidence of
infection and were quite normal in appearance, although in several in-
stances isolated grains had been injured by the scalpel incision.
Isolations were made from 100 grains of a composite sample taken at
random from four cobs inoculated with the Grafton isolate of Gibberella
fujikuroi var. subglutinans. These cobs showed only slight external evi-
dence of infection in the form of isolated discoloured and rotted grain in
the vicinity of the husk incision. It was found, however, that 92 per cent,
of the gram from the composite sample yielded pure cultures of the
fungus.
The control ears showed no evidence of infection, and isolation from 100
grams of a similar composite sample yielded the fungus in 2 per cent, of
cases only.. No isolations were made from the ears inoculated with Gibber-
ella moniliformis, as the investigation was not concerned primarily with
this organism.
(3) Husk incision plus agar culture insertion. —Fifteen ears inoculated
with Gibberella saubinetii; fifteen ears inoculated with Gibberella monili-
formis; ten ears inoculated with Bathurst isolate of Gibberella fujikuroi
var. subglutinans; ten ears inoculated with Grafton isolate of Gibberella
fujikuroi var. subglutinans; ten control ears.
This method of inoculation gave positive results with each organism in
a high percentage of cases.
Ihe ears inoculated with Gibberella saubinetii were much more severely
rotted than those inoculated with the other isolates. The extent of the
injury varied from severe localised rotting to complete destruction of the
cob and grain tissues. In the majority of cases the greater portion of the
ear was severely rotted, and there was a profuse development of pinkish-
white mycelium between and over the surface of the rotted grains. The
most striking features of the rotted ears were the extent of the injury and
the pronounced reddish discolouration of the rotted tissues. The husk
tissues were commonly severely rotted and firmly cemented to the underlying
rotted gram, and in some cases the fungus had grown through the husks
and patches of characteristic pinkish-white mycelium were present on the
exterior of the ear.


The ears inoculated with Gibberella moniliformis were characterised by
localised rotting of the grains in the vicinity of the point of inoculation.
Fig. 15 .—Maize ear showing rotting
of cob and grain tissues and germina-
tion of grain in situ due to inocu-
lation by insertion of agar culture
of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans
at tip of ear.
There was a moderate growth of mycelium
over the surface of the rotted grains and
also between the rows, but in no case was
the fungus responsible for any extensive
general rotting of the cob and grain tissues.
The husks overlying the rotted areas on
the ears were commonly discoloured and
partially rotted.
The extent of the injury resulting from
inoculation with the Bathurst and Graf-
ton isolates of Gibberella fujihuroi var.
subglutinans varied from severe rotting-
of a few individual grains around the
point of inoculation to a fairly extensive
general rotting of cob and grain tissues.
(Fig. 15.) The affected grains were badly
shrivelled, and dull brownish-grey in col-
our. There was no profuse development
of mycelium, but a slight whitish mycelial
weft was usually present over the rotted
grains and microconidia were abundant
on the affected tissues. The husk tissues
overlying the rotted grains and surround-
ing the point of inoculation were usually
discoloured and partially rotted. One o
the most striking features of the ears
inoculated with this fungus was the man-
ner in which the partially rotted grains
had germinated in situ and produced weh-
developed coleoptiles up to 2 inches m
length. The dead, brown, shrivelled cole-
optiles were commonly present on a high
percentage of affected grains, and fre
quently the mycelium and microconidia oi
the fungus were present over their sur-
Isolations from the rotted and discol-
oured grain and husk tissues in every in-
stance yielded pure cultures of the fungus
which had been used as inoculum. None
of the control ears showed any evidence
of cob or grain rot. Injury to the husk
was confined in all cases to slight localised
• <■ .1.1, Tn a few cases slight
browning around the jpargms o t een cau9e d by the scalpel in-
“:;"in ioinlnc e e injury accotnpanied by the development
of any fungal organism.
2. 1933-34 Infection Experiments.
Soil Inoculation.
Additional soil infection cut
sterilised oat* were added to


M 31St AugUSt ’ 1933 ' and ten BTains of surface steril-
contalt wßh ° W m 2? e were sown dee P 1 T in each pot in direct
isolate thr / lre . e pots were inoculated with the Bathurst
isolate, three with the Grafton isolate, and three were arranged as un-
inoculated controls. All pots were maintained in a cool position on a bench
m the laboratory, and the soil was, kept fairly moist.
After seven days emergence commenced in the control pots, and it soon
become evident that the inoculum was having a markedly depressing effect
•on germination and seedling vigour. Each of the thirtv grains in the
control series germinated and emerged normally, but in the inoculated
““* ° CCUr in 8,1 inSt ““ S ' The eheSence "
Uninoculated controls—3o (100 per cent, emergence).
Grafton isolate —28 (93 per cent, emergence).
Bathurst isolate—22 (73 per cent, emergence).
Fig. 16.-Left: Maize seedlings eighteen days after sowing in sterilised soil. Right- Maize seedling
eighteen days after sowing in sterilised soil inoculated with Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
One seedling in the series inoculated with the Bathurst isolate only par-
tially emerged, and was considerably stunted and distorted. On 15th Sep-
tember a large brownish water-soaked lesion was present on the stem of
this plant at soil level.
The seedlings were kept under close observation and, apart from the
slight differences in emergence numbers, there were no apparent differences
between the two sets of inoculated pots, although there were marked differ-
ences m seedling vigour between the inoculated and control series. (Fig
16.)
On 22nd September two of the inoculated seedlings had wilted badly and
were leaning over. Examination showed that in each case the basai por-
tions of the stems were browned and water-soaked in appearance. Three
days later, on 25th September, these plants had collapsed and broken over,
and several others were showing basal stem lesions accompanied by foliage
wilting. On 28th September ten seedlings in the Bathurst series and seven
m the Graven series had totally collapsed and died, whilst many of the


remaining plants were showing definite symptoms of wilt resulting from
the rotting of the basal tissues. (Fig. 17.) The brown water-soaked lesions
generally extended up the stems for some distance, and after the plants had
collapsed and broken over the spores and mycelium of Gibberella fujikuroi
var. subglutinans were found to be developed abundantly over the rotted
tissues. A detailed examination of the seedlings in one of the pots inocu-
lated with the Bathurst isolate showed that in addition to the extensive
necrosis of the basal stem tissues the roots were also browned, discoloured,
and extensively rotted (Fig. 19). On sth October all seedlings in Wh
series of inoculated pots had collapsed completely and broken over (Fig.
18). Pure cultures of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans were in-
variably isolated from both stein and root lesions.
Fig. 17. —Wilting and collapse of maize seedlings
twenty-eight davs after sowing in sterilised soil
inoculated with Gibberella fujihuroi var.
subglutinans.
Fig. 18. —Collapse and death of maize seedlings
thirty-five days after sowing in sterilised soil inoc-
ulated with Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinans.
Throughout the experiment the uninoculated controls remained heaitl y
and vigorous, and at the conclusion of the experiment examination of the
roots of the seedlings in two of the pots showed that they were abundantly
developed, white and normal in appearance.
A further soil inoculation experiment with Gibberella fujthum var.
subglutinans, using the same inoculum and seed as that
experiment in the laboratory, was conducted in krge earthenware pots oi
sterilised soil maintained in a shaded position outside the Biological Branch
glasshouse at the Botanic Gardens, Sydney. and sowing
were done on Bth September, 1933, the grain being sown deeply and place
in direct contact with the inoculum. Twenty-four grains were sown in


each inoculated series, and a like number were sown in uninoculated pots.
On 22nd September fifteen seedlings in the control series had emerged, but
there was no evidence of emergence in the inoculated pots until several days
later.
As in the laboratory experiments, it was found that the inoculated series
were characterised by faulty germination and poor seedling vigour.
During the seedling stage a number of the inoculated plants wilted and
broke over at soil level. The main injury, however, resulted from faulty
germination and pre-emergence killing of the seedlings. The final survival
figures at maturity were as follow:
Uninoculated control ... 23 plants ... (95 per cent, survival);
Grafton isolate ... 12 „ ... (50 per cent. „ );
Bathurst isolate ... 7 „ ... (29 per cent. „ ).
Fig. 19. —Severe necrosis of root and basal stalk tissues
of maize seedlings due to sowing in sterilised soil inoculated
with Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
Ear Inoculations.
Methods. —The infection experiments in the plot at the Botanic Gardens,
Sydney, during the 1933-34 growing season were confined to ear inoculations
with the Bathurst and Grafton isolates of Gibberella fujikuroi var. sub-
glutinans. The variety used in all cases was Funk’s Yellow Dent. Some
of the experiments were designed to ascertain whether internal seed-borne
infection could be established by inoculating through the shank and at the
base of the developing ear. The others were concerned with the produc-
tion of typical symptoms of ear rot by pure culture inoculations.
The methods of inoculation differed slightly from those employed in the
previous season, hypodermic injections of aqueous spore suspensions being
used in addition to the agar insertion method, which had given the most


promising results in the previous ear inoculations. Ihe agar insertion
method was itself modified to some extent, in some cases the inoculum
being introduced into the base of the ear and in others placed on the gram
at the tip end.
The shanks were inoculated by boring a small hole into the stalk at the
node where ear production had occurred, in such a way that it passed
through the base of the shank attachment, the hole itself not extending very
far into the stalk tissues. A fragment of either a potato dextrose agar
or a corn meal agar culture of the fungus was then inserted in the cavity
and the aperture plugged with cotton wool, soaked m sterile water. .
cheesecloth bandage was then tied over the incision m order to minimise
the risk of chance infection from wind-blown spores. Lhe inoculations
were carried out whilst the cobs were at the early milk stage, and m all
cases the ears were covered with glassine bags to minimise the risk ot
blown spores establishing infection through the silks.
The agar culture insertions were made through, small lengthwise in-
cisions in the husk, the inoculum being pressed against the young grams.
After inoculation the incisions in each case were covered with a pad ol
cotton wool soaked in sterile water. The pads were artificially moistened
every day for a fortnight after inoculation and were allowed to remain
in position until the ears were harvested. At the time of inoculation the
ears were at the late milk to early dough stage.
The hvpodermic inoculations were made with aqueous spore suspensions
from notato dextrose agar. Two to three cubic centimetres of inoculum
we” intcted info each ear when at the late milk stage of development.
The needle was inserted through the husks with a slow downward move-
ment and frequently pierced the developing cob and tissues The
inoculum was liberated slowly. Some ears were inoculated at the 1 utt
end iust above the attachment to the shank, others were inoculated at t
tip just betow the silks, and in a few instances individual cobs were mocu-
lated at both the tip and butt ends.
Appropriate controls were arranged for each method of inoculation,
stetile agar medium being inserted into the shanks or ears, and sterile
water being introduced into the ears by means of a hypodermic syringe, an
all control received precisely the same treatment as that given to
corresponding inoculation series.
(1) Agar Culture Insertion in SVf --Twenty-five ; shank*>
with Bathurst isolate; twenty-five shanks moculated with Grafton isolate,
twenty control ears.
p eriodic examination d^howed^sthat^Jiunshlerable^^internal^^rotiin^^^^a
St
perithecial-like bodies of the fungus were also sparingly developed.
In e— with "atiyt wh”n
rehmtinXd extended int°o the basal cob tissues. The grain was usually


bleached, dull in colour, and in many cases pronounced white streaks
were present on the kernels (Fig. 20). The streaking and bleaching of the
gram were generally more pronounced on the butt end of the cobs, but it
also occurred on the central and tip regions. When grain from ears with
soft and spongy cores was removed from the cob, it was commonly found
that portion of the cob tissues came away with the grain in the form of a
long stringy attachment to the tip end.
A biological examination was made of six one-hundred grain samples
taken from individual cobs, three of which had been inoculated in the
shank with the Bathurst isolate, and the other three with the Grafton
isolate. It was found that internal seed-borne infection had been success-
fully established in a high percentage of cases. The infection figures
obtained for the Bathurst isolate were 12, 25 and 66 per cent, respectively,
and for the Grafton isolate the figures were 9, 86 and 88 per cent, respec-
tively. Further isolations were made from one hundred grains taken at
random from a composite sample of grain derived from all ears inoculated
Fig. 20. -Pronounced white streaking of maize grains taken from cob
showing rotting of the shank and basal ear tissues following inoculation
with Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
with the Bathurst isolate, and it was found that 38 per cent, of the grain
was internally infected with the fungus. Similar isolations from one
hundred g’rains of a composite sample taken from all ears inoculated with
the Grafton isolate showed that internal infection with the fungus had
been successfully established in 26 per cent, of the grain.
Isolations from one hundred grains of a composite sample taken from all
the control ears failed to yield Gibberella fufikuroi var. subglutinans in a
single instance, although a very small percentage of other organisms was
found to be present. The control ears were all normal in appearance, there
was no rotting of the shank or basal cob tissues, and the grain was bright
in colour, tightly packed and firmly attached to the cob, and showed no
evidence of bleaching or streaking.
(2) Agar Culture Insertion at Tip of Ear. —Twenty-five ears inoculated
with Bathurst isolate; fifteen ears inoculated with Grafton isolate; fifteen
control ears.
Positive infection resulted in the majority of cases, but the extent of the
injury varied from localised rotting of the grains in the vicinity of the
point of inoculation, to severe rotting of the cob and grain tissues, involving


up to one-third of individual ears. The cob tissues at the tip end were
usually more or less severely rotted (Fig. 21), and were easily broken
across The grains at the tip end were commonly bleached and streaked
with white, but many of the more severely rotted grains were reddish purple
in colour at the crown end. In isolated instances bleached and streaked or
rotted grains were distributed irregularly over the cob (Fig. 22). Many ot
the grains had germinated in situ and the dead brown shrivelled coleop-
tiles were still attached. There was no profuse development of _ mycelium,
but it was invariablv present over the rotted areas. The husk tissues were
discoloured and showed slight rotting, particularly when m contact with
rotted grains.
Fig. 21. —Rotting of cob and grain tissues
of maize following inoculation of the young
ear at the tip with an agar culture of
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
Fia. 22. —Randomised rotting of maize
grains following inoculation of the young
ear at the tip with an agar culture of
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
Isolations from the rotted cob and grain tissues yielded Gih^ re J la
C 0 —normal in — «ce an d no


ears, and Penicillium sp. was occasionally present between the grains
Isolations from a number of grains taken from the tip end of several con-
trol ears yielded the latter fungus in some cases, but Gibberella fujikuroi
ar. subglutinans was not recorded in any instance.
(3) Agar Culture Insertion at Base of Ear.— Twelve ears inoculated with
Tathurst isolate; twelve ears inoculated with Grafton isolate; twelve
control ears.
Positive infection _ was obtained in all cases, the extent of the iniury
varying from bleaching and streaking of the kernels to severe rottino- 0 f
the basal cob and grain tissues (Fig. 23). In all cases the rotting was
restricted to the basal portions of the ear, the central and upper portions
being normal in appearance.
Fig. 23.— Severe rotting of cob and grain tissues
of maize following inoculation of young ear at the
base with an agar culture of Gibberella fujikuroi var.
suogtutinans .
Fig. 24. -Severe rotting of husk tissues of maize
following inoculation of young ear at the base
with an agar culture of Gibberella fujikuroi var.
subglutinans.
The rotted grams were shrivelled and brownish in colour, but flecks
and streaks of purplish red were often present. There was no profuse
development of mycelium, and many of the partially rotted grains had
germinated in situ. Ihe husks covering the basal portions of the ear
were generally discoloured and badly rotted (Fig. 24).
Isolations from the rotted grains, husks, and basal cob and shank tissues
mvariabiy yielded pure cultures of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans.
isolations made from one hundred apparently normal grains taken from
the central and upper portions of two cobs badly rotted at the base, showed
that m 24 per cent, of the grain the fungus had become established as an
internal seed borne organism.


All the control ears were normal in appearance and showed no evidence
of rotting or discolouration of the cob or gram ttssues.
(4) Hypodermic Injection of Spore Suspension.— Twenty five ears
oculated with the Bathurst iso-
late; twenty-five ears inoculated
with the Grafton isolate; twenty
control ears. None of the ears
was covered and no attempt was
made to keep them moist. A
week to ten days after inocula-
tion the husk tissues surround-
ing the needle punctures showed
localised hrown water - soaked
lesions, some of which were
partly covered by a faint mycelial
weft. At maturity it was found
that in practically all cases the
ears showed definite evidence of
infection. The extent of the in-
jury varied from discolouration
and rotting of localised grains or
groups of grain, to a complete
cob and grain rot condition in-
volving the entire ear (rig. A>).
The affected grain was dull
greyish-brown in colour, but oc-
casionally showed traces of red-
dish purple, particularly on t e
crown end. Where extensive rot-
ting of the ear had occurred
there was an abundant develop-
ment of dirty white mycelium
between and over the badly rotted
greyish-brown kernels, and in
such cases the husks were severely
rotted and more or less cemented
to the underlying rotten kernels.
In cases of localised infection
the overlying husk tissues were
likewise discoloured and rotted,
where they had been m contact
with the affected grains. Occa-
sionally the cob tissues were soft
and spongy, and when broken
across by slight pressure the cores
showed a marked pinkish or red-
dish discolouration. The myce-
lium which developed over the
rotted grains produced an abun-
dance of microconidia, and isola-
tions from the affected cob, grain
Fig. 25.-Maize ear showing extensive rotting of
cob, grain and husk tissues following inoculation
by hypodermie injection of a spore sus pension of
Gibberella fujikuri var. sutglutinans.
and busk tissues invariably yielded pure cultures of fujiUroi
var. subglutinans.


ofinfrotl^, o^ 1 ’ 0 .! eal ! Were .T m f l in appearance and showed no evidence
oi infection at any stage of development.
I ield Infection Experiment.
v nd Mp J l^' ds ~ A infection experiment was commenced
W. w England Experiment Farm, Glen Innes, in October, 1933 It
Mrfiwif'r-n 0 the effect of inoculation with Oitlerella
saubinetu, Gibberella moniliformis and Gibberella fujihuroi var sub-
Both nC th S ® S + tand i a n d J ield ° f maize under normal field conditions.
h tli the Bathurst and Grafton isolates of the latter fungus were used
? t] f r or §' amsms . we re the same isolates that had been used in the
w^hlL in i eC + T + e ? Pen f ent . S - t The ex P eriment was mainly concerned
it ll Ifie effects of these fungi when used as soil inoculants, the inoculum
M case consisting of pure cultures on sterilised oats. Inoculations
7 th y 1 ® Bathurst and Grafton isolates were also made by allowing grains
to soak for three to four hours in heavy spore suspensions in sterile water.
Ihe variety used throughout the experiment was Wellingrove, which is the
standard variety for the Glen Innes district.
n 7 Was intended to sow the plots during the first week of
C *?. er ’ an . inoculate each hill at the time of sowing by dropping a
■ nia quantity of inoculum along with the grain. Wet weather conditions
rendered it impossible to adhere to this plan, and all sowings were made
in oors in small cardboard pots. Three grains were sown deeply in each
pot m direct contact with the inoculum, and the soil was firmly compacted
attei sowing. Ihe pots were placed on large wooden trays and completed
surrounded and covered over to a depth of about half an inch with light
triable soil. The trays were then placed in a cool position in an open
s led and the pots were kept fairly moist until emergence commenced.
At the end of fifteen days, when transplanting was done into the field
area, germination had occurred in all cases, but emergence in each of the
inoculated series had been considerably retarded and only a few isolated
shoots were evident. In the uninoculated controls the majority of the
seedlings had emerged and were making satisfactorv growth. When trans-
planting, each pot was regarded as a single hill and the transfer of seed-
lngs to the field was readily effected by tearing away the cardboard pot,
placing the contents into previously prepared holes and compacting the soil
firmly round each hill.
The experiment was concerned with seven different treatments, which
were as follow:
1. Uninoculated control.
2. Soil inoculation with Gibberella saubinetii.
Soil inoculation with Gibberella moniliformis.
inoculation with Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinans
(Bathurst isolate).
5. Soil inoculation with Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinans (Graf-
ton isolate).
0. Seed inoculation with Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinans
(Bathurst isolate).
i. Seed inoculation with Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinans (Graf-
ton isolate).
The experiment consisted of ten replicated blocks each containing one
five-hill row (15 plants) of each treatment in random sequence. The
order of planting each treatment row in each block was determined by
drawing out of a hat, Every alternate row was a check consisting of three-
gram hills of Wellingrove sown at the time of transplanting the treatment
rows.. The two hills at each end of each treatment row were also checks
of this type. The rows were 3 feet apart and a space of 3 feet was left


Treatment.
Bate of
Examination.
46
97
*98
99
98z
99z
C.
CO
CO
1
CM
CO
CO
CO
CM
CO
CO
1
rH
1
***
CM
CO
1
CO
CO
CM
CO
CO
CM
CO
CO
CO
CM
CO
1
CM
CO
CO
CO
CM
CO
CO
CM
*4
CO
1
CO
CM
CO
CO
1
1
CM
**
CO
CO
CO
CM
CO
1
CM
CO
CO
CO
CM
Block 1
„ 2
„ 3
„ 4
„ 5
„ 6
„ 7
,, 8
„ 9
„ 10
8
6
6
4
10
10
9
9
11
11
8
5
6
3
9
10
9
9
11
11
7
7
8
9
10
5
11
7
9
5
6
7
8
8
10
5
11
6
8
4
12
13
13
12
11
11
12
13
14
9
12
11
11
12
11
11
12
13
13
8
9
8
11
8
8
10
8
4
9
11
8
7
9
8
8
8
8
3
8
10
12
12
12
6
9
11
9
12
10
12
11
10
12
6
7
10
7
10
10
10
8
9
10
6
8
7
11
11
12
11
7
9
10
6
8
7
7
10
12
10
10
15
12
12
13
10
14
13
15
12
10
IS
u
11
12
10
11
13
15
10
Totals
84
56
81
54
78
73
120
114
86
77
105
93
93
86
126
116
77-3
Percentage survivals...
52
48-6
80
76
57-3
51-3
70
62
62
57-3
84
between the individual hills in each row. Each block was thus 8 yards long
and 14 yards wide, and a space of 2 yards each way was left between each
block.
Experiment Results. —The blocks were inspected at regular monthly in-
tervals, and at each inspection individual hill counts were made in each
treatment row in every block in order to obtain accurate plant survival
figures for each treatment. The first count was made seven weeks after
sowing or a month after transplanting into the field. It was then found
that there were considerable variations in the seedling survival for the
different treatments. A careful examination showed that in practically
all cases where the plants had failed to become established the seedlings
had been killed before emergence.
Pre-emergence blight was the main factor responsible for reduction in
stand and, although a few seedlings subsequently succumbed to seedling
blight, the monthly survival counts showed that in practically all cases
the seedlings which emerged reached maturity. During the growing period
a few plants were destroyed by cultivation implements, but as these plants
were destroyed by chance this factor was not considered to interfere with
the relative accuracy of the results obtained.
The actual seedling survival figures for all treatments seven weeks after
sowing, and the maturity survival figures at the time of harvest are given
in Table 20. The relative seedling and maturity survivals for all treat-
ments are given in Table 21. Ihe numbers given under the heading of
“treatment” refer in each case to the accession number of the culture
which was used for inoculation. Ihe letter C refers to the uninoculated
control, and the letter x indicates seed inoculation. Ihe accession numbers
are as follow :
46 — Gibberella moniliformis.
91—Gibberella saubinetii.
*98 — Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinans (Grafton isolate).
99 — Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinans (Bathurst isolate).
Table 20. —Maize field infection experiment, New England Experiment
Farm, Glen Innes: Seedling survival for each treatment on 24th No-
vember, 1933 (seven weeks after sowing), and maturity survival at
time of harvest, 23rd March, 1934. Fifteen grains were sown in each
treatment row in each block.
* All results obtained from soil inoculation with the Grafton isolate of Gibberella
fujikuroi var. subglutinans are unreliable, as unfortunately
Innes the inoculum of this isolate became heavily contaminated with PemctUium
sp.


Treatment.
Seedling
survival
24-11-33.
Maturity
survival
23-3-34.
Uninoculated control ..
Per cent.
100
95-2
83-3
73-8
68-2
66-6
61-9
Per cent.
100
98-3
80-2
74-1
66-4
69-8
62-8
fujikuroi var. subglutinans (Grafton)
Seed ,, „ (Bathurst)
Soil —Gibberella moniliformis
Soil— • Gibberella saubinetii
Treatment.
Block.
46.
97
*98
99
98*
99*
C.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Total
oz.
28-5
23-5
320
10-0
290
40-0
45-0
370
330
450
OZ.
28-0
45-5
41-5
43-5
50-5
260
53-5
370
45-5
24-0
OZ.
590
270
50-5
61-0
41-0
53-5
64-5
400
55-5
33-5
OZ.
41-0
35-0
31-0
38-0
43-0
310
45-0
12-0
47-0
19-5
oz.
21-0
61-0
50-0
32-5
34-5
46-0
28-0
44-0
58-0
43-0
OZ.
46-5
34-0
38-0
31-
34-0
32-
24-0
59-0
82-0
45-5
oz.
54-0
51-5
41-0
57-0
44-
45-
54-0
66-5
82-0
48-5
323 0
395 0
475-5
342-5
418-0
427-0
564-5
Table 21.—Maize field infection experiment, Mew England Experiment
-b arm, Wen Innes: Relative survival for each treatment, seven weeks
after sowing, and at time of harvest.
Randomised inspection of the blocks without reference to the identifica-
tmn pegs showed that at monthly intervals it was always possible to distin-
guish the uninoculated control row in a majority of the blocks, owing to
its more vigorous growth and better stand. The control rows in each block
commenced to tassel before the inoculated rows, but it was not possible to
obtam any definite information on the relative rate of maturitv of the
plants subjected to the various treatments, as harvesting was done before
the ears had ripened fully, in order to avoid damage by parrots.
At the time of harvest the grain was at the late dough stage, and
moisture determinations made by the Chemist’s Branch of the New South
Wales Department of Agriculture showed that the moisture content of the
gram ranged from 35 per cent, to 40 per cent. The ears were husked in the
Held, and the cobs harvested from each treatment row in each block were
placed in separate bags which were placed in the sun every day until the
f 0 '' iac dried out and the grain had matured. In this way mould develop-
ment was prevented, and the grain matured normally with onlv very slight
evidence of pinching.
The grain was threshed and weighed six weeks after harvest. Moisture
determinations made from the grain of each treatment showed that the
moisture content varied from 16.4 per cent, to 19.0 per cent. All weights
were adjusted to a standard moisture content of 14 per cent., which is the
standard figure for prime dry maize (Table 22). The weights were com-
pared by Fisher s' method for the analysis of variance, and the mean yield
per plot of each treatment is given in Table 23.
T a ble 22. Field infection experiment, New England Experiment Farm,
(ilen Innes: 1 ield of prime dry maize (14 per cent, moisture)
expressed in ounces of shelled grain for each treatment in each block.


Treatment.
Yie
Ounces.
Id.
Per cent.
Uninoculated control
56-5
1000
*Soil inoculation G. fujikuroi var. subglutinans (Grafton)
47-6
84-2
Seed ,, ,, ,, (Bathurst)
42-7
75-6
Seed ,, ,, ,, (Grafton)
41-8
740
Soil ,, G. saubinetii
39-5
700
Soil ,, G. fujikuroi var. subglutinans (Bathurst)
34-3
60-7
Soil inoculation G. moniliformis
32-3
57-2
Standard error
3-7
7-0
Significant difference
110
19-5
Table 23.—Field Infection Experiment, New England Experiment Farm:
Mean yield per plot of each treatment.
Discussion of Infection Studies.
The infection studies have shown that Gibberella fujilcuroi var. subglu-
tinans is capable of producing the following pathological effects on maize: —
1. Rotting of seedling stalks.
2. Necrosis of seedling leaves.
3. Rotting of roots and basal stem tissues.
4. Rotting of internal stalk tissues.
5. Discolouration of fibro-vaseular strands in stalks.
6. Rotting of the shank attachment of the ear.
7. Varying degrees of ear rot, from rotting of localised grain to exten-
sive rotting of the cob, grain and husk tissues.
No marked differences in pathogenicity were found in the Bathurst and
Grafton isolates of the fungus; the results obtained at Glen Innes must
necessarily be disregarded on account of the contamination of the inoculum
of the Grafton isolate.
It has been shown that a high degree of internal seed-borne infection
results from inoculating the silks, and also from inoculating the shanks,
or the base of the ear. Under field conditions at G'len Innes it has been
shown that the organism is a serious factor in reducing the potential stand
and yield of the crop, the main losses resulting from pre-emergence killing
of the seedlings.
The ear inoculations were of considerable interest, as typical symptoms
were not readily produced by artificial inoculation. Complete rotting of
the ear tissues was obtained by one method of inoculation only—hypo-
dermic injection of a spore suspension. Reference to the literature con-
cerning Gibberella moniliformis and Gibberella saubineiii has shown that
little critical work has been done on the precise factors which govern ear-
rot infection. Koehler 11 has attempted to determine the critical period for
infection, and has also studied the effects of different methods of inocula-
tion. The results obtained with !Gibberella moniliformis showed that
inoculations with spore suspensions were slightly effective when applied
to the silks, very effective on the tips of the ears, of doubtful effect when
made (beneath the husks towards the butt end of the ear, and ineffective
when made in the shank, leaf axil subtending the shank, or in the stalk
just below the shank-bearing node. With Gibberella saubinetii silk inocu-
lations were slightly effective on one date only, tip of ear inoculations were’


■effective on three dates, but all other methods and times of inoculation were
either doubtful or ineffective. The writer has found that highly satisfac-
tory results were obtained with Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinuns when
the ears were inoculated with agar cultures either at the tip or butt end, or
by means of a hypodermic injection of an aqueous spore suspension. More-
over, a high degree of internal infection was established by spraying the
silks, whilst inoculation through the shank or base of the ear produced
somewhat less satisfactory results. One of the most striking features of
ears inoculated with Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinans was the manner
in which the partially rotted grain frequently germinated in situ.
The cob rot infection obtained with Gibberella saubinetii was also of
considerable interest. Koehler and Holbert 13 found that infection with
this fungus was almost invariably restricted to the tip of the ear, and it
was only rarely that the ears were completely rotted. The isolate used by
the writer was a much more virulent ear-rotting organism than either
Gibberella moniliformis or Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinans. In
many cases the rot produced involved the -whole ear and invariably the
greater part of the cob and grain tissues was severely rotted.
It has not been possible to make any critical study of the relation of
temperature to infection of seedlings by Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglu-
tinans, but the experimental evidence suggests that a comparatively low
temperature is the optimum for infection and seedling injury. The avail-
able data concerning the natural occurrence of seedling blight due to this
organism also indicate that injury is most severe under low temperature
conditions.
The infection studies have also shown that the three species of Gib-
berella are capable of causing extensive necrosis of the internal stalk
tissues, and the manner in which the infection passes along the fibro vas-
cular strands is of considerable interest.
The field infection experiment at Glen Innes has shown that each
organism is capable of causing an appreciable reduction in stand and yield.
In each case the principal injury resulted from pre-emergence killing of the
seedlings. The experiment did not demonstrate any significant differences
in pathogenicity between the three species of Gibberella.
THE POSSIBLE PRODUCTION OF A GROWTH STIMULATORY
SUBSTANCE BY GIBBERELLA FUJIKUROI VAR. SUBGLUTINANS.
An unusual feature of ears inoculated with Gibberella fujihuroi var. sub-
glutinans was the manner in which partially rotted grains frequently
germinated in situ. This feature was observed in ears naturally infected
as well as in ears artificially inoculated, and in rare cases it was also found
on ears infected with Gibberella moniliformis. Some of the most striking
examples of germination in situ occurred in ears inoculated by fragments
of agar cultures, and, as the control ears which were treated similarly with
•sterile medium failed to show any evidence of grain germination, it was
considered probable that the fungus was in some way concerned with the
phenomenon.
The premature germination of grain partially rotted with this fungus
was of particular interest, as the closely related organism Gibberella fuji-
huroi, the causal agent of the “bakanae” disease of rice, has been found to
produce a marked stimulation of growth in young seedlings. It was shown


hy Hemmi and Seto 8 , Ito and Shimada 10 , Knrosawa 16 that stimulation of
seedling growth could be induced by filtrates of certain culture media m
which the fungus was growing. It was also shown by Nisikado and Matsu-
-moto 26 that Gibberella fujikuroi produced abnormal elongation of seedlings
of maize, sorghum, barley, sugar cane, and Panicum miliaceum, m addition
to rice. v .
Rather interesting results were obtained from a germination test with
grains from an ear inoculated at the base with an agar culture of the
Bathurst isolate of Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans. The basal cob
and grain tissues were badly rotted, and a number of the grainsi had ger-
minated in situ. Twenty-five partially rotted grams which showed no
evidence of germination were selected from the basal region of the cob,
and a similar number of normal unaffected grains were taken from the
upper and central portions of the cob. Both lots of gram were placed on
wet blotting paper in germination trays and maintained at 25 deg. Bent.
It the end of thVee days it was found that thirteen of the partially rotted
grains had germinated. Despite a certain amount ot mycelial "
of these had produced radicles and plumules which were remarkably long
and well developed for a germination period of only three day •
remaining twelve grains had failed to germinate, and were completely
enveloped in a thick mycelial weft of Gibberella fulAurot aui-
nlutinans The twenty-five unaffected grains germinated much more slowlj,
Ind at the end of three days only six grains showed any evidence of ger-
mination, and in each case this was restricted to emergence of the rad.de
There was no evidence of fungous mycelium on any of the grams m t
series Ten davs after the test commenced the unaffected grams h&a
germinated 100 per cent. No further germination occurred m the grains
from the basal portion of the cob andl of the> tl^
developed three were killed by seedling blight shortly after the emergen e
of the plumule, whilst the remainder were lacking m vigour and made .V
poor growth in comparison with the other series.
No further work has been carried out, but the phenomenon of premature
germination appears to be of considerable interest and will be more fu
SSSSS at a later date. It is worthy of note, however that m soil
inoculation experiments the organism has not been observed to exercise
any stimulatory effect on seedling growth; on the contrary, it has h
depressing effect. ——
SUMMARY.
1. Gibberella fujikuroi (Saw.) Wr var. mbgUhrmns n comb, the
hitherto undescribed ascigerous stage of Fumrtum mon*/ormc Sb in' New
subglutinans Wr. and Rg. has been recorded on maize, Zea mays L. in hi
2. The occurrence of two biologic strains of the fungus has been demon
"‘s I*The 1 *The cultural and morphological features of the two strains have been
described In detail, and a technical description of the fungus has been
gl 4 ei The previous history and taxonomic relationships of the fungus have
'T Reference has been made to the occurrence and economic importance
of the fuZs in New South Wales, and it has been established that in the
3S serious losses occurred in some maise-growing districts
tough defective germination and seedling blight due to the sowing of
grain infernally infected with the organism.
f 78665—C


6. Biological examination of grain samples from the principal maize-
growing areas of New South Wales has shown that a high degree of
internal seed-borne fungous infection commonly occurs in maize used for
seed purposes. The most prevalent fungi were Gibberella moniliformis,
Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans, Penicillium spp. and Cephalosporium
acremonium. Gibberella saubinetii and Diplodia zeae do not occur to any
appreciable extent.
7. It has been shown that a high degree of internal seed-borne infection
with Gibberella fujikuroi var. subglutinans can be established by inocu-
lating the ears at the late milk to early dough stage by spraying the silks
with a spore suspension, and by the insertion of small fragments of agar
cultures into the shank attachment or the basal ear tissues.
8. The pathogenicity of I Gibberella fujihuroi var. subglutinans on maize
has been demonstrated by a comprehensive series of infection experiments,
involving seedling, stalk and ear inoculations.
9. Comparative infection studies with Gibberella fujikuroi var. sub-
glutinans, Gibberella moniliformis, and Gibberella saubinetii have shown
that soil inoculation with each organism is reponsible for considerable
reduction in the stand, and consequent grain yield, of maize under normal
field conditions in New South Wales.
10. The possible production of a growth-stimulatory substance by Gib-
berella fujihuroi var. subglutinans has been discussed.


REFERENCES.
I Bennett, F. T. —Gibberella saubinetii (Mont.) Sacc. on British Cereals. Anns. App.
Biol. 17 : 43-58. 1930.
3 Branstetter, B. B.—Fungi internal to Missouri seed corn of 1921. Jour. Amer.
Soc. Agron. 14 : 354-357. 1922.
3 . Corn root rot studies. Missouri Agr. Expt. Stat. Res. Bull. 113; 80 pp.
1927.
4 Cayley, Dorothy. —Some observations on the life history of Nectria galligena. Anns.
Bot. 35 : 79-92. 1921.
5 Edgerton, C. W., and Kidder, A. F.—Fungous infection of seed corn kernels and
the importance of germination tests. Louisiana Agr. Expt. Stat. Bull. 193 : 3-24. 1925.
6 Edwards, E. T. —A new Fusarium disease of maize. (A preliminary note on the
pathogenicity of Fusarium moniliforme (Sheld.) var. subglutinans Wr. and Rg., and on
the occurrence of its hitherto unrecorded ascigerous stage, Gibberella fujikuroi (Saw.)
Wr. var. subglutinans (n. comb.). Agr. Gaz. N.S.W. 895-897. 1933.
7 Fisher, R. A.—Statistical methods for research workers. 4th ed., 307 pp. 1932.
B *Hemmi, T., and Seto, F.—Experiments relating to stimulative action by the causal
fungus of the “ bakanae ” disease of rice. Proc. Imper. Acad. (Tokyo) 4 : 181-183.
Abst. in Rev. Appl. Mycol. 7 : 668. 1928.
9 *lto, S., and Kimura, J.—Studies on the “ bakanae ” disease of the rice plant.
Hokkaido Agric. Expt. Stat. Rept. 27 : 99 pp. Abst. in Rev. App. Mycol. 11 : 398-399.
1931.
10 *Ito, S., and Shimada, S. —On the nature of the growth promoting substance excreted
by the “bakanae” fungus. Ann. Phytopath. Soc. Japan 2 : 322-338. Abst. in Rev.
App. Mycol. 10 : 547. 1931.
II Koehler, B.—A year’s progress in solving farm problems in Illinois, 1929-30.
43rd Ann. Rept. Illinois Agr. Expt. Stat. : 51-52. 1930.
42 Koehler, 8., Dickson, J. G., Holbert, J. R.—Wheat scab and corn root-rot caused
bv Gibberella Saubinetii in relation to crop successions. Jour. Agr. Res. 27 : 861-879.
1924.
13 Koehler, 8., and Holbert, J. R. —Corn diseases in Illinois. Illinois Agr. Expt.
Stat. Bull. 354 : 164 pp. 1930.
i4*Kurosawa, E.—Uber den erreger der “ bakanae ” krankheit von reisplanzen mit
isolierungs und infektions-versuchen. Ber. Naturhist Ges. Formosa 18 : 380-401. 1928.
is* . On the cultural characters of the “ bakanae ” disease fungi on various
nutrient media and the temperature for their development. Rept. Nat. Hist. Soc.
Formosa 19 : 150-179. Abst. in Rev. Appl. Mycol. 9 : 54-55. 1929.
16* . On certain experimental results concerning the over-elongation^phenom-
enon of rice plants due to the filtrate of a culture solution of the “bakanae” fungus.
Rept. Taiwan Nat. Hist. Soc. 22 : 198-201. Abst. in Rev. Appl. Mycol. 12 : 590. 1932.
17 Leonian, L. H.—The pathogenicity and the variability of Fusarium moniliforme
from corn. West Virginia Agr. Expt. Stat. Bull. 248 : 15 pp. 1932.
18 Limber, D. P. —Fusarium moniliforme in relation to diseases of corn. Ohio Jour.
Sci. 27 : 232-246. 1927.
19 Maneval, W. E.—Longevity of cultures of Fusaria. Phytopath. 14 : 408-410.
20 Manns, T. F., and Adams, J. F. —Parasitic fungi internal of seed corn. Jour. Agr.
Res. 23 : 495-524. ’ 1923.
21 *Martin, J. P.—Proceedings Hawaiian Sugar Planters’ Association, 50th Annual
Meeting, 1930. Abst. in Rev. Appl. Mycol. 11:4. 1932.
22 McDonald, J. —Annual Report, Senior Mycologist, for 1931. Ann. Rept. Dept.
Agric. for 1931, Kenya, 118-130. 1932.
23 Melchers, L. E., and Johnston, C. O. —Corn root, stalk and ear rot disease investi-
gations in Kansas. Progress report for 1922. Phytopath. 13 : 52 (abstract). 19—!.
24 Mendiola, Victoria B. —The Fusarium disease of corn. Phil. Agric. 19 : 79-106.
25 Nisikado Y.—Uber zwei wirtschaftlich wiehtige, parasitare Gramineenpilze : Lisea
fujikuroi Sawada und Gibberella moniliformis Wineland. Zeitschr. fur Parasitenkunde 4 :
285-300. 1932.
26 Nisikado, Y., and Matsumoto, H.—Weitere vergleichende untersuehungen über
die durch Lisea fujikuroi Sawada und Gibberella moniliformis (Sheld) J* ur "
sachten Gramineenkrankheiten. Ber. Ohara Inst, Landw. Forsch. 5 : 481-000. 1933.


-'*Nisikado, Y., Matsumoto, H., and Yamauti, K.—Zur Kenntnis der physiologischen
differenzierung der Fusariumarten. 11. Entwicklung verschiedener Stamme des
Bakanaepilzes und Temperatur. Landw. Studien 20 : 346-375. Abst. in Rev. Appl.
My col. 13 : 323. 1933.
“ 8 Ocfemia, G. 0., and Mendiola, Victoria B.—The Fusarium associated with some
field cases of heart rot of Abaca. Phil. Agric. 21 : 296-308. 1932.
29 Ramos, Mariano M. —Mechanical injuries to roots and corms of Abaca in relation
to heart rot disease. Phil. Agric. 22 : 322-337. 1933.
30 Reinking, 0. A.—Fusaria inoculation experiments. Relationship of various species
of Fusaria to wilt and Colorado disease of banana. Phytopath. 16 : 371-392. 1926.
31 Reinking, 0. A., and Wollenweber, H. W.—Tropical Fusaria. Phil. Jour. Sci.
32: 103-253. 1927.
32 Ridgway, R.—Colour standards and nomenclature. 43 pp., 53 col. pi., 1,115 named
colours. Washington, D.C. 1912.
33 Roldan, E. F.—The non-infectious twisted or tangled top disease and pokkah-
boeng of sugar cane in the Philippine Islands. Rev. Appl. Mycol. 11 : 266-267. 1932.
34 * Sawada, K.—Beitrage über Formosa-pilze Nr. XIV. Ber. Naturhist. Ges. Formosa
31 : 131-133. 1917.
35 *Seto, F.—Untersuchungen über die Bakanae-krankheit der Reispflanze. IV. Über
die Beziehungen zwischen der bodentemperatur und dem krankheitsbefall bei boden-
infektion. Forsch auf. dem Geb. der Pflanzenkrankh (Kyoto) 2 : 138-153. Abst. in
Rev. Appl. Mycol. 13 : 263. 1933.
36 Sherbakoff, C. I). —Fusaria of potatoes. Cornell Agr. Expt. Stat. Mem. 6 : 89-270.
1915.
37 Sideris, C. P.—The role of the hydrogen ion concentration on the development of
pigment in Fusaria. Jour. Agr. Res. 30 : 1011-1019. 1925.
38 Valle ait, W. D.—Seed corn infection with Fusarium moniliforme and its relation
to the root and stalk rots. Kentucky Agr. Expt. Stat. Res. Bull. 226 : 27-51. 1920.
39 Voorhees, R. K.— Gibberella moniliformis on corn. Phytopath. 23 : 368-378.
1933.
40 Voorhees, R. K., and Eddins, A. H.— Gibberella moniliformis on corn plants in the
field. Phytopath. 22 : 29. 1932.
41 Wardlaw, C. W. Fusarium tip rot of immature Cavendish fruit. Trop. Agri-
culture 10: 6. 1933.
42 t —. Banana diseases. VIII. Notes on various diseases occurring in Trinidad.
Trop. Agriculture 11 : 143-149. 1934.
43 Wineland, Grace 0. —An ascigerous stage and synonomy for Fusarium moniliforme.
Jour. Agr. Res. 28 : 909-922, 1924.
44 Wollenweber, H. W. —ldentification of species of Fusarium occurring on the sweet
potato I pomoea batatas. Jour. Agr. Res. 2 : 251-286. 1914.
43 . Fusarium monographie, Fungi parasitici et saprophytici. Zeitschr. fur
Parasitenkunde 3 : 269-516. 1931.
46 Wollenweber, H. W., and Reinking, 0. A.—Aliquot Fusaria tropicalia, nova
vel revisa. Phytopath. 15 : 155-169. 1925.
47 Wollenweber, H. W., Sherbakoff, C. D., Reinking, O. A., Johann, Helen,
Bailey, Alice A.—Fundamentals for taxonomic studies of Fusarium. Jour. Agr. Res.
30: 833-843. 1925.
48 Zeller, S. M.—Species of Nectria, Gibberella, Fusarium, Cylindrocarpon and
Ramularia occurring on the bark of Pyrus spp. in Oregon. Phytopath. 16 : 623-627.
926.
Sydney: Alfred James Kent, I 5.0., Government Printer- 1935.
* Original papers not seen by the writer.


