

Studied
on
Australia's Situation
in the Pacific.
A collection of papers submitted by the Victorian Division of
the Australian Institute of International Affairs, Institute of Pacific
Relations Group, to the Sixth Conference of the Institute of Pacific
Relations, held at Yosemite Valley, California, August, 1936.
MELBOURNE.
1936.




STUDIES ON AUSTRALIA’S
SITUATION IN THE PACIFIC.


HegislereJ at the General Post Office. Melbourne, for transmission
through the Post us a booh.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia for The Australian Institute of
International Affairs, Victorian Division, Kurrajong House, 177 Collins Street.
Melbourne, by Fraser & Morphet Pty. Ltd., Printers .3 and 5 Eastbourne Street.
Prahran, Melbourne.


Studies
on
Australia's Situation
in the Pacific.
A collection of papers submitted by the Victorian Division oj
the Australian Institute of International Affairs, Institute of Pacific
Relations Group . to the Sixth Conference of the Institute of Pacific
Relations, held at 1 oSemite Valley, California, August, 1936.
MELBOURNE.
1936,


CONTENTS.
Page
1. Collective Security on Trial.
F. W. Eggleston 7
2. Naval Armaments in the Pacific.
J. C. Rookwood Proud 27
3. Comments on J. C. Rookwood Proud’s Paper, “Naval
Armaments in the Pacific.”
Tristan Buesst 39
4. Economic Aspects of Australian Defence.
Gerald Packer 46
5. The Collective System in the Pacific.
P. D. Phillips 52
6. Industrialisation in Japan and its Effects upon
Australia.
K. J. Binns 65
Appendix; The New Australian Tariff Schedule, 22nd
May, 1936 87


I.
COLLECTIVE SECURITY ON TRIAL.
By F. W. Eggleston.
Every lover of peace and supporter of the League
must at the present moment hope that the application
of sanctions to Italy will bring the Abyssinian War to a
speedy conclusion. For whether the doctrine of collec-
tive security be sound or not, or was worth the risk of
invoking it, having been invoked it is essential that it be
pushed to a successful issue against a war of brutal and
perfidious aggression. There would be a successful at-
tempt at international co-operation which will do much
to place some such system on a firm basis for the future,
and the League will gain an authority in world affairs
which it very badly needed. The international system
will be stabilised.
The case against Italy is of course overwhelming,
and humanity would be false to any idea of international
order if it permitted it without protest. If there were
no League of Nations and no system of collective security,
I would still support Great Britain if she decided to sup-
port Abyssinia. I say this though I am normally op-
posed to interventions. The pacifist movement under
Bright and Cobden was founded on non-intervention.
They found that intervention could be used by militarists
and sentimentalists to justify any war. Nevertheless,
these are degrees, and history can hardly record an in-
stance of war so completely without provocation or justi-
fication. A spontaneous refusal of civilisation to permit
it was due.
We now have two capital instances of wars being
undertaken in defiance of the League Covenant—that of
Japan in Manchuria and of Italy in Abyssinia, and con-
clusions as to the validity of a system of collective
security should be based on the experience these afford
us. There are indeed several other incidents of unpro-
voked aggression—Corfu, Vilna and Memel. Action
against the aggressor has been excused in each of these
cases on not very logical grounds. They must be taken
as illustrations of the principle that the circumstances
of each case must be taken into account, and that to make
war follow automatically on aggression, whatever the na


ture and circumstances of that aggression, would be in-
tolerable. These examples establish the fact that Europe
will not firmly punish all acts of unprovoked aggression.
We will confine ouyselves to a comparison, of the two
chief examples. Ido not think that the action of Japan
in Manchuria was nearly as culpable as that of Musso-
lini in 1935, or as that of Poland in Vilna. Japan had
certain treaty rights in Manchuria, and China was doing
her best to nullify them. Those who allege that all ag-
gression in defiance of the League Covenant must be re-
sisted by sanctions if the League is to be effective have
usually conceded that Japan had a case. This conces-
sion must not be taken as justifying the treachery dis-
played by the Japanese to their obligations under the
Covenant. If Japan had a case she should have brought
it before the League. I will assume, however, that Japan
and Italy were equally in the wrong for the purpose of
pointing out the chief difference between the two cases.
This is that, in the Japanese case no effective' action wag
possible, while Italy is vulnerable at a hundred points.
There is no doubt that military or naval action against
Italy can make the war impossible. Economic sanctions
may be equally successful if sternly applied.
My first proposition that sanctions could not be ef-
fectively applied against Japan is disputed by advocates
of the Doctrine of Collective Security, and I must say
a word or two to prove it. Idoso on strategical grounds.
It should not be necessary to emphasise this, but the ne-
glect of these considerations is conspicuous in the advo-
cates of Collective Security. They talk constantly as if
war was some sort of impersonal force, e.g., a flow of
water through a fire hose which could be played on any
conflagration and put it out. A war, of course, is a
human operation. It must be fought by individual mem-
bers of groups in a definite area. These groups have po-
tentialities and are subject to conditions affecting their
powers and the method of fighting and the risks of war,
the chances of success and the policy to be pursued in
case of success depend on considerations arising out of
all these factors. To impose sanctions there must be
the unrestricted power to impose the collective will on
the power against whom they are to be applied.
This did not exist as against Japan, it does exist
as against Italy. Japan had made herself supreme in
the North-Western Pacific. She had ten capital ships
and other arms and five first class naval bases. It is
true that the ratio of the Washington Treaty had been
framed so that Great Britain and U.S.A. could just exer-
cise some influence there, and that Japan was nervous


of that influence, but in the case of Manchuria she de-
cided that her interests were so important that she would
risk this. When she acted, the general staffs of Great
Britain and U.S.A. advised that action was hopeless.
This was realised by all thinking students of the situation,
and is based on the strategical principle that modern
battleships cannot fight more than five hundred miles
from their bases. As neither U.S.A. nor Great Britain
had a base nearer than 3000 miles from Japan, action
was impossible. Japan’s action brought this to the test,
and the weakness was disclosed.
In the case of his attack against Abyssinia, Musso-
lini has exposed himself to every risk that could be con-
ceived. He sends his troops over about 1500 miles of
sea over which he has no command, and through a
bottle-neck which, if necessary, could be blocked. This
might' be contrary to international law, but it could be
blockaded at each end. He is very vulnerable also, to
economic sanctions, and his position in relation to them
is very different to that of Japan. If economic sanc-
tions had been applied to Japan, she could have taken
Hong Kong or Singapore, and controlled the whole Far
Eastern trade of the Western Nations.
These considerations appear to me to establish the
very important point that sanctions can be applied
against some nations and not against others. When and
how they can be applied with success depends upon the
strategical position of the aggressor. An exposed na-
tion like Italy is vulnerable. A distant nation like Japan
is not vulnerable. Nations that are in the centre between
a complex of nations, like Germany or Russia, are not
very subject to sanctions. It is interesting also to note
that self : contained nations are not subject to sanctions,
and it may be that one of the factors of economic nationa-
lism has been fear of an attempt to control national
policy in the interests of world order.
The lesson to be derived from the present crisis is
that in an ideal case for the application of sanctions,
both military and economic, the nations of Europe will
not agree to apply military sanctions, and exhibit great
hesitation about applying economic sanctions. This hesi-
tation militates against their effect. In a more difficult
case, where the issues are less clear and the opportuni-
ties less obvious, the situation would be very difficult.
Where a crisis arises it must be considered by all con-
cerned in a judicial disinterested manner. This is diffi-
cult to secure. It is obvious that in considering a re-
quest for the application of sanctions the various Mem-
bers of the League are affected, first by their own exter


nal situation from a strategical point of view. They con-
sider this not only in relation to their own risks and lia-
bilities, but in view of ultimate results. For example,
France would have no hesitation in acting with Great
Britain against Italy, if Great Britain would enter into
an offensive and defensive alliance with her against Ger-
many, or would agree to automatically go to war if Ger-
many moved against France. Britain has never been
willing to do this, and therefore France enters into agree-
ment with Italy, which is inconsistent with the automatic
application of sanctions in Italian aggression. France,
indeed, has a network of alliances and agreements which
are inconsistent with the application of sanctions to any
nation except Germany. She has also been the chief
protagonist of armaments and the main obstacle to dis-
armament. Ido not Relieve that France gives any dis-
interested support to the doctrine of Collective Security
as an element in a world order, but only regard it as
an element in a national defensive policy against Ger-
many. There is no doubt also that France is seriously
considering the effect on her strategic position of the
successful action of the British Fleet against Italy in
the Mediterranean.
If the most powerful nation in Europe looks at the
matter in this intensely interested way, what must be
the position of exposed nations like Spain and Greece,
or nations like Denmark, Sweden and Norway, who have
no strategical interest in the situation whatever. It is
useless to blame hesitation in exposed nations—their exis-
tence may involve abstention. The action of nations will
also be affected by their internal situation. A nation
like Spain, which is precariously approaching some sort
of order, may not be able to assist in applying either
economic sanctions or military sanctions. Nations like
Greece, where a dynastic problem exists, may be equally
unable to intervene. Nations like France, where there
is a very unstable political situation, find equal difficulty.
Another feature which is visible on the surface of things
to-day is that the typical pacificist regards the applica-
tion of sanctions as an act of. war, and war he is in prin-
ciple against. Is he wrong? I don’t think he is. We
have to realise that sanctions may bring about a univer-
sal war, the results of which cannot be calculated. The
advocates of sanctions betray a faith in the efficacy of
war which is far greater than military philosophers. The
truth about war is that it changes all things, and that
you cannot rely on realising a clear cut limited policy by
war. You let loose dogs and you don’t know what de-
struction they will do.


Another thing is visible, and that is the disinclina-
tion of the average citizen to support wars unless he can
be brought to realise their justice and necessity. We
have not been able to educate the average citizen up to
a comprehensive view of a world order. The more we
try to, the more will individual points of view be raised,
and the more difficult it will be to get support for collec-
tive action. Wars are not fought by machines but
peoples, and I feel that it will be impossible for govern-
ments to bring their people into war for general prin-
ciples, or in any case where they are not in fear.
The British people is the most enlightened and
the best balanced in the world. The next best is that
of the U.S.A., but 3000 miles of ocean make the latter
quite indifferent. These pacificist objections to war are
reinforced by the tremendous power of modern arma-
ments. Civilisation can literally be blown to pieces by
modern armaments. Where this is so the application of
armaments for general purposes will simply destroy so
much that the order they seek to establish will be pro-
foundly changed, not supported. The only justification
for sanctions, then, is that the threat would be success-
ful. If it is not, and war results, they do more harm
than good. I would have far less objection to sanctions
if there had been any limitation of armaments.
Finally, I would point out that these resistances to
war are entirely healthy. A world ready to go to war
for sanctions is not much better than a world ready to
go to war for national policy. It is in the highest degree
dangerous to create a war system ready for operation.
A system of automatic operation of military sanctions
would be a nightmare. If we possessed in the mind some
divine intelligence capable of infallibly deciding the
right time to apply them, it might be well. But we have
no such thing. The decisions will be made by finite
human beings acting in political bodies, and anybody
who knows how they work can hardly expect that they
will always use their enormous power rightly.


II.
THE DOCTRINE OF COLLECTIVE SECURITY—
Its Definition and Implications.
I have adopted the course first of examining the
working of the doctrine of collective security from two
concrete instances because this is the most effective way.
I will now attempt the more technical or theoretical
parts of the subject in a more summary way. In doing
this, I will omit a good many phases of the argument
which do not appear to be regarded as very important
at the present moment. The doctrine of sanctions ap-
pears to be based on the following proposition:—The
peace of the world can only be secured if the nations of
the world subscribe to an agreement that no nation will
resort to war under any conditions to enforce its policy,
and that if any nation does so the others will combine
against the aggressor by effective sanctions, if neces-
sary, military sanctions.
There are two main elements, the guarantee against
the use of force, and the promise to use sanctions against
that force. Sanctions, however, are not included under
the League of Nations merely as a means for punishing
the aggressor. They are there used as a means of com-
pelling the submission of disputes to the League. If dis-
putes are submitted to the League, the sanctions do not
come into force until there is a consideration of the ques-
tions and a unanimous decision. A Power is free to go
to war after the expiration of three months. If there is
a unanimous decision, no guarantee to use military sanc-
tions is given, but no Power can go to war against the
decision, and Powers are given freedom to take action.
There is a definite promise to use Economic Sanctions if
the conditions prescribed are present.
This is a most skilful attempt to work out the con-
tingencies in the most effective way from the theore-
tical point of view, but it is highly elaborate and slow
acting. It might be useful in minor disputes, and where
the nations were disarmed and not deeply stirred by
emotions. But that is just the time when aggression or
provocation is not likely to occur. A powerful armed de-
termined nation will not allow himself to be enmeshed
in this elaborate procedure. All his preparations and


armaments will lose their effect if he delays. He is
ex hypothesi dissatisfied with present dispositions, and
will be better served if he challenges them and puts on
those who are the onus of immediate sanctions against
him. It is true that the provisions for consideration and
report are to enable all phases of the dispute to be con-
sidered, and if the disputes can be adjusted by changes
in the status quo, they can be made. But this may de-
pend on the consent of a dozen nations, without any
power to compel them, and until it has been tried and
proved feasible, nations are not likely to rely on it. It
is significant that no great dispute has ever been brought
to the League under these clauses. The failure to do so
is the greatest calamity for the League. But with so
many great nations outside it, it hardly has sufficient
authority to see that settlements proposed in time of
war are carried out. On the whole, it must be con-
cluded that the weakness of the membership of the
League, and the elaborate and uncertain character of
the procedure, have the effect that both the pro-league
and aggressive nations tend to face up to each other at
once. This means that any nation which is actively
behind the League will have the brunt of the dispute
forced on to it.
In view of this, it is somewhat ironical that the
peacemaking machinery has to be called “Collective
Security.” This name has the nature of a slogan, and
has a significant history. Besides the clauses for the pre-
servation of peace, there is in the Covenant the provi-
sion for disarmament. Where certain nations, among
them Great Britain, called upon the other nations to
carry out their promises of disarmament, they were met
with the plea that they would diminish their security if
they disarmed. The answer was that the clauses of the
Covenant gave all the security that should be asked,
but the response was that this was not enough. An issue
thus developed between Britain and France. France de-
manded a treaty of alliance as against Germany. This
was rejected by the British people as a whole because it
would allow France to determine British policy—give her
a blank cheque—and was inconsistent with the disinte-
rested role which each nation should adopt in the
League. France also demanded an international force,
and she made a series of other alliances to strengthen
her position, and at each stage her slogan was security.
Various attempts were made to strengthen the Cove-
nant. The Treaty of Mutual Assistance, and then the
Protocol, were early attempts. Finally, the Locarno
Treaty was the furthest that Great Britain would go to


wards a guarantee of France against Germany. One
cannot but feel that this cry for security was somewhat
hollow. Germany was disarmed and in part occupied
by the Allies, and was helpless. All attempts at dis-
armament failed completely. It is only fair to France
to say that Great Britain was almost as loth to sacri-
fice naval strength as France was to sacrifice military
strength. Her naval strength has visibly deteriorated,
but it is still sufficient to exercise enormous influence on
continental powers. Their tolerance of it is partly due
to their feeling that they can rely on it to enforce sanc-
tions against an aggressor. This is a position which
Great Britain should not and cannot alford to allow.
The opposition to disarmament and the call of
France and other European nations for security, is thus
really due to their lack of faith in the Covenant as it
stands. Yet its injustice to Germany has been such that
when she determined to re-arm, European opinion could
not be mobilised against it. To each proposal to fill up
the gap in the Covenant, there is the most potent ob-
jection. Nobody in the position of the League can exer-
cise the control over a number of highly armed nations
necessary to adjust their contentions. It is not a super
state or a world state, and if a world state were created
it would not command sufficient obedience or force to
give effect to its decrees. Disarmament was thus a para-
mount factor in the system of Collective Security as con-
tained in the Covenant. It has completely broken down.
In despair, British opinion seems to have surrendered to
the doctrine, which it originally rejected, of guaranteeing
security by force and filling up the gap in the Covenant.
This is supported as the only means of securing disarma-
ment, but most advocates of Collective Security in Eng-
land to-day affirm the principle that force is a neces-
sary factor in the international order. (See “Challenge
to Death”),
I suggest, therefore, that on all sides the principles
of the Covenant have in reality been departed from; the
nations of Europe are really working in a power complex
with armaments as they exist; the peace clauses of the
Covenant will not work; the risks of injury are too great.
A fatal mistake was made when disarmament was frus-
trated. With armaments drastically reduced you may
rely on the scheme of the League. But armaments show
that people are not trusting the League system, and it is
hardly worth while clinging to it. In my opinion, peace
will only come when we realise that armaments are the
main causes of insecurity. In the circumstances, all


machinery for security is futile. Ten years ago ninety
per cent, of British opinion would have supported my
thesis. The present position is due to their abandon-
ment of it through the irrational obduracy of France and
her craven fear of Germany. Finally, as we are using
the system now, sanctions are a species of bluif, justified
only if it be successful. If not, it will extend the area
of war, exclude a proper consideration of the causes of
war, make it automatic in character, make every war a
world war, and cause the building up of armaments so
as to fight another war to end war.


III.
DIFFICULTIES OF SANCTIONS.
Having- explored the meaning of collective security,
we must state somewhat more systematically the difficul-
ties in the way of the application of such a doctrine. In
this section I shall deal mainly with military sanctions.
It is generally assumed that all sanctions mean war. I
do not think that this is necessarily so. In a disarmed
world it would probably not be true. In a world which
through excessive armaments had become a power com-
plex it almost certainly would. We shall very shortly
see to what extent economic sanctions will produce re-
sults. Italy is a nation which is more vulnerable to eco-
nomic sanctions than most nations. She is more vulner-
able to military sanctions. Japan was more vulnerable
to economic sanctions, but she would certainly have
treated economic sanctions as a cause of war in order
to bring her real strength into play to counteract her
economic weakness.
Italy may not resent economic sanctions because of
her military weakness except against Abyssinia. We may
then take it that in a power governed world economic
sanctions, like military sanctions, depend on the stra-
tegic bases, though the two forms may have a somewhat
different incidence. The fact that economic sanctions
may succeed as against Italy is no guarantee that they
will succeed in other circumstances, though such a vic-
tory would so increase the prestige of the League that it
would be a decisive factor in peace. On the other hand,
a failure as against Italy would expose the system as a
crude conflict of force.
We may classify the difficulties of sanctions as either
strategic, political or executive.
1. Strategic. The fundamental fact to appreciate
is that sanctions are war, and are subject to the condi-
tions which attend war. The advocates of collective
security constantly speak as if sanctions were like the
water which a fireman directs from a hose into a confla-
gration. This is wholly fallacious. Sanctions mean war
fought by human beings against human beings in de-
fined groups in the earth’s surface, or within a few hun-
dred yards above or below it. As the different groups


that must fight occupy different areas with different de-
grees of accessibility one to another, war against anyone
must conform to certain strategic requirements. One
nation will, therefore, be much more vulnerable than
others. From this follows our first conclusion.
(1) Sanctions cannot be applied equally. Some na-
tions will be vulnerable, others can defy them with im-
punity. This is illustrated by the cases of Japan and
Italy. Japan was completely immune. Italy is exceed-
ingly vulnerable. Her enterprise can be obstructed at
a hundred points along a thousand miles of communica-
tions. It can be truly said that no sane soldier could
plan such an enterprise if he believed in the possibility
of military sanctions. It quite discounts all ideas of Mus-
solini’s genius. If he wanted colonies, a combination
with Germany to demand colonies within the League
would have been far more likely to achieve the result.
Mussolini’s effort is an irrational expression of an uneasy
dictatorship. I could develop this into a great many
other conclusions. For instance, what coercive effect
could the League exercise against Russia, a self-con-
tained, populous and inaccessible country. I must pass
on to point out that the unequal operation of sanctions
is a serious blot on the doctrine of collective security.
In a power complex it will definitely affect the lines of
the whole structure. Invulnerable states will become ag-
gressive, and vulnerable states quiescent. The Great
Powers will tend to attract into their orbit the weaker
states. Weaker states will protect themselves in other
ways.
(2) A corollary to this is that the burden of apply-
ing sanctions will fall unequally. The most potent in-
strument of sanctions is the blockade, and therefore on
the strongest naval power will fall the burden. This
means that Great Britain will have to fight through the
system of sanctions. Ido not regard this prospect with
pleasure. Great Britain is by her position and her lack
of self-containment the most vulnerable power. Her
naval position has depreciated enormously since the War,
and air power against naval power has yet to be tried
out. To act in the Mediterranean against Italy, a Medi-
terranean power with great air force and innumerable
potential air bases, is fraught with danger. France it-
self would not care to see Britain supreme in the Medi-
terranean. Supremacy in the Mediterranean is not a
supremely vital British interest. Yet at the present time
not to act there will mean a lessening of British prestige.
The burden on small states near states against whom
sanctions are to be applied must likewise be appreciated.


(3) The consequences of the application of sanctions
are unpredictable. The apologists for the extreme appli-
cation of collective security are ignorant of the nature
of war, and betray a blind faith in its efficacy. Here
again the huge armaments of to-day complicate the
situation; when war is engaged it is absolute, and the
armaments of to-day are such that civilisation can be
blown to pieces in a few months. Under these circum-
stances, to calculate with any precision the consequences
of their application is absurd. War is only justifiable in
so far as a definite objective or policy can be realised
by it. If it can only cause confusion and chaos, it must
be taken completely out of the categories of remedies,
even for breach of the peace. lam convinced that this is
a sound objection. It would compel us, I admit, to dis-
card sanctions and to search for some other system for
peace. What it does reveal is that we took a wrong
turning when we said that security must be achieved
before we could disarm. The contrary is the true pro-
position. The doctrine that you will not get disarma-
ment unless you settle all political questions in issue is
a sophistry. Political issues never are settled, they are
in their nature conflict of forces or influences, the future
of which vary. But people can be sufficiently enlightened
to say that they will fight these issues without arms.
2. Political. The principal political difficulty about
sanctions is that it involves a guarantee of the
status quo, that is, the present international relations as
expressed in their boundaries and other conditions. This
is the world as settled by the Treaty of Versailles with
all its defects. If, then, the world is unbalanced or un-
sound, if it needs rectification, the doctrine of collective
security will tend to prevent adjustment. This will, of
course, be disputed by many advocates for collective
security. No doubt in the working of the mechanism of
the League there is room for changing the status quo if
it is found to be injurious. Nations cannot be com-
pelled to agree to a change, but in a bad case the
League might refuse to support a nation which would
not agree. It would probably be impossible to mobilise
the League to act against an aggressor who had a
very righteous case for change, but in this case the
League system would break down. Generally speaking,
the nations would consider themselves bound to prevent
aggression if the aggressor had made no attempt to get
justice through the League. But would the chances of
redress be such as to induce a person dissatisfied with the
status quo appealing to the League. Certainly no power
has yet done so.


Germany has talked about a return of her colo-
nies, but has never brought the matter up formally. Italy
has made no claim for territory in which to expand.
Italy may have come to the conclusion that it is useless
to appeal to the League, or may have meant to defy the
League out of sheer bravado. If the latter, the nations
who support the League should certainly prevent her.
But Italy would certainly have good grounds for believ-
ing that the League would not interfere with the status
quo without the consent of the nations affected.
France has been fanatical in the support of the
Treaty of Versailles as expressing a European order. It
may be doubted whether France would support the
League for a month if it did not believe that it was the
bulwark of the status quo.
I think, then, that it must be taken that the League
will support the status quo. I admit that changes in the
status quo are difficult to make. But all changes in an
international situation are resisted, and some have to be
made. If they are not made some states will be starved
of raw materials or food. In many cases action by na-
tions which is quite legal may intensify the difficulties
of a nation. A system, therefore, which prevents change
in the status quo is exceedingly dangerous, and may make
war inevitable.
Changes in the status quo need not be confined only
to changes in territory or in sovereignty. These are ex-
cessively difficult to make, but most difficulties would be
eased if economic policy, especially economic nationalism,
were changed. The accepted system of collective secu-
rity which adopts as a criterion merely the fact of ag-
gression, and ignores ultimate causes of war, may be the
most unfortunate influence against such an adjustment
as will make the world relatively stable.
It is most convenient to meet here the argu-
ment that force is an ingredient in all political
actions, and that, as we have not abolished
the policeman within the State, we cannot ex-
pect to abolish force in international relations, but the
League of Nations gives us a feasible system of ensuring
that international force will be used to support a stable
world order. It must be admitted that a world order
without government is a lame world order, but, on the
other hand, the need of world authority does not make
world authority real. Governments are not created, but
grow, and habits of obedience and allegiance to autho-
rity are essential to their effective establishment. These


conditions do not exist. Allegiance is given to national
governments and not to the League. States send dele-
gates to the League to represent national interests.
Again, States have found that the physical force at
the command of its citizens must be controlled by public
sentiment, otherwise force is a tremendous danger to
the state. If our police were armed with machine guns
there would be no sense of security. Popular govern-
ment, with all its inefficiency and gaps, is the chief bul-
wark against the misapplication of force within the
State. Even this does not enable us to make great
changes in social relations easily. No changes would be
made if all sections were armed to the teeth. The answer
to the argument is that:—
(1) International government does not exist, and it
will take generations for it to grow.
(2) The present day armaments create a situation
quite unlike that which exists under civil autho-
rity.
3. Executive Difficulties. The executive difficulties
of carrying out a system of collective security are being
exemplified before our eyes every day. As we have seen,
the efficacy of the system depends on its bluffing power;
if the dangers of flouting the world are not a sufficient
deterrent, the system does more harm than good, because
the whole is embroiled, and either suffers the horror of
war or economic loss. Swift collective action is essen-
tial, and anybody who has studied history knows that
with a body of nations this is impossible. The most per-
fect illustration of this is provided by the controversy
between Professor Noel Baker and Professor Zimmern,
published by the Royal Institute of International Affairs.
Professor Baker has explained what, in his opinion,
could and should have been done by the League in the
case of the Manchurian dispute. I must confess that
when I read this I shivered at contemplating the fact
that Professor Noel Baker had once been Under-Secre-
tary for Foreign Affairs for the British Empire. Nobody
with any experience of affairs could have imagined that
such a programme could have been put into effect. Pro-
fessor Zimmern shows how far a collaborative body, like
the League, actually was from doing the things Professor
Baker says it should have done. Nobody even proposed
them.
It will be suggested, of course, that the League
should have been prepared to do them, but we should
think a little deeper. Is not a body like the League of


Nations bound to consider the issues, to digest and circu-
late facts, to discuss means of avoiding war or rectifying'
injustice. If it is not, then Articles 15 and 16 of the
Covenant are to be mainly a machine for bringing about
automatic war, which, in my opinion, is a terrible thing.
I believe that in the case of Italy, and possibly in the
case of Japan, the League should have been prepared
to act, and if it was to act it should act quickly, but it
is a true saying that hard cases make bad law, and you
forge a terrible weapon if you create a machine for turn-
ing on war automatically.
SECURITY IN THE PACIFIC.
We have seen that one fatal defect of the system of
sanctions is that different nations are unequally vulner-
able to them, while the burden of ’applying them falls
unequally on different nations. This is not merely a
strategic defect, but it is a defect which would tend in
time to distort the world order, give a premium to nations
favourably situated. If the system were firmly estab-
lished, it would be used by the favourably situated na-
tions to secure advantages of a crucial character. This
is not merely speculative. All political history shows
examples of a similar exploitation of a favourable posi-
tion as between classes in a community. . It may be re-
marked finally that a system of sanctions is not likely
in the long run to be favourable to Great Britain. She
is of all countries the most vulnerable to sanctions unless
she has command of the seas. This does not now exist.
On the other hand, her large fleet in European waters is
regarded as the main instrument of sanctions. But the
frequent use of the blockade would be intolerable to
European nations. In fact, the success of the blockade
in the Great War has been one of the main factors in
the growth of economic nationalism, which is a tremen-
dous blow to British external trade.
Europe, indeed, is a very special case. All nations
there are in some greater or lesser degree vulnerable to
sanctions. Their dependence on foreign trade and on
imports of food and raw materials, and the few exits
from Europe to the world, makes them all vulnerable
and nervous about their future under such a regime.
Most of them have considerable confidence that Britain
will exercise her power honestly, and for the benefit of
the world, but it would be asking too much of European
statesmen to ask them to place implicit reliance on this.
This precarious interdependence of European nations is,
therefore, one of the greatest factors of world instability.
Theoretically, sanctions can be very efficacious, but their


very efficacy makes them dangerous. The situation is
intensified because the nervous instability of European
States is the cause of large armaments, and these arma-
ments accentuate the instability. Europe is a very special
case, partly because of the development of Imperialistic
capitalism through the over-population in Europe.
We have only to look at a map of the Pacific to
see how different conditions are there. There are wide
extents of ocean separating nations which occupy as a
rule areas adequate for their populations and are self-
contained. Such nations are not vulnerable to sanctions.
They are so far separated that they cannot co-operate
in the application of sanctions. The tempting but dan-
gerous weapon of the blockade is not possible. This is a
wide generalisation, and it is not all of it true of the
north-west Pacific, and the seas around China, Japan
and Eastern Siberia. Japan is dependent on foreign
trade, and Japan and China are to an extent qverpopu-
lated; whereas Japan has an efficiently organised State,
China has displayed little civic sense, at any time in her
history, but has developed a high type of family or small
group social system. This precludes her from united ac-
tion. Japan has taken advantage of this, and made her-
self supreme in the area, and is determined that her
position shall not be worsened there. Any power which
attempts to make advances there will be fought. Russia
tried before Japan was recognised as a first class power,
and Japan beat her back. The weakness of the Soviet
regime has enabled Japan to press Russia even further
back.
Under the circumstances, it is crass folly to believe
that sanctions can be applied against Japan while Rus-
sia and China are as they are. So far as armaments go,
she is clearly impregnable, and unless European states-
men wish to discredit the system of sanctions they must
let it alone. This is elementary diplomacy. Neverthe-
less, the economic and military position of Japan is pre-
carious. Economically she is more dependent on foreign
trade than even Great Britain. From the military point
of view, her eighty million people have an essential in-
feriority to the four hundred million Chinese, and to the
ultimate power of Russia with the development of the
eastern section of the Empire. Her armaments are an
enormous burden on her, and she has shown a disposi-
tion to reduce them if the armaments of the other Great
Powers are reduced too. All that is needed to check
Japanese expansion is a stable China. It is clear that,
even with the ratios fixed at Washington, U.S.A. and
Great Britain are not willing to risk intervention in the


Far East. The differential ratios in favour of Great Bri-
tain and U.S.A. are just enough to make Japan uncom-
fortable, and justify her armaments, to induce her to
strike if any advance be made towards her, and so main-
tain her impregnability. It would be better then to
abandon all idea of sanctions, and accept the offers of
disarmament that Japan has made. The position will
then be that Japan, even with reduced armaments and
a highly organised army, retains her present dominance,
for what it is worth over Chinese policy. This can last
only until China creates from the immense human and
material resources an organised community. It would
not be necessary for her to become similar to a modern
military state. Any degree of organisation which would
enable a government of China to be set up which would
speak for China and carry out a systematic policy would
be sufficient. We have to be content with this, for there
is no other way to secure stability in the North-rwest
Pacific.
The lesson of this is that disarmament in the Paci-
fic is a far greater factor of security than any collective
system.
ALTERNATIVES.
It is not incumbent in the author of a critical paper
to elaborate a system of alternative means of securing
peace. In the British mind the resistance to a guaran-
tee of force was broken down by the plea that there was
no other way to peace. I answer that if sanctions cause
such difficulties in operation, they are no means of ob-
taining peace. Sanctions cause difficulty because there is
no world government, and no authority capable of solv-
ing the numerous incidental problems. There is no pos-
sibility of setting up such authority, and until it is set up
to wield a system which necessitates such an authority
is a danger. It may be that we are up against a great
moral crisis, and the only way to peace is through a
better and higher ethical standard in the average man.
But there are alternatives of a less formidable charac-
ter. Reduction of armaments to such a strength that
they cannot strike vital blows is an essential for security.
The world has been working on a false premise during
the last ten years. It has postponed disarmament until
security was attained. This is the wrong way round.
You cannot get security if aggressive armaments are
permitted. The solution of the question of disarmament
depends on two things. First, the working out of a sys-
tem of defensive armaments. This is exceedingly diffi-
cult owing to the peculiar power of the air arm. Secondly,


a change of heart which will make people discard fears
and spontaneously agree to disarmament. This moral
disarmament is essential. It may involve a great faith
in human nature to believe it possible, but there is no
other way, and after all, if it is somewhat absurd to be-
lieve that peace can come without it, people must come
to realise that the way of armaments is the way to de-
stroy civilisation, and that the way to security is by re-
duction.
If we got disarmament, especially naval disarma-
ment, immediately all the typical European problems are
mitigated. Economic nationalism is the direct product
of armaments and recollections of the blockade. On
the other hand, while armaments remain as they are,
systems which depend on sanctions are more of a danger
than the reverse. It is easy to see that the war spirit
and a belief in force is kept alive so that we shall be in
the mood to enforce sanctions. For example; British
ministers have complained that their capacity to restrain
Italy and enforce sanctions has been weakened by Bri-
tish disarmament. The conclusion of the matter is that
to attempt a system of security through the application
of powerful sanctions against an aggressor in a world
which is economically unstable, and made more unstable
by excessive armaments, is a false and dangerous policy.
Such a system simply adds one other dangerous instru-
ment of force into a force complex. What is needed is
to relieve definitely, and as quickly as possible, the eco-
nomic and military instability of the world. This is dif-
ficult but not unpracticable. A constructive policy of this
kind would require much demonstration.
But a short summary will indicate what I mean.
(1) Disarmament to a defensive minimum. Offers
such as Japan and Germany to disarm or abandon of-
fensive arms should not be scouted.
Particular attention should be paid to naval disar-
mament, and the doctrine of the freedom of the seas es-
tablished, so that European nations will not have to fear
the stoppage of their trade. As Great Britain has not
got the command of the seas, and cannot make her own
communications secure, her position is radically different
from the time when she did have command. Air disar-
mament is difficult to secure, but air attack is really the
reply of European nations to navalism. No nation can
profit by meaningless destruction of communities. Euro-
pean philosophy based on Nietsche, and acted on by Mus-
solini, certainly does worship force, but if European civi


lisation is committed to air fighting, it is doomed, and
all we we can do is to draw a cordon sanitaire around
Europe.
The relief of economic instability is a more dif-
ficult and more uncertain process. The problem has three
phases:—
Overpopulation in Europe.
Unequal division of the outer world.
Economic restrictions.
These are all results of the same economic insta-
bility, and they tend to accentuate each other. For in-
stance, redistribution of population on a large scale in
a few years is virtually impossible. The greatest in-
equality of territory is in Africa. Yet the areas occupied
do not absorb any large European population. There
will have to be a large transfer of world populations in
the next century, and everything must be done to faci-
litate it. It will not be an agricultural transference, but
a transfer of industrial populations. Economic nationa-
lism in new countries is serving a function, though it de-
feats itself if applied in an exaggerated form. A world
of States which are less dependent on foreign trade will
be a more secure world than the present. Apart from
communities which need development, the utmost free-
dom of trade should be developed.
SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS.
1. The scheme of Collective Security contained in
the Covenant is a skilful attempt to secure a fair consi-
deration of world problems likely to cause war, but it
is not being carried out in its entirety, and without dis-
armament it is so imperfect that it may prove a danger.
2. The defects which are disclosed are vital.
(a) It is unequal in its consequences, some nations
are vulnerable and others not. Some nations
will be called on to bear the burden, others not.
It cannot, therefore, be used as a foundation for
better world order, and has always broken
down in practice.
(b) It will almost certainly be used to maintain the
status quo, and prevent practical approach to
the solution of the causes of war.
(c) It is so difficult of execution that it tends to be-
come ineffective to prevent war.
3. The doctrine cannot be applied to the Pacific for


strategical reasons. No nations can apply such
pressure on others as will prevent them from
aggression. The North-West Pacific is domi-
nated by Japan, but merely because of China’s
exceptional weakness—the balance would be
recovered by the restoration of China to reason-
able stability.
This note is a reduction to writing in October, 1935, of a lec-
ture delivered in September, 1935. It will be seen that the history
of the application of sanctions against Italy leaves very little to
be added to the article, and very little difference of emphasis is
needed. The only two points I would refer to are the emotions of
resentment aroused in the people of Italy, and a very definite
weakening of British strategic position. It looks as if she has no
longer any command over the Mediterranean.


NAVAL ARMAMENTS IN THE PACIFIC.
By J. C. Rookwood Proud.
Of late years no arm of the Empire’s Defence Ser-
vices has received so much publicity as the navy. A num-
ber of distinguished writers, both inside and out of the
service, have pointed out the serious decline in British
naval strength since the war, and strongly advocated
the repair of the wastage.
For Britain this is a necessary policy, and the recent
rearmament proposals have indicated that the statesmen
have realised that, despite the increased effectiveness of
the Air Arm, a strong navy is the most certain way of
securing Britain’s lines of communication on which she
would be completely dependent in the event of an out-
break of war. Under existing world conditions, this is
the primary purpose of sea-power; “as the importance
of the control of these communications will vary accord-
ing to the activity of a nation’s existence, so the quan-
tity of naval force which a nation requires depends upon
the extent to which its national existence, territorial or
economic, is dependent upon the maintenance of its ex-
ternal communications.”
On this argument it is obvious that Great Britain,
whose national and economic welfare is almost entirely
dependent on these factors, must possess a naval force
which will enable her to protect her interests against
any likely combination of enemies. At the close of the
war she more than held this position, for, according to
Mr. H. C. Bywater, she possessed at that time “1354
combatant vessels, with an aggregate of 3,250,000 tons,
forty-two of these being capital ships of the Dreadnought
type. There were 109 cruising ships, 13 aircraft car-
riers, 527 destroyers and torpedo boats, and 137 sub-
marines. In actual fighting potency, the combined fleets
of the other allied and associated Powers were over-
shadowed by this gigantic force.”
It is wise to remember at this stage that by far the
greater portion of this force was concentrated in Euro-
pean waters, and was fully occupied there. This was
only made possible by the existence of the Anglo-Japa-
nese Alliance, which freed Britain from the necessity of
keeping a fleet of any size in the Pacific. Had this al-
liance not existed at that time, it is difficult to imagine


what total naval strength would have been required to
enable Britain to guard her interests in these waters.
To-day Japan is no longer an ally, and it is therefore
hardly surprising that many Australians are extremely
dubious of the value of the British Navy as a protection
for this country, for any aggressive action by a Pacific
Power would probably be made when Great Britain was
fully occupied elsewhere. This doubt is greatly increased
by the fact that the British Navy is to-day considerably
below half its post-war strength.
The situation created by the very great size of the
British Navy, and the rapidly increasing strength of
Japan and the United States, was placing an impossible
burden on the taxpayers of these countries in the years
immediately following the war. Japan and the United
States were in fact engaged in a naval armaments race,
which, had it been allowed to persist, must have led to
a clash between these two great Pacific Powprs. The
situation in the Pacific at this time tended to make that
region the central point of interest in international af-
fairs. This was largely due to the increase of Japanese
domination in China, which caused the other Pacific
Powers, particularly the U.S.A., to fear for their own
interests in that country. It was obvious that some sys-
tem must be devised which would, by settling the poli-
tical differences of the interested powers, prepare the
way for a cessation of the ruinous competition in naval
construction. To achieve this a very great measure of
agreement between Great Britain and the United States
was necessary, and the Anglo-Japanese Alliance stood in
the way of this.
THE RATIO SYSTEM.
After the War, the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, which
had been consummated in 1902, and renewed in 1911,
was viewed with considerable concern in America. Al-
though the terms of the Alliance definitely excluded the
United States from its operations, it was, nevertheless,
disturbing Great Britain’s relations with that country, and
from the point of view of Canada, in particular, this was
clearly untenable, for that Dominion’s very existence de-
pended on the continuance of good relations with her
powerful neighbour, to whom she was so closely bound
both economically and geographically.
In Australia the government was not inclined to
oppose the continuation of the Alliance which had
proved so satisfactory during the War, and little sym-
pathy was felt for the point of view of the United States,


for Japan was a much closer neighbour, and apparently
disposed to be friendly. However, the activities of Japa-
nese and American shipbuilding yards at this time
created a fear in the minds of many people that war in
the Pacific was imminent, and any move to bring about
some measure of disarmament and establish a system of
secmdty for the Pacific was welcomed. In addition,
there were points in the Anglo-Japanese Treaty which
were incompatible with the obligations of the two na-
tions under the Covenant of the League, and in 1921,
both Governments notified the League that they would
be bound by the Covenant rather than the Alliance. The
Japanese, realising the difficult position in which Great
Britain was placed, prepared the way for the Washing-
ton Treaties by agreeing to the termination of the Al-
liance.
The ratio system which was set up at Washington,
and which established some measure of stability in the
Pacific during the next ten years, was based on certain
political agreements between the interested Powers. In
addition to fixing the ratio of 5:5:8 for the capital ship
tonnage of Great Britain, the United States and Japan,
an attempt was made to prevent the establishment of
any new fortifications of naval bases in certain terri-
tories and possessions of the three Pacific Powers. These
Included:—
(1) The possessions of the United States in the
Pacific, except (a) those adjacent to the coast of U.S.A.,
Alaska, and the Panama Canal Zone, not including the
Aleution Islands, and (b) the Hawaiian Islands.
(2) Hong Kong and the possessions of the British
Empire in the Pacific east of 110 degrees east longitude,
except (a) those adjacent to the coast of Canada, (b)
the Commonwealth of Australia and its territories, (c)
New Zealand.
(3) The following insular territories and posses-
sions of Japan. The Kurile Islands, Bonin Islands, Amami-
Oshina, the Loochoo Islands, Formosa and the Pesca-
dores, and any other possessions that Japan might after-
wards acquire.
The effect of this clause was that the great distances
over which the fleets would have to operate in the Paci-
fic almost precluded the possibility of aggression by any-
one of these Powers against another. It gave to each
Power, but to Japan in particular, almost complete
security in its own waters.
During the next ten years many attempts were
made to extend the ratio system to all categories. The


abortive Geneva Conference of 1927 was an example of
this. In 1930 the British Labour Government issued in-
vitations to a conference in London, and this resulted in
some measure of agreement being reached by the three
principal naval Powers. Great Britain had always de-
manded a minimum of seventy smaller Cruisers, and the
tonnage limitations suggested by the U.S.A. made this
impossible. The Labour Government, however, reduced
this demand to fifty, and agreement between these two
Powers was made almost complete. Japan was granted
60 per cent, of the American figure for heavy cruisers,
subject to an understanding which gave her 72 per cent,
up to 1936. In other cruisers and destroyers a ratio of
70 per cent, was fixed. Great Britain also accepted a
crfiiser replacement tonnage of 91,000 tons, without any
corresponding provision by the other Powers. The
■“escalator clause” of this treaty has been criticised as
valueless, as its invocation would provoke a dangerous
crisis.
The London Agreements were at the best a tem-
porary arrangement, and strongly criticised in Great Bri-
tain and Japan. The ratio system was obviously prov-
ing unworkable, and Japan, by her action in Manchuria,
made any further agreements unlikely. Moreover, her
newly acquired possessions, and her increased impor-
tance as a commercial nation considerably strengthened
her claim for equality. This claim was still strongly op-
posed by the United States and Great Britain, and the
preliminary conversations for the London Conference
showed a great divergence of views.
THE LONDON CONFERENCE (1935).
Jstpan pressed for an abandonment of the ratio sys-
tem, and the granting of the principle of equality on the
basis of a common upper limit to which all Powers might
build; a reduction in the size and numbers of so-called
offensive vessels; and a limitation in the tonnage of capi-
tal ships, aircraft-carriers and submarines. Once the
common upper limit was established, there should then
be put into force an all round reduction of total tonnage,
with freedom for each Power to use this tonnage as it
pleased.
The United States was engaged in a large naval
construction programme, but was in favour of a general
reductidn of twenty per cent. She rejected the Japa-
nese demand for equality, insisted on the retention of
the ratio system, and firmly championed the battleship,
which she considered was of particular importance in
the Pacific owing to its long cruising range. It was also


pointed out during the conversations that, whereas Japan
had commenced construction on all the vessels allowed
by treaty, save one of 1500 tons, Great Britain lacked
44 vessels of a total tonnage of 132,975 tons, and the
United States 78 vessels of 136,975 tons. Great empha-
sis was placed by the United States on the point that
equality of security did not mean equality of armaments.
In the event of the abandonment of the ratio system,
Great Britain proposed that all Powers should announce
their building programmes for the next six years. She
was in favour of a reduction of capital ship tonnage to
25,000, with 12 inch guns, of cruiser tonnage to 7006 with
six inch guns, and of submarines (failing their total
abolition), to 250 tons, thus limiting their operations to
coastal defence.
The policy of France and of Italy was affected by
the Anglo-German Naval Agreement (by whick Ger-
many might build up to 35 per cent, of British tonnage) >
and the Abyssinian campaign. France, therefore,' de-
manded a capital ship tonnage of 420,000, refused to
submit to any restrictions on submarines, and stated that
she would only bind herself for a short period. Italy
still based her policy on equality with France. Any
form of agreement appeared to be impossible, and this
was particularly so in the case of Japan. When
country’s delegation withdrew from the Conference it
was evident that no matter what agreements might be
concluded among the remaining four Powers, these
would lack force owing to the instability of the situation
in the Pacific. Any system involving the limitation of
the number of ships, or of global tonnage, was thus out
of the question.
According to cabled reports, the final terms of the
Treaty, which was signed by Great Britain, France and
U.S.A., imposed the following limitations:—
Battleships. —3s,ooo tons and 14 inch guns, with
liberty to use 16 inch guns if Japan does not agree by
April 4th, 1937.
Aircraft Carriers. — 23,ooo tons atld 6 inch guns.
Cruisers. —Booo tons and 6 inch guns.
Submarines. —2ooo tons and 5 inch guns.
No warships were to be built between 10,000 and
17,500 tons, and four months’ notice of building proposals
were to be given.
The main significance of the terms is the complete
abandonment of ratios, and (from the point of view of
Great Britain), the establishment of an 8000, ton limit
for cruisers. An agreemeht was also reached betweOh
Great Britain and the tJ.S.A. that “there shall be no coni


petitive naval building between ourselves, and that the
principle of parity as between the fleets of the British
Commonwealth and the United States of America, shall
continue unchanged.” In the closeness of Anglo-Ameri-
can relations, there is some cause to hope that these
two Powers may yet co-operate to achieve a stable sys-
tem in the Pacific.
THE PRESENT SITUATION IN THE PACIFIC.
This sketch of events since the war seems to indi-
cate three stages in post-war naval history.
(1) The period of unbridled competition in naval
armaments, during which Great Britain, although im-
measurably superior, was in danger of being overtaken
by the United States and Japan.
(2) The period in which this competition was held
in check by the ratio system. This system was never
based on any real strategic foundation, and was .unsatis-
factory to the majority of Powers. The United States
alone was favourable to its application to all classes,
and it is very doubtful that, if the system had been based
on a satisfactory foundation, she would have possessed
parity with Britain. During this period it became in-
creasingly evident that the system was inherently un-
stable.
(3) The period which has just commenced which,
while abandoning the ratio system, endeavours to control
competition and impose a limitation on the tonnage of
the various categories. This is considerably weakened,
if not completely stultified, by the non-adherence of
Japan.
To arrive at any conclusions regarding the policies
which might be adopted under the existing circum-
stances, it is essential that the strategic factors operat-
ing in the Pacific Area should be borne in mind. The
assumptions underlying the Washington Treaties were
that, in the event of a war between Japan and the
U.S.A., it would be impossible for either fleet to advance
far enough from its bases to meet the enemy, and Cap-
tain Bernard Acworth, of the Royal Navy, contended
that, at present strength, Hong Kong would be occu-
pied by the Japanese within a fortnight, and a British
fleet operating from Singapore would be powerless to
prevent a Japanese naval attack on Australia.
The situation can best be realised by an understand-
ing that a modern battle fleet can only operate from a
base that is protected, not only from naval, but from air
attack, and has accommodation for ships of the largest
size. The nearest American base to Japan is then seen


Capital
8 inch gun
Seaplane and air-
Carrier borne
ships.
cruisers.
craft carriers.
aircraft.
U.S.A 15
15
4
230
Japan .... 9
British
12
6
180
C’wealth. 0
7
1
15
to be Pearl Harbour, at Honolulu, which is 8400 miles
from Yokohama, and the radius of a modern American
cruiser, according to modern authorities, is only 2500
miles at high speed. Britain’s most advanced base is
Singapore, which is 3000 miles from the same port. In
neither case would a battle fleet be able to operate ef-
fectively at these distances, for it would have no fuel
to spare for manoeuvring. Thus the only two bases
from which British and American fleets could operate
against Japan are Hong Kong and the American island
of Guam. Both of these are about 1500 miles from the
Japanese bases, but neither has a dock suitable for capi-
tal ships, and under the terms of the Washington Treaty
they may not be equipped with one.
To-day, then, Japan, even with an inferior fleet, has
almost complete immunity from invasion, and possesses
virtual domination of the whole eastern coast of Asia.
According to the only fig’ures available, the respec-
tive strengths of the three Pacific navies are at present:—
The strength of the British Fleet has been materially
weakened by the concentration of vessels in the Medi-
terranean. Three of the seven cruisers are part of the
R.A.N., the other four are attached to the China Squad-
ron.
THE UNITED STATES.
The Naval Policy of the United States has been sub-
jected to a great deal of criticism abroad, for while it is
realised that she has a long seaboard and important com-
mercial interests to protect, yet her geographic isola-
tion hardly necessitates the maintenance of a navy of
the first class. Writing in 1934, Mr. H. C. Bywater said,
“The United States, if called upon to state its reasons
for demanding a navy second to none, would have to
appeal to academic rather than concrete principles.
Separated from Europe and Asia by the width of oceans,
it is in no danger of direct attack on a serious scale, nor
could it be blockaded in any literal sense of the word.
The Philippines are a dangerous liability so long as they
remain under the American flag, but the proposed grant
of independence of those islands, and the consequent
withdrawal of the Asiatic Squadron, would close the gap


in the naval defences of the United States, which would
then be invulnerable. Henceforth Washington could
view the development of Japanese, French, Italian and
even of British seapower with Olympian" calm and de-
tachment, though considerations of prestige might still
justify the maintenance of a United States fleet second
to none.”
Of late years, however, there has been a much closer
alignment of British and American naval policy. The
views of one writer are that “the days of Anglo-Ameri-
can rivalry in this sphere would appear to have passed,
and the two navies now seem to have the common ob-
jective of securing world peace on the sea. For this rea-
son, it now seems that the United States Fleet will have
to bear the major part of the common burden in the Paci-
fic. This it will be able to do with the knowledge that
the Atlantic seaboard will be guarded by Great Britain.”
JAPAN.
This new relationship between these two great
Powers can be largely traced to the policy enunciated
by Japan in recent years. Her desire to establish a
Monroe Doctrine for Asia, coupled with the very great
power wielded by the militarist caste, has not been con-
ducive to the tranquility of her neighbours in the Pacific
area. Already she is strong enough to make armed in-
tervention by any single power, with the exception of
the U.S.S.R., out of the question. Yet, apparently, the
power that she has already gained has only whetted her
appetite for more, and in the light of events since 1931,
it is hardly to be wondered at that her demand for “parity
in principle” was met by a firm refusal.
The anxiety which has been felt regarding Japanese
policy has been intensified in recent months by the state-
ments, such as that of Admiral Takahashi, Commander
of the Japanese naval forces, who declared that, in cer-
tain circumstances, Japan would be compelled to estab-
lish “footholds” in the mandated islands. While it is
unwise to attach undue importance to such provocative
statements, it is easy to understand why other nations
are inclined to regard the rise of this hew Power with
suspicion and distrust.
The actual territories of the United States and
Japan, with the exception of the Philippines, are, as has
been indicated, separated by vast distances. Yet Ame-
rica has in recent years devoted considerable attention
in their naval and air force exercises to the problem of
negotiating these. This is exemplified by the flights
from Honolulu to Midway Island, and naval manoeuvres


in the Western Pacific. If the Philippines are aban-
doned, the United States will be released from an embar-
rassing commitment, although it is unfortunate that, at
the same time, it removes another obstacle from the path
of a Japanese drive to the south. Cabled reports of a
considerable defence programme indicate that the Fili-
pinos are alive to the danger.
THE BRITISH EMPIRE.
For Great Britain and her Pacific Dominions the
problem is difficult. None of the Dominions is able to
defend itself against a serious naval attack, and the
widely scattered nature of the British Umpire makes it
vulnerable at many points. For this reason, it would
be impossible for Great Britain to concentrate her whole
fleet in any one place. If any exception is to be made
to this rule, it would be the North Sea, for England’s
almost complete dependence on her overseas trade would
render it imperative that she should possess complete
supremacy in home waters. It is certain that any great
concentration of the fleet in the Pacific would be impos-
sible. Yet British territories in this area ate not nearly
so favourably situated as those of the United States, Who,
save for her weakness in the Philippines, can be regarded
as invulnerable. Hong Kong lies only four hundred
miles from Formosa, and further south the equator is
the only dividing line between the islands under Japa-
nese Mandate and the Mandated Territories of Australia.
The Caroline, Marshall and Bottih Islands “lie scattered
across nearly thirty degrees of latitude, like stepping
stones between Australia and Japan.” Rumours of
Japanese activities in these islands have already created
a certain amount of apprehension in this country, for
were that country to establish a base there, it would
bring her within 2000 miles of the vital centtes of Aus-
tralia.
THE U.S.S.R.
The activities of the U.S.S.R. are another factor in-
fluencing the present general political situation, and her
membership of the League is also important, as it throws
her weight on the side of Great Britain. It is, of course,
unwise to regard League membership as having any
great influence in the Pacific area, for there at least,
the collective system would appear to be dead, if indeed
it ever existed. In this case, however, the alignment of
the Powers in Europe makes it extremely improbable!
that Britain and the Soviet would be in opposite camps.


The relations of the U.S.S.R. and Japan, as evidenced
by the strained situation in Outer Mongolia, would ap-
pear to make it unlikely that Japan would fight an ag-
gressive action against any other Power when the dan-
ger from that quarter is so great. Vladivostock is within
close range by air of Japanese centres, and the Japanese
are very conscious of this.
FUTURE NAVAL POLICIES.
It is difficult to envisage any future naval policy in
the Pacific which is not based on closer Anglo-American
co-operation. The British Empire no longer possesses
complete control of the seas. For some time the new
re-armament proposals will in reality only bring the navy
up to treaty strength, and, in any case, the provisions
of the treaties will remain binding until 1937. More-
over, it can no longer be said, with any degree of cer-
tainty, that the British still retain control of the Medi-
terranean. If it were possible for this sea to be closed to
British shipping, the Pacific would be even more isolated
than it is to-day. For this reason it is necessary for Bri-
tain, if she is to protect her interests in this area, to es-
tablish a Pacific Fleet of sufficient size to make its pre-
sence felt. It has been estimated that such a fleet would
have to consist of at least six capital ships, with a pro-
portionate number of auxiliary craft. It would in all pro-
bability be based on Singapore, with the possibility of
another base in Northern Australia. The cost of such
an undertaking may appear to be prohibitive, but it is
doubtful if any lesser measures could be effective.
If such a policy were to be adopted, British inte-
rests in India and the East Indies would be adequately
protected, but unless a base were established in Aus-
tralian waters the same could not be said of this country
and New Zealand. Singapore is approximately 3000
miles off the direct line from Japan to Australia, and a
fleet operating there would have little chance of pre-
venting a serious naval attack on some of the more ex-
posed Australian cities.
It has also been argued that the value of Singapore
as a base depends to a very large degree on the reten-
tion of Hong Kong. If this latter port were incapable
of defending itself, as it is at present, then a British Fleet
would be powerless to protect British interests in China.
On this assumption a number of naval authorities argue
that as Japan has rejected the ratio system, so should
Great Britain and the U.S.A. refuse to consider any ex-
tension of the non-fortification agreements. By so doing


Hong Kong and Guam could be strengthened, and fleets
operating from these bases would be able to seriously
challenge Japan’s position in the Western Pacific.
Excellent as this reasoning is, it fails to take into
account the fact that Japan would, in its present state
of mind, almost certainly meet such a threat with coun-
ter measures. The danger of war in this area would
thus be intensified to an alarming degree. In addition,
Japan would no doubt consider herself free to establish
bases in the Marshall and Caroline Islands, which would
bring her within 2000 miles of Australian ports. It would
start an armaments race in the Pacific, and greatly in-
crease the likelihood of war.
For good or ill, Japan to-day controls the eastern
coast of Asia. America has similar control in the
Eastern Pacific, and Great Britain, by exercising a deter-
mined policy, could assert her supremacy in the south.
If these spheres of influence can be maintained, and if
the Powers concerned can trust the others not to abuse
their privileges, a stable system might even now be
maintained. Unfortunately, Great Britain’s European
commitments make it impossible for her to accede to the
Japanese proposals for a common upper limit fixed as
low as possible, but even so, some modification of this
which would apply to the Pacific alone might yet be es-
tablished. Less rivalry and fear, and greater mutual
co-operation among the Powers concerned would not
only avert the danger of another armaments race, but
might, in time, even bring about a gradual reduction in the
armed strength of the Pacific Powers.
THE POSITION OF AUSTRALIA.
Such a consummation need not be regarded as hope-
lessly Utopian, but it must have its origins in firm and
determined action by Great Britain in the present crisis.
There could be nothing more fatal than that any one
Power should leave inviting plums lying about so that
they could apparently be had for the taking. At pre-
sent, there is no worse offender in this regard than Aus-
tralia, whose immigration policy has been the subject of
much adverse criticism. Most of this criticism is ill-in-
formed, and could be disregarded but for its unfortunate
effect on those countries which consider themselves
directly affected by a policy which endeavours to re-
tain this continent for the benefit of a certain section
of the people of the world, and allow it to develop un-
hampered by the difficulties which face those countries
which possess a mixed population. Yet even in these


circumstances Australia has allowed its long coast line
to remain comparatively undefended.
At the present time there does not appear to be any
real danger of a direct attack on these shores on any
large scale, but it would be folly to base our defence
plans on this assumption. Unfortunately, the scope of
these plans must be severely restricted by the very limi-
ted financial resources which are at the command of
the Australian Government. For this reason, the main-
tenance of an independent navy on a sufficiently large
scale to ensure adequate protection is out of the ques-
tion, owing to the high cost of these armaments. As it
has been suggested that a British Fleet stationed at
Singapore could render Australia very little assistance,
it would be almost equally unsatisfactory if we increased
our contribution to the Imperial Navy either in ships or
in money, so long as conditions remain as they are. It
might be possible, however, for the Australian Govern-
ment to undertake to contribute to the establishment and
maintenance of a suitable naval base in Australian
waters, while maintaining our navy at its present
strength. This would ensure more adequate protection
of Australia, while it would also guard the approaches
from the East to the Indian Ocean.
The effectiveness of aircraft as a means of defence
has yet to be demonstrated, but it appears that in this
arm lies the best solution of Australia’s problems. The
range of these craft is necessarily limited, and is greatly
influenced by the prevailing weather conditions, but it
should be possible for an effective air force to have a
sufficiently deterrent effect to prevent an enemy com-
ing within raiding distance of our shores. The compara-
tive cheapness of this arm is also a strong consideration.
Certainly aircraft could not prevent a blockade being
established, but it is doubtful if anything but a very
powerful fleet could prevent this weapon being used.
In any case, it is unlikely that a blockade against Aus-
tralia could be very effective. By strengthening her air
force so that it would become an effective means of de-
fence, and contributing to the maintenance of a Pacific
Naval Squadron by the means suggested, Australia
would cease to be the weakest link in the chains of Em-
pire communication.


COMMENTS ON J. C. ROOKWOOD PROUD’S PAPER,
“NAVAL ARMAMENTS IN THE PACIFIC.”
By Tristan Buesst.
I. Some stress, I think, might have been laid on the
significance of the exclusion of all political questions
from the recent naval conference. Quite early in the
negotiations that took place during 1934, Japan made
it clear that she had no intention of entering into any
discussion of such questions, and this fact, coupled with
her refusal to accept a ratio of tonnage inferior to that
of the United States, was plainly calculated to destroy
what little hope had ever existed of making a success of
the Conference. The United States was determined, not
to accede to Japan’s demand for equality; Japan was
equally determined not to modify the demand. So un-
compromising an attitude on each side might not have
been displayed if a basis could have been found for some
form of political agreement, but this basis was lacking.
Once again the statesmen of the world were to learn
that, failing such prior agreement, international confe-
rences are doomed to failure from the start.
Was Japan alone, or even mainly, to blame for the
failure of the Conference? The answer to the question
depends on the manner in which we regard her claim
for “equality.” On the face of things, her technical
proposals were by no means unreasonable, I would sug-
gest. She claimed that the ratio system imposed finan-
cial burdens on her without offering compensating ad-
vantages in the way of security, in a word, that the ratio
system was not suited to her requirements, and her argu-
ments in support of the claim are convincing enough.
Again, there was nothing unreasonable in her sugges-
tion that a distinction should be drawn between offen-
sive and defensive vessels, and that capital ships, “A”
class cruisers and aircraft cruisers should be included
in the former category, and therefore subject to limita-
tion as regards both size and number. The contention
is likely to make a much stronger appeal to taxpayers,
if to no one else, than the contrary contention advanced
by the United States. Japan opposed the British de-
mand for the abolition of submarines, but, on the other


hand, agreed to the limitation in their tonnage; that is,
was prepared to renounce the use of the ocean-going
submarine of evil memory.
But Japan demanded, first and foremost, parity
with Great Britain and the United States. Like other
hungry and ambitious nations, like Germany and Italy,
she is set upon asserting her “equality” in the coterie of
the Great Powers, and any discrimination against her,
any condition imposed on her that might be construed
as a stigma of inferiority, she has long made up her
mind to resist, cost what it may. To this rebellion
against any mark or symbol signifying a restriction of
her power, a diminution of her prestige, is to be ascribed
Japan’s intransigence; not necessarily to sinister plans
for achieving the hegemony of half the world. Ido not
say that some of the rulers of Japan do not harbour deep,
■and, from our point of view, dangerous designs. I
merely say that her recent actions can be regarded, if
we rid ourselves of certain prejudices, in a much less
sinister light than is fashionable in most English speak-
ing circles to-day.
11. The Anglo-German Naval Agreement is a not-
able example of a bilateral agreement swiftly and easily
achieved. As we know, the resolving bilaterally of in-
ternational difficulties is nowadays all the rage, at a time
when never could so little reliance be placed on the mul-
tilateral form of treaty. In England the tendency was to
regard the Anglo-German agreement of last June as a
praiseworthy diplomatic move, and one calculated to re-
move a superfluous thorn or two from the path of the
Conference. But on the Continent no such cheerful view
was taken, and a good deal of sarcastic comment was
heard on Britain’s traditional hypocrisy. She was ready
enough as a rule to condemn the breaking of treaty
pledges, it was said, but, in this instance, to suit her own
ends, she calmly ignored the fact that by her action she
was condoning, not to say encouraging, Germany’s vio-
lation of the naval clauses of the Treaty of Versailles.
(A trenchant criticism from the French angle is con-
tained in an article by “Pertinax” in “Foreign Affairs,”
October, 1935).
There is one aspect of the agreement of particular
interest to Australia. At all naval conferences the Bri-
tish Navy has been treated as a unit, that is, as includ-
ing such naval forces as belong to the Dominions. And
likewise, under the Anglo-German Agreement, Germany
is accorded 35 per cent, of the strength, not of Great Bri-
tain’s navy, much less of that part of the navy stationed
in European waters, but of the combined fleets of the Em


pire. It is rather surprising that Britain has agreed to
this provision, and why so long—since Washington,
1921-22 —Australia has tolerated it. The circumstances
may arise in which Australia, faced with a plain threat
of aggression, might wish to increase her navy. But if
she persisted, her gain would be Britain’s loss; more
ships for Australia would mean less for Britain; and
Australia would be in the embarrassing position of being
able to increase her security only at the risk of decreas-
ing Britain’s.
111. Proud contends that, even if an adequate Bri-
tish fleet based on Singapore were available, only the
defence of British interests in India and the East Indies
would thereby be ensured in the event of a conflict with
Japan; Australia would not benefit. With this view I
am in accord. I have never been able to understand
why the mention of the Singapore base is greeted with
such enthusiasm by the statesmen and naval authorities
of this country. The best that can be said for it by Aus-
tralians is that it is not quite as far away as Malta.
Australian naval policy is, as I understand, based
on the principle of co-operation of the Australian naval
forces with the British primarily in defence of Australia,
and secondarily, of British interests everywhere. Proud
suggests that the Australian Government might possibly
“undertake to contribute to the establishment and main-
tenance of a suitable naval base in Australian waters,
while maintaining our navy at its present strength.”
This, in my view, is an extremely useful suggestion. I
would go so far as to say that the establishment of a
naval base, preferably on the eastern coast of Australia,
should precede any other step taken by the Government
to increase our naval defences. By adding another unit
or two to the Australian fleet, which is all we can af-
ford, we shall be making but an inconsiderable direct
contribution to the strength of the Imperial Navy. By
providing a naval base near at hand, making possible
the rendering of effective British naval aid in case of
need, we shall be making an indirect contribution of the
utmost value. For a long while to come our best policy,
so far as naval armaments are concerned, will be to
assist our friends to assist us; not a very heroic policy,
I agree, but the best we can look to in the circumstances.
Too much importance cannot be attached to this question
of a naval base in Australian waters, I venture to as-
sert ; it is a question that has received far too little notice
in press and Parliament.
What will happen when, upon the expiration of the
treaties, the Powers are free to fortify their insular pos


sessions in the Pacific? I suppose no one can say.
Japan will no doubt take very ill any move to strengthen
the defences of Hong Kong and Guam; whether she
would forcibly resist any such move is another matter.
There will presumably be no objection, speaking in
terms of diplomacy, to the fortification of Australian
ports and harbours, Australia not being an “insular pos-
session.” The Empire, therefore, should the construc-
tion of further naval bases be deemed advisable, will
be in a better position to pursue its plans without diplo-
matic unpleasantness (to use a mild word), than the
United States.
IV. The comparative table of naval forces given by
Proud is evidently a propagandist effort, and is of little
use to the student. No mention is made of light cruisers,
destroyers and submarines, and while the full strength
in capital ships, heavy cruisers and aircraft carriers of
Japan and the United States is stated, only a beggarly
seven cruisers and one carrier are placed to the credit
of the whole Empire. The table, I take it, has been com-
piled to illustrate in as striking a manner as possible the
extreme paucity at this present time, when the navy is
keeping an eye on Malta and Egypt, of British men-of-war
within coo-ee, so to speak, of Australian shores.
I am not unaware, of course, of the great difficulties
that beset anyone who seriously undertakes the compil-
ing of comparative tables of naval strength. So many
factors have to be taken into account that no doubt even
an Einstein would have his work cut out to establish a
proper relativity.
V. Proud questions whether the League has now,
or has ever had, any influence in the Pacific area.
“There,” he says, “the collective system would appear to
be dead, if indeed it ever existed.” Leaving aside the
question what influence the League has exercised, the
point seems to be that a collective system for the Pacific
was thought to have been established at Washington, and
that, in 1931, it was discovered that one Great Power at
any rate would have none of it. For ten years we
cherished the belief that the major issues of Pacific in-
ternational relations were the collective concern of at
least the signatories of the Four Power treaty; when the
crisis came, the edifice believed to have been constructed
was found to be so insubstantial as to be uninhabitable.
By the end of this year, when the treaties expire, the
wreckers will presumably have completed the work of
demolition.
I note with interest, by the way, that Lord Lothian
makes the statement ( International Affairs, March-April,


1935, at p. 157), that one of the principles upon
which the Washington Settlement was based was that
“Far Eastern affairs were recognised to be the collective
concerns of the nine Pacific Powers—the United States,
Japan, Great Britain, Canada, Australia, New Zealand,
France, Holland, Portugal.” The Dominions are evi-
dently included because of their separate membership
of the League, but the omission of China from the list
is rather curious.
To the question: Is the collective system dead? I
for one can only answer yes. Lip-service is still paid to
the idea of a collective system; the phrase is still cur-
rent in the press and on the lips of foreign secretaries
and prime ministers; but the life has gone out of this
once vital principle of international conduct, and it is
no longer the real motive force behind the manoeuvres
of governments. By the collective system we mean, I
take it, the regulation and control of international rela-
tions by joint decision of all the Powers concerned, who
pledge themselves to take joint action against any one
or more of their number refusing to abide by such deci-
sion. The wider idea of the League is that the relations
of states are the concern of all the states of the world,
and not only of the states in a particular area, or with
certain interests in common, but the difference is one of
degree and not of kind.
The collective system has been tried in the Pacific,
and it has to all appearances failed; may be, as Proud
suggests, it never in fact existed there. The idea of a
collective system lingers on in the remnant of the League
and a number of states whose purpose it serves — Britain,
France, Soviet Russia and others—still profess to set
much store by it. The United States regards it with a
benevolent eye, but is actually as disinclined as ever to
stir from the fire-side of her “neutrality” when action is
called for on its behalf.
And one after another of the most energetic and
ambitious members of the world community have de-
cisively rejected it. First Japan, then Germany, and
now Italy: the “hungry and dissatisfied Powers,” who
argue that the collective system is nothing more than a
device to perpetuate a state of affairs becoming ever
more intolerable as time goes on, a device only of ser-
vice to the “sated” Powers, who have every reason,
things being as they are, to desire no change. That
there is a good deal of truth in this argument, I suppose
few will deny, even in so-called pacificist circles where


they for ever talk of peace, when what actually they
mean is the preservation of their national privileges and
possessions.
VI. Assuming, as I think we must, that in the Paci-
fic area, at any rate, the collective system is dead, what
then? The world will doubtless not come to an end,
nor will armageddon break out to-morrow, because a
system has been tried and failed, and the task of the
nations will now be to contrive some other method of
preserving law and order in a restless world.
So far as the Empire is concerned, there are three
possible policies that may be adopted, according to Lord
Lothian (op. cit.). The Empire can build an additional
fleet, to be stationed at Singapore, and be prepared to
meet force with force; or can come to an understanding
with the United States as to the terms on which they
will stand together; or can come to terms with Japan.
The cost of the first course is likely to be prohibitive,
and the third is likely to be not only precarious but hu-
miliating as well. The most promising policy is there-
fore the second. But Lord Lothian, unlike some other
people, does not ignore the difficulties in the way of
Anglo-American co-operative action to keep the peace
in the Pacific. Indeed, he states very clearly the weak-
ness of his own case.
Proud goes altogether too far, in my opinion, when
he says that “it is difficult to envisage any future naval
policy in the Pacific which is not based on close Anglo-
American co-operation.” That, I maintain, is a very
short view. Nor can I see the force of Bywater’s con-
tention, quoted by Proud, that “it now seems that the
United States Fleet will have to bear the major part of
the common burden in the Pacific.” We may like to
think that the United States will lighten our burden for
us, but opinion in America is quite definitely opposed
now, and is likely to be in the future, to any measures
serving merely to pull the chestnuts out of the fire for
someone else, to use a popular expression. We shall be
wise, therefore, not to lean too heavily on the prop of
American goodwill.
VII. The general conclusion arrived at in Proud’s
paper seems to be that, whatever happens, the Empire
will be obliged to look very closely to British defences
in the Pacific area, and that Australia will have to bear
her part. If I say that I entirely agree with this view,
this is not to say that I dispute the proposition that close
Anglo-American co-operation is highly desirable. On
the contrary, a permanent close Anglo-American accord


should be our constant aim. Moreover, the questions to
what extent the grievances of Japan are legitimate, and
what steps Britain and Australia can take to remedy
these grievances without in the process intensifying
rather than quelling the present Japanese spirit of ag-
gression; such questions should constantly exercise our
minds. But I cannot do better than refer on this aspect
of the matter to the concluding part of an article in the
March Round Table, “The End of the Washington
Treaties.”
VIII. If I may be allowed one final comment, I
should like to refer to Proud’s remark that, although
Great Britain cannot accede to the Japanese proposal
for a common upper limit, yet “even so some modifica-
tion of this which would apply to the Pacific alone might
yet be established.” Unfortunately, we are not told how
it might be established, and no solution is offered, there-
fore, of a problem that has been vexing some of us. for
years.
The issue was raised at the recent conference, when
the British and American spokesmen argued that Japan,
having always the whole of her navy available in Far
Eastern waters, would invariably be in a more favour-
able position than either Britain or the United States,
the former being compelled to retain a considerable pro-
portion of her navy in the North Sea and Medi-
terranean, the latter a considerable proportion of
hers on the Atlantic seaboard. That is, any
practicable proposal for regional naval disarmament in
the Pacific can only come from Japan, and will inevitably
entail a unilateral decrease in Japanese naval armaments.
The Japanese reply, in effect, was that so long as
the whole of the British navy, or the American navy, is
in existence, the whole of this force can be used against
Japan, and that she can have no certain guarantee
that it would not be used against her in given circum-
stances. No mere paper guarantee would satisfy her,
since she has as little faith as anyone else nowadays in
the sanctity of treaties; and not even modern science
can presumably devise a method of warship construction
which will render warships physically incapable of pro-
ceeding east of Suez, or west of Pearl Harbour, as the
case may be.
Therefore any scheme of regional disarmament, so
far as naval armaments are concerned, is bound to fail
so long as Japan persists in her belief that ships that
float in one ocean will also float, and possibly fight, in
another.


“ECONOMIC ASPECTS OF AUSTRALIAN DEFENCE.”
By G. Packer.
1. The defence of a modern industrial community
involves as many economic as military considerations.
The economic factors, however, are customarily dis-
torted in their application to military affairs. This is
partly due to the absence of any clear doctrine upon the
war time adjustments from a competitive to a planned
economy. It is also due to the ignorance of military ex-
perts of the flexibility of productive and financial ma-
chinery.
These remarks are particularly true in regard to
three aspects of Australian defence. Namely:—
(a) The economic effects of Blockade.
(b) The importance of industrial preparedness.
(c) The financial adjustments in war.
THE LIMITATIONS OF ECONOMIC BLOCKADE.
2. Belief in the efficacy of economic pressure as a
substitute for ordinary warfare is a recent development.
Prior to the establishment of the Covenant of the League,
the usual guarantee of the enforcement of a treaty was
the threat of war. The apparent success of the blockade
of the Central Powers, however, was the genesis and the
justification of Article 16 of the Covenant. General
Smuts, whose draft of this Article most resembles the
Article finally adopted, says of economic pressure:—
“The experience of this war has shown how such a boy-
cott, effectively maintained, chiefly through sea power,
has in the end availed to break completely the most
powerful military power that the world has ever known.”
The disastrous consequences of this misconception are
now only too evident, and it is noteworthy that the advo-
cates of the doctrine of economic pressure have never
taken the trouble to study the true facts of the isolated
example upon which it is based.
3. The history of the blockade of the Central
Powers is an interesting illustration of the limitations of
economic pressure to produce direct military result. The
blockade was conducted in two phases—a limited bloc-
kade of essential raw materials for approximately one
year, followed by an unlimited blockade of three years'
duration. The first campaign failed because stocks and
hordes of raw materials greatly exceeded expectations.


General consumption was reduced, and supplies were ob-
tained by direct purchase from abroad, even from within
the Empire itself. At the end of the third year of close
blockade, serious shortages of coal and textiles were an
embarrassment to the civilian population. An acute posi-
tion would have arisen in the fifth year. Meanwhile the
military effort was continued upon a lavish scale which
only just fell short of decisive success in the field.
4. After the war, the German authorities made a
very thorough examination of the causes of defeat. The
commission of enquiry had strong incentive to blame the
blockade for military failure. They found, however,
that it was not the primary effect upon military effort,
but the secondary consequences that are dangerous. If
the civilian population is subjected to prolonged discom-
fort without hope of mitigation, then political distur-
bances terminating in social upheaval are tolerably cer-
tain. Increase in susceptibility to disease, in mortality
and lowered morals, are obviously in proportion to the
severity of the shortage. A beleaguered country has a
very different problem to a city besieged, and the powers
of resistance of a modern industrial community, equipped
with a diversity of machines and resources, are very con-
siderable. The prostration of the Central Powers after
defeat, and additional months of blockade and inactivity,
is no proper indication of the inherent weakness of this
form of attack. There is no evidence that an economic
campaign can stop a military one. Economic sanctions
which fall short of blockade can only be regarded as a
supplement to effective military action.
5. The law of blockade from the League of Armed
Neutrality in 1780, to the Pact of London in 1909, has
been based upon the presumption of effective blockade.
One of the determinants of naval strength has been that
there should be adequate force available to render such
blockade effective. An appreciation of the limitations of
blockade under modern conditions of self-sufficiency and
industrial strength should not be without its effect upon
naval strategy.
6. The crucial point governing the severity of bloc-
kade is the adequacy of indigenous supplies of raw mate-
rials to maintain normal consumption plus added military
requirements. A satisfactory criterion is that stocks in
hand, together with potential production, should be ade-
quate for a minimum period of two years. In addition,
of course, machinery and skilled labour must be at hand
for fabrication.
7. The position of Australian production in rela-
tion to foodstuffs, essential industrial products, and raw


materials in terms of probable consumption, demand is
unique in that it is potentially and actually more nearly
self-contained than any major industrial power.
The principal deficiencies lie in essential industrial
resources, such as machinery replacements, chemicals
and petroleum. There is also a deficiency in the follow-
ing raw materials:—Aluminium, rubber, nickel, potash
and mercury. Of these certain manufactured chemicals,
rubber and petroleum alone are of major importance.
To this list may be added certain specialised military and
other items of equipment. It is outside the scope of this
paper to consider the measures necessary to organise and
amplify these resources.
THE IMPORTANCE OF INDUSTRIAL PREPAREDNESS.
8. The possession of adequate reserves of raw mate-
rials, machinery and skilled labour, is not in itself a suf-
ficient economic safeguard. Semi-skilled defence against
a fully deployed attack with modern weapons is value-
less. Defence involves the employment and maintenance
of equipment of similar character. This is impossible
without the mobilisation of these potential resources.
The world war demonstrated that the necessary organi-
sation cannot be rapidly extemporised. The manufac-
ture of war materials will require the diversion of a
considerable part of industrial machinery from normal
activities. Plans for such redistribution are vital to sus-
tained military effort.
9. The following extract from a speech before a
Senate Committee in the United States in 1924 illustrates
the degree of preparedness required. “The World War
taught us one outstanding lesson in National Defence.
The ultimate battlefield, where rests the final decision,
is the factory. Unless we have the facilities, and know
how to equip without loss of time a modern military
force, in which the use of improved mechanical devices
for firing, and for the transport and protection of men
is rapidly becoming more and more important, we are
as helpless in face of a well-organised attack as knights
on horseback in face of gunfire. To be prepared to raise
and train a large army of men, willing and eager to de-
fend their country, and not to be prepared to place at
their disposal the modern munitions and equipment they
must have for an even break in battle, is not to be pre-
pared. It is as futile as it would be to build warships
without guns, waiting until an emergency arose, not to
make guns, but to learn how to make them.
There are certain things which the Army, and Navy
need in wartime for the production of which no previous


training on the part of the managers and workers in our
factories is required. These are commercial articles,
such as shoes, clothing, etc. There are other things
which the military force needs which are not produced
commercially. Ordnance, of course, for instance, rifles
and artillery and their ammunition, is the outstanding
example. We do not have in this country any large
privately operated munitions industry, as do some of
the countries of Europe. Our Government arsenals have
a maximum capacity to produce only from one-half of
one per cent, to five per cent, of the total requirements
in time of war of the various articles of ordnance equip-
ment. For many indispensable articles, therefore, we
must rely in war time upon commercial plants which have
no experience in peace time with their production.
These factories not only lack experience; they also
lack the necessary dies, jigs and fixtures to produce these
non-commercial but indispensable munitions and equip-
ment. The outstanding problem of industrial prepared-
ness is how to provide commercial factories capable of
conversion to this specialised kind of war production,
with the minimum training of personnel essential to keep
the art of manufacture alive, and with the minimum
equipment of tools essential to insure a rapid conver-
sion from ordinary peace time to war time production.”
10. The industrial plan must necessarily be modi-
fied according to the view held upon the effectiveness or
otherwise of air attack. Under Australian conditions,
sustained air interruption of productive activity in war
seems improbable. Air attack as a form of economic
pressure is as yet an untested theory. It is not unlikely
that it could be neutralised by forethought in preparation.
FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS.
11. Financial ability to wage war is the subject of
great diversity of opinion as the result of ignorance of
the simplest consideration of banking and public finance.
It is frequently asserted that the war effort of a particu-
lar country, i.e.. Fascist Italy, will collapse for purely fi-
nancial reasons. The general financial problem in war
may be summarised in the following terms, which show
that financial ability to fight is surely considerable.: —
(a) Inability to finance purchases abroad has the same
effect as economic blockade, and the results evi-
dent only after a period—usually protracted.
(b) Mobilisation necessarily results in the re-orienta-
tion of national production. The initial rise of


prices in war is due to active demand for war
materials and similar products in face of limited
supplies.
(c) Whilst aggregate production in war is probably
approximately equal to that in peace, the substi-
tution of government expenditure for private in-
vestment will not necesarily lead to inflation
other than that following direct from (b).
(d) The ability of the government to finance its ex-
penditures within these limits is very great indeed.
In theory it is not necessarily conditioned by the
willingness of individuals to accept long term
loans, for, in the absence of openings for private
investment and of hoarding, savings would be
available, and equal to government outlay.
(e) True inflation should only commence when it is
necessary to raise production over the peace time
level. With the knowledge now possessed of the
banking system, there is no reason why such in-
flation should not be kept within moderate limits.
(f) The above processes can continue, as we know,
to very considerable lengths before a flight from
the currency becomes a reality.
12. The position of Australia is relatively favour-
able in relation to war-time finance. The majority of
the excess raw materials for export are durable, and
can be stored. Production of perishables—meat, but-
ter, fruit, will obviously be restricted. Stocks of durable
goods in excess of local requirements would certainly
be purchased at agreed prices by the Government or
the Central Bank. These commodities would serve to
widen the ordinary metallic base to the Central Bank
reserves. On conclusion of hostilities, they would be
available to re-establish the exchange, and in all pro-
bability would be resold profitably in terms of Australian
currency. The purchase of these supplies would, more-
over, tend to temper the initial rise in prices and any
later inflation.
13. With the judicious handling of public finance,
the self-contained State has no reason to anticipate a fi-
nancial collapse in war.
RELATION TO COLLECTIVE SECURITY.
14. The economic considerations set out above have
a general relevance to agreements for collective security.
The agreements contained in the Covenant of the League,
and subsequent arrangements, were based upon the moral
condemnation of the use of war as an instrument of


policy, a condemnation which receives general, if not
universal, acceptance, and upon the expectation of world-
wide catastrophic destruction as the result of future war,
an expectation which exaggerates the economic interde-
pendence of nations. Unless the guarantee of enforce-
ment is the threat of war, such agreements depend either
upon the efficacy of sanctions, or upon the possibility
that the economic adjustments necessary in a dynamic
world are not inconsistent with peaceful change and poli-
tical stability.
When the covenant of the League was established,
there were reasonable grounds to assume that military
action was not the essential condition of the veto. War
experience of the partial success of blockade, and a tra-
dition of economic interdependence based on half a cen-
tury of laissez-faire, had appeared to provide the neces-
sary background. Subsequent economic changes, how-
ever, have resulted in a series of tensions such that poli-
tical stability can, in all probability, be maintained only
by the exercise of force.
The growth of national self-sufficiency undoubtedly
weakens the incentive to render mutual aid whilst in-
creasing the extent of the military effort to produce re-
sults. For, in so far as the world is closely bound by
economic ties, then an act of aggression has the maximum
repercussion, and the economic and military pressure
which can be exercised against the aggressor is corres-
pondingly more effective. Once it is admitted that the
function of economic pressure is merely to supplement
military effort, the probability of active mutual assistance
becomes very small indeed in a world striving for self-
containment.
15. The geographical position of the nations bor-
dering the Pacific, and their economic relations, are un-
favourable to the extension of the collective system in
the Pacific. In these circumstances, the problem of Aus-
tralian defence is mainly determined by military and
economic considerations similar to those described herein.


THE COLLECTIVE SYSTEM IN THE PACIFIC.
By P. D. Phillips.
The emergence of controversial views of a broad
general nature in the sphere of international politics is
a new phenomenon. Political crises there have been in
the past. Governments have fallen upon issues of foreign
policy, and parties have been divided thereon, though
not so markedly as upon issues of domestic policy. On
the whole, however, the great mass of the public have
not been divided upon broad questions of principle in this
sphere of human affairs. Two factors have combined
to alter this situation. The first of these is the democra-
tisation of external politics, the direct product of, the war,
and the conviction of the ordinary man of his vital in-
terest and personal concern. The second factor is the
experiment of the League of Nations.
In the result, a broad political controversy has
emerged between the proponents and opponents of the
“collective system.” Like all major political controver-
sies, this one demonstrates its vitality by accumulating
round it very considerable elements of emotional irra-
tionality, misguided enthusiasm and factual imprecision.
The contesting parties tend to be divided as much by tem-
peramental classifications as by rigidly intellectual con-
ceptions. Naturally enough, those who formed their
political principles in the pre-war period in many cases
find greater difficulty in embracing post-war conceptions
than younger politicians. It is not yet established, of
course, that wisdom and insight is a monopoly of the
human race up to the age of 35. Nevertheless, the con-
troversy over the collective system sometimes displays
the appearance of a sentimental contest between the
young men in a hurry and the old men in a fright. Under
these circumstances, there is a strong obligation to free
ourselves from the almost religious fervours which tend
to be generated in this arena of politics, and to try to re-
member that what is required is a painstaking examina-
tion of political proposals, bearing in mind, however, that
the proposal is not necessarily impracticable because it
is novel, and further, that the experience of the world,
both in and since 1914, raises the prima facie presump-
tion of ineffectiveness against established methods, with-
out, of course, proving the effectiveness of any alterna-
tive.


Considering the short period during which this
major controversy has been proceeding, the whole con-
ception of collective security has displayed conspicuous
fecundity in the propagation of characteristic ambigui-
ties, and both verbal and intellectual inaccuracies. The
term “collective security” is neither self-explanatory nor
easily limited by definition to a single precise idea. To
some it conveys a picture of a watertight system of rigo-
rously defined legal rights and a generalised protection
by international police action of the same. To others
it connotes a vague system of consultation —multi-lateral
conversations more extensive than, but otherwise indis-
tinguishable from, the Concert, which maintained Euro-
pean peace with some degree of success in the nineteenth
century. 'Other conceptions stretch out in a series be-
tween these two extremes. It will be observed that at
one end of the series the conception primarily empha-
sises the idea of collectivity, and has little to say about
security, whilst, at the other extreme, the chief emphasis
is imposed upon the conception of security, and the col-
lectivity becomes rather a means than an end in itself.
Much controversy has raged within the camp of the
proponents of the collective idea as between these two
conceptions. This controversy may not be fruitless if it
directs our minds to a rigorous analysis of the precise im-
plications involved in the term “collective security.” It
is clear that the politician’s adherence to the collective
idea may mean much or little. In short, a new currency
has been introduced into international intellectual ex-
changes, the metallic base of which is as yet indifferently
stabilised.
Controversies of the kind indicated above may
easily prove dangerous, since the enthusiasm of expo-
nents for one particular point of view tends to create
a belief that there is only one truth involved. The fact
is that more than one conception of the collective idea
may be applicable in a world of great variety and com-
plexity. There is a real danger that the controversy
may be dominated by conditions characteristic of one
part of the world, or that the outcome of the controversy
so conditioned may be relatively inapplicable in other
parts of the world.
The thesis of this paper is that the conditions of
Europe do, in fact, impose a framework upon discussions
of the collective idea, and point to a definite result, that
such conditions do not exist in the Pacific area, and that
the logical cogencies which point to a conclusion for Euro-
pean statesmen do not exist elsewhere. In short, whilst


the presence of certain factors in Europe rightly leads
to the conclusion that the exponents of the collective idea
who emphasise security are pursuing the right line, at
the same time the absence of those very factors in the
Pacific should lead the very same exponents if they are
to maintain a logical consistency, to adopt the opposite
view of the same collective conception.
An examination of the applicability of collective
security to the Pacific throws important light on the
nature of the tensions and relations of the Pacific coun-
tries, and also upon the debates which are proceeding
upon the other side of the world as to the development of
a system of collective security. At the present stage it
is doubtful whether European man will pursue his ex-
periment in the way of evolving a system of collective
security. It may well be that we are at the beginning
of an era in which these experiments will be abandoned,
and for the time being other methods of solving or avoid-
ing the solutions of pressing problems will be attempted.
Nevertheless, I retain the view that the permanent sal-
vation of European civilisation can be found only in a
complete system of collective security, and I am unde-
terred in my belief by the probable expectation that
European men and women will prove incapable of ap-
plying for the present the logical implications of this idea
to the solution of their problems. Nor is it material to
consider for our purposes whether their failure to evolve
logical plans of this order may not result in the complete
destruction of their civilisation, despite the fact that that
destruction will have the most profound repercussion
upon the peoples of the Pacific and their mutual rela-
tions, as well as upon the standard of civilisation and cul-
ture to be found within each of the Pacific nations. I
think it is important to consider in what respect the
logical validity of a collective system as applied to Euro-
pean peoples is not applicable in the Pacific, and if the
argument be sound, to ask what plan and design should
be drawn in the Pacific in view of the inapplicability of
the clear logical conception which wisdom, though not
political expediency, would dictate for Europe.
The essential conditions which seem to me to make
probable the eventual evolution of a complete system of
collective security in Europe are firstly, the existence of
large numbers of human beings on a comparatively small
part of the earth’s surface, for the most part separated
only by imaginary lines upon a map, or not very consi-
derable geographical frontiers; secondly, the existence
of a psychological condition amongst a sufficient num-
ber strong enough to break down this tradition of com


plete and independent sovereignty; thirdly, the emer-
gence of new technique with regard to instruments for
war so effective as to seriously jeopardise the whole phy-
sical structure of European civilisation; and fourthly, the
fact that each of the Great Powers is equally vulner-
able, and equally liable to implication in any struggle
which may there break out. Doubtless there are other
factors which necessitate, if salvation is to be achieved,
the application of the principles of collective security.
These factors, however, provide the chief and vital pre-
disposing causes. The most striking feature of the Paci-
fic is that with regard to each of these particular mat-
ters the situation is almost the exact opposite of that pre-
sented by Europe. There is, to begin with, no geographi-
cal propinquity between the Pacific Powers, but on the
contrary, dispersion. The very pressure which results
from propinquity—not merely the fear of immediate ac-
tion resulting from geographical closeness, but the ines-
capable reciprocal reaction to every passing mood and
colour of political life in all the countries involved—
creates the condition out of which man in Europe may
be forced to adopt the system of collective security.
Coupled with this fact, which colours all the political life
and thinking of Europe, is the psychological condition
of fear, which again is the product of geographical pro-
pinquity. This fear is partly the product of physical
nearness, and partly the product of the new technical
methods of warfare, chiefly to be summed up in the
method of aerial attack and chemical destruction. The
dispersion of peoples in the Pacific not only alters the
rapidity and intensity of political reaction in one country
to the happenings in another, but relieves the average
man and woman of the ever constant fear which is the
transcendant fact of European life to-day.
Politicians who desire to impose an idea of collec-
tive security upon Pacific voters or ordinary citizens
would obviously have a much more difficult task, because
the ordinary experience and the normal expectation,
and the habitual reaction of those citizens is so different
from European man. This experience and expectation
is naturally a reflection of the conditions in which the
ordinary man lives. It is quite apparent, for instance, in
Australia that, with a fair amount of agitation and a
considerable volume of press warning, the average man
persistently fails to feel a condition of personal insecurity
or threat, and will probably so continue to fail merely
because he is separated by considerable distances from
the source from which his dangers may be supposed to
come.


Despite a longer period of incubation, such common
ideas have not yet broken through the shell of geo-
graphical isolation in the United States of America.
When man is presented with obvious examples of a par-
ticular danger, such as a danger to his standard of liv-
ing from the present and immediate competition from
low grade labour, he may be awakened to his situation.
This is exhibited by the history of the Pacific coast when
faced with cheap Chinese and Japanese labour. Once
remove the immediacy of the pressure, however, and
the ordinary man proves incapable of projecting his mind
across thousands of miles of ocean, and receiving a re-
mote danger as a matter of significance to himself. There
is, moreover, one very obvious technical reason behind
this psychological attitude. In Europe geographical pro-
pinquity is linked with the danger of aerial warfare.
In consequence, all the normal results arising from pro-
pinquity are magnified by the immediacy of the aerial
danger. It is important to realise that almost the exact
opposite of this situation is to be found in the Pacific,
and that the perfection of aerial warfare, where with
regard to almost all Pacific countries, leads to elevation
of the means of defence over those of attack. Instead,
therefore, of the skies appearing to the average man
to harbour the greatest possible threat to his security,
they bear more the appearance of a new and expansive
shelter. This, at all events, appears to be true with re-
gard to the British Dominions and the United States.
Where it is not true in the Pacific, namely between Japan
and the Far Eastern Soviet possessions, it is because the
conditions of propinquity characteristic of Europe are
there repeated.
On the whole, without going into the technical con-
siderations which have been discussed, it is true to say
that the development of aerial means of warfare appear
to have provided Australia with an effective instrument
for defence which is reasonably within the limits of its
economic capacity to provide, without at the same time
having equipped any prospective enemy with equally ef-
fective instruments for attack. It may be doubted
whether the optimistic views entertained on this particu-
lar ground are quite as well founded as this statement
might suggest. Possibly the potentialities of aerial at-
tack are rather greater than is admitted, and clearly
enough minor developments in the way of extra destruc-
tiveness may render this particular arm vastly more ef-
fective in attack than it is at the present time. Should
this eventuate, and the fact become generally realised,
then the psychological conditions predisposing Europe


to consider more seriously a system of collective security
will tend to be repeated in the Pacific area. At the pre-
sent moment, the average Australian, though perhaps
not fully aware of the defensive advantages of an Air
Force, is certainly not unduly impressed with the de-
structive threat of aerial attack. Under these circum-
stances, he readily enough falls into line in declining to
consider seriously far reaching proposals for collective
security. In all probability, the general technical and
strategical consideration involved in the rather self-satis-
fied view of effective defence and ineffective attack, de-
termines the situation at the present time, and is the
chief factor underlying the formulation of any political
structure in the Pacific. The geographical dispersion, the
long distances which naturally lessen the impact psycho-
logically upon the ordinary citizen of the conduct and
policy of other states, and the distribution of technical
powers between attack and defence, form the main un-
derlying features which create the situation out of which
a collective system could or could not be constructed.
These features all present a situation entirely opposed
to that in Europe, and lend strong support to the idea
that, whilst the collective system may be rational and
indeed necessary to Europe, it is inapplicable in the
Pacific area. This conclusion is strengthened by the
more immediate factors presented by the attitude of the
two Powers of chief importance in the Pacific area,
namely, Japan and the United States.
It is unnecessary to recount the present Japanese at-
titude, and the quality and principles of the prevailing
military authorities. It is clear, however, that these are
utterly inconsistent with any plan of collective security.
Would it be possible to envisage developments of a sys-
tem of collective security between the other Powers in
the Pacific, which would be open to adherence by Japan
as well, but which might provide some security for the
non-Japanese powers until such time as its reality and
pressure induced the Japanese to come in. On the
whole, this line of approach seems an unprofitable one
because the underlying factors mentioned above make
difficult the creation of a state of mind which political
leaders might utilise to lead their people to enter such
a system. Fundamentally, the existence of such facts has
produced the state of mind responsible for recent policy
in the United States. There the whole tendency over
the last eighteen months has been to move further and
further from any collective idea. Looking at the mat-
ter generally, we may say that the very tentative pro


posals planted in the Washington Treaties have withered
rather than flowered.
In the very recent past the possibility of an exten-
sion of American policy in the Pacific in the direction of
a collective system has been revealed as less substantial
than some supposed. Two or three years ago there was
some ground for believing that the isolationist policy
which traditional American attitudes had evolved with
regard to European Powers and the European Conti-
nent, did not apply to the Far East. This was always
a puzzling feature in view of the comparative insignifi-
cance of real American interest in the Far East. But
whether there was substantial cause for the American at-
titude or not, there certainly was reason for believing
that her attitude in this direction might be different from
that exhibited for a hundred years, vis-a-vis Europe. To-
day America’s westward orientation is almost as isola-
tionist as her attitude to Europe.
In the general sphere, the recent neutrality legis-
lation and the discussions which have arisen with regard
to it, show increasing strength of the isolationists, and
under circumstances which might well have been sup-
posed to promote an opposite tendency. The minor con-
flict between Congress and the Administration leaders
over neutrality legislation resulted in a rapid retreat by
the Administration from the very limited attitude of
co-operation with other Powers which they were propos-
ing. This retreat indicated how rapidly the near ap-
proach of real issues in place of academic speculation
could dissipate the tentative “co-operativeness” of the
State Department. The moment even the shadow of
possible complications were actually displayed, the iso-
lationist tendencies were reinforced. This appears not
only with respect to neutrality legislation, but in the even
more surprising outcome of proposals for American ad-
herence to the Permanent Court of International Justice.
Moreover, recent attitudes towards “Far Eastern” issues
indicate this same increasing isolation. The not very
marked, but distinguishable, co-operative and collective
attitude of the Hoover-Stimson Administration with re-
gard to the Far East has not been continued by the Roose-
velt Administration. The readiness to let the European
Powers take the lead with regard to China and its re-
construction, and to remove the United States from even
minor embarrassments with regard to Japanese forward
movements, is unmistakable. To some extent the re-
treat from the Philippines may be cited as an additional


tendency in this same direction. When the compara-
tively small amount of real American interest in the Far
East is taken into account, it is not too much to suppose
that this general restrictive policy will continue to ex-
press itself in that part of the Pacific just as unmistake-
ably as it has done, and is doing, in Europe.
A consideration, therefore, of the fundamental fea-
tures of the Pacific area and of the main tendencies of
policy in two of the chief Powers concerned therein lends
strong support to the abandonment of proposals for any
real scheme of collective security. Is the natural
corollary to this conclusion a system of complete isola-
tion with such defensive methods as technical knowledge
and financial resources make possible, or should wisdom
and long view statesmanship turn to consideration of
other expressions of a collective idea in the Pacific ? It is
my view that the proper conclusion from the foregoing
considerations is that the collective idea should be
explored vastly and more vigorously in a different direc-
tion. Even the European discussions are beginning to
reveal a clear distinction between the idea of collective
security on the one hand and the elaboration of a collec-
tive system on the other. We shall observe within a
comparatively short time an agitated debate in the Euro-
pean mind as to whether the temporary failure of the
system of collective security is to be the prelude to an
abandonment of all ideas of a collective system, or
whether the structure is to be rebuilt upon the slower
and surer basis of collective co-operation, not for the pre-
sent linked with a security system at all. I venture to
suggest that the Pacific is unembarrassed by any failure
of a security system, and therefore unhampered in the
exploration of the possibilities of building a collective
system apart from a security system altogether. On the
other hand, the conditions are highly favourable to the
attempt to explore a collective system not linked with a
security system at all.
What are the conditions favourable to the develop-
ment of a system of continuous, organised and systema-
tised inter-Governmental discussions and plans in the
Pacific area ? These conditions are chiefly to be found in
the nature of the problems and issues which arise
between the Pacific peoples. These problems and issues
are of a technical character. With the exception of the
racial element involved in migration problems, they are
not coloured and distorted by either historical tradition or
“national patterns” which are characteristic features of
European interstate relations. They are problems in
which scientific knowledge, accurate information, and
responsible official discussion are more likely to achieve


result than is the case in Europe. The chief problems,
after all, are concerned with trade, with tariffs, with
migration, with capital investment, and with even less
explosive and more technical problems such as health
and communications. It may be suggested that the chief
cause of the growing tension in the Pacific has not been
the existence of fundamental international rivalries,
based upon a deep feeling of fear or hatred or unsatisfied
cravings such as have complicated the European situa-
tion, but rather the development of technical problems
arising from considerations of the kind I have outlined
above. These are steadily growing more intractable,
largely because of an absence of free discussion and a
failure of governments to examine the implication of
these particular problems. In other words, the factors
making for Pacific rivalry may not be of an entirely diffe-
rent nature from those which are to be found in Europe,
but at all events they are not complicated by history.
Whilst the explosive emotionalism underlying the Euro-
pean situation renders the process of collective discussion
more and more difficult, the Pacific presents us with an
area where the absence of discussion leads to an increase
in flexibility in the approach to these technical problems
which is steadily increasing their danger.
It is suggested, therefore, that the wise course of
policy in the Pacific is to endeavour to build up in the
Governments of the Pacific States an inclination to
explore the possibility of regular and permanent discus-
sions, backed by the responsibilities of Governments and
assisted by official knowledge and information. This
system of discussion might well commence with the least
explosive of subject matters, such, for instance, as com-
munication, transportation, health, and trade. Then
upon this basis of regular technical discussions should be
gradually added the more difficult but not insoluble
problems arising from tariff, migration and capital invest-
ment. That, in short, as a long term policy we should
begin now elaborating a regular collective system, assisted
and reinforced by a permanent and effective secretariat.
The application of the collective idea in the Pacific is not
to be found in the elaboration of a security system, but in
the elaboration of a technical system based upon
co-operation with regard to those matters where it would
be most easily applied in the first instance, but directed
towards those matters which are realised to be of first
importance but are becoming more and more difficult as
discussion is becoming less and less frequent.
What are the chief obstacles to an elaboration of a
system of this kind? We may disregard, in the first
instance, those exponents of a system of essential isolation


who will not be bothered with the exploration of pro-
posals of this kind, but who think that the only safety is
to be found in a rapid construction of an adequate system
of defence. Such a policy seems to be a resort of the
destitute, turning away from any long term permanent
construction of an interstate system in the Pacific and
admitting even to itself that the shelter which is contem-
plated is not likely to continue for any length of time,
and is at best an immediate system of doubtful efficacy.
Panic is not politics. The temporary readiness of com-
paratively sane democracies to resort to something
perilously close to panic is merely due to the reaction
from an undiscerning reliance upon unsubstantial alter-
native methods, and is not likely to continue to dominate
the more effective powers for any length of time.
The chief difficulty in beginning a collective system of
a permanent nature of the kind I have suggested will
doubtless be a sense of futility in the minds of the Govern-
ments in the Pacific States. This feeling of futility will be
due to a disinclination to embark upon courses because
they may not bring forth immediate profits. Govern-
ments are loath to admit the value of an educative process,
and in the absence of some strong emotional drive are
disinclined to create the necessary machinery. On the
other hand, the alternative in the Pacific seems so futile
and empty that there is some hope that by way of con-
trast to the alternative of a rivalry which cannot produce
any practical fruit for any of the rivals, something of this
sort may be attempted. A greater difficulty is due to the
fact that the technical matters which should before long
be brought within the sphere of a permanent collective
system of the kind I have envisaged are precisely those
matters within the inner circle of so-called domestic juris-
diction upon which voters are most positive and special
interest most easily aroused. Under these circumstances
a government may tread very warily along the path of
constructing the collective system for fear lest dangerous
questions as to domestic autonomy may be raised. This,
however, is not an insuperable objection in itself because
it is becoming clearer every day that a refusal to admit
the collective nature of these interests is not an effective
denial of their collective nature in fact. Diffident as
governments may be, they may yet be persuaded to begin
upon matters of a less explosive nature, proceeding by a
gradual process of political experimentation with regard
to these so as to smooth the path for consideration of the
more important matters. Moreover, each of the States
itself, whilst feeling that certain matters are especially
of domestic concern, will not be in agreement as to
which these are. Thus, for instance, the tariff question


may appear to be altogether too dangerous for America
or Australia to debate whilst the questions of standards
of hours and wages and industrial conditions may appear
to them to be essentially matters of general Pacific con-
cern well worthy of agreement. It is not difficult to see
that the opposite may be the case with regard to Japan.
The normal result of the practice of regular governmental
common discussion may be to break down the timidity
with regard to technical discussion and so open the way
to a much more tolerant view of what is possible in the
Pacific with obviously satisfactory results.
One implication of the kind of proposals here out-
lined is that the world-wide character of technical
discussions which have hitherto gone on at Geneva will
have to a large extent to be abandoned. It may be sug-
gested that if the idea of the League as a security system
is very substantially modified for the present some of the
greatest advantages of a single centre for technical dis-
cussion can be abandoned without great loss. The
confining of Geneva to technical discussions chiefly
affecting Europe, and only extending to the rest of the
world when obviously of immediate importance thereto,
would enable the construction of a Pacific system with-
out loss either in the East or the West. The desire to
maintain the actual oecumenical character of the League
was doubtless chiefly inspired by the hope that the
security aspect of the Covenant would not be weakened
by a process of sub-division. If, however, the League is
frankly to be perceived as the centre of a collective
system not based upon the pursuit of security, but upon
the pursuit of general common interests of policy, there
seems to be less danger in the Pacific development which
I have outlined.
The chief question of practical importance is the
estimation of the probable attitude of Japan and the
United States to the development of any such proposal as
this. Would the foundation and gradual elaboration of
a regular system of inter-governmental consultation and
agreement be inconsistent with the views of Japanese
military and American isolationist doctrine ? It is always
difficult, and perhaps impossible, for a person in one
country accurately to estimate the probable attitude of
leaders in any other country. There are certain factors,
however, which lead to an optimistic view upon this par-
ticular matter. One thing is the actual nature of the
subjects to be discussed. I have expressed myself upon
that matter above. Another matter to be considered is
that the isolationist attitude of the United States never
extended strongly to the technical discussions which took
place for a period of years very frequently at Geneva.


There seems to be a marked desire to compensate for the
deficiencies of isolation in one direction by active
co-operation and even leadership in the other direction.
Whilst it may be true that these activities are confined to
comparatively innocuous subjects, the recent tendency to
develop systems of trade treaties and to explore the pos-
sibilities of commercial agreements by United States
Administration may suggest the possibility of multi-
lateral discussions amongst Pacific countries on these
matters being contemplated by the American Adminis-
tration. There are contradictory indications in Japanese
politics from which it is difficult to draw a definite con-
clusion. The attitude during the course of 1934 to the
technical intervention of the League into the affairs of
China would suggest that the Japanese are bent upon
“technical isolationism” just as strongly as the Americans
are bent upon military isolationism. On the other hand,
the obvious advantages of international discussion upon
Japanese trade penetration, upon the problems of Pacific
trade, and transport and communication, may weigh
strongly with Japanese leaders despite the desire to be
left alone in China. It may be suggested that on a long
view Japan has more to gain by a frank discussion of
common economic and financial problems in the Pacific
and between the Pacific peoples than she has to lose by
abandoning a monopoly position vis-a-vis China. At all
events, there do not appear to be such settled conclusions
apparent to the Japanese mind as to preclude the possi-
bility of exploring this particular avenue.
I have only outlined vaguely the suggestion of how
one with still some belief in the necessity for not going
back upon the collective idea should envisage the future
in the Pacific. It appears necessary, first of all, to formu-
late in our mind the direction which a collective system
should take in order to begin the task of persuading
governments to pursue this course. These tentative ideas,
therefore, are suggested as a very minor starting point in
the elaboration of a collective system which, spreading
outward from a small group concerned with one coun-
try, might reach a wider public and so influence doctrine.
Hitherto, Pacific peoples have been satisfied to pursue a
mild academic study of Pacific problems, believing on the
whole that no great good would come from agitating for
the construction of official machinery. Partly this was
due to obsession with the embryonic system believed to
be evolving in Geneva. Partly it was due to a cloaking
of the reality of the technical problems in the Pacific,
and partly, also, it was due to a belief that stability had
been created by the Washington Treaty and that those
treaties represented the probable maximum of American


co-operation. The collapse of the Geneva system, the
demonstration of the ineffectiveness of a security system,
the obvious dangers of isolationist policy, whether in the
field of defence and mutual security or in the field of
technical problems of economics and finance, have all
conspired to accentuate the dangers of the position in the
Pacific and the deficiency of policies of panic or merely
defensive isolation, and to increase the desirability of
exploring once again the painful task of building a collec-
tive system from the ground up. If the history of Geneva
in the post-war period is to teach us anything, it seems to
teach us that a fully-fledged collective idea cannot be
brought about with rapidity, but must be as painfully
and slowly elaborated as constitutional methods were
elaborated in particular States. The whole burden of
these remarks is directed to suggesting that a fully-
fledged collective idea is inapplicable in the Pacific owing
to the geographical and psychological conditions in that
area and among the peoples inhabiting the States'thereof,
but that the conclusion to be drawn from these particular
conditions is not that the whole collective idea should be
abandoned, but that the painful search should be con-
tinued in other directions, and that if we will but see it,
the technical and geographical, economic, financial and
commercial conditions in the Pacific are not unfavourable
to the constitution of a substantial system which may go
further towards the solution of Pacific problems than the
over ready adoption of European proposals appropriate
to that area but inappropriate elsewhere.


INDUSTRIALISATION IN JAPAN AND ITS EFFECTS
UPON AUSTRALIA.
By K. J. Binns.
PART I.
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS.
1. Introduction.
Better informed opinion has been reluctant and dif-
fident in the matter of analysing the real effects upon the
economic welfare of Australia of industrialisation in
Japan. In any debate upon the subject, prejudice is often
allowed to determine the issue. Japanese imports are
almost universally associated with sweated labour, and
there is a firm conviction still that they will be “shoddy.”
The words, “Made in Japan,” have attained an almost
sinister meaning. The facts may be so, but no reasoned
or scientific attempt has been made to appraise the true
extent of the invasion by the Orient of “sacrosanct” mar-
kets.
The general attitude of hostility could more logi-
cally be appreciated if Australian manufacturers and
traders had been as hard hit individually by Japanese
competition as have the cotton manufacturers of Lan-
cashire. But just because Lancashire has lost and Japan
has gained, we have not, ipso facto, “a case against
Japan.” If Lancashire has failed to meet that competi-
tion by making the necessary internal readjustments,
which is apparently the general verdict on the issue, pre-
judice may solicit our support, but cannot show without
detailed and searching analysis the extent of the real
economic loss. So long as people continue to regard
foreigners as “people with a lower standard of living
who are always more prosperous than ourselves,” a
strong plea for impartiality will be demanded when the
subject for consideration has been clouded and befogged
for so long.
In this paper attention has of necessity been con-
fined to developments within the last ten years or so.
Several problems relevant to the subject under considera-
tion have merely being mentioned, without any attempt
being made to investigate them. But it will suffice so


long as their existence is not forgotten or ignored, and
provided that what has been written concerning Japa-
nese industrialisation is treated on its merits, free from
all prejudices and pre-conceived notions.
2. Industrialisation in Japan. Some General Observations.
A plethora of literature has appeared recently on
the internal readjustments in Japan consequent upon
industrialisation. So far as Australia’s difficulties are
concerned, much has been written about the population
problem, the standard of living, and the living wage.
But these domestic problems, even if most interesting,
are hardly germane to the subject now before us. Men-
tion will be made later of the question of the probable
future relationship of primary and secondary produc-
tion in this country to general changes in the world eco-
nomic structure, and especially to changes centred about
the Pacific. For the moment it will be justifiable, how-
ever, to ponder for a few minutes over the motive force
actuating the far reaching changes and transformation
which are only now at their zenith in Japan.
What is the economic background which has con-
ditioned this delayed Industrial Revolution? What are
the real reasons for the considerable increase over the
past few years in the national wealth and per capita in-
come of Japan? The population of Japan has doubled
since 1873, and is now increasing at the rate of about
one million per annum. Since sundry parts of the globe
are closed to Japanese migration, a policy of industrial
expansion as the only means of solving her population
problem has been embarked upon. In this regard it is
easy to show, as many have already done, how vital an
influence industrialisation has had on the character of
Japanese society by changing to so marked an extent
the proportion of rural workers, and increasing the num-
bers engaged in secondary industry. And yet Japan
is still essentially an agricultural nation. The gradual
intrusion of Western ideas and tastes has undoubtedly
lent support to the general transformation. But there
are far more important economic considerations.
We must remember that coal and iron are not found
in Japan in any quantities sufficient to justify their being
mined economically. But any such lack of richly en-
dowed resources has not formed an insuperable bar to
industrial development. An all-important economic con-
sideration has certainly been the fact that Japan must
be supplied from outside with almost all the raw mate-
rials for her industries, as well as a considerable part of
her foodstuffs.


Japanese Trade
as a %
of World Trade, 1927-1934.
1927
2.92
1931
2.86
1928
2.79
1932 . .
. . . 2.82
1929
2.86
1933
. . . 3.08
1930
2.61
1934 . .
... 3.32
Before the Sino-Japanese war, when her industry
was still in its infancy, Japan imported mainly finished
goods, and exported principally materials and semi-
manufactured articles. To-day “growing industrialisa-
tion involves growing dependence on outside areas for
raw materials and foodstuffs.”
Raw silk occupied for many years thirty to forty
per cent, of the value of the total exports of Japan, but
the depression in U.S.A., and to some extent the pheno-
menal development of the rayon industi'y, have driven
down prices. In 1930 raw silk fell to 28 per cent, of total
export values, and in 1934 to 13 per cent. The Great
War, the overvaluation of sterling when England re-
turned to the Gold Standard in 1925, and, in many re-
spects, the depression, have, to a very large extent, sup-
plied external world conditions calculated in many ways
to foster rapid industrialisation in Japan. Internally, of
course, the competitive advantage of an abundant and
cheap labour supply cannot be exaggerated, but to. a
consideration of facts such as these we shall return in
the next section.
For the present, it will suffice to round off this very
sketchy review of important factors in Japan’s industria-
lisation by stating, with little fear of contradiction, that
the quality of Japanese exports has undoubtedly im-
proved greatly over recent years. This change for the
better has been largely assisted by the good work of
trade agents. In the promotion of internal economies,
the Advisory Board of the Bureau of Industrial Rationa-
lisation has done invaluable work.
Briefly, then, the population problem, rationalisa-
tion, increasing technical efficiency of industry, abundant
cheap labour supply, governmental support for industrial
development, war operations stimulating the demand for
textiles, an easy credit policy, and many other factors
have all played an important role in fostering Japanese
industrialisation. Figures of Japanese trade as a per-
centage of world trade for the years 1927 to 1934 give
some slight indication of how intense this industriali-
sation process has been.
3. Competitive Advantages—Fair and Otherwise.
At the onset of the depression, two courses were
open to Japan—either contraction of imports or expan-


sion of exports. As Japan is a country which does not
produce many of the raw materials essential for manu-
facturing, a consequence of the adoption of a policy of
expansion of exports was an increase in imports also.
And in this regard Japan, defying the prevailing tenden-
cies of bilateral trade, has managed to increase her total
exports and imports more successfully than any other
country, and has done so by the time-honoured methods
of triangular trade.
As was only natural to expect, industrialised Japan
did not confine her attention solely to the opening up and
development of previously untapped markets. Many
manufacturers and traders throughout the world, and
practically all important exporting countries, have to a
greater or less extent felt the effects of Japanese compe-
tition, which has steadily grown more intense. Let us
consider, then, what factors have materially helped
Japan in her deliberate trade expansionist policy. Many
have been branded as “unfair,” but before we can hope
to pass such judgment, we must first enquire whether
these factors have arisen from any especial characteristics
and comparative advantages of the Japanese economy,
or whether they are based on the exploitation or infringe-
ment of methods of production debarred internally by
civil law but which cannot be prevented internationally.
The outstanding advantage in Japan’s industrial
development has undoubtedly been the abundant labour
supply. In this regard there can be no question of right
or wrong to the rest of the world. The low level of real
wages has certainly been a major consideration. But
are wages much below the level of the marginal net pro-
ductivity of labour? Low standards of living, and the
absence of legally constituted arbitration tribunals such
as exist in Australia, will certainly make it easier to main-
tain a low level of real wages. But lower costs are not
to be measured simply in terms of low wages and low
standards of living. It is costs per 1 unit of output that
matter. Costs are not high or low in any absolute sense,
but merely in relationship to output. It has yet to be
shown whether the low labour costs in Japan are not high
in terms of marginal efficiency. Wages are only one of
several costs of production. An absolute difference in
average wages as between two countries—Japan and
Australia for our present consideration—does not in itself
alone provide a basis for international trade.
There are few exporters who would not immediately
cite “depreciation of the yen” as an illegal competitive
advantage enjoyed by Japan in her invasion of oversea
markets. But several queries immediately suggest them-
selves. Is the yen undervalued ? Is it undervalued more


than the Australian pound? Does not a lower rate of
exchange invariably mean higher prices for imported
raw materials, and a corresponding increase in produc-
tion costs? Surely a currency is only undervalued when
the cost-price structure is distorted in favour of the
exporter? Was it not absurd for Canada to charge a
duty on Japanese imports in proportion to the degree of
the alleged undervaluation of the yen, for surely any
exporting advantage Japan might have enjoyed arose
not from the depreciation itself, but from the difference
between the external and the internal value of the yen,
from the difference between export prices and internal
costs? These are some of the questions which must be
answered before we can pass judgment on this problem
of the external value of the yen.*
Other commonly alleged trading advantages must
be dismissed in a few words for want of space. High ad
valorem customs duties may be fairly common in Japan,
but are oversea imports excluded to any greater extent
on that account there than in the case of practically all
other countries? On imports for domestic consumption,
totalling 2246 million yen, the Government raised 114 m.
yen in customs duties for 1933-4. Customs and excise re-
venue totalling £A34 million was collected on total Aus-
tralian imports of £A 83 m. for the same period.
Any accusation of Japanese “dumping” will be dif-
ficult tQ/substantiate. Japan has certainly been charged
with wholesale dumping of exports, but it is important
to remember that there has perhaps been little neces-
sity for her exporters to adopt such trading methods.
*Some fifteen months ago the “Economist” made an extremely
speculative calculation, similar to the following, to determine the
% under- or over-valuation of the various currencies in the Sterl-
ing area. Following their example we get:—
Wholesale Prices, Base 1927-29, equal 100.
Year. U.K. Australia. Japan.
1927-29 100 100 100
Fourth quarter, 1935 . . . . 73.2 82.1 86.8
Average Rates of Exchange.
Sterling to Yen on Kobe, 1927-29, 1/101 . . . . Relative 100
4th Qr., 1935, 1/2 3-64 . . Relative 61
Sterling to £AIOO, 1927-29, £ stg. 100 Relative 100
4th Qr., 1935, £ stg. 80 . . Relative 80
Undervaluation.
In the fourth quarter of 1935, comparing wholesale price levels
to give equality or parity of purchasing power, the relative figures
for the average rates of exchange should have been; Australia, 89;
Japan, 84. This gives undervaluation for £A of 10 9;, the yen
27%. As it is extremely doubtful whether the £A was at all under-
valued at the end of 1935, it is fairly safe to conclude that the com-
petitive oversea trade advantage which Japan was accused of ex-
ploiting was not nearly as considerable as many imagined.


Attention must once again be turned to prices relative
to costs of production. Extremely low costs may have
enabled Japanese manufacturers to sell goods at profit
in foreign markets when competitors imagined they were
selling below cost.
It is now generally agreed that the amount of assis-
tance directly given by the Japanese Government to in-
dustries has often been over-exaggerated. Subsidies,
bounties, guaranteed export prices, etc., are not entirely
unknown in other countries.
A defence of the facts of Japanese trade competition
is of course not the same as the question whether
Japanese merchants have conducted their export trade
with judicious foresight in view of the varied complaints
from all quarters of the globe. Foreign competitors may
be justified in their belief that Japanese manufacturers
have been guilty of unfair practices in imitating Western
ideas, designs and patterns, labels, and in fact everything
of any commercial value. If such is the case, if Japanese
manufacturers have committed such malpractices, it is
safe to say in partial extenuation that they have reaped
the reward for their sins, in this country at least, in the
shape of the uninformed criticism that has been hurled
at all branches of their new industrialisation. But such
considerations are, of course, beyond the scope of this
paper.
We must conclude this section with the statement
that “the fear of universal undercutting is fallacious,”
for the reasons given above and for the multitude of
factors to which we shall now turn our attention.
PART II.
TRADE.
The Basis of International Trade.
Australia’s very unfavourable trade balance with
the United States has been the topic of much considera-
tion in this country for some time. Our imports from
America greatly exceed our exports, and in consequence
there are many who argue that we should not increase
our indebtedness to the States by one more dollar until
drastic measures have been taken to redress the gross
barter terms of trade between the two countries. Few of
the people that express such views, however, realise that
our exports to Japan are approximately twice to three
times as great as our imports therefrom. Even if they
are aware of the facts, they are keen to point out the
folly of any Japanese claim for a “balanced trade.” The


balance is now “on the right side” so far as Australia is
concerned. There are even some who will argue against
the facts, declaring that Japanese competition is a threat
to world industry. They fail to see that the more Japan
exports the more she must import, for the total value of a
country’s exports cannot long exceed the value of her
imports. Of course this should not be taken to mean that
between every pair of countries there will be balance in
the long run, but rather that any “shortage” in one direc-
tion will be counterbalanced by “surpluses” elsewhere.
Whilst on the subject of trade balance, it is interesting to
note that several curious cases have been recorded
recently where the trade statistics of two countries have
shown both of them to be in the happy position of having
a “favourable” trade balance with the other. Imports
constitute the payment for exports. Thus, unless Japan
is to become an exporter of capital, every increase in her
exports will involve an increase in her imports; conse-
quently she cannot capture all the world’s markets.
What commodities will a country export? She will
“export those goods, and services, in the production of
which she is at the greatest comparative advantage or at
the least comparative disadvantage.” To the “practical”
business man the law of comparative costs may read as
“academic” nonsense, but its validity cannot be denied.
It is a total disregard of this law which makes Japan per-
sist in her attempt to establish an iron industry, bringing
coal from China and iron for smelting from the
Philippines. Some may argue that the law is axiomatic.
They should be careful lest they also reason that because
of relatively high labour and other costs in this country,
every care must be taken to defend all local secondary
production, and possibly much primary production, from
the dire threat to its very existence which is spelt in
Japanese industrialisation. “Given an expanding value
of production, a rising standard of living, the existence of
local differences of costs and productive possibilities, then
not only is international trade possible, but it is capable
of indefinite expansion.”
4. Japanese Competition.
Now for the first time we come to grips with the
real issue, “The effects upon Australia of Industrialisa-
tion in Japan.”
Several avenues of approach suggest themselves,
but consideration along the lines indicated in the next sen-
tence will, it is hoped, afford a logical approach, and at
the same time direct attention to three equally impor-
tant phases of the problem. Foreign competition can


AUSTRALIAN TRADE WITH JAPAN (INCLUDING FORMOSA),
1925-6—1934-5. £A000’s.
Year.
Exports.
Imports.
Balance.
Total Oversea
Trade Balance.
1925-6
11,043
4,372
+ 7,671
— 5,429
1926-7
10,363
5,188
+ 5,180
— 20,632
1927-8
12,571
4,283
+ 8,289
— 6,739
1928-9
11,519
4,707
+ 6,812
— 2,015
1929-30 ...
6,555
4,182
+ 2,373
— 5,954
1930-1
9,500
2,784*
+ 6,717
+ 33,533
1931-2
11,659
3,044*
+ 8,615
+ 51,619
1932-3
11,468
4,421
+ 7,048
+ 48,426
1933-4
13,906
4,596
+ 9,310
+ 47,550
1934-5
12,096
5,781
+ 6,315
+ 20,347
Total
+ 68,330
-1- 160,706
take three main forms: (a) intrusion of the home mar-
ket, (b) extrusion from a particular market of goods
domestically produced for that market, and (c) replace-
ment in foreign markets of export goods from one
country by export goods from another. Thus we shall
consider in the following order (a) Japanese imports
into Australia, (b) Australian exports to Japan, and (c)
Japanese and Australian exports in oversea markets.
For several fairly obvious reasons this approach has
been preferred to the two-fold division of the problem
into (a) supply and (b) demand.
5. Japanese Imports into Australia.
Before considering specifically the nature and
amount of Japanese imports into Australia, this is per-
haps the most suitable place to set out for future refe-
rence a table showing the total amount, in Australian
currency values, of trade between this country and
Japan over the last ten years.
*lt is important to remember that in all official Commonwealth
publications, imports are expressed in terms of sterling, exports in
Australian currency values. In this paper, with one or two minor
exceptions, adjustment where necessary has been made on this ac-
count. For the years 1930-1 and 1931-2, this is extremely difficult,
for the Bank Buying Rate fluctuated from £AIO2 to £AI3O equals
£stg. 100, changing ten times in all. The mean rates for 1930-1
and 1931-2 were very approximately £AII7 and £AI27, =
£stg. 100 respectively.


This table, in view of the all important role that ex-
ports play in her economy, gives some indication of the
value to Australia of her trade with Japan).
Any analysis of Japanese imports into Australia
to be of real significance must be more than a mere con-
sideration of actual and percentage changes in declared
values. It must consider (1) the kind and quality of
goods imported, and (2) changes in the value of this
trade compared with the import trade of other coun-
tries. A study must be made of what imports are com-
petitive, what non-competitive. What proportion of
“non-competitive imports” represent commodities which
Australia might otherwise produce, or which she may
be likely in the relatively near future to produce inter-
nally? What imports represent Producers’ goods, what
Consumers’ goods? In what lines of imports is the trade
likely to increase, what to decrease? Briefly, what is
the relationship of such imports to the present Aus-
tralian economy and its most probable future develop-
ments? Often many of these questions cannot be an-
swered. In some cases a good working knowledge of
conditions in certain specified branches of trade is neces-
sary before one could even hazard a guess. And the
whole time there must be kept in mind the fact that, in
the Australian economy, secondary production is bound
to play a role of steadily increasing importance. With
these and other considerations in mind, let us set out the
nature of, and changes in, Japan’s exports to Australia.


AUSTRALIAN IMPORTS FROM JAPAN (INCLUDING FORMOSA).
£stg.000’s.
A.
1927-8 —
1932-3—
B.
1932-3 — *
Real
1927-8.
1934-5.
1929-30.
1934-5.
1934-5.
Corrected.
(B.— A.)
Change.
1.
Foodstuffs, Animal Origin
64
50
303
108
235
—68
(Fish)
54
44
265
91
198
—67
2.
Foodstuffs, Vegetable Origin
22
46
88
86
187
+99
(Tea)
3
37
8
55
120
+ 112
6.
Animal Substances not
Foodstuffs
226
229
797
818
1,778
+981
(Raw Silk)
225
195
783
719
1,563
+ 780
7.
Vegetable Substances
40
46
138
129
280
+ 142
8.
Apparel and Textiles
3,287
3,275
9,895
8,242
1,817
17,928
+ 8,033
(Cotton and Linen)
351
697
919
3,950
+3,031
(Silk)
2,729
1,851
8,140
4,847
10,536
+2,396
(Towels)
—
34
—
133
289
+ 289
(Yarns)
8
67
126
235
489
+363
9.
Oils, Fats. Waxes
46
22
139
56
122
—17
12.
Metals —Machinery
20
181
69
409
889
+ 820
(Lamps)
4
15
13
59
128
+ 115
13.
Rubber and Leather
4
37
7
76
165
+ 158
14.
Wood, Wicker
228
31
643
75
163
—480 ,
15.
China, Glass, etc.
127
216
399
576
1,252
(Household Crockery)
73
162
244
451
980
+736
16.
Paper and Stationery
17
53
57
134
291
+ 234
(Stationery)
13
36
46
82
178
+ 132
17.
Jewellery, Clocks, Fancy
1,033
+735
Goods
100
179
298
475
(Fancy Goods)
52
111
188
287
624
+436
18.
Optical, Surgical, and Scien-
34
74
+ 71
tiflc Instruments
1
21
3
19.
Drugs, Chemicals
45
117
146
363
789
+ 643
(Sulphur)
—
72
—
249
541
+ 541
Misc., Bags, Trunks, etc.
14
40
54
63
137
+ 83
Total
4,283
4,625
13,172
11,839
25,737
12,565 (+ 95%)
*Fnr the three vears. 1932-3 — 1984-5. the total value
of Australian imports was fstg. 192.8m„ compared with
fstg.
422.7m. for 1927-8 — 1929-30. a decrease of 54 per
cent. In
order to analyse the real significance of changes in Japanese
exports to Australia, allowance must
be made for this very marked drop
in import trade. Just as
figures or nominal
waees for two periods are adjusted.
in relationship to some price level, in order to give
the level or
real wages at the
two dates, so similar adjustments have been necessary here
Briefly, Japanese imports for
1932-3 —1934-0 nave oeen
tiplied by 100/46, for total imports In
the latter
three years were only 46
per cent, or tnose tor me lormer penuu.


Many will immediately point to the large predomi-
nance of plus signs in the last column of the table and
say, “Our case is proved.” But, on closer analysis, we
see that a remarkably small proportion of the commodi-
ties enumerated in the imports table compete directly
with articles of Australian production and manufacture.
In practically every instance it will be necessary
for Australia to continue importing in consider-
able quantities, and for some years to come,
the major number of the articles listed. The
figures opposite “8, Apparel and Textiles” may
at first sight appear a little staggering. But in this
case it is only those with an intimate working knowledge
of conditions now prevailing and likely to prevail in the
future in the textile industries of the Commonwealth who
are really qualified to express a valid opinion.
It can, with comparative safety, be concluded that
“of total Japanese imports into Australia in recent years
half the goods were non-competitive with Australian
manufactures.” Care must be shown, however, in not
interpreting this to mean “only half the goods imported
were competitive with British goods.” Consideration of
this latter question raises many problems of intricate
detail.
It is difficult not to laugh at some of the recently
published statements of the Melbourne Chamber of Com-
merce. They voice “the great concern among manufac-
turers at the tremendous increase in imports from Japan
in the past few years,” and quote, as an outstanding ex-
ample, “an increase of 622% in imports of optical and
scientific instruments.” They do not say that the in-
crease was from £stg. 942.
6. Australian Exports to Japan.
Let us consider, along the lines suggested in the last
section, Japanese imports of Australian goods and mer-
chandise.


AUSTRALIAN EXPORTS TO JAPAN
(INCLUDING FORMOSA).
£A000’s.
1927-8.
1934-5.
A.
1927-8—
1929-30.
1932-3—
1934-5.
B.
1932-3— *
1934-5.
Corrected.
Real
(B.— A.)
Change.
1.
Foodstuffs, Animal Origin
119
76
469
190
216
—253
(Frozen Beef)
46
27
238
73
83
—205
(Milk and Cream)
58
43
189
91
103
—86
2.
Foodstuffs, Vegetable Origin
976
2,308
3,252
6,221
7,070
+3,818
(Barley)
—
25
92
74
84
—8
(Wheat)
890
2,274
2,946
6,046
6,870
+3,924
(Flour)
10
8
26
65
74
+48
5.
6.
Live Animals
Animal Substances (not
5
13
23
27
31
+8
foodstuffs)
10,448
8,859
23,820
29,144
32,891
+9,071
(Cattle)
7
108
40
165
188
+148
(Trochus Shell)
96
47
256
137
156
—100
(Wool —Greasy)
9,819
8,614
22,566
28,244
32,095
+ 9,529
(Wool Scoured)
105
66
261
523
594
+333
7.
Vegetable Substances
5
23
7
35
40
+33
8.
Apparel, Textiles
14
11
25
25
28
+3
9.
Oils, Fats, Waxes
426
174
1,233
537
610
—523
(Unrefined Tallow)
425
174
1,230
537
610
—520
11.
Stones, Minerals
—
143
97
199
226
+ 129
12.
Metals, Machinery
537
401
1,497
839
953
—544
(Pig Lead)
85
87
264
83
94
—150
(Scrap Iron and Steel)
—
138
45
258
293
+248
(Zinc)
429
164
1,125
425
483
—642
13.
Rubber and Leather
2
5
5
12
14
+9
19.
Drugs, Chemicals
(Casein)
Miscellaneous
21
15
19
42
31
43
144
122
68
88
64
58
100
73
66
+44
—51
—2
Total
12,571
12,096
30,645
37,471
42,581
11,936 (+ 39
*See Footnote to Table on Page 74. Correction figure is
100/88, Australian exports in the two periods being £A408.0m. and
SA357.4 m.


Some may object that to be logically consistent, and
in order to give a fuller picture of the real position, our
“correction” should have been made in terms of total
Japanese imports, rather than total Australian exports.
Australian exports to Japan have increased by £A42.6m.,
or 39% relatively to total exports for 1932-3—1934-5.
But the real increase in Japanese imports of Australian
origin has only been approximately 27%.* But one con-
clusion is obvious—that Australia has definitely not lost
ground in Japanese markets.
Australian exports to Japan have shown a fairly
appreciable increase. Exports of certain commodities
and certain groups of commodities have declined abso-
lutely, but there is certainly no evidence of the exclusion
from Jg,pan of Australian exports. To follow our pur-
pose to its conclusion, we should now ask, are any of
these decreases due to Japanese industrialisation?
In view of the relatively small order and significance
of such decreases, other more important points for con-
sideration suggest themselves, however. It will suffice
to say that, from the very order of things, it is extremely
unlikely that for some time to come there can be any
serious competition between the primary products of
Australia and the manufactured goods of Japan.
Five commodities, wool, wheat, metals, tallow, ores
and concentrates represent more than 90% of our export
trade with Japan. The importance of Japanese compe-
tition in the Australian wool market is w T ell known. For
the current season, to March 31st, Japan is second on
the list of buyers of Australian wool, with purchases total-
ling £Al2m. Great Britain took 838,000 bales, Japan
669,000, and Belgium, third, 326,000 bales, from total
shipments of 2,421,000 bales. This demand, moreover,
is steady and well assured, for whilst importation of wool
into Japan from other countries may increase, the use of
that wool is dependent on the importation of large quan-
tities of Australian wool for admixture. Practically the
whole of the wool manufacturing machinery installed in
Japan is of the continental system type, and is expressly
designed for the use of merino wool. Similarly, in the
case of the other four commodities, Japan offers to Aus-
tralian exporters a safe and comparatively well pro-
tected market.
But some will immediately ask, “What are the pros-
pects of increasing our exports to Japan and of widen-
*lmports into Japan proper, 1928-30 inclusive, were 5884 m.
yen, compared with 5631 m. yen for 1932-34. Our correction figure
then becomes 100/96, instead of 100/88. (See footnote table,
page 74).


ing the general range of commodities shipped?” Per-
haps this is one of the motives lying behind all the talk
of the conclusion in the relatively near future of a trade
treaty between the two countries. What of meat, milk
foods and butter, fruit, rice, possibly cotton, and so on?
What will be the influence of a raising of the Japanese
living standard on our Eastern export trade? These
very interesting questions are beyond the scope of this
paper, however.* For the present we must conclude
that there is little, if any, evidence of the deliberate re-
striction of Australian exports to Japan. Moreover,
there is little apparent reason to fear such exclusion for
some time to come.
7. Japanese and Australian Exports in Oversea Markets.
Here two separate problems must command our at-
tention; oversea markets which Australia has lost to
Japan, and markets which Australia might have obtained,
and which, as a direct consequence of eastern industria-
lisation, have gone to Japan. This will be the most dif-
ficult aspect of all this analysis, and especially where
“possible markets lost” are concerned, for there the rea-
soning must become extremely speculative.
As regards the problem in general, the most obvious
method of approach is to consider those countries with
which, after taking into consideration the great decrease
in oversea trade consequent upon the world depression,
Australia’s favourable trade balance has decreased, or
unfavourable trade balance has increased over the last
few years. We must then make similar calculations to
*Undoubtedly the most obvious method open to Australia to
increase to any extent her exports to Japan is by increasing her
imports from that country. Such a course would certainly help
to alleviate much of the criticism and concern which has recently
been voiced in Japan over the state of the trade balance with Aus-
tralia. Increased exports will undoubtedly enable Japan to make
larger purchases of Australian primary products. But can Aus-
tralia finance a large volume of imports? In these days of bi-
lateral trade treaties, and export-import balances, one possible, if
hardly appropriate, solution to the problem suggests itself. Are
there any countries, outside the British Commonwealth of Nations,
for obvious reasons, with which Australia has a very unfavour-
able trade balance, and from which are imported commodities which
Japan is as well, or almost as well, able to supply? Those who
might deem this a profitable field for investigation will be pleased
to find that Australian imports, amongst many other such commo-
dities, in some quantity tea from the Netherlands East Indies,
paper from Norway and Sweden, paper pulp, dairy machinery and
wood manufactures from Sweden, ornaments, textiles, silks, clocks,
watches, etc., from Switzerland, apparel from Czechoslovakia, cot-
ton piece goods, certain drugs and chemicals, and some machinery
from U.S.A., etc., which Japan might otherwise supply.


determine whether the trade balance of Japan with these
same countries has become relatively more favourable.
If this is so, it will then be necessary to enquire what
commodities are exported by Japan in greater quanti-
ties; whether those same commodities show decreased
export from Australia; and finally, whether the cause of
the loss of this trade to Australia is due to industrialisa-
tion in Japan, or to some other cause.
At the outset eight countries naturally suggest them-
selves for consideration. The statistical information re-
levant to the methodology suggested above is now set
out and explained where necessary.


AUSTRALIAN TRADE BALANCE, 1927-8—1929-30 COMPARED WITH 1932-3-
WITH EIGHT COUNTRIES. £A000’s.
-1934-5,
Balance
3 years,
Country. 1927-8 —
L929-30. (A.)
Balance
3 years,
1932-3—
1934-5.
Corrected
Balance,*
1932-3—
1934-5. (B.)
Real
Change.
(B.-A.).
Annual
Average
Change.
New Zealand + 4,274
India + 283
Canada — 9,462
China — 192
Netherlands, E. Indies — 12,975
U.S.A — 78,599
British Malay + 1,693
Union of Sth. Africa + 4,302
+ 3,380
— 8,886
— 7,667
+ 8,503
— 10,596
— 24,898
+ 1,838
+ 278
+ 4,691
— 12,335
— 10,644
+ 11,804
— 14,706
— 34,449
+ 2,551
+ 386
+ 417
— 12,618
— 1,182
+ 11,996
— 2,380
+ 44,040
+ 858
— 8,916
+ 139
— 4,152
— 394
+ 3,099
— 798
+ 14,680
+ 286
— 1,805
*As the total value of Australian oversea trade fell from
£A831m. for 1927-8 — 1929-30 to £A598m., for 1932-3—1934-5 our
multiplier is 138.8/100. See footnote to table on page 74.


JAPANESE EXPORTS, IMPORTS AND TRADE BALANCE,
1927-9 — 1932-4. YEN 000,000’s.
Nether- Union of
India. lands, South
East Indies. Africa.
Total
Trade.
Imports, 1927-9 843.5 294.0 3.8
Exports, 1927-9 511.7 243.1 36.5
6591.7
6112.9
Balance — 331.8 — 50.9 + 32.7
Imports, 1932-4 613.9 159.4 14.6
Expoits, 1932-4 655.5 415.3 73.4
5631.5
5443.0
Imports, 1932-4
Adjusted* 718.8 186.6 17.1
Exports, 1932-4
Adjusted* 736.1 466.4 82.4
Balance + 17.3 + 279.8 + 65.3
Real Change + 349.1 + 330.7 4- 32.6
Real Annual Change + 116.4 + 110.2 + 10.9
_ -
In the case of these three countries we find greater
imports of Japanese origin for each succeeding year,
1932, 1933, 1934, in the following commodities: —
India. — Beer, camphor, menthol, matches, certain
types of cotton goods, woollen tissues, silk tissues, knitted
goods (various), buttons, paper, glass manufactures,
iron manufactures, machinery and parts thereof, lamps.
Netherlands East Indies. — Wheat, flour, vegetables,
matches, cotton and silk tissues, cotton yarns, knitted
goods, iron manufactures, rubber, wood, lamps, potteries,
buttons, cement.
South Africa. — Cotton and silk tissues,
goods, glass manufactures, wood.
knitted
In the case of India it is fairly safe to say that the
predominant part of Japan’s gain represents England’s
loss. Australia has lost more ground relatively in India
The last column of this table can be taken to repre-
sent the real annual average change in the Australian
trade balance with the countries indicated. In the case
of India, the Netherlands East Indies, and the Union of
South Africa, the changes “against” Australia are appre-
ciable. In these countries Australian exporters have lost
ground relatively to exporters to other markets. Has
Japan, on the other hand, gained ground here?
*See footnote table on Page 74. Imports x 117.1/100,
Exports x 112.3/100.


than in other overseas markets, but it is extremely
doubtful whether any part of the “blame,” certainly no
appreciable part, can be ascribed to Japanese industria-
lisation.
So far as the Netherlands East Indies are concerned,
as more than 85% of Australian exports to those islands
have always been foodstuffs of animal and vegetable ori-
gin, it is certainly difficult to see how Australian markets
could have been filched to any extent by Japan when
that country is dependent for her very existence on the
importation of considerable quantities of foodstuffs.
South Africa has long objected that Japan should
purchase from her far more of her imports. South
Africa, which buys large imports from Japan, has for
some time begrudged Australia her very favourable
trade balance with Japan. Steady Japanese buying, as
mentioned earlier, has proved an extremely valuable con-
sideration in the disposal of our wool. The many simi-
larities between the economy of the Union and that of
Australia, and especially the dependence of internal
conditions in both to such a marked extent on oversea
markets for the disposal of their primary products, does
make these two countries important trade rivals. It
does seem safe to conclude, then, that Australia has per-
haps lost some of her Japanese trade to South Africa.
We know that there is an agreement, which has been re-
newed annually since it was reached in 1934, under which
Japan buys South African wool. But, on the face
of it, it is rather unlikely that there will be any marked
swing of trade away from Australia in the direction of
South Africa.
Intensified Japanese competition would first be ex-
pected in markets nearest home. Undoubtedly increased
Japanese exports, consequent upon industrialisation,
have invaded the many islands of the Pacific. Oceania
does offer tempting ground. But in view of the above
analysis it does seem difficult to imagine just how Aus-
tralian export manufacturers could have suffered to any
appreciable extent. But we must now pass on to con-
sider the basis of Australian export trade and the future
of Japanese trade.


PART III.
GENERAL SURVEY.
8. Future Prospects.
(a) The Basis of Australian Trade.
Japanese industries are complementary to Austra-
lian raw materials. That this is so cannot be empha-
sised more forcibly than by pointing to the increase in
the demand from Japan for wool, from one pound per
head in 1914 to approximately 3|lbs. at the present time.
Undoubtedly intensified Japanese competition has been
one of the most significant facts in world international
trade over the last few years. But in any analysis of
its effects extreme care must be exercised in delimiting
most carefully the scope of the enquiry. We have been
concerned with the effects upon Australian trade. Any
conclusions that we may have reached refer only to Aus-
tralia, and cannot be held equally to apply to conditions
throughout Great Britain or the British Commonwealth
of Nations, or to the world in general.
To date we have endeavoured to show whether or
not Australia has already lost, or is likely soon to lose,
any of her present trade to Japan. We should conclude
this section with an attempt to discover whether
there are discernible any latent trends which,
though at present of minor effect, may deve-
lop into large proportions. Taking the
Empire as a whole, is Eastern industrialisation
likely vitally to affect the current of imperial trade?
What will the position be when Australia is better able
to meet the requirements of markets, such as exist in
South America, from which Australia is at present ex-
cluded by the very nature of her export trade?
These and many other such questions open up a
very wide and general problem where it is well nigh im-
possible to forecast. We can state, however, that Aus-
tralia has not yet, as she should have, reached the point
where her policy will permit of the harmonisation of the
changes which are occuring in the Far East with her own
economic development and requirements. “An implica-
tion of material progress throughout the world is the
urgent need in Australia to tackle the real task, which
calls for industrial statesmanship, in the development of
new industries, which, instead of struggling for markets
already in existence, will make possible the growth of


entirely new markets.” “New Markets” must be spe-
cially catered for. We must realise that the Australian
economy will become more and more dependent upon
the development of her secondary production.
(b) The Future of Japanese Trade.
“The attention recently aroused by Japanese exports
is probably due less to the rate of their expansion than
to the fact that Japanese competition has been most
manifest in trades and markets in which it was previously
of relatively small importance.” Between 1983 and
1934, for example, Japanese exports to Central America
rose lay 168%, to South America by 102%, and to Canada
by 38%. Finished goods, which some forty years ago
occupied only about 25% of the total export trade, rose
to over 40% after the war, and in 1934 reached approxi-
mately 62%.
What of the future? As world recovery continues,
and raw material costs rise, the competitive advantage
enjoyed by Japan from any disparity between internal
costs and export prices will tend to narrow. Retail prices
are bound to rise in Japan, and costs may rise more than
proportionately because of the easy credit policy which
the Government has followed for some years. Yet all
highly industrialised countries must expect still more in-
tense Japanese competition. But as Japan’s exports in-
crease so will her imports. Australians may take solace
in the fact that, in so far as a country which to-day has
seventy million people is able to raise its standard of liv-
ing through industrialisation, it will no doubt become one
of the best customers of the world’s agricultural pro-
ducers and suppliers of raw materials. And so far as
Japan is concerned, we can say that her continued pro-
gress will require careful direction to avoid lop-sided or
uneconomic development.
9. Summary.
There are many who would explain the whole prob-
lem of the relationship between East and West as an out-
come of Eastern industrialisation. But this diagnosis
does not go below the surface; it only helps to explain the
internal strains and stresses which are set up in all the
industrialised countries of the world. The ultimate con-
sequence of industrialisation, given a balance between
population ’growth and technical progress in Japan, will
be an increase in the per capita welfare of the Japanese
people, and eventually of the whole world. Japanese in-
dustrialisation is not inconsistent with the continued well-
being of all Western countries.


There are probably no countries, certainly no Paci-
fic countries, with respect to which an exchange of pro-
ducts is more to the economic benefit of both than it is
in the case of Japan and Australia.
10. Conclusions.
We can state no dogmatic conclusions if for no other
reason than because one, and perhaps the most impor-
tant, aspect of the whole problem of the effects of indus-
trialisation in Japan has been completely ignored except
for one passing mention—the indirect and ultimate ef-
fects of that industrialisation upon the current of Im-
perial and Empire trade. That problem opens up another
and entirely fresh field for consideration. But we have
reached a position when we can endorse the skit pub-
lished recently in the “Economist,” “The Kobe Exchange
opens ten hours ahead of London. The Japanese cot-
ton merchant gets his orders and confirms them by the
evening mail before Lancashire is out of bed. How can
we keep any trade east of the Greenwich line? A Royal
Commission, with power to co-opt the Astronomer-
General, is imperative.”
As regards trade in any particular commodities, if
ever we are tempted to take drastic measures to restrict
Japanese competition, we should remember the consumer
as well as the producer. We should keep in mind the
fact that a check on competition in one direction may
merely spell intensified competition elsewhere.
As regards trade in general, it is high time that Aus-
tralians realised more fully that the future prosperity of
their country will, to an increasing extent, be dependent
on that of their neighbour in the Near East. Whether
this dependence will require them to cultivate a more
reasonable and sympathetic attitude to Japanese prob-
lems and Japanese industrial development, is not our con-
cern now, but it is self-evident that two countries so vitally
concerned with each other’s development should exert
every effort to eliminate all possible sources of discord
and misunderstanding. This harmony in relationships
will be most speedily achieved when the peoples realise
the mutual benefit and assistance each can be to the
other when international trade is allowed to flow unim-
peded and unrestricted in its natural channels.
Internationally, Japan is as important a factor in
world markets as a buyer as she is a seller. Japanese
industrialisation may have caused many disturbances in
world markets, but at the same time it corresponds to


a real growth of wealth. Professor T. E. Gregory states,
■“lt requires a degree of economic irrationality of which
the present writer is not capable, to regard the process
as on balance undesirable.”
Preface.
Contradictory as it is, I leave the Preface to this
monograph as a concluding apology.
I am fully aware of the many inconsistencies of argu-
ment with which this paper bristles. In defence, I plead
that it was of necessity, if most reluctantly, an extremely
“rushed job.” Many important considerations have been
ignored. But possibly some avenues for further investiga-
tion have been suggested; if that is so, it is hoped that the
Conference will be able to give them the thought they
deserve.
My considerable reliance on the writings of others
is sufficiently obvious to require no further comment. It
is to Professor D. B. Copland, however, that I owe thanks
for most help in this work.
K. J. BINNS.
Melbourne, 14/5/36.


APPENDIX.
THE NEW AUSTRALIAN TARIFF SCHEDULE.
22nd MAY, 1936.
Reference was made on page 78 of my memoran-
dum on “Industrialisation in Japan and its Effects upon
Australia,” to the possibility, however undesirable and
impracticable it might be, of Australia endeavouring to
give to Japan a greater share of her import trade by
making Japan, rather than certain “bad customer” coun-
tries, the market from which she purchased various
classes of commodity imports. Little was it imagined
when that was written that the Commonwealth Govern-
ment had in mind any tariff policy such as that announced
at the end of last month, a policy which does attempt
to equate imports from, and exports to, individual coun-
tries, but which, at the same time, illogically spells les-
sened Japanese-Australian trade.
Introducing the new Tariff Schedule and list of im-
port prohibitions, the Minister in Charge of Trade Trea-
ties (Sir Henry Gullett) said:—
“Circumstance compels us, however reluctantly, to
follow the policy adopted by a large number of coun-
tries throughout the world, and divert a certain amount
of our import trade from countries which are very in-
different purchasers of Australian exports, first as far
as practicable to Australian secondary industry, and next
to countries which are, or recently have been, heavy
purchasers of our exports. To achieve this object, the
Government has decided to proceed in two ways—by the
adoption of a licensing system over a limited range of
imports, and by the imposition of higher duties where
this course has appeared more desirable.”
He stated that the value of import trade which it
was anticipated would be diverted and supplied from
new sources was £A2,863,000. It was estimated that
Australian manufacturers would benefit to the extent of
£A1,056,000, the United Kingdom by £A1,638,000, and
“good customer” foreign countries by £A169,000 per an-
num. These figures do not include £A5,000,000 for
motor chassis expected to be manufactured in the near
future in Australia.
The principal commodities affected are motor
vehicles and chassis, cotton piece goods and rayon pro-
ducts, silk manufactures, paper, machinery of various
types, Oregon timber, and tobacco. So far as textiles are
concerned, it is interesting to note that in 1934-35 Aus


tralian imports of apparel, textiles, and manufactured
fibres were £5tg.17,736,000. Of this trade f5tg.8,858,000
will be affected by the new tariff and £5tg.3,692,000 of it,
42%, will be drastically curtailed, coming as it does from
foreign countries.
Australian imports of Japanese textiles last year
totalled £5tg.3,275,000, or 89% of those from foreign
countries. Licences will now be required to import from
Japan cotton piece goods (£5tg.697,000), silk goods
(£5tg.1,851,000), and yarns (£5tg.67,000), amongst other
commodities. On this point the Minister said: “It is not
possible to give a sound estimate of the effects of the new
duties upon the imports of rayon and cotton piece goods.
Japan, even under the new duties, will continue to be the
principal supplier of our market in rayon; in cottons
there should be a considerable increase in United King-
dom imports, but Japan will still continue to supply a
substantial portion of our imports.” Despite all official
protests, it is difficult to see how there has been any
object in mind other than to prevent Japan from “flood-
ing” the Australian textile market with goods produced
at “uncompetitive” prices.
It can be imagined that the purpose behind the
drastic changes was partly to relieve the London Funds
position. But in this regard it should be remembered
that at first, and for a period at least, so far as rayon and
cotton goods are concerned, the tariff amendments will
not occasion a reduction but a diversion of purchase from
a cheap market to a dearer one; and secondly, the mere
threat of a withdrawal of Japanese competition from the
wool sales will undoubtedly have far-reaching conse-
quences. Thus Japanese opposition to the amendments is
likely to have a fairly serious effect upon the Australian
balance of payments.
There is some talk now of the Australian Govern-
ment granting to Japan a quota limit of fifty million
square yards of cotton piece goods and thirty million
square yards of rayon. But it is far too early to forecast
what the final result of any negotiations might be. The
position is certainly disquieting at the moment. The only
consolation to be found is in a long period view of the
changes. The Australian trade balance with Japan is
very “favourable,” and we understand that the new
tariff, if with unfortunate secondary repercussions, is
directed primarily against “bad customer” foreign
countries.
K. J. BINNS.
17/6/36.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia for The Australian Institute of
International Affairs, Victorian Division, Kurrajong House, 177 Collins
Street, Melbourne, by Fraser & Morphet Pty. Ltd., Printers. 3 and 5
Eastbourne Street. Prahran, Melbourne.


