

Studies In The
Revelation
The Historicist Viewpoint
Concerning The Seals,
Trumpets, and Vials


Studies In The
Revelation
The Historicist Viewpoint
Concerning The Seals,
Trumpets, and Vials


Not many Christians today show much interest in the Revelation,
chiefly because they cannot understand it. Happily, there are signs,
however, that interest is beginning to grow, undoubtedly because the end is
obviously drawing near. The greatest reason there is so little understanding
of the Book is that in this twentieth century most people are being taught
the Futurist interpretation. It was not always so. For several centuries
preceding ours, evangelicals almost exclusively believed the Historical
interpretation, and they were able to locate their own times in the seals,
trumpets and vials. This made the Book very practical to them, and very
exciting. Today hardly anyone has even looked at the Historical
interpretation, and they are missing out, more than they could imagine.
In the Greek, the word for Revelation is apokalupsis, from apo
“away” and kalupsis “a veil.” So it is a taking away of a veil. An
unveiling. A revealing of something that was hidden. The future was
hidden, but it is unveiled, in the Revelation. Verse 3 says “Blessed is he that
readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and keep those
things that are written therein, FOR THE TIME IS AT HAND” (not 19
centuries away). This blessing is not arbitary, as if there was something
magical about reading the Revelation. Much more than mere reading is
required, to obtain the blessing. The blessing is inevitable, if we do what is
stated. The word “readeth” is anaginoskon, which means “to know
accurately, to distinguish, discern.” So it is reading with understanding
that brings the blessing. “Keep those things,” the verse says. “Keep” is
terountes, “give heed to, watch NARROWLY, guard, observe.” The truh
is that those who read with accurate understanding and discernment will
receive such a thrilling, enlightening revelation of God’s hand in the
experiences of the church down through the whole Christian era, as it lives
out its life and witness among the nations, that their blessing knows no
bounds. Seeing their own days laid out before them in the prophecy
becomes an encouragement, an assurance, and comfort, especially in trial
and persecution. Almost all of this is lost, with the futurist view, because
the events are all held to be beyond the church age, hence are of little
PRACTICAL benefit to the church. Pardon me, but I believe the futurist
view is incorrect. Here are some reasons.
(1) It is a Revelation of “things which must SHORTLY come to
pass.” “For THE TIME IS AT HAND.” This was true in John’s day; and
the words refer especially to the seals, trumpets, and vials. This is clear
from the fact that John was told to “write the things that thou hast seen,
and the things which ARE, and the things which shall be hereafter” (1:19).
The “things which thou hast seen” refer to his vision of Jesus, in verses 10
to 20. “The things which ARE” were the existing conditions in the seven
churches in Asia Minor at that time. There MAY be a case for seeing the
seven messages to the churches as ALSO a prophecy of seven progressive
conditions of the church down through the church age, BUT THE
REVELATION NOWHERE SAYS THIS IS SO. Primarily, if not
exclusively, they are conditions existing in John’s day, and the Lord’s
personal advice to those existing churches. “Things which ARE” are NOT
“things which must SHORTLY come to pass.” Hence the only item
relating basically to the future is “the things which SHALL BE hereafter;”
and the only item to which this can refer is the seals, trumpets, and vials,
And they were SHORTLY to come to pass, not in the dim distant future,
nineteen centuries away.
(2) The futurist view means that from 4:1 to the end of chapter 19
refers to the future, which was then 19 centuries away, and concerns a


period of only seven short years. This is unthinkable in a Book which was
undoubtedly written for the guidance and comfort and encouragement of
the saints during the trials of the Christian era. It was sent to “show His
servants (douloi slaves) things which must shortly come to pass” (1:1).
We are his His love-slaves, having been bought with His precious blood, so
we are not our own, we are His. The people of Israel (natural) are not His
servants, so it was not written to natural Israel, but to the saints. The
Revelation is not a Book written mainly about natural Israel, as some
allege. It is Christ’s intimate revelation to His saints, spiritual Israel, and
thus concerns the church.
When one looks at the vast array of events pictured in the seals,
trumpets, and vials, it is obvious that they must cover far more than seven
years. Because the Revelation concerns the events in which the church
would be involved for centuries, John “wept MUCH” because no man
could unseal the revelation. Why would he “weep MUCH” about a
revelation which concerned events 19 centuries ahead, and for a tiny seven
years only, and at which time the church would not be involved in the
events anyway, because they would be in heaven? Futurism destroys the
AIM of the Revelation.
(3) Chapter 4:1 is taken by futurists to refer to the rapture of the
church, at the Lord’s coming. It goes a long way from saying this, however,
for it is simply an invitation to John personally to come up, and watch the
Lion of Judah unseal the scrolls, thus unveiling the future events in which
John was so interested. Nothing whatever is said about the church “coming
up,” and it therefore has nothing to do with the rapture. Probably John
was there, not in body, but in Spirit, as in 1:10, and as Paul in 2 Cor. 12:4.
In fact 4:2 says so.
(4) One of the reasons most insisted on for the futurist view is the idea
that in Daniel’s 70 weeks prophecy, there is a gap of 19 centuries between
the 69th and 70th week; the whole church age. There is not a hint of such a
gap in Daniel. The theory carries over into the Revelation, and “the things
that are” is interpreted as the church age, with the seals, etc. coming after
that. Then, too, another stumbling-block to many is the day-for-a-year
interpretation of many prophecies. This is familiar, in the Bible. We find it
in Numbers 14:34, and Ezekiel chapter 4, and in all of Daniels’s time-
prophecies. The writer has a paper on Daniel’s prophecies where this is
demonstrated at length, which is available to those interested.
ORIGIN OF THE FUTURIST VIEW
(5) In the sixteenth century a Jesuit priest named Joseph Ribera
introduced the futurist interpretation. He was alarmed at the evangelicals
teaching that the Pope was the Anti-Christ, and that his persecuting of the
saints was fulfilling Revelation chapter 13 etc. He claimed that all the seals
were after the Rapture, so Anti-Christ would not even be revealed till then;
hence the Pope could not be fulfilling the prophecies in Revelation, in the
16th century. When Schofield produced his “Schofield Bible” and filled it
with futuristic notes, the evangelical world followed him. It is easy to see
why a Jesuit priest would welcome the futuristic idea.
A SYMBOLIC BOOK
The Revelation was given in symbols, not literally. Chapter 1:1 says
“He sent and SIGNIFIED it by His angel.” That is, he communicated


it in SIGNS. John uses this method in his Gospel, where, unlike the other
evangelists, he selects about eight miracles of Jesus, and uses them to
illustrate spiritual truths. For example, after the feeding of the 5000, he
tells of Jesus teaching about the Bread which came down from heaven,
which, if we eat of it, gives eternal life. It is manifest that there is a high
degree of symbology in the Revelation. Stars are said to fall on the earth.
Most stars are much larger than the earth. For instance, the sun, which is
an average star, has a million times the volume of the earth. Imagine what
would be left of the earth if a star really fell on it. But regard the sun, moon
and stars as the luminaries in the political realm, the kings and rulers of
nations, and to “fall to the earth” is simply a graphic way of describing
their fall from power. In 9:1 a star fell from heaven, and was given the key
of the abyss. Of what use would a key be to a literal star? The sun ‘turns
black as sackcloth of hair.” This would only happen if the sun lost its great
temperature, millions of degrees Celsius. Unthinkable! But God has warned
us that it is all given in “signs,” so let us believe Him, and seek the
meaning. Mostly it is not difficult. The Lord said of Judah, “Her sun is
gone down while it was yet day” (Jer. 15:9), meaning her kingdom came to
an end suddenly, prematurely, not fading away slowly after enjoying a full
“day,” like a gradual sunset. It is more LITERALLY expressed in verse 4,
“I will cause them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth.”
Similarly in Amos 8:9.
CHAPTERS 4 AND 5
Just a brief word, concerning chapters 4 and 5, before we begin to
look at the seals etc. The four “living ones” (not “beasts” as it is
incorrectly translated) with the strange heads, represent the saints. This is
clear from 5:8-9 where they sing to Christ, “Thou wast slain, and hast
redeemed us . . .” Only the saints can sing this. The 24 elders are also a part
of the same community. It is all based on the ancient camp of Israel. The
tribes were arranged in four groups of three, under the respective banners
of a lion, an ox, a man, and an eagle. Likewise there were 24 courses of the
priesthood in Israel (1 Chron. 24:1-18). They are all, therefore, a symbolic
picture of the saints, who are spiritual Israel, the true Israel. They are an
enlightened community, for they are “full of eyes within” (4:8).
The “book” which needed to be unsealed probably consisted of seven
scrolls, wound on a stick, each one being sealed with its own seal. The first
scroll would be wound on top, and when its seal was loosed, it could be
spread out, and read; with the seal of the second scroll now exposed, ready
to be loosed. The scrolls were written “within and on the backside.” As the
scrolls deal with the warfare between God and Satan, Christ and
Antichrist, Zion and Babylon, etc. probably the things relating to the
church were on the “inside,” and Antichrist etc. on the outside, or back.
The whole programme of events is very much concerning the saints in this
age, for they (the living ones and elders) all have harps (for praise) and
“vials full of odours, which are THE PRAYER OF SAINTS.” They are a
praying community, so it is during the days of their pilgrimage, not after
the rapture.
The statement that “the Lion of the tribe of Judah,” the slain and
risen Lamb of God, prevailed to open the seven-sealed book is tantamount
to saying that He not only unveiled the future things written therein for the
encouragement of His “servants” (or love-slaves), but that He is actually
controlling and superintending these events as they take place. All nations


and events are in His hands, and under His control. He is the great
Controller of history, and as we study each of these events in turn, we are
encouraged with the knowledge that He is at the helm, guiding them with
unerring hands, to bring about His ultimate purpose. We need to
remember this, and not to allow the events to become our obsession, but to
keep Him in the central place, marvelling at His prowess, and glorifying
Him in it all.
STRUCTURE OF THE REVELATION
A careful perusal of Revelation shows that when the seventh seal is
opened, seven angels with trumpets begin to sound (8:2). Connecting 7:1-3
and 8:2 and 8:13, it is clear that the first four were wind-trumpets, and the
last three were woe-trumpets. The seventh seal thus includes these seven
trumpets. The seventh trumpet (11:15) consisted of seven vials of wrath
(15:1 and 16:1). Hence we can represent the programme in a diagram thus:
As Ephesians 6:10-12 shows, the church’s warfare is not against
human individuals or governments, but against Satan and his hosts in the
spiritual realm. Nonetheless, human governments are often Satan’s
instruments, and in the warfare he has maintained against the saints, he has
often used human governments as his instruments. When Peter tells us that
“your adversary the devil walketh about, seeking whom he may devour,”
he was speaking basically of the afflictions they were experiencing at the
hands of pagan Rome under Nero.
John was well aware of this warfare, for when he wrote the
Revelation, he was in exile on the Isle of Patmos, banished by the Roman
emperor Domitian. This no doubt quickened his desire to know what the
sealed future held for God’s people. The Lamb opening the seals is a
graphic way of saying that Christ is in full control over the future. He had
the right, or was worthy, to open the seals, because He was slain for us, and
thus the destiny or future of all men is in His hands.
CHAPTER 6
Seal No. 1 A.D. 96-180.
The arena of the conflict was the Roman Empire. It was the fourth
beast of Daniel chapter 7. In the first seal, one of the four living ones (the
saints), invites John to “Come and see.” The saints are thus identified with
the warfare. “And I saw, and behold a white horse: and he that sat on him
had a bow; and a crown was given unto him: and he went forth, conquering
and to conquer.”
The white horse speaks of righteousness and peace. In chapter 19
Christ and His saints are on white horses. Not only so, but the rider is
wearing a crown. There are two kinds of crown in Revelation. There is the
Stephan, or wreath, given to overcomers, similar to the Olympic Games
winners of ancient times. Jesus promises it to His followers who overcome,
in 2:10. The 24 elders wear them, in 4:4. Christ himself wears one, in 14:4.
They are for those on the Lord’s side, not the enemy. The rider, of the


first seal, is wearing a STEPHAN, or overcomer’s crown. He is therefore
NOT antichrist. The other crown is the diadem, the hereditary crown of
kings. Christ will one day be crowned with many of these, according to
Revelation 19:12, for He will take the crowns of ALL kings, when “the
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of His
Christ” (11:15).
Taking the horses in the first four seals to represent the Roman
Empire, we would look for a time of peace immediately after John wrote.
The rider is primarily the one astride the Empire, the Emperor. And there
WAS such a time, during which a succession of emperors, called the
Antonines, ruled; from Nerva to Marcus Aurelius, 96 to 180 A.D. It was
called “the golden age of the Antonines,” because it was an era of peace
and prosperity. It was the high point of the history of the Roman Empire.
But God gave peace for a special reason. Peaceful times help the spread of
the gospel (1 Tim. 2:1-4), and at this period there was ANOTHER RIDER
OF THE HORSE, behind the scenes, engaged in spreading the Good News.
He was the white-clad stephaned Bowman, in victorious warfare against
the forces of darkness, in particular against the Paganism which was
enthroned in the empire, which not only kept mankind in darkness, but
actively and grievously persecuted the Christians. But the Bowman “went
forth, conquering and to conquer.” Ultimately Paganism fell, as we shall
see.
Seal No. 2 A.D. 183-211
The next horse was red, indicating bloodshed. The rider had “a great
sword” (machaira a dagger, as distinct from a rhompaia or sword in
T. 16). The machaira was worn by the emperor and his officials, governors,
magistrates, etc. It was a badge of office. In bidding us to obey them, Paul
says “he beareth not the machaira in vain” (Rom. 13:4). This period of the
empire was thus one in which many were put to death by the officials of the
realm. It was a time of riots, and resulting massacres. No doubt many of
the riots were due to unjust rules, for some of the worst of the emperors
ruled during this period. Yet God, in His wisdom, allowed even the wrath
of men to praise Him, for many of those slain had been oppressors of the
Christians during the period of the first seal. Even senators were not
immune, for Commodus, a particularly brutal emperor, murdered many
senators with his “machaira,” and was himself murdered.
Seal No. 3 A.D. 212-235
The third horse was black, and pictures a time of darkness and misery.
The rider bears a pair of balances, and is weighing out the food to the
people at exorbitant prices. It was a time of scarcity, but it was scarcity due
to the deliberate oppressive rule of the emperor. The words “see thou hurt
not the oil and the wine” literally mean “do not unjustly by.” Food supply
was threatened due to unjust taxation, was the meaning. It was a time of
such oppressive taxation that many were forced off their farms, and great
areas were left uncultivated, the inhabitants crowding to the cities for
sustenance. The exorbitant taxation, raised to support the army in
extravagance, because the wicked emperors needed a strong army to ensure
their own survival on the throne, was worsened by the corruption and greed
of the “tax-farmers,” such as Zacchaeus apparently used to be before he
met Jesus. One of the emperors during this time, Alexander Severus, struck
a coin showing himself with a balance in his hand.
Seal No. 4 A.D. 235-303
The last horse was a “pale green” chloros a sickly death hue.
The name of the rider (the emperor) was “Death.” How fitting this name
was. Of the twenty-one emperors during this period, only one,


Numerianus, died a natural death. Fourteen were murdered, four were
killed in battle, one committed suicide, and one died of a plague. To wear the
imperial purple was to sign your death warrant. But the riders also
INFLICTED death. They had power over “the fourth part of the earth” to
kill. At this period of the Roman Empire, according to the celebrated
historian Gibbon, the Empire was divided into four prefectures. They
were, from west to east, Britain, Gaul and Spain; Italy and Africa;
Illyricum and Macedonia; and Egypt to Persia. Of these four, the arena of
the riders of the four horses was the Italian portion. It was the seat of the
pagan empire, and all the events recorded above took place in it. Thus the
emperors of the fourth seal had power to kill, over this fourth part of the
Roman world (or earth). Many, including nobility, were slaughtered.
Maximin was especially cruel, venting his rage against the pagan
authorities, till even Rome itself rebelled, resulting in much slaughter.
Famine was followed by pestilence in the great plague, lasting from 253 to
268 A.D. The empire was beginning to fall apart. Raids by the barbarian
tribes (Goths, Franks, Alemanni “the beasts of the earth”?) added to
the loss of life.
The first four seals were each introduced by one of the four “living
ones.” Thus during all this time, the bloodless conquest by the Bowman
was going on. However, the fifth seal brings a change. It is not introduced
by a “living one.”
Seal No. 5 A.D. 303-311
The reason this seal was not introduced by one of “the living ones” is
probably because it was directed particularly against them. They were the
victims. Right through the four seals, they had been persecuted, especially
during the fourth seal. The emperors Decius, Maximin, Gallus, and
Valerian were particularly severe. But none of it equalled the ferocity of the
persecution under the fifth seal, started by Diocletian in 303 A.D. It
continued under his successors, till 313 A.D. The fifth seal pictures their
souls under the altar of sacrifices, when they had been slain for the word of
God, and for the testimony which they held, crying out to God, and asking
when He would avenge their blood on their cruel Pagan persecutors.
Retribution was not far away. They were told to rest for a while, till the rest
of their brethren should be slain.
Seal No. 6 A.D. 311-324
The answer to their prayers is the subject of the sixth seal. It opens
with a ‘great earthquake.’ The sun is blackened, the moon became as
blood, and the stars of heaven fell to the earth. The heaven departed as a
scroll, and the great men of the earth cry for mercy, for the great day of the
lamb’s wrath is come. This, of course, is not a literal picture, for reasons
noted earlier. We must seek the MEANING of the symbols. The answer is
to be found in the political heavens. The great luminary in the Roman
heaven, the sun, was the Emperor; the moon was the Pagan priesthood;
and the stars were all the greater and lesser rulers and authorities in the
realm. Paganism, the worship of idols (particularly the emperors, dead and
alive) was the religion of Rome, and the empire was a combination of this
military and ecclesiastical power.
At work in these pagan surroundings was the Christian church. Its
testimony of the true God and His Son inevitably brought it into conflict
with paganism, which sought to exterminate it with sword and fire. But the
white-clothed Bowman was about to emerge victorious. Paganism was
about to be hurled ignominiously from the Roman ‘heaven.’ At this time,
the Empire had been divided into two, with Galerius emperor in the East,
and Constantius the Western emperor at Rome. On his death in 306 A.D.,
Constantine “the great” ascended the western throne. He was a Christian,


and immediately set about to “Christianise” the empire. In the West,
Maxentius revolted, and was defeated by Constantine at the battle of
Milvian Bridge in 312 A.D. and the forces of paganism were put to the
sword. Finally in 323 A.D. Constantine defeated the Eastern Emperor
Licinius at the battle of Chrysopolis, and Constantine became the sole
emperor of the Roman Empire. The pagan ‘Sun’ had been extinguished,
became “black as sackcloth of hair” and the pagan ‘moon,’ the priesthood
and ecclesiastical authorities, expired in ‘blood,’ at the swords of
Constantine’s armies. Pagans were turned out of office, Christianity
became the religion of the empire, with drastic changes everywhere. It was
“a GREAT (politico-ecclesiastical) earthquake.”
There was wild rejoicing among the Christians. To them it seemed as if
the Kingdom of God had come, and the Lamb’s final wrath had been
executed. Hence the words in Revelation 6:16-17, and in 12:10 as we shall
see later. But the victory was more apparent than real. The Christianity
which Constantine had espoused was Catholic. For many years it had
grown in influence, and in many of its beliefs it was simply paganism in
another dress. The faithful Christians, who adhered to the teachings of the
New Testament, would have no fellowship with it. And when the Catholic
Church became the woman clothed with the sun of imperial favour, with
the pagan moon under her feet (12:1), she soon began to persecute the real
Church with greater zeal than the pagans had. But it was a victory for
nominal Christianity against paganism.
CHAPTER 7
This cleavage among the Christians necessitated the “sealing”
operation in Chapter 7. A seal is a mark of identification, and the object in
Chapter 7 is to thus mark those who truly belong to God. Having His seal
in their foreheads is to have a mind which is truly His, having given full
assent to His truth. Those who “have obeyed from the heart that form of
doctrine which was delivered you.” (Rom. 6:17). There were now in the
world two classes of ‘Christians,’ and it was God’s plan to bring judgement
upon one class, while protecting the faithful ones from those judgements.
The judgements were to proceed from the barbarian tribes in the north,
who would ravage the Western Empire, and from the Mohammedan and
Turkish hordes, who would do the same in the East. These judgements are
the subject of six of the seven trumpets which would begin to sound after
the opening of the seventh seal. The sealing period lasted from 324 till 396
A.D. The sealing was not in the “heaven” of the Empire where the
Catholic party was enjoying imperial favour, but in the “earth, sea and
trees,” where the faithful persecuted remnant was found.
There were to be 12,000 sealed from each of the tribes of Israel.
Remembering that this is a book of symbol suggests immediately that they
are not natural Israel, but Spiritual Israel. To take it as referring to natural
Israel is to create serious problems. First, the Revelation concerns spiritual
Israel, the Church, not the natural Jews. Secondly, why is the tribe of Dan
left out? Would there be none at all saved in this tribe? And would there be
exactly 12,000 in each of the others, no more and no less? Surely it is a
figure, based on the nation of Israel. Twelve tribes, squared and multiplied
by 1000 to indicate a great number; a symbolic number, indicating a vast
number of “spiritual” Israelites. This interpretation eliminates all
problems. In this case, the great multitude, of all nations, and the 144,000
are the same people. In Revelation 14:1 the 144,000 are seen again. They
sing a song which no one else could know. They are without fault. If they
do not represent the whole of the redeemed, they are an elite class, above
all the rest of the saints, and they live and reign with Christ for 1000 years
(ch. 20). All of this seems hardly likely to apply to a company of


natural Jews who were not ready for the rapture, and were converted in a
short 3!/2-year period after the rapture.
CHAPTER 8
Seal No. 7 (324 A.D. till the Millennium)
Firstly there was silence in heaven for half an hour. Of course, this
could be taken to mean simply a very short space of time. But it COULD be
a real time period. There is a decorum about the time periods of the
Revelation. Half an hour is a reasonable time if you are standing waiting
for something to happen. And in Chapter 11,3 /i days is a reasonable time
to expect dead bodies might be permitted to remain unburied while their
enemies triumph over them. But to convert those times to the actual
periods in history might require different treatments. All we ask is that each
is treated on its merits, and the overall picture taken into consideration,
before rejecting them. And remember, that the suggestions given herein in
each case are those which were given by the evangelical believers at the
times the different events took place. They are NOT a modern invention.
So, with regard to the half-hour, one suggestion has been that as an hour is
the twelfth part of a day, on a day-for-a-year principle, this would mean a
month, a twelfth part of a year; half an hour would be fifteen days.
However, as the event turned out, from the time Constantine became sole
emperor, in 324 A.D. there was a period of peace, or silence, in the political
“heaven” for 14 years a period of freedom from war. If we double up
on the day-for-a-year principle, the half-hour becomes, not 15 days, but 15
years. Actually it was “about” half an hour, or 14 years of peace from 323
till 337 A.D.
This short period of peace was followed by the angel taking the
incense, with the prayers of the persecuted saints, offering it to God, and
then casting it into the earth with fire from the altar. In other words, God’s
answer to the prayers of the persecuted saints (persecuted, this time, not by
the ousted pagans, but by the Catholic church sitting enthroned in power)
is what followed the pouring of the altar fire into the earth (8:1-5). The
result was “voices, and thunderings, and lightnings, and an earthquake.”
When Constantine died in 337 A.D. the silence ceased. Assassinations,
wars between his sons for the throne, wars with the Persians and the
barbarian tribes, shook the empire. “And an earthquake.” The
earthquakes in Revelation are fascinating. There was the “great”
earthquake in 6:12 that shook the pagan world. In 11:13 there was another
“great” earthquake, fulfilled in the French Revolution, which has affected
the world ever since. Finally, in 16:18, when Jesus comes, there will be a
“great earthquake,” greater than any before or since. It will shake all the
kingdoms of men, and they will become Christ’s. The descriptions of all
these earthquakes are “spot-on.” So, in the one before us in 8:5, the
earthquake happened in the time of the Emperor Julian (360-363 A.D.). He
grew up a Catholic, but when he became emperor, he turned to paganism,
and is known as “Julian the Apostate.” He destroyed many Catholic
temples, and reinstated pagan priests and officials. But he only reigned for
three years, so the effects were relatively small, and his successor
immediately undid all his reforms. It was only “an earthquake” not a
“great” one.
The seven angels then prepared themselves to sound. This consisted in
the northern barbarian tribes establishing themselves in the eastern
extremities of the empire, ready for their onslaughts on the west, where the
trumpets were to sound. During all this period, from 323 till 396 A.D. the
Catholics were stepping up their persecution, and developing their system


of idols, and pagan festivals. For all of these things, the seven trumpets
were soon to sound against them.
Ist Trumpet 395-410 A.D. against “the earth”
The emperor of the east. Arcadius, made Alaric the Goth ruler of East
Illyricum, and for four years he prepared to attack the West. About 400
A.D. he began his march, and ravaged Tuscany, Florence, and Gaul. In
408 A.D. he marched on Rome itself, and after a three-year siege, Rome
fell, in 410 A.D.
2nd Trumpet 429-477 A.D. against “the sea”
Generic and his Vandals conquered the coasts of Spain, Gaul, Italy
and Africa. He slaughtered multitudes of Catholics who opposed him, and
delivered the Donatist believers from Catholic persecution. In 455 his fleet
sacked Italy and Rome. A huge fleet of 1113 ships came against him, which
he destroyed with fire-ships.
3rd Trumpet 450-453 A.D. against “the rivers and the fountains of waters”
Attila and the Huns. His name Apsinthos means “undrinkable.” It
was the name of a river in Illyria, from whence he came. He had ravaged
the east since 433, and in 450 A.D. he came against the west. His activities
were in the area of rivers and fountains of waters beneath the Alpine snows
in the north of Italy. He blazed briefly like a meteorite; caused flight,
slaughter and slavery and made the waters of life undrinkable and bitter for
the inhabitants. After three short but terrible years he died, but not before
Rome bought him off with a huge ransom.
4th Trumpet 476 A.D. against “the sun, moon, and stars”
In 475 A.D. Romulus Augustulus became emperor in the West. He
was the last of the western emperors. He was deposed and banished in 476
A.D. Odoacer, a barbarian chief, then ruled under Zeno, the Eastern
emperor. Odoacer was defeated by the Ostrogoth King Theodoric, who
became King of Italy, independent of the East. Thus the 6th (the Imperial)
head of the dragon was slain (13:3), and Theodoric reigned as the 7th (the
Ostrogothic, Regal) head, in 493 A.D.
In these trumpets, we notice that the first dealt with the “third part”
of trees and grass; the second with the third part of the sea, ships, and
marine life; and the third, the third part of the rivers and fountains, while
in the fourth, the third part of the sun, moon and stars were smitten. Since
the days of Constantine, the rulership of the empire was divided into three
sections: the West (Gaul, Spain, Britain, Italy, Africa); Illyria; and Asia
and Egypt. The first four trumpets were against the Western third. Hence
to say, in the fourth trumpet, a third part of the sun, moon, and stars were
smitten, and ceased to shine, is to say that in this western third, the political
sun (the emperor), the moon (the Catholic hierarchy), and the stars (all
degrees of ruling officials in the realm) ceased to function. So simple, and
so obvious! Thus, the work of the first four (wind) trumpets against the
idolaters of the Western Empire, was finished in the extinguishing of their
“sun, moon and stars.”
The last three of the trumpets are called Woe trumpets. Devastating as
were the effects of the wind trumpets upon the Western third of the
Empire, the Woe trumpets were even worse, hence their name (8:13). These
Woe trumpets were also unleashed upon a third of the Empire (9:15), but
this time it was the Eastern third. With fanatical fury, the Arab Muslim
scourge, followed by waves of Turkish invaders, descended upon it.


CHAPTER 9
sth Trumpet 632-932 A.D. (FIRST WOE)
Early in the seventh century Mahomet began to have his dreams of
being a prophet, and to write the Koran. At first his Arabian brethren
regarded him as a fanatic, and persecuted him, forcing him to flee to
Medina, the great Hejira, in 622, which is the first year in the Muslim
calendar. For ten years he harangued and fought his fellow Arabians, till in
632 all were subject to his command, and devoted to Islam. In that year
they poured out of the abyss of Arabia. The star (Mohammed) having
fallen from heaven on to the earth of the Byzantine empire, they poured
out like hordes of locusts. Arabia, the sun-scorched country, remote from
the civilisation of the Mediterranean, is a fitting type of the abyss which
will be eternal home of Satan and his angels. Its only outlet to the
Mediterranean countries of the Eastern Empire was through the Ghor, the
deepest depression on the earth’s surface, starting at the valley of the
Jordan, and dropping to 2500 feet below sea level at the Dead Sea,
continuing on into Africa as the Rift Valley. It was out of this deep
depression, or abyss, that the Muslim armies emerged. They were followers
of their one God, Allah, and hated all idolatry. They offered the Catholics
of the Byzantine empire, who were worshipping images and departed
“saints,” the Koran, tribute, or the sword. For a period of five months, or
150 days, that is, 150 years, they “tormented” (9:5) the East with these
alternatives, like the locusts whose native home is in Arabia, and who
appear in spring and devastate the country for five months. This was
followed by another “five months,” or 150 years of “hurting” the hapless
idolaters of the Eastern empire. For 300 years in all, their terrible scourge
continued, till 932 A.D. They did not overthrow the empire, but merely
subdued, punished, and “Islamised” it. Men would have welcomed
“political” death, the extinction of the empire, to escape the “torment,”
but it was not to be (vs. 6). It was reserved for the 6th trumpet to bring to
an end the Catholic empire in the east. They not only tormented the eastern
empire, but the west (where the empire had already been extinguished) also;
and soon they were in control right across Europe. For most of this 300
years, their throne, or seat of empire, was at Bagdad, ruled by the Caliphs,
or successors of “the prophet.” Well did they earn their name Apollyon, or
Destroyer, from Mohammed down through all the Caliphs. The
description of their armies in 9:7-10 is vivid and accurate, with their yellow
turbans (like gold crowns), bearded faces, and long flowing hair. Their
steel armour, their cavalry, are seen in verse 9, and the “stings in their
tails” is a reference to the “Saracen fire,” a fearsome incendiary weapon, a
precursor to modern firearms. In 933 A.D. the independent Persian-
Moslem dynasty of the Bowides stripped the Caliph at Bagdad of his
secular and military power, and the sth trumpet came to an end.
6th Trumpet 1062-1453 A.D. (Second “Woe”)
The period between the sth and 6th trumpets was occupied in the four
angels bound at the great river Euphrates preparing the four waves of
Turkish invaders, ready to begin their “second woe” against the East. In
1062 Togrul Beg, a Seljukian Turk, defeated the Bowides, restored the
power of the Cailphate, whose daughter he married. His nephew Alp
Arslan, crossed the Euphrates in 1063, and began the first invasion, which
lasted till 1092. For about the next two centuries the Crusades intervened,
in which, of course, the Saracen Muslims were arrayed against the Catholic
Byzantine crusaders. The second wave of invaders were the Moguls and
Tartars, under the Khans. They conquered most of Europe, and ruled till
1304. The third wave came forth under the cruel Tamerlane, King of the
Moguls. It lasted from 1326 till 1405. The fourth and last were the Ottoman


Turks. From 1421 till 1453 when Constantinople fell to their cannons, they
slaughtered and plundered, finally setting up their Capital in
Constantinople itself, where they have been ever since. In these waves of
conquest, gunpowder was used for the first time, and it is graphically
described in 9:17-19. Thus the Woe trumpets extinguished the last remnant
of the Roman Empire, the Byzantine. The “trumpet” lasted from 1062 till
1453 A.D., a period of 391 years. Verse 15 said it would be “for an hour,
and a day, and a month, and year.” This adds up to 391 days and one
hour, which at one day for a year equals 391 years and one month, and the
period was fulfilled exactly. The large number of soldiers employed, 200
million, has to be taken over the whole period.
Omitting chapter ten, since it deals with the seven thunders, about
which John was not permitted to write, we turn to chapter 11.
CHAPTER 11
“And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel stood,
saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that
worship therein. But the court which is without the temple, leave out and
measure it not, for it is given unto the gentiles; and the holy city shall they
tread underfoot forty and two months.”
In chapter 21:15, the New Jerusalem was measured with a golden reed.
This is the company of the redeemed, in glory, all tribulation past. But in
chapter 11:1 the reed used is like unto a rod, a rhabdos, about which Paul
once wrote “Shall I come unto you with a ‘rhabdos,’ or in love, and in the
spirit of meekness?” (1 Cor. 4:21). A rhabdos speaks of affliction,
chastening, tribulation. In 11:1 the temple is to be measured for affliction.
Again it refers to the saints, God’s Temple, but it is the time of tribulation.
And it is to last for 42 months, or 1260 days, or, as we by now expect, 1260
years is the measure of the days of its affliction. During this time the
temple, or holy city, spiritual Jerusalem, is afflicted, trodden underfoot by
the gentiles, who constitute the unmeasured outer court (no affliction for
them at this stage); and the witnesses prophesy IN SACKCLOTH. The
witnesses in sackcloth are the temple under the measuring rod. There are
two witnesses. Who are they? Verse 4 obviously takes us back to Zechariah
chapter 4 and the candlesticks. There, two olive trees feed a single
candlestick with oil. In Revelation there are two candlesticks, each with its
olive tree. The difference is not accidental. Romans 11:16-26 prepares us
for the fact that there is a good olive tree, and a wild one. The saved and
the unsaved. So it transpired during the long 1260 years of tribulation. The
saints maintained a glowing testimony for the Lord, despite persecution,
but they were “helped” by groups of unsaved people who were appalled at
the cruel persecution, and often arrayed themselves in battle on behalf of
the unresisting saints. As 12:16 puts it, “The earth helped the woman.”
Two separate candlesticks, “the earth,” and “the woman.”
When did the persecution begin? From the time Constantine ascended
the throne of the Western Empire at Rome after his defeat of his pagan
rival Maxentius, at the battle of Milvian Bridge. The Catholic party, being
then in power, not only dealt with the remnants of pagan activity, but
persecuted the dissenting saints also, led by Constantine himself. Verses 5
and 6 tell of the scorching testimony of the saints, and the militant might of
their helpers (the earth) against the persecutors.
From this date, 312 A.D., 1260 years brings us to 1572, in which year
took place the awful “massacre of the Huguenots,” the faithful Christians
of France. It marked the end of their “sackcloth witnessing.” Not long
afterwards, in 1598, the Edict of Nantes protected them from further


slaughter. Peter Jurieu, a Huguenot pastor, writing in the year 1600, wrote,
in “The Accomplishment of the Scripture Prophecies” his conviction that
1572 marked the end of the 1260 year witnessing period. At the end of it,
the “beast that ascendeth out of the abyss” made war against them, which
resulted in their death. It came about thus. In 1685 the government enacted
the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, and they set about immediately to put
an end to the witnesses. Under the infamous Cardinal Richelieu, dissenters
were forbidden to hold meetings for worship. Multitudes were subjected to
unspeakable tortures, imprisonment, and death. Great numbers fled the
country. The witnesses were, for all practical purposes, “dead,” their
witness silenced. Their dead bodies were to lie in the street of the great city,
which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, where also our Lord was
crucified, for “three and a half days.” Spiritually, the evil city of the
Apocalypse is called Babylon, and in chapter 17 it is identified as the City
of Rome. It is not Jerusalem. The city of Rome, by decree of the Emperor
Caracalla, was co-extensive with the Roman Empire. Therefore,
Apocalyptically speaking, Jesus was crucified in Rome, for Jerusalem was
part of the empire. His death was carried out by the soldiers of the Roman
Emperor, “The strong bulls of Bashan,” of Psalm 22.
The Roman Empire was later divided into ten parts (the ten horns) as
we shall see in chapter 12. Of these, France was one of the principal. It was
therefore “the tenth part of the city” (or empire) of Rome (11:13), which
was soon to fall, in retribution for their persecution. For 3‘A days, the
witnesses lay unburied. Not literally. Their witness was silenced for this
time, while the persecutors rejoiced over them (vs. 10). Even the Pope
rejoiced publicly.
In 1572 a medal was struck, with Pope Gregory XIII on one side, and
on the other the Catholic church rejoicing over the slain Huguenots. A
Pastor Bicheno (Baptist) of Newbury, England, wrote in a pamphlet in
1793 that he believed that 3 A days were lunar days of years, and actually
105 years, so that he said the “resurrection” of the witnesses took place 105
years after 1685 (the Recovation of the Edict of Nantes, when the witnesses
were finally “killed”), that is, in 1790. He took a lunar period (a twelfth
part of a Jewish year of 360 days), as 30 days. Three and a half of these is 105
days, which on the day for a year principle is 105 years. He saw his own
times, in the Apocalypse. I agree with him.
Verses 11-13 tell of their resurrection and the resulting fear; their
ascension to “heaven,” followed by a “great earthquake,” the falling of
the tenth part of the city, the slaughter of 7000 “names of men,” the
“fright” of the remnant, and the glorifying of God. It all occurred in the
French Revolution. The monarchy and Catholic church were completely
overthrown (the “great earthquake”) in France which was proclaimed a
Republic in September, 1792; the laws against dissenters were abrogated, so
that they were free to witness; the “earth” (lovers of freedom) that had
“helped” them, ascended to the “heaven” of the political realm in the
newly-formed Parliament, which was composed mainly of the previously
down-trodden classes. A great political earthquake took place, in the name
of freedom, equality, and fraternity, which has changed the world. The
country of France, once the brightest star in the Catholic firmament, “fell”
from being a Catholic power. Innumerable titles and privileges of
aristocracy (“names of men”) were abolished. In the reaction against the
aristocracy, the new government instituted “the Reign of Terror,” in
which many were affrighted, from the king down, and on May 7, 1794,
Robespierre proposed, and had carried, the two following affirmations as
the policy of the new France: “The French people acknowledges the
existence of the Supreme Being, and the immortality of the soul.” “It
acknowledges that the worship most worthy of the Supreme Being is the
practice of the duties of man.” On June 8 a National festival was held in


honour of the Supreme Being. They “gave glory to the God of
Heaven.”
At this point, in both East and West, the “second woe,” or 6th
trumpet, was finished, and 11:15 announces the blowing of the 7th
trumpet, which will ultimately usher in the Kingdom of God, after the
outpouring of the seven vials. Meanwhile, chapters 12 and 13 give further
details covering the events of the 1260 years. It is significant, too, that the
“witnessing” has proceeded with unprecedented vigour since “the
resurrection of the witnesses.” About 1790 William Carey, “father” of
Modern Missions, commenced his missionary career in India. In 1804 the
British and Foreign Bible Society was formed, and soon missionary
endeavour was greatly enlarged.
CHAPTER 12
Chapters 11 to 13 are obviously “insets,” as distinct from the main
programme of seals, trumpets, and vials. They fit into the general scheme
and 11:14 shows where. The end of verse 13 brings us to the end of “the
second woe,” or 6th trumpet, as pointed out earlier. From the fact that the
1260 days, or 42 months appear in all three chapters, it is clear that they are
dealing with related time-periods, and that they simply approach the same
events from a different viewpoint; hence, to get a full picture, we need to
put the three sets of details together.
“And there appeared a great wonder in heaven; a woman clothed with
the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve
stars.” Reading from verse 1 to verse 5 would seem at first glance to refer
to the birth of Jesus, with Mary as the woman, Jesus the man-child, and
the dragon as Herod. But this can hardly be, for they are “things shortly to
come to pass,” not past events. And the woman IMMEDIATELY AFTER
HIS BIRTH flees into the wilderness, for 1260 years. Hence it is
impossible to interpret the birth of the man-child as something IN THE
PAST (before 96 A.D., when John wrote the Revelation), and interpret the
1260 day persecution as something occurring many centuries later after the
rapture of the church. Futurists should consider this seriously.
We suggest the woman is the church. Beginning as the chaste wife of
Christ, it is soon evident that this did not continue. “The mystery of
iniquity doth ALREADY work,” wrote Paul in 2 Thess. 2:7. As early as
Acts 6 dissensions were beginning to appear in the church, and in Acts 15 it
had developed so alarmingly that a Church Conference was convened, to
deal with the Judaising heresy. John writes of some “who went out from
us,” and of the gnostic heresy. Peter wrote of grievous wolves coming after
his death. The cleavage became very apparent in the second and succeeding
centuries. By the beginning of the fourth century the Catholic element was
emerging as the majority, and most influential party. Eventually it
“brought forth” Constantine, the first Christian emperor, who was,
apocalyptically speaking, “caught up to God, and to His throne.” That is,
he ascended to the headship of both the church and the empire. He presided
over the early church councils, such as the famous Council of Nice in 325
A.D. We suggest he was the “man-child,” and when he became Emperor
of Rome, in 312 A.D., he took the church up with him into the place of
power. She was then the “woman clothed with the sun,” with the ousted
pagan “moon” or priesthood, under her feet. What of the 12 stars?
When John was given the Revelation, the twelth emperor of Rome was
reigning. John had been banished to the Isle of Patmos by the 11th
(Domitian), and now Nerva was reigning on the imperial throne. From
Augustus to Nerva (27 B.C. to 98 A.D.) there were just twelve. Since the


“sun” and “moon” are imperial powers, the stars undoubtedly are also. In
John’s day, therefore, the Empire is pictured as consisting of 12 stars, and
this becomes its identification for the years to follow. She (the woman) now
has the rights and prerogatives of the 12 starred Empire.
For approximately 280 “days” of years she had been pregnant with
this “man-child.” From about 32 A.D. till 312 A.D. All based on the
normal period of pregnancy. The last ten years of this pregnancy were years
of extreme persecution, for the Pagan “moon,” angry at the challenge to
its power by the Catholic party, launched its bitterest persecution against
real and professed Christians, under Diocletian, and his successor, from
303 to 313 A.D. They were the “birth-pangs” that brought forth the man-
child. The dragon-power not only persecuted the church, but it stood ready
to devour her child as soon as it was born. The first great attempt to destroy
Constantine was made by Maxentius, at the battle of Milvian Bridge in 312
A.D. Constantine was victorious, and became emperor and protector of
the church, thus being born as “the man of sin” (2 Thess. 2:3). Paganism,
“that which hindered” his revelation, had been “taken away” and the man
of sin revealed. The contest went on, until finally Licinius, Emperor in the
East, was defeated by Constantine at Chrysopolis in 323 A.D. Thus the
dragon was “cast out of heaven.” Paganism was dethroned. Michael and
his angels, of whom Constantine and his armies were a type, in uprooting
Paganism, were victorious. This is not to say that there was not a time when
Satan, the power behind the pagan Dragon, was cast out of heaven
literally. He was, but it was long before Apocalyptic times.
The Dragon’s tail, in the last crisis of his defeat, “drew a third part of
the stars of heaven, and did cast them to the earth.” This is obviously not
literal, but the fact is that the last crisis of Paganism was the defeat of
Licinius, the Eastern Emperor in 323 A.D. This was the eastern “’third” of
the empire, into which it was divided at that time. The “head” of the
Dragon had been in Rome, and its “tail” at Nicomedia, the seat of the
Eastern Emperor. All of the pagan degrees of rulers (the stars) went down
with Licinius.
This “great red (pagan) dragon” with seven heads and ten horns is
seen in all three of these chapters. It did not cease to exist when Constantine
defeated it, because the Catholic empire, which displaced it, proved to be
about as “pagan” as its predecessor. In a later phase, in 13:11, it appears as
a beast which had “two horns like a lamb (seeming to be Christian), and he
spake as a dragon (pagan).” Hence, although one of Constantine’s early
Edicts was the Edict of Milan, in which he promised freedom of religion, he
almost immediately excluded from this, the dissenters from Catholicism,
that is, the real Christians, and began persecuting them. This explains why
the woman, clothed with the sun, is immediately seen fleeing into the
wilderness. The Catholic aspect of the woman was in power, but the
spiritual “woman” was persecuted. The devil (the pagan dragon) though
cast out into the earth, dethroned from power, was still operating in
Constantine, and persecuted the woman for the same period of “times,
times, and half a time.” This is 3 I A “times” or years, of 360 days; that is
1260 days, or years. She was given two wings of a great eagle, to fly into the
wilderness. The eagle was the symbol of Rome, being on its shields etc. She
was protected in the “wings” or extremities of this empire, from the
dragon’s wrath. When the dragon tried to “drown” her in a “flood” of
persecution, “the earth,” or lovers of freedom, “helped” her, and
swallowed up the flood. She is described as “those which keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ,” in
contrast to the “woman” regaling herself in imperial splendour. In 12:3
the dragon is said to have the crowns on his heads.


CHAPTER 13
John says, “And I stood upon the sand of the sea, and saw a beast rise
up out of the sea, having seven heads and ten horns.” Clearly it is identical
with the dragon (12:3), except that its crowns are on its horns, instead of its
heads, and also upon its heads was “the name of blasphemy.” This is
pointing us to a later period of the Roman Empire, and it is well for us now
to do a little sorting out of these heads and horns, to avoid being confused.
17:10-11 tells us that the seven heads were seven hills (the hills of Rome), and
seven kings (or kingdoms). They were not contemporary kings, but
succeeded one another. Five were already gone, in John’s day, he was told,
and he was living in the time of the sixth head. From the founding of Rome
in 753 8.C., till John’s day, there had been five kinds of rulership of the
Empire. They were in order: 1. Kings 753-509.
2. Consuls.
3. Tribunes.
4. Senate.
5. Dictators.
And now, in John’s day there was the sixth, or Imperial Head, in which
Rome was ruled by Emperors, beginning with Augustus in 27 B.C. When
John wrote the Apocalypse, the 12th emperor, Nerva, was on the throne.
John was told that when the sixth head fell, it would be replaced by the
seventh, which would continue “for a short space.” The sixth head in the
West fell in 476 A.D., when the last Roman emperor, Romulus Augustulus,
was deposed by Odoacer, the barbarian, during the fourth trumpet. The
seventh head was Regal, consisting of the Barbarian Ostrogoths, who ruled
as kings “for a short space” in Rome, from 493 till 554 A.D. The rather
cryptic information given in 17:10-11 and 13:3 informs us that the sixth head
was not “killed” but “AS IT WERE wounded to death,” and that the
wound was later healed. In other words, after the seventh head period was
finished, the sixth head again came to power, and it was the “eighth head,
but it was of the seven,” being the sixth head restored. It was during the
period of the seventh head, that crowns began to appear on the horns, that is,
the ten kingdoms into which the Roman Empire was ultimately divided
began to appear. In Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, they are the ten toes of the
image. This beast “came up out of the sea.” We call it “the beast of the
sea.” The sea is the Mediterranean, that is, the scene of the Roman Empire.
It was followed by another beast “coming up out of the earth.” The “earth”
was that realm of Europe remote from the empire; where the barbarian
hordes dwelt, which from time to time invaded and plundered the empire.
The Franks and Germanic tribes from the “earth” section under
Charlemagne, revived “the Holy Roman Empire” in 800 A.D. so that their
emperors become the eighth head, which, being Imperial, like the sixth, was
“of the seven.” The “name of blasphemy” which was on the heads of the
“beast of the sea,” but not on the previous manifestations of the dragon, can
only refer to the fully developed alliance between the Emperors and the
Papacy, as 17:3 clearly shows. The head of the Catholic church became
known as the Pope during the time of the seventh head. In the “beast of the
sea” were combined all the elements of Nebuchadnezzar’s image. 13:2 says it
was like a Leopard (Greece Dan. 7); the feet of a bear (Medo-Persia); the
mouth of a Lion (Babylon); with the Dragon’s (the eastern Roman Emperor)
power, and seat, and great authority given to it. When Christ returns, this
will again be the case, as the image of Daniel chapter 2 stands upon its feet
against Christ, to be broken to pieces by Him.
The formation of the “beast of the sea,” or eighth head, came about
mainly after the seventh head (Ostrogothic) Kings, who were anti-Catholic,
passed from the scene in 554 A.D.
From then on, the papacy, with the help of the Eastern Emperor
Justinian began to increase in power; the combination of the Imperial


power and the papacy being the formation of the eighth head. That is, “the
Dragon gave him his power, and his seat, and great authority” (13:2). By
the end of the sixth century all of the horn kingdoms had formed, and one
by one they gave their support to the developing papacy. France did so
first, henceforth being known as “the eldest son of the church,” and the
Lombards were last. Later, three of them (the Vandals, Lombards and
Huns) were “plucked up by the roots,” by the “little horn” (the papacy),
(as shown in Daniel 7:8) and became his. The little horn then became the
eighth horn of Daniel, and the eighth head, of Revelation. The final
development of the eighth head was “the beast of the earth” (13:11), which
had “two horns (the Emperor and the Pope) like a lamb” (having the
appearance of Christianity), but “it spake as a dragon” (essentially pagan).
It is the beast of the “earth” because it was Franco-Germanic under
Charlemagne, from the “earth” territory referred to above.
As we saw earlier, all of this is later than the dragon stage in Chapter
12, where the heads, not the horns, were crowned. The ultimate end of the
beast of the sea was the crowned horns. Therefore, when we read of the
beast of the sea continuing for 42 months (or 1260 days, that is, years), it is
evidently a different 1260 year period from those in chapters 11 and 12. In
529 A.D. the Eastern Emperor Justinian recognised the Pope as Universal
Bishop of Christendom, and 1260 years later brings us to 1789, the time of
the French Revolution, when papal power disappeared in France, and soon
the Napoleonic wars began, which led to the complete loss of temporal
power by the Pope, right throughout the empire, as predicted in the first
five vials, in chapter 16. Also, in 610 A.D. the Eastern Emperor Phocas
went further, and made an official decree that the Pope was Universal
Bishop and Head of Christendom. Taking 1260 years from 610 brings us to
1870, when Garibaldi stripped the Pope of the last of his temporal power,
and left him with only the Vatican.
There is an interesting chronological connection between the two 1260
year periods. The first was the period of the two witnesses, from 312 till
1572 A.D. The second was the period of Papal supremacy, 610 to 1870
A.D. From 324 A.D. when Constantine was Emperor of both East and
West of the empire, till 604 A.D. when Phocas began to prepare his Decree
of the Pope’s universal bishopric (promulgated in 610) was a period of 280
years. As we saw earlier, the “pregnancy” of the church “brought forth”
Constantine as “the man of Sin,” the first Catholic emperor and head of
the church. So, from the time Constantine reached his full power (324
A.D.) till the Papacy received its full recognition (604 A.D.) was 280 years.
Constantine was the “papacy in embryo,” so to speak, and after the
gestation period of 280 years, the “woman clothed with the sun” finally
brought forth “the man of sin” (the papacy) the Antichrist, in his fullness.
Summarising, the “beast of the sea” is the eighth head (the sixth or
imperial head restored). In the full development of this beast, it becomes the
“beast of the earth” (v. 11), and ultimately gives way to the ten crowned
horns, or ten kingdoms of Europe. This two-horned “beast of the earth,”
under Charlemagne and the Pope, began to do miracles of deception, to
deceive the world. In this, we can include all the pseudo-miracles of Rome,
our Lady of Fatima, and all the rest. Between them they brought about
“the image of the beast.” Now the beast that was restored was Imperial
(the sixth head). The “image” of this imperial beast was the Papal church,
which became an empire within the empire, independent of the Emperor,
and the Pope ruled his church with imperial power, with all the retinue of
imperial nobility, his cardinals, bishops, priests, etc. It was an ecclesiastical
image of an Imperial Power. And its authority was not only ecclesiastical.
It ruled over kings of the earth,” even bringing powerful emperors like


V
— 5
I
— 1
c
— 100
A
R
I
— 1
V
— 5
S
F
I
— 1
L
— 50
I
— 1
I
— 1
D
— 500
E
I
— 1
666
Henry IV under its domination. It was the great harlot, with whom “the
kings of the earth committed fornication” (18:3).
The mark of the beast (v. 16-18) in the forehead means a mind totally
sold out to the beast (the Papacy), and the mark in the right hand means a
person has totally yielded his life and activity to the beast. It is NOT a
visible physical mark in the forehead or the right hand. Those who belong
to God’s fold have His seal, or mark, in their foreheads (7:3), that is they
are totally yielded to Him.
The number of the beast’s name is 666. This is a cryptic number, not a
literal one, for it requires “wisdom” and “understanding” (v. 18) to
decipher it. Various solutions have been proposed, one of which is the
Pope’s title, Vicar of the Son of God, in his own language (Latin), which is
VICARIVS FILII DEL The numerical value of these letters, in Roman
notation, is 666.
Looking again at the three parallel chapters 11 to 13, we note that in
chapter 11, the centre of interest is the “two witnesses,” and everything
relates to them. In chapter 12 the theme is the development of the man of
sin and his “beast” empire, while chapter 13 continues the “beast” theme,
and follows its gradual development from the dragon stage, through to the
beast of the sea, beast of the earth and the “image of the beast,” the Papal
Empire. It also, together with additional details from chapter 17, relates
them all TOGETHER, by explaining that the sixth head, which was
existing in John’s day, was wounded, and later, after the seventh head
passed away, was restored as the eighth head, or final two horned “beast of
the earth.”
Reasons for the Symbology
Just a word here, regarding the wisdom of God in giving us the
Revelation in cryptic “signs.” Suppose He had used plain language, and it
ran something like this. “John, about two centuries from now, a false
church will arise, out of the true church. It will be called the Roman
Catholic church, and for 1260 years it will cruelly persecute My saints ”
What an impossible situation it would have caused. The Catholic church
would have had no escape from this condemnation. It would have either
had to destroy the Revelation, or give up its career. As it was, the Jesuit
priest, Ribera, was able to invent the futurist theory, and convince most
evangelicals eventually that as all the seals etc. are after the Rapture(!)
chapters 11 to 13 could not refer to Catholic persecution of the saints


during the Christian era, so the Roman Catholic church could not be the
Antichrist. This was only possible because it was couched in symbols.
On the positive side, another reason is, it is “the Glory of God to
conceal a thing, but the honour of kings (which we all are) is to search out a
matter.” Hence the need to tell us that the blessing of Revelation depends
on “knowing accurately” the meaning; searching out the truth.
CHAPTER 14
Chapter 14 looks ahead to the final fulfilment of the Divine
programme, though many of the details leading up to the end still have to
take place, as outlined in chapters 16 to 19. Verses 1 to 5 make it obvious
that the 144,000 standing victoriously on Mount Zion are the totality of the
redeemed, from this dispensation, though many more will be added during
the Millennium. Even the announcements of the two angels, in verses 6 to 8
are to some extent anticipatory, because the third angel (v. 9-11) gives a
final warning to mankind not to worship the beast or his image. The
Father’s Name written in the foreheads of the 144,000 is not a physical
mark. It simply indicates their total assent, with their full mind, to His
truth and will. Similarly, the mark of the beast is not a physical mark in
forehead or hand, but indicates the total submission of mind and life to the
beast. NOR is Sunday keeping, as some allege, the mark. It is nothing less
than total alignment with and submission to the Papacy and his teachings.
CHAPTER 15
The chapter opens up with the introduction of the seven angels with
the seven last plagues, or vials, which fill up the wrath of God, before
millennial peace is possible. As a result of the vials, John sees Christ and
the saints standing on a sea of glass which had been mingled with fire, and
they are celebrating final victory, with the harps of God.
Seas are interesting, in the Bible. Before the six days of creation, there
was one vast sea covering the whole earth, just as before the tower of
Babel, mankind was one great nation, with one speech. Then the seas were
broken up, and mankind has been in a state of division ever since. Most of
mankind are described by Isaiah 57:20, “The wicked are like a troubled
sea, when it cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt.” Upon this
troubled sea, with its turmoil, God pours out His wrath, last of all in the
vials, and the sea is “mingled with fire” of judgement. When the fire has
done its work of purifying, the sea is like glass, peaceful and unruffled,
“having been mingled with fire.” Seas, in the Revelation are “nations”
(17:15), and mostly noisy.
“The song of Moses” (v. 3) in Exodus 15 and Deuteronomy 32 were a
celebration of deliverance from Egypt, and the resulting blessings. “The
Song of the Lamb” (5:9-10 and 14:3) is the ultimate celebration of victory
over every enemy, not during the infinitesimal period of 3 /i years allegedly
following the Rapture, but the many-centuries-long conflict between
spiritual Zion and Babylon.
CHAPTER 16
Once again the Revelation returns to the unfolding theme of the seals,
trumpets, and vials. Now we have arrived at the vial period, the closing part
of the seventh seal-seventh trumpet period. When we looked at the sixth
trumpet (second woe), we were in the time of the French Revolution. Then


the seventh trumpet sounded (11:15), and having looked, in chapters 14
and 15, at the final result of the blowing of this trumpet, we now return, to
consider the DETAILS involved in the seventh trumpet; that is, the seven
vials. The vials were God’s judgements on those who had the mark of the
beast.
First Vial 1792 - 1794 A.D.
When the French Revolution took place, the nations of Europe rose
up together to demolish it, and restore the monarchy, and Catholic
hierarchy, in France. Many of the dispossessed nobility, and priests, etc., in
France, encouraged by this, revolted, and the scene was set for widespread
slaughter throughout Europe. The first angel poured out his vial, or bowl,
of plagues, “upon the earth.” This is the region of Europe which was
originally outside the confines of the Roman Empire; in other words the
nations of Europe, to the north of the original area. These were the nations
that attacked France, in the first vial period. The insurgents within France
were summarily dealt with, and France declared war on the invaders, under
the leadership of one of the most capable generals the world has ever seen,
Napoleon Buonaparte. Very soon “the grievous sore” of the first vial was
being felt all over the “earth” part of Europe.
Second Vial 1796-1801 A.D.
The second vial was poured out upon “the sea.” In it, Britain was
persuaded to enter the war against France, mainly by sea. And though
Britain was highly successful, winning some of the most famous victories in
British history; at the Battle of the Nile 1798, Copenhagen 1801, and
Trafalgar 1805; she suffered much, as did all the nations involved.
Napoleon had invaded Egypt, with a view to extending his empire,
intending to set up a universal empire ruled by France. But Daniel chapter 2
had revealed that the next universal empire on earth will be Christ’s own
kingdom in the millenium, so he was not successful. Nevertheless, he
tormented the Catholic powers in the Mediterranean area (“the sea”). The
second vial, against the sea, actually continued till the downfall of
Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815.
Third Vial 1796-1801 A.D.
The third vial was against the “rivers and fountains of waters.” As we
saw in the first four trumpets, these vials followed the same pattern, in the
same order, and the areas involved were the same. So, in the third vial,
Napoleon attacked the areas between the Alps and Italy. Lombardy, the
Tyrol, Sardinia, Milan, Venice, Switzerland and Italy were put to the
sword.
Fourth Vial 1805-1807 A.D.
The fourth angel poured out his vial upon the sun. It seems hardly
necessary to say this is not the literal sun. The emperorship of the Roman
Empire came under direct attack, for it was the political “sun” of the
empire. At this time, the Austrian Empire held the reins of the empire, with
their capital at Vienna. Napoleon postponed his planned invasion of
England to attack Austria. At the battle of Austerlitz in 1805, the emperor
capitulated. The following year, Napoleon took several German states also.
Emperor Francis II renounced his claim to emperorship of the Roman
Empire, and was henceforth known simply as the Emperor of Austria. The
“sun” of the Empire was “darkened,” hundreds of thousands of his
subjects being “scorched with fire.” Prussia also came under attack, and in
1807 by the Treaty of Tilsit, was cut in half.
Fifth Vial 1808-1815 A.D.
The fifth angel poured out his vial on “the seat of the beast.” The vial
commenced by Napoleon joining the papal states to the kingdom of Italy.


His aim was to strip the Papacy of all his temporal power, leaving him only
an ecclesiastical authority. The Pope resisted with all his might. Eventually
Napoleon took him prisoner to Avignon. The emperor of Austria, alarmed
at the possible fate of the church, again took up arms against Napoleon,
only to be signally defeated. Eventually the Pope agreed to give up all
authority over the kingdom of Rome and Italy (the “seat of the beast”).
However, Napoleon’s plans were not able to be completed, due to his final
defeat at Waterloo in 1815. It remained for Garibaldi in 1870 to finally
divest the Pope of his sovereignty, leaving him only the Vatican.
Sixth Vial 1820-1917 A.D.
The sixth vial is of particular interest to us, because in the midst of it,
the return of Christ (16:15) takes place. It began to be fulfilled immediately
after the fifth vial, early in the nineteenth century. If there is one thing
which illustrates the weakness of the futurist position, as against the
historicist position, it is the sixth vial. So we shall have a look at it in some
detail.
Briefly, it foretold (1) the drying up of the Euphrates, in preparation
for the coming of the kings of the east, (2) the return of Christ and the
gathering of the nations to Armageddon. The sequel to Armageddon was
the seventh vial, the fall of Babylon. Futurists have prophesied, from
16:12, that the kings of the East (China etc., they say) will invade the
Middle East; that they are even now preparing a high way across Asia for
this purpose; that the drying up of the River Euphrates will remove a
barrier in the way of their doing this. We want to suggest reasons for
rejecting this view; to suggest from Scripture a meaning which will surely be
obvious when stated, and to see how much of it has already been fulfilled.
We wish to suggest that the River Euphrates would hardly be a problem to
a modern army, so the drying up for this purpose would surely be
unnecessary.
We need to remember that Babylon has already fallen once, in the long
distant past. The details of its fall will help us to interpret the sixth vial
correctly. The armies which conquered Babylon were the Medes and
Persians, countries to the east of Babylon. Under these “kings of the east”
they set out to overthrow her. But Babylon had walls 300 feet high, and 87
feet thick. All the outer gates were shut, so there was no way to get in.
However, Cyrus the Persian, at the head of the armies, had a plan. The
River Euphrates flowed under Babylon’s walls; in one side and out the
other, so he stationed troops where it entered and left the city. Then he
chose a spot nearby, but out of sight of the Babylonians and dug an
artificial lake (said to be about 40 miles square) and diverted the waters into
it. Thus, the bed of the river through the city was temporarily dried up, and
his troops marched along the river bed, and found all the inner gates had
been left open, and they went in and took the city, as told in Daniel chapter
5.
Isaiah 44:26-28 and 45:1-3 tells the story, including the drying up of
the river. In these chapters, Cyrus is pictured as God’s agent to destroy
Babylon. He is obviously presented as a “type” of Christ. God calls him
“My Shepherd,” and “My anointed,” and says he will decree the
rebuilding of Jerusalem and the temple, and 45:13 says “he shall let go My
captives.” Jesus will do all this, in a physical and spiritual sense, and in a
much greater way. He will destroy Babylon (Rome), set His people free,
restore Jerusalem, build God’s temple. Obviously, “the kings of the east”
in Revelation 16:12 are the counterpart of the Medes and Persians in their
onslaught against Babylon. Who will destroy Babylon (Rome), and restore
Jerusalem, etc.? Christ and the saints. They they simply MUST be “the
kings of the east” in Revelation 16. They are “the kings from the sun’s


rising”, following the King of Kings, the Sun of Righteousness Who will
arise, as Malachi 4:2 declares. It has nothing to do with China, etc.
Remembering that the Revelation is given in symbols, we ask what do
these things mean? To answer, let me outline events which have recently
happened in the Middle East. As we saw in the sixth trumpet, in 1453
Constantinople fell to the Turks, who were waiting at the Euphrates River
(9:14), and they built up a huge empire around it. It included countries of
south-western Asia, and Europe, Egypt, etc., AND PALESTINE. For 400
years they ruled mercilessly. They prevented Jewish immigration to
Palestine, and terribly mistreated the Jews who were in Palestine. About
1820 onwards, the Turkish empire began to “dry up” in all directions.
Today it includes only Asia Minor. The Euphrates River flowed through
their territory, and Turkey in modern times is the “Euphrates” of the sixth
vial. We note also that the sixth trumpet related to Turkey, and the
Euphrates is mentioned; so now also, in the sixth vial. In 1917, General
Allenby led the British armies into Palestine, and took Jerusalem without
firing a shot. That year, Turkey “dried up” out of Palestine. In the same
year, the British Government passed the Balfour Declaration, promising
Palestine as a National Home for the Jews; and the modern return to Zion
began. We are aware that this was necessary before Christ could return.
The Divine Programme was that the Jews would return to Israel, and
rebuild it, and flourish. Then Russia would cast greedy eyes on the land of
Israel, and with its satellites would invade it. They would be met by fire
and brimstone from God, who would then restore Israel nationally and
spiritually, and His Kingdom would be set up. All of this, from Ezekiel,
chapters 38 and 39.
Hence, to prepare for Christ’s coming (to prepare the way of the kings
of the east) the Euphrates (Turkey) had to be dried up (especially out of
Israel), in order to set the scene for the Gogian invasion of Ezekiel 38, and
call forth the return of Christ to rescue His people, and destroy Babylon.
Much of this has already been done, and we are now waiting for the
imminent return of Christ. This is why, in the middle of the sixth vial, we
read the words “Behold, I come as a thief.”
Following the drying up of the Euphrates River, verses 13-14 say “And
I saw three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon,
and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false
prophet. For they are the spirits of demons, working miracles, which go
forth unto the kings of the earth and of the whole world, to gather them to
the battle of that great day of God Almighty.” Thus they are gathered
together to Armageddon. The world against Christ.
It is not difficult to identify the “beast” as the remnants of the “holy
Roman Empire,” in its latter-day manifestation of “the ten horns.”
Without a doubt they are the ten Common Market nations (E.E.C.) which
are destined to become a great military as well as economic power.
Likewise, “the false prophet” is seen as the ecclestiastical power based on
the seven hills (Rome see chapter 17) the Papacy. The “dragon,” we
saw as the pagan rulership of the Empire, which was finally conquered by
Constantine when he defeated Licinius the emperor of the Eastern Roman
Empire. Thenceforth Constantinople became the eastern seat of
Constantine’s empire. Today it is occupied by Turkey, but according to
Ezekiel 38, Togarmah, which is identified by many scholars as Turkey, will
be part of the Soviet bloc before Gog invades Israel. Perhaps, therefore,
Russia is the third frog-like spirit, so that the armies which oppose Christ
will be those of the ten kingdoms of Europe, the Papacy, and the Soviet.
From medieval times the frog has been the emblem of France, appearing on
its heraldry, and perhaps because France was a major part of the Roman
Empire, the frog identity is used. It is still future, so time will tell.


Seventh Vial
As we have seen, the programme of the seals, trumpets, and vials is a
huge one. On the face of it, it is extremely unlikely that it would fit into 3 Vi
years. It has, as we have seen, occupied centuries. Today, instead of being
on the eve of the START of the programme, as the futurists believe, we are
almost at the END of it. We are in the middle of the sixth vial. The seventh
vial includes all that remains to introduce the Millenium. It is poured out
“into the air.” At present Satan is the “prince of the POWER OF THE
AIR.” His human agents, “Babylon etc.,” at present occupy this exalted
position of the “air,” which is above the earth. But the seventh vial will
change that, with “a great earthquake (political) such as was not since men
were upon the earth, so mighty an earthquake and so great” (v. 18). In the
great upheaval, the kingdoms of this world will become the Kingdom of
Christ. The devastating results on “the great city” (the “Beast” empire of
Rome, Babylon) are described in graphic symbolic language, in verses
19-21.
CHAPTER 17
As we have seen, chapter 17 is closely associated with chapters 11 to
13. Chapters 17 and 18 give much more detail of the Papal system, which is
part of the beast of the sea, and the beast of the earth, and is seen in its
completeness in the image of the restored sixth head of the original beast.
We will not go further into the beast details, but concentrate on “the great
whore” that sits astride the beast, with the name upon her forehead,
“Mystery, Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and abominations of
the earth.” The “scarlet” (sin) coloured beast that carries her is “full of
names of blasphemy.” She has been committing fornication with the kings
and inhabitants of the earth. That is, spiritual fornication. She has become
fabulously wealthy in her prostitution, selling her ecclesiastical services to
the people in her prosperous trade in “the souls of men” (18:13). For a
price, she undertakes to release souls from a fictitious purgatory, and even
‘‘sells” indulgences, so that people may be forgiven in advance for the sins
they are going to commit. No wonder Luther stormed against it all. He saw
great caravans of donkeys loaded with wealth making their way to Rome,
to fill the bursting coffers.
Two women are featured in the Revelation; the Bride of Christ, and,
the Mother of Harlots. On the one hand we have the Papal Man of Sin, and
his consort, the harlot church of Rome, and on the other, the Son of Man,
Faithful and True, and His Bride, the true Church. Chapter 17 describes
the former, and chapter 18 her downfall; while chapters 19 and 21 describe
Christ’s Bride, and her glorious future.
Verse 8 of chapter 17, says the beast carrying the great whore ascended
out of the abyss; both from the Franco-Germanic abyss outside the original
confines of the Empire, and spiritually from the abyss of Satan’s domain.
She is “drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the
martyrs of Jesus.” All of which recalls the massacre of the Waldensians
and Albigensians, the massacre of the Huguenots, the persecution of the
Donatists, the horrors of the Inquisition, and many more such like. Her
names are names of blasphemy because she claims to be God’s Vicar on
earth, and even to change times and laws which He has made (Daniel 7:25).
She changed the date of Passover to Easter, in honour of Astarte the
Babylonian Goddess; the birthday of Jesus to December 25th, the pagan
“birthday of the sun,” the Sabbath from Saturday to Sunday, not realising
that the fourth commandment passed away, with the rest of the Law, at the
cross, and Christ Himself is now our true sabbath rest, the Antitype


of the old Sabbath law. She has even accepted such forms of address as
“our Lord God the Pope” in fulfilment of 2 Thess. 2:4.
Chapter 17:9 says she sits on the seven-hilled city (Rome). The seven
hills are Mount Capitoline, Mount Esquiline, Mount Palatine, Mount
Aventine, Mounts Quirinal, Viminal and Coelius. Rome was the only city in
John’s day which “reigned over the kings of the earth” (v. 18). In the past,
her warfare against God’s people has really been against “the Lamb,” but
she is destined yet to confront Him in final and mortal combat. He will
overcome her and her ten-horned kingdoms, “for He is King of kings and
Lord of lords.” She “sitteth upon many waters,” which are “people, and
nations, and multitudes, and tongues” (v. 15). She decreed, during her
1260 years of power, that no man “might buy or sell, save he that had the
mark, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.” This was
often literally true, people losing food, freedom, and even life at her
orders. But it was true in a greater spiritual sense. No man was permitted,
where she could prevent it, to engage in spiritual ministry, hold meetings,
or do the things, (which she was doing for gain), unless they gave allegiance
to the Pope. They could not “buy or sell” spiritual things, without papal
ordination. Sometimes she placed whole nations, such as England, under
an interdict, so that people could not even be given “Christian” burial,
because of her displeasure.
CHAPTER 18
Chapter 18 pictures her downfall, and the lamentations of her regal
paramours at her destruction. A final call is given to God’s people to come
out of her, lest they be involved in her plagues. Her (spiritual)
“merchandise” is no longer in demand, as men see how worthless it is (v.
11 to 13). No longer will the nations be deceived by her “sorceries” (v. 23).
The chapter explains itself.
CHAPTER 19
The chapter opens with great rejoicing at the downfall of Babylon. “The
marriage of the lamb is come, and His wife hath made herself ready” for
the great celebrations. Who is the wife of the Lamb? Many today are
denying that it is the church. But her very clothing reveals her identity. She
is “arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, for the fine linen is the
righteousness of saints.” She is obviously the community of the saints.
Doubtless the marriage feast will take place in heaven before the
Father’s throne, the Father Himself officiating, uniting His Son and the
church in eternal blissful union. The time is unquestionably after the rapture
and rewarding of the saints at “the judgement seat of Christ” (2 Cor.
5:10). Accompanied by His bride, every one of whom by this time knows
their place and rank in Him, they follow Him forth on white horses, to
carry out the remaining work of bringing the whole world into subjection
to Him, in fulfilment of Psalm 2. On His head are many diadems, taken
from the heads of all earthly rulers, for their kingdoms have become His by
right of conquest. The “beast” (the secular, military arm of the coalition)
and “the false prophet” (the papal, ecclesiastical arm) are defeated by Him
(v. 19-20), and go into perdition, into the lake of fire.


CHAPTER 20
With all enemies vanquished, and Satan bound in the abyss, the
Millenial reign, so often proclaimed by the Old Testament prophets,
begins. In those days “all shall know the Lord, from the least to the
greatest.” Harvests will be abundant, for the “ploughman shall overtake
the reaper, and the treader of grapes him that soweth seed.” “The
inhabitant shall not say, I am sick,” “As the days of a tree shall be the days
of My people.” Even the animal kingdom will be at peace. Spiritual
blessings will abound. Oppression and war will cease. “God’s will shall be
done on earth, even as it is in heaven.” It will be a new “heaven” and a
new “earth,” wherein dwelleth righteousness.
The subjects of this kingdom will be the mortal survivors of the world-
wide fiery judgements of Armageddon etc. (Zech. 14:16). Their rulers will
be Christ, and His saints. Not those who withstood the persecutions of 3'A
years after the Rapture, as the futurists would be obliged to interpret verse
4, but those who in all ages have “through much tribulation inherited the
Kingdom of God.” They are there by the grace of God, and in
acknowledgement of the fact that their “overcoming” in the days of their
flesh was really “God working in them,” the “battle being the Lord’s,”
they cast their stephans, their overcomers’ crowns, at His feet (4:10).
The staggering fact is that even after such a righteous reign of 1000
years of blessedness and peace, many will rebel at the end, when Satan is
loosed, and deceives them again into believing that they can cast off the
cords of the King of kings. But it will be so, as verses 7 to 9 declare. Their
defeat is decisive, and Satan is cast into the lake of fire with the beast and
false prophet. At the “great white throne” judgement, this rebellious
“heaven and earth,” the rebel rulers and rank and file of this deluded
army, “flee away.” Finally, the closing verses of the chapter tell us of the
final abolition of death, as far as God’s people are concerned.
CHAPTER 21
“And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the
first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.” It seems to me
this “new heaven and earth” is post-millennial. The millennium brought a
new heaven and earth, or a new order of ruling and ruled classes, in which
dwelt righteousness, in contrast to the present heaven and earth which are
riddled with sin. But after the millennium even this heaven and earth or
millennial order, gives way to the eternal new heaven and earth, in which
there is no more death and sin (v. 4). In this final order, “there is no more
sea.” We have already seen that the nations of this present age are like a
miry, restless sea. We also saw that the fiery judgements of Armageddon
purify this “sea,” and it is like a “sea of glass having been mingled with
fire” (the Greek for “mingled” is the past particle “having been mingled”)
so that the “Sea” of nations during the millennium is clean and at peace.
But now, after the Millennium, “there is no more sea.” The nations have
disappeared altogether. There are no more mortals on earth, and never will
be. All the inhabitants of the earth, the whole family of God, will be
immortal.
John sees “the holy city, New Jerusalem” descending out of heaven.
He is shown that she is “the bride, the Lamb’s wife” (v. 9-10). She has the
glory of God in her, for she is the church. It is not a literal city, but a city
picturing the church. The church is filled with His glory. The name of the
twelve apostles are in the foundations of its walls, as we would expect from
Eph. 2:20. Its “size” is approximately 1500 miles in all directions. Even
1500 miles high. Imagine what this would look like, if it was a literal city


sitting on an earth which is only 8000 miles in diameter. What imbalance!
God does not do such things. He does everything beautifully and in order.
Also, imagine if the bride of Christ was a literal city. What possible
communion could He have with her? What becomes of the intimate joyous
spiritual sharing we would expect Him to have with His eternal
companion? But if, as we are warned in chapter 1, it is symbolic, and is the
church, arrayed in the garments of righteousness with which He has
provided her, what blissful communion is foreshadowed between Him
Whose character and personality are so infinitely wonderful, and the
innumerable company whom He has lifted out of the mire, and made fit to
be partakes of the inheritance of the saints in light. If now it is so precious,
what will it be then?
CHAPTER 22
From Ezekiel 47, and Zechariah 14:8 we may be sure that there will
literally be waters of blessing flowing out from Jerusalem, when it becomes
“the city of the great King,” but in Revelation 22 (v. 1) the main thought is
surely that God and the Lamb have provided the “spiritual” water of life
for the dying sons and daughters of men. Likewise, also, He has become
“the tree of life” to mankind (v. 2). When Adam and Eve sinned, they
were prevented from eating of the tree of life. But in Christ, we have eaten
of it, for He IS “the tree of life.” And our eating will be complete, when
we are made immortal. Partaking of Him, we “have everlasting life.” John
6:54. In that day, when all nations have partaken of this “Tree of life,” He
will be their heavenly food, and eternal healing will be theirs, in the change
from mortality to immortality (v. 2). “His Name will be in their
foreheads,” for their minds will be full of Him (v. 4). He will be their
“light” (v. 5), and their everything. It is the time of everlasting decision.
Those who are still “filthy” then will remain so for ever, and those who are
righteous then, will be eternally so (v. 11).
“The Spirit and the bride say Come,” to all those around them in this
evil dispensation. Surely this identifies the bride. Who but the church has
received the Divine Commission to evangelise the world, for they have been
given “the ministry of reconciliation” (2 Cor. 5:19).
Jesus says, “Surely I come quickly.” Even so, Come Lord Jesus.”
HALLELUJAH!


Copies of this booklet may be obtained on application to:
E. J. WATSON,
29 Kingaroy Street,
Kingaroy, Queensland
4610
DOWNS PRINTING CO. PTV. LTD. 253 MARGARET ST., TOOWOOMBA
