

■ J 0
•iSUAKIM
AND THE
COUNTEY OF SOUDAN.
<*■
ARTHUR T. HOLROYD,
F.R.G.S., London,
4 •
WRITTEN EXPRESSLY FOR THE INFORMATION OF THE NEW SOUTH WALES MILITARY
CONTINGENT BOUND FOR SERVICE IN AFRICA,
'JUtthoritj):
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER
[Price, Is.]-
. - =#




AND THE
COUNTRY OF SOUDAN.
ARTHUR T. HOLROYD,
F.R.Gr.S., London.
WRITTEN EXPRESSLY FOR THE INFORMATION OP THE NEW SOUTH WALES MILITARY
CONTINGENT BOUND LOR SERVICE IN AFRICA.
JUithoritj):
SYDNEY ; THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.




n 23 ss/p /os//
as.
INTRODUCTION.
Little did I think a week ago that the Volunteers would bring
me out in a novel character. My intimate friends were aware
that I was an old African traveller, and many of them were con-
tinually compelling me to spin them African yarns. Sixty years
ago I first turned my attention to discoveries on this large
continent, but then I never expected to do more than amuse
myself with the most popular authors. I commenced, as most
boys did at that time, with Mungo Park ; but soon aspired to
something higher, and made myself acquainted with Bruce,
Burckhardt, Belzoni, Irby and Mangles, Waddington, Speke
and Grant, Baker, Livingstone, Barth, Salt, Lord Yalentia,
and other modern explorers. At length an opportunity offered
to visit the Valley of the Nile : this, however, dropped ; but
as I had made preparations to spend a few months in Egypt,
I decided to make an excursion to Wady Haifa. The distance
from the Mediterranean to Essouan, the first Cataract, is
about 700 miles, and 200 miles more brings the traveller to
Wady Haifa, the second Cataract. This I had intended should be
the limit of my trip, but everything was so new and interesting
that I could not refrain from extending my journey. I had only
two Arabs with me, Hajji Suleiman, my dragoman, an honest,
faithful servant, who did not care what he said or did for an
Englishman, and Ali, a sulky cook.
I had already purchased a couple of donkeys, and I started
from Wady Haifa for Dongola, using the donkeys the whole
journey, but changing them every two hours: a pleasanter
journey it was impossible to enjoy. When I arrived at New
Dongola I was fully in the Beled of Soudan, and there I
remained, roving about from Berber in the east to Sennar on the
Blue Nile in the south, and Alleis on the White Nile to El
Obeid, the capital of Kordofan, on the south and south-west.
On referring to the map, it will be seen what an extensive
breadth these boundaries include.


These remarks are introductory to my reasons for issuing this
brochure for the Volunteers. It was to give them an epitome of
the route in which they were about to embark. I saw Mr. Dailey
and mentioned my intention to him, and he immediately fell in with
my views. My object was not to bring out anything elaborate, but
something practical, short, and useful. I was never at Suakim;
and as the Volunteers land there, it was quite necessary that
there I should commence.
In the Herald of the 21st instant there appeared an excellent
article entitled “ Our Troops in the Soudan,” with numerous
quotations from Colonel Colborne’s recent publication “ With
Hicks Pasha in the Soudan.” I saw Mr. Fairfax about copying
this article, and he very kindly told me to use what I wanted. I
have done so, and I am desirous of bringing this into circulation
before the \ olunteers sail. Berber, New Dongola to Ambukol,
and Ambukol, are abridged from my notes, and give a tolerable
idea of desert travelling.
But then it was necessary that the Volunteers should have a
map to illustrate their routes. In a paper which I published in
the 9th volume of the Journal of the Eoyal Geographical Society
of London, I added an excellent map of a portion of the Beled-
Es-Soudan, over which I had traversed, and I should have liked
to have appended it here, but unfortunately it does not include
the Bed Sea and Suakim, and I was therefore obliged to issue a
map that showed both. I have adopted the map of Mr. George
Birkbeck Hill, who has recently edited a work entitled “ Colonel
Gordon in Central Africa, 1874-79,” and to this I have added in
red lines my different routes. This map is not so complete as I
could wish; but considering that it has been put together hastily,
I hope the Volunteers will overlook any inaccuracies that I may
have committed; at all events, it will show them the Bed Sea
and Suakim.
Sherwood Scrubs, New South Wales,
February 25, 1885.


SUAKIM.
Suakim is situated upon an island joined to the mainland by a
recently constructed causeway. It is described, as seen from tbe
sea, as a glittering white town built of madrepore, the houses
looking at a distance like the pierced walls of a fortress. In the
town itself a G-overnor’s palace, redolent of departed glories and
rats, two mosques with minarets, the inevitable Eastern bazaar,
two or three tolerable houses devoted to the uses of Consuls and
foreign visitors of distinction, and a mixed population of about
8,000. The town spreads “ suburbs” to the mainland; and here
the people we should in Australia call forwarding agents chiefly
reside. They are the camel-drovers of the great caravan routes
of the desert, chiefly Arabs of the tribe of the Hadenowa. Most
of them, as indeed most of the Soudan Arabs, are chiefly dis-
tinguished by their hair, which they wear long, anoint plentifully
with tallow, and train to stand erect from the crown of the head
and to fall in plaits upon the shoulders. “In physique,” says
Mr. James, E.E.G-.5., who spent three winters in the Soudan, in
1881-2-3, “they, with many wandering Arab tribes, resemble
closely the ancient Egyptians, as depicted on the walls of their
temples and tombs. Their mode of wearing their hair is identical;
so, also, are many of their household implements; and there is a
striking similarity between many of their words and those dis-
covered on the ancient hieroglyphics. On the mainland there
also is a huge caravansary built by a native by slave labour, at a
cost of 80,000 dollars ; otherwise it would have cost fully a third
more.”
Lieutenant-Colonel Colborne, now with Sir G-arnet Wolseley,
who followed Hicks Pacha to the Soudan, but luckily left


invalided before El Obeid, says, under date February 11th,
1883 :
The plain after leaving Suakim is apparently level, but there is a gradual
and imperceptible rise, as, after a few hours’ march, the town is seen like a
glittering white streak below us. The plain is strewn with huge black
boulders. After 12 miles of this we arrived at Bir Handuk, our first halting-
place. Eight glad were we to descend from our pinnacles and stretch our-
selves on the sand while our tents were being pitched. At 6we sat down to
our first camp dinner in the wilderness —we had not lost our appetites. Grlad
were we to turn into our sand beds —a sounder sleep I never enjoyed. The
wells are situated at the foot of a low rocky spur jutting out from the main
range which bounds the horizon. Massey and I strolled out upon the spur
before dinner in search of game. We found nothing but doves.
And upon the next day :
We now came to the mountains, and the higher we got the sweeter was
the scent of the fragrant herbs which grow here so well. Camphor, mint,
and thyme blended their aromatic odours until the air was sweet with them.
How, we said, we are indeed inhaling spices and frankincense as in “ Araby
the blest” ! I believe no spot in the world can surpass the mountains of this
region in their variety of sweet-smelling herbs ; it is their peculiar habitat,
but by wdiat process of natural selection I know not.
Lieutenant-Colonel Colborne writes : —“ The afternoons only
were hot; the early mornings from 1 to 4 were bitterly cold.
From 5 to 7 the air was bracing, balmy, and delicious, and in the
open plains there was generally a breeze.”
But there is a direct distance of 200 miles between Suakim
and Berber, which on the various routes is extended from 230 to
270 miles. By camel caravans this is traversed in from twelve
to fifteen days ; and, four days’ journey from the coast, rise
mountains 6,000 feet in height, and stretching for 200 miles
inland. It is to these that Osman Digna retreated after his
memorable defeat at El Teb by General Graham. It is here
that he lingers still, and, emboldened by the success of his chief,
will doubtless offer determined resistance to any efforts that may
be made either to push a column or to construct a railway
through the heart of the world-old hunting and plunder grounds
of the Hadenowa tribes. Our soldiers need not fear a procession
to Berber, or an easy time even if employed in guarding the con-
struction of the railway through the desert which alone will form
the highway of a permanent civilization.


Here is another picture from Lieutenant-Colonel Colborne’s
narrative;—=
We reached Hkratree on the fourth day. There are two deep wells here 5
about 3 miles apart. Their names are El Bir Tamai and El Bir Tuahwah-
This is the highest point between Suakim and Berber and the watershed
between the Nile and the Bed Sea. We approach it through a ravine, or
rather a labyrinth of ravines. Indeed, the road from this point to Ariab
was nothing but a mountain pass, alternating with basin-like valleys, sur-
rounded by amphitheatres of mountains. And such mountains ! Bold, jag-
ged, and split with deep gorges and ravines filled with dark mysterious
shadows. We toiled through a succession of basins, and along stony paths
that would seem to offer a serious impediment to the apparently soft, velvety-
gloved feet of our camels; but pointed edges or roughly covered boulders,
were alike passed over without inconvenience or lameness. From clefts and',
crannies tufts of dried desert herbage seemed to struggle for life. We had
the thorny mimosa always, through which, if not careful, we were dragged by
our camels, to the detriment of flesh and clothing. Sometimes isolated rocks
would rise in the glare like fortresses of medkeval structure; sometimes
huge boulders tossed hither and thither, would start up like giant idol heads
in all direction.
But Sinkat will be reached before this, and probably will be
garrisoned and stocked with all sorts of provisions for man and
beast, which will be sorely needed before the desert is crossed.
At and about these wells of Haratree is a plain or rather basin,
the floor of which is comprised of alternate strips of coarse
herbage and bare stone; and a little further on another well
called Salalaat, with sand grouse in abundance round about.
Thence is a 24-miles’ march to the wells of the Wady Kokreh,
These wells are of various sorts, the group at Wady Kokreh con-
sisting of three, the first two merely holes scooped in the sand,
the third a good well revetted with stones, and furnishing an
ample supply of good water. Four miles from this Wady
Kokreh, a little to the south, is the oasis of Eoweh, and near it
the line of division between the Hadenowa and Bishareen Arabs.
“ Here,” says Lieutenant-Colonel Colborne, “ the Sheikh of the
Hadenowa levies tribute.”
We have no fair account of the oasis of Eoweh; but 25 miles
further on is Ariab, described as the prettiest oasis between
Suakim and Berber. It is at the junction of several narrow
valleys, a spot where the mountain torrents pour their floods,
and the soakage keeps a perpetual moisture, which supports a


clump of full-follaged acacias, and some grass and scrub growth
sufficient for the camels and horses. Here Hicks Pacha, with
whom travelled Colonel Colborne, rested a day with 300 Bashi
Bazouks, 100 Egyptians mounted, and a train of 150 camels. It
is in such a place that our contingent may some day expect to
halt, with these grim black mountains around them, and a desert
beyond which will try all their hearts.
The road from Haratree to Ariab is described as the sanatorium
of the desert. Between Ariab and the Nile lie two great water-
less wastes, 70 miles, two good days’ journey from Ariab to
O’Bak ; the camping ground being a gravelly waterless plain,
with the mountain mass called Jebel Grumat to the right. No
water, no grass, no herbage. The camels, bearing four days’
supply in their own natural tanks, do well enough ; the horses
and the men take meagre supplies from the tanks the camels
■carry. At O’Bak a few miserable wells of brackish water, and
then a further stretch of 74 miles of utter desolation. Eirst, 6
miles of shifting sand blown up into dunes about 100 feet high,
of which writes Colborne :—-
Over and among them toiled our camels, and as we passed over each
eminence we could see the waterless, treeless plain beyond, which now and again
gave place to that malicious mocking demon of the wilderness, the mirage ;
constructing forms, with magic celerity, all the enchanting scenery, “ cloud-
capt towers and gorgeous palaces,” cool lakes and shadowy groves, which
seem so specially designed to mock the thirsty desert wayfarer, that one can
devise no more apt expression for the mirage than that of the Arabs—Bahr
es Sheytan (“ the Sea of Satan”).
Our camels sank deep into the fine quicksand at every step, and we were
heartily glad to get on firmer ground, however dreary. And a gloomier waste
never man saw than that in which we encamped, at a spot about 24 miles
from O’Bak. There was no water, not a vestige of vegetation, nor of organic
life of any kind. The loose black boulders with which the plain was strewn
gave a terrible aspect to it. They looked as though they had been blackened
by fire, and the entire region seemed to be the debris of a vast conflagration
—the cinder of a burnt-up world. The scenery is of the type that astrono-
mers tell us is presented by the moon—the remains of a worn-out volcano.
Before reaching our camping-ground we passed the huge solitary block of
granite called “ Eremit” ; and further on was visible Aboo Odfa, the obelisk-
like rock mentioned by travellers. The wind-driven sand has worn its base
until it resembles in form a huge fungus or a pear. Smaller blocks of this
kind are seen at intervals on the road. As we lay encamped “ all in a hot
and copper sky,” a simoom sprang up, and we saw the sand gathered into
columns apparently interminable in height, as their attenuated tops vanishing
into air travelled along the horizon. They seemed to stalk over the desert


like storm spirits, and called back to my memory the Djin in the “ Arabian
Nights,” which, let out of the casket, assumed the proportions of a huge
column of cloud. Nature here is so grim and gruesome in all her moods
that one can well imagine the strange creations of Ghouls and Djins which has
been called forth by the fancy of the people.
Country o£ this sort extends to Bir Mohabe, an hour’s easy ride
from the Nile, 140 miles of utter desert. It was traversed by
Hicks Pacha with his train in four days, making with the seven
occupied in travelling from Suakim to the Oases of Ariab eleven
days. It has been crossed by fleet dromedaries in two days, and
the whole distance between the two cities has been done under
eight. And now to give a little more hope to this dolorous
description, let us quote once more from this Colonel Colborne,
one who rode across this desert with about such a troop as we
propose to despatch, and twelve months later returned invalided,
slung between two camels. He says, summarizing the whole
journey, and criticising other projects, which need not be
particularly noticed just now :
I have urged over and over again that, if an expedition for the relief of
Gordon is to be sent, this is the only practicable route to be taken, for these
reasons : it is certainly 45 miles longer than the distance from Korosko to
Abu Hamad ; but the country is far more practicable, for almost at the end
of every day’s march a certain quantity of water would be found, and these
wells could be held by parties of cavalry, sent on in advance. Flocks and
herds could be captured by our horse, as well as grain ; the camels would
always find food by way of long grass and shrubs, while the men could find
plenty of firewood. Fresh wells could be sunk, and tubes used to get a much
larger supply than is usually obtained. Supplies could be forwarded with
far greater ease than by any other route, Suakim always being our basis.


BERBER,
Berber or El Makrif is a place of some importance, and con-
tains between 8,000 and 9,000 inhabitants. The houses are
generally built of sun-burnt bricks, of a square form, and many
are enclosed in a small court-yard. There is a daily market,
badly supplied and ill attended. The vendors of grease for the
body appeared to have the most business. Adjoining the bazaar
is a coffee-house, where the Turks indulge in their favourite
pastime of draughts and munckalah. A mosque adorned with a
lofty minaret was erected by Abbas Agha.
Berber has been the rendezvous of slave-merchants from
Sennar and Khartum, who proceeded to Cairo by the desert of
Korosko, and, as may be naturally supposed from the number
of Jelleps or Slave-dealers generally congregated there, the slave-
trade has been in full vigour. The men are tall and handsome,
of a dark-brown colour, and generally allow their hair to grow
long. They wear moustache and a small portion of beard
round the edge of the chin. They are deceitful, and not to be
trusted. They wear a takiyeh or skull-cap, a fold of cotton
thrown round the body, or a large white calico shirt, and a white
cotton shawl or furdy over it. The women are of a lighter tint
than the men, —of a beautiful brown, with sparkling eyes.
They plait their hair in small plaits, and wear a fold of cotton
round the body, which they also throw over the head, though
they are not very particular in covering their faces.
Abbas Agha, a former Governor of Berber, was celebrated for
his attachment to Europeans, and for his liberality in supplying
them with provisions whenever they took up their quarters there.
He seemed delighted with their society, but little intuitiveness
was required to discover that his friendship was in a great


measure “cupboard love.” He had a failing —his weak point
was his penchant for physic, and such was his|gluttony for
medicine that he purchased his hobby at an exorbitant price.
During my first visit, though he was in perfect health, I told
him that I had had a dream that he was suffering from a
serious disease, which till lately had been deemed incurable, but
that after intense application I had discovered a nostrum which
would cure him in three weeks. He answered, “ Praise be to
God!” and added what a providential circumstance it was that I
had arrived in time to save his life. I was determined to strike
while the iron was hot, so I said, “ Have you bottles ?” “ Yes.”
“Send them.” “I will.”
I filled them with a solution of Epsom salts and Rhubarb,
and told him to drink some as often as he liked, and if he found
it agreeable he might take a little with his dinner. He admired
my liberality, and hinted that he had never had such a windfall
of physic, and that he valued my opinion the more for having
given him permission to indulge in it so freely. Having noticed
his eyes sparkling with delight whilst I poured out a wine-glass
of the nauseous mixture, and observing him smacking his lips
after swallowing the dregs, I thought it was just the moment to
ask him “how he was off for flour.” “Do you want any?”
“Yes.” “How much?” “An ardeb” (five bushels). Turning
to his scribe, he said, “ Let the Bey be served with what he
requires, and may his shadow never be less.” “ But I want also
dhourrah.” “How much?” “Two ardebs”; and the words
were hardly out of my mouth before the scribe was desired
to execute my orders. I had hardly left his presence an hour
before he sent me a present of four sheep, a jar of rancid butter,
and 10 lbs. of Mocha coffee. I visited my patient daily. He
bolted his physic without flinching, and on the third day he
intimated that his bottles required replenishing. I lost no time
in gratifying his wish, and during the twelve days I remained at
Berber he managed to discuss the contents of thirteen quart
bottles.


Time lias somewhat altered tlie course of the river at Berber.
Formerly, when the river was high, there was a small navigable
channel for several months in the year, close to the town, but
this was choked up with sand and alluvial deposit, and the course
of the river described a curve.
The last occupant of my apartments at Berber was a French
St. Simonian, who died there a fortnight before my arrival.
He was on his way from Cairo to Khartum when he was attacked
with dysentery, and died on the tenth day. His dragoman,
Mohammed el Burbo, and his cook w T ere waiting at Berber until
they heard from the French Consul at Cairo, to whom an express
had been sent by Abbas Agha informing him of M. Miel’s
decease.
The Bishareen Arabs in Berber were fine handsome men, of a
dark brown colour, and wore the hair in a peculiar manner. It
was allowed to grow long—that on the crown of the head stood
erect, whilst on the sides and occiput it was combed down.
A wooden skewer was stuck in the hair, with which they tickled
the vermin whenever they showed symptoms of a desire to feed.
They wore a fold of cotton round the waist, and sometimes it
was thrown over the shoulders, but generally the body was
naked above the middle. Each carried a shield and sword or
some spears.
At four hours distance from Berber there are two kinds of
earth, which contain saline matter ; one is tonic and the other
purgative, and esteemed as a remedy for syphilis. The natives
mix the tonic earth with milk, and when the saline matter is
dissolved, after straining the liquor, they drink it. When indis-
posed they take this medicine for eight successive days, and it is
said to have a pleasant flavour.
The purgative earth they treat in a similar manner, sub-
stituting only water for milk, and mixing the earth and water in
equal quantities. The solution from the purgative earth is
bitter.


Before leaving Berber I was obliged to provide myself with
skins for water from hence to Jebel Berkel. [Fortunately there
were two Government magazines, one of new and the other of
old skins, both of which had been partially tanned; from the
latter I selected those required for the journey. Travellers
should always choose old in preference to new skins, as the
water from wells becomes more quickly unpalatable when con-
tained in the latter.
Abbas Agha informed me that two days’ journey to the east of
Goz Eadjeb, in the desert between Berber and the Bed Sea, the
true capricorn abounds, and they are frequently seen in herds
of 200 and upwards.
About the same locality the wild ass and ostrich are occasion-
ally taken.
On taking leave of Abbas Agha I gave him half a pound
of gunpowder, a penknife, and a silk handkerchief; and besides
the provisions I received from him, he gave me a tea-cup
and a coffee-cup made of the horn of the rhinoceros, and a pair
of live ostriches, which I had intended bringing with me to
Cairo; but having adopted the precaution of trying how they
wmuld travel before commencing my journey, and finding it
impossible to drive them unless I took two men to each bird, I
accepted an offer of Abbas Agha to send them by one of the
Government boats so soon as the Nile had risen sufficiently for
them to be brought down. The Governor embarked them the
first opportunity, but owing to neglect or some other cause
they perished on the voyage.
I had now been twelve days at Berber —I had made a large
quantity of biscuits for the journey—l had procured a few pro-
visions—l was convalescent from an attack of dysentery, and I
determined to proceed. I asked Abbas Agha to provide me ten
camels. “ How now,” said he, “ you see you have not cured me
of my severe indisposition, I am some days better and some days
worse, but lam far from well.” I replied that I had told him


in the first instance that it would take three weeks to effect a
cure, that I would leave him some medicine, and at the expiration
o£ that time he would find himself in perfect health. “ Would I
not stay to see it P” No; my time was precious, and I must
leave, and with some reluctance I prevailed upon him to order
the camels I required. Having moved my effects to the edge of
the river I crossed to El Wohsh, a village situated on the opposite
side of the Nile, and the point from which we intended starting
to Meraweh.
I need hardly add that Abhas Agha was a confirmed hypo-
chondriac : his complaint was fanciful, and he was free from
all disease.
A few months after I left Berber he was cut to pieces in his
own divan by a Bishari Arab, whose father he some years
previously had placed before a gun and blown to pieces for
some trifling offence. Though Mohammed Ali Pacha had ordered
the Bishaeen to give him up they refused, and they gave the Pacha,
by arrangement, one thousand head of cattle instead.


NEW DONGOLA TO AMBUKOL.
The novelty of circumstances which had engaged my attention
at New Dongola made me anxious to proceed without delay to
Khartum, and after the usual preliminaries of bargaining and
higgling with the Captain of the Port I engaged a boat to
convey me to Ambukol. I gave a passage to Sheikh Mohammed
Sala, a Scribe of the Government, and with whom I resided
during my stay there.
I stopped at the island of Ourbi, situated between New
Dongola and Handok, to endeavour to obtain provisions. If a
traveller asked for milk, the answer invariably was they had
none, but as soon as they found he intended to pay for every-
thing he required they produced the provisions he wanted in
abundance.
On the second morning after I left New Dongola I arrived
at Handok, an irregular ill-built town, with many houses in a
dreadful state of dilapidation. A bazaar was held on Mondays
and Thursdays; that on the former day was the largest, though
poorly supplied and scantily attended.
I landed in the Turkish dress, to escape observation. I found
great difficulty in dealing with the people. Whatever I wished
to purchase, I was asked to name my price, and then they com-
menced saying “Efftohala!” (Bravo, well done!), and after I had
advanced considerably above the value of the article I wished to
obtain, they impudently exclaimed that they would not take
double my offer.
I had travelled at first as a Hakeem Bashi, or Chief Physician,
but relinquished this title and profession in consequence of being
pestered continually for medicines; and, though I had a very
good stock with me, I soon discovered that both Turks and


Arabs were such gluttons in physic that if I continued to dis-
tribute my medicines as freely as I did the first fortnight, my
chest would have been cleared out in less than a month
after leaving Wadi Halfah. I therefore only assumed the title
of Hakeem Bashi when I required any assistance or provisions
from a Giovernor whose weak point I had previously ascertained
was physic.
Under the title of Harreed Bey I was soon recognized in the
Bazaar of Handok, and the people rose from their seats, and
saluted me as I passed along with the grave and respectful
Saalam Aleikoum.
There was a Governor at Handok, but he was absent, and his
post was filled by a Coptic Scribe —a jolly, hard-drinking, good-
natured fellow, with whom I took coffee and a chibouk (pipe).
He gave me some excellent bread, returned my visit, and, being
much out of health, I secretly gave him some medicine.
Thirty miles south of Handok are the ruins of Old Dongola,
situated on the east bank. It was formerly a place of great
importance, but its population did not then exceed three hun-
dred.
The sand is of a very bright yellow colour, and has accumulated
in such quantities as in many places to conceal the houses ; its
surface being level with their roofs, and the entrance to the
apartments being through the ceiling of the rooms. There is no
land capable of cultivation near the ruined town ; in short, almost
all the east bank of the Nile between Old and New Dongola
is covered with drifted sand, and rare is it to see even a few
feet of cultivable soil.
At Old Dongola the river takes a turn, and the current
proceeds from east to west. It continues to come from this
point almost from Ambukol; before, however, arriving there the
current is a little more from north-east than east; so that the
river forms a curve from east to west from Ambukol to Old
Dongola.


About 20 miles to the south-east of Old Dongola, on the west
bank, is the small village of Debbah, the residence of a Kaschef,
and of importance to notice because the caravans start from
this point to Kordofan by the desert of Simrie,
To travellers crossing this desert it may be as well to mention
that there is a scarcity of water. The best time to cross it is
immediately after the Khariff or rainy season, when the water is
found in pools.
At other times there is in one part of the journey nine days
without water. Dr. Gallina, who was attached to one of the
Pacha’s Eegiments at El Obeid, the capital of Kordofan, men-
tioned that on one occasion he passed by this route to El Obeid,
and having fallen short of water, and being unable to replenish
his skins, was compelled to slake his burning and distressing
thirst by drinking the urine of cows.
The country between Kordofan and Debbah is hilly, and
cannot be passed under thirteen days.
In three hours from Debbah we arrived at the island of Gery,
only worthy of notice as being a boat-building station of Mo-
hammed Ali Pacha.
Sherg Turkos consists of a few huts, principally inhabited by
Bedoween, on the east bank of the river, opposite the island of
Goosharbah.
The ruined fortress of Hattani is observed on the west bank,
about 10 miles before reaching Ambukol. It is of modern
structure, built upon an eminence, and was probably one of
the fortified stations of the Mamlooks, to protect them against
the incursions and attacks of the inhabitants of the Seikiyah.
A little to the east of Hattani, and about 8 miles west of
Ambukol, is a portion of desert near the river called Haag-
barlak. The superficial stratum here is a coarse sandstone,
curious and interesting from its containing many siliceous fossil
trees. I observed five or six, the largest of which, situated
twenty minutes walk from the river, was 51 feet in length and


20 inches in diameter at its largest extremity. It was partially
buried in the sand. The peasants splinter off fragments and
use them for gun flints, and to strike a light with a steel and
amadoo or Gierman tinder. It appeared to me that these fossils
were palms or doom trees ( Giocifera Thebaica).
Between Haagbarlah and Ambukol the desert approaches close
to the river, and in many places the cultivable ground is only a
few feet in width. Occasionally there is no cultivable ground,
the desert approaching the edge of a precipitous bank.
All the islands between New Dongola and Ambukol are
tolerably well cultivated, and these islands being formed by the
rich alluvial soil of the Nile, produce abundant crops. The
peasantry appeared however in a state of great poverty.
On the Bth of January,! arrived at Ambukol, and took up my
quarters at the house of my passenger friend, Sheikh Mohammed
Sala. He was a Scribe of the Grovernment, whom I had brought
from Dongola. He had left my boat the day before, and had
hastened forward to have everything ready for my reception.
After leaving Old Dongola on the 4th I was attacked with
intermittent fever, which, in spite of quinine and other remedies,
assumed a continued form, and when I arrived at Ambukol I was
so exhausted with the exertion of riding from the Nile to the
milage, a distance of three-quarters of a mile, that I sank into a
state of collapse, from which it was very long before reaction
came on, and I felt that it was impossible that I could recover.
The day after my arrival, although the Hajji, by my orders,
had told the Kaschef of the village that I was too seriously
indisposed to receive visitors, he came with a retinue of at least
a dozen attendants, and with the curiosity peculiar to the Turkish
character, insisted upon seeing and handling my pistols and guns,
and in tasting half the contents of my medicine-chest, until I
was afraid that a visible effect would be produced from the
physic he had taken before he quitted my apartments. My
fever continued to increase, and I became delirious, with
occasional lucid intervals. Sheikh Mahommed and the Hajji


held a consultation, the result of which was that the former
persuaded the latter to permit him to burn under my
coverlet some amulets which he had written, and which he
asserted were a certain remedy for my complaint. I was asked
to submit to this plan of treatment, and, being unconscious of
what was going on, I was informed afterwards by the Hajji that
I acceded to their request. Subsequently I learned that the
Sheikh wrote some passages from the Koran on slips of paper,
and having placed a small earthenware stone under the coverlet,
burnt each amulet separately, at the same time placing his right
hand upon my forehead, and repeating prayers until the papers
were consumed, a remedy which almost roasted me alive and
stifled me with the carbonic acid gas produced.
During the night the delirium decreased ; towards morning I
began to doze, and at noon this formidable symptom disap-
peared. The Sheikh was extremely anxious to repeat the
remedy, and I as obstinately refused to submit, though I had
his assurance that I should suffer less every time the remedy w r as
repeated seven successive evenings, and convalescence would
undoubtedly be established. My reply was, “ I would rather
chance it.” When I recovered my consciousness I missed the
Hajji, and was informed by Ali that he had gone out early in the
morning and had not returned. I felt severely his absence,
more especially as he was an intelligent Arab, and had up to the
present time shown great patience and fidelity ; he was aware
that I had been dangerously ill for some days past, and therefore
I was surprised at his leaving me when I was so near the point of
death. My anxiety was relieved by his re-appearance in the
afternoon, and then be informed me that having witnessed during
the night the severity of my symptoms, and thinking that it was
impossible that I could recover, he had mounted the donkey and
started to a neighbouring village in search of planks, to be pre-
pared to inter me in the European manner in case I should have
fallen a victim to the fever from which I was suffering. I
recovered gradually, without any relapse, but did not resume my
journey until my health was re-established.


A mhukol was a large village. A market was held there every
Tuesday, and a tolerable bazaar every Friday; at the latter the
principal things for sale were Dburrab, cattle, sheep, goats, asses,
butter, and cotton.
A Kaschef is the principal person, and he is assisted by a Haas
elc Kaadat (Head of the Laws) or Kadi, who settles disputes and
administers justice.
I noticed many eagles constantly in the village, looking for food,
and some rock pigeons in the neighbourhood.
The thermometer from the 4th to the 21st of June had varied
between 70° and 80° of Fahrenheit.
I engaged seven camels to transport me to Khartum: two
for water, two for the Hajji and Ali, and three for the haggage.v
I had two donkeys for myself.
The people of Ambukol are generally good Mahomedans, and
abstain rigidly from the use of ardent spirits, whilst the inhabi-
tants of Dongola drink Arrakee to excess. They all carry spears.
Mine host, Sheikh Mohammed Sala, was a fine, tall, handsome
fellow, thirty-four years of age, well made, of a dark brown
colour, and a good Mooslim. He had had seven wives—from four
he had been divorced from incompatibility of temper, two were
living with him at Ambukol, and one he had left at New Dongola.
The land in the vicinity of Ambukol is rich and fertile, hut
most of it unfortunately was out of cultivation.


AMBUKOL.
The camels were not brought before half-past 9 a.m., and then
the Kababish (plural of Kabbash, “ a shepherd”) Arabs whom I
had engaged to take me to Khartum, intimated that they should
not start before 1 p.m. At 11 a.m. I experienced another severe
fit of ague, which lasted until 4. Nothing daunted by this
fresh attack, and hoping to escape the malaria by striking into
the desert at once, I started at 5 in the afternoon. I left
Ambukol after having taken an affectionate farewell of my kind
host Sheikh Mohammed Sala.
I immediately put myself under quinine, which prevented a
recurrence of the intermittent fever, and before I arrived at
Khartum I was convalescent.
I resolved to cross the desert of Bayudah, because I believe it
had never been previously passed by any European traveller.
My first day’s journey w'as short as first days journeys always
are in the East.
On the third day at Abu Samud we fell in with an encamp-
ment of Bedoween surrounded by camels, and large flocks of
goats and sheep. I endeavoured to persuade them to sell me a
sheep, bat they positively refused.
They brought us abundance of goat’s milk, which was delicious.
A plentiful supply of forage for their flocks grew round their
tents, and the only inconvenience from which they suffered was
a want of water, which they could not obtain nearer than the
wells of Bayudah, three hours distant, and whither they drove
their flocks every alternate day.


The wells of Bayudah are beautifully situated and surrounded
by a grove of trees. Many wells have been sunk, but we found
water only in three, and in small quantities.
The water is good, and free from brackish taste; it is thick,
and of a deep yellow colour, deriving these properties from the
soil through which it passes, and it deposits largely when left in
a vessel. The water which we had brought from the Nile was
putrid and nauseous, and we were glad to avail ourselves of the
opportunity of procuring a fresh supply. ¥e were delayed
several hours in obtaining a small quanity, the wells having been
visited by Arabs during the morning before our arrival, who had
drawn largely upon the springs for their goats, sheep, asses, and
camels. These were the only wells between Ambukol and El
Hajir.
While replenishing our skins some flocks came to be watered,
and I purchased a fine young sheep for 8 piastres, as well as a
supply of goat’s milk from the Bedowy who tended them.
Immediately after leaving the wells we crossed a small ascent
of about 70 feet, and then our road lay over a plain.
We had seen during our journey several herds of the Oryx or
G-ems-Bok, and previous to arriving at El Atherleh our camel-
drivers discovered the track of one which had been ensnared;
for the Bedoween take them in a leathern snare, to which is
attached a small block of wood, and the whole fastened to the
ground by a curved peg, so that if the Oryx escape with the
snare the Bedowy is enabled to trace him by the log which is
attached to his foot. In such a predicament was the one whose
track we crossed ; and as the impression on the sand was fresh,
one of my Arabs immediately followed in pursuit. After a chase
of two hours he hailed us from a distance, desiring that a camel
should be sent to him, which was speedily done, and in about an
hour the two men returned with the slaughtered animal, having
left the horns behind.


It was a remarkably fine male, of a dun and white colour, and
the flesh when cooked strongly resembled young beef in appear-
ance and flavour.
Between Kus Abu Deluah and El Atherleh I observed fine
plants of Cassia oifusa flowering luxuriantly.
Between El Atherleh and El G-harah we fell in with another
Bedoween encampment, where we procured a small quantity of
camel’s milk.
At 9 a.m. on the 31st January we arrived at the Nile, leaving
the desert between two rocky hills—El Hajir, about 150 feet
high on the right, and Grebel-el-E-oyan, about 250 feet high on
our left; the latter situated on an island called Greziret el
Haggeeb, for here the Nile divides into two branches, and forms
an island which is extensive but barren and mountainous. Wild
guinea-fowl abound on it, and M. Linant informed me that he
had found very small rubies on Grebel-el-Eoyan.
About two miles south of El Hajir we arrived at the tent of
the parents of one of our camel-drivers. We had not been
there long before the Hajji and Ali were busy in the culinary
department, and whilst breakfast was preparing my attention
was attracted to an adjoining tent, where the affectionate mother
was relieving her son of parasitical animals which infested
his head, and the operation being concluded she shaved his
occiput, and then anointed the shooshah or hair which remained
on his crown in profusion, not with the renowned cream of Cir-
cassia, but with the most rancid, stinking, offensive grease that
ever produced an impression on’my olfactories ; and so disgusting
was the stench that after his toilet was completed I was obliged
to insist upon his keeping at a considerable distance during the
remainder of the day.
I crossed the desert of Bayudah, as I have shown, between
Ambukol and El Hajir, and the journey is usually performed in
seven days, though it might with ease be made in six. It is flat,
with few hills, and those small and of easy ascent.


After leaving Ambukol the surface is alternately sand and
gravel, but the substratum is sandstone, and continues to be
such till within an hour of reaching Abu Samud, where we came
upon gray granite, furrowed by veins of primitive quartz. The
gravel, both to the right and left of Abu Samud, contains quartz
pebbles in great abundance, and I noticed also portions of
silicious fossil trees similar to those observed at Harabarlak.
At Abu Samud, the wells of Bayudah, and in short as far as El
Hajir, sandstone occurs with only one exception, where a vein of
red granite crossed from west to east between these two places.
I observed occasionally stones of a yellowish gray colour, spotted
wdth black points. I also found abundance of fragments of hard
sandstone, containing quartzose pebbles, which were in patches,
and at no great distance from each other. The patches of stones
of a gray colour, which appeared volcanic, were at least 40 or 50
miles from the hills; and though they appeared to have been
deposited after some volcanic convulsion, I was unable to discover
any extinct volcano. The sand does not drift much in this desert;
I also occasionally found hard, black cinders; it is, however,
remarkable that these isolated patches are found at so great a
distance from the mountains. At eight hours south of Ambukol
I came upon places where water had collected during the Kharif
or periodical rains, so as to form shallow pools. As evaporation
had proceeded, the surface was dried and warped, and upon re-
ferring to Mr. Arrowsmith’s map I observed that he had laid
dowrn their northern limits with great accuracy.
The desert of Bayudah abounds in many herbaceous plants. I
noticed an exceedingly beautiful variety of feather-grass, and
occasionally large patches of a species of Oschynomene, eagerly
devoured by the asses and camels. I frequently met with the
Cassia chtusa and a small prickly plant which is excellent food
for the camels, and which my friend Dr. Lush informs me is the
Acanthodium spicatum of Delile, allied to Acanthus. The seed,
says Dr. Lush is a most interesting microscopic object. On
being moistened, and the mucus dissolved, a number of clusters
of spiral vessels are seen arising from the surface of the testa.


This plant abounds in almost all the deserts—l first observed it
soon after leaving Hannek, and between this place and New
Dongola. There are also one or two varieties of mimosa in the
desert of Bayudah.
It possesses also many objects of great interest in the animal
kingdom, especially the lion, leopard, oryx or gems-bok, hysena,
fox, jackall, wild goat, capricorn, and many varieties of gazelle.
Prince Puckler Muskau’s caravan was attacked by a lion in
this desert, whilst crossing from Jebel Berkel to El Metemmeh.
Between Jagjoke and Kerreri I stopped at noon to repose,
near the river, under the foliage of a lofty widely spreading
acacia. Along the banks were some Kababish Arabs, with a
breeding herd of at least 10,000 or 12,000 camels ; these were
driven down to water every ten days. The camels were large,
strong, fine, and powerful animals, had never been used as beasts
of burden, and were kept as breeding stock, to be disposed of for
transit purposes and for the butcher.
The residence of these Arabs was in the desert, between two
and three days’ journey west of the Nile, and I could not discover
that they had any specific name for the particular spot they
inhabited.
We were soon on excellent terms. They brought us abundance
of camel’s milk, and I in return gave them a few needles and
beads, for which they were very grateful. I also purchased of
them some spears, weapons with which they were well provided.
A mutual confidence was speedily established, and ere I had
finished my first pipe I was called upon to settle a question
arising from the abstraction of some camel halters from the
Arabs by a slave of Sulieman Kaschif, Governor of the district,
whose residence is at Kerreri. I soon discovered that the nigger
was guilty of theft, and compelled him to return the halters to
the owners, at the same time severely reprimanding him for his
dishonesty.


The Hajji was guilty of a little insubordination. In the
morning my caravan had been stopped by an Arab, who asserted
that he was an officer of Customs and wished to search my kit, —
an inconvenience to which I positively refused to submit. As the
man seized both me and the donkey I was riding, and used me
rather more roughly than was agreeable, I begged the Hajji to
give me my pistols in order to alarm the Arab by a show of fire-
arms.
The Hajji however refused, fearing as he afterwards told me
that I should shoot the Custom-house Officer. "While adjudi-
cating the case between the nigger and the Kababish Arab, I
happened to have a korbadj (a hippopotamus hide whip) in my
hand, and the Hajji improperly suspecting that my decision
would be a word and a blow, or perhaps the latter without the
former, gently removed the korbadj from my hand. As I found
from these two circumstances that the Hajji entertained an idea
that I was incapable of controlling my actions, and desirous of
convincing him that my orders in the one instance should be
obeyed, and in the other that he must not interfere unless called
upon to do so, I planted one or two sharp blows on his chest, which
made him stagger and reel backwards several paces. Like a fly
driven from the object he adores, he returned immediately in a
semi-pugnacious attitude, inquiring with great vehemence why
I had struck him, and protesting that his conduct did not warrant
corporal punishment. My only reply was that the next time he
was guilty of unnecessary interference, I should not let him off
so lightly. I am happy, however, to say, that throughout my
long and protracted journey this was the only instance in which
a difference of opinion between us existed, and in which I felt
called upon to show positive authority. Hajji Suliman was one
of those rare beings, a trustworthy, honest, active, industrious,
and courageous Arab.
The road for two or three miles on both sides of Kerreri winds
beautifully through groves of the prickly mimosa and other trees,
presenting a park-like appearance, and wanting only grassy
verdure to render the resemblance complete.


Kerrori is situated on a prominent point, and commands an
extensive prospect. It was under the Government of Suleiman
Kaschef, who was formerly a Mamlook of Khurshid, Pasha of
Khartum, and who resides here during the Kharif or rainy
season, but the remainder of the year he dwells in tents on the
west bank of the White Kile, for the purpose of collecting
tribute from the Hasaniyeh Arabs and the villages between the
river and the commencement of the deserts of Habshabeh and
Sakrah.
On the 2nd of February we arrived at the banks of the White
Kile. After some little delay we procured a boat to convey us
to Khartum (the proboscis), situated on the west bank of the
Blue Elver about a mile and a half from its junction with the
Bahr-el-Abyad or White Kile.
The position of the junction of the Bahr-el-Abyad or White
Eiver, with the Bahr-el-Azreek or Blue Eiver, in the observa-
tions given me by M. Linant, is 15° 34' 40" north and 32° 11' 25"
east of G-reenwich. These observations do not agree with those
already made by the same gentleman, and published in a memoir
on the Bahr-el-Abyad, in the 2nd volume of the London Geo-
graphical Journal; for M. Linant there gives the position of the
junction of the two rivers as 15° 34' K. lat. and 32° 30' 58" E. long.
Mr. Perring, a civil engineer in the employment of Mohammed
Ali Pacha, who kindly undertook the construction of my map,
pointed out the discrepancy between these observations ; and we
immediately saw M. Linant on the subject, when he told us that
he considered the list furnished to me, from which I took all the
fixed points, to be the most deserving of reliance, because he
carefully looked over and corrected his observations after his
return to Cairo, and subsequently to his sending his papers to
the African Association.
Before concluding Ambukol, I think it but right to add that
I differ from Lord Wolseley in the way in which he is getting to
Khartum via Metemmeh. The route from Korti to Metemmeh


is the old caravan route; mine, from Ambukol to El Hajir by
the Desert of Bayudah, is more level, open country, and shorter,
and only 172 miles, and I think that the line might be fortified
and kept open for transit.
AMBUKOL TO KHARTUM.
h. m.
January 24. —Ambukol to Berg el Korrar 2 45
25. —Berg el Korrar to Kbor el Ghanim 7 30
26.—Khor el Ghanim to Abu Samud 9 0
27. —Abu Samud to the Wells of Bayudah 8 0
Wells of Bayudah to Khor el Laban 3 0
„ 28. —Khor el Laban to Kus Abu Deluah 8 15
29.—Kus Abu Deluah to El Atherlek 7 0
„ 30. —El Atherlek to El Gharah 8 0
31.—El Gharah to the Nile at El Hajir 3 30
52 0
El Hajir to Jagjoke 2 40
February 1. —Jagjoke to Kerreri 8 40
„ 2.—Kerreri to the Northern point of the White Nile ... 4 0
(Nil el Abyad) 15 20
Northern port of White Nile to Khartum 1 0
KHARTUM.
I have not thought it necessary to give any description of
Khartum, as it has undergone many changes and alterations
within the last few years. It is situated on the west bank of
the Blue River, about a mile and a half from its junction with
the White Nile. It is the seat of Government of the Beled-el-
Soudan, and the residence of the Governor. It was a small
village when Mohammed Ali Pasha subdued the kingdom, but
rose rapidly into importance at the expense of Shendi and
Sennar. It is a place of considerable trade, being convenient as
a rendezvous for the slave caravans from Abyssinia, Sennar, and
Kordofan. A large military depot was always kept there in
Mohammed Ali Pasha’s time.


USEFUL HINTS.
Abstain as much as possible from beer, wine, and spirits. I
was never a spirit drinker. I took six bottles of pale brandy
wken I started up tke Nile, but only consumed one, and that—a
dessert spoonful in my tea —when fatigued. I always drank Nile
water when I could get it. The Nile water, after the tropical
rains, is of a thick chocolate colour. The sediment is got rid of
by sprinkling a small quantity of powdered alum (about enough
to cover half-a-crown is sufficient for 10 gallons), and let it
settle. In an hour it is clear, and fit to drink.
I noticed that too much animal food was too stimulating in
the Beled-es-Soudan, and I reduced my quantity to two days
consecutively, and then the tvro following days my diet wmuld be
rice or macaroni.
If a person should lie down in a damp place, or where dew has
fallen, he is almost certain to be attacked with either Egyptian
ophthalmia or Asiatic dysentery. If with ophthalmia, bathe the
eye with tepid water, and then drop in a few r drops of wffiat the
Erench call “ collyrio de Luxor,” composed of saturated with
sulphate of zinc and alum in equal quantities, and applied to
the eyes night and morning.
I have had a dozen patients in a day who have suffered from
Egyptian ophthalmia, and never lost an eye from this treatment.
I have found five-grain doses of ipecacuanha, four times a day,
very beneficial in dysentery, and, though I relieved many by this
treatment, it never cured me. In some cases, if necessary, I
should add a little opium to the ipecacuanha.
Horses, donkeys, and mules will eat dhourrah (Holcus sorghum)
freely in about the same quantity of feed, as oats.
Sydney ; Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBBs.










■
