

SUBJECTS FOE UNITED PEAYEE,
The following Subjects, agreed upon at a Meeting of Ministers and others held in Sydney,
are recommended to Congregations, Families, and private Christians, during the first
week of January, 1864.
January 3rd to 10th, 1864. —Former invitations to observe a week of Special and United
Prayer at the beginning of the year have met with a very extensive and hearty response. From
almost every country in every quarter of the globe did much prayer ascend to heaven, during
that hallowed week, on behalf both of the Church and of the World.
The manifest blessings by which those seasons have been marked render it imperative
upon us to repeat them. Christians of every country and name are, therefore, affectionately
recommended to set apart the eight days—January 3rd to 10th inclusive—of the ensuing year,
for simultaneous and earnest supplication with thanksgiving to Him who has commanded “ Pray
without ceasing;” “in everything give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus
concerning you.”
The following topics are suggested as suitable for a prominent place in our exhortations
and intercessions on the sucessive days ; the general adoption of which would give a character
of agreement to our services highly acceptable to the Lord (for so lie hath taught us), and
animating in the consciousness of it to our own hearts.
Sunday, January 3rd. —Sermons on the dispensation of the Spirit.
Monday, January 4th.—Humble confession of our manifold sins as individuals, families,
Churches, and nations; prayer for the Lord’s blessing on the services of the week.
Tuesday, January 6th.—The conversion of the ungodly, especially those of our own
families and Congregations; larger success to all the means employed for the evangelisation of
different classes of the population, and for checking every form of vice and immorality.
Wednesday, JanuaryGth.—lncreased spirituality and holiness in the children of God, loading
to their closer union and sympathy with each other, and their more marked separation from the
world ; a richer baptism of the Holy Spirit on all Ministers, and their fellow labourers in
Christian lands, to quicken their love and zeal, and make them “wise to win souls;” a blessing
on all seminaries of sound learning and religious education; a large increase of devotedness,
self-denial, and liberality on the part of the people at large.
Thursday', January 7th.—The evangelisation of all nations of mankind, and a blessing
upon the labours of those engaged in missionary work; the overthrow of every form of anti-
christian error; the comforting and liberation of those in bonds for the Gospel’s sake; the
emancipation of the enslaved; the cessation of war; and the establishment of civil and religious
liberty among all nations.
Friday, January Bth.—The Word of God : the universal recognition of its Divine inspiration
and authority; the power of the Holy Spirit to accompany its circulation and perusal. The
Lord’s Day: the acknowledgmcut of its sanctity and obligation ; a blessing upon all efforts for
promoting its better observance at home and abroad.
Saturday, January 9th.—Thanksgiving for our numerous temporal blessings and spiritual
privileges. Prayer for kings and all in authority ; for all who are suffering from war or scarcity,
or any other affliction; for all sorts and conditions of men.
Sunday, January 10th.—Sermons: the Church “praying always with all prayer and
supplication in the spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance.”
May the spirit of grace and supplication be abundantly poured out upon
all who respond to this invitation. May their prayers come up with acceptance
before God the Father Almighty, through the Priesthood of His Blessed
Son. “The Lord will be very gracious to the voice of thy cry; when lie
shall hear it, He will answer thee.”
PRINTED BY 8. ELLA, PITT AND KING STREETS, SYDNEY.


