

?ETI4 Pp\Vi
S-1
SUBSTANCE OF A REPLY
A DEPUTATION
APPOINTED AT A PUBLIC MEETING
MEMBERS OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
IJELD IN
Hobart Coton,
ON THURSDAY, APRIL 22, 1852,
A
i
FRANCIS-RDSSELL NIXON, D.D.
BISHOP OF TASMANIA.
SECOND EDITION.
■ J
LONDON:
FRANCIS & JOHN EIYINGTON,
st. Paul’s church tabd, and waterlog place.
1853.




£ I ?»Lf ao
CORRESPONDENCE,
Hobart Town, sth May, 1852.
My Lord,— Having acted as Chairman at the Meeting of Members
of the Church of England, convened as to take into consideration
the recent condemnation of Ministers of the Church of England by
the Bishop of the Diocese, and other matters of importance to the
Church, held at the Mechanics’ Institute on Thursday evening, the
22nd ultimo, I beg leave to forward to your Lordship a newspaper
which contains a report of the Resolutions that were then passed.
I have the honour to request that your Lordship will be so good
as to appoint a time to receive the Deputation directed finally to
present the Resolutions.
I would also express the hope that your Lordship may be pleased
to return an answer in writing to the Deputation, in order to prevent
the danger of any misapprehension, as the subject of the Resolutions
is of such deep importance.
I should also state, for the information of your Lordship, that an
amendment, proposed by the Rev. F. H. Cox, to the effect that your
Lordship should be requested to take into consideration the subject
of the condemnation passed upon the Clergy before being called
upon to withdraw it, was not seconded, and met with no support;
the strongly expressed sense of the Meeting being, that, as your
Lordship had condemned them without requiring any explanation of
the opinion attributed to them, they are justly entitled to an uncon-
ditional withdrawal of such condemnation, previous to any explana-
tion being required of them, —it being manifestly unreasonable, that


the Clergy should be subjected to undergo an examination in order
to ascertain whether a condemnation already passed upon them could
or could not be justified.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord,
Your very faithful servant,
(Signed) THOS. J. KNIGHT.
The Lord Bishop of Tasmania.
Bishopstowe, Cth May, 1852.
S IR) —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your letter
of yesterday’s date, requesting me “ to appoint a time to receive the
Deputation directed finally to present the Resolutions ” passed at a
meeting, purporting to be of “ Members of the Church of England,
held at the Mechanics’ Institute on 22nd ultimo.
In reply, I beg to say, that I shall be ready to receive such persons
as desire to lay these “ Resolutions ” before me on Wednesday next,
at the Hutchins School, at three o’clock in the afternoon; on which
occasion I propose to offer such remarks upon the demands made in
them as may appear to me to be called for.
I remain, &c.,
(Signed) F. R. TASMANIA.
Thos. J. Knight, Esq.
RESOLUTIONS.
I Inasmuch as the Lord Bishop of Tasmania, in February last,
rejected the Certificate given to a Candidate for Holy Orders by the
Rev A. Stackhouse and the Rev. G. Wilkinson, by the Rev. Dr.
Browne and the Rev. A. C. Thompson, on the ground that they are
unsound in their religious opinions, and therefore incapable of testi-
fying to the soundness of the opinions of another, and that they had
acted inconsistently with their allegiance to the Church of England,
because, with eighteen other Clergymen, they had signed the “Solemn


Declaration of Ministers of the Church of England,” in which they
declared,
“ That the Holy Scripture is the sole rule of Faith, and that
“every individual has the right to read and interpret the Word
“of God by his own private judgment, with the aid of the
“Holy Spirit. Denying the authority of Tradition, or the right
“of any Church or Minister to prescribe to individuals, in
“ matters of religion, in opposition to their own judgment
And inasmuch as the Bishop has refused to countersign the Testi-
monials of a Clergyman leaving the Colony, because one of the
Clergymen whose names were affixed to the Testimonials had signed
the above-mentioned “Declaration:”
And inasmuch as this proceeding of the Bishop is an act of per-
secution against those Ministers who in the Solemn Declaration
opposed Romanism in the Church ; and as its direct tendency is to
compel them to renounce one of the fundamental principles of the
Protestant Reformation, and to coerce them into an acknowledgment
of an authority in the Church to overrule private judgment, setting
aside the Divine authority of Holy Scripture as the sole rule of
Faith, and subverting religious liberty: And inasmuch as this
proceeding w r ould render the whole Church subservient to the arbi-
trary will of the Bishop, and is calculated to drive out the Evangelical
Clergy from the Diocese, and to fill their places with Ministers of
Romanizing sentiments, —
Resolved, —That a Deputation, consisting of R. Q. Kermode,
Esq., Major Cotton, J. Barnard, Esq., Nigel Gresley, Esq., Capt.
Mackay, J. D. Loch, Esq., Rev. Dr. Fry, Rev. J. G. Medland*,
Rev. A. C. Stackhouse*, and Rev. W. R. Bennett*, be appointed to
wait upon the Bishop of the Diocese, and to request him, in the
name of this Meeting, to withdraw his condemnation of the Clergy.
11. Inasmuch as the Bishop of Tasmania, in his last Charge and
elsewhere, has “ protested ” against the decision given by the Privy
Council in the case of Mr. Gorham, whose opinions he terms a
heresy, and refuses to admit to Holy Orders any candidate of similar
sentiments, not holding the doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration—
that is, that all children baptized are necessarily regenerated : And
inasmuch as, in the opinion of this Meeting, such resolution of the
Bishop is a denial of the law of the Church of England, tending to
separate the Church in this colony from the Mother Church in
* These Clergymen were not present at the presentation of the Resolutions.


England: And inasmuch as this determination of the Bishop, by his
sole authority, excludes from the Church of this Colony ministers
holding Evangelical sentiments, and therefore narrows the terms of
communion in the Church, and is highly detrimental to the cause of
true religion: —
Resolved, —That the before-named Deputation be instructed to
request the Bishop, in the name of this Meeting, to retract his protest
against the decision of the Privy Council, and his resolution to
exclude Ministers not holding the doctrine of Baptismal Regenera-
tion.
111. Inasmuch as in the “Solemn Declaration” above twenty
Clergymen in this Colony have shown that the books called “ Steps
to the Altar,” “Spiritual Communion,” and “Theophilus Anglicanus”
inculcate some dangerous errors and corrupt practices of the Church
of Rome: And inasmuch as this Meeting fully concurs with the
statement of the Ministers in the “ Solemn Declaration,” and deeply
regrets that the Bishop of this Diocese should have expressed his
judgment that the above-named books are identified with the true
teaching of the Church of England; and that, under his direction,
“ Theophilus Anglicanus ” has been prescribed to Candidates for
Holy Orders, and is taught to students in divinity at the College,”—
Resolved, —That the before-named Deputation be instructed to
request the Bishop, in the name of this Meeting, to prohibit the use
at the College of the book called “ Theophilus Anglicanus.”
Bishopstowe, 24th May, 1852.
Sir, —Some time may probably even yet elapse before the sub-
stance of my lengthened reply to the Deputation, of which you were
the official organ, can pass through the press. I have, therefore,
judged it better to forward to you this brief preliminary answer to
the three requests that you have urged upon me.
Pardon me, however, in reminding you, at the outset, that it is
only in accordance with that spirit of Christian courtesy, which, as
the Chief Pastor of this Diocese, I desire to show both to its Clergy
and its Laity, that I could have consented to receive you, for the
purpose of hearing representations which, in reality, amount to com-
plaints.
No Bishop can recognize the authority of public meetings to call
upon him virtually to render an account to them of the ordinary
exercise of his pastoral office ; although, of course, they possess


the right of passing whatever opinions they please upon his public
acts.
Still less, —should any of the Clergy conceive it needful to take
exceptions to his decisions, —can he countenance their illegal conduct
in appealing to the people through the medium of newspapers and
public meetings, when an appeal to the Metropolitan is not only
secured to them as their lawful right, but pointed out as their only
lawful course.
Permit me also to express my surprise, that a body of men, wdiether
lay or clerical, who, after professedly mature deliberation, have
openly denied the Church’s right to prescribe to them in matters of
religion, in opposition to their judgment, should assume to them-
selves the privilege of attempting to prescribe to their Bishop in such
matters, in opposition to Adjudgment. It cannot surely be pleaded,
that a public meeting possesses an authority in itself which it re-
pudiates as belonging to the Church at large.
You ask me, in the first instance, to withdraw what you call my
“ Condemnation of the Clergy —in other words, you call on me to
admit the soundness of the position “ denying the right of any
Church to prescribe to individuals in matters of religion in opposi-
tion to their own judgmentfor this, I must beg you to remember,
is the portion of the “Solemn Declaration” to which I more im-
mediately demurred.
I reply, that if I am to take the common-sense interpretation of
these words, I can make no such admission. I am unable to act
otherwise than I have done, until the repudiation of the Church’s
authoritative teaching, as set forth (in my judgment) in this new
Article of Faith, be itself repudiated; or such satisfactory explana-
tion given, as to amount to a repudiation. Until this be done, I
shall be reluctantly compelled to decline granting Testimonials to, or
accepting signatures to Testimonials from, those few Clergymen who,
after consideration, have reiterated the declaration to which I
object.
You ask me, in the second place, to “ retract my protest against
the decision of the Privy Council, and my resolution to exclude
ministers not holding the doctrine of Baptismal Regeneration.”
I reply, that I have heard no arguments from any quarter, suffi-
ciently cogent to satisfy me, that my duty calls upon me to do either
the one or the other. It must be conceded, that lam as free to
entertain and express my opinion of that decision as you can
possibly be.


Further, it would be a dereliction of duty, w T ere Ito allow my
office to be so put into commission as to consent to have my dis-
cretion fettered in the exercise of, perhaps, the most awful responsi-
bility that can be imposed on man. For my admission or rejection
of those who present themselves for acceptance as ministers and
stewards of God’s mysteries, I have to answer to Him, —not to any
human power. I desire to regulate my decisions in this respect in
accordance with what I believe the Church has recorded as her
doctrines. I cannot admit that her acknowledged principles, synodi-
cally decreed, can be set aside, or explained away, by privy councils,
public meetings, or protestant associations.
Even to put the question upon its lowest, but perhaps most
popular footing, let me remind you, that whatever the Privy Council
may have decided with regard to the admission of clerks to bene-
fices in England, no courts of law have ever yet ventured to coerce
a Bishop’s conscience in the solemn duty of conferring Holy Orders.
The same rule which Lord Ellenborough laid down with regard
to the granting or withholding a licence will equally apply to the
case of ordination. —“ The Court,” his lordship said, when delivering
judgment in a well-known case, “ has never yet been called upon to
act authoritatively upon the conscience of the Bishop, when his
judgment appeared to them to be formed upon the personal qualifi-
cations of the party, after full inquiry ; and when his refusal stood
upon the distinct and clearly exhibited ground of a conscience so
informed.”
Rex v. Archbishop of Canterbury and Bishop of London, 15 East, 117*
You ask me, thirdly, to prohibit at the College the use of the
book called “Theophilus Anglicanus.”
I reply that, although I was in no respect concerned in intro-
ducing it to the College, I see no sufficient reason why I should
overrule the Warden’s discretion in retaining it. No valid proof has
been brought forward of its unsoundness, though much has been
asserted respecting its supposed demerits. I do not forget, that
certain of the Clergy have condemned this book as popish, and that
their condemnation has been confirmed by your recent public
meeting,—not half-a-dozen probably of the whole body having ever
read it through, and so made themselves sufficiently masters of its
contents to be qualified, in the eyes of any careful critic, to pass a
correct judgment upon it.
But I do not forget either, that this book has been so highly


thought of in England as to have passed through six large editions,
and to have secured the approval of (I believe) more than half her
prelates, who have thus borne testimony to the orthodoxy of its
author. Dr. Wordsworth needs neither defence nor commendation
at my hands. He is sufficiently recognized at home, as being one
of the most learned and successful champions of the Church of
England, against the unjust claims and corruptions of Rome, that
God in His good Providence has raised up to us in this generation.
In thus respectfully, but firmly, declining to accede to your re-
quests, I pray you to believe that I am actuated solely by a remem-
brance of the duty imposed upon me at my consecration, and by a
keen sense of the allegiance which a well-tasked conscience convinces
me that I owe to that Church in which I was baptized, —whose true
principles, as I understand them, I am sworn at all hazards to
maintain, —and in whose communion I hope both to live and die.
I remain, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) F. R. TASMANIA
T. J. Knight, Esq.
Hobart Town, 9th June, 1852.
My Lord, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your Lordship’s letter to me dated the 24th ultimo. In the interval,
since that day, I have collected as quickly as I could the sentiments
of the members of the Deputation, who were scattered in different
parts of the country. It was only yesterday that I received tw'o of
their replies upon perusing your Lordship’s letter.
In order to avoid the possibility of our misunderstanding or mis-
reporting the answers that your Lordship might be pleased to give
us, we had requested your Lordship, before you fixed the day for
receiving us, to favour us with a copy of them in writing.
We were prepared to wait your Lordship’s convenience, as to any
delay that you might think desirable for the preparation of your
answer. We were not, however, favoured with your Lordship’s
answer in writing at that time, your Lordship informing us that it
would be subsequently printed.
Those of the Deputation who were present are of opinion, that
this preliminary answer with which your Lordship has favoured us
could not with propriety be given by us to the members of the


Church of England, as adequately conveying either the tone and
spirit displayed, or the arguments and sentiments advanced, by your
Lordship, in your verbal reply to the Deputation.
The whole Deputation are unanimously of opinion, that it would
not be right for us to retain this preliminary answer in our possession,
but that we should await your Lordship’s convenience for the pro-
mised publication of your Lordship’s lengthened reply, trusting that
this may not involve any considerable further delay.
I am therefore desired most respectfully to request that your
Lordship will consent to receive again into your hands your Lord-
ship’s present communication, and I pray your Lordship to be
assured, that every member of the Deputation disclaims any inten-
tion of showing discourtesy to your Lordship in making this request.
I have the honour to be,
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s very faithful servant,
(Signed) THOS. J. KNIGHT.
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Tasmania,
•Bishopstowe, 10th June, 1852.
Sir, —In acknowledging the receipt of your letter of yesterday’s
date, I need only say, that the substance of my lengthened reply to
the Deputation is in the printer’s hands.
I remain, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) F. R. TASMANIA.
T. J, Knight, Esq.


SUBSTANCE OF A REPLY,
Gentlemen, —I am, of course, unable to controvert the
declaration which Mr. Knight has this moment made, viz.,
that he is in a position to prove that not more than fifteen
persons were present at the recent meeting at the Mechanics’
Institute (of which you are the deputation) who were not
members of the Church of England.
In speaking of that meeting, as “ purporting” to consist of
members of our Church, rather than actually being so, you
must be well aware, that I did but express the conviction of
those who were attendants at its proceedings, as well as
yourselves. I must, however, confess, that I should be glad
to see the proof of which you speak; and I trust, that, as
you have thought it needful to take exceptions to my words,
you will afford it.
But, had each individual then present been, bond fide, a
member of the Church of England,—you must pardon me
in saying, that I should still be unable to recognize such an
assembly as possessing any power, either by law or usage, to
interfere between me and the ordinary exercise of my
Episcopal authority, in and over the Clergy committed to
my charge. A Bishop’s rightful jurisdiction does not depend
upon the popular will, but upon fixed and acknowledged
principles. It would be difficult to show, that, in declining
to accept certain signatures to testimonials for Holy Orders,


I have, in the very remotest degree, stepped beyond law,
custom, privilege, or principle. The simple assertion to the
contrary is no proof. Permit me also to state both my hope
and belief, that for the honour of Van Diemen’s Land, your
meeting did not express the sentiments of the Laity at large
respecting the subjects on which it has pronounced so
decided an opinion. With reference, however, to the Clergy,
I need not express the hope, but record my conviction, that
the majority of their body would, and will, repudiate all
sympathy with the discreditable, and indeed illegal conduct,
adopted by some of their brethren, with regard to these
recent proceedings.
It grieves me to use such strong language, or to apply
such harsh terms to any one, —but I am confident, that, in
the judgment of sober-minded people, who are conversant
with the solemn pledges which bind the Clergy to their
Bishop, nothing short of discredit can ultimately attach to
those, who not only openly defy his ordinary and legally
recognized authority, but revile him in the newspapers, as
an arbitrary persecutor, charge him with being virtually a
traitor to the Church, by watching his time to Romanize it,
through its Ministers, and do their best to bring his good
name into disrepute, and even his orthodoxy into question.
A public meeting, open to all sects and parties, is not,
surely, the place which Ministers, zealous for the honour of
their Church, and anxious for Christian unity and concord,
would select for the discussion of points connected with her
doctrine or her discipline. Nor can he, who has voluntarily
undertaken reverently to obey his Ordinary, to “ follow with
a glad mind and will his godly admonitions, and to submit
himself to his godly judgments,” be in the strict path of his
self-imposed duty, when as an attendant at such a meeting,
he not only listens complacently to the cheers which follow
upon each mistaken interpretation of his Bishop’s words and
acts, but joins greedily with others in the hasty condemnation
of his spiritual superior, whom, if oaths and promises have
any meaning, he is at least bound to abstain from “ treating
disrespectfully,” and “judging harshly or uncharitably.”
The conduct to which I allude is as contrary to law as it


is to propriety. A complaint is made against what is called
a “ sentence” of the Bishop. Now (to say nothing of the
obvious fact, that if any act of mine seems in the eyes of the
Clergy to be so arbitrary, unjust, or illegal, as to afford fair
ground of exception, a remonstrance should, in the first in-
stance, have been addressed to myself), they are well aware
that, from any sentence of the Ordinary whereby they may
feel themselves aggrieved, there is, very properly, an appeal
to the Metropolitan secured to them by the Letters Patent
constituting the Bishopric.
We are yet to learn the reasons why this wholesome
provision has been thus summarily set aside in favour of an
appeal, not to the members of the Church of England only,
but to the public at large; or why letters in newspapers, and
the excitement of public meetings, have been substituted
for that grave and calm deliberation which alone can befit
the character of the priesthood. Neither have we been
informed, how, in a question of ecclesiastical order, referring
exclusively to the relation between the Clergy and their
Bishop, the interests of the Church are best consulted, as
one Clergyman appears to consider, “by leaving the matter
in the hands of the Laity.”
Nevertheless, unwilling, and, indeed, unable as I am, to
recognize either the meeting or this deputation as adequately
representing either the people or the Clergy, I have readily
consented to receive you, to hear your representations, and
to afford, in reply, such information and explanations as may
probably lead you to re-consider your opinions, and to ques-
tion their real soundness. I trust that I shall never be
indisposed to adopt this course, or unwilling to listen to such
observations upon important matters connected with the
Church’s weal, as any of her members may desire to put
before me.
You are here avowedly to-day for the purpose of making
three requests : Ist, —That I should withdraw what you term
my condemnation of the Clergy, who have signed a tract
called the “ Solemn Declaration.”
2nd, —“That I should retract my protest against the


decision of the Privy Council, and ray resolution to exclude
Ministers not holding the doctrine of baptismal regeneration.”
3rd, —“ That I should prohibit the use, at the College, of
the book called Theophilus Anglicanus.”
Before replying to the first of your requests, permit me to
point out an error into which you have been inadvertently
led. You state, as a fact, that I have “refused to counter-
sign the testimonials of a Clergyman leaving the Colony,
because one of the Clergymen whose names were affixed to
the testimonials had signed the above-mentioned declaration.”
It may be as well that you should be in possession of the
whole truth; for a most important part appears to have been
withheld from you.
The Rev. Mr. Batchelor (to whom, I presume, you allude)
applied to me for the usual testimonials on leaving the
Diocese for England. I represented to him, that as he had
been, for the last three years, absent from the Colony, and
entirely removed from all intercourse with his brethren, it
was impossible that any of them could, with a due regard to
truth, depose to their “personal knowledge ” of his moral and
religious character for that period. I told him, however,
that, in default of ordinary testimonials, I would myself so
record my estimate of his services, and so represent the
peculiar difficulty in which he had been placed, as to remove
all possibility of any demur being raised to his officiating in
another Diocese. With this reply he was perfectly satisfied,
and gratefully acknowledged the testimonials which I subse-
quently gave him.
Without his knowledge (as he himself assured me), testi-
monials signed by three Clergymen were presented to me
for counter-signature. I endorsed three objections to this
document:—lst, “That the form is not that adopted in this
Diocese” (a copy of which, I scarcely need add, might
have been procured on application to myself). 2nd, “That
the subscribing parties cannot of their ‘ personal know-
ledge’ depose that the Rev. F. S. Batchelor hath led his life
piously, soberly, and honestly, during the time specified;
Mr. B. having been for the last three years removed from
their personal observation, in consequence of his residence


at Norfolk Island. Dr. Fry (one of the subscribers) has,
moreover, been in England for two out of these three years.”
This last reason would have been sufficient to have com-
pelled me, as a matter of truthfulness, to refuse my counter-
signature ; for I have no mind that testimonials should be
thus made a perfect mockery, or that persons living at a
distance of 1800 miles, who had neither seen nor conversed
with a Clergyman, for one single moment during the entire
period of his ministerial career for which they certified,
should be admitted as competent witnesses, of their own
“personal knowledge,” to his doctrinal soundness or his
moral character; and this, I must take the liberty of saying,
is a matter for the Bishop’s sole consideration. The third
objection, to two out of the three signatures, was founded
upon the clause in the “ Solemn Declaration,” to which such
frequent reference has been made.
I now come to your first request; and, in replying to it,
I must enter somewhat at length into the reasons which
constrain me to decline acceding to it.
In July last, the Rev. Dr. Bedford forwarded to me a copy
of a tract called a “ Solemn Declaration,” signed by several
of the Clergy, containing a critique upon certain theological
works that had been circulated in this Diocese. It is suffi-
cient, on the present occasion, to say that, in differing from
their estimate of these works, I do but prefer the theology of
those who have hitherto been considered at once the sound-
est and most learned divines whom the Church of England
has produced, to that of the few Clergymen whose signatures
were affixed to this document.
But there was another portion of the tract which caused
me more serious concern. It was that in which what the
subscribers called “ the principles of the Protestant Reforma-
tion were put forth. It seemed to me to be a matter of deep
regret, that a small body of Clergymen, in this remote corner
of the world, should have thought it necessary, or even within
their province, to compile and publish what are virtually new
articles of faith, when the Thirty-nine Articles, to which we
have all subscribed, have been for well-nigh three hundred


years regarded as sufficient, in conjunction with our Scrip-
tural and Apostolic Liturgy, to set forth the principles, to
record the judgment, as well as to define and guard the true
character of our reformed Church of England. Under any
view of the question, they are supplementary to the Thirty-
nine Articles, and, as such, I see no reason for their admission
on the Bishop’s part. Even if they are in accordance with
the Church’s existing Articles, there can be no need of them;
if there is but a possibility of their being otherwise, the
sooner they are abandoned the better.
I was pained to see in this document a new definition of
the “ Church,” unrecognized by, and essentially differing
from, that given in our nineteenth Article, —in that it
omitted two important characteristics of a true Church;
namely, the preaching of the “pure Word of God,” and the
due administration of the Sacraments, “ according to Christ’s
Ordinance, in all those things that, of necessity, are requisite
to the same.”
But there was a more startling position than this:—
namely, that put forth in the clause to which I have objected,
and which objection forms the groundwork of your present
complaint. I found a declaration “denying the authority
of tradition, or the right of any Church or Minister to pre-
scribe to individuals in matters of religion, in opposition to
their own judgment ;” a declaration which, to my mind, is in
no respect dependent upon, or satisfactorily explained by,
the previous portion of what is now called “the Second
Article of the principles of the Protestant Reformation;”
viz., “that the Holy Scripture is the sole rule of faith; and
that every individual has the right to read and interpret the
Word of God by his own private judgment, with the aid of
the Holy Spirit.”
I felt then, I feel now, and I dare say that I shall feel
ever, that the declaration which I have declined to affirm is, in
reality, equivalent to reducing every thing to each individual’s
private judgment; before which creeds, catechism, articles,
liturgy, all, must give way. I could regard it in no other
light than a denial of all authoritative teaching on the part
of the Church, which no mere explanation could get over, if


these words were still to stand, and to be allowed to bear
their plain, legitimate meaning.
The time came, when, as it seemed to me, I was called
upon virtually to affirm or deny the orthodoxy of this
declaration, by accepting, or rejecting, the signatures of some
of its subscribers, to testimonials furnished by them to can-
didates for Holy Orders.
Unwilling, as I was, to run the risk of disturbing the
peace of the Church, by refusing to pass over, officially, so
sweeping a repudiation of all Church authority, —my duty
was clear. I declined receiving testimonials so signed,—not,
as I might legally have done, without assigning any reason
for my refusal, but distinctly expressing my own honest con-
viction, that the declaration in question was inconsistent with
the recorded principles of the Church of England, with
which alone, I as one of her Bishops, had to deal; and of
which, in my own Diocese, I am the authorized exponent,
should any doubt or difficulty arise.
So many of you as are familiar with the ordinary discipline
of the Church of England must be perfectly aware, that, in
declining to accept these testimonials, I have done no more
than exercise that discretion, which law, custom, and neces-
sity unite in conceding to a Bishop ; and, indeed, I may say,
to a Presbyter as well: for every Clergyman possesses the
uncontrolled right of signing testimonials, or not, according
to his own conscientious discretion; a right which was ex-
ercised by Dr. Bedford, and Mr. Stackhouse, with regard to
Dr. Fry himself, when, in 1843, the former refused to sign
his testimonials for priest’s orders,—whilst the latter wrote
to me, remonstrating against his admission to the priesthood,
on account of the alleged Romanizing tendency of a work
on the “ Apostolic Ministry and Tradition,” which he had
recently published.
You, Gentlemen, have to-day told me, that you regard this
refusal of the Bishop to accept these testimonials, in oppo-
sition to his own carefully examined view of his sworn duty
to the Church, as “ an act of persecution ” against the Clergy,
who, as you say, have opposed Romanizing in the Church.
You assert, that its tf direct tendency is to compel them to


renounce one of the fundamental principles of the Protestant
Reformation, and to coerce them into an acknowledgment of
an authority in the Church to overrule private judgment.
It has been alleged on the one hand, that I have overlooked
the former part of this “ Second Article,”—and yet you tell
me now, that I “set aside the Divine authority of Holy
Scripture as the sole rule of faith,” and that I “subvert
religious liberty” thereby. You say also, that “this pro-
ceeding would render the whole Church subservient to the
arbitrary will of the Bishop, and is calculated to drive out
the Evangelical Clergy from the Diocese, and to fill their
places with Ministers of Romanizing sentiments.” One of
this deputation,—the Rev. Dr. Fry, —represents this exercise
of my discretion, as “ depriving the Clergy of their right, as
Presbyters, to recommend candidates for Holy Orders.”
He speaks of it, as an “undue exercise of authority;” as “a
sentence, groundless, arbitrary, unjust, unnecessary, illegal,
and absurd;” as “arbitrary persecution ;” as “a deplorable
violation of charity and good feeling.” He would fain per-
suade the public that it amounts to “excommunicating,
without trial, legal enquiry, or explanation, above twenty
Clergymen, several of them older in the ministry” than
myself. I pause for a few moments, to turn your attention
to the strange recklessness with which such terms are used.
“ Trial and legal enquiry ” are superfluous, when a Bishop is
simply called upon to declare his opinion upon theological
statements publicly propounded by certain of the Clergy:—
“ explanation ” was invited by the very act of my refusal;
and still more so, by the letters in which that refusal was
intimated. But it is really presuming too far upon the sup-
posed ignorance or credulity of the public, to denounce my
act as “ excommunication.” Permit me to remind you, that
excommunication is a censure, duly passed by ecclesiastical
judges, after legal enquiry, whereby the person, against whom
it is pronounced, is, for the time, cast out of the communion
of the Church. It consists of two kinds; the lesser, de-
priving the offender of the use of the Sacraments, and divine
worship; the greater, excluding him not merely from the
Sacraments, and the benefit of divine offices, but also from


the society and conversation of the faithful. But Dr. Fry
tells me further, that my “ decision is universally regarded
as no less destitute of every form of law, than derogatory to
the character of the Clergy, and the office of a Bishop/’
He gives it also as his opinion, that “ every Minister and
member of the Church is under a positive obligation to
protest against, and oppose a sentence and proceeding tend-
ing to subvert his religion, to destroy his liberty, and to
establish Romanism.”
He regards the construction that I have put upon this so-
called “ fundamental principle of the Church of England,”
as “most forced, unnatural, and uncharitable.” He asserts
also, that “never was the fundamental principle, on which
the Protestant religion is founded, more distinctly denied by
any Roman Catholic controversionalist, than it has been in
this instance” by myself. He has further intimated to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, that the “ only remedy for this,
and all other evils, is the establishment of a constitutional
assembly of the Clergy and Lay representatives;” and that,
if this be not obtained, one of the results will be, that
he and his “ must protest publicly, and establish a Church
in opposition to the Bishop and his party.” I make no
observation on this extraordinary language. Nothing more
is needed than to remind you, that it proceeds from those
selfsame lips that have answered to the question, “Will you
reverently obey your Ordinary?” “I will do so, the Lord
being my helper.” I leave to your own good sense to decide
what would be the measure meted out to any subordinate
officer, in any other department, who thus demeaned himself
towards his acknowledged chief; and I will come at once to
the consideration of the true nature, as I regard it, of this
new article of faith, which has been so unguardedly worded,
and to which I have been compelled to take such serious
exceptions.
In proceeding to comment upon it, the fairer course would
appear to be, to take the explanation, as recently drawn up
by five Clergymen at Campbell Town, and subsequently
affirmed by seven others.


I place its two parts in juxta-position :
“ The second Article of the Decla-
ration does not contradict the right of
the Church of England to frame arti-
cles of religion, and to decree rites
and ceremonies (the same not being
contrary to God’s Word), which its
members are bound to receive and
observe as long as they continue mem-
bers of the Church of England.”
“ The Article in the Declaration only
asserts that every Christian may in-
terpret the Word of God by his own
private judgment with the aid of the
Holy Spirit, and declares that no indi-
vidual is bound to receive on the au-
thority of any Church or Minister,
doctrines which the private judgment
of such individual may convince him
to be contrary to Holy Scripture.”
These two propositions, when taken conjointly, or sepa-
rately, appear to me to make but little account of either
heresy or schism, as sins: allowing, as they virtually do, any
form or shade of belief, that each man’s private judgment
might happen to select, as its interpretation of God’s Holy
Word, in contradiction, it may be, to the Church’s recorded
exposition of that Word; and sanctioning, by implication,
secession from the Church, if her members feel themselves
unable to receive her truths.
I do not see how these concessions are reconcilable with
the principles of a Church which assumes something beyond
the mere right to frame articles of religion,—a Church, which
claims “ authority in controversies of faith,” authority, to say
the least of it, to decide on the true interpretation of those
articles, and her other doctrinal positions, should any doubt
or difficulty arise on the part of her individual members.
The ride by which her decisions are to be guided is Holy
Scripture, which alone she recognizes as the basis of her
faith and teaching; laying down the wholesome caution, that
nothing ought to be required of any man, “ that it should
be believed as an article of faith, or be thought requisite or
necessary to salvation,” “ that may not be read therein, or
may be proved thereby.” Thus she puts forth her truths,
not because she says thus or thus, but because she has
proved thus or thus.
If the assertion in the “explanation” be true, as a
negative proposition, that no individual is bound to receive,
on the authority of any Church, doctrines which the private
judgment of such individual may convince him to be contrary


to Holy Scripture,—it must be true, also, as a positive pro-
position, that every individual is at liberty to reject any
doctrine of the Church that does not agree with his own
interpretation of Scripture.
Apply this principle to the Church of England, and to the
individual members thereof, with reference to any particular
doctrine which that Church has deduced from Scripture,
laid down as proved by Scripture, and put forth as her
interpretation of Scripture. We will take the doctrine of
the Trinity by way of example. If this declaration, to which
I so strongly object, be indeed a principle (not of the
“ Protestant Reformation,” with which we have nothing, just
now, to do, but) of the Church of England, then it follows,
as a necessary consequence, that every member of the
Church may reject all belief in the Godhead of our Blessed
Lord, if his own study of Scripture should lead him ulti-
mately to prefer the interpretation of the Socinian to that
recorded in the teaching of the Church. And if he he so
at liberty, it follows also that he may, without offending
against the revealed law of God, or without transgressing
the rule of the Church, become a heretic, by denying the
Lord that bought him,—or a schismatic, by seceding from
her communion, because he will not receive her teaching, in
deference to the caprice of his own, perhaps ill-informed, and
too probably, headstrong private judgment.
Whatever those differing from our Church may think
ought to be the rule in this respect, 1 cannot see how any
one, whether of our own communion or not, can discover in
the recorded principles of the Church of England any such
latitude as that claimed for her members in the new “articles”
of the so-called “principles of the Protestant Reformation.”
It seems to me to be rather the leading principle of dissent;
and, as such, I can quite understand how the dissenter
would advocate and claim the unlimited right of private
judgment in and over every single point of doctrine that has
been, or may be, deduced from Scripture.
Such entire abnegation of all reverence for the well-
weighed judgment of centuries is quite consistent on the
part of those who reject the authority of Creeds, Catechisms,


and other summaries of faith, which the pious wisdom of
grave and holy men have drawn up, not from their own tra-
ditions, but from the one only source of infallible and saving
truth—God’s Holy Word. But the Church of England
teaches her own children a far different lesson.
In her eighth Article she declares, that the three Creeds
“ ought thoroughly to be received and believed; for they
may be proved by most certain warrant of Holy Scripture.”
The Athanasian Creed says, “ Whosoever will be saved [qui-
cunque vult salvus esse], before all things it is necessary
that he hold the Catholic faith; which faith, except every
one do keep whole and undefiled, without doubt he shall
perish everlastingly; and the Catholic faith is this, that we
worship One God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity.” The
same Creed says, in still stronger words (if possible), “ Like
as we are compelled by the Christian verity to acknowledge
every person by Himself to be God and Lord, so are we
forbidden by the Catholic religion to say, there be three
Gods, or three Lords.”
No language can be more explicit: there are no “open
questions” here; no licence given to each individual’s private
judgment. The Church, as a faithful monitor, puts the
truth before him, “ whether he will hear, or whether he will
forbear.” If liberty to reject it be claimed by him, or for
him, is it liberty according to God’s Holy Word, or in oppo-
sition to it? in conformity to the principles of the Church
of England, or in defiance of them ? If the latter be the
case, such liberty can scarcely be upheld as a fundamental
portion of what she would call the “ principles of the Pro-
testant Reformation.”
Those who have put forth this “ declaration” are individual
members, as well as Ministers, of the Church of England.
In accordance, then, with their own claim to the plenary
right of private judgment for others, they must, of course,
possess it themselves; as individuals, they must be at perfect
liberty to reject any doctrine which their private judgment
may convince them is contrary to Scripture.
If this be truth, they must needs, in teaching their flocks,
tell them (learned or unlearned, stable or unstable, it matters


not) that, —if they “interpret the Word of God by their own
private judgment, with the aid of the Holy Spirit,” in a sense
totally different from that in which the Catholic Church of
Christ has interpreted it, —they are at perfect liberty to do
so : the Church allows it; it can, therefore, be no sin. The
Church disclaims all right to fetter their free opinion: she
has only, according to Dr. Fry’s view, “ authority to teach,
guide, direct, or influence,” but none to prescribe ; none to
speak with authority, so as to “ overrule private judgment.
No man is bound to receive its teaching in opposition to his
own judgment.”
Now, not to dwell upon the well-known truth, that the
Creeds themselves are a standing protest against the here-
sies which they severally condemn, —and so, a protest also
against the licence of individual private judgment,—the re-
sult of teaching, such as I have described, is too manifest to
require comment. No Church, no civil society, could stand
upon so insecure a foundation : each requires an authority,
somewhere, to interpret its fixed rules, and to prescribe such
interpretation to its acknowledged members.
But, were each man to be his own interpreter, in matters
where the Church has recorded her judgment, and to be at
liberty to set up his individual opinion against that judgment,
either because his own dwarfed intelligence could not, or
his own rebellious spirit would not, receive it,—it requires no
great stretch of the imagination to forecast the consequence.
Such liberty, or rather such licence, would speedily bring
about a state of things similar to that which St. Peter de-
scribes, when he tells us that, in his days, “ the unlearned
and unstable” wrested St. Paul’s epistles, as they did also
“the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction.” We
cannot be so uncharitable as to suppose, that they, who
did thus much, abjured all prayer to the Holy Spirit, to be
guided aright in their search of Scripture. Wherefore, then,
did their study of God’s Holy Word lead to such an awful
result?
Is it too much to say, —because they preferred their own
individual opinion to the judgment of the then infant Church
of Christ ? because they neglected, or rejected, the means of


grace which Christ had ordained for the general teaching
of His Church,' and virtually challenged a miracle to be
wrought in their behalf, for their own especial and individual
illumination ?
The Apostle warned the erring members of the Church, in
his day, against the peril and the consequences of this misuse
of the “right of private judgment.” A virtual repetition of
his warning is, in these days, branded by some as “imposing
on our consciences and understandings a heavier and more
arbitrary yoke than that of papacy.” Its rejection is upheld
as advocating the liberty of what is called “ the Protestant
religion.”
If I required historical proofs of the miserable effects of
an undue exercise of private judgment in religious matters,
I should discover them, not only in the many forms of heresy
with which the primitive Church was afflicted, in consequence
of individuals disregarding her warning voice, claiming and
exercising the right of interpreting Scripture according to
their own fancy, and so, bringing its sacred authority for
each strange notion that was broached; but I should find
them also in our own history, and in that of the modern
Protestant world.
There was a period in our annals, subsequent to the
Reformation, at which not merely the Church’s authority to
“ prescribe” was repudiated, but her mission even to “ teach,
guide, direct, and influence,” discarded. There was a time
when “ the liberty of conscience,” as it was called, was denied
to the members of that Church, whilst it was claimed as the
inalienable privilege of all beside. It was a time to which
we should as little love to refer for lessons in theology, as
for principles of loyalty.
“ Recur to the history of our own land two centuries ago.
Then, those principles which are sometimes called Protestant
principles, and are even imagined by some persons to be the
only true Protestant principles, but which are very often
found to be most favourable to Popery, had their full sway.
Then every man was left to do what was right in his own
eyes. Every man expounded the Bible for himself. Then
Episcopacy w'as abolished, ceremonies were abolished, the


Liturgy was abolished, Creeds and confessions were abolished.
Catechisms and Articles were abolished,' the Church of
England itself was abolished; all these things, I say, were
abolished, as far as men could abolish them. And what was
the consequence ? Did a golden age succeed ? Did peace
flourish? Did truth prevail? Did charity abound? No:
Rome, Rome enjoyed a triumph. She exulted in the work
of destruction. One whose testimony cannot be suspected
in this matter, Richard Baxter, thus speaks of the harvest
reaped by Popery in those miserable times : — i What abund-
ance have the Papists lately won in England !’ he exclaims ;
‘ persons of the nobility, gentry, and clergy, as well as of the
common people, and zealous professors of religion, of late
have been seduced by them. I must confess this/ he adds,
* though some will think this to be our dishonour. But it is
easier to pull down than to build V ”
And are we so blind to the true spirit of our Blessed Lord’s
most touching and almost dying prayer for the unity of that
Church which He was about to purchase with His sore
anguish, and the sacrifice of His blood, as not to see that
it cannot be after His mind that that Church, instead of
being one, as He and the Father are one, is split up into I
know not how many sects, divisions, and parties, each
pleading conscience as the groundwork of separation, each
putting forth the right of private judgment as the watch-
word of his party, —all appealing to their own interpretation
of the Bible as the standard of their faith, —all justifying
by that their peculiarities, their scruples, their hostilities, or
their schisms ? Is there no warning in the existing state of
Protestantism on the continent of Europe ? no lesson to be
learnt from the creedless and godless Church of Geneva,
which is now avowedly a Socinian community? none from
the wild latitudinarianism of the manifold Protestant sects of
Germany, where each man is well-nigh his own teaching
priest, and where individual opinion seems almost man’s only
creed ? none from the innumerable forms of Christian doc-
trine which are severally proclaimed as God’s everlasting
1 Wordsworth’s Occasional Sermons, preached in Westminster Abbey ;
vol.'i. p. 71.


truth by the countless sects within the young but vigorous
new world, which, in its energy and enterprise, has given
full proof of the vitality of Anglo-Saxon blood ?
You are aware, that it has been urged by some, that as a
matter of consistency, it was my duty immediately to have
revoked the licences of the Clergy who signed the “ Solemn
Declaration,” if I considered the principles put forth in any
portion of it to be so unsound, as to prevent me from accept-
ing their signatures to testimonials given by them to others.
The objection amounts, in fact, to this; that I have not acted
arbitrarily, or hastily,—but that I have exercised forbearance,
as long as I could do so, with a sound conscience.
The objection itself would scarcely have been hazarded by
any one really familiar with the ordinary routine of an
English Diocese. There are Clergymen here, who could tell
you, of their own knowledge, instances where a Bishop has
declined accepting an incumbent’s signature to testimonials,
and who, nevertheless, did not feel himself called upon to
eject him from his living. A Bishop may regard some of a
Clergyman’s published opinions as equivocal or questionable,
and, as such, he may decline to affirm them by any official
act of his own ; but it does not, therefore follow, that, by
such refusal, the Clergyman is condemned as a heretic or a
schismatic; or that the Bishop can be justly branded as an
arbitrary and illegal persecutor. They understand these
things better in England.
It has been asked by others,—why did I not take earlier
notice of published opinions, to which, afterwards, I so
strongly demurred ?
Had I entertained the fear, that those who promulgated
them were determined to carry into effect the principles
which seem to me to be their natural deduction, —had
I believed that it was their deliberate intention to urge
their flocks so to act upon the plenary right of private
judgment, as to set up that judgment in opposition to the
Church’s teaching,—had they, in so many words, instructed
their congregations to the effect, that they were at liberty to
reject just so much of the Church’s accredited summaries of
faith as they thought proper to cast aside, —it would indeed


have been, then, my duty, to put a stop to ministrations
which, under such circumstances, would have’been carried on
in defiance of those principles which the Clergy are pledged
to maintain.
But, anticipating no such evil, —believing that those who
signed this declaration did so in haste, without clearly seeing
the extent of that to which they thereby stood committed, —
and regarding them as mistaken, rather than heretical (as I
have been charged with pronouncing them), I anticipated no
evil results in their own pastoral teaching; but I could not,
therefore, be altogether insensible to the mischief of an
erroneous principle laid down in an abstract form, —and so
put before the whole body of the Church.
After the most anxious reflection on the several points of
the case, I came to the conclusion, that the more forbearing,
and, therefore, the more Christian course, would be to ab-
stain from officially expressing my sense of their error, until
circumstances should absolutely compel me to do so. I
resolved to awaken no further causes of dispute at a time of
notorious excitement, but to wait, in the hope that patience
with all, and individual remonstrance with some, as opportu-
nity might offer, would gradually produce a re-consideration
and revision of their words. In the meanwhile, I determined
to let no feeling of my own prevent me from cordially co-
operating with them, —as with others, —for the general weal
of the Church, as far as I might be permitted to do so, without
compromising any principle of my own.
In deciding upon this course, I could not conceal from
myself the possibility, that my forbearance might be cast in
my teeth, and turned as an argument against me. But this
was a minor evil, in that it mainly affected my own comforts,
and neither endangered the peace, nor perilled the interests,
of the Church at large.
I most thankfully say, that this forbearance on my part
has not been misconstrued by all; misinterpreted though
it has been so strangely by a few. Some of the original
subscribers to the “ Solemn Declaration ” have admitted to
me, that they had overlooked the force and tendency of this
passage, to which I object, when it was read to them, before


affixing their signatures; and that they merely meant to
make a “ general protest against Popery.” Others have
written to me in a frank and manly spirit, avowing that they
were in error in this respect, —whilst they are careful to
intimate, that “ their Protestant feeling remains unchanged.”
So, I hope, does mine.
It has been again and again asserted, that a “ majority of
the Parochial Clergy” are condemned by my “sentence,” as
it is called, and that the “ Solemn Declaration ” is regarded
“by the members of the Church generally, as a truthful
and dignified assertion of the great principles of the
Protestant Reformation.”
I am not certified that any such expression of opinion
has been made by the members of the Church generally;
for I must decline taking the statements, either of your
recent meeting, or of the Committee on Church Affairs at
Launceston, or of the Committee of the Protestant Associa-
tion, as conveying the sentiments of the Lay members of the
Church at large. With regard to the statement that has
been put forward respecting the Clergy, a few facts and
figures will serve to show its careless inaccuracy.
Out of the fifty-four Clergymen in the Diocese, forty-three
may fairly be called “ Parochial Clergy;” having, that is,
licensed charge of parishes or districts. Out of this number,
eleven have re-affirmed the new Article of Faith (as explained
at Campbell Town), two of whom had ‘previously resigned
their Chaplaincies. The whole Diocesan account stands
thus : —out of thirty-two Clergymen in the Archdeaconry of
Hobart Town, eight have sent in their renewed adhesion to
the same document; out of twenty-two in the Archdeaconry
of Launceston, four have adopted a similar course. How a
“majority” is thus made out, — or why these individuals
should be put forward as “ the Clergy of the Diocese,”— it
would be hard to say.
Dr. Fry has further published his opinion, that, whilst
some of the “ Tractarian writers have indeed depreciated, and
imposed limitations on the right of private judgment,” yet
that, “ as far as he knows, I am the first Minister by whom
it has been denied.”


It may be very convenient to put words into my mouth
which I have never uttered, and to ascribe to me sentiments
which I have never entertained. lam not aware that I have
done more than impose the same limitations on the right of
private judgment which the Church herself prescribes ; but
which, as it seems to me, are ignored by the loose and
unguarded terms wherein the objectionable clause in the
<f Solemn Declaration ” is drawn up. In so doing, neither
the Tractarian writers, as they are called, nor myself, are
without good authority and precedent.
It must be a singularly unhappy memory, that can forget
the testimony of the numberless worthies of our Reformed
Church, who have been venturesome enough to entertain a
higher estimate of her collective judgment, than of the private
judgment of any individual member.
Are the writings of such men as Overall, Field, Bramhall,
Hammond, Bull, Beveridge, Patrick, Thorndike, Jebb, and
the like, so out of date, as to be entirely unknown amongst
us? or are they to be esteemed such incompetent witnesses
to the true principles of the Reformed Church of England,
that we are to prefer the theology, and succumb to the
authority, of the “ Second Article of the principles of the
Protestant Reformation,” as drawn up in Hobart Town, and
expounded at Campbell Town?
I, for one, am not so confident in my own opinion, as to
seek to be wiser than, or independent of, the Catholic verities
accepted by the Church of England. It is my desire (as it
was Dr. Fry’s in 1843), to “ submit myself, and my poor
endeavours, first, to the judgment of the Catholic (Ecu-
menical Essential Church ; which, if some, of late days, have
endeavoured to hiss out of the schools as a fancy, I cannot
help it. From the beginning it was not so.” ******
“ I do implicitly, and in the preparation of my mind, submit
myself to the true Catholic Church, the spouse of Christ, the
mother of the saints, the pillar of truth. And seeing my
adherence is firmer to the infallible rule of faith, that is, the
Holy Scriptures interpreted by the Catholic Church , than to
my own private judgment or opinions, although I should
unwittingly fall into an error, yet this cordial submission is


an implicit retractation thereof; and I am confident, will be
so accepted by the Father of mercies, both from me, and all
others, who seriously and sincerely do seek after peace and
truth *.”
But, w r ere these bright lights of the Anglican Church ex-
tinguished, there would still be one, even in this distant part
of the earth, who had borne prior testimony to the peril and
the sin of individual opinion measuring itself with the care-
fully-considered and time-honoured judgment of the Church.
As strong language, as any with which I am acquainted on
the subject, is to be found in a work on the “Apostolic
Ministry and Tradition,” published by Ur. Fry in 1843.
“ The rejection,” he observes, “ of the authority of tradition,
by throwing men upon their own private judgments, to form
their belief by unguided interpretation of Holy Scripture,
necessarily calls forth the spirit of disputation and contention,
where men are earnest in seeking to discover the truths of
religion. Such a spirit is completely opposite to that pre-
scribed in Scripture; submissiveness, docility, and readiness
to believe and to obey, are the characters of Scriptural piety.
The mind of a little child is the pattern set forth by Christ;
difficulty of receiving the truths of religion is termed hard-
ness of heart, and unbelief is the sin of condemnation. If
men have no other guide to the interpretation of Scripture
but their own private judgments, their chief security against
error would be incredulity, and the questioning of the evi-
dence of every doctrine; it w r ould be impossible to cultivate
the spirit of simple confiding submission, and an humble
mind could never arrive at confidence in the truth of its
faith, which it knew to be controverted by many of superior
judgments, and with better means of ascertaining the true
sense of Scripture 3 .”
Reject, then, the authority of the Church, — cast aside the
true principles of guidance,—assert the unfettered liberty of
individual belief, and you will succeed, ere long, in rendering
J Preface to Archbishop Bramhall’s “ Replication to the Bishop of Chal-
cedon’s Survey of the Vindication of the Church of England from criminous
Schism.”—Works, p. 151, fol. ed., Dublin, 1677.
3 Page 148.


each grave matter of Apostolic faith an “ open question.” It
has been well observed, that “ there has been one only
“ individual of the human family, whose single judgment
“ might dispense with the aid of external counsellors. The
“ head of the renewed family alone possessed in Himself all
“ that light, which, in their measure, He bestows upon His
e ‘ brethren. For in Him dwelt all the fulness of the God-
“ head bodily. In others, the spiritual judgment is developed
“ only through communion with Him ; and their union with
“ Him is through acceptance of the common faith, and
“ inherence in the common body 4 .”
I have now given you my reasons why I have refused to
affirm the soundness of these words to which I have objected,
by accepting the testimonials of those who have re-affirmed
them.
In making this declaration, I pray you bear in mind,
that, in countersigning, accepting, or granting such docu-
ments, a Bishop virtually puts his hand to an averment, that
the subscribing parties have not, to his knowledge or belief,
maintained or set forth any thing contrary, in his judgment,
to the doctrine or discipline of the Church of England. It
cannot be urged that a Bishop is to be denied all discretion
in such grave matters; that he alone in the Diocese is to be
debarred from the free exercise of his own conviction; that
he is constrained to accept a testimony of which, in his
conscience, he disapproves; or, that he is a mere passive
instrument, whose office is to affirm and record such doctrinal
or practical views as any section of the Clergy, or any
individual amongst them, may desire to put before the public.
I did not undertake the supervision of our Church in this
Colony upon such terms.
The request which you have made to me, that I should
rescind my resolution in this respect, is equivalent to asking
me to admit, that the denial of the right of the Church of
England to prescribe to her own children in matters of reli-
gion, in opposition to their own judgment, is a fundamental
principle of that Church.
I wish to sit in no judgment upon the motives with which
4 Archdeacon Wilberforce on the Principle of Church Authority, p. 137.


such a position has been advanced; still less, to take upon
myself to decide what impression its framers and advocates
have desired to convey. All that I have to do is, to take the
words as I find them, in their literal and grammatical sense,
in their natural and ordinary acceptation.
Believing, then, that their common-sense interpretation is
tantamount to a declaration, that the “ heresy and schism,”
from which, in our Litany, we pray to be delivered, are not
only no sins, but allowable by the teaching of the Church of
England,—it would be a pitiful weakness, of which I hope
I am incapable, to act so contrary to my deliberate convic-
tion, as to accept signatures to testimonials from, or to grant
testimonials to, such of the Clergy, as, after due consideration,
have publicly renewed their adherence to this portion of the
“ Solemn Declaration.”
Let me not be told, that by this decision I am accountable
for disturbing the peace of the Church, and for exciting all
the evils of strife and of dispute. The sin of this, —be it
more, or be it less, —must rest with those who have needlessly
provoked this controversy, by not being content with the
profession of faith which the voice of the Church has uttered
as her own —but must needs add to her Articles, —and have
thus compelled their Bishop to sit in judgment upon the
necessity and soundness of their additions.
I have full confidence, that, in the view which I have taken,
I shall ultimately be borne out by a majority of the Clergy in
this Diocese; and, surely, I need not altogether abandon the
hope, that a calm re-consideration of the whole question will
induce all to regard these words as hastily and unguardedly
put forth; as conveying more to the ordinary reader than
they themselves intended to express; and as being, in reality,
contrary to the tenets of a Church which claims “ authority
in controversies of faith,” whilst she acknowledges the Holy
Word of God as the only ultimate appeal,—the only source
of all saving truth; and sends her children to the prayerful
study of that Word, with the full recognition of our Blessed
Lord’s command, “ Search the Scriptures.”
Your second request is, that I should “ retract my protest


against the decision of the Privy Council, and my resolution
to exclude Ministers not holding the doctrine of baptismal
regeneration.”
Three assertions have been made by you, either collectively,
or individually, with regard to this decision, and the points
alleged to be established by it.
Ist. That it was thereby settled, that “Clergymen denying
the doctrine of baptismal regeneration should not be refused
admission into the ministry.”
2nd. That my resolution is a “denial of the law of the
Church of England, tending to separate the Church in this
Colony from the Mother Church in England.”
3rd. That Mr. Gorham’s views amount to no more than
a denial of the position, “ that all children baptized are,
necessarily, regenerated.”
Upon the first of these assertions I need dwell but briefly.
It is so well known to every one, conversant with
ecclesiastical jurisprudence, that no attempt has ever yet
been made by any court of law to restrict, in the slightest
degree, a Bishop’s discretion in the solemn responsibility of
conferring Holy Orders, that I am concerned to find a
Clergyman of the Church of England gravely advancing such
a position at all; still more so, that he should have asserted
it to be “ the important decision ” arrived at by the Privy
Council.
It ought not to be needful for me to assure you, that this
Committee never debated upon, never alluded to, never pro-
nounced any opinion upon the subject. It would have been
beyond their power to have done so. Restrictions enough
are put upon the Church of England,—but matters have not
yet come to such a pass, that her Bishops should be directed
by courts of law whom they are to admit as the ministers and
stewards of God’s mysteries. I do not, then, feel myself
called upon to dwell longer upon the presumption, that any
resolution of mine respecting the admission or rejection of
candidates for Holy Orders is a “ denial of the law of the
Church of England.” No such law exists, as you appear to
suppose —it is quite superfluous, therefore, to enter into any
discussion as to its application.


But it may not be out of place to enquire a little fui thci
into the amount of jurisdiction claimed and exercised by the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council itself, the real
decision at which they arrived,—and the actual opinions of
Mr. Gorham, as put forth in his volume on the efficacy of
baptism.
First, then, of the Court:—the Church of England, as
a Church, could not, consistently with her own principles,
formally recognize the competency of any mere court of law,
to prescribe to all her members, both lay and clerical, in
grave matters of doctrine. No decision respecting such
questions can be, with strict propriety, pronounced, except
with the concurrence of Convocation. Such is the Church s
law ; such, too, the law of the land.
In the Royal declaration prefixed to the Thirty-nine
Articles (which I pray you to observe, as incorporated into
the Prayer Book, is a part of the statute law of the realm of
England), the following words occur:—
« r phat if any difference arise about the external Policy,
ee concerning the Injunctions, Canons, and other Constitutions
« whatsoever thereto belonging, the Clergy, in their Convoca-
«tion, is to order and settle them, having first obtained leave
“ under Our Broad Seal so to do; and We approving their
« S aid Ordinances and Constitutions, providing that none be
« made contrary to the laws and customs of the land.
“ That out of Our Princely care that the Churchmen may
« do the work which is proper unto them, the Bishops and
(( Clergy, from time to time in Convocation, upon their
“humble desire, shall have licence under Our Broad Seal to
« deliberate of, and to do all such things, as, being made plain
“by them, and assented to by Us, shall concern the settled
« continuance of the Doctrine and Discipline of the Church
«of England now established; from which We will not
« endure any varying or departing in the least degree.”
Further, the 139th Canon declares, under penalty of
excommunication to those who refuse to affirm it, that the
“ sacred Synod of this nation, in the name of Christ, and by
“ the King’s authority assembled, is the Church of England
<£ by representation;” whilst the 140th affirms, under the


same penalty, that all persons, “ either of the Clergy or
“ Laity, are subnect to the decrees thereof in causes ecclesias-
“ tical.”
With this legal position the Judicial Committee of the
Privy Council concurred, as the following extract from their
judgment will show conclusively :
“ This Court, constituted for the purpose of advising Her
“ Majesty in matters which come within its competency, has
“no jurisdiction or authority to settle matters of faith, or to
“ determine what ought, in any particular, to be the doctrine
“ of the Church of England.”
So, too, —some time after the delivery of the judgment,
one of the most distinguished members of the Committee,
the Lord Chief Justice, in writing to Miss Sellon (whose
declared faith on the subject of baptismal regeneration was
known to be identical with that of the Bishop of Exeter),
said, “ I assure you, that we have given no opinion contrary
“to yours, upon the doctrine of baptismal regeneration.
“We had no jurisdiction to decide any doctrinal question;
“ and we studiously abstained from doing so. We were
“ only called upon to construe the articles and formularies
“ of the Church, and to say whether they be so framed, as
“ to condemn certain opinions expressed by Mr. Gorham.”
We must suppose that the members of the Council were
somewhat more competent to decide upon the extent of their
own jurisdiction, and the meaning of their own judgment,
than an individual Clergyman, or a public meeting in Hobart
Town.
What, then, did they decide ? The answer must be given
in their own words. “We have abstained from expressing
“ any opinion of our own on the theological correctness, or
“ error, of the doctrine of Mr. Gorham, which was discussed
“ before us, at such great length, and with so much learning.
“ His Honour the Vice-Chancellor Knight Bruce dissents
“ from the opinion we have formed. But all the other
“ members of the Judicial Committee, who were present, are
“ unanimously agreed in opinion, that the doctrine held by
“ Mr. Gorham is not contrary or repugnant to the declared
“ doctrine of the Church of England, as by law established ;


“ and that Mr. Gorham ought not, by reason of the doctrine
ee held by him, to have been refused admission to the
“ Vicarage of Bramford Speke.”
It is not mine, to reconcile the manifest contradiction of
a judicial coui’t, on the one hand, disclaiming all authority
and intention to pronounce any opinion upon doctrinal
matters,—and, on the other, virtually giving judgment upon
them. I simply state the fact. But, with their disclaimer
before me, am I wrong in taking them at their word, and
in regarding what they have implied, as well as expressed,
upon the doctrine of baptismal regeneration, only as an
opinion delivered by five lawyers, as to the construction
which might legally be put upon the words, in which the
Church of England has advanced it,—and not as the
deliberate judgment of the Church herself, —as to the con-
struction which she, theologically , has or would put upon
them ?
In distinctly refusing, then, to suffer the judgment of the
Privy Council, in the smallest degree, to fetter or guide my
discretion, as to the admission of Candidates for Holy
Orders, it cannot be fairly urged, as a ground of complaint,
that I am flying in the face of the law of the Church of
England. No one conversant with that law, no one who
has carefully perused that judgment, no one familiar with
English jurisprudence, would, after mature deliberation, lay
down such a position 5 .
Let it not be said, either, that, in refusing to license
any one who holds Mr. Gorham’s opinions, I am acting in
defiance of the law of either Church or State. The question
of licence was not raised in any argument brought before,
or in any question decided by, the Privy Council. When
I am called upon to “institute,” in the legal sense of the
5 On moving the first reading of the “Clergy Proceedings Bill” in the House
of Lords, on February sth, 1850, the Bishop of London observed that “a Judi-
cial Committee of the Privy Council was not a suitable or competent tribunal for
questions involving decisions upon what was heresy or false doctrine. It was not
a Church tribunal .” Upon the same occasion the Archbishop of Canterbury,
after expressing his agreement with the remarks made by the Bishop of London,
said, “ it cannot be expected to be satisfactory to the public, that a court, by
which cases of unsound doctrine are tried, should consist wholly of Laymen.”


word, a Clerk in Holy Orders, legally presented to a benefice
legally constituted, it will be time enough to say what I shall
or shall not do. Until I am so called upon, I must be
allowed to exercise my discretion as to granting or with-
holding a licence; subject, as you are aware, to an appeal
to the Metropolitan. And, until a law is passed, compelling
a Bishop to say, “ I approve,” when he does not approve,—
“ I express my confidence,” when he does not confide, —it is
useless to debate the question further.
But more; —having subscribed to the Thirty-nine Articles,
which are a portion of the Statute Law of England, I must
not forget, that they distinctly declare that “ the Church
hath authority in controversies of faith,” —an authority
which, as I have shown you, the Privy Council disclaims,
but with which the Church has never parted. Until, then,
she deliberately, in Convocation, repudiates the “plain and
full meaning,” and “the literal and grammatical sense,” in
which she enjoins her Articles, and, surely, all her formu-
laries, to be construed, —until she sanctions what she now
forbids, that every one may “ put his own sense or comment
to be the meaning” of her words, —until she formally allows
grave matters of faith, which she has put forward as God’s
Holy Truth, to be open questions,—l, for one, shall adhere
to her authority and to her exposition,—and continue to be-
lieve that, whatever may be the indirect effects of the decision
of the Privy Council (and they are, as I have already noticed
in my last Charge, most serious), the direct effect in no way
disturbs the pre-existing law of the Church, but leaves the
Book of Common Prayer in the same position as before.
It is because of the magnitude of these indirect effects, —
because the decision, until superseded, conveys a final judg-
ment upon the general doctrine, —because it fetters the free
action of the Episcopate in England, that I adhere to the
declaration which I have more than once made, that, as
God gives me grace, I shall protest against it to my dying
day. But, in doing so, I cannot admit that I am violating
the law of the Church, as laid down by herself; or that the
effects of this decision, be they more or be they less, legally
extend to this Diocese.


I have already, in my Charge, expressed my regret that
there are those who rejoice that the legal opinion on the
Church’s words should, in any case, supersede and over-ride
her theological judgment. It will be an abiding regret.
I cannot but mourn when I find that there are those who
will prefer the construction put by five lawyers (one of whom
was a Presbyterian), upon the language of the Church of
England, to the undisputed judgment of the Church of
Christ for fifteen centuries; to the well-known sentiments
of the Reformers, who avowedly deferred to that judgment;
and to the recorded opinion of the most learned and accurate
theologians whom the Church of England has produced, from
the days of the Reformation to the present hour. I must
needs grieve when there is rejoicing that the Primate has
thought good, or felt himself compelled, so to set aside the
conscientious scruples of one of his Suffragans, as to institute
a Clerk, whom that Suffragan had proved to entertain here-
tical notions on one of the two Sacraments of Christ; if,
indeed, in these days, learning, argument, documents, and
the testimony of centuries, be allowed to prove any thing.
Verily, we are sunk low as a Church, indeed, if the ma-
jority of her members rejoice that these things should be so;
and hopeless is the degradation of the Church of England,
if she should not only be content complacently to bear her
fetters, but openly to parade and triumph in their clank.
You, Gentlemen, at least, can hardly be partakers in this
joy. You, who have denied the Church’s right to prescribe
to individuals in matters of religion, in opposition to their
judgment, cannot with consistency plead for the possession
of that right on behalf of five laymen , especially when they
themselves have so emphatically disclaimed it.
But, before I quit this subject, permit me to remind you
that there is rejoicing elsewhere than amongst the members
of the Church. The note of triumph has been sounded over
the direct and indirect effects of this most unhappy decision,
by those who make no secret of desiring and looking for the
downfall of the Church of England. “ I own, my brethren,”
says one who had a deep interest in keenly investigating it,
and in calculating its probable consequences, “ I own it does


ee appear to me as if God had some great view in what has
« happened. If it has been treated by men here below as a
“ matter of earthly interest, as a decision to be guided by
ce human wisdom, yet it cannot appear to us otherwise than
<e as a providential event, in which the wisdom of God has
t( directed the course of things, as it does those of all earthly
(S events, for the advancement of his holy religion, and for
(( the triumph of his true Church. It is impossible not to
“ see what a new element of dissolution has been hereby in-
<l troduced into the English Church; how those errors, which
“ till now have been merely unrecognized differences of
“ opinion, may now take a systematized form. It is impossible
te not to see how the decision which has been come to on this
“ matter would be similarly pronounced upon other doctiines,
“ were they to be brought into the same course of judgment.
“ And one can hardly foresee the extent to which this may
<£ increase that complete division that already exists among,
i( not merely the members, but the rulers of that Church,
“ upon the other of its great admitted Sacraments, and upon
(e the very vital question of Apostolic succession and the
e< Divine rights, even in spirituals, of the rulers of the
“ Church. My brethren, when these great questions of
ee principle may arise, as I before said, it is not what may
« actually happen, but it is what has virtually taken place,
« when the cause has been permitted, that we must attend to.
« It is not certain that a house will fall immediately because
«it is undermined, but the fact of its being so may prepare
« us for the fall at any moment G .”
Let those, then, who choose, rejoicethey will find the
Pope’s new cardinal a partaker in their joy; for they are his
words that I have quoted.
Had you done me the favour to read carefully that portion
of my last Charge, in which I entered at some length into the
discussion of Mr. Gorham’s peculiar views on the Sacrament
of Baptism, it would have been needless for me to retrace any
portion of the ground then gone over. But, as you evidently
6 Wiseman’s Sermon on the final Appeal in matters of Faith, p. 35.


consider those views to amount to no more than the simple
position, that “ all children baptized [rightly baptized, I pre-
sume you mean], are not necessarily regenerate,”—and that
this is the position which I have pronounced heretical, —I
must detain you for a while, in order to place before you the
real facts of the case.
And here I prefer using the words of one who can speak
on this, or indeed on any other subject, with far more autho-
rity than myself,—l mean the present Bishop of London.
Few will question the peculiar fitness of this learned and
clear-sighted prelate to pronounce an opinion upon a case to
which, as is well known, he has given the most anxious con-
sideration.
“ The Judicial Committee of the Privy Council have stated
that Mr. Gorham’s doctrine appears to them to be as follows:
‘ That baptism is a sacrament generally necessary to salva-
tion, but that the grace of regeneration does not so necessa-
rily accompany the act of baptism, that regeneration inva-
riably takes place in baptism ; that the grace may be granted
before, in, or after baptism: that baptism is an effectual sign
of grace, by which God works invisibly in us, but only in
such as worthily receive it; in them alone it has a wholesome
effect; and that, without reference to the qualification of the
recipient, it is not in itself an effectual sign of grace ; that
infants baptized, dying before actual sin, are certainly saved,
but that in no case is regeneration in baptism unconditional.’
Had this been a full and accurate account of Mr. Gorham’s
opinions on this subject of baptism, as set forth by himself,
and had the reasoning, by which the judgment of the Judicial
Committee is supported, been omitted in part, at least, 1
might have felt less difficulty in assenting to the judgment.
It certainly must be admitted that regeneration does not
invariably take place in baptism, if such admission be limited
to the case of unbelieving or impenitent adults; and that the
grace is not so restrained to the rite, but that God may, if it
so please Him, grant it separately from the rite, and that it
is an effectual sign of grace to them only who worthily receive
it; the question being, whether all infants are worthy re-
cipients : and, lastly, that in no case is regeneration in baptism


unconditional, the question being, what are the conditions to
be fulfilled?
“But Mr. Gorham’s assertions are not fully or adequately
represented by the foregoing statement. His real errors, as
I consider them to be, are of a more serious nature; being,
as far as I can understand his language, not merely of a
doubtful tendency, with reference to the Church’s doctrine,
but precisely and dogmatically opposed to that doctrine.
Those errors are passed over in silence by the Judicial Com-
mittee, in their elaborate report to the Queen; a silence,
which is, in one point of view, satisfactory, inasmuch as, if
it does not expressly condemn the errors in question, it
certainly does not expressly vindicate, nor, in terms, sanc-
tion them. ‘Mr. Gorham,’ says the Judicial Committee,
4 maintains, that the grace of regeneration does not so neces-
sarily accompany the act of baptism, that regeneration inva-
riably takes place in baptism; that the grace may be granted
before, in, or after baptism.’ It is true, that Mr. Gorham
asserts this in some of his answers; but, in others, he goes
much further, and advances positions from which it follows,
as a necessary inference, not only that there may be cases
in which infants are not regenerated in and by baptism,
but that they are in no case so regenerated; that infants
duly baptized may be regenerated,—but that if they are, it
is before baptism, by an act of prevenient grace, and that
so they come to baptism already regenerated; that forgive-
ness of sins, the new nature, adoption into the family of
God, the being made ‘members of Christ, children of God,
and inheritors of the kingdom of heaven,’ are benefits con-
ferred on worthy recipients, ‘not in baptism, but by an
act of prevenient grace given by God before baptism,’—so
making them worthy recipients of the rite, that baptism is
so far an effectual sign of God’s grace bestowed before-
hand, implanting a new nature, and strengthening and con-
firming faith in Him. Thus, according to Mr. Gorham,
the strengthening and confirming of faith is the whole of the
spiritual grace bestowed in baptism, even on worthy reci-
pients : —faith, forgiveness of sins, regeneration, the new
nature, and adoption into the family of God, have been all
bestowed upon such, if at all, before baptism.


“It did not appear to me possible to reconcile such
statements as these with the plain and unequivocal teaching
of the Church of England as to the nature of a Sacrament.
They seemed to me to be a plain denial of that which the
Church asserts, —that an infant is made in and by baptism,
(not before nor after it,) a member of Christ, a child of God,
and an inheritor of the kingdom of heaven. If there be
any meaning in words, those statements are express contra-
dictions of the truth, that in a Sacrament the outward and
visible part, or sign, is a means whereby we receive the
inward and spiritual grace, as well as a pledge to assure us
thereof. If this theory of Mr. Gorham’s be true, then is
baptism no longer a sacrament, according to the Church’s
definition; nor can we, with a safe conscience, continue to
teach our children that catechism, which yet the Church
declares is to be learned of every one of her members. It
appeared to me, then, that these assertions of Mr. Gorham,
which were passed over without notice by the Judicial Com-
mittee, but to which I could not shut my eyes, went to
deprive Holy Baptism of its sacramental character, and
utterly to evacuate its peculiar and distinctive grace 7 .”
You will pardon this long extract in consideration of its
singular value. It will, I trust, serve to convince you, that
Mr. Gorham’s peculiar views are not such as you have been
accustomed to regard them; and that, what I and others have
ventured to speak of as heresy, would have been regarded as
such in the best and purest days of the Church of Christ.
You are not ignorant that the belief which I entertain,
respecting the Holy Sacrament of Baptism, has been spoken
of as contrary to that of the Reformers, and of the Church of
England generally. You know, also, that a Clergyman in
this Diocese has alluded to this belief as “ my own views ” on
the subject, as though they were peculiar to myself; a fancy
of my own in short; —and has declared that these views are
« identified with the Romanizing party in England.”
And is, then, the ancient belief of the Church of Christ,
that all infants, rightly baptized, are « regenerate,” (in the
Church’s sense of the word,) hostile to the doctrine laid down
7 Bishop of London’s Charge , p. 4.


by the Anglican reformers on this subject? Nay; a close
search into their writings will prove, that, as a body, they
w’ere too well read in the theology, and too observant of the
“ mind and purpose of the old fathers ” of the Church, to
gainsay this belief, or to leave it an “ open question.”—ls it
foreign to that of the Church of England generally ? Ido
not pause to recapitulate the testimony borne by a host of
divines to the legitimate interpretation of the Prayer Book
on this point: it is too well known to every (even moderately
read) theologian, to become requisite.—ls it a novel dogma ?
a private opinion ? It may, with equal justice, be said, that
the doctrine of the Trinity is a novel or private opinion. Is
it Romanizing ? Strange, that its staunchest advocates, in
times past, should also have been amongst the most approved
defenders of the Church of England against the claims of
Rome.
But the fact is indisputable, that this belief was in ac-
cordance with the interpretation put upon the plain language
of the Liturgy, on the Sacrament of Baptism, at times nearer
to its compilation; when the intentions of its framers were
more distinctly recognized, and when the imputation had
not been cast upon them, that what they stated as a fact,
they only meant to be regarded as a possibility. It would
weary you to quote at length from the works of the theo-
logians of that day, who wrote as though there could be no
question but that the language of the Church, as set forth in
her formularies, was not so studiously framed as to be capable
of a double meaning; but that it was to be taken in its plain
and ordinary acceptation. They all spoke substantially the
sentiments of Martin Luther : —“ Baptism cannot fail to effect
that for which it was appointed, namely, regeneration and
spiritual renewal, as St. Paul teaches in the third chapter to
Titus 8 .”
But there is a remarkable evidence to this fact in the re-
cords of the seventeenth century. In the Savoy Conference,
held in the year 1661, when the Puritan divines were invited
to lay before the Commissioners the sum of their complaints
8 Horn, de Baptismo.


against the Book of Common Prayer,—they demurred,
amongst other things, to the doctrine of baptismal regene-
ration, as taught in the baptismal and confirmation services.
I give the exceptions in their own words:—
PRAYER BOOK.
“ That it hath pleased Thee to rege-
“ nerate this infant with Thy Holy
“ Spirit.”
EXCEPTIONS.
“We cannot in faith say, that every
“ child that is baptized is regenerated
“by God’s Holy Spirit. At least, it is
“ a disputable point ; and therefore we
“ desire it may be otherwise ex-
“ pressed.”
In their estimation, then, there was no doubt as to the
sense which the words were intended to convey. They un-
derstood them, in connexion with the whole service in which
they occur, as declaring that every child that is baptized
is regenerated by God’s Holy Spirit; and therefore they
objected to their retention in the Liturgy. But, had the
Church spoken any language intentionally doubtful upon
the subject, what an admirable opportunity it would have
been for the respondents to have told the objectors, that they
were entirely mistaken as to the meaning of the words; that
the Church never intended to declare that all infants rightly
baptized were, therefore, regenerated; that she purposely
framed her Liturgy and her Articles so as to leave this an
“ open questionthat her words were to be interpreted
charitably, hypothetically, hopefully (as the modern phrase
is); and that, in consequence, they need not be altered.
They were too honest to disavow what they knew to be the
Church’s teaching, in order to secure an apparent conformity,
or a hollow peace; too straightforward to explain away her
language, in order to suit a purpose. Their answer was,
“ Seeing that God’s Sacraments have their effects, when the
receiver doth not, ponere obicem , put any bar against them
(which children cannot), we may say, in faith, of every child
that is baptized, that it is regenerated by God’s Holy Spirit;
and the denial of it tends to anabaptism and the contempt of
this Holy Sacrament, as nothing worthy nor material, whether
it be administered to children or no 9 .”
a Cardwell’s Conferences, 325. 356.


Another exception was taken to the second prayer before
baptism, that the infant “ may receive remission of sins by
spiritual regeneration.” “ This expression,” objected the
Puritans, ee seeming inconvenient, we desire it may be changed
into this, — 4 May be regenerated, and receive the remission of
sins.’ ” The Bishops 3 answer was, that the passage objected
to was ee most proper; for baptism is our spiritual regenera-
tion. St. John hi., 4 Unless a man be born again of water
and the Spirit, 3 &c. &c. By this is received remission of
sins. Acts ii. 3, 4 Repent, and be baptized every one of you,
for the remission of sins. 3 So the Creed, 4 One baptism for
the remission of sins V 33
Once more:
The Office for Confirmation says :
M Who hast vouchsafed to regenerate
“ these thy servants by water and the
“ Holy Ghost, and hast given unto them
“ the forgiveness of all their sins.”
The exception taken was : “ This
“ supposeth that all the children who
“ are brought to be confirmed have the
“ spirit of Christ, and the forgiveness
“ of all their sins; —whereas great
“ numbers of children at that age,
“ having committed many sins since
“ their baptism, do show no evidence
“ of serious repentance, or of any spe-
“ cial saving grace ; and therefore
“ this confirmation, if administered to
“ such, would be a perilous and gross
“ abuse.”
Again the Bishops maintain the literal interpretation of the
Church 3 s words; again they stand stedfastly by the simple
grammatical meaning, without resorting to any non-natural
interpretation as their refuge. Their answer is, 44 it supposeth,
and that truly,— that all children were at their baptism re-
generate by water and the Holy Ghost, and had given unto
them the forgiveness of all their sins; and it is charitably
presumed, that, notwithstanding the frailties and slips of their
childhood, they have not totally lost what was in baptism
conferred upon them 2 .”
1 Cardwell’s Conferences, 324. 356.
2 The principle that guided the Episcopalian Divines in their rejection of
these and other “ exceptions” may be best understood by a reference to the fol-
lowing words in the preface to the Prayer Book, drawn up after the Savoy Con-
ference, by (as is generally supposed) Bishop Sanderson, “Of the sundry
alterations,” it is there said, “ proposed unto us, we have rejected all such as
were either of dangerous consequence, (as secretly striking at some established


I need hardly tell you, that with these old-fashioned
opinions I do most heartily concur, believing them to express
the true doctrine of the Church of England, and knowing
them to set forth the orthodox faith of the Church of Christ
for the first fifteen centuries of its existence.
Yet these opinions are charged by Dr. Fry with being
“ identified with the Romanizing party in Englandthe
opinions, that is, of such men as Sheldon, Cosin, Sanderson,
Heylin, Pearson, Sparrow, Thorndike, —for these are amongst
the list of divines who took part in that memorable Con-
ference. You will pardon me, even, were other testimonies
silent, I should entertain a higher estimate of the theology of
such men as these, than of your public meeting, or of the
Protestant Association.
But testimonies of a later day to the existence of the self-
same truth are not wanting:—John Wesley was no Romanizer
when he said, “It is certain our Church supposes that all
who are baptized in their infancy are, at the same time, born
again; and it is allowed that the whole office of baptism for
infants proceeds upon this supposition 3 .” Simeon was no
Tractarian when he wrote thus: “In the baptismal service,
we thank God for having regenerated the baptized infant by
his Holy Spirit. Now from hence it appears that, in the
opinion of our Reformers, regeneration and remission of sins
did accompany baptism. But in what sense did they hold
this sentiment ? Did they maintain that there was no need
for the seed then sown in the heart of the baptized person to
grow up and to bring forth fruit; or, that he could be saved
in any other way than by a progressive renovation of his
soul after the divine image ? Had they asserted any such
doctrine as that, it would have been impossible for any en-
lightened person to concur with them. But nothing can be
conceived more repugnant to their sentiments than such an
idea as this: so far from harbouring such a thought, they
have, and that too in this very prayer, taught us to look to
God for that total change both of heart and life which long
doctrine or laudable practice of the Church of England, or, indeed, of the whole
Catholic Church of Christ,) or else of no consequence at all, but utterly frivolous
and vain.” Ib. 328. 358. 3 Sermon on the New Birth.


since their days has begun to be expressed by the term re-
generation. After thanking God for regenerating the infant
by his Holy Spirit, we are taught to pray, that he, being dead
unto sin and living unto righteousness, may crucify the old
man, and utterly abolish the whole body of sin. And then,
declaring the total change to be the necessary mean of his
obtaining salvation, we add, ‘ so that, finally, with the residue
of the Holy Church, he may be an inheritor of thine ever-
lasting kingdom. 5 Is there (I would ask) any person that
can require more than this ? Or does God in his word re-
quire more 4 ? 55
Even a seceder from our Church to the ranks of dissent
has borne a corresponding, though, it may be, an unwilling
testimony. Mr. Baptist Noel, in his volume on the Union
of Church and State, declares, “ I once laboured to convince
myself that our Reformers did not, and could not, mean that
infants are regenerated by baptism ; but no reasoning avails.
This language is too plain. Although the Catechism declares
that repentance and faith are pre-requisites to baptism, yet
the Prayer Book assumes clearly, that both adults and infants
come to the font unregenerate, and leave it regenerate: that
worthy recipients of baptism are not regenerate before bap-
tism, but come to be regenerated ; that they are unpardoned
up to the moment of baptism, that they are pardoned the
moment after 5 . 55
«If ? ” then, writes one of the soundest theologians of the
present day, “the words of the English Church in the
English Prayer Book are not to be understood in their plain,
simple, literal English sense: if, when she says, ‘ Seeing,
dearly beloved, this child is now regenerate, 5 she is not to be
understood to mean that the child is regenerate; then doubt,
suspicion, and scepticism will lurk beneath her altars, and
steal into the most solemn mysteries of religion. Then faith
in subscriptions to Articles will be no more; and all confi-
dence in her teaching and in that of her ministers will be de-
stroyed. And so a grievous penalty will be inflicted on her
and them ; a heavy injury will be sustained by her people,
4 Simeon’s Works, vol. si. p. 259.
6 Page 419.


and the English name and nation will sink low in the scale
of honesty, sincerity, and truth 6 ,”
Is it sound argument, then, to say, that I adopt Ro-
manizing views, if I too speak thus the sober language of the
Church of England,—refuse to admit that the compilers of
our Liturgy were so double-minded in their dishonesty, as to
say what they did not intend ? to assert categorically what
they meant hypothetically? And if, in the exercise of the
solemn office of commissioning a younger brother in the faith
to preach the Gospel as the Church of England has inter-
preted it, I decline to have ray discretion circumscribed within
those limits that your public meeting desires to prescribe,—-
if I declare, that neither fear, nor obloquy, nor opposition,
shall turn me one step from what, in my conscience, I believe
to be my duty to the Church of England,—and if, in this, I
do no more than tread in the steps of those who have hitherto
been regarded as the giants in English theology,—am I to be
charged with exceeding my lawful powers as a Bishop of the
Church of Christ ?
Nay, there is one Clergyman at least in this diocese who
has taken a far different view of episcopal functions.
“ The office of a Bishop/’ says this writer, “is ministerial
and judicial: it includes all the priestly functions in their
highest degree; besides which, it also possesses supreme
authority over all orders of the Clergy, and is exclusively in-
vested with the power of transmitting and conferring holy
orders by ordination, and of imparting ecclesiastical authority,
and of licensing the ministry to exercise their functions in
the congregation. This is the episcopal office as it at present
exists in the Church.
“He is generally to reprove, and rebuke, and exhort
(2 Tim. iv. 2J. It is therefore plain that he is invested with
full episcopal authority over the Clergy, that he is to superin-
tend their conduct and ministry, and to judge, try, and punish
the guilty, as well as to reward the laborious and meritorious.
He is to hold fast the form of sound words, which can only
be conceived to have been a summary given him by St. Paul
6 Wordsworth’s Occasional Sermons, vol. i. p. 165.


of the nature of a creed or ritual, a summary of the doctrines
of the Gospel, or a form of divine worship, probably both ;
he is to commit the sacred form to faithful men, able to
teach others also, and he is to put the people in remem-
brance of these things, charging them not to enter into con-
troversies.” *****
“It is plain, that he possessed a full control and authority
over the Church, in selecting its ministers, making regula-
tions for its guidance, and exercising a general superintend-
ence over all its members.” ******
“In addition to this authority, it only remains that
Timothy should have had the power of ordaining, by laying
on of hands, to prove that his episcopal office was complete;
and this power is shown to have been possessed by him, by
an incidental allusion to it by St. Paul, directing him to 4 lay
hands suddenly, or without due examination, on no man’
(v. 22) ; an expression which shows, that he had not only the
power of ordaining committed to him, but that he was to ex-
ercise it at his own individual discretion .” *****
«To the third order of Bishops, in addition to the minis-
terial office and privileges conferred upon the priesthood, of
which they were the highest order, and therefore possessed
the fullest graces and privileges, the Apostles transmitted
their office of governors and judges in the kingdom of Christ,
as it had been appointed to them by our Lord, —commissioned
them to transmit the holy office by ordaining Priests and
Deacons at their own discretion and on their own responsi-
bility, and gave them power to rebuke with all authority, to
reject or excommunicate heretics and impenitent sinners, to
superintend, judge, and punish Priests and Deacons, and to
make regulations for the general direction of the Church.
There is positive proof that this authority and commission
were transmitted by St. Paul to Timothy and Titus, as they
had been before vested in himself. There is not the least
appearance of their authority having been in any degree de-
rived from the congregation: they received their commis-
sion as ministers of Christ from the Lord, through His
Apostles, by imposition of hands, without any mention or
reference to the consent or sanction of the congregation, who


are commanded to obey them, as being ‘ set over them in the
Lord/ and commissioned to govern with all authority, under
the ordinance of Christ, that whoever resists those whom
He sends are guilty of disobedience to Himself, and that
the personal ordination of the Apostles leaves no room to
doubt or deny their mission by the Lord. This is the
simple view of the ministry as described in Scripture, derived
from Christ, conveying His spiritual privileges to the con-
gregation, ministering by His commission transmitted by
apostolic ordination, which hands down the sacred office with
the certainty of the Divine Commission, and of the
ministerial graces and privileges which are essential to the
Priesthood and the Church 7 .”
Now, I do assure you. Gentlemen, that this strong lan-
guage respecting the episcopal office was not penned by one
of the “ six Oxford clergymen/’ who, as Dr. Fry avers, in his
published letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury, “ have
surrounded the Bishop, and, by their flatteries and exaltation
of his office, have filled him with the notion of his occupying
the position of an Apostle, and that his judgment is to be
received as sacred as that of the Church, involving those who
do not hold his religious sentiments in the sin of rebellion
and schism”—(language, which, I need hardly say, has
never either directly or indirectly, been addressed to me by a
single individual). The words that I have quoted are those
of Dr. Fry himself.
As to the vague charge of t( Romanizing,”—the defenders
of the true, old-fashioned principles of the Church of Eng-
land are no strangers to such accusations. The “judicious”
Hooker was similarly reviled : Archbishop Potter had to
defend himself against the selfsame charge: even the single-
minded Bishop Hall did not escape. The imputation of
Popish tendencies is an old invention, and has, for a time,
led astray many, even amongst the pious and the learned.
The celebrated nonconformist Baxter admits his own rea-
diness thus to misjudge his fellow-man; but, when age and
experience had tamed him down, he had the honesty to
confess his error, and to record it.
1 Fry on Apostolic Tradition, pp. 83, 84. 90.


C£ At first,” he said, “ it would disgrace any doctrine with
me, if I did but hear it called popery and antichristian : but
I have long learned to be more impartial, and to dislike men
for bad doctrine, rather than the doctrine for the men ; and
to know that Satan can use even the names of popery and
antichrist against a truth 8 .”
We can readily forgive the error, for the manly frankness
of the writer.
But, at the risk of wearying you, I will bring forward yet
another authority, which I am bound to presume will have
great weight with you all.
“ The primate Laud,” says an author in this colony, “ was
accused of being a papist, because he maintained the apostolic
succession of the ministry, and the tradition of the Church.”
ts The same charge has since been always preferred, with
the same disregard to truth, against those who maintain the
authority of the apostolic Church, and of its faith or tra-
dition, and ministry,—even though in their conduct they
should disclaim all communion with the Church of Rome,
and in their writings have strenuously exposed her corrup-
tions, and the falsehood of her claims to spiritual dominion.
There is nothing more disingenuous, and regardless of truth
and justice, than the irreverent spirit of rationalism, —any
thing of a sacred authoritative character is at once denounced
as Popish and superstitious; it spurns restraint and guidance,
and stigmatizes respect and submission for the teaching or the
testimony of antiquity, as a violation of the right of private
judgment , and an attempt to bind or fetter human reason;
£ while it says, it has need of nothing, it knows not that it is
miserable, poor, and blind/ and that the semblance of the
truth which it retains is the remains of the apostolic instruc-
tion it contemns , and which it would never otherwise have
acquired. Had there never been a Church with authoritative
creeds, forms, worship, and ministry, there would have been
as little prospect of men’s arriving at, or retaining, the doc-
trines and worship of the Gospel, by the exercise of reason,
in interpreting Scripture, as there is, that the dispersion of
the Scriptures in a heathen nation, without ministerial and
* Quoted in Wordsworth’s Ecclesiastical Biography.


doctrinal instruction, would form and preserve the people as
an orthodox Church. The scorn of the authority of the
apostolic Church, which men suppose to be the vindication of
reason, against superstition and prejudice, might occasion a
doubt of the light of reason as a moral guide, by the want of
candour, and of truth, it supposes itself justified in showing
towards those whose sin is obedience to what they believe to
be that Church, ■which their Lord commanded them to hear,
if they would not be counted by Him as heathens.”—Again
I quote the words of Dr. Fry 9 .
Your third request is, that I should “ prohibit, at the
College, the use of the book called Theophilus Anglicanus
and, in making this request, you have asserted, that, “ under
my direction, it has been prescribed to candidates for holy
orders, and is taught to students at the College.”
I have no right, perhaps, to be surprised, that you should
implicitly believe what has been so confidently advanced by
others; and what, in common with similar assertions, I have
scarcely thought it worth while to contradict. But, as you
come before me, thus publicly, to make these statements, it
is due to you simply to say, that you have been entirely
misinformed as to facts. I have given no directions that this
book should be prescribed to candidates for holy orders; nor
have I even recommended, still less enjoined, that it should
be taught to students at the College.
Some six or seven years ago, I gave a copy to one whom
I had reason, at that time, to regard as a candidate for holy
orders ; without, in any way, prescribing it to him, as a
book in which he would be examined. I have since, from
time to time, put into the hands of private friends some few
copies, which were presented to me by its esteemed author.
I should do the same, had I a hundred copies, with regard to
those who were likely to make a good use of them.
Archdeacon Marriott has assured me, that, though he has
(wisely, as I think) recommended its study to some of those
candidates for holy orders, who have requested him to turn
* Apostolic Ministry and Tradition, p. 212.


their attention to such available books as might be useful to
them in their theological studies, he has in no case prescribed
it, nor, as far as his memory serves him, framed a single
question for examination from its pages.
With regard to its introduction to the College, I need only
say, that neither in this, nor in any other respect, have I, in
the slightest degree, interfered with the discretion of the re-
spective Wardens, as to the ordinary routine of instruction to
be adopted there. I should not have appointed them, had I
not felt that they were worthy of implicit trust.
“Theophilus Anglicanus” was introduced to the College
by the first Warden, Mr. Gell, too well read a Churchman
not to have discovered Popery therein, had it really existed;
too honest a man to have withheld such a discovery from the
Visitor; and too sound a scholar to be insensible to the merits
of a work that has (I believe I am correct in saying) com-
mended itself to more than half of the English bishops. Its
own intrinsic merits have secured its continuance by Mr.
Gell’s successors.
With the estimate formed of this work in the highest
quarters in England, a more intimate knowledge of its con-
tents induces me to concur. It seems to me to be peculiarly
valuable in that very respect in which it is supposed by your-
selves to be deficient. I scarcely know an elementary work
in which the points at issue between the Churches of England
and Rome are more tersely put; none, in which we find, in
so few words, a more intelligible, or a more convincing
advocacy of the claims of our Reformed Church, against the
pretensions and misrepresentations of Rome.
It would seem, from the remembrance which Dr. Fry has
published of a private conversation held with him, some six
years ago, as though he would desire to have it believed, that
ray estimate of the work at that period was different from
what I entertain at present. I, too, well remember that con-
versation : my remark was to the effect, that an isolated pas-
sage, which he pointed out, if taken by itself, and followed
out to an undue length, would lead to Romanism. But the
same remark, with reverence I say it, may be applied to
certain passages in the Book of Common Prayer, if the same


principle of interpretation were extended, and the modern
theory of “ development” were applied to them.
But you. Gentlemen, on the part of the recent public
meeting, have recorded your sentiments of this book, as in-
culcating “ some dangerous errors and practices of the Church
of Rome.” I do not pause to inquire how many of the at-
tendants at that meeting, or even of this deputation, had
read the book throughout, or how many had mastered the
several Greek and Latin quotations with which it abounds ;
yet without which no man can pretend to be a competent
judge of its entire merits : —but I must remind you that you
have shown no cause for the condemnation that you have
passed, or for the request which you have preferred. No
valid reason has been given why I should take the extreme
step of prohibiting its use at the College.
You have merely advanced your opinion as to its merits.
That opinion, I grant, is supported by some of the Clergy,
who have, as you believe, “ shown,” —but, as I believe, as-
serted, without showing,—that doctrines hostile to the faith
of the Church of England are to be found therein.
It is enough to say, that with that opinion I do not concur,
and that it is not my intention to fetter the Warden’s discre-
tion in the use of this book or its continuance.
And now, dear Christian friends and brethren, suffer me,
before we part, to address to you a few words of earnest and
affectionate counsel, and even of remonstrance. I speak as
your chief pastor, not as that of the Clergy only.
I give you all credit for honesty of purpose and upright-
ness of intention. I believe you to be sincere in your fears
that Romanizing tendencies do exist in this our Tasmanian
Church, though I may, and I must, differ with you as to the
fact; or else, cast aside all my reading, and all knowledge of
the writings of our Reformers, and of our most approved
expositors of God’s holy Word. Had I not been thus assured
of your purity of thought, in all these unhappy matters, I
could not have met you here to-day.
But whither do these struggles tend ? It may be—nay,
it ought to be, a serious consideration with us all, how far


the notoriously divided condition of the Church of England
in this Colony can ultimately conduce to her permanent well-
being. If active energies are wasted in internal discord,
which should be spent in making head against the untiring
foes of God and man, —if intellectual powers are frittered
away in polemical arguments, in public speeches, and in
unprofitable discussions, which were far better exercised in
pondering on the means, how, with God’s blessing, souls,
perishing for lack of knowledge, may be brought to love and
serve the Saviour, —then the truth cannot be disguised : we
are not doing our all to promote that entire oneness with the
Father, and with each other, for which our suffering Lord so
earnestly and so touchingly vouchsafed to pray;—we are
not fulfilling our appointed mission, nor calling down God’s
abiding blessing on our work.
Whilst, by variance and discord, we are daily scattering
our own strength, and even scandalizing those around us, —
experience itself presents the startling truth, that we do
but pave the way to send the Church’s children, in very
weariness of this incessant strife, to the promised peace and
unity of Rome, or to the unbridled liberty of any and every
form of dissent. Once unsettle the human mind, —and you
leave it to be “ tossed to and fro, and carried about with
every wind of doctrine.”
There is a noble vocation before the laity of this, and of
every other diocese of the Reformed Church of England.
Do not let me even seem to speak harshly, if I express my
conviction, that this vocation will not be found to exist in
striving to see where their Bishop haply may be in error, in
this or that point,—but how they may best co-operate with
him for the Church’s general weal.
When the events of the last few months are fully and freely
canvassed, as they will be, by earnest and well-read members
of the Church at home; when it is seen by them, that the
rule by which the Bishop desires to be guided, is “Holy
Scripture, interpreted by the Catholic Church,” and that the
principle for which he contends is, after all, the assertion
of the simple fact, that there must be some authority within
the Church, by which a check is placed upon unlicensed


private interpretation or repudiation of Catholic verities, —
they will marvel at the strange misapprehensions that have
so long existed. But will they stop there ? When they see
that there are both lay and clerical members of the Church,
who have been active in diffusing these misapprehensions,—
there will surely be grave questionings, how far the remodel-
ling of our existing constitution may be safely entrusted to
such hands; or, whether the Clergy, who have taken so
decided a part against their Bishop, require to be still further
removed from such restrictions, as his authority, either theo-
retically or practically, imposes on them.
How can they fail to ask, is it well for a Clergyman of the
Church of England, who has sought and obtained admission
into her ministry, under her existing constitution, boldly to
declare to the venerable Primate, that, unless this constitution
be altered, —so altered, as to introduce a new' element into its
composition,—that one alternative must be a public protest,
and the establishment of a Church, “in opposition to the
Bishop and his party?”
The establishment of a Church! I thought we belonged
to Christ’s Holy Catholic Church; established by Him who
purchased it with His agony and blood. And can an indi-
vidual Clergyman, or any number of individuals establish a
Church , of their own personal authority? and that, too, in
avowed opposition to the very principles which they have
voluntarily covenanted to regard ? Alas, my brethren, it is
easy to establish a sect —easy to create a party, —the name
of such is legion ; and one more would be but a drop of
water in yonder river; —but to establish a Church is beyond
man’s wit now.
And they wdll ask too, is it well, that an ordained servant
of the sanctuary should, on no better grounds than his
own mere opinion, deliberately denounce his Bishop as an
arbitrary and illegal persecutor, —a subverter of religious
liberty,—a violator of charity and good feeling; and, above
all, that he should charge him with being such a double
traitor, (as, whilst it is admitted that “he is not himself
desirous of embracing Romanism,”) secretly to plot the
downfall of that portion of the Church of Christ, which is


committed to his guardianship, by desiring to withhold that
partial remodelling of her polity, for which circumstances
seem to call, “ until such a number of Tractarian Clergymen
shall be introduced as may Romanize the Church, and prove
a majority of the assembly.”
Let us, after this, hear no more of the helpless condition
of the Clergy of this diocese, —no more of their slavish de-
pendence on the Bishop’s will, —of the insecurity of their
position, if they have the courage to contravene it. Why,
the very safe utterance of these, and such like charges, all
unproved, and unsupported by one jot of sound evidence,
as they are, is, of itself, a testimony, that their tenure of
office is not so very insecure, and that their spiritual ruler, to
whom they have voluntarily sworn obedience, “ in all things
lawful and honest,” is not so over rigid in tasking or exacting
it. The very immunity from official censure, with which
these wild declarations have been treated, may be taken as a
proof, that the Bishop of this diocese is not disposed to lord
it over God’s heritage, nor tempted to use the autocratic
power ascribed to him, to hurt, instead of help. It will
satisfy all thinking people, that he is deliberately resolved to
stretch forbearance to its utmost limits, in the earnest hope,
that, in God’s good time, his daily prayer may at last be
granted,—that those who have thus been led away, as he
believes, to forget, for a season, their duty to their Church
and to themselves, may be so brought to reconsider their
course, as to exert the talents and influence which they
possess, not to confusion, but to peace,—not to unsettling
men’s minds, but to build them up in the Redeemer’s fear
and love, —not to exhibit to the gainsayers the sad spectacle
of the Church of England, even as “ a house divided against
itself j” but as one, whose every member will say unto his
fellow, —“ behold, how good and how pleasant it is for bre-
thren to dwell together in unity.”


APPENDIX.
Reference having been made to a Letter written by the
Rev. Dr. Fry to the Archbishop of Canterbury, it is here
subjoined: —
Hobart Town, 20th February, 1852.
May it please Your Grace, —I beg permission to give you a
short account of some matters of importance to the Church in this
Colony, for which you were pleased to show much interest when I
had the honour of an interview with your Grace in 1850.
Your Grace is aware of the Resolutions of the Bishops at Sydney,
at their Conference, and of the opposition and apprehensions which
their proceedings occasioned. The sentiments or judgment of your
Grace and of the Archbishop of Dublin on their Minutes have pro-
duced the most beneficial effects in these Colonies, both in repressing
the designs of the Romanizing party, and in encouraging the Evan-
gelical or Protestant Clergy and people. We feel deeply thankful
to your Grace for the expression of your opinion, and, under Provi-
dence, look to you for support and advice.
I forwarded to your Grace a copy of a pamphlet signed by myself
and twenty Clergymen of this Diocese, remonstrating against the
dissemination of Romanizing books and opinions. Our tract was
termed “ A Solemn Declaration,” &c. Your Grace may, perhaps,
have deemed this tract over-severe or injudicious; but I can assure
you, that the progress of Romanizing opinions,—the avowed and
acted-upon intention of excluding all Ministers who did not par-
ticipate in them, and the denunciation of Evangelical religion,—left
us no other course to pursue. Your Grace will learn with satis-
faction, that the result of this publication, and of other documents
of a Protestant Association which I organized, has been completely
to overthrow the projects of the Tractarians, to stop the circulation
of Romanizing books, to encourage the advocates of Protestantism,
and to excite a general and determined Protestant spirit in the
community.
I had the pleasure of forwarding to your Grace an Address from
the Christian Knowledge Society in this City.
As my object and that of my brethren was, not to create a schism,
but to maintain and promote the true principles of our Church, I
ever avoided any proceeding likely to depreciate the Bishop, or lead
to a renunciation of his authority, which many deemed the only


means of opposing the evils we designed to repress. Privately and
personally, 1 ever used any influence, I could employ, to lead him
to a true understanding of his dangerous and false position. He is
not, himself, desirous of embracing Romanism ; but Archdeacon
Marriott, and six Oxford Clergymen whom he brought out to the
Colony with him, have surrounded the Bishop, and, by their flat-
teries, and exaltation of his office, have filled him with the notion of
his occupying the position of an Apostle, and that his judgment is
to be received as sacred as that of the Church, involving those who
do not hold his religious sentiments in the sin of rebellion and
schism.
He, at length, appeared willing to concede to an opposition which
he felt to be insurmountable ; and on receipt of your Grace’s reply
to the Minutes of the Bishops’ Conference, he summoned a meeting
of the Clergy to express their sentiments on the subject of a Con-
stitution for the Church. Desiring to embrace the prospect of an
accommodation, I communicated with the principal Clergymen of
the Bishop’s party, and arranged that a Petition should be adopted
in the words of that previously forwarded from the Protestant
Association, in which no mention was to be made of the Sydney
Conference, or their plan of a Constitution, and in which the only
thing sought for should be the removal of any restriction upon our
assembling. I forward to your Grace a copy of this Petition,
fearing that the authentic document may be long delayed, as it is to
be transmitted through the Bishop, who will send it through the
Bishop of Sydney.
The hope of accommodation thus entertained was soon destroyed ;
a fortnight after our meeting the Bishop received an application
from a Candidate for Holy Orders, named Smith, with the usual
Testimonials, signed by the Rev. Alfred Stackhouse and the Rev.
George Wilkinson, two of the most respected Ministers in the
Colony ; —the former, especially, is a man eminent in his ministry.
The Bishop rejected the Testimonial, on the ground of Messrs. S.
and W. having signed the “ Declaration,” “ denying the right of any
Church or Minister to prescribe to individuals in matters of religion
in opposition to their own judgment ,” as being a repudiation of the
authoritative teaching of the Church, and, therefore, he says, he
“cannot accept their testimony as satisfactorily vouching for the doc-
trinal soundness of another." Your Grace will perceive the cautious,
and, indeed, undeniable proposition which the Bishop so strongly
condemns, as to excommunicate the majority of the Clergy who
have signed it.
It is not denied that the Church has authority to teach, to guide,
direct, or influence, but only that it has not authority to overrule
private judgment, —that men are not bound to receive its teaching in
opposition to their own judgments. To deny this appears to sub-
vert the fundamental principle of Protestantism. As might be ex-
pected, this act of the Bishop has created a very strong feeling in
our minds ; but one not sufficient to render us regardless of the
great interests of peace and unity, and of submission to constituted


authority. We do not feel that we are called upon publicly to de-
nounce this error, as we did the Romanizing teaching; for the
Bishop may disgust and drive away the members of the Church by
preaching against private judgment, but he will never make a single
convert, so we do not fear the progress of this great error ; and we
feel that the only remedy for this and all other evils is the establish-
ment of a Constitutional Assembly of the Clergy and Lay represen-
tatives : to this we look for redress and protection against the de-
sign and unrelaxing attempts to render our Colonial Church a
Tractarian sect. If we do not obtain this, one of two results will
follow, —either we must protest publicly, and establish a Church in
opposition to the Bishop and his party; or, we must submit to see
the people forsake the Churches, as they have done where Roman-
izing Clergymen have been forced upon them, and to have the
parishes filled by Tractarian Ministers.
Under these circumstances, I feel justified in soliciting your
Grace’s interference in promoting the object of the Petition. It is
so simple, that the Ministers of the Crown can easily pass it; and
it exactly agrees with the opinion expressed by Sir G. Grey, that
we might be permitted to manage our own affairs. It embraces the
circumstances of all our Colonies. Any definite form of Constitu-
tion framed at home for all the Australian Dioceses would be fraught
with difficulties, if not impracticable. The imposition of any restric-
tions upon us would only lead to resistance. Leave us free, and, by
God’s blessing, we will maintain our connexion with the Evangelical
Church of England, and promote the true end of a Christian Church.
I trespass upon your Grace from a sense of the urgency of the sub-
ject, and from a Jcnowledye that the Bishop and his party are in
reality reluctant to our obtaining a Constitution, until such a number
of Tractarian Clergy shall be introduced as may Romanize the
Church and form a majority of the assembly.
I beg your Grace to excuse the haste in which the pressure of
parochial duties compels me to write.
I have the honour to remain,
Your Grace’s most faithful servant,
HENRY PHIBBS FRY.
DECLARATION.
Whereas certain statements have been publicly circulated in Tas-
mania and the neighbouring dioceses, and forwarded to the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury and other high authorities of the Mother
Church in England,—statements that are too likely to compromise
seriously the character of the Clergy of the diocese of Tasmania, or
many of them, and to lead the members of the Church at large to
suspect their faithfulness to the true principles of the Church of


England, their moral honesty of purpose, and the willingness of their
obedience to the Bishop,—We, the undersigned Clergymen of the
said diocese, do hereby declare,
I. That we are stedfastly resolved, by God’s help, faithfully to
act up to the true spirit of the English Reformation; believing that
it has not only preserved and perpetuated among us the fellowship
and doctrine of the One Catholic and Apostolic Church of the first
and purest ages, but has laid upon us the solemn obligation of
protesting against many corrupt doctrines and practices, introduced,
at a later period, by the Church of Rome.
11. That, while we maintain the right and recognize the duty of
every Christian to use all the powers which God has given him in
examining the grounds of his religion, and while we firmly believe
(with the sixth Article of our Church) that “ Holy Scripture con-
tained all things necessary to salvation,” we yet no less earnestly
believe and maintain (with the twentieth Article), that “ the Church
hath power to decree Rites and Ceremonies, and authority in con-
troversies of faith.”
111. That, although we desire to see the resources of our Church
developed, in the practical operation of her existing system, —paro-
chial, diocesan, and provincial, —we do not desire, but earnestly
deprecate, any radical change in her constitution; and especially,
and in the strongest manner, repudiate the attempt or intention that
has been publicly broached in this diocese, of establishing, under any
possible circumstances, “ a Church in opposition to the Bishop V’
IV. That, so far from our being “in reality reluctant 12 ” to the
Church’s obtaining the powers necessary for the development of her
constitution, we sincerely and honestly re-affirm (so far as any of us
took part in originally affirming) the opinion expressed by the Bishop
and Clergy in January last, —namely, that it is desirable for the
Clergy and Laity of the Church to possess adequate synodical
functions ; and we claim our right to be believed in this our affirm-
ation.
V. That the imputation to “ the Bishop and ” some persons
termed “ his party” of a systematic design to “ Romanize the
Church 3 ,” and to procrastinate the procuring of synodical functions
until the completion of the Romanizing process is, in our belief,
utterly indefensible : that such a design, if the Bishop or any of the
Clergy were capable, ever so remotely, of entertaining it, would be
1 “ Either we must protest publicly, and establish a Church in opposition
to the Bishop and his party ; or we must submit to see the people forsake the
Churches, as they have done where Romanizing Clei’gymen have been forced
upon them.” —Dr. Fry’s Letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury ; published
in the Appendix to the Bishop of Tasmania’s “ Reply to a Deputation,” &c.
2 «i trespass upon your Grace from a knowledge that the Bishop and his
party are in reality reluctant to our obtaining a Constitution, until such a num-
ber of Tractariau Clergy shall be introduced as may Romanize the Church and
form a majority of the Assembly.”— lbid.
3 See preceding Note.—“ The progress of Romanizing opinions, and the
avowed and acted-upon intention of excluding all Ministers who did not parti-
cipate in them, and the denunciation of Evangelical religion, left us no other
course to pursue.”— lbid.


worthy only of abhorrence ; and that a charge, so unwarrantable in
the first instance, ought, now that it is thus publicly repudiated, to
be as publicly withdrawn and atoned for.
VI. That desiring, in the due fulfilment of our solemn vow,
“ reverently to obey our Ordinary, unto whom is committed the
charge and government over us,” and believing that this vow is best
observed by respectful demeanour towards our Chief Pastor, and
quiet diligence in the work which he, under Christ, has appointed
to us, we protest against the wrongful dealing of those who would
charge us with sycophancy or hypocrisy, as though any of us could,
on the one hand, “ surround the Bishop with flatteries* ,” or, on
the other, through fear or mental thraldom, suppress the conscien-
tious convictions of our hearts.
VII. That we are deeply grieved at the aspect of division under
which our diocese has for some time past stood forth to the world.
That if (as it may be in God’s sight) any of us, by word or deed,
have caused “ any brother to stumble or be offended,” and thus have
borne a share in promoting this division, our grief and our desire for
pardon must thereby be deepened and increased. And that, for the
work which may henceforth lie before us in the Church of Christ, it
is our earnest and humble prayer that we may, one and all, faith-
fully and in brotherly love, follow “ the things which make for peace,
and things wherewith one may edify another.”
f F. A. Marriott, Archdeacon of Hobart Town.
° ( R. R. Davies, Archdeacon of Launceston.
W. Trollope, M.A., Master of Oatlands
Grammar School.
J. L. Ison, 8.A., Chaplain of Oatlands.
J, Fereday, M.A., Chaplain of George
Town.
J. Yarker, S.C.L., Chaplain of Trinity
Church, Launceston.
W. Tancred, M.A., Chaplain of Rich-
mond.
T. J. Ewing, Chaplain, New Town.
F. H. Cox, 8.A., jMissionary Chap-
lain, St. John’s, Hobart Town.
S. B. Windsor, M.A., Warden of
Christ’s College.
J. R. Buckland, 8.A., Head Master,
Hutchins School.
T. Reibey, Chaplain, Hadspen.
J. H. Reibey, 8.A., Chaplain, Carrick.
C. Dobson, Chaplain, Prosser’s Plains.
D. Galer, Chaplain, Factory, Hobart
Town.
D. Boyd, Missionary Chaplain, Norfolk
Plains.
M. Williams, Missionary Chaplain, De-
loraine.
F. Brownrigg, 8.A., Chaplain, Pater-
son’s Plains.
G. Eastman, Chaplain, Factory,
Ross.
S. B. Ffookes, Chaplain, Impression
Bay.
T. B. Garlick, Chaplain, Lake River.
H. A. Middleton, Assistant Master,
Hutchins School.
R. Wilson, Chaplain, Bruni.
J. Andrewartha, Missionary Chaplain,
Huon Settlement.
B. Ball, 8.A., Missionary Chaplain,
Port Sorell.
R. Crooke, 8.A., Chaplain, Circular
Head.
* “ He (the Bishop) is not himself desirous of embracing Romanism ; but
Archdeacon Marriott, and six Oxford Clergymen whom he brought out to the
Colony with him, have surrounded the Bishop, and, by their flatteries and ex-
altation of his office, have filled him with the notion of his occupying the
position of an Apostle, and that his judgment is to be received as sacred as that
of the Church.”— lbid.


The following Letter, addressed to one of the Clergymen who
signed the “ Solemn Declaration,” will show, that all that the
Bishop requires is a satisfactory explanation of the words to
which he demurred :
Bishopstowe, 3rd April, 1852.
* * *
With reference to the conversation which I held
with you yesterday, I wish you clearly to understand, that my de-
clining to accept signatures to Testimonials from such of the Clergy
as have subscribed the Declaration “ denying the right of the Church
to prescribe to individuals in matters of religion, in opposition to
their own judgment,” is conditional, not absolute.
If the subscribing Clergy are willing to afford an explanation of
this clause, and if that explanation amounts to an unequivocal and
explicit acceptance of the undoubted authority of the creeds, articles,
catechism, and liturgy of the Church of England, over her own
children, and especially over her Clergy,—their “ private judgment,”
notwithstanding,—l shall be perfectly willing to regard such an ex-
planation as satisfactory, provided it be not accompanied with a
reiteration of the clause to which I object, and that it be reduced to
writing.
In making this stipulation, and in declining to receive a verbal
explanation upon so momentous a matter, I do not conceive that I
am, in any way, exceeding my ordinary authority as the Chief Pastor
of this Diocese, nor acting in contravention of recognized usage.
The Declaration in question has been printed, made public, widely
and notoriously circulated, both here and elsewhere. It is now
before the whole body of the Church. lam compelled, therefore,
in justice to the Clergy, to myself, and to the Church at large, to
require that such explanation as the subscribing Clergy, either col-
lectively or individually, may desire to make, should be of a docu-
mentary character.
I have good reason both to hope and to believe, that, if you will
do me the favour to reduce to writing the sentiments which you con-
veyed to me yesterday upon this subject, there will be no material
(perhaps not any) difficulty remaining, as far as you are concerned.
I must confess to you, that, if I am to put the common-sense in-
terpretation upon the clause, as it at present stands, it seems to me
to be inconsistent with the claim of our Church to possess “ authority
in controversies of faith;” and with the ministerial commission, not
only to speak and exhort, but also to “ rebuke,” if need be, “ with
all authority .”
In acting, as I have done, upon this conviction, I do but claim
for myself the same freedom of judgment with regard to Testimo-
nials, that every Clergyman in the Colony would demand for him-
self, and which you yourself, in time past, have exercised without
let or hindrance.
If every individual Clergyman possesses the undoubted right of
granting or withholding the expression of his entire confidence in, or


concurrence with, the doctrinal opinions or soundness of another,
surely it will not be urged that the Bishop is to be deprived of a
similar privilege, unless, indeed, it be contended, that he alone in the
Diocese is to be debarred from a conscientious expression of opinion
upon questions of theology.
No Bishop would expect a Clergyman to sign a Testimonial in
another’s behalf, contrary to his honest conviction : why, then, should
the Bishop be required to accept or countersign Testimonials con-
trary to his honest conviction ?
I am exceedingly anxious to promote and to secure the peace and
welfare of the Church, w hose supervision is committed to my charge.
But I must not suffer this anxiety to render me indifferent to what a
well-tasked conscience satisfies me is virtually a forgetfulness of her
real claims to the undivided allegiance of her children. It has given
me great pain to find myself differing from several of my brethren.
* * * * But where, what I verily believe to be, my duty is involved,
I must not suffer any private feelings of regret to stand in the way
between me and its performance.
Believe me, &c.
(Signed) F. R. TASMANIA.
[To this letter no answer has been returned.]
THE END.
Gilbert & Rivinoton, Printers, St. John’s Square, London.
