

' - * "."V i
ÜBSTANCE OF A SPEECH |
SUBSTANCE OE A
Rfijwl o<J* P^AfS.
IN THE
BOX 6
SYNOD OF EASTERN AUSTR A L I A,
RELATIVE TO THE ERECTING OF A
PRESBYTERIAN COLLEGE,
IN CONNECTION WITH
T lIE TJ N I.y ER 81 T Y 0 F BYDN E Y,
AND THE DUTY OF
CO-OPERATING WITH OTHER PRESBYTERIAN BODIES,
IN PROMOTING THAT OBJECT.
NOVEMBER MDCCCLVII,
M. MAC KAY, L L [)..
SYDNEY.
WITH EXTRACT LETTER FROM REV, DR. DUFF, CALCUTTA
SYDNEY.
JAMES W. WAUGH, 139, GEORGE-STREET; AND JOHN L. SHERIFF, 135,
GEORGE-STREET.
AND SOLD BY THE VARIOUS BOOKSELLERS IN THE COUNTRY.
0
MDCCCLVII.
i




p I jUain
SUBSTANCE OE A SPEECH
IN THE
SYNOD OF EASTERN AUSTRALIA,
RELATIVE TO THE ERECTING OF A
PRESBYTERIAN COLLEGE,
IN CONNECTION WITH
THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY,
AND THE DUTY OF
CO-OPERATING WITH OTHER PRESBYTERIAN BODIES,
IN PROMOTING THAT OBJECT.
NOVEMBER MDCCCLVIL
EY M. MACKAY, L Ll).,
SYDNEY.
WITH EXTRACT LETTER FROM REV. DR. DUFF, CALCUTTA,
SYDNEY;
JAMES W. WAUGH, 139, GEORGE-STREET; AND JOHN L. SHERIFF, 135,
GEORGE-STREET.
AND SOLD BY THE VARIOUS BOOKSELLERS IN THE COUNTRY.
MDCCCLVII.




PREFACE.
The University of Sydney was incorporated by an Act of the Colonial
Legislature, which received the Royal assent in 1851.
An Act to encourage the erection of Suffragan Colleges was passed
by the Legislature in 1854.
Considerable assistance is offered by this latter Act toward the
erection and Endowment of such Colleges. Of these provisions
the Church of England in the Colony of New South Wales, the
Church of Rome, and the Wesleyan Church, are now availing them-
selves.
In course of the present year, it was resolved by the Synod of
Australia in connection with the Established Church of Scotland,
to take steps toward the erecting of a Presbyterian College, in terms
of the Colleges’ Act.
In the month of July, 1857, a communication from the Moderator
of the Synod of Australia was addressed to the Moderator of the
Synod of Eastern Australia, in name of a Committee of the former
Synod, inviting the Synod of Eastern Australia to co-operate with
the other Synod, in the important undertaking of having a Presby-
terian College erected.
The Moderator of the Synod of Eastern Australia, on receiving
this communication, having conferred with the brethren within his
reach, on this subject, a Requisition was addressed to him by those
brethren, to call a meeting of the Synod of Eastern Australia —pro re
nata —to consider the subject; which meeting of that Synod wag
accordingly convened on August 6th, 1857, and the Moderator’s con-
duct in having called that meeting was unanimously approved.
At the said meeting of the Synod of Eastern Australia, the fol-
lowing motions were submitted :


I. (By Rev. A. Salmon,) “ That whereas this Synod has already
condemned and petitioned against indiscriminate religious endowments
as unscriptural and irrational ; and whereas the same vitiating prin-
ciple is contained in the Colleges’ Act, and that in an aggravated
form, the Synod does not feel at liberty to take advantage of its
provisions, and all the less, considering that under the provisions of
the Act in question, the College would he comparatively useless as a
Presbyterian College.” »
11. (By Rev. James Cameron,) “ That, in the opinion of this
Synod, their availing themselves of the aid offered by the Government
of this Colony for the erection and endowment of a Presbyterian
College, to he affiliated to the University of Sydney, involves no
violation whatever of sound principle, and is in full harmony with the
principles and practice of the Free Church of Scotland ; and that
their declining to avail themselves of the invaluable privileges con-
nected with National University education in the land, would he
unjust to the people under their charge, and in every way prejudicial
to the interests of Free Church Presbyterianism in this Colony.”
After reasoning, the latter motion was carried by a majority of
seven to three. At the next diet; for the purpose of giving effect to
the above decision, the following motion was submitted: —
I. (By Rev. James Cameron,) “ That this Synod, in terms of its
decision at last sederunt, resolves to co-operate with such other
Presbyterian bodies in this Colony as may engage in the undertaking
of having a Presbyterian College erected, in terms of the “ Colleges’
Actand that a Committee of this Synod be appointed to carry out
their decision ; and that the following he special instructions to the
said Committee, viz.:
Ist. That the Synod of Eastern Australia be equally represented,
in any joint Committee carrying out the Colleges’ Act, with the Synod
of Australia.
2nd. That no minister now in the Australian Colonies be appointed
either Principal or Professor, in the Presbyterian College, in the first
appointments to be made.
3rd. That any Principal or Professor of theology appointed shall,
ipso facto, cease to have any ecclesiastical connection with, or he in
any way subject to the jurisdiction of, any Church beyond the hounds
of this Colony ; and,
4th. That any Principal or Professor appointed to the said College
shall, before entering upon office, sign the Westminster Confession of


Faith, and take the oath de fideli of his prelections being always in
full accordance with the same, and with the several other Standards
usually denominated the Westminster Standards.”
And as an amendment, (by Rev. William Maclntyre,)
11, “ That this Church is constrained to abstain from associating
itself with the Synod of Australia in connection with the Established
Church of Scotland, in erecting a Presbyterian College within the
University of Sydney, under the provisions of the Act 18 Victoria,
No. 37, in supplying in such College “ systematic religious instruc-
tion,” as that Act requires, and in training a native ministry,—on the
ground that by such association it would compromise the distinctive
testimony for the maintenance of which it assumed the position of a
separate body, and homologate the acquiescence of the Synod of
Australia in connection with the Established Church of Scotland in
the testimony of that Church, as vitiated by its submission to the en-
croachments, on the part of the civil power, which issued in the dis-
ruption.”
After reasoning, the former of these two motions (including the
special instructions to the Synod’s Committee) was carried, by a ma-
jority of six to four. A Committee was appointed; and they pro-
ceeded to co-operate with the Committee of the Synod of Australia,
in taking preparatory measures for furthering the erection of the pro-
posed Presbyterian College, till the next ordinary meeting of the
Synod of Eastern Australia, on 4th November, 1857 ; when, at the
first business diet of that meeting, the following motions were sub-
mitted, viz. :
I. (By Rev. William Maclntyre,) “ That the Synod considering
that the co-operation on the part of the Presbyterian Church of
Eastern Australia with the Synod of Australia in connection with
the Established Church of Scotland, in erecting a College within the
University of Sydney, and providing for the accomplishment of the
purposes of such College, particularly as regards the communication
of religious instruction, is inconsistent with the maintenance of the
distinctive testimony of this Church, —resolve that such co-operation
be abandoned ; and accordingly rescind the resolution relative to it
adopted at a pro re nata meeting of this Court on the 7th of August
last.”
11. (By Rev. Jaihes Cameron,) “ That the decision of the pro re
nata meeting he confirmed.”
After reasoning, the former of these two motions was carried by a
majority of thirteen to eight.


It was in support of the second of the above motions, that the
author of the following pages addressed to the Synod, substantially,
he thinks, what these pages now contain. Having made but
mere jottings previously, of what he intended to say upon this most
important subject, he is quite conscious that there must be many
omissions of what may have been stated, and not a few additions also,
of expressions and ideas not given forth in addressing the Synod,
found in these pages.
Nothing but the Author’s full conviction of the present being a
crisis in the history of Presbyterianism in this Colony, could have
made him yield to the earnest desires of the brethren with whom he
acts in the Synod on this subject, to have his Address published.
This is the Author’s first essay in the lists of controversy. He most
earnestly hopes it will also be his last. The subject is of such im-
portance to the future of this country, that the Author thinks it can
scarcely be over-rated.


SUBSTANCE OF A SPEECH, &c
Moderator,
In rising to address the Synod on the subject now occupying
our attention, I confess I feel its importance so deeply, that I shall
not wonder should ray feeling of this so choke ray utterance as to ren-
der me altogether incapable of communicating to others any measure of
my own views on the subject.
It were but superfluous, if not impertinent I should remind this
House that Australia is yet but in its infancy, and that it is but be-
ginning to emerge into its higher existence of a distinct and substantive
nationality. But there is a future before it, the complexion of which
cannot fail to be deeply influenced by every present movement of its
people. And while this, no doubt, is felt and known by us all, it is
well to be reminded, and that we should remind ourselves, of the
mighty consequences which may be suspended even upon our own de-
cisions at present, in such an important matter as that which is now
before us. We are not gifted with eyesight that can penetrate at all
into the future; but let us remember that, here, the ordinary laws of
moral responsibility may appear at first sight to be reversed ; for, in
such cases as this, assuredly the deeper our ignorance of the future,
the higher our responsibilities for the present; for it is from thfe
actings and decisions of men in the time and in the circumstances
now present, that weal or wo shall flow to this land. Nor is this re-
sponsibility at all diminished to us, by our being but a small body,
numerically considered, of the population of this Colony. The respon-
sibility attaches equally to State, and Church, and Community: and
in every department of the one, and in every branch of the others, the
morally healthy condition would be, that the true feeling of Iris own
responsibility to God were present habitually to every man’s mind.
Assuredly to every individual that responsibility extends ; for as there
is a future judgment, so is there a present “rule to direct us,” and
as that rule emanates from the mind, and is founded upon the eternal


principles of the Godhead, so may we be sure that holding by
it we shall be doing good, and that forgetting it, or trampling on its
authority, evils to others will flow from our actions, of which we can-
not at present see or estimate the extent or amount. These considera-
tions summon every branch of the Christian Church, in these Colonies,
at this period of their history, to great duties ; and we have need of
great wisdom to enable us to fulfil them.
In all Colonies of the British Empire, with but few excep-
tions, there is, so far as known to me, a practical equality at
common law conceded to all Protestant Churches at least, and such es-
tablished usage I believe to be considered by many jurists the strongest
of all laws. But, in this Colony, it is manifest there has been a wide
stride made beyond the usual limits of toleration, in that communions
neither Protestant nor Christian, are equally endowed, the same as any
body of Protestants who choose to embrace the like offers. We make no
claim, Moderator, to sit in judgment on those actings of the civil power
farther than respectfully to exercise our right of private judgment, and
to express it lawfully; while we claim to ourselves the full exercise of all
our own spiritual and religious rights and duties : and this, Sir, is a very
precious liberty, and enjoyed to the utmost in this Colony, for which we
owe thanksgiving to God; and, what is equally due in its place, the
according in our hearts of the same full liberty to others. Sir, it is
not in the way of complaint nor of murmur that 1 make these remarks,
but in the way of rerhinding this Synod that the more widely the door
has been opened in this country for all religionists to be on a footing of
equality with the State, the greater need is there to Presbyterians, if
they seek to preserve and uphold the faith of their Fathers, to draw to-
gether, and to open the doors of their own very hearts the one to the other,
and to seek unity, and to be at peace among themselves, even as they
would seek, ‘‘ so far as in them lies, to live peaceably with all men.’’
Sir, it will little avail us (and the great question is here whether it be
our duty to God), to draw off, to stand aloof, and to be killers of our-
selves by our own chagrin or our sourness, —and refusing to come in
-contact at all with those from whom we differ, and shrinking back lest
we be defiled or polluted. We read of those who would not enter into
Pilate’s judgment-hall lest they should be defiled, while they wereraad
with the fiendish passion of seeking to imbrue their hands, as they
speedily did, in the innocent blood of the Son of God.
Sir, next to the propagating and upholding of true religion, the
business of spreading the benefits of a sound Christian education is cer-
tainly the most important; nor can the former, humanly speaking, be


successfully conducted without the latter being also faithfully plied. Let
all our teaching be based on the true religion ; let us strive with one
heart that it be so ; and that, while not making it any part of education
to enforce religious conformity upon others, but cultivating the widest
toleration to all. It was thus in our Parish Schools of Scotland, and in
our Parish Churches too. It is thus in our Free Church Schools, and
places of worship, and Colleges also, at this day, in Scotland, while they
desire most strictly still to adhere “ to the law, and to the testimony.”
And the blessed benefits of such arrangements have not all of us seen ?
And deeply cognizant am I, Sir, that in the schools of the Free Church of
Scotland these benefits are increasing from year to year ; nor <fo I, by
any means, affirm but they may be so in the schools of the Established
Church of Scotland too. May we not freely co-operate with others in
the furthering of the great work of education, — with others with whom
we may not in good conscience ecclesiastically unite in the still higher
and more spiritual matters of faith, and of religious observance and
practice ? And while all of us here, I presume, do maintain it to be
the duty of rulers to support and to help to propagate the true religion,
and a universal education among the people, based on its principles, so
far as men will accept it; and while we would, in Christian charity, bear
with all those who on these important points may differ with us in opinion
and judgment, and agree to differ with them, still esteeming them
brethren, and still co-operating with them too —as the Free Church of
Scotland assuredly does—let us do the same to the very utmost we
can, following such examples wherever found; yet, when it is felt that
our respective paths must diverge, let our mutual charity still abide.
And, Sir, it is here, that I conceive, minds of the highest moral
honesty, and with much zeal to do good, may be greatly perplexed
when, with respect to education, and religion too, the question comes
to be agitated—What is the most Scriptural, and the most desirable
Scriptural form of either or both ? Such doubting we may not approve,
neither, on religious grounds can it ever be justified ; for the truth is,
most clearly revealed. But still we can have sympathy with
such doubts, and pray for their removal from minds perplexed
with them. The reality here seems to be, that while all religious
truth is one—one whole —indivisible, it may be presented to the
human mind in different forms —that is, one portion of it remaining more
prominent in one system and form of communication, and another
portion more prominent in another system and form; and still nought
of the truth being left behind in any of those outward forms
in which it may be conveyed ; and while under all such


forms there may be the same subjection of mind and spirit
to the whole of the truth of God. And such true, unfeigned,
and real subjection to the Divine authority of the whole truth
I hold to be the very essence of all true practical religion, while
we would cherish the widest toleration for many forms of its out-
ward expression. Presbyterian as I am, and of the Free Church of
Scotland, and most truly attached to every doctrine and to every form
of Presbyterianism, as those which I hold to be the most consonant
with the w T ord of God, I believe there are multitudes indeed in other
churches who feel and own subjection to the whole word of God just
as sincerely and as faithfully as we do ; while in the outward forms of
the administrations of their faith, and in their ecclesiastical polity, there
may be very much from which we cannot but most firmly dissent, and
which we cannot but hold as directly hostile to the expansive and prac-
tical influence of the truth throughout the world, hindering, obstruct-
ing, and frustrating its progress, and therefore sinful, though not dis-
cerned really to be so by many of those who differ from us.
But, Sir, while the full discussion of such positions as these would
run into many intricacies, there is one position, we think, that will not
be denied—the leavening power of education and training ; nor will it
be denied that this is even so great that, generally speaking at least, the
faith and the outward forms of the faith of the educator and trainer
will become the faith and forms of the faith of the trained. The imita-
tive faculty we hold to be practically the very strongest of the human
mind, especially in the years of its youthful plastic growth. We have
known instances, and we believe them to be very numerous, where
Presbyterian youths have been committed to the educational care of
Episcopalians, and Roman Catholics, and others, and where all
attempts and efforts at proselytism were prohibited on the part of
parents and guardians, and renounced on the other side, and, I am per-
suaded, with full and perfect honesty, on the part both of Episcopalians
and of Romanists too ; and most honourably observed, no attempt what-
ever at proselytism being made. And yet, what may be styled the
percolating power which the imitative faculty from within gives to im-
pressions from without, drawing the individual, and subjecting him to
the usages and the habits presented outwardly to the view of youth, until
ultimately those usages come to have a charm and a preference over all
others ; and consequences are seen to result, over which many religious
and conscientious parents have grievously mourned and wept. And with
all sincerity of respect for the many excellencies that may adorn the char-
acter of many of those with whom we differ, we do think that Pres-


byterian parents and guardians of Presbyterian youth do grievously err,
when they resign their trust into the hands of others, let those others
be ever so honourable, or ever so conscientious. We all here, Sir, do
surely think and feel that both in our Presbyterian doctrines and in
our Presbyterian forms of outward adininistratiou and polity, there is
very much that we can never conscientiously resign, nor even permit
to be modified ; and which we dare not resign, not merely because we
have sworn both to God and to men to maintain it, though that itself
were motive sufficient; but because we feel it to be due to God from us,
that we hold and maintain it as His truth.
Now Sir, it is in direct maintenance of these our Presbyterian con-
victions, —we hold them honestly, I question not; and we hold them
sacred and dear to our inmost souls by a thousand associations which
the history of times that are past has stamped indelibly not only
upon our memories but upon the very inmost parts of our being ; and
when, together with all this, the godly examples which many of us
here, if not all of us, have witnessed under the parental roof, have
acted like those wonderful liquids of which manufacturing chemistry
speaks, used in fixing colours upon blank fabrics in such
manner that they can never be washed out by any appliances
till the very fabric itself be consumed; it is, Sir, just in defence
of these our convictions that some of us at least do so earnestly
seek we should take our Presbyterian stand side by side in what is
most undoubtedly to prove our chief National University in this land,
with the other bodies and the other communions of our fellow-subjects,
and that we may retain the Presbyterian training of our own Presbyterian
youth in our own Presbyterian hands; feeling, as we cannot but feel, if we
be Presbyterians indeed, that when we surrender that trust into other
hands than our own, we surrender a trust of the highest responsibility
that God has committed to our care. And as for speaking of our Presby-
terianism being preserved, while the trust I speak of is betrayed; is that
anything else, but simply a contradiction in terms? And, Sir, I trust I do
not vainly flatter myself when I think I can now set before you, in some
measure, if the brethren will but patiently bear with me, how our Pres-
byterianism will be preserved or lost, how it will rise or fall, how it will
expand, or be contracted and shrivelled, and perish in this land, ac-
cording as we maintain or not our connection, as the Presbyterian
Body, with the National University of Sydney, by our having our
Presbyterian College there.
Moderator, I have already presumed to state that New South Wales
is but beginning to assume a national identity, if indeed the first linea-


ments of that identity have yet been formed, and one may be inclined
not unfrequently to hope that they have not. But, Sir, whatever may
be present appearances, whatever present discouragements, discrepan-
cies, and incongruities, yet such an identity will grow. It is the ten-
dency of our common nature, as all nations testify, and such a growth
cannot be prevented, though it may indeed be retarded. And what is
it that shall chiefly mould and fashion that identity, and give it its own
substantiality? We trust—may (rod grant it of His own infinite
grace—true religion will mould it, the glorious Gospel of the grace of
God. But, Sir, humanly speaking, this must be through its Institu-
tions, its household and family piety and morality, its Schools, its
Churches, its Colleges, and its University.
Sir, there is much, —there is almost inimitably much, of power, in
Institutions that are really National. Their Nationality is a species of
soul that such Institutions possess ; and it is a kind of soul or spirit
that is incommunicable to any other Institutions, be they ever so good,
that may be reared in the same land. All that we see of this in his-
tory, or by personal observation, or by experience in our own minds, we
think we might prove to be almost a necessary working of the deepest
affections and principles of our nature. Sir, without going into any
reasonings or subtleties upon this subject, we may safely maintain that
it is this kind of spirit, undefinable as it may be by any definition,
which ensures the perpetuity of such National Institutions, and their
highest usefulness too. Do what we may, the charm and the prestige
which attach to National Universities, those venerable seats of erudi-
tion and learning, can never be transferred to other institutions, but
grow with the growth of the National Universities —are strengthened
by their strength become venerable with their age, and all the
more powerful, from generation to generation, and from century to
century. Look to England, and look to Scotland, and look to Ireland,
and look to every country of Europe, and you will meet with the same
thing. And, Sir, tlniversities, seats of the highest learning, must be
considered to be one of the necessities of every civilised land—National
Universities and National Colleges. The human intellect has to be
cultivated, and expanded, and elevated—human tastes have to be
purified and refined, and human affections and sentiment to be subli-
mated and regulated, and evoked to go forth to the elevating of our species.
And toward all this, and much more being effected, all due and necessary
appliances have to be provided, and put into exercise. Sir, if we
expect good, we must be both just and generous to our own nature ;
and a nation would be “ hiding itself from its own flesh,” not to make


the institution of a University—one or more—one of its first and most
cherished efforts, so that human minds may be led forth both to the exer-
cise and the true enjoyment of their highest and best capabilities. And
we know not of any occupation of rulers, or princes, or wealth, more
noble, more high, more fertile of future benefits than the creating and
planting of such National Institutions, when on pure and solid foun-
dations, and in sugh generous spirit, and with such guidance of wisdom,
as shall leave those Institutions equally open to every rank, to every
class of a country’s population alike —where all shall be on the same
level, while equally pursuing those elevating acquirements to which no
royal road can be found. It is such Institutions assuredly, that
help to level society, not downward, but upward, and to connect
and cement it firmly together. Sir, to attempt high things in that
direction, is the highest duty of man to man. It was a favourite
maxim with an illustrious man, Dr. Chalmers a maxim on
which he delighted frequently to dwell—that man’s primeval state
was the very opposite of the savage. A state it was (sail he) of the
highest intellectual culture, the highest human knowledge, with the
highest and purest sources of action that can adorn the moral being of
the rational creature of God. Sir, moral evil is that which did degrade
this noble being, and sink man down, step by step, to his most miser-
able and lowest level of the brutalized savage condition; and all
this evil and misery can be remedied only, and primeval blessedness,
yea, and more abundant blessedness still be ultimately restored, by the
renovating influences and power of divine grace,—of divine Truth and
reality, as made manifest in the great mystery of godliness. And
National high Institutions lead forward to this blessed end* and
especially wheif they place high over their gates, and over the whole
of their other objects and pursuits, as upon the very summit pinnacle
of each University and College, the thorough, systematic, and effective
teaching of a pure Bible Theology. And such National Institutions
just by doing this, while they shed around them such blessed light,
they secure at the same time, so far as human affairs can be said to
be stable, they secure the permanency of their own character amidst
the many changes and tossings into which nations and men may be
thrown. There are thus unspeakable elements of permanency in such
National Institutions. They may be tried, they may temporarily be
corrupted, and may come to be backsliding, and unsound, to a deep
extent. And yet they will again come right, just as certainly as the
compactly built ship, when well equipped, well found, well manned,
and well commanded, will again come right, “as a thing of life,”


unaer the force of the most fearful and perilous tempests that can
sweep across the surface of ocean.
Sir, it is on such grounds as these I rejoice that a Uni-
versity has been founded in New South Wales ; and that I
consider our Colonial Rulers have in this matter acted most dutifully
and wisely to this Colony, and that they merit our lively grati-
tude. That the University they have founded, or that the pro-
visions of their Legislation upon the subject may not present to every
mind its own beau ideal of Universities or of Colleges ; —and as-
suredly for my own part, let me with all humility say it, — I
find not there my own beau ideal of either, —that does scarcely,
if at all, detract, —all circumstances considered, from the amount of
gratitude due to God, and to men too in their place, for the advantages
bestowed. Sir, I object most thoroughly and entirely, to all indiscri-
minate religious Endowments. I hold the system to be nationally
sinful; and that Rulers are bound to discriminate between truth and
error; especially when God has given them His truth, and the means
of its knowledge: but if we must have such a system, though Ido not
admit that there is any must in the matter, on the part of Rulers, either in
this Colony, or any where else, and this Colony forming part of a Chris-
tian and Protestant empire ; and seeing that on us the obligation of
obeying the powers that be is laid, as to them the responsibilities of
legislation specially belong, while we bear the responsibilities of the
former but not of the latter; and if by legitimate means we cannot
amend the system, then, I say at once, I should much prefer, with
respect to Universities and Colleges, the grouping of them together
and the placing in juxta-position of what we consider to be positive
truth and positive error, than to see them placed* separate and
far apart in the same land. And however strange this may appear to
some, I would appeal to every Protestant, whether he be Episcopalian
or Presbyterian, who has visited Ireland, and made himself in any way
acquainted with its Institutions, to say whether it were not better that the
College of Maynooth had been placed in Stephen’s Green in the noble
city of Dublin, and in juxta-position to that very noble institution, Trinity
College ; and whether the noble influences of the one might not tell upon
the tastes, and the habits, and perhaps the principles of the other, incalcu-
lably more than they are ever likely to do, while locally placed as they
now are. And, Sir, with respect to our own begun University here ; and
I take into account Victoria’s begun University also, I must openly
avow ray having no sympathy whatever with those who begrudge the
endowments of those Institutions, or who mourn over the pecuniary


cost of them. Sir, the very highest interests of every Land, of every
Commonwealth, and even of every family, are those interests that can
never be estimated by any pecuniary calculations ; that can never at all
be represented by money. such travestied calculations suggest
the grotesque and unnatural, and revolting idea of a child setting
a money price upon the life of the parent, or the parent upon the life
of the child. T would, indeed, argue for no reckless or extravagant
expenditure. But our Universities we must have ; and, if need be, at
any price. They are a necessity. I look upon the instituting of them
not only as acts of wisdom and justice, but as deeds filled with hopeful
encouragement to every parent in these Colonies, who has made, or yet
may make Australia his own home, and the home of his children. I
think of the instituting of these Universities, as if I saw the Rulers
taking early pledge from the very soil of these Colonies,
that it shall yet bo made to yield to its sons as they grow up in succes-
sive generations, an expanded, an expansive intellectuality, a pure, a
high, and an enlightened bearing; and that whatever impediments
may be now apparently in the way,—that these very Institutions shall
be over-ruled for incalculable good, and be made the means of produ-
cing, till it yet become the leading characteristic of Australia’s families,
a pure and enlightened subjugation of spirit to the God who made them,
and who offers to save them, and who in His providence has given them
personal interest in these goodly lands :—and that, thus, the righteous-
ness which exalteth a nation, shall yet give to the empire of the
Australias, within the whole full bounds of the Southern hemisphere a
place correspondent in dignity and in strength to that which its own
parent Empire holds in the Northern hemisphere of the world.
Sir, we must have, by the blessing of God, our National University
and its colleges too; and in both, as true Presbyterians, we must each
and all have our share, whatever may be our minor differences or dis-
tinctiohs. Upon this object, yea, and upon all these unhappy dif-
ferences too, I would still fondly trust, we may yet, and, perhaps,
speedily, be all at one. And that any judgment of this Court
should condemn all co-operation with other Presbyterian bodies,
in seeking to have our Presbyterian National College, I could
not but mourn as a most severe calamity to ourselves, fraught
with miseries for the future. Sir, I have already stated, that our
Colonial University and College legislation is not by any means
my own beau ideal; but let me presume to direct your attention
to one feature of our University's legalized Constitution, which,
I think, we cannot too highly appreciate; and in which I freely con-


less, I do myself most sincerely rejoice, and that is, the opening
wide of its gates to embrace all shades at least of Protestant non-
conformity. Happy would it have been for England, I do most
verily believe, had its noble National Universities shared in the
arrangement for Colleges now proposed for the University of Sydney.
# Had the Universities of England opened wide their gates to admit all
non-conformists, how many acrimonies would have been spared ! —how
many fierce religious contentions, —how many religious variances, and
hatreds, and envies, and strifes, might have been prevented ! Truly it may
well be our full belief that such an arrangement would have proved to be
the greatest blessing to the Church of England itself, and to the whole of
England too, and to the multitudes of her population. How different
an aspect from what non-corformity in England this day bears, should
it ere now have borne ! The exclusiveness of the Universities of England,
beyond doubt, has been deeply detrimental to England’s national in-
terests, We may see that exclusiveness reflected in the minds and
bearing of many ranks and professions in England,—less or more :
when Englishmen have no feeling of it themselves, —no suspicion of
its attaching to them at all, other nations can very easily, as they do ,
discern it, and feel it. Sir, I might say much upon this subject, not
invidiously, and still less if possible, in any thing like bitterness, so far
as I know my own heart But my object is, to demonstrate the power
of a National University education, —the influence which it has in
forming, and framing, and moulding, both the inward and the outward
man : and multiplied are the blessings and benefits which such National
University teaching and training are capable of producing ; and which
cannot be acquired but at National seats of learning; while nothing of
man’s devising ever can be so perfect as not to be attended with
many tendencies to abuse and to evil. Had the university of
Sydney in its Constitution the same exclusiveness as the Univer-
sities of England so long have had, we should have every cause
deeply to lament it. For my own part, I feel the moral assurance
that now it can never have—and I feel confident too, that, by the
blessing of God, the effects of such a wise, and just, and en-
lightened liberality will he great and manifold in this land throughout
generations to come ; —blessings of peace and of mutual charity to the
people, and in the midst of them all. I feel, Sir, the thorough conviction,
that in time to come, the university of Sydney, must from the very na-
ture of human beings, become the National chief seat of learning in this
l an d 5 the summit standard and level of a polite and classical, a scien-
tific and complete education : and that it shall so appear to the public


mind of this country. Public attention in this country will be turned
to it. Its immunities will increase: already the source and fountain in this
land of all literary and scientific distinctions and honours, it will take
root in the soil: its facilities of doing great things will be increased, in-
cluding those to be found in its Colleges : bequeathments to it will be
multiplied, nor is it any exaggerated imagination which would contem-,
plate, that some of them may yet be enormously large. I look, Sir, to
the history of other Universities and Colleges of a national character.
Professorships will be founded within it, and liberally endowed. Its
libraries will he largely, indefinitely increased, in extent, in number,
and in excellency—in interest; —they will increase,—even in the very
curiousness of their literary stores, their antique, and even oftentimes
their unique appearance, as well as in their character, and their history.
Sir, the foundations of this university are laid on vantage ground. And
how? Why, there is a grouping round it, though invisibly, and
perhaps insensibly to the public mind itself, ol National respect, perhaps
of almost a National fondness. On its widely comprehensive founda-
tions, we may rest assured, a National respect will yet rest. Every
man, every parent, every youth in the land may say in a sense —It is
my own. And to this National University will the National resort of
our youths be. It may have many faults ; and many blemishes, and
many imperfections no doubt it must; and I speak of it in the group,
with all its affiliated Colleges. Some may now think, and perhaps in
time to come, and may justly think, that the rendering of such homage to
the power of its 'prestige may be very foolish. And still, even in such
times, should they come, though we fondly trust that they never shall—
still, —to that place will be the great resort of the ingenuous youth of this
land. YoU cannot arrest the flowings and the current of such feelings
in the National mind, as the Nationality of this land shall grow up,
any more than you can arrest or turn the tides and currents of the
mighty deep.
Sir, it is freely admitted you can educate young men elsewhere, in some
departments of knowledge, just as well, if not perhaps better, than in such
a University. But we never can admit, that you can educate them
elsewhere in this land, or in any other, by any means so well, in all
departments of knowledge, as in a National seat of learning. Educa-
tion, Sir, is a term of very comprehensive meaning. And its comprehen-
siveness implies many a facility, and many a stimulus, and many an
avenue, to the cultivation of knowledge, of science, feelings, and tastes,
and manners, and bearing, which National Institutions alone can
command. And why—in the name of wisdom and charity,—why


exclude ourselves from the multiplied benefits of our chief National seats
of learning ? What are to be our gains by any such an exclusion of our-
selves, as Presbyterians, from all these benefits ? Some may tell us there
will be in such a University many dangers to our ingenuous youths : they
will meet with errors, deadly errors perhaps, infidelity, superstitions,
and evil communications corrupting good manners. Sir, we do
not by any means deny but there may be such dangers. But if there
be, —then let us gird on our armour, and betake us to the scene wkere
those dangers appear, or where they threaten to appear, and let us speak
to the enemy in the gate! —Let us be the real guardians, under God, of the
purity and the faith of the youth of our Church ; that our teaching
and training may keep them safe, and carry them onward unscathed,
and land them upon the firm shore of a Scriptural Faith, which in all
their future days, may he peace, and comfort, and strength to them.
And it is thus to stand between our young men and those dangers,
that is one of our manU dd reasons, why we plead for such a standing
place within that University. This is at least one of our manifold
reasons. If there be such dangers, —is that the time for us to desert
our post, and to flee ? Where the danger is proclaimed, there let
our foot be planted with all the more faithful and the more resolute
and determined stand !
Sir, as Presbyterians, we are not to expect that our peaceful immunities
in all their fulness, shall continue to be to us in this country, what they
were in Presbyterian Scotland, where our Presbyterianism had all things
its own way, and where its position was paramount. Neither surely
can we expect to be able to bend the minds of all others to the shape
and the form of our own. And is it any thing like true wisdom,
or is it indeed conformed to the highest principles or to the highest
examples of our most holy faith, either to flee from danger when
we may be assailed, or to content ourselves with attempting to thunder
forth our feeble and sulky anathemas against those who may differ
from us, however wide such differences may be. With meekness
of Christian faithfulness and fortitude must we learn, amid all outward
differences, and dangers, and trials of patience, and changes, to give
full utterance to our own faith wherever the door may be opened to us in
God’s holy providence to do so : and there must we learn the more
earnestly to inculcate our every principle, especially upon those who
are our own flesh ; and there must we strive, that our principles be not
concealed; that they be not set under a bushel; there we must labour, to
make them to shine forth in their own light, even to others : there
must we learn to submit all our principles to the test of scrutiny by


other minds, when such minds seek to examine them ; and when the call
to any such fair and candid examination of our principles may have come
to our door. All issues belong to God; but ours is plainly the duty, when
invited to stand forth to exercise our privilege equally with others,
humbly, and faithfully, and most firmly, to do so. Let us not fear : and I
cannot allow myself to believe that any one here, could for a moment,
cherish any such fear.
It is, Sir, a very precious prospective excellency of this University,
and of our projected Presbyterian College, that they shall be always-
open alike to every class of the community; to the rich and the
richest, and to the poor, down to the very poorest of our labouring
classes ; and it is also most valuable, that these Instititions shall hold*
forth to the poorer, substantial invitations in the shape of Exhibitions,
or as we were wont to term them in Scotland, Bursaries, to support
young men of talent and promise, throughout the course of a Univer-
sity education, whose means are stinted, but whose minds are noble :
it is a precious boon to every class, that there, rich and poor shall
be on the same level. The instituting and the multiplying of
facilities to the humblest classes of our talented youth, within this
College, and within this University, by which they may yet rise to
dignity and honour, and to be benefactors to their native country, and
possibly to their age ; —Sir, —I consider this to be a most mighty
privilege. Already have such endowments begun to flow in to the Uni-
versity, and to be offered to the Presbyterian College also : and already
are there young men, striving, most honourably, to obtain these advan-
tages. And, Sir, by the very facts of such a University being instituted,
and such Colleges offered us, and by means of them such splendid benefits
freely offered to the youth of this land, —I do affirm it, that there is not
a Presbyterian family within the whole bounds of our Colony, but has a
vested interest in this University, and in suchaPresbyterian College too;
and that we should be most grievously interfering with their sacred
rights, their very precious privileges, were we to think of shutting
the gates of those National seats of learning in their face ! No ! —we
trust that wisdom and light will be abundantly granted us ; and that
we shall never be led to occupy the invidious position of standing
between the present and coming generations of Presbyterian parentage
in this land and their birth-right privileges, and the birth-right
honours to which we ought ever to use our best efforts to help them
forward. Let us not be told that such encouragements held forth to
our young men are mere temptations. No Sir, but let us see rather,
that we tempt not them to forego the faith of their Fathers, because


we ourselves were not valiant for the truth in the earth; and if
we do not go forth to maintain and propagate the truth, and now,
to secure all its benefits to all the youth of our communion, who
by their being rightly conducted onwards, may yet rise to be the
best blessings to the land of their nativity in their respective
generations and days; —Sir, what do we do, but inflict injuries
of which we cannot see either the amount or the number. It is
one of the many excellencies of our Scottish Universities, all of
which are National, that they are truly and fully open to the
youth of every religious persuasion, and to the very poorest of the
land as well as to the richest. It is to be the same in the University
of New South Wales, and so far as I have understood, in all its affiliated
Colleges also. It is surely not our duty to throw such immunities
away from us, when they are placed within our reach and our offer.
In no civilized country on earth, of a population so limited in number,
do we believe we could find so many splendid and instructive instances oc-
curring, even within the lastcentury, of individuals, emerging from youth-
ful obscurity, yea and from penury itself, to be men of abundant wealth,
and of most honourable station and influence, and of world-wide
reputation, —as we find in Scotland. Volumes would scarcely
suffice to describe to you instances of this which have come under my
own observation and knowledge; and mostly all of them to be traced
to the multiplied benefits of a National University Education. Sir, I
confess to you that I long to see the same system transplanted, to take
root, and to grow, and to flourish, and to bear abundant fruit, in our
richdr Australian soil. From such benefits, lot me once more ask,
why exclude our talented and promising youths ? Why weave nets of
temptation, and put stumbling-blocks in the way of their
or in their own way, causing them to depart from those principles
which we hold to be precious and sacred ? And good it is, perhaps as
much for ourselves as ministers, as it is for them as hearers, in their
most laudable seeking to push forward their sons and relatives, into the
enlightened paths of literature and science, —that as ministers, we
can exercise no lordship over the minds or the consciences of the
parents, or of the youths of our flocks, to any such extent as to limit or
to coerce in any way the most full exercise of every talent and aptitude
that God may have given them ; and which are never given by Him, but for
purposes of infinite wisdom and goodness. Sir, we cannot coerce them !
we would most earnestly, and most solemnly tell you, that in this
Colony we have no just cause to go about, and to endeavour to


found any other diminutive and skeleton Colleges, wilfully disinherit-
ing ourselves and others of our free-horn and our National University privi-
leges. Sir, I would say of diminutive Colleges, what the illustrious Wel-
lington said of little wars, that they ought never to be undertaken at all.
They do not elevate a people, they do not benefit a nation. Sir, there
are many Colleges, so called in England, standing connected, some of
them, even with the Church of England itself, and others of them with
several of the non-conformist communions and interests :.and some of such
minor Colleges, no doubt, may be found possessing excellent tutors, and
the services of other truly religious men; and these institutions may
be found turning out from among their students, —from time to time,
I deny not, men of high accomplishment in certain departments;
perhaps in theological learning. But how wholly unlike are such
private Institutions to what have been styled “ The two eyes of
England,”—Oxford and Cambridge ? Of the former I can say some-
what, from personal observation; and while, doubtless, I think, it
would have become more illustrious still than it now is, had its gates
been thrown wide open to all non-conformists ; yet as it is, notwithstand-
ing all its short-comings, Oxford assuredly is a marvellous spectacle!—
with its nineteen Colleges and its five Halls : and its marvels swelling
upon the inquirer’s mind, the more that he endeavours to grasp them in
any thifig like detail! Its venerable prestige, —what intelligent mind can
but feel!—the honoured training place, the combat field, the martyrdom
scene, of many of England’s most illustrious and most honoured Reform-
ers! Look to its foundations, its splendid endowments, its noble, its
princely erections ! Look to the munificent bequests that have been
accumulating upon its many Colleges. Look to its literary and philological
antiquarian treasures, in almost all the languages of the world ! Look
to its Libraries, which, with all the literary treasures contained in them,
are positively amazing! Look to the almost incalculably gigantic
power of all its scholastic machinery : and though periods of dormancy
may have unhappily overtaken this gigantic power, and though even
religious backslidings may have grievously stained its fair history and
its name; we still believe, by the blessing of God, that though the
noble ship had fallen by some culpable neglect into unpreparedness
for the storm by the long prevalence of a stagnating calm, she
will yet right herself after all, and will be restored to her
former fulness of gallant strength, and will enter again upon prose-
cuting the high and the true ends of her mission; and how precious
to the civilized world, and to the Christian world, the treasures
which that magnificent, that noble University carries! And


while beholding its resources for good,—and mourning over the
defections of many there from the simplicity that is in Christ; —still
more bitterly should we mourn, did we not cherish the hope that
its grievous wound shall yet be healed; and that the period shall
again be, when in the highest and purest sense it may be said of
it, —“ The shout of a king is among them.” A pride of England
it is, and well indeed may it be! Sir, your small Colleges
have no sueh recuperative power, when dangers assail them, or
when error may seize them; for they become at once corrupt,
and they wither, and die. Governed by the will of one or two or
three individuals, however well and sincerely meant the efforts
of such good men may be; such foundations, in themselves,
possess no guarantee of future or lengthened stability; “ a breath
can make them as a breath has made!” in less time than one
generation, the whole of any such Institution may be turned
upside down, with all its original purposes defeated. And it is, we
repeat it, only the positive power of National resources, and the fiat of
a National will, working onward through National councils, and
spoken forth and declared authoritatively by its own Legislative utter-
ances at last, —that can, humanly speaking, so far as history records
past events tons, give stability and permanency to high Institutions of
science and learning.
We ourselves, Moderator, know of instances, of the decay of Colleges
even in Presbyterian Scotland. The crumbling tower of Fraserburgh
College, we have seen, —an Institution so utterly perished as to leave its
actual history a puzzle to Scottish antiquaries. We know there was a
College there; and that there, the godly and learned Ferme, wrote his
deep and logical, and learned commentary on one of the most difficult
parts of critical theology; but while the writing remains, the College
is gone.
Some here present, perhaps, may know somewhat more or less about a
mighty and wide-spread religious revival in the Principality of Wales,
about the middle of last century, perhaps the most remarkable in the
Christian Church, since the times of the Reformation. The estab-
lished Churches, in England and Wales, and in Scotland too, were at
that time in a very torpid spiritual condition. This religious revival
wrought great changes in Wales. A very large proportion of the
Welsh population forsook the Established Church, never to return to its
communion : they could no longer find any spiritual nourishment in its
ministrations. These people were much “ spoken against;” many of
them were much harassed, it may be said persecuted, by their lay


superiors who frowned upon them; and but little worldly favour was
shewn them in general. Their descendants still form the religious
communion in Wales, called “ Calvinistic Methodists”; but they are
virtually Presbyterians, in doctrine, and almost in all matters of out-
ward form ; and among them, I can bear testimony, that much deep,
pure, unfeigned, and intelligent G-ospel religion exists. Compassion-
ating their difficulties, and anxious to raise up and supply to them an
intelligent and edifying Gospel ministry, two noble Ladies of well
known religious character in their day, Lady Glenorchy in Scotland, and
Lady Huntingdon in England, piously set to work, to build a
College in Wales, if not two. The one at Trevecca, in South Wales,
I had opportunity of visiting not many years since. Its buildings
seemed to have been what at the period of their erection, would have
doubtless been called highly respectable. But at the period of my visit
(1851.) those buildings formed a rural farm-steading. What, apparently,
had been Lecture-rooms, and most probably a Library, now form a stable
and cow-house; the reading desk at which students of theology did read
their compositions to their Professors, is still partially standing, its book-
board with its picturesque carving still remains, butnow only to furnish
nestling convenience to a promising brood-hen of the worthy farmer’s es-
tablishment ! What may have been the endowments of that Institution, I
had not the means to ascertain ; but that the noble and enlightened
Ladies who built that College, and noble were they, both by nature and
by grace, should not make what they considered adequate provision of
that kind is not to be supposed; and yet in less than one century,
there is the fate of their College ! Yet was that religious revival blest
indeed, to many thousands of souls, and in many of its permanent
fruits it still continues to be so; and were this the time and the place,
it would require, I fully believe, no straining of facts to show, that
two blessed Institutions did spring up from that religious revival, —one
of these far beyond the bounds of the Principality, the Gaelic School
Society in Scotland, virtually, there, a second reformation to many
extensive districts of the Highlands and Islands, —and the other, —
even that glorious World-wide Institution, too well known to be
anything but named, the British and Foreign Bible Society.
Still this one of that same Revival’s Colleges went to decay, how-
ever purely established, and by noble individuals of the highest
intelligence. May the efforts now made to revive it, by the
blessing of God upon them, be more successful. And, Moderator,
whatever may have been the necessity for instituting such a College in>
Old South Wales at that period, there exists not one shade of a shadow


of necessity for the instituting of any such College in New South Wales
at this day. The erection of any such divisional or sectional College
in this Colony, in present circumstances, would be hut a perpetuating
of Presbyterian divisions and strifes, —even to entertain such an idea
would be so. But let us seek, and pray, and trust, that unanimity shall
yet be given us ; and that all of us shall see with full clearness, the path
of duty in this most important business. Sir, what place do small
Colleges hold, even in connection with the powerful Established
Church of England, where it seems to have been thought necessary at
one time to endow some such minor Colleges. What honour have they
brought,—of what real service have they ever been to that Church ? I
must indeed leave this quesion to the judgment of those who have better
knowledge, and better right to decide it. But I speak particularly of the
College of St. Bees, and of Durham in the North of England, and of
the latter even in its renovated condition. This at least I believe is well
known, that for all the education that can be given and received at these
Institutions, and most excellent as the education supplied may be, speci-
ally at Durham, —its students are not considered to be on any full foot-
ing of learned equality with those of the great National Universities
of England. Sir, lam unable at this very time, to state what may
be the measure of advancement at which the Queen’s three Colleges
in Ireland may have arrived; but liberally founded, built, and pro-
vided as they have been, and under sanction of Royal authority, and
by Legislative enactment, and by National funds, and with a staff of
nearly twenty professors and tutors to each of them, they shall have a long
and a tough contest to try them, ere they gather any prestige around
them, or make to themselves any name, that will detach, it may
be said, even one student in Ireland, from the older, the nobler, the
National, that illustrious Institution, Trinity College, Dublin. And in
passing, be it remarked, that the Presbyterian Church in Ireland, the
sister ally of the Free Church of Scotland, and long may it continue
to be so, was no way scandalized to see one of its own most res-
pected ministers become Principal of one of those Queen’s Colleges ;
and certain others of its ministers become professors, or tutors in
some of the same Institutions. Neither have we learned that the
Free Church of Scotland has ever found any fault with her own
ministers or probationers becoming professors in some of the same
Institutions in Ireland.
Sir, while Universities and Churches are distinct Institutions, yet
is there, and there must always be, a very close connection subsisting
between them, wherever the Christian faith is at all in a state of health-


ful and sound existence. Harmony between both classes of Institutions
is surely to be studied, and most earnestly desired and pursued; and if
without dire and hard necessity — opponency in originating Colleges be
once set up, that bitterness will extend to the kindred institutions of
Churches; and strifes, enmities, and grievous divisions, will be
the results in the visible Church. You will permit me to read
upon this subject, one short extract; one of the many products
of an intellect of which the united British Empire may well be
proud, though Ireland chiefly, Edmund Burke. It is from his
speech on behalf of the Bill for the relief of Dissenters, in 1773.
When lately reading this extract in private, I could not re-
frain from instinctively substituting, as matter of wish, “ Presby-
terian Church of Australia,” for “ Established Church of England,”
as the latter stands in the extract; nor is it assuredly at the cost of
anything like overthrow of the latter, I should seek such blessings to
accrue to the former. “ I wish to see,” (says Edmund Burke,) “ the
“ Established Church of England, great and powerful; I wish to see her
foundations laid low and deep, that she may crush the giant powers
of rebellious darkness; I would have her head raised up to that
heaven to which she conducts us; I would have her open wide her
gates by a noble and liberal comprehension; but I would have no
breaches in her wall; I would have her cherish all those who are
within, and pity all those who are without; I would have her
a common blessing to the world, an example, if not an instructor
to those who have not the happiness to belong to her; I would
have her give a lesson of peace to mankind, that a vexed and
wandering generation might be taught to seek for repose and
toleration in the maternal bosom of Christian charity, and
not in the harlot lap of infidelity and indifference. Nothing has
driven people more into that house of seduction than the mutual
hatred of Christian congregations. Long may we enjoy our Church
under a learned and an edifying episcopacy (Presbyterian Ministry.)
** * Do not promote diversity; when you have it, bear it;
have as many sects of religion as you find in your country; there is
a reasonable worship in them all. The others, the infidels, are out-
laws of the constitution, not of this country, but of the human race. *
* * Under the systematic attacks of these people, I see some of the
props of good government already begin to fail. I see propagated
principles which will not leave to religion a toleration. I see myself
sinking every day under the attacks of those wretched people. How
shall I arm myself against them ? By uniting, all those in affection


who are united in the belief of the great principles of the Godhead
that made and sustains the world.”
And in connection with this, would, that we each and all did
accept to ourselves the sound though severe rebuke and testimony
of the famed and godly Mr. James Durham, in his well known
treatise on Scandal; when he says thus, “ A.nd it is found that
seldom have offences been in the Church, but ministers have had
a prime hand therein, as if it had been a prime part of their duty to
promote the same; which shows that they have special need to be
watchful at such a time. Ministers ought to endeavour much unity
among themselves, and unity among professors. There is no keeping
off of offences without this; for strife and contention are the fuel by
which this plague of scandal is kindled and entertained. When
offences are abounding in Corinth, it is the first direction that Paul
giveth 1 Cor. i. 10.—“ I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all speak the same things, and that there
be no divisions among you.”
Sir, I must come more closely into contact with the special and
practical matter which now engages our thoughts, —a Presbyterian
College in the University of Sydney. To my own mind nothing can
possibly be more clear, than that all the highest interests of all
Presbyterians in this Colony, are most largely and deeply wound up in that
Institution: and that if our whole Body seek to preserve Presbyterianism
alive at all in these lands, we are bound by the deepest moral and religious
obligations to hasten onward so noble an Institution as this. Nothing
to me is more clear and certain, than that if you eschew connection
with that Institution, your own people will very speedily begin to
eschew connection with you; and with the Church, the Church
to which they belong, and in which it is our duty to keep them;
and let me add, they will justly do so, while they see that you could
have helped them forward to a due sharing in all the benefits of such
an Institution, without prejudice to any one professed principle either of
jpur own or of theirs ; and that you declined to do so, when you had
the full opportunity. Sir, I do, and most respectfully, but most sincerely,
most anxiously, warn you, that our conduct in this matter will touch
affections and feelings, which are the very deepest and strongest in the
human soul; —that it will touch the objects of those affections, dearer
incomparably to every pure-minded parent than the apple of
their eye. You will find, Sir, and not causelessly, if you set your
face against that National Institution, and seek to exclude our people
from it, that you will speedily find you own people drifting, and drafted.


and sliding, and driven away from you, and from their Presbyterian prin-
ciples, and associations, and habits. And if there he value in Presbyterian-
ism, whose is the chief responsibility here ? Would you have Christian
Presbyterian parents when they desire as their fondest wish, to see
their own children advanced in intellectual culture, and in liberal
knowledge, and in public esteem, and in public usefulness in their own
native land, to leave them to he stinted or starved in their education,
and to he held in society as mere second rates, if indeed at all so high,
compared with onr National University students ? Sir, we ought
to know well, that Presbyterians are not the men, nor yet the
women, to do this. Were there no Presbyterian College allowed
in that University, —did any hostile influence, any exclusive
authority, frown, or look down upon you, or seek to exclude
you;—then indeed might you have on your side all sound
and legitimate argument, to justify your own defensive line of
action in the matter. But the very reverse is the case : and it is justice)
and all such argument is now taken away from you. Your people
will feel that it is so. Both their understanding and conscience
will perceive it \ they have both, as well as we their ministers and elders
have ) and long be it ours more and more to enlighten their conscience
and their understanding alike, but let us not put stumbling-blocks in
their way, —let us not tempt them with painful misgivings, let us not
perplex them with doubts and with fears : let us not embitter, nor narrow
their minds by causeless prejudices, nor by needless alarms, nor conten-
tions ) let us not cause them to do, with a bad conscience, what, in
itself, is both Just and legitimate. Sir, if we would preserve the
Presbyterianism of this country pure and intact, both in time present,
and for time to come ; and if we would raise it up .to, or keep it up at,
the social and the spiritual level, which we consider to be equally its
due on the one hand, and the fair result of its own capabilities on
the other, it does appear to me to be matter to us all, as Presbyterians,
of immediate and most imperative duty, as many of us in this land as
own the Presbyterian name, to be united in this one great matter at
least j united in heart and in hand, united in throwing all our best
energies into this great and necessary undertaking. Sir, necessity is laid
upon us, in the Providence of God, to do this. Conld any one of us show
that any one of our religious principles is to be sacrificed by such
united action j then, I trust, I should, myself, and I am certain many
more of us would, and I would seek to think all of us would, eschew
the scheme as an evil, however fair in its promises, or flattering in
its prospects. But I believe most truly it cannot be shown by any


legitimate reasoning,—4hat to take part with other Presbyterian bodies
in this scheme, is contrary to any sound and solid religious principle
professed by this Synod. Let other bodies judge for themselves; we have
no right to attempt to perform that office for them : they are able to
perform it incomparably better for themselves. Such co-ope-
ration with the other Presbyterian bodies in such a matter
as this, is surely not to be viewed, in common sense, as if it were any-
thing like incorporated union with those other bodies, in any ecclesi-
astical sense: it does not imply that any one of the too many, alas,
of our several bodies, embrace any one specialty of the other. lam
not speaking at present, of how desirable such a union, most assuredly
is;—and may God hasten it in His time. But if this which we now de-
sire, be union, it is a union which the sound, sober, practical common sense
of conscientious Scotch Presbyterians has approved in their own land,
and does still approve. Did those who forsook the Established Church
of Scotland, and became dissenters from her communion; —did they
forsake the Universities of Scotland, or the benefits of them, or even
their Divinity Halls ? Did they forsake these National Colleges ? Have
they ever yet done so ? Has the Free Church of Scotland done so ?
I shall be told that it has done so, so far as Theology is concerned.
But permit me to answer, Sir, that a dire necessity constrained the
Free Church to do so, and to have its own Theological Halls—a
necessity of which not one shadow obtains in this Colony, Sir, let me
especially direct your attention to the conduct of the Free Church to-
ward the National Universities of Scotland, separate as the Free Church
is from the Established and National Church of Scotland. Look to the
real state of matters ; —and we find Professors, in Scottish Universities,
not a few of them, and at least one Principal, Dr. Brewster, of world-
wide philosophical fame, bearing office in the Free Church of Scotland,
as elders. We have never heard any challenge or demur on the part of
the Free Church to such connection or arrangement. We see Pro-
fessors of a Free Church Theological College, elected to professors’
chairs in the National Metropolitan University of Scotland, and peace-
fully taking, or at least keeping, possession of their chairs, with no ana-
themas nor rebukes thundered after them by the Free Church, as if they
had deserted their principles. We see ministers and Probationers of the
Free Church receiving and accepting ecclesiastical offices from the
Crown, as chaplains to her Majesty’s forces, and these doing Hospital
duty, and Garrison duty, and Camp duty, and Field duty, co-operating,
im the Christian great duty, of mitigating the horrors of war, and the suffer-
ings of our common humanity, with ministers of the Church of England ;


and yet the Free Church not frightened from its own sober propriety
by these things. We see some of its ministers receiving and accepting
appointments and presentations to College Professorships under the Crown;
and still, there are no ecclesiastical earthquakes ! We see, perhaps indeed a
majority, of the ministers of the Free Church of Scotland, now
numbering nearly eight Hundred, co-operating in religious and spiritual
matters, as members of the Evangelical Alliance, with almost all
other Protestant distinctive bodies, throughout Europe and America; and
yet the Free Church of Scotland is very quiet—yea, and it is prosperous too !
We see Ihe Free Church, in many localities, laboriously urging onward
the great business of Education, in co-operation, in many localities, with
persons of different sections of the Christian Churches ; we see it co-
operating in this matter with the State, receiving its funds, to be devoted
to this great purpose of education. And when I mention to this Synod, the
name of my venerated and beloved friend, Dr. Duff, the chief Missionary of
the Free Church of Scotland, in India ; —the man of whom one of the chief
ministers of the British Crown says recently, that “to Dr. Duff,
India owed as much as to any of its Governors-General,” his name will
surely command respect. And what is that most eminent individual’s con-
duct with respect to co-operation with other bodies besides his own in the
matter of National Universities ? It is, I presume, known to this Synod,
that the Government of India has been for some time past, engaged
in founding or rather re-modelling the National Universities there—one at
the seat of each of the three original Presidencies, Calcutta, Madras,
and Bombay. While these Universities in time past, and not causelessly,
had been stigmatized by many as “ Godless Institutions,” Dr. Duff, having
been appointed by Lord Canning a member of the Committee to prepare a
scheme, for the future regulation of these Institutions, readily and at once
took his place, to co-operate with others,in devising the advancement of
those Universities. In a recent official communication to the Foreign Mis-
sions’ Committee of the Free Church, Dr.Diiff, after reciting certain modifi-
cations and improvements which others and he had been enabled to
effect—he proceeds thus, —“ Here, then, I pause, and ask, —with any
respect to truth and reality can our Indian Universities be any longer
stigmatized as “ Godless ” or “ Christless ” Institutions ? Ought not,
then, all the true friends of India, instead of indulging in groundless
and railing accusations, to rejoice in the consummation now so
happily realized ? Ought not the great object, more especially of
all Christian men to be, to work those Universities as mighty engines
for the real enlightenment, and even regeneration of India’s educated
sons? It is not by coldly, contemptuously, keeping aloof from them


that any mischief is to be prevented, or any good gained; but rather
by throwing one’s self heartily into the practical working of them, so
as to direct them with an increasing momentum of force, to salutary
measures and ends. For my own part, I felt keenly that the crisis
was one of life or death to our higher missionary and other Christian
Institutions ; and therefore did I throw myself with my whole heart and
soul into the discussions which eventuated in so happy a consummation, —
praying unceasingly with all the fervour of which my poor languid spiritual
frame was capable, that the Lord Himself would graciously interpose, and
plead the cause that was his own.” Never in my life did I feel more
that the work was the Lord’s, and that any favourable result, in swaying
and ruling men’s- minds and predetermined opinions, and foregone con-
clusions, must be the Lord’s, and His alone. And as point after point
was gained, and sometimes very unexpectedly gained, in these earnest
discussions, I never in my life felt more strongly that it was really the
doing of the Lord, and marvellous in our eyes ! To Him then, whose is
the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory, be rendered all the praise.
“ Already have means been employed to ascertain what Institutions might
be worthy of being affiliated. From the decidedly favourable aspect of
the University towards natural and revealed religion, ray respected col-
leagues and myself did not hesitate for a moment in applying that our
central Institution in Calcutta might be formally recognized as one of that
number. Nor was there any hesitation whatever in admitting the validity
of our claims.—Ours is, therefore, now, one of-the “ affiliated Institutions ”
of the Calcutta University.”
We trust that this quotation from one of Dr. Duff’s despatches to the
Convener of the Foreign Missions’ Committee of the Free Church of
Scotland, shall not, here, be given in vain. And most heartily and unani-
mously did the General Assembly of the Free Church, in May last,
approve of what their noble Missionary and his colleagues had done. This
surely brings out the mind of the Free Church, and its liberal, enlightened
Catholic spirit, on this and kindred subjects.
Sir, it is well to keep before our own minds’ view the manifold benefits
and privileges which the erection of our Presbyterian College in the Uni-
versity of Sydney, would confer upon our Presbyterian youths. The atten-
dance in the first place, upon all the literary and scientific classes in the
University’s Curriculum, (or course of study) is surely a benefit to our Pres-
byterian youth, while they are astricted, so far, at the same time, to our
Presbyterian College, and kept under full Presbyterian training. We shall
not be restricted in our Presbyterian College from having as many literary
and scientific classes as we may desire, and may be able to endow and equip ;


approximating by degrees as best we may, to the usages and the benefits of
the Presbyterian Colleges of our native lands. And with all this, we shall
not desire to infringe upon any one statute of the University’s Senate, so
far as I have been able to understand those provisions and statutes, as now
set forth.
It shall be in no way incumbent upon Presbyterian students to board
themselves in the Presbyterian College. It shall not be imperative upon
any one of them. Every student shall be at the most perfect liberty to
live under his parental roof, or at his usual home, during the whole course
of his attendance upon the classes of the University, or the College, or
both. This may be, and is on purpose left to be, as it may best suit the
views, the convenience, or the means of individuals ; while at the same
time, the system of boarding within the College must prove a most valuable
and desirable arrangement to parents and friends of students in the interior,
and sometimes at shorter distances from Sydney. I should not count it
a Presbyterian College at all, or worthy of being either sought or had, were it
not equally free of access to every young man in this Colony from the
very wealthiest families, to the very poorest and humblest; —and we have full
moral assurance that so it shall be. We already see bounties waiting to
flow in to this College, as they have already done to the University also, to be
expended, in time to come, according as these bequests annually fructify un-
der judicious management, in order to their being made prizes to deserving
young men, giving encouragement to their abilities and their genius—by
these tokens of distinction conferred on their early merit, which may be the
means of conducting them onward through an honourable career, to high
distinction, and to affluence, which shall not unfrequently in some measure,
return to the Treasury of their University and their College, to enlarge
and widen the capabilities of those Institutions, to cheer onward the youth
ef succeeding generations to the like honours, and the like usefulness in
the world. While we have mentioned the system of boarding in the
Presbyterian College, we do not think that the Principal shall be in any
way bound to receive boarders. But in the department of theology alone,
the Presbyterian College must have at least three or four chairs occupied ;
and some consider that each Professor or Lecturer, as well as the Principal,
ought to have a residence capable of comfortably receiving a given number of
Boarders: and some think that this would be a better arrangement, than
that of public tables, and general dormitories ; and would tend to have
more of the family and domestic habits cultivated among our students.
And, Sir, Is it nothing, to have our young men becoming matriculated
students within our National University ? Surely it must be much, to
have them partaking to the full with all the other youths of this land, of all


those benefits and refinements which cannot hut flow from the highest
kinds of an intellectual, a classical, a scientific, and an elevated and
elevating system, of what is denominated in common speech, a University
education; and which cannot possibly he supplied to the youth of our
land elsewhere, do what you may, but in our National University only.
Sir, what is it at this moment that has so long formed the heaviest drag on
our intellectual progress as a community, historically youthful, and what
is it that still continues to be the same drag ? Is it not, that mostly
all who have attained to the power of bestowing upon their children
the higher or the highest education, (and what can be a more
legitimate affection and feeling ?) have been constrained so frequently to flee
this Colony, and to betake themselves to the seats of the National Colleges
and Universities, and the National Schools, of Scotland, and England, and
Ireland ? Sir, is not this a sore evil, which it is a great duty to remedy ?
Is not this fair land,—denuded, in this way, of its own proper National
wealth, which would otherwise fructify within its own hounds, to the benefit of
the land itself, and of its growing population ? But is the land not
denuded also, of what is infinitely more precious than all its silver and gold can
be to it, of themselves ; and that is, the native attachments of its own sons, and
its own daughters, who, by this not very natural, though perhaps necessary
transfer, from one side the world to the other, —are in danger of never coming
to feel that they have had any special, local nativity at all! They can scarcely
find any of their birth-right associations in an opposite Hemisphere ; and they
learn to forget the nature and power of all those associations ere they
return to the soil of their birth : their native country comes to be scarcely
their own country to them ! But there are evils more, which our
National University, and Colleges, and Schools, we trust, shall greatly
help to lighten and to extirpate. How many affectionate hearts of weeping
parents, drooping over the last hopes of their children’s future advance-
ment, —how many such hearts have been wrung, and have bled, when they
found and felt to their cost, seeing it in the drooping and languishing of
their beloved youths, —dearer to them a thousand times than their own very
lives, —that the severe climate of Britain, or even of Ireland, is not, alas,
sufficiently congenial to rear them up, or to suit their constitutional texture
and temperament; and that now they are losing them wholly, when they
thought, and honourably thought, to have raised them to eminence and to
honour ? Do not these dealings of God’s providence point out to us that
we must labour to have within ourselves all the means of intellectual
culture, and of the higher and the highest kinds of mental, and scientific
acquirement, to supply the real wants of all the youth of the Colony ?
These things do seem to indicate and point to a purpose in the Divine


mind that Australia’s day is coming, when she shall have her own high
duties and destinies to fulfil; —when she shall have full need of all her
own children’s deepest affections to support, and to defend, and to deliver
her, and of all the best energies of every one of her patriot youths,
to carry Australia onward, and to higher and higher advancement still ;
when once it has taken its place among the enlightened, and the intel-
lectual, and the polished Nationalities of the Christian world.
Let, then, the Institutions of this wonderful land he founded in the
exercise of an enlightened and wise liberality : let us profit by the history
of ages past, and by what we see or hear, that all other Christian nations
are doing; and frequently doing even to their but half-civilized subjects.
Sir, there are high responsibilities, and high duties that attach to us,
with respect to this Presbyterian College. If we be really true Pres-
byterians, and I am far from suspecting any one here of the contrary, —
then we must desire that the generations to follow us may also be so :
and if we really desire it, we must now labour that they shall be so.
And in my own estimation, there is not a more weighty duty that
each one Presbyterian in this Colony, at this day, has to perform, than
even to set his heart upon that Institution, and to hail and to foster its
progress to the very ulmost limits of his pecuniary capabilities and
resources, consistently with other relative duties. And it is, assuredly, so
far as we can foresee, —just according as a fulness of liberality shall flow
towards this Presbyterian College, that manifold blessings and benefits
shall again flow forth from it, and from our National University—to culti-
vate, and to adorn, and to tnrn into multiplied blessings, and into
sources of the purest intellectual and spiritual enjoyments, the almost
innumerable physical resources, —and the very numerous interesting
and rare scenes that render this not merely a fair, but almost a fairy
Land —those resources which in its very creation have been so largely
and richly granted it —over almost the whole of its length and its
breadth.
But, Sir, I must now come, at last, to say somewnat on that part of
the subject before us, which here, though last is not assuredly least. It
is the greatest, and the most important of all, in connection with the
Presbyterian College in the University of Sydney :—I mean its Theology,
while that is not exclusively the object by any means, so far as I can
perceive, contemplated by the Colleges’ Act. —I do certainly look upon the
Theological faculty and department of our projected College, as the most im-
portant of all, and the most pressingly needed of all; if we would have
our Presbyterianism either to flourish or to live, or even long to exist
at all, in this Land. Sir, “ More men from England!” aye or from


Scotland either, it is surely no faint-heartedness to wish for, —or to seek
for: but will they come ? Is it not too painfully evident that they
will not come to us in the needed number, nor at the times, even
when we implore them to come, to be ministers of the Gospel of
Christ, to those, who in this land, are in danger every day of
perishing for ever for lack of knowledge. Sir, in every way, it is
most clear, that it is the genuine, the native product of the soil of Aus-
tralia itself, that must supply this most important department of Austra-
ia’s spiritual necessities. \nd can there be to us any higher or nobler
duty, than to provide for such supply ; —to urge forward the promis-
ing youths of this Land, to devote themselves to the service of God,
in the ministry of the Gospel ? Sir, the very fact of such a College,
within such a University, being actually seen by our ingenuous youths,
would, of itself, as a means, with other appliances, be a mighty
instrumentality to stir them up to seek to the ministry of the Gospel. And,
Moderator, while we look forward with earnest expectation, and in hope,
to the time, when candidates for the ministry of the Gospel, of native
lineage, of native associations, and predilections, and aptitudes, shall so
abound in number, that our Presbyterian congregations may have full
and free choice and selection among them, as I hope, and endeav-
our to pray they may ever have, even to the end of time, —full and
unfettered liberty of making that selection of Presbyterian ministers
to themselves, to be their pastors, their spiritual instructors and
guides; let us seek now ; and, Sir, now is emphatically the time, —
to regulate,—yea and to fix, — not indeed the number, —but the quality
of that greatly needed supply of Presbyterian ministers, to this Land, to go
forth, and to gather into one the scattered fragments and the isolated
members of our Presbyterian Church, whose wants have never yet, in this
Colony, been fully overtaken.
Sir, it were scandal upon Presbyterianism itself, which I am certain
not one of the brethren here would ever seek to lay upon it—that its
aspirations are not after the highest and the best acquirements and accom-
plishments of the human mind, in every department of human attain-
ment : —it were scandal to say, though I accuse no one of raising or
giving it currency here, that its Theology, pure and strictly Scriptu-
ral as it ever has been, —is not calculited, from its very first principles,
and in connection with the very forms in which its very beginnings and
first principles are taught, to exercise, and to open, and to elevate, and
to strengthen, all the intellectual, all the moral, and all the active and
reasoning powers of the human mind; while it directs at the same time those
minds, to Him, and to Him alone for Salvation, who tells us —“ lam
the way, and the truth, and the life, no man cometh unto the Father
but by me.” And so'much and so strongly are those aspirations


grounded and planted in the ingenuous minds of Presbyterian youth ;
that if you seek to stint them, or to lay any thing like arrestment on the
free exercise of those most legitimate, and pure, and honourable aspirations,
you will find that any such arrestment, or atttempt at anything of the kind,
will not take effect, hut that the very reverse will ensue, —a rejection
of the authority that seeks to enforce it. And my own practical
observation and experience are, in dealing with our Presbyterian
youths ; —teach them but conscientiously,—teach them earnestly ; and
teach them in close conformity to our Presbyterian models and Stand-
ards of morals and of Religion, —the average effect will be, that almost
all of them will have earnest aspirations, could they but follow them out, —
toward the very highest sources and means of knowledge, both secular
and sacred. Our Presbyterian youths in our native Lands, —and in this,
we do rejoice, yea and we will rejoice, that they should thus go
forward, in the attainment of knowledge ; —and I trust that we shall
all unitedly rejoice, and all unite, by God’s own blessing, to make
it so in this Land also; and that we shall all unite in building
up the future hopes of our Australian Pfesbyteriau Church, and in
bidding them, “ God speed,” in their onward career to high, and
sound and solid attainments, till they reach to the highest.
Aud Sir, I do freely confess that I greatly rejoice to contemplate,
that the educational up-bringing, and rearing, and training of the
minds of our future Presbyterian ministers in this land shall be so much
within the walls and the Halls of a National University. Most
fully persuaded I am, that it is there alone their minds can be enabled
to keep pace, in expression, enlightenment, refinemement, acquire-
ment, and personal learning, and personal bearing too, with the ad-
vancements of the age in which we live. If we wish our own
religious principles, and our own form of Ecclesiastical polity to be
permanent and expansive, and influential, and made to be a sound and
solid blessing in the distant lands to which we have carried our princi-
ples ; we must prepare to raise up for our Presbyterian Church,
—ministers, who, with natural talents to command respect in any
sphere of life, can make good to themselves the highest acquire-
ments under adequate means of instruction, in every department of
human knowledge; and who, when such is the gracious will of God,
receiving grace, so far as fallible men can judge, —shall be seen to have
been brought under the power of renewing and sanctifying grace their hearts,
and to be now consecrating all their energies to the service and glory ot
God, and to the eternal salvation of immortal souls. Sir, we must
send them forth to these their labours, possessed of the most liberal ac-
quirements possible, but never without credible evidences of the grace
of God being given them ; we must send them forth possessing sound,


deep, classical, and scientific acquirements, the most liberal knowledge ;
and at least average accomplishments and refinement of mind.
Sir, we may well he assured, and let it be borne in mind by us ; and
would that its responsibilities were more habitually remembered by us all;
—it is to the level of their ministry, under the practical and popular work-
ings of our free Presbyterian polity, that our people will either seek to rise,
or will inevitably fall; and let us be aroused, to discern, as I trust we
all seek to do, that there is just as little of sound wisdom, as there is of
liberal thought, in any theory, or in any tendency, that would de-
preciate the manifold blessings that there are to a Church, and to a
Land, and to the souls of men, in an educated and accomplished, as well
as in a sound and evangelical, and a spiritually-minded ministry.
Sir, it is not yesterday nor to day, that this discovery is seen to have
been made by most of the several communions of the great Non-conformist
Body in England, who have still such arduous steeps to climb, ere
they can at all attain for their ministry the summit-level of the benefits
derivable from a National University education. But, Sir, in these lands,
we shall not have, in the practical, political, or Ecclesiastical sense of
the terra, any Non-conformity whatsoever! Under these same Uni-
versity and College’s Acts, which shall yet we doubt not, he still more im-
proved in their provisions,—it may be said, that we shall all start at
the summit-level; all on the footing of that religious equality, as commu-
nions, and as ministers of the Gospel, which, by the blessing of God, in
generations to come, I, for one, do fondly hope — is destined in this land,
to soften asperities, to rub off all grudgings, to reconcile differences, to
quell strifes, to destroy for ever all sectional antagonisms among
us —to subdue animosities, and to clear our religious atmosphere by God's
own blessing, from the very existence of these wranglings, and enmities,
and envies ; —all of which, if they taint the religious atmosphere, must
come down over the face of the land as withering, corrupting blights,
destroying all hope of spiritual prosperity or peace. I surely need
not he ashamed to profess that I rejoice in spirit at the blessedness
of such a prospect; —and that the day may he not chronologically
very distant in the future before us, when all our own Presbyterian
differences shall have utterly disappeared, and when with all the
blessings of a free and full Presbyterian polity—that policy can
be recognized by others, as having its foundations laid deep in those
eternal principles that are enunciated in the word of Divine truth and
all this seen, even by the blessedness and the purity of its fruits.
And it is joyful even to hope, that thus, our sad and harassing mutual
differences, however conscientiously they may now, or may have long
been followed, let us trust, shall be most entirely forgotten, even yet by


ourselves ; or still more certainly by those who succeed us ; when our
own exhausted and wearied bodies shall have found rest in our graves,
(for which some perhaps do sinfully long,) and when our souls,
debtors for ever to redeeming love, and abounding grace, shall find
an incomparably higher rest in the kingdom of glory; and where,
let us hope and pray, we shall meet, in the bonds of eternal love,
with many with whom we had the grief and misfortune to differ on
many points, perhaps throughout all the few and the weary days of
our pilgrimage on the Earth.
Moderator, the establishing of a Theological Faculty or equipment, in
this projected Presbyterian College, is a consideration indeed of the very
highest importance. And we think, could prejudices be but laid aside,
the difficulties that atttend it might very speedily, by the blessing of God,
entirely vanish. All that has been hitherto done by the General pro-
visional Committee, of which this Synod’s Committee at present
forms a part, is but provisional and perhaps approximate, but by no means
fixed. We suppose that whenever a public meeting has been held, and a
Committee, named either by it, or by those who shall become Subscribers
to the proposed College, it is only then, the Provisions shall be drafted
by those entrusted with that business, which may afterwards be
framed into a Bill, and that Bill be passed into an Act, according to
the provisions of which, the Presbyterian College in connection with
the University of Sydney, shall, in future, be regulated. It were
altogether premature, and we have no right to judge, what those Provi-
sions specially may be. At this stage of the commencement of this
Presbyterian movement, I hold myself perfectly free, to act as shall appear
to my own judgment best: and on the other hand, equally am I bound
to say, that there are certain Provisions, with regard to the arrangements
of the Theological Faculty, without the full granting of which being a
fixed and determined matter, I could not consent to be a party to the
instituting of such a College at all, —however many might be its advantages
in all other respects.
Sir, were we to consent ever to lose or to forego the fixed and pure
Scripture Theology of the tried and venerated Church of our Fathers,
we should be in danger very speedily to lose our pure morality next,
and we should richly deserve to lose, all the blessings of both. And then,
none other refinements, none other acquirements, none other philosophies,
none other accomplishments, could ever make up the loss to us of any
one single iota of all that we had cast away from us. But while I say all
this, it were unfair and uncandid, not at the same to express my full and
cordial, and thoroughly happy conviction, that those with whom


this Synod’s Committee have been acting hitherto, are just as de-
sirous to secure all these conditions toward the purity of their Theology
being secured, as we are, or can possibly be. Nor is it but fair to say,
that we have every reason to believe, they would have sought all those
necessary conditions for themselves, just as much as now, should
we have never joined nor co-operated with them at all. I speak this not
in the way of compliment; it might very justly be repudiated,
or considered superfluous, or ill-timed; and I grant it would be
so : but there are circumstances with respect to ourselves, which
render it necessary thus to speak. Had our Committee’s Report been
called for by this Synod before the opening of the present discussion ;
and I am exceedingly sorry and disappointed it has not been so, —I
should have felt bound as the Convener of that Committee to have stated
all this in ray Report, as I now do here. And I now do it here, as my
duty, and with cordial satisfaction.
Now Sir, what has been so far sketched for the regulation of the Theo-
logical Faculty of the Presbyterian College, is somewhat like the follow-
ing : That the Principal, and the Professors, and Tutors, of the said
Theological Faculty, shall, themselves, hold, and conscientiously and
strictly teach, the whole Theology of the Westminster Standards ; the
distinctive Theology of Presbyterians: —that the Principal and Professors
of that Faculty, as such, shall hold no ecclesiastical connection with, or be
subject in any degree whatever to the jurisdiction of, any Church, beyond
the bounds of this Colony : that they shall give full assurance of their
soundness in the faith, and that all their prelections shall always be, in full
accordance with the Westminster Standards of the Presbyterian Church.
And what is more ; —it is proposed there shall be a Board of visitors,
selected from the several bodies of Presbyterians in the Colony, taking
part in erecting the College ; —that, that Board shall be entitled
to visit the Theological Faculty and should, unhappily, any occasion
arise, —then this Board to have right to deal with any such Prin-
cipal or Professor as may be seen in any way to come short of fulfilling
the duties of his office, or departing in any way in his teaching from
soundness or purity in the faith, —and all this to be done in accordance with
the forms of process and other rules of the Presbyterian Church. If such
provisions be granted ; and we have every reason to think they shall, thus it
may truly be said that we shall have full guarantee for the thorough
soundness and purity of our Theological teaching. And whatever may be
said of the distinctive principles of any branch of the Presbyterian Church
in this Colony, the Standards which have been named arethose practically, of
every class of Presbyterians in Scotland, in England, in Ireland, and through-


out the world : they assuredly are those of the Free Church of Scotland ; and
its distinctive peculiarity is, close and firm adherence to them. And if
there be distinctive peculiarities, which any branch of the Presbyterian
Church in this Colony may avow —our own branch, or others, what can be the
difficulty of that Branch having a separate Theological class or classes,
apart from this College, (if that be required,) and where the youth of
that Communion, together with receiving all the benefits of the University’s
teaching, and of the Presbyterian College too, may be instructed in the full
knowledge of these distinctive principles or special views. This is, sub-
stantially, what is done in Scotland ; and we believe elsewhere also, by the
several bodies of Presbyterians who have dissented from the Established
Church of Scotland, and belong not to the Free Church. Nor is it thought
by many, that, here, even this will be found necessary. But should the time
arrive, of which we see not at present the most remote or distant sign,—when
our spiritual independence may be threatened, or the Christian liberty of
our people, in the free choice of their spiritual instructors invaded, or
when the Theology of our Presbyterian College may have become unsound,
and that the remedies proposed may fail to correct that evil; —then shall
be the time, (though let us hope, as we do hope, it shall never arrive !) to
arise, and to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints,
—even as our forefathers were enabled to do in the days of peril to their
own and their National faith, their National Church, and their National
Covenants, when they resisted unto blood, striving against sin, not
counting their lives dear to them. But let us trust that the times
of such contendings are now for ever passed away ; and though of
this we can indeed have no full assurance; let us not anticipate
them. By such arrangements as have been now intimated for the securing
of sound Theological training, we could easily prove, were it
necessary here to enter into details, that we should have stronger
guarantee for soundness of Theological teaching in our proposed Presby-
terian College, than the Church of Scotland itself has ever had in its
Universities, or Theological Halls in their respective constitutions. And
from this statement, I believe none of the ministers, either of the Free
Church, or the Established Church of Scotland, who know the history of
the Church of Scotland, and the constitutions of the several Uni-
versities of Scotland, would undertake to dissent.
I freely confess, Sir, I should, for my own part, personally prefer, were our
Principal and Theological Professors in our proposed College of the
Free Church of Scotland’s Communion. But with equal clearness
do I aver, that I can, with all conscientious freedom, accept the
teaching of the Theology of the Bible, through the medium of the


Westminster Standards, from ministers or Professors not of the Free
Church. And should any real evil he found to result from such an
arrangement, then would be the time, as already intimated,for endeavour-
ing the application of an efficient remedy.
Sir, sufficient, has been already said I (rust, to show, that the Free Chunch
of Scotland’s spirit and bearing are not exclusive, but Catholic ; and such
they have ever been. If in accordance with thp deep humility which
becomes me, I might be allowed to glory in any thing, it would be in my
humble individual connection with that Church from the very commencement
of its initial formation. And Sir, the history of that Church, is such, Ido
maintain, that it can never be thoroughly realized, but through the
medium of actual and <p e rs° na l experience of the interests, and of the
feelings and affections in defence of thbm, which the vexatious and
trying events of those times either originated, or called forth into action
in the very depths of the heart of Presbyterian Scotland. And Sir,
I should never think of testing the soundness of any one indi-
vidual Presbyterian’s faith, or personal Christian character, by de-
manding from them any formal or abstract profession, as such, of their
adherence to the specialties of Free Church principles or practice,—in any
parts of the world, —where, in God’s providence, experience was never
practically to be had by them, of the positive trials to the consciences,
and to the souls, and even to the temporal lot of men, which did arise
to multitudes in the troublous times originating the Free Church of
Scotland, within Scotland itself.
Sir, it is not to be wondered at by any means, that strong feeling
should still exist in the minds of many natives of many parts of Scotland
upon this subject, even from what many of them actually suffered. And
while I may say, without boasting, that few, even in Scotland, can know what
those sufferings were, better than I do ; and that it was much of my
labour for many a day, to endeavour to diminish and lighten them,
until my bodily strength began to fail me under the mental burden ;
—yet, most assuredly would I consider it nothing better than very
grevious sin on my own part, and not in any way consistent with the
preaching of the Gospel of peace, —were I to seek to perpetuate in
any way, in the minds of human beings in this, or in any other
distant Lands, the hostile or wrathful remembrance of those wrongs,
—grievous indeed as they were.
Sir, I grieve to have heard in this place, on this, and on former oc-
casions, so much spoken about the sacrifices made by ministers, in the
Disruption of the Church of Scotland. There were sacrifices. And
some of my own most intimate friends were among those who made


the largest sacrifices. Sir, they never grudged them ; and from them
the world always heard the least spoken or said, upon that subject; and
assuredly by them, was all “ boasting excluded.” But, Sir, it was
not the case universally. There were some ministers, who, instead of
making sacrifices, were lucrati by the Disruption. Sir, I love, and I
cherish with my whole soul, the principles of the Free Church of
Scotland. I consider them as exponents of the mind of Him, who is
Head over all things to His own body, the Church. I love and
I venerate, and with the fondest remembrance do I cherish, and ever
shall, the memory of those illustrious men of God, some of whom
have gone to their reward in Heaven; —who were constrained from
circumstances over which they had no control, to take the very fore-
front in the harassing contendings of those days; and of whom it
may well be said “ the world was not worthy.” Sir, I knew well
their deep trials of soul, their faithfulness, their earnestness, their
prayerfulness, their simplicity of purpose, and their burning zeal for
their country’s good, as well as for the glory of God, Sir, I knew well
their enlightened Christian loyalty; and in whose bosom did the pure
flame of Loyalty to his earthly Sovereign ever burn more brightly than
in his, who was “ the Moses of our Exodus ?” I knew their love for
their country’s Institutions, and Laws, and Government, and for
its Ecclesiastical Polity ; and that nothing, assuredly, but the stern
voice of believing filial duty to God could ever have compelled them, to
do as they did. And unworthy as I may have been, these illustrious
men honoured me with their confidence from the very beginning,
and throughout the whole, of that movement; and I trust I may take
upon me to say that those of them who remain would venture to
trust me still.
But, Sir, with all this, and with all my love of the Free Church of
Scotland, and of its history, and its principles, and its specialties, and
its contendings, and its honoured Fathers, and its beloyed Brethren, —
and I know them well, —I can never consent; and I know well, while
acting here on my own responsibility to God, they would never seek —that
I should ever consent, to Idolize either the Free Church, or its history, or
that I should give to either of them the foreground place in any one of
my dealings with the immortal souls of perishing sinners : it were to
put (the Free Church in the place due to the adorable Saviour Himself.
And with all our love of that Church, —let us all here be assured,
that we shall honour it most, and cause to rejoice most the enlightened
minds and souls of its Fathers, its Brethren, and the multitudes
of its intelligent people, when they see and hear of us taking the


best measures in our power consistently with Truth to enlarge the
bounds of the Kingdom of Christ on the earth; and still retaining all
our sound and pure Presbyterian principles. It is thus too we shall be
honoured in our place, however humble it may be, to be with others,
means of manifold blessings to this Land, as it advances onward to
fulfil its appointed purposes in the great scheme of the counsels of
Him whose is the earth and the fulness thereof. And may we be
enabled to contemplate in faith these blessings going forth, as it is their
very nature to do, fructifying by their own spiritual vigour given them
from above, to exalt and adorn, perhaps a whole Hemisphere ; and this, in
part, to be traced to the Institution of which we now speak,—sending
forth from its own teaching and training, by the blessing of God
upon those its labours, a devout and zealous, a learned and accomplished,
a godly and liberal-hearted Presbyterian ministry, throughout future
generations and times. It is such action, and such energy as that,
that vtould be glorifying to God, and profitable to men.
Moderator, it is the course of action which would lead by God’s blessing
to such issues, in the most important business now before us, that I would
humbly seek to advocate. I deeply feel, Sir, that the present period is truly
a crisis in the history of Presbyterianism in this Colony —perhaps in all the
Australias. And let it be under such views of this truly great subject
that we shall feel ourselves called to decide upon the motions now
before us. While I would endeavour to plead for all the blessings of a full
National University education to be thrown fully and freely open to all
the Presbyterian youths of this Colony, both in this generation and in all
those to come, I feel conscious strength,—and that I stand upon firm ground,
and —that I plead a cause that is far above any selfishness of my own ; and
that my clients are past all calculation numerous, and that the more
throngly they crowd around me, my responsibilities become proportionally
high, even in my attempting to plead their cause.
And, Sir, while my bodily eyes can look around the respected but
limited assemblage here, I feel that my mind’s view and its longings are
impelled onward to embrace a much wider range, and to compass a still
more interesting spectacle ; —to reach forth to times and to scenes looming
large in the dim and distant future of the history of New South Wales,
and the other Australian Colonies : Sir, I feel in this matter, and at this
moment, as if I had much more to do with those who are thus but yet far
off in the future, more than even with those who at this moment are
here. But, Sir, —on behalf of ail who are here, of their children, and
their children’s children, onwards to their very latest posterity, and
throughout the territories which they may yet possess, and in the name


of that sacred and eternal justice on which both their claims, and I feel
thoroughly convinced my own arguments on their behalf are founded,
I p l ead that our decision, so far as in us lies, may go forth to protect
all their moral and their spiritual, and their everlasting interests.
Sir, I need not say that I try to realize, for the scene forces itself
inward upon my mind’s apprehension, —when the enormously wide and
variegated extent of the whole territory of this magnificent Colony,
itself perhaps become a mighty Kingdom, shall be densely studded
over, throughout every square mile of its surface, with the goodly and
happy dwellings of a virtuous and enlightened, an intellectual and
religious population, each one sitting under his vine and under his
fig-tree, and none to make him afraid, and all rejoicing with one accord
in the fulness of blessings enjoyed by them beneath the pure and
free and full dispensation of the glorious Gospel of the grace of God,
and under a wise and paternal earthly G overnment; and sure I am, that
if such a scene of moral magnificence as that be ever realized through-
out this Land, —there will be throughout the whole of such a popu-
lation also, an ability intelligently to trace the history of their moral
and religious, of their social and civil advancement, and of all their
blessed immunities, exceedingly much to their National seats of Learn-
ing. And advanced then, as most undoubtedly they shall be, far beyond
us in wisdom and in Christian love, up to the blessed condition of keep-
ing the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace, —the Presbyterians of
this Land shall be found —reverencing, and loving, and venerating, as
one of the chief sources, (humanly speaking) of those multiplied
privileges which their very souls shall then enjoy even in this world,
the Presbyterian College in the University of Sydney.
And Sir, let me be permitted to hope, and trust, and pray, that in
our hands in this Synod, nothing shall occur which may be to us the
sowing of the bitter seeds of Dissension, or that may lead to produce
and to perpetuate the more bitter fruits still if possible, of a cruel,
and lasting, and blighting disunion amongst us ; or that may tend to
prevent the speedy prospering and maturity ol this proposed Insti-
tution. And whatever may be our decision and let us strive to give
full, credit the one to the other for the very best and the purest
purposes and desires,—still let us be most fully persuaded at the same
time, that “ Blessed are the peace-makers, who seek to draw together,
and not to rend asunder the visible Church of Christ, or any one of
its weakly branches, into small and helpless, and embittered diminutive
antagonist sections, that will but henceforth, perhaps for many gene-
rations to come, 11 bite, and devour one another, and continue to main-


tain a hostile, repellent, chilling attitude—the one toward the other,
obstructive of all Christian charity and its blessed fruits, —obstructive
and frustrating to their progress and blessed increase throughout the
whole of our sinful world. May we be preserved from such evils by
the kindness and faithfulness of Christ, by His own Spirit dwelling in
us ; and He yet giving us unity, who, Himself is the Prince of peace.
And Sir, while I do deeply grieve at hearing thrcatenings of disunion, —
equally unconstitutional in all discussions of this kind, as they
have for certain their evil tendency to arouse the very worst
passions of our own corrupt nature, —Sir let us hope for the growth
of that meekness, and patience, and that mutual forbearance,
which become us as the professed servants of Christ. For
myself; and I am persuaded I may also speak in the name
of the friends now here around me, —we shall have no Disunion,
whatever the issue of the present discussion may be. We trust and
hope, on the contrary, that a blessed unanimity and concord may soon
return, and be again, and permanently experienced by us all, as it
surely ought to be, and as it ought to be seen by the world, to reign in
the midst of us. And not only while here, excited perhaps by dis-
cussion ; but while we prosecute our labours from day to day in the
spheres severally allotted us, —let us ever strive to remember that “ The
fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace.”


APPENDIX.
N oxe .—lt has been while the preceding pages were passing through
the press, that the author was fayoured with the communications from
the Rev. Dr. Duff, Calcutta, from which the following is an Extract.
With those who have had the privilege of making that distinguished
man’s acquaintance, —or even of hearing him on the subjects which
fill his own soul, or of perceiving from works of many others, the
high estimation in which he is held throughout the Protestant
Church, both in Europe and in America, his opinion and judgment
on the subject of the preceding pages, or on any point, or any sub-
ject, either of an ecclesiastical or Theological nature, must possess
much weight. An experience of upwards of thirty years, both as a
Missionary and a minister, and the multiplicity of his labours both
in India and at home, would entitle him to be heard by any Church .
and while his own Church has ever delighted to hear him, to other
Chur chefs, too, the depth and soundness of his practical wisdom have
been largely demonstrated by the nature, as well as by the zeal and
extent of his labours in India; of which the blessed fruits, both
directly and indirectly, are now appearing. The author had
not yet been favoured with Dr. Duff’s communications, when he in-
serted the extract of a letter of his (Dr. Duff) to the Foreign
Missions’ Committee of the Free Church of Scotland, which indeed
was not given in addressing the Synod. The author of the preceding
pages cannot but rejoice in the identity of opinion subsisting between
Dr. Duff and himself on the subject of a Presbyterian College in this
Colony. The author feels that he takes with Dr. Duff the liberty of a
friend in publishing the following extract; but he knows his venerated
friend too well, to think he would shrink from the full avowal of his sen-
timents on a matter of such importance. And it is to he hoped that the
wise, independent, and unbiassed judgment of Dr. Duff upon this


truly important subject will be soundly appreciated by all the Pres-
byterians of this Colony.
Extract Letter Rev. Dr. Duff, to Rev. Dr. Mackay
“ Calcutta, 18th Sept., 1857.
“ I am delighted to hear that you are at last in the way of getting
a Presbyterian College in Australia, feeling assured, as I do, from
long observation and experience, that without such an Institution
Presbyterianism will exhibit but a rickety existence, and ultimately
die of sheer inanition. But to enable it to fix its roots permanently
in the soil, there ought to be not only a Presbyterian College but
Presbyterian Schools, in the organization, support, and encourage-
ment of which Presbyterian agency contributed a potential element.
In nothing did our noble Scottish ancestors shew their profound saga-
city and true practical wisdom more than in the strenuousness with
which they insisted on the inseparable connection between Church
and School, —the School the feeder of the Church, the Church the
nourisher of the School; —and both successful in rearing and training
a race wiser for both worlds than that of any other land. In order
to the full success of Presbyterian Colleges and Presbyterian Schools,
the union of all orthodox Presbyterians, that is, of all Presbyterians
holding the Westminster Standards, in one grand Presbyterian Church
of Australia would be necessary.
“On this account I did rejoice in the prospect of union between
the Free and established Synods in Victoria ; and earnestly hoped it
would prove the commencement of a union of all other Synods in
Australia and Tasmania, and of all the united Synods in a General As-
sembly ! Why should not such a consummation be realized ? lam
aware that there are difficulties in the way; but was there ever a good
cause in this world which had not difficulties to encounter in the way
of its development and ultimate establishment ? These are designed
by a gracious Providence to try men’s mettle, —their sincerity, their
earnestness, their manly courage. I know there are individual con-
scientious scruples in the way ; and these are permitted by a gracious
Providence, not to stand out as impassable barriers, but as stimuli to
impel all, and all alike, to sift alleged principles to the very bottom,
and separate all mere plausibilities and appearances, from the genuine,
the true, the immutable, the divine. But on this subject I shall not
at present enlarge,—contented to remark, that in the peculiar circum-
stances of Australia, I could not help regarding the basis of union


between the Synods of Victoria as a sound and satisfactory one.
Fervently do I hope, and pray that the time is not far distant when
the basis of union between all orthodox Presbyterian Churches (and
ultimately between all evangelical Churches whatsoever) will be
agreement in all grand essential fundamental points, i. e. points con-
nected with salvation, and the mutual forbearance and tolerance (the
offspring of faith, hope, and charity), in all minor points whatsoever.
The main thing surely is to win souls from perdition. As to your
proposed Presbyterian College, I understand there is with some of
you a preliminary difficulty connected with the subject of indiscrimi-
nate endowment.
“ The G-overnment, as I understand the matter, come forward to
offer to assist the Presbyterians in the erection and partial endowment
of a College of their own—a College in which, without any interfer-
ence, they will be allowed to establish their own curriculum of study
in Classics, Philosophy, Natural Science, and Christian Theology ; and
the question raised is, Shall we accept of this offer, if made to us hona
fide without the imposition of any Erastian or other obnoxious condi-
tions, —judging the offer to assist us in maintaining our own cherished
system, which we of course regard as the truest and best, —a good
one ; —and holding the Government, and not ourselves , to be wholly
responsible, in the eye of human reason and of God, for whatever
other application they may be pleased to make of any other portion
of their own funds ? Or, shall we refuse to accept the offer made to
us, unless the Government engage to assist us exclusively ? i. e.
engage to give no portion of their own funds to any other party but
ourselves, or, at least, to any other party but such as we would, by a
considerable stretch of charity, approve of, or at any rate, not
violently disapprove of ?
“ Now, without entering into any elaborate discussion on the sub-
ject —reckoning that what may be decided by a simple stroke of broad
common sense needs no discussion, —I do not hesitate for a moment
in stating, that I have long ago come to the fixed conclusion that wo
ought to accept of any spontaneous offer on the part of Government,
or any other public body, or private individual, to assist us in doing
good,—provided the offer leaves us perfectly free and unshackled, —
being unaccompanied by any restrictive or offensive qualifications
whatsoever ; no matter what appropriation such government, or pub-
lic body, or private individual, may be pleased to make of any other
portion of their own pecuniary resources ; —seeing that for any other
such appropriation, whether right or wrong, they, and not we,


are alone responsible to God, the sovereign Proprietor and giver
of all.
“To my own mind, the case, when thus simply put, stript of all
adventitious excrescences, casuistical distinctions, and metaphysical
subtleties, —seems so obvious, —so based on a naked truism, that I
feel almost ashamed to enlarge upon it. If Government, or any pri-
vate individual, is inclined to assist us in doing good, surely in this
they do well:—why then should we refuse such assistance ? If at
the same time they should offer to assist others in doing wrong, in
this they do ill : —why then should we not boldly and fearlessly
expostulate with them on the sin of so doing ? But if, notwithstand-
ing our protestation, they still persist in following a sinister course as
regards others , surely, surely common sense must pronounce them,
and not us, blame-worthy—them, and not us, answerable to God for
their abuse of stewardship !
“ Wealthy Hindu polytheists, whose errors and sins I have unspar-
ingly denounced, have more than once sent me donations for our
Institution, under the persuasion that it was conferring a certain
amount of benefit upon their countrymen. These being sent to be
applied in any way I thought proper, without any limitary conditions
whatever, ought I to have accepted them,—seeing that the donors
might at the same time be conferring ampler largesses on idolatrous
Institutions ? I confess that I never had the least scruple in receiving
such donations. I thought of Cyrus, and other monarchs, who
assisted Ezra, Nehemiah, and other pious Jews in rebuilding the
temple of Jehovah and the walls of Jerusalem, —I asked myself the
question, Did the God of truth and holiness forbid these pious Jews
to receive such assistance in promoting this good and holy undertak-
ing, at the hands of heathen monarchs, merely because these same
heathen monarchs might, at the same time, be founding and endowing
temples for idolatrous worship ? No such thing ! God is the God of
Providence. The gold and the silver are His. He has the hearts of
all men at His disposal. And if He dispose the hearts of heathen
monarchs, or latitudinarian members of a professedly Christian Go-
vernment, or carelessly indifferent members of a private community,
to assist with a portion of the gold and the silver those that love and
fear Him, in advancing His own blessed cause on earth, would it not
be to make ourselves wiser and better and holier than God, were we
to refuse such assistance, when it is rendered without enacting any
unrighteous compromise, or conscience-fettering conditions of any
kind ?


Our Indian Government goes far beyond yours in indiscriminate
endowment. Upwards of forty years ago it endowed Branches of the
Established Churches of England and Scotland, in India. Before
that, and subsequently, it upheld many idol temples and Mahommc-
dan Mosques. It still maintains purely Brahmanical and Mahom-
medan Colleges; while, until recently, it would extend no aid to any
Christian schools or seminaries. About three years ago, a change
came over the spirit of Government, and though still continuing their
endowment of Hindu and Mahommedan Colleges, they have offered
grants in aid to all Christian schools, whether Missionary or other-
wise, which may choose to avail themselves of the offer, without im-
posing any conditions on the subject of religious teaching. The
mission Committees of the Church of England and the Free Church,
in disapproving of the principle of this concession, have left it to
their missionaries abroad to apply for and accept such grants in aid
as they may deem expedient. We have, in point of fact, made ap-
plication for a grant-in-aid in behalf of one of our Branch Schools,
and it has been conceded. If we find it work well, and we have no
reason to doubt it will, we mean to apply for others. Our language
to the Government has ever been, —you do wrong, very wrong, in
helping Hindoos and Mahommedans to teach their deadly errors ; but
you have at last begun to do right in aiding us to teach them the
truth. But yours, and yours only, is the sin of such inconsistent
conduct. If you choose on the one hand, to minister the means of
providing poison to kill men’s souls, and with the other the means of
providing medicine to heal their spiritual maladies the gross, the
palpable, the sinful inconsistency is yours, and yours only. But your
sinful inconsistency is not reason why we should refuse to accept from
•you the proffered pecuniary means of securing the medicine which,
skilfully administered, may, to some extent at least, and by God’s
blessing, tend to counteract the otherwise fatal effects of the poison.
“ All this, so far as the principle of the thing is concerned,, appears
to me mutatis mutandis, to be applicable to your case. May you and
your brethren be guided to such a resolution on the subject as shall
abide the ordeal of the great Assize !
“ But supposing the resolution to be in favour of accepting of en-
dowment from Governmenf, for your projected Presbyterian College,
I understand that, with some at least, there are other difficulties
a-head.
“ You are at full liberty to have your own curriculum in Literature,
the Sciences and Theology too. This is good, very good. But your


students, in order to obtain University honours, must give a certain
amount of attendance on the University’s teaching. In what the
harm of this can consist, I cannot possibly see. Any University
classes to be thus attended, can only he Literary, Philosophic, or
Scientific classes, as its own constitution has no religious teaching in
it. But is it not so in all our Scottish Universities, —hating the Di-
vinity Halls, which are only attended by theological students.
“ The University, however, by its constitution appears to demand
from all applying for honours, that they possess a competent religious
knowledge, —certified by the religious community to which they be-
long. Well, what of this ? The Presbyterian community, conscious
of inculcating God's truth in its Schools and Colleges, would rejoice
in granting the needful religious testimonial to its youthful aspirants
after Academic honours. And if the Government, by exacting the
same requirement from a community that teaches error , thereby
makes itself so far responsible for that error, let us, while exposing
and protesting against this inconsistency, hold them , and them alone,
to be responsible for it.
“ But another question arises,-—Can ministers and members of the
Free Church consistently unite with ministers and members of the
Established Church in providing and maintaining a Presbyterian Col-
lege ? I unhesitatingly say, Yes ; on certain reasonable conditions.
Suppose the Body of College Trustees to be chosen equally from the
membership of both Churches; suppose it to be agreed that the
Westminster Standards be honestly adhered to in all Theological
tuition; suppose the Principal and Professors to be chosen by the
joint Trustee Body,—Free Churchmen to be solemnly declared to be
equally eligible as others, —the sole object being to obtain men, who
to perfect soundness in the Faith, superadd the highest general quali-
fications for their respective offices ; suppose the Principal and Pro-
fessors, whether chosen from the Established or Free Church, or most
probably, partly from both, —when once out among you, cease to be
amenable to the jurisdiction of the Churches at home, and subject
exclusively and without any appeal, to your own local Synods, or
other competent local authorities ; supposing, I say, these points to
be thus conclusively settled, I cannot see why you should not safely
and consistently unite with the established Synod in the attainment
of so transcendently desirable an object as that of a Presbyterian
College,—and that, too, altogether irrespectively of any union quoaJ
ultra.


“ I am perfectly aware that much that is plausible, and not without
apparent weight, may be said on the other side of the question.
Australia, however, ought to be dealt with ou its own merits ; and
and from large-minded views of its own peculiarities and necessities.
Stereotyped forms of thought and of practice in old Scotland may he
found inapplicable to the special exigencies of young Australia. The
grand thing is to maintain essential truth in its integrity ; but as to
modes of expressing it, or forms of external organization in propa-
gating and perpetuating it, —plainly these must vary with the varying
characteristics of peoples and climes.
“ The Disruption in Scotland was a great and necessitated event.
But is it necessary to transplant all the old controversies connected
with it into foreign lands ? Or, if transplanted, are they likely to
act as a moving, controlling element over the minds of men, placed
in such very different circumstances there ? Rather, —are they not
more likely to resemble the many plants that die when removed to
another soil ? Is it wise, then, to try and perpetuate them among the
new scenes, the new conditions of society, and the new energies of a
rapidly developing realm like Australia?
“ At the period of a great crisis like that of the Reformation, or
the Revolution in IGBB, —or, more local still, in our own Scottish
Disruption, the minds of many become as it were stereotyped —living
on the traditions of the past, and the fruits of the victory gained,
rather than gathering up the spoils and converting these into engines
of progression in the time to come. The present condition of Luther-
anism, and of many smaller isms in our own highly favoured land,
bears out this remark in a striking way. From standing still, and
isolating themselves, and wrapping thenselves up in ossified forms,
are not many of these nearly high and dry on the sands of a barren
orthodoxy, or lifeless symbolism ? All this seems to suggest some-
thing of the radicaljj\SiiVLxe of some of the questions at issue in Aus-
tralia now. For the central point seems to be,' —Will the recollection
that in Scotland a Disruption took place in 1843, on a vital subject,
sustain a living, aggressive, strong Church in Australia ? My own
emphatic answer —judging from human nature generally, and past
experience—is “ No.” Except in a very indirect way, Church
movements of importance aCthe time, cease to move —they even cease
to be remembered as motive forces in after ages, or in distant climes.
It is Truth alone that never dies —and ever moves and actuates vitally
and powerfully the souls of men.


“ The present, then, is a golden opportunity for all the orthodox
Presbyterian Churches in Australia to arise ; and, shaking off, like
moulten feathers, the stereotyped habitudes, forms, modes, and usages
of the old country, in so far as these may be lacking in congmity
with the altered condition of things in the new, —resolve to unite
themselves into one grand Presbyterian Church, that shall exhibit
the breadth and dimensions of a National Institution —powerful from
its numbers, its intelligence, and its piety—and commanding the
admiration of old Christendom by the vigour, the catholicity, and the
majesty of its movements.
Allow me to express the most fervent hope, that the ministers,
office-bearers, and members of our own branch of the great Presby-
terian family, will not be wanting in so great a crisis. Strong, good
common sense, patience, meekness, and forbearance, are qualities pre-
eminently needed at such a time and in such uniqueness of circum-
stances. But these are qualities that may be expected in answer to
earnest prayer. The terms of union and co-operation now offered to
the Free Church are such, that I would not be myself a party to the
rejection of them for all the gold of your Australian mines ; for cen-
turies may elapse before such a favourable opportunity for extensive
good and healthful influence may be in the offer of any Church.
FINIS.
Printed for J. W, Waugh, 139, George Street, at Bradshaw’s Printing Office,
6 and 8, Church Hill, Sydney.


REASONS OF DISSENT
From the Deliverance of the Synod of Eastern Australia,
adopted on the 6th November, 1857, anent the co-operation of the
Synod with other Presbyterians for the erection of a Presbyterian
College, to be affiliated to the University of Sydney.
1. Because it is only three months ago that this Synod, after solemn
deliberation, came to the conclusion that it was its duty so to
co-operate in this undertaking. It is therefore, in the view
of the dissentients, unseemly, if not unconstitutional, to
reverse with such indecent haste, that previous Deliverance,
after action had been taken thereupon, and before the Keport
of the Synod’s Committee on this subject had been given in.
2. Because the decision now come to cannot be regarded by the
dissentients as either a true or constitutional expression of the
judgment of the Synod on this important subject, inasmuch
as the Synod, on occasion of its present sittings, is in no way
entitled to be called a Free Assembly in the constitutional
sense of that term; and that the following facts furnish most
substantial and convincing proof of this allegation:—
(1.) Threats and intimidations were had recourse to, calcu-
lated to influence the minds of members of this Court,
and to interfere with the free exercise of their
judgment.
(2.) Monies due to the Treasurer were systematically and
wilfully held back, until it should be ascertained in
what way the Synod had decided, or was likely to
decide, on this subject.
(3.) An unusually large number of representative elders
were introduced into the Court, who had no commissions
from Kirk Sessions, and consequently no constitutional
right to vote, while several Members of Synod who
had undoubted legal right to vote, happened to be
absent. It is admitted that, in one or two special
cases, it has been the practice of the Synod to admit
elders without a regular commission, but the Synod
has uniformly pronounced the practice to be unconsti-


tutional and bad—not to be encouraged or taken ad-
vantage of, but to be avoided and abandoned with all
convenient speed. The extent, therefore to which, on
tliis occasion, advantage has been taken of this confess-
edly irregular and vicious mode of introducing mem-
bers into this Synod, together with all the attendant
circumstances, leaves no moral doubt on the minds of
the dissentients that all this was done for the express
purpose of swaying the decision of this Court on this
and kindred subjects.
(4.) The refusal of a certain member of Synod, and on what
appeared to the dissentients insufficient grounds, to
occupy the chair on this occasion, while it was univer-
sally admitted that it of right devolved on him to fill
this office, had the effect, whether it was intended or
not, of modifying to a certain extent the state of the
vote on this question.
These facts, viewed in connection with all the con-
comitant circumstances, constrain the dissentients, how-
ever painfully, to regard the present decision of the
Synod on this all-important subject as unconstitutional
and vitiated, and demanding on every just ground, to
be deplored and testified against. The dissentients
feel called upon to record their abhorrence of such
methods as have been referred to having been had re-
course to, with the view of ascertaining what might be
the most profitable guidance to the Synod, as a Court of
Christ, on matters that have a most important bearing
on the interests of Christ’s cause and kingdom on the
earth.
Because while the reasonings employed by the majority of the
Synod, as at present constituted, might have had some
force, if the step to be taken had been an ecclesiastical
Union properly so called, with the Synod of Australia; but
that it has not, and cannot be, shewn that such co-operation
as was contemplated by the Committee of the pro re nata


meeting, involves the sacrifice or compromise of any truth or
testimony which the Synod is called Upon to maintain; and
that therefore it is unjustifiable and unwise for the Synod to
endeavour, by any act of this kind, to cut off the people of
her communion from those national benefits and privileges
which they have a right to expect, and which are of incal-
culable importance to them, and their • children after them,
to the latest generations.
JAMES CAMERON,
(Adhering) M. MACKAY,
S. F. MACKENZIE, Ministers.
DAY. L. WAUGH, Elder.
11.
REASONS OF DISSENT.
Dk. Mackay and others, from a deliverance of the Synod of
Eastern Australia, relative to questions proposed to be put to office-
bearers of this Church, at their ordination, or at their induction into
their respective offices, and proposed to be henceforth used, and to be
subscribed by the several office-bearers of this Church, the said
Deliverance having been pronounced by the Synod of Eastern Australia,
on Wednesday, November 11th, 1857.
I dissent from the said Deliverance, in my own name, and in the
name of all those who may adhere to me, for the following reasons,
viz.: —
1. Because no intimation whatever was ever made to me, either
before, or at the time of, or after, my having become a
minister and member of this Synod, that the Synod required
from me, answers to any other questions, or subscription to
any other Formulary, than those in common use in the Free


Church of Scotland ; and that, in point of fact, I was not
required to sign any formula at all, not even the Confession
of Faith.
2. Because to the document now specially proposed to be referred
to in the series of questions to be put; and in the Formula
proposed to be subscribed by all intrants into office in this
Church, I am an utter stranger, having never made
myself at all conversant with its terms or its obligations,
understanding clearly from the members and inferior Courts of
this Synod that they held no principle or practice but
what the Free Church of Scotland held; and that I should
consider it wholly inconsistent with first principles admitted
by all moralists, that to profess obedience or adherence to pro-
positions which one has not duly considered, nor has had
any opportunity to study,—no obligation having ever been
laid upon him to do so, would be altogether an immoral act,
and having appearance of aggravation if done in connection
with any prospective benefit.
3. Because, after the Presbytery of Sydney having been satisfied,
on the occasion of my induction into a pastoral charge in
this city, with having put to me the questions usually
proposed by the Free Church, and none else, and having
been satisfied with the answers given to the same—it is
in my opinion, both unconstitutional, unusual, and irregular,
for this Synod to go back upon the proceedings of the Pres-
bytery of Sidney, or to annul the same after so long an
interval especially, and after the Presbytery’s books had
been visited and approved by the Synod.
4, Because, in point of fact, the questions now proposed to be
put for the future to all intrants into office in this Church,
have never, in time past, with any uniformity of practice,
been put to intrants by this Synod or its inferior judicatories;
and because it was not always judged indispensable by this
Synod to put to such intrants any questions at all in time
past, or that they should sign any Formula.
5, Because, since the actual deliverance of the Synod now


dissented from having been pronounced, I have read the
Protest referred to in the series of questions proposed now
to be put in future, and in the Formula proposed to be
signed; and, because I see in the said Protest, “ a Bond”
referred to, or founded upon, of which I had never, to the
best of my recollection, even heard of before at all; and of
all the provisions of which lam entirely ignorant; and
cannot possibly therefore engage to have respect to its
provisions, while I am entirely ignorant of what those
provisions may be.
6. Because I have stated these my scruples and difficulties to the
Synod, and craved time to consider both the Protest and the
“ Bond” referred to, and have even implored the Synod to
grant me time to consider these documents ; and that such
permission was refused.
7. Because I consider such treatment of any brother minister
to be altogether oppressive and unconstitutional, if not
unprecedented in the history of the Presbyterian Church.
8. Because it does not appear that in this Synod hitherto, there
has been any fixed series of questions at all, or any Formula
that had ever been used, it is not accordant with Presby-
terian usage, to introduce any such organic change, per
saltum, as is now proposed in this matter, in this Synod; and
that the proposal ought rather to have been given in charge to a
Committee, to be reported upon at a future meeting of
Synod, when all the members would be better prepared to
pronounce deliberate and intelligent deliverance respecting
the same.
9. Because, if I find myself, .from any difficulties that may arise
to me in the course of making myself acquainted with the
said Protest and the said “ Bond,” precluded from consci-
entious liberty of signing the said Formula, this Synod may
then, perhaps, proceed to consider whether they hold me
competent to be any longer a member of this Synod ;
and that I should consider any such treatment to be wholly
unconstitutional, as well as oppressive: as I should also,
that of the Synod agreeing to permit me to continue a


member thereof by mere sufferance; and partly because I
consider myself to have been entitled to be informed by this
Synod, or by the Presbytery into whose bounds I was to be
received, and that fully, what the several obligations were
under which I should have to come.
For these, and other reasons, to be propounded in proper time
and place, I-dissent from the said finding of the Synod of Eastern
Australia.
M. MACKAY.
(Adhering) J. CAMERON,
S. F. MACKENZIE, Ministers.
Sydney, November 18th, 1857.
111.
REASONS OF DISSENT.
Dr. Mackay and others, from a Deliverance of the Synod of
Eastern Australia, on 11th November, 1857, viz., “That a Committee be
appointed to consider whether, in present circumstances, any steps
ought to be taken, and if so, what steps, with the view of erecting and
bringing into effective operation, a College in connection with this
Church, and which shall be conducted in accordance with its princi-
ples, and to use legitimate means to interest our people in such an
undertaking.”
I dissent from the above Resolution in my own name, and in the
name of all those who may adhere to me, for the following reasons,
viz.:—
1. Because I consider the judgment by which former Resolutions
of this Synod on the subject of a College have been set
aside, unconstitutional, and vitiated; that, therefore, the
judgment now dissented from must be necessarily vitiated
also, and not binding on the consciences of the members
#
of this Synod.


2. Because, I consider that to unite and to co-operate with all
other Presbyterians in giving all furtherance to a Presby-
terian College affiliated to the University of Sydney, would
have been the wiser course for this Synod to have followed,
and that which all the circumstances of the case rendered it
imperative upon this Synod, as matter of duty to the Pres-
byterians of this Colony, and to the general interests of the
Kingdom of God in this and in other lands to adopt.
Because there is contained in the said Resolution of this
Synod, an implied judgment of the principles upon which
the proposed Presbyterian College in connection with
the University of Sydney, is to be conducted; whereas
these principles are not yet in any way known, the
constitution of the said proposed College not having been
yet in any way fixed at all; and that to try and con-
demn what has yet actually no existence, is ludicrous, and
calculated to bring the proceedings of this Synod not into
high estimation; and that such a judgment, in such unwar-
ranted circumstances, is altogether contrary to that charity
which “hopeth all things.”
Because that such a judgment, in the circumstances in which
it has been pronounced, though not wilfully we desire to
hope, on the part of its promoters, —is calculated to mislead
the minds of our people, and to excite the prejudices of
many of them, rather than to enlighten them.
Because that the endeavour to erect a Presbyterian College
separately from that proposed to be erected in connection
with the University of Sydney, would be to perpetuate
divisions in the Presbyterian Church of this Colony, which
could not fail to be injurious to the best temporal interests,
and to the souls of men.
M. MACKAY.
Sydney, November 18, 1857.


