

Australian
Including the Prevention of Preferential
Railway Rates.
By A. FORSYTH.
/ifcelbournc:
J. C. Stephens, Printer, 146 Elizareth Street.


As I take a deep interest in Australian Federation,
I beg to lay before you the following extracts from a
Pamphlet which I published, criticising the Draft Consti-
tution of 1891, and suggesting amendments therein. These
suggestions are tendered in the hope that they may prove
useful in the framing of a wise and workable Federal
Constitution for Australia.
The change in public opinion during the past five
years on several Federal questions, has necessitated some
additions in the form of notes, and leaving out portions
of the original criticism, as no longer required.
Yours truly,
ARCHIBALD FORSYTH
18 Collins Street, Melbourne.
339 Kent Street, Sydney.
NATIONAL
LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


Extracts from Original Pamphlet
AUSTRALIAN FEDERATION.
Appointment and Power of the Governor-General.
The charge that the Convention Bill places too much power
in the hands of the Governor-General and the Imperial Govern-
ment, if judged by the present measure of political power
conferred by the several Colonial Constitutions, does not appear
to be well founded. But we think that the stage of develop-
ment and population to which Australia has now attained entitles
her people to ask for, and receive, a greater measure of political
power than they have hitherto enjoyed as separate colonies, and
when the draft Constitution is examined under this light the
charge is fully sustained.
In proposing to enter into an Australian Federation under the
Crown, we have surely a right to expect as full a measure of
national power and freedom on all questions of Australian
domestic legislation as England at present enjoys under the
Crown, and that the prerogatives, functions, authority, and
powers exercised by the Queen, by and with the advice of her
Privy Council and Ministers of State, should be extended to
her Viceroy, the Governor-General, to be exercised by him, by
and with the advice of the Queen’s Australian Federal Executive
Council and Ministers of State. Provision is made in the draft
Constitution for the appointment by the Queen (or her Viceroy)
of such a Council and Ministers to aid and advise her Majesty
(or her Viceroy) on Australian affairs, and this advice should be
tendered in the same manner, and to the same extent, as her
Imperial Council and Ministers do at present. Under such a
Constitution there would be no cause or necessity for Imperial
Ministers interfering with or advising the Queen on Australian
domestic legislation as contemplated by the draft Constitution.
If we are entitled to this measure of political power in managing
our own affairs, it is made apparent that the draft Bill approxi-
mates nearer to Imperial than to Australian Federation under
the Crown ; for, as a matter of fact, it does not secure Govern-
ment under the Crown, but Government under the Imperial
Ministers in Downing Street. For it can be seen at a glance
that the powers to be exercised by the Queen under the draft
Constitution are not confined to the Queen’s Sovereign Pre-
rogatives, but include powers and functions exercised under the
advice of Her Council and Imperial Ministers, so that the allowance
or disallowance of an Australian Act would not depend on the


advice of Her Majesty’s Australian Council and Ministers but on
that of Her Imperial advisers. Doubtless questions will arise in
which Australian interests will be mixed up with or conflict with
Imperial policy on treaties similar to the late Chinese Restriction
Act. When such questions arise the Queen will have to consult
both Councils and decide on the combined advice of Her
Imperial and Australian Councils. But on all Australian
domestic legislation there are no good reasons for and several
against the Imperial Government retaining the power to advise
Her Majesty to refuse assent to the Bills that have been
previously assented to by Her Representative the Governor-
General under the advice of Her Australian Council, for
assuredly the latter are in a better position to wisely advise Her
Majesty on Australian questions than her Imperial Councillors.
By the 2nd clause in Chapter 1., the Queen is empowered to
appoint a Governor-General to exercise during her pleasure
“ Such powers and functions as the Queen may think fit to assign
to him!' Now, there can be no doubt that this unlimited power
is both excessive and dangerous. That it is made “ subject to the
provisions of this Constitution ” in no way limits its exercise, as
no definition of the Queen’s power is contained within the four
corners of the proposed Constitution. This and several other
dangerous powers are defended by several public men of
recognised ability under the plea that, although powers are given
that could endanger home rule if they were exercised, these
powers are not intended to be operative. In an unwritten
Constitution like that of England, unused, or latent powers may
exist without endangering political liberty, but such is not the
case under a written Constitution, which should contain no power
that is not required and all powers intended to be conferred
under it. During the past century, the powers of the Crown
have been greatly curtailed, and the practice of Constitutional
Government under this curtailment has become the Constitutional
Law of England ; but this Constitutional Law could not be
securely made to apply to Australia except by enactment into a
written Constitution. Under the English Constitution the Queen
has certain recognised Sovereign Prerogatives which she can
exercise with or without the consent of her advisers. Now,
while there is no objection to the Governor-General exercising
such of those Sovereign Prerogatives, as the Queen may assign
to him, there are strong objections against giving the Governor-
General power to exercise “ Such powers and functio7is as the
Queen may think fit to assign to him.” The powers and functions
so assigned to the first Governor-General of Canada were found
to be so excessive that they required to be curtailed, and some
nine years were occupied in negotiations between the Canadian
and English Governments to put matters right.


It is therefore our duty in forming a Constitution to guard
against a similar error, by confining the personal power of the
Governor-General to the exercise of the Queen’s Sovereign Pre-
rogatives.
I therefore beg to suggest that Clause 2 of Chapter I. be
amended by striking out all the words after the word “ Constitu-
tion,” and inserting in their place “ Such of Her Majesty's
Sovereign Prerogatives as the Queen may think fit to assign to
him , together with the powers and duties conferred on him by this
Constitution^
Election of the Senate.
The Draft Bill provides that the Senate shall be chosen by the
Houses of the Parliament of the several States, but in the
absence of any provision as to how the appointments are to be
carried out, such appointments would have to be by a Bill passed
by both Houses, as the Constitution of the several States will
not allow the two Houses to vote together as one body. Surely
such a mode of election would be impracticable, and in direct
opposition to representative government. In fact it would place
the appointment of the Senate in the hands of the Upper
Houses, and give the same power to a nominee as to an elected
House. But even if the several States procured amendments of
their Constitutions so as to permit the two Houses to vote
together as one body ; the objection against giving a nominee
House a voice in the election of members of a Senate possessed
of co-ordinate powers with the House of Representatives would
still exist, and would entirely nullify representative government.
It is, therefore, necessary to amend the 9th clause of Chapter
I. so as to provide that only such members as had attained their
position by popular election should be entitled to vote. I there-
fore beg to suggest that the clause be amended by striking out
all the words after the word “ State," and inserting in their place
“ chosen by one elective body composed of such members of the
Houses of the Parliament of each State as have attained their
position by popular election!'*
Qualification of Elector for the House of
Representatives.
The objection against not including in the Draft Bill the
qualification of electors for the House of Representatives is held
by a majority of the people, or at all events by all in favor of
one man one vote. Now, while the Convention were doubtless
right in not attempting to interfere with the qualification of the
electors of the States’ legislature it was undoubtedly their duty
* Popular election might be preferable if the qualification of electors included the
attainment of 30 years of age.


to provide for the qualification of the electors of the Federal
Parliament, so as to insure a uniform qualification in the various
States, as it is evident that the political opinions of members
of the House of Representatives must be mainly determined by
the qualification of the federal electors. If a resident quali-
fication is adopted in one State, and a property qualification
giving a plurality of votes in another, no important question can
be settled on representative democratic lines. It is, therefore,
necessary to amend Clause 25 of Chapter 1., so as to provide for
a residential qualification, and I beg to suggest that the clause
be amended by striking out all the words after the word
“ representatives ,” and inserting in their place “in each State shall
be a residential qualification only giving one man one voted
Deadlocks.
The 55th clause of Chapter I. provides that the Senate shall
have equal power with the House of Representatives in respect
of all proposed laws with specified exceptions on Money Bills of
a certain character, which it may reject or affirm but may not
amend. The provisions relating to these Money Bills appears to
be wisely framed so as to give the Senate as much power as could
be given to it without danger, but the same cannot be said with
respect to the equal power given to both Houses on all other
Bills, for doubtless this co-ordinate power is bound sooner or later
to result in a deadlock. It will no doubt be a difficult matter to
settle this co-ordinate power of the two Houses to the satisfaction
of both the large and the small colonies, but when it is borne in
mind that the duties of a second chamber are generally held to
be to prevent hasty legislation and not to block for all time some
important measure demanded by a large majority of the people,
it can be seen that this duty can be fulfilled and deadlocks
avoided by the provisions contained in the following suggested
new clause to follow Clause 56 :
“ When any Bill which has been passed by either House of the
Parliament has been rejected by the other and the same Bill or one to the
same effect has been again passed by one House after a general election
has intervened and is again rejected by the other , the two Houses shall
form one body and shall vote together on such Bill, and if an affirmative
vote of two-fifths is given in Us favour the Bill shall be declared carried.”*
Royal Assent to Bills.
The draft Constitution provides that when a Bill passed by the
Parliament is presented to the Governor-General for the Queen’s
assent he shall declare, according to his discretion, either that he
* The form of referendum which requires a majority of States and a majority of
votes to legalise any measure would be preferable to the plan in the above amend-
ment, as it preserves State power.


assents to it in the Queen’s name, or that he withholds assent, or
that he reserves it for the Queen’s pleasure. Now, surely the
time for giving the Governor-General such autocratic power is
past. It is not carried out now, and perhaps it is not intended
to be carried out, and both reasons are good ones why it should
not be given. The 57th clause should therefore, be amended so
as to provide that the power should be exercised by the
Governor-General-in-Council, but reserving power for the
Governor-General to reserve for the Queen’s pleasure, with or
without the consent of his Council, any Bill that, in his opinion,
conflicts with Imperial policy or treaties.
By the 58th clause the Queen-in-Council is empowered to
disallow any Bill that has been assented to by the Governor-
General at any time not exceeding two years. This is another
dangerous power, perhaps not intended to be applied ; at the
same time if the power is given it could be exercised to block
any legislation distasteful to Downing Street, and with the
present social unrest, it is probable that within a few years several
radical measures may be passed in Australia that would be
opposed by the Queen’s Ministers. To avoid any conflict on
such a question it is advisable to excise this power to disallow
laws already passed from the 58th clause. This amendment
could be made by striking out all the words after the words
“ copy to the Queen ,” and insert in their place “ together with the
reasons on whicJi such assent was given!'
Appointment of Federal Executive Council.
The Governor-General is empowered to appoint a Federal
Executive Council to consist of such persons as he may think fit.
By a subsequent clause it is provided that the members of the
Ministry shall be members of this Council, but as the Governor-
General is empowered to appoint as many non-official members
as he thinks fit, it follows that the Ministry may be in a minority,
and the majority may decide important questions adversely to
the views of the minority. Of course, it can be urged that under
such circumstances the Ministry could resign. But why should
a Ministry, carrying on Parliamentary Responsible Government
be forced to resign, and, perhaps, delay necessary legislation, or
executive action, on some important question through the action
of non-responsible members of the Council ? In answer to this,
it can be urged that the Governor-General can prevent any such
resignation by placing the Government in a majority in the
Council by the dismissal of members, or appointment of
additional members, but such safety valves only show the un-
wisdom of following old mouldy models that are only tolerated
because they are not carried out. Should any Ministry cease to
possess the confidence of Parliament or of the Governor-General,


the Sovereign Prerogatives assigned to him by the Queen will
enable him to dismiss and appoint Ministers at his pleasure, so
that the power given to the Governor-General to appoint as
many members of Council as he may desire is a bad one, and the
clause should be amended so as to provide that the number of
non-official members shall not exceed the number of Responsible
Ministers. This could be provided for by amending the 2nd
clause of Chapter 11. by striking out all the words after the words
“ Federal Executive Council ,” and inserting in their place “ and
shall consist of the Responsible Ministers of State, together with
such persons as the Governor-General may appoint, but such non-
official members shall not exceed the number of Responsible
Ministers. They shall be sworn in as Executive Councillors, and
shall hold office during his pleasure.
Power of the Governor-General in Council.
By the draft Bill the Governor-General is empowered, with two
exceptions, to exercise all his powers, duties and functions,
including those empowered by the “ Queen's Letters Patent and
Instructions',' without reference to his Council ; but from the
nature of most of these duties, and from the practice of
responsible government in British colonies, the insertion of this
power is evidently another mistake of inserting power not
intended to be exercised. It is therefore necessary to provide
that these duties, functions and powers shall be exercised by the
Governor-General-in-Council, which can be done by striking out
of the third clause of Chapter 11. all the words after the words
“ Governor-General,” and inserting in their place “ and the
Governor- General-in-Council shall both mean and shall apply to the
Governor-General acting by and with the advice of the Federal Executive
Council; but the Governor General may exercise such of the Sovereign
Prerogatives of the Queen as Her Majesty may assign to him , with or
without the consent of the Federal Executive Council , namely: Appoint-
ment and dismissal of the Members of the Federal Executive Council and
Ministers of State, granting cr refusing a dissolution of the House of
Representatives.
Responsible Ministers of State.
By the 4th clause of Chapter 11., the Governor-General is
empowered to appoint officers to administer the various depart-
ments of the Government, who shall hold office during his pleasure,
and such officers, it is stated, shall be members of the Federal
Executive Council and the Queen’s Ministers of State for the
Commonwealth. It will be seen that under this clause the
Governor-General can select persons who are or are not members
of either house of the Parliament. Now, although the Constitu-
tion of England practically compels Ministers of State to be
selected from Members of Parliament, it would surely be the


height of madness to accept a written constitution for establishing
Parliamentary Responsible Government, which empowers the
Governor-General to act contrary to the intentions and spirit of
the Act. No doubt, to compel the Governor-General to select
every Minister from Members of Parliament would not be a wise
provision, as some of the ablest and most experienced statesmen
are, from the caprice of electors and other causes, occasionally
excluded from Parliament; but this can be no justification for
empowering the Governor-General to go outside Parliament for
all his Ministers. It will, doubtless, be contended that the
practice of Responsible Government will compel the Governor-
General to select most of his Ministers from members of Parlia-
ment. It is now an unsettled question here, as well as in
England, what proportion of Ministers must have seats in Parlia-
ment. It is, therefore, advisable to amend Clause 4of Chapter
11., so as to provide that a certain proportion of Ministers shall
be Members of Parliament. The clause can be amended by
striking out all the words after the words “ Such officers " and
inserting in their place “ shall he the Queen's Responsible Ministers
of State, and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Governor-
General, and until other provisions are made by P arliament. Not
less than five, nor more than seven, of such Responsible Officers shall
have seats in either of the Houses of Parliament.
Commandp:r-in-Chief.
By the 9th clause of Chapter 11. the Governor-General is
appointed Commander-in-Chief of all military and naval forces
belonging to the Commonwealth. This appointment is both
appropriate and necessary, but its exercise should be under the
Governor-General-in-Council, and even under this safeguard the
Soudan episode warns us that it should be provided that the
military and naval forces of the Commonwealth shall not be
employed outside the boundaries of the Commonwealth without
the consent of Parliament being first obtained.
Even with above amendments the command of the Naval
Forces would be a mixed one. The agreement between England
and the several colonies re the Australian Auxiliary Squadron
may not result in any difficulty or disagreement while the colonies
remain unfederatcd ; but on the advent of P'ederation the
provisions of the agreement must produce a divided command,
which will doubtless lead to disputes between the Federal and
Imperial Governments. The former could not, in justice, claim
the sole command, nor could they be expected to concede this to
the latter. It is, therefore, advisable that the draft Constitution
should empower the Federal Government to take over ships (of
the Auxiliary Squadron) to the value of the Australian
contribution.


Intercolonial Freetrade.
One of the principal reasons for Federation is to acquire power
to establish a uniform tariff throughout the Australian Colonies,
yet the Draft Constitution makes no provision as to the time
when it shall come into force; on the contrary it includes elaborate
provisions to enable the Commonwealth to collect the duties of
Customs and Excise imposed by the several colonies for an
unlimited period after the establishment of Federation. By these
provisions goods can be exchanged free of duty but not free from
Custom House examinations and interference, and doubtless both
the expense and trouble on intercolonial trade, under the proposed
method, will be as great, if not greater than it is under separate
tariffs. It is therefore necessary, in order to accomplish
main objects of Federation, to limit the time during which the
Commonwealth is authorised to collect the duties imposed by
the tariffs of the several States so as to compel the Federal
Government to pass a uniform tariff within a reasonable time.
This could be done by adding the following proviso to the 7th
clause of chapter IV. : “ Provided that no duties of Customs or Excise
except those imposed by the Federal Parliament shall be collected after two
years from the date of the establishment of the Commonwealth.”
Pacific Islands.
In the 3rd clause of Chapter VI. it is sought to obtain power
to acquire territory in the Pacific. Now. such a power on the
surface may appear to many to be a desirable one ; but reference
to historical records will show that it is a most dangerous one,
calculated to bring us into conflict with European nations. Had
such a power existed during the dispute about the New Hebrides
and New Guinea, or had the Imperial Government followed the
cry raised in Australia, there is little doubt that a war with
France or Germany or perhaps with both would have ensued,
and danger from this source will become greater as we increase
in population and power. The British possessions in the Pacific
are at present a source of danger to us, and this danger will be
increased tenfold should the power we ask for be granted. The
Monroe doctrine of America as originally understood and
practised has freed that country from many International
disputes and war arising therefrom, and it is even more applic-
able to Australia than to America as our territory is cut off
from foreign nations by the ocean. On these considerations it
is desirable that the 3rd clause in Chapter VI. should be amended
by striking out the power to acquire territory in the Pacific.
Differential Railway Rates.
It is greatly to be regretted that the spirit of Provincialism
and Localism is too strong in all the colonies to permit the State


railways, with their debts, to be taken over by the Federation, so
as to put an end to the war of differential rates which entails a
loss on the working of the State railways of nearly all the
colonies. It has been contended that as differential rates impose
no tax on products they cannot be of a protective character, as
such rates offer facilities for traffic. But surely it can be seen
that protection can be given by a bounty as well as an import
duty, and these differential rates are simply a bounty paid out of
the railway receipts to city merchants as goods forwarded to such
border districts as have cheaper transit rates than the ordinary
mileage rates of the railway. There are two methods open to do
away with the loss caused by the war of differential rates. First:
That the Federal Government should take over the State
railways with their debts. Second: That the Federal Govern-
ment be empowered to frame a proportional mileage scale for all
distances, giving each state the right to charge high or low rates
as they think fit, so long as the proportional scale is maintained.
There would be no difficulty in framing such a scale under which
each state could determine its own transit rates, but would be
powerless to impose differential rates ; but these and every other
plan that could be proposed would be useless so long as the
narrow-minded spirit of Provincialism that now exists is main-
tained, as any remedy would either prevent agreement amongst
the various colonies, or the power would be refused. However,
if Federation is once established, it will soon be seen that inter-
colonial trade can be as much interfered with under a Railway
as a Customs tariff, and its evil effects will pave the way for a
remedy of some kind.
Note.
It is now generally recognised that freetrade between the Colonies
cannot be attained while the various States have the power to impose
preferential freight rates. To prevent this, the obvious remedy is to
hand the Railways, or at least the main lines, with their debts, over to
the Federal Government, and thereby prevent destructive Railway com-
petition between the various Colonies as well as interference with the
intended intercolonial freetrade; for it must be evident that protection
can be secured as readily through a Railway as a Customs Tariff, and
although I believe in protection against foreign made goods, I hold that
as all the Colonies are on the same plane of civilisation, with similar
rates of wages and standard of living, we have nothing to protect
against each other, and that therefore our several tariffs act as barriers
against the free interchange of our respective products. Now, while
differential or rather preferential rates would continue this state of things,
they would at the same time sacrifice a large portion of the Railway
Revenue; but there are other reasons why the Railways should be
federated, for it must be evident that a uniform gauge can only be


&t6Uo
J. C. Stephens, Printer 146 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.
rPP> r / r ‘Pa~
secured by placing the Railways under Federal control. But even with
these and other strong reasons which could be stated, I am afraid that
the spirit of Provincialism is too strong to enable such a measure to be
carried in the present Convention, and I therefore beg to suggest means
by which differential rates could be prevented even while the Railways
remain under State control.
This could be effected by empowering the Federal Parliament (in one
of the sub-clauses of Section 52) to control Railways with respect to
differential rates as is done in the Draft Bill of 1891 with respect to
transport. With this power the Federal Parliament could pass an Act
containing a classified goods schedule with their respective mileage
rates to be charged on State Railways, and giving each State power to
increase or decrease the rate on all or any class of goods by such per-
centage as each State thought advisable on condition that the Federal
Government were duly'notified of such alterations. This would enable
each State to determine the freight rate to be charged on any class of
goods, and at the same time prevent them from charging differential
rates to a greater extent than the mileage rate in the Federal Schedule.
For example. Let us suppose that Victoria with a view to increase the
demand for manufactured articles in Riverina, decreased the freight rate
20 per cent, on this class of goods, or that New South Wales, with a
view to attract wool to Sydney, decreased the schedule rate by 20 per
cent., this would involve a 20 per cent, reduction in freight on all
manufactured goods carried by rail in Victoria and a similar reduction
on all wool carried by the Railway in New South Wales. This would
entail such a heavy loss in Railway Revenue that all attempts to secure
trade by reduction of rates must come to an end leaving goods free to
follow the shortest and cheapest transit route to market.
No doubt all graduated mileage rates are to a certain extent differ-
ential and rightly so, both in the interests of the Railways and in that
of the producers, but mileage rates recognise the principle of charging
more for a long than a short distance, while what we call differential
rates generally charge less for a long than for a short distance. No
doubt a mileage rate would have to be carefully considered so as not to
press unduly on producers far removed from their market, and in this
respect the New South Wales Railway mileage rates appear to be fair to
the Railway and to distant producers, but the classified table would
require reconstruction.
I sincerely trust that you will give this suggested plan due considera-
tion, for without doubt it will enable each State to fix their own rates of
carriage for all classes of goods and at the same time prevent the
imposition of differential rates. If you think this is the case all that is
required at the hands of the Convention is to have the power to control
Railways (so as to prevent the impositon oj preferential rates) placed in
the list op subjects on which the Federal Parliament is authorised to
legislate.
