

ROADS, BRIDGES, AND
CAUSEWAYS:
SUGGESTIONS
CONCERNING
A LETTER
TO THE HON. JOHN SUTHERLAND, M.P.,
MINISTER FOR WORKS.
BY
VOX E DESERTO.
GOULBURN:
PRINTED BY W. E. RILEY, HERALD OFFICE, AUBURN-STREET.
1870.






C
B
A


ROADS, BRIDGES, AND CAUSEWAYS.
TO THE HON. JOHN SUTHERLAND, M.P.,
MINISTER FOR WORKS.
Sir, —From my personal knowledge of yonr character I am assured
that your desire is to have the public works of the colony carried
out in such a manner as will at once be economical, durable, and
efficient; and believing that in the roads department there is
abundant room for improvement, I do not conceive any apology
necessary for addressing to you a few suggestions arising from my
own personal observation. In other ways public attention has
lately been directed to the mismanagement that exists in respect to
our roads and bridges ; and certainly there can he no better time
than the present for considering the importance of the subject and
for maturing plans to prevent further waste of money in carrying
out works which are scarcely required in fine weather and which
are destroyed in foul. .
The following remarks are intended more in the light of
suggestions than anything else. There is not now time nor is it
necessary to go very fully into matters of detail which properly
belong to your subordinates. It will he sufficient to place the
leading ideas concisely before you; when, should they have your
approval, you will know how to reduce them to practice, notwith-
standing the opposition they are likely to meet with from officials
jealous of anything like interference with subjects they arc sup-
posed to understand better than others.
It is now abundantly evident that an entire change in the
methods hitherto pursued in dealing with our roads and bridges is
absolutely necessary; and all who take an interest in the matter,
and who have any schemes to propose, will he only doing their duty
by bringing them forward. For this purpose it is not necessary
that men should be civil engineers. Notwithstanding a want of
technical knowledge of details they may suggest some valuable
plan. In any case the engineers have failed ; so that it is time for
non-engineers to take up the subject.


When our main roads are being macadamized, the metal
is put down in the middle of the road, of which it occupies about
a third in width. To save as far as possible the feet of their horses
and bullocks and the tiers of their wheels, teamsters prefer not to
travel on the metal until after it has become consolidated. Logs
are therefore placed across two-thirds of the roadway which force
vehicles to proceed over the metal. The consequences arc, first
that there is not quite sufficient room for two vehicles to pass each
other with safety; next, that accidents are far more likely to occur
than if the road were left its full width, of which we had a deplorable
instance not very long since on the western road ; and thirdly, that
though the road undoubtedly becomes consolidated much sooner by
this plan yet that it is worn out in one-third of the time. Then
there is of course fresh work for overseers and contractors; and
fresh grants of the public money have to be expended. A private
individual making a road at his own cost for his own use, would of
course prefer that it should last as long as possible, that it should
be as safe and as convenient as possible, and that it should inflict
as little injury as possible on the feet of his cattle. But the re?
verse of all this is very effectually brought about by the plan fol-
lowed by the roads department.* Whatever be the object, the fact
remains that the road •> are constructed to last as short a time as
possible, to be as unsafe and as inconvenient as possible, and to
inflict as much injury on the feet of the cattle and on tfie tiers of
the wdieels as possible.
Whatever may be the reason, there is no doubt that in most
cases the bridges constructed by the roads department are utter
failures. As a rule th y are not required in ordinary weather ; and
in times of flood they are either swept away altogether or are sub-
merged and useless until the return of line weather.
An instance or two of these failures may be taken from the
neighbourhood of Argyle.
Some years ago a bridge w T as erected over the Mulwarree at
Thorn’s Crossing-place. The first flood after its completion took it
away. A second bridge w r as soon afterwards constructed which still
stands, having however the disadvantage of not being crossable in
times of flood ; so that it has just been found necessary to accept
a contract for the erection of a third ; and this we are assured will
be useless in times of high flood, besides from its position being
more likely than the present structure to be sw'ept aw T ay by the
waters,


At Bungonia a few years since a bridge was erected at a cost of
something like £4OO. The first heavy flood carried it away. Sub-
sequently a stone causeway was erected at a cost of £7O ; and this
has stood a number of severe floods, including the recent ones,
without injury. The gentlemen who designed it and superintended
its construction were two of the road trustees, neither claiming a
knowledge of civil engineering.
It is but the other day that a contract was accepted for the
erection of a bridge over Reedy Creek on the Braidwood road.
While the contractor was proceeding with his work the recent flood
came, and the bridge went. The result must have been the same
had the work been finished. From the position of the bridge, be-
tween Boro and Braidwood, it could not have been of any practical
use until other bridges—one over the Shoalliavcn, the other over
the Mulwarree —were first constructed ; and of these, one has not
been commenced, and the other has not even been decided on.
While the traveller for G oulburn cannot cross the kjulwarree, and
the traveller for Braidwood cannot cross the Slioalliaven, it is but
mockery to say there is a bridge over Reedy Creek.
A bridge costing some hundreds of pounds was a few years ago
built over the Wollondilly at Baw Baw. After being finished it
was discovered that there had been no provision in the specification
for approaches. There was the bridge completed and paid for, but
utterly useless; and as the amount voted for its erection had all
been expended, for some time the bridge remained a spectacle to
gods and men. Two adventurous individuals appear to have
crossed it. By means of a ladder ten feet long they climbed to the
flooring ; then they drew up the ladder, carried it to the other end
of the bridge, and by its aid descended. It is certain that in no
other way could it have been crossed at all—unless in a balloon !
After remaining in this state for some months —until another
session of parliament had voted additional funds—a fresh contract
was taken for the construction of approaches. They cost nearly as
much as the bridge itself. Very shortly afterwards came a flood
and the whole was swept aAvay. The materials were afterwards
given to the neighbours, who employed them in the construction of
a smaller bridge, the cost of which was paid by subscription; but
this has lately shared the fate of its more expensive precursor.
It is now several years since the first bridge was erected at
Marsden’s Crossing-place over the Wollondilly. Its cost was about
£7OO or £BOO. Shortly after a flood came, and the approaches
went. Three extra spans were then added costing some £SOO, and


the bridge stood for some time —that is, while the weather was fine
and the river fordable. There was this peculiarity about the
bridge which distinguished it from others in the district—the hand-
rails 0 were on hinges with the view of dropping them when the
waters rose, thus reducing the resistance. Very possibly this it
acted on might have preserved the structure: certainly the plan
was worth trying. But nobody was appointed to take charge of
the matter ; so when a flood came the rails remained fixed and the
bridge was wholly swept away. After some delay another bridge
was determined on; and as a low-level structure had already
failed, the new one was carried three feet higher than any pre-
viously-known flood. We believe that this cost some £2OOO and
was finished just two years ago. It was fearfully and wonderfu y
made. It had two straight wooden girders supporting the centre
span, these girders each consisting of a single beam ninety feet
long It was doubtful whether fair weather or foul would be most
fatal'to it: it was certain that it must ere long have come to pieces
from faults inherent in the plan itself. However the last flood
made a complete wreck of it, the ninety-feet span and one of the
approaches having been swept away, and other injury laving een
sustained by the portion that remains. #
Both the Baw Baw and Marsden’s bridges having gone, the
Wollondilly once more can be crossed only when fordable.
Let us see what has been wasted in this quarter. In the absence
of official documents the following figures are put forward as
approximations only; but should anyone undertake the task of
verifying them they probably will be found not very wide of the
truth.
Bridge at Marsden’s:
First structure
. T, 100
Approaches ..
Enlargement
Second bridge ™ g3OO
Bridge at Baw Baw:
First structure • • ‘ * g
Approaches
Second bridge IQOO
Cost of determining sites, surveying same, plans, specifi-
cations, and supervision, probably not less than 1000
Total.. .. £5306
And for this we have after all no bridge.


The same amount would have built an iron girder bridge simi-
lar to the railway viaducts, though somewhat lighter, carried ten or
fifteen feet higher than the bridge which has just been swept away.
We should then have had a permanent structure calculated to last
for generations.
Of course it may be said that the traffic over the Wollondilly is
not sufficient to justify so large an expenditure ; but the expendi-
ture has taken place already and we have nothing to show for
it. This is taken as a case in point; and there need be no hesita-
tion in saying that it is better to have one first-class durable
structure that will remain than half-a-dozen that the first high
flood will carry away.
Those who have given the subject their attention must ere this
have arrived at the conclusion that there can be no mean between
high-level bridges of the most substantial character and ordinary
causeways made perhaps with a little more judgment than has
sometimes been shown in their construction. Tliis'being so, and
the element of expense being borne in mind, it follows that in the
case of our main roads, the rivers that are subject to floods which
render them unfordable for days together should be bridged with
really —not nominally—high-level bridges ; and where the flood-
waters rapidly subside, or where the streams are not of great
depth, causeways will answer every purpose. In the case of our
minor roads, causeways will generally be found the more suitable,
though of course there are exceptions. The small rude bridges or
culverts with which these roads are dotted every half mile or so,
last but a short time even under favourable circumstances, and
when floods come are almost invariably destroyed. Ordinary cause-
ways would be more quickly made and more readily repaired,
would not be easily washed away, and would not be affected by dry-
rot or by any process of natural decay.
In the case of the main roads and a few others where there is
traffic sufficient to justify the erection of high-level bridges, it is to
be hoped that a different plan will be pursued to that which has
hitherto been followed. They should be built not only above, but
considerably above, the highest known floods. During the last
twenty years, floods have been witnessed far higher than were pre-
viously known. Public buildings and gentlemen’s and settlers
houses that have since been invaded by the waters were built with-
out any thought of floods ever suggesting itself. Who shall say
that the same may not happen again ? The Yass district has now


been visited and houses in the town itself destroyed by a flood far
higher than any witnessed since the whiteman settled there ; but
flood-marks are to be found which confirm the traditions of the
blacks that the waters have been still higher. Yet this was not
known —only for want of inquiry—when the Yass bridges—old and
J2OW —were designed. It is in vain to suppose that any structure,
however substantial, can resist the pressure of an immense body of
moving waters, accompanied too by trees, logs, and all sorts of
drift. The bridges to be really durable must therefore be consider-
ably higher than has hitherto been thought necessary.
But this is not all. We have built expensive bridges which
have not been carried away by floods, but which have been short-
lived notwithstanding. The Yass bridge, erected not many years
ago, from errors in its construction long since became dangerous
and at last had to be pulled down. The new and expensive
structure intended to take its place has while in course of con-
struction been injured to a most serious extent. The Queanbeyan
bridge has had to • undergo a thorough and costly repair, and yet
cannot be called a permanent structure. The bridge at Thorn’s
Crossing over the Mulwarree, though it still stands is found to
be so utterly useless in times of flood that a new one has been
determined on in its stead. The Yass and Queanbeyan bridges
cost thousands. The existing bridge at Thorn s w*as not very
expensive certainly; but the intended new one will be more
costly ; and from what can be learned, it is not likely to be either
very useful or very lasting.
It is not to be supposed that the Goulburn and neighbouring
districts have a monopoly of these misfortunes. Those who can-
not design bridges suitable for the Wollondilly, the Mulwarree, or
the Bungonia or Reedy Creeks are not likely to be successful else-
where. These cases have been selected only because they happen to
have occurred at the writer’s own door. Other country residents
could of course enumerate similar instances in their neiglibour-
hoods. . ,
In all the cases here mentioned bridges are not required at ail
except in times of flood; and in none could the structures that
were erected be used in times of flood.
The losses which take place from the destruction and decay of
bridges amount in the aggregate to something enormous. It
may be laid down as a principle that unless the. importance of
the traffic will justify the expenditure necessary for the construe*


tion of first-class high-level bridges, it will be better in most
cases to do without them altogether. In all parts of the country
one sees bridges erected at a cost of three or four hundred
pounds. In dry weather these are little more than ornaments,
since no work at all in most cases and in others only a compara-
tively inexpensive causeway would answer every purpose. In wet
seasons, when the bridges should give, in their usefulness, some
return for the outlay, they are either swept away or the approaches
are so damaged that access cannot be had to them. The innu-
merable culverts to be found on every road are either very soon
carried away or they rapidly decay and become useless. In reality
the erection of bridges of an unsubstantial character actually impedes
communication. If they are erected at the old crossing-places, the
fords are almost sure to be destroyed ; if erected somewhere else,
the road is diverted and the old fords are either fenced in, are un-
known to travellers, or become unapproachable. So when the
bridges fail, there are not the same means of crossing that existed
before their erection. On the other hand, causeways would be made
only at the natural crossing-places, and would continue known and
continue approachable.
If however we are still to have bridges over our minor streams,
there is no reason why improvements should not be made in the
principle on which they’ are constructed. A notable and important
one would be that represented in the plate at the commencement of
this letter.
Fig. A shows the present method in which the piles and the rest
of the woodwork face the stream. First the expense is incurred of
squaring the timber, thereby diminishing its substance ; and then
the woodwork is so placed as to offer the maximum of resistance to
the water with the minimum strength. The same timber placed as
shown in fig. B would offer much less obstruction to the flood while
its strength would be greatly increased. But in fig. C we have a
still further improvement. There is as much strength as in the
case of B, while there is a sharper cut-water, and only two sides of
the trees have to be adzed down instead of four.
One thing has hitherto been sadly neglected in the construction
of bridges; and that is seeing that the timber is properly seasoned.
Under our present system this is simply impossible. Three or four
months are allowed for the completion of a contract; and it is only
after a tender has been accepted that the timber is cut down in the
bush. Perhaps the only way in which this difficulty can be over-


come will be by the government having the timber cut on their
own account and stacked at a few central depots. Perhaps this
is work which the government should scarcely be expected to
undertake ; but as we have no large road-contractors who can
afford to cut timber in advance and stack it, it would appear to
be the only remedy for a state of things the evils of which are
considerable.
One reason why causeways, except on the main thoroughfares
of the colony, will answer every purpose is this. During con-
tinuous heavy rains the state of the minor roads becomes such
that travelling is altogether put a stop to. If the bridges are not
washed away, still people cannot get to them. . It was only last
month that a medical man was called a day’s journey into the
country. He duly arrived at his destination ; but the state of the
road was such that it was an entire week ere he reached the Wol-
londilly on his return; and then, though the bridge had been
carried away, the river had again become fordable.
The cost of a causeway is considerably less than that of a
bridge ; and it can be constructed in a tenth of the time.. In many
instances a few days’ labour of a man, horse, and cart is all that
would be found necessary. Here the cost would probably be about
the twentieth part of that of a bridge. Where there ,is con-
siderable traffic and where the river or creek is veiy rapid it wo
be wise to take more care and incur more expense, and perhaps
during fine weather to form a crossing regularly paved or of con-
crete. The cost would in such cases probably be about a sixth of
that of a bridge of the usual construction.
Causeways would be found more durable than any except first
class bridges. A case has already been mentioned where a bridge
costing £4OO was swept away by the first flood, while a causeway
since erected, costing £7O, has stood for several years. But sup-
posing this to have been carried away also —the loss would have
been but £7O against £4OO. Causeways too are easily repaired by
the unskilled labour of the neighbours ; and when destroyed the
country would not be put to the expense and delay involved m a
fresh survey of the site and in the preparation of expensive plans
and specifications.
Of course in choosing between a bridge and a causeway severa
considerations must be borne in mind. For instance, where the
banks of a creek are high and sound a bridge may be cheaper;
but even here it will sometimes be the greater economy in the end


to cut down approaches to a causeway. There are again cases
where streams which cross our main roads take their rise at no
great distance. The flood-water may here rise to a height that
would render it impossible to cross without a bridge ; but the
water will generally subside very rapidly. It is only after a stream
has run some considerable distance, receiving tributaries in its
course, that it is likely to remain in flood for days together. Hence
it does not necessarily follow because a traveller may now and then
see a stream unfordable that therefore a bridge is preferable—its
cost being considered—to a causeway. The bridge, unless very
costly, would not stand; and if very costly would save only a few
hours’ delay. This is a matter the importance of which, though
considerable, does not appear hitherto to have been generally
recognised.
Should it be determined to bring causeways into general use
it will be important that they should be constructed in accordance
with some well-considered plan. '
Perhaps it would be well to divide causeways into three classes—
those of the first class for streams where the current is rapid, the
rise of water great, and the traffic considerable; those of the
second class for fords where either from a more sluggish current,
a less rise of water, or smaller traffic, the expense of a first class
causeway would scarcely be justified ; and those of the third class
for creeks and water-courses where small culverts are now used.
Three kinds of plans and specifications should be prepared, one
for each class ; and one or other of these would be applicable for
every causeway throughout the country. The only variation would
be in the length and in the cuttings. Hence in the case of minor
roads for instance, it would only be necessary for the trustees to
write to the roads department stating that they require a second or
third-class causeway, and a plan and specification could be sent
them by return of post; and all they themselves would have to do
would be to determine what length the causeway should be.
Although three kinds of causeway are here proposed, the differ-
ence between them would be but in matters of detail, chiefly in
having those of the first and second class more durable than those
of the third. The following general description will therefore serve
for each class.
The more expensive causeways should be formed of concrete
or paving-stones accurately laid; the others of stones and gravel
protected by logs or piles. Guide-posts four feet high should


be erected at distances of about twenty feet apart; and between
these posts there should be smaller ones three feet high or
the purpose of supporting a hand-rail. The guide-posts should
be divided into four divisions each one foot, the first foot to be
coated with coal-tar, the second to be painted red, the third
green, and the fourth white, besides bearing the figures 1, 2 d,
and 4 respectively. These colours being uniform throughout the
colony, would soon be known; and even when the figures could
not be distinguished the colour seen above water would show
the depth When the posts were concealed altogether, the river
would not be fordable. All the posts both on the upper and lower
sides should be set with a sharp cut-water to the up-stream e
hand-rails should rest on the top of the short posts and be muled t
the down-stream side of the high posts, so that if drift collected
against them or if they were struck by logs or trees fought down
by flood they only would be swept away, the posts themsehes
maining uninjured. This however would seldom occur, as few of
our creeks or rivers bring much drift with them until they ia\e
risen more than three feet, after which everything would pass o\er
tllC There r is another plan for crossing'rivers at times when the
floods are so high that causeways or low-level bnd S es “f™"
approachable. A steel-wire rope, or a common hawser could be
permanently stretched from bank- to bank ; and it should be made
part of the duty of the road-overseer or trustees to keep it m g
repair and painted or tarred at proper intervals. By meansmf ttn
a man could easily draw himself across; and if a small punt,
made from a cask cut lengthwise or in some other inexpensive
manner were added it would be a great convenience.
Although trustees have been spoken of, this has been done on y
because road-trusts are actually in operation. There is however
little to be said in favour of their continuance. Complaints are
common as to the waste of resources consequent upon the> present
system of dealing with the minor roads. Sums of = wteh
though trifling in detail amount in the aggregate to something
pretty considerable, are year after year expended ; and yet, when
season like the present occurs, communication becomes impeded to
a serious extent over large tracts of country. Either Mg*l a
swept away, or the roads become impassable, or both. Individual
suffer and 7 the commerce of the country generally is interfered
with.


Various schemes have been devised from time to time to
remedy this state of things. The establishment of provincial
councils is considered by some persons as the proper organization
for dealing with the minor roads, which are stated to he legitimate
objects to be dealt with by local taxation and local agencies. The
time will no doubt come when a change of this nature may be
made; but at present there are very few parts of the country
where the population is sufficiently dense to give such organizations
a fair chance of success.
The practice of handing over specified sums of money to road
trusts, as at present carried out, is unquestionably open to many
objections. The whole thing is very loosely conducted. The
trustees are in effect irresponsible. There is little or no super-
vision exercised over them by the department to which they are
supposed to render an account; and if they are discreet enough to
avoid gross and palpable violations of the trust reposed in them,
they may do almost what they please with the funds at their dis-
posal. As a matter of fact there is no doubt that a deal of
jobbery goes on, and that money which should be devoted to the
improvement of the roads finds its way into other channels. A
colourable pretext is seldom wanting where there is any taint of
dishonesty; and it is not difficult to evade the tests devised to
prevent mal-practices. It is surprising how lax are the notions
which are entertained by many otherwise respectable persons m|
relation to the disposal of public money. Persons who would
scrupulously avoid any approach to dishonesty in private dealings
will yet wink at, if they do not participate in, transactions of the
most doubtful nature where public money is concerned.
This is one source of w T aste of money in the management of
the minor roads. Something might be devised to reduce this evil,
which those who have had opportunities of becoming acquainted
with the matter will agree is a serious one. There ought to be
officers accountable to the department whose duty it should be to
examine and report upon the works carried out by road-trusts
and if the expense of this supervision were defrayed by deductions
from the grants, the inhabitants themselves who are concerned m
having good roads would be gainers and not losers. The mere
fact that such supervision existed would tend to check improper
practices and help to remove the temptation which the irrespon-
sible handling of public money necessarily gives.


Not that road trustees are necessarily corrupt; but nevertheless
abuses arise from the present loose mode of conducting these
matters. And even where there is no suspicion of mal-practice,
there is another source of waste, and that is the want of know-
ledge on the part of trustees of the proper modes of carrying on the
works under their care. When we see frequent errors committed
by persons who have been trained to the business, it cannot be
surprising to find those who have had no special training
making still more frequent and more serious mistakes. Now
much might be done to remedy this state of things. The govern-
ment officials who have supervised the construction and mainte-
nence of roads for years past, ought to have accumulated a large
mass of practical experience and information. The result of this
might to some extent be made available to the various trusts.
There are numerous works, such as draining, clearing, the con-
struction of culverts and causeways, and the like, which are similar
in the mode of carrying out and even in the cost m most parts of
the country. Plans, measurements, specifications, and schedules
of prices for these works, are in the possession of the roads depart-
ment and materially assist the operations of their own officers.
But they are not furnished to the road trusts, though it is
obvious that information of this kind would be of great value.
If the furnishing of such information, entailed cost, the expense
| m igbt be deducted from the amount of the vote, with advantage
to the interests concerned.
The system of road trusts is confessedly a temporary ex-
pedient ; but as it will be some time before a permanent system
can be established in its place, it seems to be highly desirable that
gomething should be done to increase its efficiency and to remove
the abuses attending it. To establish a system of supervision on
the one hand, and to supply the trusts with all available informa-
tion to assist them on the other, appear to be steps likely to have
a good effect. ..... . ~
The sums of money which have been expended in the formation
and maintenance of roads in this colony are exceedingly great.
Mr. Robertson stated recently in the Assembly that. the amount
expended in this way was greater proportionately than in any other
country. But the want of navigable streams necessitates a large
expenditure upon roads; and if the money be laid out with pru-
dence, it would be difficult to point to any other object of a mate


rial nature which so thoroughly justifies expenditure. Without
good roads there can he no satisfactory progress made. Those
who are suffering now from the want of them will appreciate their
value. At this moment probably many settlers would give half
their crop for the means of conveying the remainder to market.
How important then it becomes that the resources at our command
for the improvement of the means of communication should be
managed with prudence and honesty.
The government may reasonably be expected to give stricter
attention to the way in which the funds for the construction and
maintenance of roads are expended. The demand upon the re-
sources available for these purposes must increase with the in-
crease of settlement; and in default of a general system of local
control, the responsibility of enforcing an efficient and economical
system remains with the central government.
Doubtless the vast number of miles over which our roads ex-
tend is one reason why hitherto they have been dealt with so
unsuccessfully. The people of the Riverine districts have com-
plained long and loudly that their local wants are neglected by a
central government situated hundreds of miles away. Whether
their complaints are well or ill-founded in other matters, they are
certainly unreasonable in respect to roads and bridges. ' While
they complain that the roads leading Sydney-wards are neglected
by the New South Wales authorities, the only highways they care
to use are those leading to the sister colony. For instance in the
case of Deniliquin and Albury, for one inhabitant who travels to
Sydney probably not less than fifty go to Melbourne. This being
so, they have little claims on us in the way of road-making—at
anv rate as far as the roads leading towards Sydney are concerned.
If there were a macadamized road, or a railway itself, from here to
Moama, still the people of that town would not use it. A little
* A recent traveller says of the great south road “Between Gunning and
Gundagai the road is rather rough ; and but little money appears to have been
spent upon it for years. After passing Gundagai however there is a marked im-
provement. All the creeks are bridged with substantial wooden bridges; and
the road is cleared to a good width, stumped, and metalled in the few places
where this is necessary. It is quite apparent that instead of the locality having
been neglected through its distance from the metropolis there has been a deal
more public money expended on its roads and bridges than in neighbourhoods
much nearer Sydney, such as Yass, Braidwood, Queanbeyan, and Manaro. The
complaints of neglect that have been made from the far country districts appear
to have had the full effect desired, if not rather more.”


consideration then must show that in road-making we ought to
disregard altogether any extent of mere population and consider
ml v the amount of traffic connected with each district. It is
therefore manifestly wrong to expend as much per mile ontheroa
between Tarcutta and Albury, for instance, where there is scarcely
, fflr* at all as we expend between Goulburn and Yass,
Swee" Batorrt anl Orangl or between Goulburn and Braid-
wood Yet we find that between Tarcutta and Albury the parlia-
mentary g ant is 1150 per mile j on part of the Brardwood road
TiffS per mile ! If matters were reversed there would be some-
ftSiiufus e 'to another matter, which while it certainly hinges
« contingency is nevertheless of the greatest importance to
the interests of the colony generally and which has a special bear-
iTpropo^Cre!entiy t been put forth in more than one direc-
-- A ; , favour of the re-adjustment of the boundary between New
<T n t Wes and Victoria, and in so doing to transfer the Bivenne
South Wdes and Viet, may be 6aid ttat poa .
siblv Victoria is satisfied with having the trade of these districts ;
L/that having this, she will scarcely care for more. But they
M Vet rid of the payment to New South Wales of some
leo )00 a year as border duties. This sum too it must be remem-
now acknowledged to bb too little ; and Victoria must ere
Kng expect to be called upon to pay considerably more. Then
however secure the Victorians may feel at the present time, there
“ay ng that New South Wales shall never adopt a tariff which
win render it necessary for a still higher sum to be paid on the one
wilirenaer «be shall not abolish indirect taxation altogether and
hand or that she shall not of EiTerina
and even compete with Melbourne traders in the border districts of
vltoT A?a from such considerations as these, there is abun-
Victoria. character of the Victorians and from the
comprtVe’smaless of their territory, to believe that they woidd
be willing enough to negotiate with this colony for a re-adjust-
that traetVfVountry lying between the borders of South
naturally belongs to Victoria
than to New South Wales. As the land revenue forms part of the
security for the public debt of the colony, if we were to part with


a considerable portion of onr territory it would be only fair bot
to the public creditor and to ourselves that a portion of the c e
should be transferred also ; and as but a small quantity of land
has been alienated in Eiverina the proportion of debt that Victoria
might be expected to relieve us from would be somewhat consider-
able. Bearing in mind the value of the land over and above our
debt and not forgetting the border duties, it will be plain that we
ought also to receive a large sum in addition which of course
could be taken in debentures. This might be applied towards the
extinction of the public debt; and the amount of revenue that
now goes to pay the interest thereon would then become available
for the improvement of the roads.
What this amount would be no data at present exist or e er-
mining; but it obviously must be very considerable The sum
now annually granted for road purposes need not be dimmishe ,
so that the new resources thus becoming available would be so
much in addition. And the happiness and prosperity of the coun-
try could in no other way be so materially increased as by devoting
the whole to the sole purpose of improving our means commu-
nication. No temporary convenience to be derived m this
that direction should therefore be allowed to interfere with what
we may almost call the. only legitimate application of these new
rGS Tf but consider what could be effected by an outlay of very
large sums of money on our roads, how much the actual welfare of
country residents both rich and poor would be increased, hol|
much toil, how much wear and tear, how much time would be
saved, how easy travelling would become, and how readily and
cheaply the metropolis could be supplied with meat and with gram
it will be admitted that.any large accession to our finances could
not be so well laid out in any other manner. It must be borne m
mind that if the above idea were carried out we should have sever
hundred miles less of roads to trouble ourselves with. Instea
expending £SO per mile on our mam roads we should be able to lay
out £SOO ; instead of £7 per mile on minor roads we could spare
£SO. There would be so much road-work going on that notwith
standing the many miles we should have parted with, we s iou r
quire even a larger number of superintendents and overseers; and m
engaging additional officers more care than hitherto should be ta ten
to secure really competent men. We should have a staff of c n
tractors and an army of labourers who would look to road-maki g


as the business of their lives. And bridges—wherever bridges
were really necessary—might then be so constructed that they
would not be carried away by floods and would not yield to
natural decay in the course of one or two seasons, as is the case
with our smaller culverts, nor even in ten or fifteen years as
appears to be the case with our more expensive structures.
It has already been mentioned that this is dependent upon a
contingency which may never be realized; but possibly what is
here advanced may be taken as affording additional reasons why a
re-adjustment of the boundary between the colonies is desirable.
As to repairing the recent ravages by floods, it .should be borne
in mind that the winter months, especially in such a winter as this,
are peculiarly unfavourable for carrying out road-works. To take
large contracts now, would be but to expend money fruitlessly and
most probably to expose the contractors themselves to heavy losses.
Only such repairs as are absolutely indispensable should therefore
be commenced till spring.
This delay will give time for maturing some new plan ; and if
this be entirely different to that which has hitherto been followed,
it probably will be vastly more successful.
Commending the scheme here elaborated to your favourable
consideration,
I beg to remain,
I * Your most obedient servant,
VOX E DESERTO.
Argyle, 6th June, 1870.
