

SULKS
GRIZZLEGRUMPS
THE
ALDEA WANE
FAIRY STORIES
No. 1




f Sf'/


TO NEVILLE


SULKS
GRIZZLEGRUMPS
ALDEA WANE
ILLUSTRATIONS BY
DOROTHY FRY
THE
ALDEA WANE
FAIRY STORIES
No. 1
Copyright


Copyright in Canada and the United States of America
Dramatic , Cinema and other rights reserved


FOREWORD.
Notwithstanding the fears of the Wezeer. her
father, that her matrimonial alliance would be
as brief as that of her predecessors during the
three long years of Shahayar’s cruel ordinance,
the king’s consort for a night with violent death
the following morning. Sharazad really took little
risk when she offered herself as a candidate for
the bridal office.
She well knew her own ability as a raconteur.
She knew the fascination of romance.
She knew the universality of the love for a
tale well told, that the desire for anecdote may
be gratified but is never satisfied, that listening
to one story creates a need for more—the neces-
sity grows with the supply, and she saw clearly
that unless her royal spouse proved to be entirely
abnormal the hearing of the first of the legends
in her repertoire would leave him eager for
another, and that Shahayar’s curiosity once
aroused b} r a narrative begun, he would never
silence the tongue that alone could tell the sequel.
For ages and ages before the cultured voice
of Sharazad charmed away her husband’s mono-
mania and brought relief to the maidens of Persia,
myth and fable have ever delighted the human
mind, and down through the centuries from that
time to this, while its form and colour mav
somewhat change with the period in which it is


conceived, good fiction has never lost its charm.
What happened during a thousand and one nights
in that eastern country under the old civilization
happens here and to-day, one book creates the
need for another and a thousand for a thousand
more, hence the series of stories of which this is
a foreword.
These stories are written for children, and
the super-human creations of the imagination,
seldom absent in ancient fiction, are freely used
to relieve difficult situations, produce or disen-
tangle weird complications, or convey to the
juvenile thought some important truth; for while
the grown-ups of this age are far too learned
and materialistic to tolerate the introduction of
the magical in literature written for their enter-
tainment, the simpler mentality of the child re-
vels in enchanted ring, carpet and lamp, in elf
and fairy, giant and genie.
Sharazad's pleasing gift of story telling
is shared by the author of “Australian Fairy
Stories/’ Aldea Wane. Never is she seen to
greater advantage than when, surrounded by a
dozen or score of children, she weaves some
charming: anecdote for their entertainment.
Never are children happier than when listening
to her tales.
Aldea Wane is an Australian for three
generations back, is rich in experience with
children, is familiar with the life of the city
and “way back,” and knows and loves her


homeland of sunshine, wattle and blue haze.
She has been persuaded by her friends to
write some of her narratives and fables to
the end that, should her skill as a scribe prove
equal to her ability as a raconteur, as we
believe it will, these tales that have so delight-
ed the few who have had the good fortune to
listen to their recital, may be equally enjoyed
by the many who will now have the opportun-
ity to read them
The stories are illustrated by Dorothy Fry
and no artist ever perceived the quaint whim-
sicalities of childhood more clearly, or depicted
them more charmingly.
JAMES PEDDLE
Sydney, October. 1917.




SULKS GRIZZLEGRUMPS.
Once upon a time near a country town in sunny
New South Wales, there lived a little girl named
Freldia. Now Freldia. I am sorry to say, was
not a very good little girl, nor was she kind to
her younger sister or the playmates who came
to join them in delightful games of Ladies, Shop,
or Hide-and-Seek.
Often Freldia's mother would take her wee
girlie in her arms and explain how a wicked
temper would soon destroy all that was beauti-
ful about her. and how selfishness and unkindness
would surely bring their own bitter punishment
sooner or later. But all to no purpose, Freldia
pouted and sulked continuously, and often
abandoned herself to outbursts of passion that
were even worse.
One day two children from Sydney came to
visit Freldia’s home. For some time the little
ones were very happy together, telling each other
about their different toys and pets, until Wilga,
Freldia’s sister, suggested a game of soldiers.
Freldia immediately wanted to play something
else, and when the little friends declared that
they preferred soldiers, instead of assenting
gracefully and so making things pleasant for her
guests, she became ill-humoured and sullen;
finally, slapping her sister spitefully across the
face for first proposing the game, she turned her


back upon the other children and commenced to
walk towards the house.
At that moment mother arrived upon the
scene, and after soothing Wilga and setting the
game to rights, she led Freldia right away to a
large paddock, telling her to stay there for the
rest of the playtime, and enjoy alone, if she could,
her own disagreeable company, where she
would be unable to disturb others by her bad
temper.
Freldia stamped her foot and cried: —“I don't
care, I won't be good, nobody loves me, every-
one is horrid.” She threw herself upon the
grass screaming and kicking, and at last, becom-
ing quite exhausted, fell fast asleep where she
lay.
When she had slept for not more than a few
moments, she was awakened by the sounds of
heavy tramping and ominous growls.
Sitting up she rubbed her eyes, looked about
her. and what do you think she saw?
Squatting upon the ground, with his legs
crossed, sat a hideous old man. His hair was
straight and coarse: his eyes, instead of being
bright like stars, as all eyes are meant to be.
more nearly resembled two pieces of dull glass;
his nose —Freldia thought she had never seen
anything like it before, was flat and wide: but
his mouth was really the worst of all, his teeth
were crooked, and his lips so thick and pouting
that she had only to look once to know he had
never smiled in all his life.


Freldia shuddered in sheer disgust at such
ugliness.
“Who are you?” she asked in a frightened
voice.
“I’m your bad temper,” answered the little
man, “and my name is Sulks Grizzlegrumps.
“What! My bad temper?” exclaimed Freldia
more astonished than ever.
“Yes,” replied Sulks Grizzlegrumps. “Every-
body’s bad temper.”
“My,” said Freldia. standing up and peering
into his face, “how ugly you are."
“Yes,” agreed Sulks Grizzlegrumps, “ and you
are growing just like me.”
“Like you!” exclaimed Freldia. never! I wont
believe it.”
“Very well,” growled the old man, standing
up and showing a pair of crooked legs, “come
to this pool of water and I will show you your
face.”
Freldia glanced fearfully around intending to
make a run for the house, but to her surprise she
discovered that the whole place had been trans-
formed from the familiar paddock where she
had fallen asleep, to wild bush and scrub land
which was entirely strange, and home, that sure
refuge whenever troubles appear, was nowhere
in sight.
“Come along." demanded Sulks Grizzlegrumps
impatiently.




“Please I don't want to,” she pleaded in a
choking voice.
"I want you to anyhow.” he replied sharply,
and without further ceremony he caught her
roughly by the arm and almost dragged her to
the edge of the water.
. This again seemed strange, for it was not the
pond she saw everyday, mudstained and dirty
fr6m the tramping cattle, but a pool as clear as
crystal, like a silvered mirror lying on soft green
velvet.
For a moment surprise and interest made her
forget her fear, but peering in. to her horror, she
beheld a face so like Sulks Grizzlegrump’s that
she began to cry piteously. "Oh dear! Oh
dear' How dreadful I look!”
Sulks appeared to be well satisfied, for he
growled quite cheerfully.
“What shall I do. what shall I do?” she ques-
tioned. endeavouring to still her sobs.
"Shut up.” rudely suggested Sulks Grizzle-
grumps.
“Your very ill-mannered.” she replied almost
angrily.
“Who cares for you. anyhow?” he returned.
Freldia hung her head: there was certainly
something very familiar about these expressions,
if everything else appeared strange; where and
how she had heard them before she did not wish
to remember just then.
Come, and I will show you some of my


children,” suggested her companion, “they are
splendid types; the most quarrelsome, the most
spiteful, the most ill-tempered children in the
whole world; and they grow worse and worse
every day.”
“Oh. I don’t want to. thank you,” said Freldia,
feeling that she had had quite enough already,
“But I want you to,” he snapped.
This was the second time old Sulks had made
use of the expression “But I want you to.
He appeared to think of no one but himself, and
to do nothing except gratify his own desires
whether it pleased others or not. Alas! The
more she got to know her unwelcome companion
the more certain she became of having met some-
one very like him before.
“Don’t keep me waiting all day,” he called out
so suddenly that she jumped to her feet and
began to follow him.
As they walked along, everything in the path
seemed to trip him up, everything near them
to irritate him. For her part Freldia could
see nothing but a few harmless twigs touching
him ever so lightly, and some gravel and small
pebbles which, but for his clumsiness, he must
have past unnoticed.
“Fools of things,” he cried, “they’re always in
the way.” “Drat these trees, 1 wish they were
all dead.” “Now there’s a beastly stone in the
track.” “Poo —ff bother the sun, it’s scorching
me to death.”


Freldia fancied —of course it was only fancy
—that the very trees laughed at such utter
nonsense.
As her companion hurried her along the rugged
track the whole scene changed. The sun slowly
passed behind a dense cloud bank and its warm,
bright rays vanished. A drizzling mist
commenced to fall. Instead of grass and shrubs
and wild flowers, the ground became barren and
bare except for a lot of rough weather-worn
stones. Penetrating deeper and deeper into this
gloomy uninteresting country, Freldia began
to hear a distant rumbling noise that at first
seemed like the thunder of a summer evening a
long, long way oft; becoming more and more
distinct as the two drew nearer, it at length
proved to be a rabble of voices brawling and
shouting in one continuous clatter of quarrelling
sounds.
As the mist lifted a little Freldia could dimly
distinguish faces. And such faces. Never
could she have believed, without seeing them
that children could grow so ugly. And the roar
and din of it. They all seemed to be talking
- O
together, each one trying to make their own voice
heard above the rest. “Shut up!” “I wont!”
"You Shant!” “I don’t want to!” “Bother you!”
were among the words shrieked in piercing
voices, mixed with cries of pain and anger, as
the children slapped and kicked and bit each
other over their unhappy games.


Freldia well remembered using all these ex-
pressions herself; but somehow, when others
repeated them, they sounded very different, and
she thought with a blush of shame how she must
have appeared. Just as these children had
taken Sulks Grizzlegrumps for their pattern
she had taken him for hers, and copied his dis-
agreeable ways only too well.
After a little while she attempted to join in
the children’s games, but while they played with
her one minute they groveled at her and found
fault the next, and when she displeased them
they slapped her. For the first time in her life
she was too disgusted to slap back.
Several times she tried to start a game herself
but some of the party always got angry, and
each attempt ended in a general quarrel.
Food was brought to them later, fresh, whole-
some and appetising, but there was so much fault-
finding, grumbling, and wishing for something
else, that every bite she took seemed to stay m
Freldia’s throat and almost choke her. She
could not imagine anything worse than having
to listen to. and witness, such scenes as these.
“Let me go! Oh let me go!” she cried, as she
threw her food aside and ran as hard as she
could.
Hearing angry sounds, she expected every
moment to be clutched from behind, but no such
thing occurred; and at last. hot. tired and trem-
bling in every limb, she reached the bush; there


sinking wearily to the ground, she lay crying
softly to herself.
“Oh to be good! Oh to get rid of this horrid
Sulks Grizzlegrumps.” she moaned.
“Why are you crying. Freldia?” inquired the
sweetest voice she had ever heard.
Looking up she saw a tiny little creature, the
prettiest you could possibly imagine, climbing out
of a large Christmas bell. Such shining hair she
had, such sparkling eyes, and lips of cherry red
curved with the sweetest of smiles.
“Who are you?” questioned Freldia, for the
second time that day.
“I am peoples’ good temper,” said the fairy, for
that is what the little creature was, “and my
>name is Felicity.’ 2
“What a lovely name,” said Freldia. “and how
beautiful you are; oh how I wish I could be like
vou.”
“So you can.” replied the fairy cheerfully.
“You are only the child of Sulks Grizzlegrumps
because you choose to be, and if, instead, you
desire to learn the way to true happiness, you
will soon lose all likeness to him, and reflect
mine instead.”
“Please do show me the way,” pleaded Freldia.
“I never wish to see Sulks Grizzlegrumps, or to
hear of him again.”
“Very well.” said the fairy, “but remember
this, while the hardest lesson taught by Sulks


111 f
\S o* i C r yLj F -
J


Grizzlegrumps can be learnt in an hour, if you
travel along the road that leads to my world
each one takes a lifetime.”
Freldia felt somewhat dismayed at this state-
ment, but smiling bravely, and looking straight
into the eyes of the lovely creature before her,
she replied. “Well then. I had better start at
once.”
“There,” said Felicity, “you have started one
of the lessons already, and if you care to come
with me I will show you how to begin some
more.”
Freldia was only too glad to follow wherever
the sweet little fairy led. and skipping along by
her side, gathering flowers here and there, she
found herself singing joyously as they went.
Suddenly she paused, exclaiming, “Look
Felicity, what I have found, a bright sixpence
just here near the path, whatever shall I buy with
it ?”
“Buy with it,” repeated Felicity, “you can,not
buy anything with it.”
“Why not?” asked Freldia.
“Because it does not belong to you,” said her
companion.
"But if I do not know who dropped it. and it
is lying on the ground, why nobody owns it.”'
said Freldia.
“There is ONE who owns everything,” replied
Felicity, “and you must return it to him.”
Freldia began to understand a little of the


fairy’s meaning, but still somewhat puzzled to
know in what way to act, she asked, “But how
-can I do that?”
“I know a way,” said Felicity, “it is through
the sick, the poor, the imprisoned; hut see,
-across the road is a box, you may post it there
and save a journey.”
Crossing over, she saw a small chest attached
to a building, with an opening that seemed to
Invite coins of all kinds; over the opening
these words were written —“Foundling Home.”
Reading the inscription Freldia did not need
any further suggestions from her little com-
panion. hut, standing on tip-toe to reach the slot
she dropped the bright sixpence cheerfully in.
Presently they came to a large garden where
hundreds of children were playing together,
while merry songs in which they all joined kept
time with their play. As she and Felicity entered
the gate several of the little ones ran towards
them, and greeting Freldia. as though she was
a friend they had known for a long long time,
they drew her into their happy circle.
Game after game was played, each new one
being, Freldia thought, more enjoyable than any
of the others, until at length she suddenly remem-
bered that she was to have started some lessons,
and wondered whether her fairy friend, whom
she had lost sight of some time before, had for-
gotten them. At last she ventured to ask about


these from a little bright-eyed girlie who had
been her partner.
‘‘Lessons in the way to true happiness,” said
her new friend, ‘‘why of course we learu these
lessons, lots of them just playing. You see, in
all games you must play fair, whether the others
see you or not; you must be careful only to take
your own turn; you must never lose your temper.
Unless you play in this way you cannot really
win anything, and you can never make others
happy or be happy yourself.”
At that moment the call was given for a race
in which Freidia had been chosen to compete,
so further talk about the fairy’s lessons had to
be deferred. The signal was given to start, and
away the girls went; faster, faster, and faster,
thgy all flew until it seemed to Freidia as though
the very trees were rushing in the opposite
direction; after a time she became very tired,
but still she ran, stumbling on as best she could,
till at last her legs, refusing to move any more,
she stumbled on to the grass and fell fast asleep.
“Freidia. Freidia,” called a voice.
“1 can’t help it,” muttered Freidia, “1 can’t
run any more I am so sleepy.”
“Freidia, Freidia.” The voice sounded nearer,
and—surely—it was mother’s. Hastily she
sprang to her feet, and rubbing the sleep from
her eyes, found that she was back in their own
paddock, just where she had thrown herself down
after her unhappy experience of the morning.


o
before she had begun to learn those lessons from
the good fairy.
“Here I am mother.” she cried, running to
meet her, and as she nestled into a pair of loving
arms she whispered—“ Mother dear, I am going
to be good : I have started quite a lot of things
to-day.” Her mother just pressed her closely
as though she understood.
That night when the two wee girlies were
being tucked up in their little beds Freldia asked.
“M ho do you think I am like to-night mother?”
“Not Sulks Grizzlegrumps,” replied the mother,
smiling, from which it would seem that some
mothers, at least, have heard of that strange and
disagreeable person.
W. C. Penfold & Co. Ltd., Printers, Sydney.


*
>
\
7


-




