

SUMMARY
OF
THE EVIDENCE
IN THE
Gunner PERRY Inquiry
BY
MR. J. WOOLF
COUNSEL FOR
Dr. MALONEY, M.P.
AS SUPPLIED TO
MR. PHILIP COHEN, P.M.
M ELBOURNE:
FRASER & JENKINSON, Printers, &c.
343-5 Queen Street.




COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
Prime Minister,
Melbourne, 14th September. 1915.
15/4026/2 T
Dear Dr. Maloney,
I desire to acknowledge the receipt of your letter, of yesterday’s
date, relative to the case of Gunner W. W. Perry, and to inform you
that your inquiry therein is receiving attention.
The Premier of Victoria has been asked to nominate a Police
Magistrate to investigate the charges made by you in the House of
Representatives on the 9th instant in connection with this case.
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) ANDREW FISHER.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
15/9/15.
The Hon. Andrew Fisher,
The Prime Minister of Australia,
Melbourne.
Dear Mr. Fisher,
Yours of the 14th received. As a member of the Opposition had
a High Court Judge to inquire into his statements. I am impelled to
demand the same treatment, and now request that a High Court
Judge or a Supreme Court Judge should lie appointed.
In regard to the proposed inquiry into Gunner Perry’s treatment,
would you be so good as to have it announced in the Press, under
your authority, that any member of the Forces who may give
evidence at this inquiry will be fully protected from victimisation by
any army or other official for any statement or evidence that he may
give.
I have a number of soldiers that will be only too glad to give
evidence as to Dr. Mead’s treatment, but they are afraid that the
officers will make things uncomfortable for them if they speak.
Yours fraternally,
(Signed) W. MALONEY.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
W- Prime Minister.
15/4026/6 Melbourne, 21st September. 1915.
Dear Dr. Maloney,
With reference to your letter of the 13th instant. I desire to
inform you that the object of the inquiry is to investigate the charges
made by you relative to the treatment of Gunner Perry, and counsel
will lie provided for you if you so desire. In the circumstances, how-
ever, it is not proposed to provide counsel for Gunner Perry.
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) ANDREW FISHER.




Summary of the Evidence.
Sir,
At the request of Dr. Maloney, I have the honor to remind
you of your question to Dr. Mackeddie yesterday, as to how
you were to determine between the six Doctors on one side
who affirm, and six Doctors on the other side who deny, that
Perry was (or was not) a malingerer or suffering from a
genuine disease.
In view of this, I would submit that the answer is simple.
It is admittedly a matter of expert evidence by Specialists.
Various medical men have been called—General Practitioners,
Physicians, Surgeons, Neurologists and Mental Disease
Experts.
It is a matter for a Specialist to determine. A Specialist
alone can deal with the matter.
The General Practitioner is in the position of a legal Prac-
titioner having a Police Court Practice, who is asked to give
his opinion on a highly complex question of International Law.
He gives an opinion which claims to be based on common
sense. Only the opinion of a King’s Counsel or a Specialist in
International Law would be conclusive
The General Practitioner has not acquired the technical
or specific expert knowledge derived from being an expert
Specialist. It is a question of fact whether Traumatic Neuras-
thenia belongs to the realm or sphere of surgery or medicine.
The fact of the man having an injury is the basis. Injury
requires surgical interference. In Lumbar Puncture a Surgical
Expert would previously be required to determine what are the
Objective Symptoms (as well as the Subjective Symptoms) of
Spinal injury.
A Physician might be called upon to deal with Func-
tional Disturbances, such as Hysteria.
The Neurologist alone is capable of advising on the cause
of nerve disturbances. He would know the constitution of the
nerve cell —how the nerve cell is injured, how and why it is
healthy; how it is diseased, and from what cause.
Mental Disease is another fact for the Specialist in Mental
Diseases. The Mental Disease Expert Psychiatrist is called
to see and testify as to the cause which led to insanity, and
the specific cause, including possible epilepsy, as well as
injuries to the brain and spinal cord


The issue here. I submit with confidence, is extremely
simple. The whole of the Medical men, from the time that
Perry joined the Camp at Broadmeadows until he was dis-
charged from the Base Hospital, were NOT Specialists—they
WERE GENERAL PRACTITIONERS, who approached
the case from a purely medical point of view. Had they been
Specialists, they would have looked for something more than
they did —they would have looked for the cause.
Medical History.
It is a condition precedent in ever}'- case for the medical
history of the patient to be obtained. The medical history
of Perry was totally unknown to anyone until this Inquiry
was instituted.
Had his medical history been known, it would have dis-
closed the following:—
1. That prior to the marriage his head was all bound up;
he was then suffering from injury to his head.
2. That he has now had an injury to the frontal lobe; the
extent of this injury is not to-day defined.
3. It is undoubted he was suffering from injury when be
was for three weeks in the Hospital at Williams-
town. His Medical Record speaks for itself. He
was crushed by 10 bags of wheat in the sling, and
his back was admittedly hurt, and he had some
ribs broken. That this would produce a severe shock
is undoubted. The degree to which his brain cells
were injured is a matter that cannot be definitely
determined. The probability is that the cells were
severely injured.
4. It is clear that when in Echuca, in 1909, his conduct
was inconsistent with that of a sane man. The
warder who slightly moved his bed gave evidence
that, without the slightest provocation beyond this
fact, Perry violently kicked him in the mouth.
A fact of some importance is that, after the
Court finally adjourned on Wednesday, I examined
the Police Record from Echuca, and this shows
that Perry had at the same time signed his name
with a cross and also wrote his name legibly. This
should be put in evidence. This is an act of no
reasoning individual.
5. Mr. D’Ombrain (of the Colonial Mutual Insurance
Company) gave evidence that Perry, in 1911, had
some fingers cut off, and that after a claim was
admitted, without any reason for simulation, Perry
had two fits, which required him to be taken to the
Melbourne Hospital. The cause of these fits Perry


stated as shock, caused by his seeing - a probable
accident. The Hospital Records establish Perry’s
different and untrue story of physical injury.
6. A fact proved is that Perry went on board the “ Shrop-
shire ” in 1914. He was, a week previously y
thrown off a galloping horse on to his back. He
was then reported ill, and from that day to this he
has never been permitted to fulfil the ordinary
duties of Military Service.
7. Within a fortnight afterwards, according to Colonel
Johnson’s statement, eye-witnesses said that he
(Perry) had a shock through a fall received while
trying to escape a kick from a horse.
Immediately after this occurrence Perry is then
examined by a succession of Doctors (all of whom
are highly suspicious (it is inferred) ; but although
they are suspicious) they all sign definite Certifi-
cates. These Definite Certificates were based upon
diagnosis.
| The definite conclusion was that on board the
“ Shropshire ” (confirmed after a month by the
same medical man, Dr. Whitford), he (Perry)
WAS SUFFERING FROM SPINAL NEURAS-
THENIA. He records the reasons which were the
grounds for his conclusion.
He (Dr. Whitford) admittedly had to use the
catheter on two occasions, and also performed the
operation of Lumbar Puncture.
Medical facts which justify his conclusion are based
upon :
(a) Objective Symptoms which cannot be simulated by
the patient.
(b) Subjective Symptoms which the patient could invent.
In other words, which depend upon what the
patient states.
The patient could tell lies as to his condition, but what is
clear is that NO PATIENT IS AWARE OF ALL THE
OBJECTIVE AND SUBJECTIVE SYMPTOMS which are
present in the case of Spinal Neurasthenia. So that while a
man may tell a lie that he is suffering from headache, he does
not know the kind of headache symptomatic of Spinal Neuras-
thenia.
In Spinal Neurasthenia he would still have to know the
reason for Paralysis of the Sphincters of the Bladder causing
retention. A fortiori, he would have to KNOW THE
WHOLE OF THE SYMPTOMS WHICH ARE KNOWN


ONLY TO THE SURGICAL EXPERT OF GREAT
EXPERIENCE, IN THE CASE OF SPINAL NEURAS-
THENIA.
Re Malingering—-Difficulty of.
The criticism of Sir John Collie, page 43 in his book on
Malingering, applies strongly, as showing it is ludicrous to
expect the ordinary layman, who tries to malinger, to be able
to trick the expert physician, with his knowledge of Anatomy
and Physiology.
This is also confirmed by the following passages from
MODERN CLINICAL MEDICINE—DISEASES OF THE
NERVOUS SYSTEM.
Edited by Archibald Church, M.D.
New York and London: D. Appleton and Co.
Page 1090-1091.
Hysteria.
“ It is necessary to point out that simulation of the
entire pathologic picture can never be demonstrated from
the proof of simulation of a few symptoms.
“ Exaggeration and aggravation are so common in
Hysteria that we must always reckon upon a combina-
tion of actual and simulated symptoms, or with an
exaggeration of actual symptom.
“ We may only speak of complete malingering when
we are able to demonstrate that each separate symptom
is simulated. Sometimes the exaggeration itself has a
pathologic character.”
The matter, therefore, comes back to this: that had the
medical history been known to Dr. Whitford, there would
have been no ground for suspicion, as there were transparent
reasons set out in the medical history that would have shown
that the Objective and Subjective signs were strictly in
accordance with nature, and had natural causes.
In other words, because Subjective symptoms, which are
capable of being imagined or fabricated, were present, as well
as Objective symptoms, this led to suspicion, simply because
Perry had apparently exaggerated or lied about the immediate
cause of the accident on board the “ Shropshire.”
In other words, the fact that Perry was probably a liar
caused suspicion, and the ignorance of his history seemed to
confirm this doubt. But this doubt in fact, after having arisen,
was dispelled in the mind of Dr. Whitford, who, ' after a
month’s suspicion, again reported formally and solemnly, in
his Certificate, the fact that the diagnosis was Spinal Nenras


thenia, and the Formal Certificate confirmed this diagnosis.
There was nothing provisional about this, and the fact is that
it was confirmed by three other medical men at Mena Hos-
pital.
If any suspicion had arisen, they formally concerned
this Certificate, and this is the strongest proof that they
had satisfied themselves of the reality of the disease.
This is confirmed by their definite statement that the dis-
ability would last for 13 months.
It would be quite opposed to common sense to assume
that, after the suspicion had been definitely raised in the
minds of four medical men whether a man was a malingerer
or not, they would formally testify that he was suffering from
Spinal Neurasthenia, and that this disease would last for about
13 months. It would prove that they were writing down
themselves as having been tricked by Perry, and that
they were incompetent if it turned out subsequently that he
was a malingerer.
This was much less to happen, as their attention
had been strictly awakened to the probability that the man
had tricked them, and was a malingerer.
Colonel Johnson’s letter (which was written by a layman)
may be of some importance if it states that while Perry
genuinely believed he was ill and could not walk, the Doctors
on board the “ Shropshire ” had an insufficient cause, and they
therefore could not understand how the apparently slight fall
would have produced such a serious result; but this merely
meant they were ignorant of his medical history. Had they
known this, their suspicion could have been clearly negatived;
but what cannot be understood is that their suspicion having
been definitely roused, Dr. Whitford and others, after a month,
should formally certify that the man was suffering from
Spinal Neurasthenia. Therefore these medical facts were
carefully recorded for all time. But what was not recorded
was the prior medical history.
Had the prior medical facts been added to the report,
there could not have been the slightest doubt as to the Certi-
ficates (that Perry was then suffering from Spinal Neuras-
thenia) being amply justified.
The next person who had suspicion was Dr. Meade. Now
Dr. Meade’s qualifications must be strictly ascertained. It
is obvious that experience must be the test for ascertaining
the qualifications of any medical man.
Admittedly, Dr. Meade’s theoretical knowledge had been
limited, by the evidence of his career while working for his
living in a chemist shop. He started in the morning with
lectures at the University at 9 o’clock, working till one at


lectures, or occasionally went to the Hospital. He spent the
rest of the day until 10 o’clock at night at his chemist shop.
Having to be at the University at 9 o’clock, and living
in a suburb, it will easily be seen he would have little oppor-
tunity for acquiring theoretical knowledge. In contrast with
this is the ordinary medical student, who has absolute free-
dom the whole of his time.
Dr. Meade produced a book which throws a light upon
his actual theoretical experience. While admittedly written
by an expert, it was designedly written to help students to
prepare for examinations. It was marked in red ink through-
out, evidently with the view of salient facts being memorised.
In other words, it is used for cramming purposes in preparing
for an examination. Similar technical books have been pub-
lished. For instance, a handbook of a few pages on the
Elements of the Law of Contact has been published, but it
does not claim to be a substitute for Addison’s Law of
Contracts, 1527 pages.
If a K.C. had to advise on a complicated question on the
Law of Contract, he would not refer to a Primer, but would
refer to the most advanced text-books, written by experts,
which would contain the whole of the case law on the subject.
A Law Student recently admitted (who had memorised
a Primer for examination purposes) would not be regarded
as an expert equal to the K.C. on that account.
That Dr. Meade, therefore, used this book as a cram
indicated (if he relied on it) that he had not exact theoretical
knowledge on the specialised subject of Spinal Neurasthenia.
His private practice also was limited to three weeks. He had
never seen a case of Spinal Neurasthenia. It was his inex-
perience which caused him to blunder so badly in this case, I
submit.
For instance, Dr. Wilkinson stated, after having 30 years’
experience, that he could not determine to his own satisfaction
what was the real matter with Perry. There was evidence of
Hysteria, but he could not determine how far this was mixed
up with exaggeration. Dr. Meade undoubtedly accepted
Perry’s statement that he was totally paralysed in the lower
limbs. He looked for total paralysis, and nothing less is
shown in his laboured report after the Court Martial.
Had Dr. Meade found out and known what is known
to-day about Perry’s medical history, he would never have
treated him as suffering from total paralysis, but would have
regarded the case from an absolutely different point of view.
The question, therefore, must come back to this: Why
was it that Perry was genuinely certified to be suffering from


Spinal Neurasthenia, although his medical history was not
fully known?
With the medical history fully known, is there the
slightest doubt that the medical men, who certified that
Perry was genuinely suffering from Spinal Neurasthenia,
would not to-day be completely satisfied that they had certified
correctly.
The issue now resolves itself into this: The only men
who have had the slightest doubt, or declared their doubts,
as to Perry’s condition, have been, on the one hand, Dr. Meade,
Dr. Boyd and Dr. Cuscaden. The objection to their con-
clusions is that they were General Practitioners, and not
Specialists in any sense of the term. Those who certify
positively are Specialists. For instance, Dr. O’Hara and Dr.
Stirling speak, after very many years’ experience, of Trau-
matic Spinal Neurasthenia. They know both the Objective
and the Subjective signs.
It is a case primarily for the Surgeon rather than the
Physician, although the Neurologist may at a later stage come
in to deal with evidence of nervous degradation subsequent
to an injury; but the Surgeon is called in in the first instance,
and the Neurologist later.
It is clear that the Neurologist, as a Specialist, should
be able to certify as to Hysteria; but, without the knowledge
of the causation of Spinal Neurasthenia, he may not be able
to give a complete diagnosis.
TRAUMATIC NEURASTHENIA is fully described in
“ DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM RESULTING
FROM ACCIDENTS AND INJURY,” by B. BAILEY;
pages 308-435.
TRAUMATIC HYSTERIA is fully described in pages
436-502. It is quite clear that there is also insanity from
“ PSYCHIC SHOCK ” (see pages 503-510).
These all illustrate the fact that the degree of the shock
is an unknown factor. A succession of shocks would
naturally cause severe injury to the Nervous system.
The Nervous System is based upon the Nerves. The
Nerves are based upon the individual Nerve Cell. The brain
consists of 24 distinct areas on the surface of each hemisphere
(see “ MENTAL SYMPTOMS of Brain Disease,” by BERN-
HARD HOLLANDER, M.D., page 14).
It is only during the last few years that the nature and
the structure of the cortex of the brain has been studied, and
the localisation of functions has been specifically admitted.
The cortex contains a multiplicity of organs of differen-
tiated structural complexus, so that the work performed by the
whole Brain is now split up and localised.


It is quite clear that the centres of the higher intellectual
portions are centred in the frontal lobes. We also find that,
if these are destroyed by injury or disease, the processes of
judgment and reason are diminished; there is an inability to
fix the attention to follow a continuous line of thought or to
conduct intellectual processes, ULTIMATELY ENDING IN
COMPLETE DEMENTIA. (See “ Mental Symptoms of
Brain Disease,” page 23-24.)
This results from lesions to the frontal lobes, and it
does not occur in the lesions of the other part of the brain.
Dr. Jones now testifies that he is doubtful whether Perry
IS OR IS NOT SUFFERING FROM DEMENTIA. This
shows that this is a matter for the Mental Experts, and the
evidence of a General Practitioner is not of the slightest value.
The Evidence of Laymen.
A number of witnesses were called to prove that Perry
was a confirmed liar, and was morally degraded and guilty
of conduct which showed moral degradation.
Witnesses were called to say he was not walking, while
on other occasions he was walking very well. Evidence was
given that the man was regarded as having a “ rat,” and he
was “ extremely eccentric.”
The issue, therefore, comes to this: What does this
evidence of physical, mental and moral degradation point to?
Does it point to a man who is merely a common-place liar,
acting from some immoral motive? or does it not point to the
fact that HE COULD NOT HELP BEING A LIAR, IN
CONSEQUENCE OF HAVING MENTAL DISEASE?
The cause of his lying should be looked into. The fact
of his lying being admitted, what is the cause?
The evidence of the lay-witnesses, and also the evidence
of the General Practitioners, are on the same basis. They are
only valuable as being a record of facts, if correctly observed,
and their grounds of suspicion are based upon the layman’s
conclusion as to what they regard as suspicious, with entire
ignorance of the scientific cause, which leads to the result.
For instance, a layman hearing a lunatic outside a Lunatic
Asylum, telling lies, only regards him as being a common-
place liar. Place him in the Asylum, where his surroundings
show him to be a lunatic, the same observer states, “ I ignore
his statements; he is only a lunatic.”
The Doctors, unless they are Specialists, are in the same
position as the layman, but have more intelligence. The facts
of mental diseases being present are clear.
From the medical history this man probably at one time
was an Epileptic. The fact of this man having sent an anony


mous letter to himself without any reason fits in exactly with
the definition of what happens in “ Moral insanity.”
Perry also suffered from “ PARA SIGMATISM,”
referred to in text-book “ PSYCHIATRY ” (Mendel &
Krauss, page 80).
Misuse of the Letter “ S,”
This is a rare but recognised phenomenon in Mental
Disease. It merely shows mental degeneration following cell
degradation, causing functional interference with the organ
of speech, and is therefore quite natural.
This unusual symptom in Mental Disease is not known
to the General Practitioner, and, although referred to in the
advanced Text Book on Psychiatry, is not referred to in many
other recognised authorities on Mental Diseases.
Doctor W. Ernest Jones recognised it as a rare accom-
paniment of Mental Disease.
Naturally, Dr. Meade, Dr. Cuscaden and Dr. Boyd would
not know its significance in Mental Disease, and at once seized
upon Perry’s stuttering as the highest degree of proof of his
being a malingerer.
They thus ignored the natural cause of the nerve degene-
ration. At the same time, they admitted (by inference)
Perry’s superior knowledge of mental phenomena and nerve
degeneration to their own if he were a malingerer.
This absurd conclusion bears its own refutation.
The facts as to his uncontrollable conduct and his fits of
weeping—his cursing—his gross ingratitude, are all sympto-
matic of his having brain disease.
The Reverend Mr. White gave evidence that three years
ago Perry tried to convert him (a Church of England Clergy-
man) to Atheism.
He (Perry) then tried to disprove the existence of God
by referring to the salaries paid to Bishops.
This is a significant proof of Perry’s unsound state of
mind.
The extent to which this has progressed is a difficult
matter to determine, and can only be pronounced upon by
the Expert in Mental Diseases. *
As soon as the Cell*becomes injured, then you have an
unknown quantity of injury.
It is quite clear that the formation of a thought depends
upon the perfect health of the brain cells.
Here there have been so many definite facts as to Perry
being abnormal that there is no reason for speculating as to
his conduct being moral or immoral. A motive was sug-
gested, without the slightest evidence, by Colonel Johnson.


There has been no evidence at any time suggesting that
any request for money has been made or that any claim has
been made. The suspicion that Perry might have made a
claim is not fit to be considered. A Court of Justice does not
act upon suspicion. There are known facts that Perry had a
series of injuries which could have caused his physical, mental
and moral degradation.
It is now a question for experts to show the degree of
this degradation, and what is the cause of such degradation.
Speculation by laymen does not affect the question.
Dr. Meade’s Charge of Malingering.
There is an absolute certainty as to proof of bona fides,
as shown by Colonel Johnson’s Certificate put in as part of the
Defence Department case, and the last witness, Dr. Mac-
Keddie, who says he has no doubt as to Perry’s absolute
belief.
Charge of Malingering,
The charge of malingering is, under the circumstances I
submit, an absolute absurdity. The charge means total inven-
tion of illness, which never existed. Here the exaggeration of
symptoms, when the man was suffering from a real disability,
forms no basis for the present charge. The charge was
founded on the belief of -a junior medical practitioner who
had only recently assumed the authority of a Captain in the
forces.
Most men would have waited until their supposed
authority had been confirmed officially. He was so anxious
to anticipate the authority that he ordered and wore a uniform.
What reliance, under the circumstances, could be placed upon
this individual’s judgment when he preferred a charge of
malingering?
Dr. Meade’s Incapacity and Cruelty to Perry.
This was shown by his inability to recognise the con-
dition of Perry, which I submit is sufficiently clear. It is
quite obvious that this case was peculiarly one for a Specialist
in Mental Disease, and it is extremely difficult for even the
Specialist to isolate complex phenomena associated with
Spinal Neurasthenia, Traumatic (or other), Hysteria and
insanity-—Mental Disease resulting from either or both of the
above or from other conditions.
Dr. Meade, being young, was completely unable, in his
then state of knowledge, to understand these difficulties. He
treated it merely as a physical case of absolute paralysis of
the lower limbs, and then Perry’s actions, being admittedly
inconsistent, as he could make movements, he was stated by
Dr. Meade as being a malingerer.
He then did not treat him for the disease, but for his rude-
ness and incivility, as appears by Dr. Meade’s own admissions


in the evidence, when Perry spoke to him about his right to be
treated fairly and his right to British justice. Dr. Meade,
as he admitted, said that Perry had no right to speak of
British justice, and his manner was objectionable, and he
had him submitted to isolation by way of punishment, and
then had three men to hold him down while he administered
the battery to his face and mouth, to compel him to admit
he was not suffering from absolute paralysis of the lower
limbs.
Perry, under the torture, would admit anything, as is
obvious. The thumb-screw and the rack have been from time
immemorial used for the purpose of extorting admissions,
whether true or untrue. The treatment, however, was, in the
circumstances, barbarous, unscientific and cruel. Dr. Meade's
cruelty has, in fact, probably helped to upset Perry’s mental
balance. This charge of cruelty has been, I submit, proved.
Perry’s Bona Fides.
The ordinary rules of evidence have been observed in
the investigation. In direct examinationof a witness, Dr.
MacKeddie, I was not permitted to remind him of what an
unquestioned authority had laid down, and to ask whether he
agreed with it.
I refer to this, not with a view of any objection or criticism,
but as showing that the same rule should be followed strictis-
sime throughout. The Defence Department in this case put
in Colonel Johnson’s letter. I objected to it as being mere
gossip, and the writer could not be cross-examined. The
Defence Department, however, insisted that it was an official
document, and same was admitted as evidence. But it was
not an official document, as was shown by the Department’s
(although requested twice by Dr. Maloney to forward every
document in the file) omitting same from the file handed to
Dr. Maloney. Now the Defence Department is bound.
This shows clearly that Perry was bona fide, and there-
fore the Defence Department cannot be heard to deny this.
Perry’s bona fide belief that he could not walk is thus
admitted. Dr. MacKeddie (the last witness) also testifies to
the same fact.
It is therefore not open for the Defence Department to
urge, or for you to find, that Perry was not in fact bona fide.
The Defence Department’s attitude is incomprehensible.
Instead of the Defence Department having the facts elicited,
they brought forward witnesses who sought to prove that
Dr. Meade was impeccable, and that Perry was a scoundrel.
The issue was clear, as shown by his medical history. Once
Perry’s history was admitted, it showed absolute reasons for
his present condition. The evidence showed that he used
to cry like a child on board the “ Kyarra.” He did so in the


Base Hospital later, and there could be no doubt that it was
due to nervous conditions arising from physical and mental
breakdown and degeneration. As Perry’s bona fides was
admitted by Colonel Johnson before his leaving Egypt, there
could be no issue left.
Re Perry’s bona fides: Why should Perry be assumed to
be a scoundrel without the slightest proof? The ordinary
principles of proof should not be departed from in this Inquiry.
The question of suspicion does .not displace facts proved.
Evidence of Dr. Sewell.
Dr. Sewell admittedly was retained by Dr. O’Hara, and,
in consultation with him, examined Perry. He then stated
that he was satisfied that the man was suffering from Spinal
Neurasthenia, subject to proof in fact of Perry having the
Catheter used on him immediately after the alleged injury.
Dr. O’Hara stated that he would try to obtain the proof,
and informed Dr. Maloney of Dr. Sewell’s requirements. Dr.
Maloney was unable to give this, and the matter remained
over until the delivery of the official file, which contained the
Certificate signed by Dr. Whitford of this material fact. Dr.
Maloney then, according to evidence, waited on Dr. Sewell,
and informed him of this fact, and then Dr. Maloney asked
him if this satisfied him, and could he so inform Dr. O’Hara.
Dr. Sewell admits the essential facts, except the message
to Dr. O’Hara. It is therefore a question of credibility.
So far as he was concerned, it was a question as to
whether the patient was suffering from Traumatic Neuras-
thenia, Hysteria, or Malingering. He had, therefore, no
justification for appearing as witness against Perry. »
This evidence should be examined like that of any other
witness. Although his evidence that the man Perry is suffer-
ing from Hysteria supports the conclusion arrived at by
either witnesses, I saill repeat that his evidence should be
disregarded in the interest of public policy.
I referred you in Court to the Evidence Act 1890, Sec. 55,
as follows:
“ No physician or surgeon shall, without the consent of
his patient, divulge in any civil suit, action or proceeding
(unless the sanity of the patient be the matter in dispute)
any information which he may have acquired in attending the
patient, and which was necessary to enable him to prescribe
or act for the patient.”
I referred you to the case of the National Mutual Life
Association of Australasia Limited, and Godrich, Vol. 10,
Commonwealth Law Reports, pagel. The decision there was
“ that the prohibition in that section extends to anything
which comes to the knowledge of the physician or surgeon
with regard to the health or physical condition of the patient,


as well as anything said by the patient to him, while the
relationship of medical adviser and patient continues, pro-
vided that it was reasonably necessary for the purpose stated.”
“ The section is applicable in every case where the evidence is
offered in Victoria, notwithstanding that the events or facts
sought to be proved occurred elsewhere.” The operation of
the section is not limited to the lifetime of the patient.
Higgins, J., said:—
“The section is, in the main, just and expedient in the
public interest.” (Page 42.)
Mr. Justice Isaacs says:—
“ It is regulation of curial procedure to effect a desired
reform in the law of evidence for the maintenance of good
faith.” (Page 34.)
“ The purpose of the legislature is manifest on the face
of the enactment. It was to prevent, within certain limits,
any public tribunal being made the instrument to violate the
confidence which a patient has reposed in a physician or
surgeon as his medical adviser.” And he says: “ Outside the
walls of the Court a medical man is left to the dictates of his
honour, the ethics or rules of his profession, or the force of
any compact he may have made with any person who confided
in him.” (Page 33.)
Chief Justice Griffith says :
“ The law governing admissibility of evidence is part of
the lex fori, and is applicable in every case where the evidence
is offered within the country in which the law is in force,
wherever the events or facts sought to be proved may have
occurred.” (Vol. 10, page 14, Commonwealth Law Reports.)
Mere Suspicion.
“ Suspicion cannot give probative force to testimony,
which in itself is insufficient to establish or to justify an
inference of a particular fact.” “ The sea of suspicion has
no shore, and the court that embarks upon it fs without a
rudder or compass.” (Moore on Facts, page 61.)
Mere Conjecture, Guess, or Surmise,
“ Neither juries nor courts are permitted to render verdicts
or judgment upon guesses or surmises.” “It is not the habit
of any courts of justice to yield themselves up in matters of
right to mere conjectures and possibilities.” (Moore on Facts,
page 62.)
Suspicion of Fraud.
Mr. Justice Grier addressed the Jury as follows:
“ You must remember that the burden of proof is on
the party who alleges fraud. That fraud, though proved by
circumstances, can never be presumed, for fraud is a crime.
It is not enough to show suspicious circumtances. Suspicion


is not proof. It does not require a great deal of ingenuity
to cast suspicion of fraud upon any transaction. There is a
very great and sometimes grievous error into which, not only
the public mind, but that of jurors and judges too, are apt
to fall, and which leads to false judgments, and sometimes to
great oppression. I would, therefore, specially draw the atten-
tion of the jury to it, and caution them to beware of it. It is
this: The law abhors fraud. Every honest mind hates it,
and even those who practise it themselves will join in the
denunciation of it. It makes them feel virtuous for the time,
and they are the most ready, from the arguments of con-
science, from judging of others by themselves, to believe it
true, and inveigh most loudly against it.
“ When the clamour of fraud is raised in a community,
or when it is confidently charged by counsel in court, we are
prone to see all the facts through a false medium, which
magnifies the importance of every fact upon which suspicion
of fraud may be raised, and ignores the plainest inference
against it. In the midst of our virtuous indignation against
fraud, we first assume it has been committed, and then seek
for arguments to confirm, not our judgments, but our pre-
judice. ‘Trifles light as air’ then become ‘strong as proofs
of holy writ.’ Circumstances which, to an unprejudiced mind,
are just as compatible with innocence as guilt, which at best
could only raise a suspicion, are set down as conclusive
evidence of crime. Those who sit in judgment over men’s
rights, whether as courts or jurors, should beware of this
natural weakness to which we are almost all of us subject.
“ We all fancy ourselves wiser than perhaps others are
willing to give us credit for. This feeling is gratified by what
we believe to be superior sagacity. Rogues may be cunning,
but they can’t deceive us. Under this satisfactory belief, we
become overastute, and often see that which is not to be
seen. We suffer our imaginations to take the rein from our
judgments, and rush headlong in this chase after the fox
called fraud. Circumstances which should avail for the proof
of fraud are such only as are inconsistent with a contrary view
of the transaction, and lead irresistibly to that conclusion.”
(Moore on Facts, page 83.)
Charge of Fraud.
“ Fraud is not a thing to be lightly charged, and most
emphatically is not a thing to be lightly established. The
stigma, which follows from it is not one to be placed upon
parties unless the evidence measures squarely up to the re-
quirements of the rule of satisfying a court clearly and con-
vincingly of the truth of the fraud.” (Page 81.)


Defence Department Has Failed to Prove Present Issue
Before Inquiry.
Re Dr. Meade’s certificates. These are subject to the
ordinary law of evidence. No evidence is admissible to con-
tradict a written document. When he signed these certificates
he cannot now be heard to dispute them. If he signs a true
certificate, he cannot be heard to say it is false; if he seeks
to contradict it after his having signed it he should not be
believed.
It is clear that this proof is given by the Department.
The issue is settled by you as follows: Was Perry incorrectly
charged with malingering? The issue is not whether he was
malingering in fact, but that he was incorrectly charged
before the Court-Martial. That he was incorrectly charged
is sufficiently marked by the medical history. The only
Doctor who was called in support of the charge was Dr.
Meade. He was subject to the same rules as other witnesses
who appeared in support of the charge. He had other medical
witnesses available, according to his own story, but they were
not produced. No Court would listen to the explanation
given, that after Dr. Meade included the names of medical wit-
nesses on the List of Witnesses, they were not called. They
were the only witnesses excluded, through ignorance or care-
lessness, as Dr. Meade now seems to suggest. Their evidence
had not, in fact, been transcribed.
The law of Court-Martials requires the evidence of all
witnesses to be transcribed, signed, and copies sent to the
accused. The accused did not have the copies of the evidence
of these medical men, simply because they did not expect to
give evidence, and did not prepare their evidence in writing.
The accused was not responsible for their neglecting to do so.
The evidence, then, in the possession of the Department shows,
as per Colonel Johnson’s letter, that the man Perry honestly
believed he could not walk in Egypt.
Experienced medical men like Dr. Jones and Dr. Mac-
keddie testify that the man now believes the same. He was
in reality suffering from Spinal Neurasthenia, or —at least—
Neurasthenia, Hysteria, or both. Meade treated him for
paralysis incorrectly.
The charge before the Court-Martial was that Perry
alleged falsely that he was totally paralysed in both legs, and
was, in fact, lying; therefore, malingering. This had been dis-
proved.
The Department is responsible for their officials and their
acts. It is not Dr. Meade alone who is concerned, but the
Defence Department. Therefore the Defence Department,
being aware of Perry’s medical history, as certified by Colonel
Johnson and Captain Whitton, and the other medical men, are


bound by these facts. They cannot both affirm and disaffirm.
They cannot both put in certificates as true and say they
are untrue. They cannot both say the Department had a true
certificate, and then say signed false certificates.
Senator Pearce’s attitude represents the attitude of the
Department. He says he accepted the verdict of the Court-
Martial. His only desire is to learn the truth, and not shield
officials. The Department, therefore, cannot both blow hot
and cold.
They therefore have failed to meet the issue, viz., was
Perry incorrectly charged with malingering?
They now want to ignore this issue, and to substitute
another, viz., Was Perry in fact suffering from a disease short
of paralysis? viz., one which in reality permitted him to walk,
as there was no organic reason otherwise.
I have the honour to be,
Yours obediently,
J. WOOLF.
31 Queen Street. Melbourne.
October 21, 1915.
PHILIP COHEN, Esq., P.M.,
Melbourne.
Fraser ana Jenkinson, Printers, 343-5 Queen Street, Melbourne.
