

SUMMARY
FOB THH
Philadelphia
CO NTAINING THE
RISE AND PROGRESS OF DARLING DOWNS,
OF THE,
TOWN OF TOOWOOMBA,
And of the Surrounding Districts
.
WRITTEN EXPRESSLY FOR THE “TOOWOOMBA CHRONICLE”
BY THE EDITOR.
PRICE . SIXPENCE,




SUMMARY
FOE THE
PHILADELPHIA EXHIBITION
CONTAINING THE
RISE AND PROGRESS OF DARLING DOWNS,
OF THE
TOWN OF TOOWOOMBA,
And of the Surrounding Districts.
WRITTEN EXPRESSLY FOR THE "TOOWOOMBA CHRONICLE” BY THE EDITOR.
PRICE, SIXPENCE.




PREFACE .
THE large demand for the issue of the Toowoomba
Chronicle, containing the Summary for the Philadelphia Ex-
hibition, has induced the Proprietors to publish the Sum-
mary in pamphlet form.
As much care was taken in its compilation, it presents a
correct record of the rise and progress of Barling Downs, of
the town of Toowoomba, and of the suburbs of Drayton,
Highfelds, and Emu and King's Creek —one of the most
picturesque and beautiful districts in all Australia.
To Mr. C. H. Hartmann, Fellow of the Poyal Horticul-
tural Society, England, we are indebted for an able and ex-
haustive report on the FRUITS, SHRUBS, TIMBERS, an d
NATIVE GRASSES °f the district, and which forms a valuable
compendium of our horticultural andforest resources.
HTJisrT & g-zroouvc.
Chronicle Office,
November 10, 1875.




SUMMARY
FOR THE
PHILADELPHIA EXHIBITION.
Agricultural and General.
The magnificent tract of country
known as the Darling Downs is situ-
ated to the westward of the large range
of mountains that divides the eastern
from the western waters. The rivers
and creeks on the eastern side find
their way to the sea through the Bris-
bane River, while those on the western
side travel some thousands of miles
until they enter the Murray River, and
join the sea near Adelaide in South
Australia. The discovery of Darling
Downs was made in 1827, by the late
A linn Cunningham, Esq., botanical
collector for the Royal Gardens at
Kew, in England, who was as ardent
an explorer as he was an enthusiast in
botany. The beautiful open plains,
stretching away for miles, that broke
upon his vision, he named “ Darling
Downs, in honor of the then governor
of New South Wales, Sir Ralph Dar-
ling. As soon as the discovery was
made known in Sydney there were not
wanting bold and adventurous men,
who started for the new country by
way of Maitland, and in course of time
the whole of it was taken up by early
pioneers, who had dangers to contend
with from the hostility of the abori-
ginal race, and the difficulty of getting
supplies —dangers of which the present
inhabitants of the district can form no
adequate idea. Whatever fortunes
may have been made by those who
first occupied the Downs, no one can
deny but what they were hardly won
and laboriously fought for. Most of
the first pioneers have passed away, —
only a few remain of those who risked
their lives and their wealth in develop-
ing the grazing resources of Darling
Downs, and planting in the wilds of the
Australian bush Christianity and civi-
lization.
Mr. Cunningham thus describes the
Downs at the time he first discovered
them :—“ These extensive tracts of
clear pastoral country commence about
the parallel of 28 6 S., and stretch
150 ° E. Deep ponds, supported by
streams from the high lands immedi-
ately to the eastward, extend along the
central lower flats. The lower grounds
thus permanently watered present flats


which furnish an almost inexhaustible
range of cattle pasture at all seasons of
the year—the grass and herbage gener-
ally exhibiting in the depth of winter
an extreme luxuriance of growth.
From these central grounds rise downs
of a rich, black, and dry soil, and very
ample surface; and as they furnish
abundance of grass, and are conveni-
ently watered, yet perfectly beyond
the reach of those floods which take
place on the flats in a season of rain,
they constitute a valuable and sound
sheep pasture.” The ill fated Dr.
Leichhardtthus describes the Downs in
1843 : —“ From the Condamine River
the country rises very gently, almost
imperceptibly, till the road passes be-
tween two hills or ranges, when the
basaltic rock reappears again. Very
extensive shallow valleys, or plains,
generally with a creek overgrown with
reeds, covered with high rich grass,
were spread before my eyes, when I
had passed these hills, the right of
which goes under the name of Rubis-
law, and the left under that of Sugar-
loaf. Here and there the grass tree is
seen either single or in groups and
groves. It is one foot and more in
diameter, and eight to ten feet high.
Till then I had never seen the grass
tree in rich soil • on the contrary it
was the sign of the poorest sandstone
rock and sand. Here the case is re-
versed $ the grass tree grows in the
finest soil, and generally in plains.
The ranges which border the plains are
covered with box, with a gum tree
called the Morton Bay ash, with a dif-
ferent species of angophora, and with I
another white gum. The trees are
generally very scattered, and the forest
becomes only denser, the vegetation
more powerful, as we approach the
range of its eastern slopes. All this
country, from the Condamine to the
Range, is called the Darling Downs.
There is no equal to them over all the
colony for sheep rearing, for the fat-
ness and tenderness of the mutton, for
the excellent qualities of the wool, and
for the cheap rate for which flocks can
he managed. One shepherd can look
after 2000 or 3000 sheep, which would
require four shepherds in other parts.
The stations are established on creeks
which come down from the western
slopes of the coast range, and meander
through plains of more or less extent
to join the Condamine River, which,
also rising in the coast range where the
latter expands into the table land of
New England, sweeps round to the
northward, and flowing parallel to the
coast range, receives the whole drain-
age from the country to the westward
of the range. The Condamine forms,
for a great distance, the separation of
the sandstone country to the westward
from the rich basaltic plains to the
eastward. These plains, so famous for
the richness of their pasture, and for
the excellence of the sheep and cattle
depastured on them, have become
equally remarkable as the depositaries
of the remains of extinct species of
animals, several of which must have
been of a gigantic size, being the mar-
supial representatives of the Pachy-
dermal order of other continents. Mr.
Isaac s station (Gowrie station, now
the property of George King, Esq.) is
particularly rich in these fossil remains.
At Isaac s Creek, they occur tog'ether
with recent fresh water shells of species
still living in the neighbouring ponds,
and with marlay and calcareous con-
cretions, which induces me to suppose
that the plains were covered with large
sheets of water, fed, probably, by cal-
careous springs connected with the ba-
saltic range, and that hug’e animals,
fond of water, were living either on
the rich herbage surrounding these
ponds or lakes, or browsing upon the
leaves and branches of trees forming*
thick brushes on the slopes of the
neighbouring hills. The rise of
the country, which is very gener-
ally supposed to have taken place,
was probably the cause of the disap-


pearance of the water, and of the ani-
mals becoming 1 extinct, when its neces-
sary supply ceased to exist.” Mr.
Arthur Hodgson, one of the present pro-
prietors of Eton Yale, and almost the
only one of the original pioneers that
holds the first run he free selected,
sent the first load of wool over the
Main Range, a range of mountains
known as the Australian Alps, and, at
the point selected for the descent, are
1940 feet above the level of the sea.
So dangerous were the aborigines in
the early days of settlement, that the
bullock drays —the only mode of con-
veyance of goods and merchandise —
passing up and down the mountain
track, had to he guarded by a com-
pany of soldiers. In the scrubs at the
foot of the Range the blacks used to
secrete themselves, and some tragic
stories are told and hair-breadth escapes
are related of the adventurous spirits
who drove bullock-teams up the narrow
gorge reaching the summit at the
eastern end of what is now known as
James-street. The whole of the Dar-
ling Downs was then parcelled out in
runs, and were held under the regula-
tions fixed by Orders in Council framed
by the Imperial Government. In
1852, during the Government of Sir
Charles Fitzroy, the leases were ex-
tended for fourteen years. The rents
paid for large tracts of country equal
in extent in many instances to German
Principalities, were very little in excess
of what is now paid for a decent four-
roomed cottage in Brisbane or Sydney.
The leases were held by the Crown
tenants under this tenure up to the
arrival of Sir George Bowen, and the
proclamation of Queensland, on the
10th of December, 1859, as an inde-
pendent colony.
In all the Australian colonies there
have been severe political struggles
between the tenants of the Crown and
the people who were desirous of settling
on the land and converting it to other
uses than merely growing wool and
tallow. Queensland formed no excep-
tion to this rule. Small experiments
in agriculture had been made, and it
was found that the soil of the Downs
would grow luxuriantly almost all the
fruits and cereals of the mother-country.
There was consequently a desire on
the part of the people to have some
portion of the land for agricultural
purposes. The Crown tenants, how-
ever, resisted the attempt to take from
them a portion of their runs, and
having a majority of representatives in
Parliament, they were able at the time
to carry the day. It will astonish most
people to find that in 1860, in the first
session of the first Parliament of
Queensland, a Select Committee was
appointed to inquire into the growth
of wheat in the colony, and hostile
witnesses were then examined, who
declared that not only in the Ipswich
district, hut in no part of Queensland
would wheat pay for growing. Mr.
Joseph Fleming, who was one time
owner of the Bremer Steam Mills, was
examined, and this was the evidence he
gave. Questioned by the Chairman,
he said: —
“You are settled on the Bremer
River, I believe ? Yes, I have Steam
Flour Mills there.
“ Do you cultivate wheat ? Yes.
“ How do you find it answer ? As
far as my experience goes, I have
found the cultivation of wheat answer
as well here as in any part of New
South Wales.
“Do you find it a certain crop?
Yes ; one person living alongside of
me cultivated wheat for three years,
and had a good crop every year.
“You have seen the wheat from the
Darling Downs; is it of a superior
kind? The wheat I have seen came
from Warwick, and was equal to any I
am getting up from Adelaide.”
The late Mr. Herbert Evans, who
was at that time Clerk of Petty Ses
sions at Warwick, had a pretty large
farm under cultivation on the Conda-


mine, and this gentleman was examined
before the Committee, at the request of
the representative for Warwick, the
late Hon. St. George R. Gore. Ex-
amined by the Chairman, he said :
“I believe you have been in the
habit of employing- men in agricul-
tural pursuits ? Yes, I have done so
for the last seven or eight years.
“Will you favour the Committee
with your experience on the subject?
Do you think wheat can be grown pro-
fitably in your neighbourhood ? With
reference to the culture of wheat in
the neighbourhood of Warwick, I am
of opinion that it can be engaged in
successfully. The climate is admir-
ably adapted to the growth of this
cereal, and it is altogether exempt,
from the diseases which are prevalent
elsewhere. As far as my experience
goes, I am of opinion that the growth
of wheat can be profitably undertaken;
for, in spite of the obstacles thrown in
my way by its conveyance to Ipswich
to be ground, and its re-conveyance to
Warwick, I find it yields a profit—
taking the average of seasons—of
about Bs. per bushel when made into
flour, supposing flour to be worth in
Warwick £3 per bag of 200 lbs.
During my experience for the last four
years, the wholesale price of flour has
never been under, and often exceeded
that price.
“ To what extent do you think wheat
could be grown in the neighbourhood
of Warwick ? I can assign no limit.
“Is there a large extent of soil
adapted to its culture ? lam not pre-
pared to say what extent of available
country there is, but I think there are
hundreds of thousands of acres.”
Notwithstanding Mr. Evans’ satis-
factory evidence, the Legislature in
1860 refused to believe in farming
L success, and agricultural reserves were
Selected in the most unsuitable places.
Thus the Toowoomba Reserve, in place
of being chosen on the beautiful plain
lanes of Gowrie, Westbrook, and Eton
Vale, was selected at Highfields, on the
v ery summit of the Main Range, and so
densely timbered, that when Sir George
Bowen visited the settlers there in 1863,
they informed him that every acre of
cleared land he had seen had cost £3O
to clear it. In this way the pastoral
tenants of the Crown united together
to retain possession of the land, and
obstruct the settlement of an agricul-
tural population. The rich black soil
was represented as barren and unpro-
ductive, and the first parliamentary
representative of Toowoomba declared
in the Legislature that Darling Downs
would not grow a cabbage, and ridi-
culed the idea of a farming community
doing anything more than starving- by
agriculture in this and the neighbour-
ing districts. No other portion of
Queensland has suffered so much from
the squatting system as Darling Downs.
The pre-emptive right granted under
the Orders in Council gave the squat-
ters the right to purchase portions of
their runs at the upset price of £1 per
acre. This right was most freely ex-
ercised ; but, unfortunately, in such a
way as to pick the eyes out of the
country. All the frontages of the water-
courses were chiefly secured in this way,
and to this day the people are suffering
from the injurious effects of the Land
Acts passed by the first elected Legis-
lature. In 1866, a Leasing Act was
passed. This gave a person the right
to select land on an annual payment of
2s. 6d. per acre, extending over ten
years, on condition that certain im-
provements were made within the first
twelve months. Under this Act thou-
sands of acres of the best lands have
been dummied—that is, taken up in
the names of others by false declara-
tions. Action has been taken by the
Government to recover possession of
lands acquired in this way, and the
Colonial Courts have decided in favour
of the Crown, but appeals to the Privy
Council have been granted, and the
country awaits the result. In 1868


another Land Act was passed, which
took from the lessees the half of the
leased land then in their possession.
Unfortunately under this Act dum-
mying was again resorted to, and at
this moment there are hundreds of
persons ready to settle on the land and
are unable to obtain it. In 1872, the
American Homestead system, which
was embodied in the Land Act of
1868, was extended, but as very little
land is available for settlement in this
district, its provisions are almost
practically useless.
But despite all the obstructions,
agriculture has made its way gradually
but surely, and Toowoomba is sur-
rounded with a tolerably large farming
population living happily and prosper-
ously, and laying the foundations of a
healthy yeomanry class that invariably
form the backbone of a country. By
degrees portions of lands have been
taken from the Crown tenants, and
these have been all settled upon and
turned to the best possible account.
With many grazing is combined with
farming. Their land is divided into
paddocks, and are then laid down with
artificial grasses, lucerne and prairie
grass chiefly. The half-bred Leicester
sheep thrive exceedingly well in these
paddocks, and it is not uncommon to
find them, when* in prime condition,
turning the scale at 100 lbs. Three
of them killed, after a recent agricul-
tural exhibition, weighed 94, 87, and
84 lbs. each respectively. The Too-
woomba butchers are now supplied
with lambs all the year round from the
small graziers. Wheat is grown in
large quantities —in the Warwick and
Allora districts especially. What the
late Mr. Evans said of the crop in
1860, has proved in all respects to be
correct. It is a profitable and valu-
able crop to the farmer, although it
has not now to be taken to Ipswich—
a distance of 80 miles—to be ground
and re-conveyed back again. W ar-
wick and Allora have each their flour
mills, Toowoomba has three, and we
hear of one shortly to be commenced
at King’s Creek. There is also a co-
operative flour mill in course of erec-
tion at Warwick. In ordinary seasons
the wheat crops average thirty bushels
to the acre, but instances are known
where fully forty bushels have been
obtained. ' The average weight per
bushel of the wheat is 60 lbs., but prize
exhibits have reached 66 lbs., 67 lbs.,
and 671 lbs. Mr. Anthony Trollope,
who has the privilege, as a fiction-
writer, of distorting the truth, asserted
in his notes of travel in Queensland
that wheat could not be grown in this
colony. He wrote, however, from
hearsay, and not from personal obser-
vation. He was feasted by the pas-
toral tenants, and with such royal hos-
pitality that he christened them
“ Dukes.” Under the influences thus
brought to bear upon him, he drew
pictures of farming life in Queensland,
and published them in the London
Daily Telegraph, which were not only
grossly exaggerated, but were posi-
tivelv untrue. The present season has
been one of a most genial character,
thousands of acres are under wheat,
and the present appearance of the
wheat fields give promise ot one of the
most abundant harvests ever husbanded
in Queensland —a living contradiction
to such privileged slanderers as Mr.
Anthony Trollope. The barley crops
are now being harvested, and never
before in Queensland have such splen-
did crops been reaped. The maize
crop follows the wheat, and as it has
all the advantage of the autumn rains,
a heavy crop rewards the enterprise of
the farmer. The .general price of
wheat is ss. per bushel, of barley 4s.
6d., and maize 3s. 6d. to 4s. Potatoes
is also a never-failing crop on all lands
within the influence of the Main Range,
but they do not reach the same size or
yield so prolificly as in Victoria or
Tasmania. Looking to the protracted
hostility shown by Crown tenants to


farming enterprise, commencing in
1860 and continuing down to the
present day, and the determined un-
bending opposition to part with any
portion of the land except under great
pressure, it is marvellous the progress
agriculture has made on the Darling-
Downs. The cry that the Downs
would not grow a cabbage, and that
farming would never pay, is now an
exploded fallacy, and even its authors
are ashamed to acknowledge they ever
originated such a ridiculous shibboleth
to retard the settlement of the colony.
In no other portion of Queensland are
the farmers more prosperous, happy,
and contented than on Darling Downs.
Although banished chiefly to the hills
and ridges, with the water frontages
largely monopolised, and the plains all
purchased or pre-empted, they have by
sheer industry and indomitable pluck
and courage, overcame all difficulties,
and their comfortable homes, sur-
rounded with gardens and paddocks
of wheat, barley, oats, and maize, and,
in many instances, their little flocks of
sheep and cattle browsing on the hill-
sides, present a picture of rural pros-
perity that foreshadows what a great
and prosperous district Darling DoAvns
would have become, if the wretched
administration of the lands of the
colony had not locked up hundreds of
thousands of acres in the hands of non-
residents, or those who hold them for
purely speculative purposes.
Pastoral.
When .Sir George Bowen paid liis
first visit to the Darling’ Downs in
1860, he was presented with an ad-
dress by the pastoral tenants, to which
he replied in the following- strain :
I'wish to’.avail myself of this opportu-
nity to state publicly that my recent
journey overr the Darling- Dq.wns has
filled me with surprise and admiration.
"Even before I left England, I knew
by report the rich natural resources
and the picturesque beauty of this dis-
trict, the scenery which vividly recalls
to my mind the g-eneral aspect of the
classic plains of Thessaly. But I con-
fess that I was not fully prepared for
so wonderfully rapid an advance in all
that can promote and adorn civiliza-
tion ; an advance which has taken
place during- the fourth part of an
averag-e lifetime. Not only have I
seen vast herds of horses and cattle,
and countless flocks of sheep over-
spreading- the valleys and forests,
which within the memory of persons
who have y£t scarcely attained to the
ag'e of manhood, were tenanted only
by wild animals and by a few wander-
ing- tribes of savag-es ; not only have I
travelled over roads beyond all com-
parison superior to the means of com-
munication which existed less than a
century ag-o in many parts of the
United King-dom; not only have I
beheld flourishing- towns arising- in
spots where, hardly twenty years hack,
the foot of a white man had never
trodden the primeval wilderness ; not
only have I admired these and other
proofs of material progress, hut I have •
also found in the long chain of settlers,
who have entertained me with such
cordial hospitality, all the comforts
and most of the luxuries and refine-
ments of the houses of .country
gentlemen in England. The won-
derful advance of this portion of
the colony during the past ten
years is due to no sudden and
fortuitous discovery of the precious
metals ; it is derived wholly from the
blessings of Providence on the skill
and energy of inhabitants in subduing
the earth. Assuredly I have observed
during* the past week very remarkable
illustrations of the proverbial genius of
the Anglo-Saxon race for the rioblt
and truly imperial art of colonization?. 1 ’
It is fifteen years since these eloquent
words were spoken, and we hardly
know in what terms oir George Bowen
would speak now of the Darling- Downs
were he to revisit this district. In


those days we had the old bullock-
team style of locomotion, and a two-
horse vehicle conveyed the mail be-
tween Ipswich and Toowoomba. Now
we have railways connecting the me-
tropolis with Toowoomba, and extend-
ing across the Downs south and west.
Owing to the creeks on the eastern
waters being bridgeless we have been
in Toowoomba seven days without a
Brisbane mail; now the morning me-
tropolitan papers are delivered daily at
half-past one. There was no electric
telegraph when Sir George Bowen first
visited us; now the latest news from
all quarters of the globe are placed in the
hands of the subscribers of the local
papers within a few hours of the wiring
of the message from London, New
York, or Paris.
The settled district of Darling
Downs comprises an area of 6000
square miles, containing 3,840,000
acres, of which 2,730,000 acres have
been alienated, leaving 1,110,000
acres still in the hands of the pas-
toral tenants under a lease of ten
years, which expires in 1878. OnDarl-
ing Downs there are nearly 3,000,000
of sheep, 130,000 head of cattle,
17,000 horses, and 4,000 pigs. Con-
siderable improvements have of late
years taken place in sheep and cattle,
and within the last three years much
attention has been directed to the im-
provement of horses, both draught and
blood. In former times, say wlien Sir
.George Bowen first visited Darling
Downs, the sheep were fed on the
natural grasses,- and were attended
by shepherds, whose flocks varied in
number according to the nature of the
run. Now, however, the shepherding
system, all over Darling Downs at
feast, is done away with, and the pad-
xl* eking system prevails on most sta-
tions. The runs are all fenced round
with galvanised wire fences, and are
subdivided into paddocks with the same
material. Formerly some of the large'
stations around Toowoomba used to
employ from seventy to one hundred
hands ; now the entire work, except at
shearing’ time, is performed by an
overseer and some half-dozen boun-
dary riders. Stations with 100,000
sheep are now managed in this simple
and inexpensive manner, and yield
enormous profits to the owners. Most
of the large stations have their stud
sheep in lucerne paddocks, and others
are housed and home fed. At the re-
cent annual exhibition of the Royal
Agricultural Society of Queensland,
whose head quarters are at Toowoomba,
the show of sheep was pronounced
equal to any exhibition of the kind in
the world. The Bankers’ and Mer-
chants’ Prize, for the best pen of 25
maiden ewes—merinos—was taken by
Messrs. Bell and Sons, of Jimbour.
These sheep had been for five months
previously fed on corn, chaff, and
pumkins. The prize for the best
champion merino sheep was taken by
the same firm. Mr. C. B. Fisher, who
has large stations in Adelaide and
Victoria, was also a successful exhi-
bitor at the society’s exhibition. The
cattle exhibited at the same show ex-
cited universal admiration, and the
show of horses was the largest, the
finest, and most varied that had ever
been exhibited in Queensland, and were
pronounced equal to anything of the
kind exhibited in New South Wales—
a colony over a century old, while
Queensland is only fifteen years in ex-
istence as an independent state.
The present improved system of
sheep farming is due in a very great
measure to the new owners of the
various stations. Messrs. Clarke, of
Talgai, and Mr. G. H. Davenport, of
Headington Hill, stand
on the Downs for having pioneered
the way in the march of improvement—
of having showed some of the old pro-
prietors how to make four or-five sheep
grow were only one grew before. A
prominent Australian statesman, in
recently addressing an audience on


general topics, made use of the follow-
ing shrewd observations :
I need not tell an audience like this, that
in the great variety of the human species
nothing is truer than that, while there may be
a hundred or a thousand members of the
human family industriouly and faithfully
following out any object to which their atten-
tion is' directed, there is not one man in a
thousand who has the capacity to direct his
fellows to that object. Men will live in the
same community for a number of years
struggling with hard necessity, endeavouring
to keep the wolf from the door, while all the
time sources of wealth l;e dormant under
their feet, until some man of penetrating judg-
men, of discerning faculty, of indomitable
energy appears on the scene, and he entirely
revolutionises the place. Those who could
do nothing before, under his guidance become
comparatively prosperous. All of us must
have seen isolated cases of that kind, and
what is true in one case is true of the com-
munity as a whole. The more we can settle
population over thmfaee of the country, pro-
vided we do not introduce any element that
would change the parent stock, provided that
we bring all the energy, independence, and
resolution which belongs to us as a nation,
the more we do that the sooner we ourselves
shall come to our birthright as a nation of
the future.
Now this is exactly what has been
done on Darling Downs. Land that
was pronounced all hut worthless—
would not feed a sheep, or grow a cab-
bage—has been made to feed five sheep
to the acre, and to grow cereals and fruits
with a luxuriance unequalled in any
other part of the colony. Headington
Hill, and the country around it, was
one of those localities pronounced as
barren and unfit for anything. This
splendid property has reached its pre-
sent state of perfection through the
skill, industry, and perseverance of Mr.
Davenport. It is a village in itself,
and has been laid outwith con-
summate judgment. Large, commodi-
ous and lofty stables, most judiciously
planned, and capable of accommo-
dating sixty horses ,- monster stacks of
the primest lucerne and oaten hay,-
machines, with horse power, shell-
ing and grinding maize ; from fifty to
to seventy men are all steady at
their respective employments, and all
around, as far as the eye can extend,
paddocks of oats, wheat, barley, and
lucerne, all uniting to show what can
he accomplished when capital and in-
telligence is united in an enterprise.
Mr. "Davenport’s sheep are chiefly of
the Leicester class, and hold a high
place in the estimation of the butchers.
The lucerne feeding, as against the
purely natural grasses, has told in the
end, and at one of our shows some of
his prize wethers realised £2 Is. 6d.
per head at auction. Mr. Davenport
has shown what the Downs can pro-
duce, and has inculcated his example
into others who are emulating him, so
far as the limited areas of land at their
command will allow. They have be-
come graziers in their turn, and are
helping in their way to develop the
vast resources of the district. At the
present time the pastoral interest is in
a high state of prosperity. Sheep and
cattle continue at high prices, wool is
firm in the London market, and station
properties command very high prices.
Toowoomba.
The town of Toowoomba, the capital
of the Darling- Downs, is situated oh
the summit of the great Dividing
Range, at an elevation of 1940 feet
above the level of the sea. It was not
originally intended for, or surveyed as,
a site for a town. Owing to the hos-
tility manifested by the early pioneers-
to any encroachment on their runs for
townships or other purposes, the few
persons who were anxious to do busi-
ness with the men on the stations, were
obliged to settle down at Drayton. It
has been rightly termed by Dr. Dang,
who once represented it in the Legisla-
ture of New South Wales, as a place
of “heights and hollows,” and was
about the last spot that any sane man
would have chosen for a township. At
one time Drayton was a place of con-
siderable importance. It possessed a
hall of justice, built of the most primi-


tive materials, and on court days, which
was generally held once a month, the
town was full of country visitors. In
1854 Toowoomba, which is an abori-
ginal name, signifying “ Great in the
future ,” began to attract attention, and
'in that year a large quantity of land
was sold by the New South Wales
Government in farm lots as suburban
to the town of Drayton. As Too-
woomba was the point of ingress and
egress over the Main Range, a large
amount of Traffic passed through it,
and, occasionally, as many as thirty or
forty bullock teams have been seen in
one encampment on what is now known
as the Mort Estate, behind the Royal
Hotel. In 1858 the population of Too-
woomba had considerably increased,
and farming on a small scale was car-
ried on by several persons. On the
separation of the colony in 1859,
Drayton and Toowoomba and the sur-
rounding suburbs were formed into an
electoral district, returning one member
to Parliament. The number of elec-
tors on the roll at the first general
election was 243. In 1860 the popu-
lation had increased to such an extent
as to justify the inhabitants in apply-
ing for incorporation under the Muni-
cipal Institutions Act of 1858. The
town was accordingly proclaimed in-
corporated on the 24th of November
of that year. The area comprised
• within the municipality is 2733 acres,
and is divided into three wards. The
Municipal Council consists of nine
aldermen, one of whom is annually
chosen as mayor. One alderman from
each ward retires annually, so that the
ratepayers have ample means of in-
fusing new blood into the manage-
ment of their local affairs. In 1863
the Legislature passed the Railway
Act, which authorised the construction
of a railway from Ipswich —the head
of the navigation of the Bremer —to
Toowoomba. Although it was at first
snpposed the railway would rather in-
jure than promote the progress of Too-
woomba, the reverse has proved to be
the case. Property has increased in
value, the population has more than
doubled itself, and Toowoomba has ad-
vanced with a rapidity unparalleled in
the history of any other town not de-
pendent on a gold-mining 1 population.
The.railway now extends to Warwick,
50 miles to the south-west of Too-
woomba, and to Dalby, 50 miles to
the north-west; and in the last session
of Parliament a bill was passed autho-
rising its further extension of 190 miles
from Dalby to Roma. This must still
further add to the commercial import-
ance of Toowoomba, and assist materi-
ally in opening 1 up a market for the
agricultural and horticultural produce
of the district.
The present population of Too-
woomba cannot be less than 4000, and
that of the suburbs, including Drayton,
Highfields, and Emu and Kings
Creek, not less than 6000—making a
total of 10,000. The properties that
were sold by the Crown in large blocks
have been mostly subdivided, and the
town now presents the appearance of a
bustling, active place of business. The
climate is, without exception, the finest
in Queensland, and now that the rail-
way has been extended from Ipswich
to the metropolis, Toowoomba must
become a favourite place of resort to
those desirons of leaving the rather
warm climate of Brisbane to enjoy the
cool invigorating breezes of the Downs.
Toowoomba has eight places of pub-
lic worship —the Church of England,
Church of Rome, Wesleyan, Presby-
terian, Congregational, Baptist, Lu-
theran, and Independent German
Church. A Jewish Synagogue is also
in course of erection.
In schools the town and district is
well provided for. There are eleven
primary and two non-vested schools.
On the Ist January, 1876, the New
Education Act, recently passed by the
Legislature, will come into operation,
and from and after that date the teach-


ng in all State schools -will be purely
secular. There is one private collegiate
school • and a new State Grammar
School is now in course of erection at a
cost of £7OOO. A Mechanics Insti-
tute, or School of Arts, has long’ been
established, and a new building’in con-
nection with the institution is about to
be erected at a cost of £2,500.
The chief supply of water for the
inhabitants is at present derived from
wells. The rapid progress of the town
and the large increase of population,
have induced action to he taken to con-
struct substantial and permanent water-
works. Parliament has voted£lo,ooo
for this purpose, and the works will be
almost immediately commenced.
The public hospital is a well-man-
aged institution, under the control of
the Government. It is supported
partly by voluntary contributions, and
partly by State aid. It has accommoda-
tion for 30 male patients, and 12 female
patients. The average number of ad-
missions during the year are 260 males
and 50 females. The averag’e number
of patients in weekly during the year
are 32. It is attended by three hono-
rary surgeons, an dps manag’ed by a com-
mittee of -ten members, and is under
the superintendence of the Resident
Dispenser and Matron. Mr. Joseph
Smith is Resident Dispenser. The
average amount of voluntary contri-
butions is £BOO per annum.
The industries of the town and dis-
trict are steadily progressing. There
are three flour mills, five steam saw
mills, an iron foundry, a large and ex-
tensive brewery, with malting-liouse
attached, five tin plate working esta- ■
blishments, hoot factories, cordial and'-
steam aereated water manufactories,
coach building establishment, wheel-
wrights, two tanneries, two soap fac-
tories, and a steam bone crushing’ and
agricultural manure manufactory, all
in active operation, and affording full
employment.
The Savings Bank Act of 1864 in
force in Queensland is an adaptation of
the English statute that was framed by
the ex-Premier, Mr. Gladstone, and was
passed by the Queensland Parliament
when Mr. R. G. W. Herbert, the present
Under Secretary for the Colonies, was
Colonial Secretary. As affording’ a test
of the thrift and frugality of our indus-
trial population, we may state that the
Toowoomba branch was openedin 1865.
In the year 1874, the accounts opened
were 767, and the amount of cash de-
posited was £27,416.
The other public institutions are the
Post Office, Telegraph Offices, Railway
Offices, Works Office, Lands Office, and
Court House apd Gaol.
Toowoomba has a Public Park of 70
acres, and it is now being laid out and
made a healthy place of recreation by
the Corporation, from funds supplied
by the Legislature.
The Yolunteer system has extended
its influence to Toowoomba, and the
town can boast of as good a corps as we
have in the colony. At present we
have one hundred and forty members
enrolled. The officers are Captain J.
Sydney Smith, an old regimental officer,
and Lieutenants Clancy and- Baxter.
The Volunteer Band numbers seventeen
performers, and is not only called out
on all festive occasions, but plays every
Saturday afternoon in some public
place. On the 9tli instant, the Prince
of Wales’ Birthday, there is to be a
Grand Volunteer Demonstration at
Toowoomba, where will be assembled
the various companies in Brisbane, Ips-
wich, and Warwick. * The total number
to he present will he 400. For the first
time the neighbouring hills will rever-
berate the echo of cannon on the morn-
ing of tjie 9th, when a Roval Salute
will he fired by No 2 Battery in honour
of the Prince’s natal day.
There are. also two Masonic Lodges
two Lodges of Odd Fellows, a Good
Templars Lodge, a Rechabite Society,
and two other benefit societies. The


Caledonians have a Society, and we
have a Literary and Debating Class.
Toowoomba has two newspapers, the
Toowoomba Chronicle and Darling
Downs Gazette, published three times
a week, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and
Saturdays.
In addition to the waterworks, a gas
company is in course of formation, to
light the streets, the stores, and all the
public offices with gas. Coal is near at
hand for this purpose. It is now gene-
rally understood that the large plains,
extending westward from the Main
Range, contains large deposits of coal.
At Clifton, about twenty-five miles from
Toowoomba, and close to the Warwick
railway line, a coal mine has long been
open, and the coal is now regularly
used in many households in Toowoomba,
Warwick, and Dalby. The mine at
present is about 60 feet in depth. At
forty feet a sean* six feet in thickness
was discovered, and is now being
worked, arid at 60 feet a seam 10 feet
in thickness was found ; but the super-
abundance of water is an obstacle to
the successful working of the latter
seam. In other parts of the Do-wns,
while sinking for water, large seams of
ooal have been discovered.
There are two Agricultural Societies
in Toowoomba, one holds its Exhibition
in Xugust, when live stock chiefly is
exhibited —the other in January, when
grain, vegetables, fruits, flowers, and
wines, are exhibited. Each Society is
assisted by the Legislature to the extent
of £IOO per annum. .
The present Mayor of Toowoomba
is R. Aland, Esq., J.P., and the Aider-
men are Messrs. James Campbell,
Richard James Barry, John Gargett,
Richard Godsall, Malcolm Geddes,
Jacob Reuter, Daniel Donavan, and
Henry Spiro. Mr. John M. Flynn is
Town Clerk.
The Parliamentary Representative
of Toowoomba is W. H. Groom, Esq.,
and of the district, E. W. Pechey; Esq.
The Police Magistrate is Gilbert W.
Elliott, Esq.
In whatever view Toowoomba is re-
garded, situated as it is in the centre
of a rich pastoral and agricultural dis-
trict, possessed of natural and climatic
advantages unexcelled, railways branch-
ing from it, and now to be carried to
other districts languishing for the pro-
ducts of the soil that are grown in such
abundance in the suburbs, it is impos-
sible not to be impressed with the pro-
mising future that lies before it.
Within the past twenty years it has
grown from a village with a popula-
tion of two hundred souls to its present
large dimensions. In the next ten
years, if its growth is as steady and
continuous as in the past, it must be-
come the second important town in
Queensland.
The Suburbs.
The suburbs of Toowoomba, includ-
ing' the populous district of Highfields
on the north, and the prosperous set-
tlements of Emu and King's Creeks to
the south, are occupied chiefly by a
farming’ population. In the Suburbs
are several beautiful gardens, that
would do no discredit to any country
in the world. Here will be found
growing* in abundance, apples, pears,
apricots, peaches, nectarines, mulber-
ries, oranges of all descriptions, plums
of all varieties, loquats, quinces, and
other fruits of all kinds. The grape
grows here in profuse abundance, and
is cultivated with great care and atten-
tion by several German colonists, who
have also manufactured wine of excel-
lent quality. Some of the gardens are
places of public resort, and are a sort
of Baden Baden on a small scale.
Highfields, in addition to its agri-
cultural resources, haS large quantities
of timber, which give employment to
a large number of hands. It has four
steam saw mills, and supplies the dis-
trict for miles around -with the most


valuable timber, a full description of
which will be found below.
Emu, King-, and Spring Creeks is
one of the most prosperous agricul-
tural settlements in Queensland. The
settlers took up their land under the
Land Act of 1868, which gave them
ten years to pay for it, at a price ar-
ranged according to its classification,
15s. per acre being the highest.
Grazing is here combined with farming,
and it has turned out very successful.
Wheat, barley, oats, and lucerne are
grown here in large quantities, and
the hay, when pressed in bales, is sent
by rail to the Brisbane markets. It
is here that the cross-bred Leicester
sheep and lambs are placed in lucerne
paddocks, and, when in condition, are
despatched by rail to the markets of
Toowoomba, Ipswich, and Brisbane.
There is not a more contented well-to-
do body of men to be found in the
colony than those at Emu, Spring, and
Kings Creeks. Of course Mr. An-
thony Trollope did not honour these
gentlemen with his presence. Had he
done so, it is more than probable he
would have written very differently of
this splendid district and its undoubted
capabilities.


FRUITS, FLOWERS, AND TIMBERS.
Y?vp«HE following reports on fruits,
flowers, shrubs, and timbers of
the district was compiled by Mr.
** C. H. Hartmann, Fellow of the
Royal Horticultural Society of England
and has been most handsomely placed at
our disposal. Mr. Hartmann is one of our
most enterprising colonists, and he has
assisted largely to make known the
inexhaustible resources of the district.
His Nursery on the Main Range, is in
every respect a credit to himself and to
the district in which he resides, and it
is a pity we have not a few more men like
him—men who are not ashamed to put
their shoulders to the wheel, and by
work and labour, from early morn to late
at night —often without results—to
assist in discovering the best commercial
articles to be grown in the field and in
the garden.
Apple Trees are growing remarkably
well, and bearing good crops. Over 200
different varieties are grown, producing
magnificent fruits, and among them are the
following:—Alexander, Beauty of Kent,
Bedfordshire, Foundling, Blenheim Orange,
Brown Spice, Caldwell’s Keeper, Christmas,
Pearmain’s Pippins (many varieties) Quar-
renden, Dickson’s Emperor Duchess de
Oldenburg, Gloria Mundi, Golden Harvey,
Red Streak, Hawthornden, Lord Nelson,
Mammoth, Mables Royal, Astrachan, Red
German, Triumph de Luxemburg, and
many varieties of Russet, Nonpareil, and
Codlins. First class prizes were received for
Apples at the Brisbane Exhibition in 1871,
’72. ’73, and ’74; and first class prizes for
Table and Cooking Apples at the Ipswich
Exhibition 1871, ’72, and ’73—and also first
class prizes for collection of Apples at the
Eastern Downs Horticultural and Agricul-
tural Association, and first, as well as spe-
cial, prizes at the Toowoomba Exhibitions
for several years. The blight having lately
become troublesome, the growing of the
old sorts has been abandoned, and atten-
tion is only paid of late to the new blight-
proof sorts—as Northern Spy, Moyetin,
Irish Peach, Summer Cheese, Gravenstein,
Duchess of Oldenburg, London Pippin, New
England Pidgeon, Bland Rose, Constanti-
nople, and some seedlings which are all
doing very well. Last year we sold two
pounds worth of apples from a single tree
that was nine years old. They were Irish
Peach and Christmas.
Pears are growing and bearing magnifi-
cently. As they do not suffer from aDy
disease, they are getting planted all over
the district. We have seen in the neigh-
bourhood trees 15 and 16 years old pro-
ducing excellent crops of delicious fruit.
Seventy-five varieties are grown, of which
many have fruited—viz., the various Berga-
mots, Beurre’s, Cresanne, Duchess de An-
gouleme, Josephine, Glau Morseau, Tar-
gonelle, Flat Baking, Marie Louise, Napo-
leon, Yon Mons, Windsor Winter Nelis,
Late Green, Large Brown, China, &c. First
prize for Pears have been received at the
Brisbane Exhibition, and also at the Ips-
wich, Warwick, and Toowoomba Agricul-
tural Shows for the last five years. The
China Pear tree commenced fruiting at three
years old, and at fouryears old produced fruit
which received first prizes at several exhibit
tions. The fruit is very large and excellent
for stewing at midwinter.
Apricots grow well and bear a most deli-
cious fruit, but in general do not crop so heavy
as the Peach or Nectarine, but as many
sorts are very early it is a highly esteemed
fruit and profitable to grow. Twenty
varieties are grown, and first prizes have
been taken for this fruit at several exhibi-
tions.


. Cherries, of which a great many varie-
ties have been tried, have borne good fruit.
There are a few large trees in the district
which have yielded very fair crops—they
are the May Duke, Royal Duke, Prusse,
Claremont, Monstreuse de Bavay, Morello,
Werders Early, and a few others ; but it is’
not thought that they can be grown profit-
ably in our neighbourhood, We have no
doubt but that this delicious fruit will grow
to perfection at and about Stanthorpe,
within a hundred miles of this.
. Nectarines grow to perfection in our
district, the trees commence bearing when
three years old (grafted), and there are trees
IB and 20 years old here which have
yielded good crops of splendid fruit every
year. The principle varieties grown are
Albert Victor, Balgowan, Elruge, Nutmeg,
Rivers, Red Roman, Victoria, Downton,
Stanwick, and some seedlings of local pro-
duction, very excellent, named Extrafine,
Crimson Beauty, and Pink Darling. The
Nectarine is an excellent and most useful
fruit for table, kitchen, and very profitable
for preserving.
Peaches may justly be termed the poor
man’s fruit, as it grows and bears abun-
dantly everywhere, except in a swamp, and
under most unfavourable circumstances
for instance, in yards round dwelling houses,
where the ground is tramped hard
all the. year round, affording cool
shade, it produces luscious fruit in
such large quantities that the trees
often have to be propped or else would break
down with the load of fruit. We have a
great many varieties ripening from Decem-
ber to March, or even later, some attaining
the enormous size of four inches diameter"
Everybody eagerly looks forward to the
peach season, particularly the children, who
scarcely eat anything else during the season
of three or four months, but peaches and
bread. Fresh and stewed, they also make
a very rich jam. Some excellent sorts have
been reared from seed named Hartmann’s
Superb, Hartmann’s Late Oval, and Extra
fine. Ihe fruit of those have gained first
prizes in several exhibitions in Queensland.
Plums are growing and bearing as well
as the Peach, but require cultivation. We
have a great many varieties and all are doing
well, ripening from November to April
They are used for table, kitchen, and pre’
serving. /The principle varieties grown are
Orleans, Gages, Egg, Golden Drop, Victoria,
Diamond, Goliath, lekworth’s Imperatrice,
Tefferson,Kirks, Magnumbonum, Quetsche,
Royal Hative, Early American, and the
Damsons, which grow to perfection and so
productive that the trees are breaking down
with fruit every year. Nearly all the
plums commence bearing the third year
after being grafted. Plum trees, since they
have been four or five years old, have
gained first prizes at all the exhibitions of
note in the colony.
Figs.— All that has been said about
peaches is also applicable to figs. The
tree grows anywhere, even on the poorest
soil, amongst rocks and stones, and yields
two crops of delicious sugary fruit, particu-
larly suitable for patients and infants. The
most esteemed kinds are the Ischia, Turkey,
and Genoa varieties, Smyrna, Singleton,
Perpetual, Provence, Italien, Large Brown,
and Dalmatian.
Mulbebkies.— Black English, Black
Cape, and some China varieties are bearing
heavy crops of fine fruit every year. They
are grown profitably for dessert, kitchen, and
preserving purposes, and are also used for
making a very pleasant drink—Mulberry
Wine. Two new American sorts have been
added to the old stock—Hicks’ ever-
bearing, and Dawning’s Prolific. They
appear to be an acquisition, are full of green
fruit now, and will come ripe between the
Early Cape and the Late Black English.
Quinces grow and bear well anywhere,
but particularly so in low moist situations,
the fruit attaining an enormous size up to
four. inches in diameter and six inches long,
and is of a most aromatic scent and flavour,
excellent for stewing, ana the jam aud jelly
is perhaps, without question, the best of all
preserves. The sorts grown are Apple,
shaped, Pear-shaped, Large Portugal-'
Orange, Angiers. lwo new sorts are newv
under cultivation, viz., Reis Seedling of
American Origin, and China; both”are
doing well; the latter, a tree only three V
years old, is full of fruit
Medlaks are also doing, very welj and
bearing heavy crops year by year without
trouble.
Guavas.— Fine ornamental shrubs, bear-
ing abundance of aromatic fruit fur table
apd preserving. The Purple ft nits for four
or five months in the year, and is very
pleasant to the taste. Inhere are, besides
the Purple, Egg, Gooseberry, and Cham-
pagne. 1 he size of the fruit varies from
a cherry to the size of a large hen’s egg,


but the tree can only be grown to advantage
in warm and sheltered situations.
Loqixat.— A very hardy large evergreen
tree, affording fine shade and shelter, and
bearing immense clusters of large berries of
pleasant flavour. The fruit is much
esteemed for dessert and kitchen. purposes,
ripening as it does when other fruits are
generally scarce —viz., through the months
of July, August, and October.
China Date Plum, Diospyrus Kalcii,
one of the most luscious fruits known
Good crops of this fruit have been obtained
from trees planted at some distance from
Toowoomba, but three varieties are now
under cultivation at the Range Nursery,
and are full of young fruit. We have no
doubt that the Date Plum will succeed
here as well as the Orange.
Custard Apple, Anona Cherimoya, and
A. reticulata would do well in warm
sheltered situations. We have several trees
now covered with blossom, and others ad-
vancing with every prospect of approaching
the varieties cultivated with so much suc-
cess in the vicinity of Brisbane.
Oranges.—We can safely say that the
Orange thrives as well in the Darling
Downs District as in any part of the world.
The trees grow well, and bear abundant
crops of sweet, juicy, and well flavored fruit.
The young trees generally commence bear-
ing the fourth year after grafting, and there
are trees twenty-two years old in the town
which yield enormous crops every year.
The principal varieties grown are Parra-
matta, Siletta, St. Michael, Malta, Queen,
Rio, St. Jago, Teneriffe, and Sabine ; and
for preserving, the Seville, Poor Man’s, and
China Gumquat.
Mandarin Oranges.—A smaller China
variety, and very prolific. The fruit is
sweet and of delicious aromatic flavour.
best sorts are Emperor of China,
Emperor, Canton, Thorny, and several
small fruiting sorts for preserving.
- Shaddocks.—Trees of the Blood and
common .varieties are now bearing fruit in
the vicinity of the town. The size of the
fruit is extraordinary, specimens exceeding
eight inches-in diameter having been
frequently brought into the market.
Lemons, like the Orange, are equally
productive. The various sorts are the
Lisbon, Common, Mammoth, and Berga-
mot. All are used for domestic purposes,
and* the manufacture of essences and
cordials.
Limes. —The West Indian variety grows
to perfection, and bears abundantly, so also
does the Sweet Lime, and we have no
doubt that it could be grown profitably for
the manufacture of limejuice.
Citrons are thriving as well as the Shad-
docks, but producing fruit all the year
round, particularly the Bergamot, Dwarf,
Bengal, and Common. The fruit is highly
esteemed for marmalade and preserving
purposes.
Olives. —There are many varieties grow-
ing and doing well in the district, but as
they have been planted only three or four
years, there are none as yet bearing, but to
judge by the healthy and vigorous growth
of the young trees, they promise most pro-
fitable results.
Nuts.—Walnuts, Almonds, and Spanish
Chesnut are growing and bearing well in
the vicinity of the town, and in most parts
of the district. Filberts and hazel nuts are
growing iDto fine shrubs. They have not
shown their bearing qualities to advantage
as yet.
The Grape Vine, without a doubt, does
as well here as in any part of the earth ; we
may simply say it is grown to perfection.
Our district is too new to the market as
yet for its wines, and consequently it has
not yet become famous; but we feel con-
fident that such will be the case in a few
years, for the fruit of the vintage is rich,
sugary and aromatic. We are at present
cultivating a great many sorts for table as
well as for wine-making, viz.:— Table —
Black Hamburg, Black Prince, Black Mo-
rocco, black, red, and white Muscat, Muscat
of Alexandria, Isabella, Chasselas, Syrian,
,Ulliade, and Sweet Water. For Wine —
Black Spanish, Solferino, Espar Gaius,
Hermitage, Madeira, Reisling, Oporto,
Sauterne, Tokay, Tonzellino, White Sherry,
and Muscatines. We are growing also the
new American varieties imported by John
Cribb, Esq., of Brisbane. Of these the
Catawbe, Anna, Rebecca, Elsinbury, Diana,
and Nordons Virginia have produced
splendid fruit, after being grafted two
years.
Pomegranate—not only bearing fine
crops of large fruit, but also forming a very
ornamental shrub.
China Raison, Hoveniadulcis— A very
fast growing ornamental tree, yielding
large quantities of a curious fruit, very
sweet, and eating very much like raisons.
Brazilian Cherry.—A very handsome


evergreen shrub, and is likely to bear fruit
at three years old. One we saw lately was
literally loaded with a pleasant subacid red
star-shaped fruit the size of a small cherry.
Date Palm.—Mr. R. F. Walker, of
Gowrie Creek, has five or six splendid
specimens of this magnificent tree, which
are now about ten years old.
Small Fruits and Useful Plants.
Blackberries. Laughtons Prolific
(American), and the Italian are growing
and bearing vary well. The fruit is large
and well flavoured in both varieties.
Strawberries, when grown here in poor
soil are simply perfection, they are very
prolific and fair flavour ; but when grown ia
rich soil or with plenty of manure, the
fruit attains enormous size, but loses in
flavour. The sorts grown are British
Queen, Omer Pasha, Keens seedling,
Margerite, Oscar, Reifleman, Alpine Red,
Eclips, and May Queen.
Passion Fruit. —A very fast growing
evergreen, handsome climber, producing a
fine flavoured acid fruit nearly all the year
round, frequently attaining the size and
shape of duck eggs.
Cape Gooseberry ( Physalis ). —A her-
baceous plant; grows anywhere without
any trouble, producing immense crops of
berries of the size of a small cherry.
They are very pleasant to eat, and very
useful in the kitchen. Fruit may be ob-
tained nine months out of the year from
these trees.
Raspberries grow and bear in cold
situations, but not profitably. The same
may be said' of Gooseberries.
Elderberry (Black European) grows
and bears as well here as it does in Europe.
So do also the following Hops (English),
Arrowroot, Rhubarb, Ginger, Grasscloth
Plant, Camphor Tree, Indigo, Saflor, Basket
Willow, Senna, Sunhemp, New Zealand
Flax, China Tallow Tree, Black and
Asamaica Tea, Madder Root, and others.
Timber Trees.
Eucalyptus corymbosa (bloodwood),
heighth, 125 feet; very soft to
work when green, but very hard
when dry; stands almost any
time in the ground without de-
caying, hence it is much used
for posts, piles, sleepers, &c.
u paniculata (ironbark), height, 150
feet; like the E. corymbosa, it
stands well in the ground, and is
very durable; splits easily, and is
much used for all kinds of
fencing and rough building pur-
poses.
“ siderophloia (broad leafed iron-
bark), height, 150 feet. This is,
no doubt, one of the best timbers
on the earth. It is first-class for
posts, piles, sleepers, girders, tele-
graph posts, rafters, shingles—
wheelwrights use it for many pur-
poses —and suitable for all kind of
fencing.
“ rostrata (blue gum), height, 200
feet; very hard ; lasts well in the
ground, and is much used for
building purposes, and is very
hard to burn.
“ tereticornis (red gum), heighth,
160 feet; very similar to the E.
rostrata, and also much used by
wheelwrights
“ maculala (spotted gum), height,
« 125 feet; very light, elastic, but
durable timber: does not split
well, but is sawn for house-build-
• mg.
“ pilularis (blackbutt), height, 200
feet. I have seen 160 feet straight
stem split up for fencing without
any waste. Is much used for
rough building purposes; it re-
quires very great heat to burn—it
is almost fire-proof.
“ obliqua (stringybark), height, 150
feet; is much used for spliting
and sawing for fencing and build-
ing, and produces good charcoal.
The bark being very fibrous, it is
often used for tying.
“ hemiphloia (box), height, 125
feet; a very hard, strong, flexible,
and durable wood, above ground,
and is much used for shafts,
handles, &c.; also very good fuel.
“ obtusijflora (yellow box), very
hard, tough, and durable wood,
but owing to its knotty growth, it
is principally used for firewood.
Syncarpia lauri/olia (turpentine), height,
200 feet; the stem grows to a
great thickness, is soft and brittle,
but very durable, is mostly used
for flooring and ornamental work,
as it takes a high polish.
Angophora subvelntina (apple tree), 100
feet high ; a light, tough, inlocked
wood, soft while green, and very


hard when dry; used for wheel
naves, bullock yokes, handles,
and in-door fixings; burns clean
away, leaving only white ashes,
which are much sought after by
soap manufacturers.
Grtvillea robusta (silky oak), height, 150
feet; a very durable elastic wood,
used principally by coopers for
making casks, vats, and tubs of
all descriptions.
Cedrella tuna (red cedar), height, 200 feet;
very light, soft, but durable
wood, used for cabinet making in
all its branches.
Melaleuca spec, (tea tree), heighth, 100
feet; a very hard close-grained
wood, used in ornamental cabinet
work, principally by turners and
carvers.
“ leucodendron, height, 50 to 60
feet; the wood is in many re-
spects similar to the last sort; the
leaves yield a very valuable essen-
tial -oil, which is also used for
rheumatic affections.
Citrus, several species—native lime and
orange ; height, various, from 25
to 60 feet. The wood in all the
sorts is very beautiful, and takes
a high polish—much used in the
finest cabinet works.
Flindersia Oxleyana (light yellow wood),
height, 150 feet; one of the
finest hardwoods for choice
cabinet work: it is of a beautiful
yellow colour in various shades.
Rims rhodanthema (dark yellow wood)
equal to the last, but the colours
shading from light brown to the
darkest.
Acacia (green wattle), light wood, used for
handles; the bark is used largely
for tanning purposes—many other
species more or less valuable.
Araucaria Cunninghamu (hoop pine),
height, 200 feet and more ; soft,
light, but durable timber, used in
house-building inside, and for
common cabinet work ; it is the
most useful of all the light wood,
and grows in immense areas on
the mountains.
“ Bidwillii (bunya bunya, a pine),
height, 250 feet; very ornamen-
tal—one of the most beautiful of
all the conifers ; the wood similar
to the A. Cunninghamii, but not
go durable. This tree bears the
bunya nut, which is one of the
principal means of subsistence of
the natives during several months
in the year. The bunya season is
the great festive time of the
blacks. About February they all
flock to the different Bunya Moun-
tains, and feasting and fighting
is the order of the day. The
Bunya cones are about 12 inches
diameter, and contain 80 to 100
nuts; each nut is about two in-
ches long and one inch thick, and
when roasted or boiled, are mealy
and very nourishing, with a flavour
of beans.
Casuarina tennissima (Forest Oak), 80
feet high, a very hard tough wood
of a beautiful colour. Can be
used for ornamental work, and is
also much used for shingles ; one
of the best for fuel.
“ stric'.a (Diamond Oak); height,
30 to 40 feet. Very tough, used
for handles, and in other respects
like the last named.
“ glauca (Kiver Oak); height, 100
feet. The largest species and the
best for all purposes—bullock
yokes, handles, tubs, water and
tallow casks, shingles, &c. When
dry it is so hard that it is impos-
sible to drive a nail into it. There
are several other sorts of Casua-
rina, all more or less useful ; but
all are excellent for fuel, burning
with a clear flame without leaving
any cinders, and causing a great
heat.
Frenela Endlicherii (Cypress Pine).— Many
species; height, from 50,t0 100 feet.
Fine-looking wood, fit for finer
cabinet work, but is much used
for rough building. The trees
are very ornamentaland graceful.
Sterculea, several spec.es (Kurrajong).
Height, 25 to 60 feet. These
trees are of very peculiar growth ;
the stems are all more or less in-
clined to great expansion, forming
immense trunks. The wood is
very light, fibrous, and flexible,
and is used for splitting laths.
The bark is a splendid fibre, and
is greatly used for tying up the
vines in vineyards, and otherwise.


Alsophila Australis, (Tree Fern).—Height,
25 to .50 feet; thickness of stem
up to 18 inches. Most beautiful
looking wood, marked in exqui-
site figures and splendid colours.
Used for veneering the finest
cabinetwork,
Dicksonia AntartXca, (Tree Fern).—Height
30 to 40 feet.
fibrosa, (ditto ditto), Height,
25 feet. The wood is all verv
beautiful, and in all respects like
the Alsopliila. The trees are
very handsome and majestic-
looking. The fronds are 9 .to 12
feet long, each tree forming a
gigantic umbrella.
native grasses.
. lhe . P>ains and open forests of onr dis-
trict (in fact ofthe whole of Australia) are
covered with most excellent and nutritions
grasses, on which animals, horses, cattle,
and sheep thrive and fatten well. The
principal varieties are Andropogon (several
species), Chloris sorts, Aristida, Paspalum,
Pamcum (many varieties), Anthisteria,
Oarex, Pemsetum, Sporobolus, Pappopho-
Ercanthus, Kyllingia, Chaetospora
Heliocharis palustris, and several others
—some of them grow their seed stalk up to
a height of six feet. The low lying grounds
and swamps owe their magnificent appear-
ance mostly to the Cyperus difformis, C
lucidum, C. fulgaris, C. umbellatus, C.
communis, Scirpus, Maritimus, and others
which also give good food to the animals.
Ornamental trees, shrubs, and her-
baceous plants— of which the forests and
scrubs abound, in fact so much so, that
very often spots are so beautiful and gro- |
tesque that it appears to be productions of !
art, by the harmony and effect of the groups i
of the different species of Celastrus, Cassias, I
of which large golden clusters of lowers’ !
mostly all the year round, may he seen
mixed with the beautiful white and sweet
scented flowers of the Tasminum suavissi-
mum T. racemosum, T. lineare ; next to
the gorgeous flowering, Hibiscus brohysi.
phonium, Eremophila, Monotoea, San-
talum lanceolatum, Alstonia constricta,.
Daviesia, Brusaria spinosa, Styphelia
lanceolata, Hernigenia, Mirbelia specios'a,
Aphanopetalum resinosum, Prostanthera' j
Pultenaea, Hartmannii, Eremophila' !
longifolia, Jacksonia scoporia, Melaleuca f
trichostachya, Dodonaeas, Cassinia, !
Epacris pulshella, Cryptandra spinescens, '
j the last three named are very beautiful
and grow quite on barren ground, between
rocks and boulders, on the ridges, in com-
pany of many species of the graceful
Aeacias, which scent the air with their
large tufts of flowers during the spring
months. Psychotria daphnoides, Hibbertia,
Acalypha, Trochocarpa laurina, a magnifi-
cent shrub, and Eugenia myrtifolia, Sponia
aspera Tristania conferta, a splendid tree
with handsome glossy foliage along the
banks of the creeks and watercourses, the
brilliant crimson flowering Callistemon
lanceolata forms beautiful groups. The
principal features in the dense scrubs are
the beautiful and majestic trees, Ficus
macrophylla, F. Australis, Erythrinas,
Sterculeas (several species), but particularly
the Sterculea rupestris, the great Bottle
Tree, Grevillea Hillii, and many others
which are often covered, stem and branches,
with splendid and ornamental looking
Orchids Dendrobium speciosum D. Hillii,
D. Mortii, D. Monopbyllum, and many
other species. Also, Bolbophyllum, Cym-
bidiurn, Sarcochilus Calcaratus, S. Hillii,
S. Hartmannii, S. olivaceus, and many
others mixed with the grand Staghorn Fern
Platycerium Grande, the shining leafed
Birdsnest Fern Thamnopteris nidus, the
grass leafed hanging Ferns Dictyopteris
attenuata and Ophioglosspm pendulum
the latter a fine flowering species—and the
graceful Asplenium falcatum. Also many
Creepers hang in waving festoons from tree
to tree, which are several species of Vitis,
Passifloras, Tacsonias, Clematis Hoyas,
Cardiospermum, Glycine, Kenedias, and
others.
Herbaceous plants which grow in great
luxuriance on the edge of watercourses,-or
on the open plain, or in the lightly tim-
bered forest, are most of them of great
beauty of foliage or flowering, as well as
good food for the horses, cattle, and sheep.
They are Eranthemum, Lythrurn, Pelec-
tranthus, Justicias, Plumbago, Nicdtiana
suavevlens, Stackhonsia, Lenzea, Ranun-
culus, Mimulus gracilis, Polygonum, Goo-
denia, Hartmahnii F. v. m, G. grandiflorum,
Brachvcome Viola, Calotis, Euphrasia'
Brownti, Hypericum, Centranthera, Sty-
pondra glauca, Lobelia gracilis, a very
pretty 'plant, with spikes of blue flowers,
Ptilotus, Polygala, Pimelia, Crotalaria,
Gnaphalium luteo, Helichrysums, many
handsome varieties, Stylidium, Actinotus,
Arthropodium, Plectranthus, Drosera,


Lotus, and Swainsonias, white, red, purple,
and copper ooloured flowering.
The mountain ravines in our district are
most remarkable for their picturesque and
romantic scenery. Waterfalls of 100 to
200 feet fall, surrounded by magnificent
and graceful ferns, of which the most beau-
tiful are Adiantum assimile, A. formosum,
Polymodium tenellum, Lomaria, Patersonii,
Nephrolepis repens, Blechnum cortilagi-
neum, Aspleuium umbosum, A. flabelli-
folium, Pteris umbrosa, Platyloma falcata,
Gymnograma rutaefolia, Lastrea decom-
posita, Adiantum hispidulum, Nipholotis
rufestris, Pellaea paradoxa, Divalia pixi-
data, Drynaria quercifolia Doodiamedia,
D. aspera, Nephrodium molle, Picopeltis
pustulata, Polystichum aculeatum, Chei-
hmthes distans, Nothocblcena distans, and
others. And here on the rocks also grows
the gigantic lily Doryanthes Palmerii, with
a flower-stalk thirteen feet high, of which
five feet are all flowers, crimson and pink.
Round the bottom oi the falls and along
the creek the majestic palms Seaforthia
elegans, spreads her graceful fronds high
above all other plants; and here also luxu-
riates the noble fern trees Alsophilas, Dick-
soniaantartica, D.6lbrosa,and I). squarrosa,
and among the other fronts of the smaller
ferns some of the delicate and chaste flower-
ing terrestrial Orchids can be seen—the
Pletia, with silvery white spikes of flowers,
Dipodium punctatum, purple flowers; the
golden Diuris, the carmine Spirandes, and
many others. It is in spots like this that
a man can worship the-Great Creator, away
from the busy crowd, and petty prejudices
of single individuals, who expound that
God can only be served by spending the
Sunday in making long faces and what
they call prayer. They have time to at-
tend all sorts of pleasures during the week
days, while the poor man works and toils;
they can go to sports, concerts, and read-
ing-rooms, but their shortsighted and one-
sighted ideas would close all those plea-
sures which often makes life sweet to a
poor man on a Sunday, even a reading-
room, the only time he could enjoy it,
thereby often driving the working classes
to really sin in drinking. When I hear
and read of such narrow minds, I cannot
help thinking how very little ideas they
must have—how very small they make the
Great God. They even go so far as to
draw Him down to their owg level; He
must have the same likes and dislikes as
themselves ; they evidently have no taste
for God’s greatness in Nature, but think
only of themselves .and *their own narrow
way of worshiping.
Tobacco.— There are several sorts grow-
ing here, large coarse-leaved and smooth-
leaved varieties ; also, Venetian and Shiraz.
All the sorts are cultivated with great suc-
cess, but the large-leaved varieties have
taken the lead, as they are more profitable
for the manufacture of tobacco ; but very
little has been done in the way of manu-
facturing tobacco, because we have no one
here who really does understand the treat-
ment of the tobacco to such an extent as the
Americans do. There is not’the slightest
doubtrthat it could be grown extensively
and very remuneratively,as the plants grow
remarkably well.
TOOWOOMBA BUSINESS DIRECTORY.
The following forms a list of the business
men of Toowoomba, and the calling, profes-
sion, and the trade of each of them :
Merchants and Storekeepers.
Holjierton and Co., E. Marwedel and Co.,
M’Leish and Alexander, I). and J. Benjamin
and Co., Lehman and' Co., H. Spiro. Powell
and Palthorpe, Thomas Murphy, W. Rawlings,
Joan Geary, H. Stevens and Co., Gustav
Riedt, B. L. Epstein, Mrs. Tant, W. Crane,
W. Perkins, M. Monrahan, Mrs. Montague,
Renwick Brothers.
Innkeepers.
Charles Walker, J. Higgins, T. W. Perkins,
James Thompson, W. Reeves, Edward Pierce
J. Gill, Mrs. M‘Goldrick, F. Wockner, G.'
Hooper, Jeiennah Allmann, James IVfaloney
James Perkins, T. Howe. Mrs. M■ Kee. Mrs!
ftPMahon, John Scully, Mrs. E. Field, John
81-annelly, W. H. Perkins, P. Nolan. Thomas
Lavis, W. Ward, Charles Rolan, 1 * John Giles,
William Burge, John Hemsworth, Charles
Lindenberg, Patrick Eyan.
Banking Institution*.
National Bank of Queensland (Limited),
Bayk of New South Wales, Australian Joint
Stock Bank.
Auctioneers and Commission Agents.
Thomas G. Robinson, W. C. Balls, J. W,


‘^rFnibar Bennett, Joseph S. M‘ln
tyre, J. Sydney Smith, and James Swann.
Solicitors.
Gustavus Hamilton, Edward J. May, Johr
Ocock, and Richard Dodd.
Saddlers.
Macdonald and Quinn, A. Gaydon, W
Bond, Alexander Morrison, W.'Martin, M
W. Bullock, R. J. Barry, and Gray and Co.
James Blackburn, and J. P. O’Connell.
Watchmakers and Jewellers.
Jacob Harris, W. Grofh, L. Muller, and W
Flavelle.
Booksellers ami Stationers. ,
J. and G. Black, J. H. Robertson, and A,
W. Noble.
Tin Plate Workers.
W. Howell, R. Filshie, J. Dandy, and H,
Collins.
Bootmakers. *
Campbell Brothers, W. White, H. S. Bloom.
G. H. Kenning, J. Finn, H. Mengell.
Surgeons.
Dr. Roberts, Dr. Armstrong (Government
Medical Officer), and Dr. Howlin.
Photographers.
M. Roggenkamp, Geo. L. Massingham, and
Chandler and Matthews.
Fruiterers.
Mrs. Baxter, J. Nock, J. Way, J. Binning-
ton, J. Green, and G. Partridge.
' Painters and Paper Hangers.
Harold Ashworth, W. Groth, sen., and F.
Fass.
' Nursery Gardener and Seedsman.
Carl H. Hartman, Fellow Royal Horticul-
tural Society, England.
Tailors.
J. A Beer, and W. Tout.
Soda Water, Lemonade, and Cordial
Manufacturers.
J. L. Ross (by steam power), Mrs. Murphy,
Murty Meade, and J. W. Dodd.
Printers and Newspaper Proprietors.
Hunt and Groom {Toowoomba Chronicle),
and White and Stevens (Darling Downs
Gazette).
Bakers and Confectioners.
W. C. Green (Confectioner), J. Hartnett, J.
Burge, A. Davis, and J. Hoey (bakers).
Builders and Contractors.
Richard Godsall and John Garget, Ren-
wick Bros.
Licensed Surveyors.
G. T. Weale, John Rosseler, and Jam
Swann.
Flour Mills.
C. Cocks, Neden Brothers, and E. W. Bridi
ford.
Timber Merchants (with Steam Mills
E. W. Pechey, 0. Cocks, Munro' Brother
Bond and Waraker, and E. W. Bridgford.
Coach Builder.
Thomas Trevethan.
Cabinet makers.
Robert Bakers and P. Keogh.
Undertakers.
C. S. Edwards and P. Keogh.
Hairdressers.
J. Way and 0. Liebusch.
Wheelwrights and Blacksmiths.
Eastgate and Buchanan,. Joseph Sterlin
Frank O’Reilly, Adam Geddes, William Sne
John Cahill, Andrew Purdon, Thomas Cba]
man.
Ironmonger.
R. Aland.
Chemists and Bruggists.
Joseph Wonderley, William ' Brocklebah
and T. L. Hodgson.
Private Collegiate School.
Rev. R. Thackeray, Head master.
Foundries and Ironworks (with
* Steam Power).
Griffiths Brothers and Co., and E. V
Bridgford. »•
Monumental Stone Cwtting Worhs {
W. Bruce and W. Reed.
Butchers.
J. C. and W. Campbell, E. Boland sncf Cc
and William Kirk.
Seedsman.
H. Schwormstadt. *
Brewers ' *
Messrs. Perkins and Co.
Tanners.
Beer and Loveday, and S. H. Whichcllo.
* Soap Factories. *
Henry Spiro, and C. Hampson.
Architect. '
W. Powell.




-- , os^{of
f A
t 4
**■
»IS»
ft)
9Yi-a
-Vfi
ifJT £
job fR/Unttustcb-.
THE
OOWOOMBA ¥
MACHINE GENEBAL PEINTIITG OFFICE.
PRINTING jiXECDTED THE JIeATEST StYLE
And at Reasonable Rates.
OZE&XXEjIE&S PTJITGTXJAIjLY _A_TTEIsrX)P]X3 TO.
| a 'Tfa TOOWOOMBA CHRONICLE is published Three Times a Week, and rvil\befound the best ADVERTISING MEDIUM
on the Darling Dorms.
HTJ2TT M G-BOOM, Proprietors.
x
*7 w ' "■ _—*'—- ' * ' v ~ ct O^)RO—• > —qswq.—/ —v--- -op
Pi sf
