

The
"Hagai fn'Ojraijljicnl of Australasia.
Queensland. Founded 1885.
President :
His Excellency the Right Hon. Lord Chelmsford, K.C.M.G.
Vice-President :
Hon. Arthur Morgan, President Legislative Council.
SUMMARY UR THE GEOGRAPHICAL WORK
J. P. THOMSON, LL.D.,
Hon. F.R.S.G.S. (Edinburgh) ; Peek Award Recipient of the Royal Geographical
Society, London; Special Foundation Gold Medallist and Honorary Secretary
and Treasurer Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland ; an Hon.
Vice-President 6th International Geographical Congress, London. Hon.
Corresponding Member of the New York Academy of Sciences; the
Sociedad Cientifica “Antonio Alzate,” Mexico; the Verein fiir
Erdkunde zu Halle; the Royal Scottish Geographical Society ;
the Manchester Geographical Society ; the Societe de
Geographic Commerciale de Paris; the Societe de
Geographic de Marseille, etc.
Approved by the Council
This Summary was carefully revised by the late Sir Arthur
Morgan, Vice-President, in 1907 from the official records of the
Society.
Ist January, 1907.
Revised Edition.
ARTHUR MORGAN, Vice-President.




||flgal snddy of Australasia,
Queensland. Founded 1885.
President :
His Excellency the Right Hon. Lord Chelmsford, K.C.M.G.
Vice-President :
Hon. Arthur Morgan, President Legislative Council.
SUMMARY OF THE GEOGRAPHICAL WORK
J. P. THOMSON, LL.D.,
Hon. F.R.S.G.S. (Edinburgh) ; Peek Award Recipient of the Royal Geographical
Society, London; Special Foundation Gold Medallist and Honorary Secretary
and Treasurer Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland ; an Hon.
Vice-President 6th International Geographical Congress, London. Hon.
Corresponding Member of the New York Academy of Sciences; the
Sociedad Cientifica “Antonio Alzate,” Mexico; the Verein fur
Erdkunde zu Halle; the Royal Scottish Geographical Society ;
the Manchester Geographical Society ; the Societe de
Geographie Coramerciale de Paris; the Societe de
Geographic de Marseille, etc.
Approved by the Council,
ROBERT FRASER, Vice-President.
22nd January, 1901.
Revised Edition.
Ist January, 1907.
ARTHUR MORGAN, Vice-President.
1




Summary of the Geographical Work
Dr. J. P. THOMSON.
The following summary of the Geographical Work of Dr. J. P. Thom-
son is chiefly taken from Vol. VIII. of the “Proceedings and Transactions’’
of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, with
up-to-date additions and corrections.
The account of Dr. Thomson’s work as originally published in the
above volume is prefaced by the following Minute of Council, signed by
the late Hon. Sir A. C. Gregory, K.C.M.G., M.L.C.
ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA,
BRISBANE.
“ Abstract of Council Minute, nth May, 1893 :
“ The Council, desirous of recognising the services of Mr. J. P,
Thomson, founder of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia,
Queensland, and the value of his numerous and various publications
resolve to publish in the ‘ Proceedings and Transactions ’ of the Society
the following revised account of his work, from ‘ The J ournal of the Man-
chester Geographical Society,’ 1891.
A. C. GREGORY, President .”
For the purpose of obtaining information of the forests and other
geographical conditions of the country and gaining professional experi-
ence, the subject of this Memoir visited New York in an unofficial capacity
during 1872 and 1874, travelling through the United States of America,,
and to the province of New Brunswick, Canada. Returning to Scotland
for a brief period, Mr. Thomson next voyaged to the West Coast of South
America, where he visited Valparaiso, Iquique, Arica, Callao, Lima, and
travelled through other parts of Peru and Chili, in all of which places he
had exceptional opportunities of studying the people, as well as the flora,,
the fauna, and the geographical and climatic conditions of these countries.
Again returning to Scotland, he afterwards proceeded to New Zealand, and
arrived in that Colony in 1876. During that year he travelled through
the whole of the provinces of New Zealand, collecting information on the
vegetation, the geographical, geological and ethnographical conditions of
the country ; and, in 1877, voyaged to New South Wales, where two years
were spent in gaining professional experience and obtaining further
information of special scientific value. While in New South Wales, Mr.
Thomson was for some time assisting in field survey operations, and em-
ployed by the Government on contract work in the drafting branch of the
Survey Department, Sydney.


In 1879, r - Thomson left Sydney, intending to enter upon a pro-
fessional engagement in the Crown Colony of Fiji. When passing through
New Zealand, en route to Fiji, Mr. Thomson’s services were retained for a
short time by the New Zealand Government, to assist in some extra
computing and examination work in the Survey Office, Christchurch,
In the beginning of 1880, he received Her Majesty’s Commission,
constituting him a duly qualified Land Surveyor, after successfully pass-
ing the usual professional examination. This commission was given
under the hand and seal of His Excellency Sir Arthur Gordon (now Earl
Stanmore), High Commissioner for the Western Pacific. Mr. Thomson
was then appointed to the position of Government Surveyor, Fiji, and
he continued to occupy that office for five years, when he received the
highest certificate that can be obtained by any professional man, namely,
that of a “ First-class Surveyor.” In the service of Her Majesty’s
Government, even under trying climatic conditions, Mr. Thomson’s
work —which comprised every possible variety of surveying, requiring
the highest professional attainments for its performance —was distin-
guished by its accuracy and thoroughness. His professional work,
which added greatly to our knowledge of the Geographical conditions of
the Colony of Fiji, was much appreciated and highly spoken of, and when
he left the country, after the completion of the surveys, he received
some flattering testimonials from Ministers of the Crown and other
high officers of the Government.
Mr. Thomson has always been noted for the special attention he has
given to the scientific side of-his profession, particularly astronomy,
to the popular aspect of all questions connected with the higher branches
of surveying, to the study of tropical life, and Geographical Science
in its widest sense.
While engaged upon official duties, as Government Surveyor, Fiji,
Mr. Thomson was entrusted with the conduct of the observation of the
Transit of Venus there, in 1882. In preparing for and carrying out this
most important scientific work, he received the warm support and hearty
co-operation of his Excellency, the then Governor of the Colony, Sir
George W. Des Voeux ; material assistance from His Excellency the pre-
sent Governor of Newfoundland, Sir William MacGregor ; and sympathy
from the present Governor of South Australia, Sir G. R. Le Hunte, all
with whom he had the honour of being associated during his term of office
in Fiji. In his professional capacity and during leisure moments as well,
Mr. Thomson also conducted extensive astronomical observations for
latitude and longitude, for magnetic declination, and the observation
of eclipses and comets.
After leaving Fiji he visited and travelled through New Caledonia;
he also paid a brief visit to New Guinea, and several other islands in the
South Pacific, in the interests of Geographical Science. He afterwards


visited Queensland, travelling through the Colony to get an idea of the
timber, the minerals, and other resources ; and subsequently took up his
residence in the City of Brisbane, arriving there in the beginning of 1885.
At that time the Trigonometrical Survey of the Colony had been
commenced, and Mr. Thomson entered the service of the Queensland
Government, in which he still is, having been employed during the last
twenty-two years or thereabouts, doing computing and examining work
in the Survey Office, Brisbane.
In addition to the important services rendered to Science, by his
numerous and various publications, the whole of Mr. Thomson’s
leisure time has, for the last twenty-two years, been devoted
gratuitously to the promotion and diffusion of Geographical knowledge,
for the benefit of the public at large and in the interests of the State of
Queensland.
At the commencement of 1885, Mr. Thomson took active steps to
institute the now well-known and successful Royal Geographical
Society of Australasia, Queensland, a State-supported body which occu-
pies a recognised place among the leading scientific societies of the world.
Being satisfied that such an institution was necessary in a vast and im-
portant colony like Queensland, with enormously rich resources and lying,
moreover, on the borders of New Guinea, it was felt that the exist-
ence of a Society of the kind in Brisbane for the purpose of collating and
disseminating Geographical information, by publications and lectures
would be advantageous to the public and to the whole colony. From the
foundation of this Society, up to the present time, Mr. Thomson has
laboured incessantly in its interest ; first for nine years as Honorary Secre-
tary and Treasurer, afterwards for three successive years as President,
lastly again as Honorary Secretary and Treasurer, and always Editor of
its literature. To the Presidential office he was elected by a unanimous
vote of the members, and after occupying the position of President for
the limit of two years, the rules of the Society were suspended at a crowded
meeting —at which His Excellency the Governor of Queensland, Sir
Henry Norman, took an active part —to allow of Mr. Thomson’s re-
election to the chair for a third term. When it became widely known
that he had been placed at the head of the Society, he received the
hearty congratulations of philosophical Institutions, as well as of emi-
nent learned men in Europe, America and Australasia.
In 1896, there was published in the nth Volume of the “ Proceedings
and Transactions ” of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia,
Queensland, an Historical Review of the Work of the Society by the Vice-
President. In this publication Mr. Thomson’s services are thus referred
to ;
“ The history of a country is said to be indissolubly bound up with the history
of its great men. Be this as it may, the history of this Society is indubitably inter-


woven with the energy and'keenness of interest which have ever been shown in its
welfare by its Patrons and by its Presidents, not the least energetic of whom has been
Mr. J. P. Thomson, the present occupant of tre Presidential chair. Indeed, it
were idle to deny him the full honour of being its sole founder. In his brain sprang
its conception ; to his untiring energy does it owe its successful career ; and upon him
mainly do we rely for its continued progress !
“ Our President (Mr. Thomson) is an acknowledged authority in the sphere of
'Geographical Science, is the Author of no fewer than 80 (now 88) contributions to
the scientific literature of the world, 29 of which have been read before this Society,
and published in its Proceedings. His greatest effcrt, perhaps, is his standard
work on ‘ British New Guinea,’ issued in 1892, in London and Australasia simultan-
eously. Professionally. I know a good deal about how very favourably this work
was received by the European and Australian Press, and respecting the avidity
with which it was read by the better class of English speaking people everywhere ;
indeed so great was the interest shown in the work, that the London ‘ Standard ’
devoted a leader to it. On account of the contiguity of our own Colony to New
Guinea, and the interest which had been aroused by the occupation of that island,
we naturally took a lively interest in the work of our President, which received
most flattering notices from Sir Henry Norman, Sir William MacGregor, the members
of the then Executive of Queensland, as well as from scientific societies and learned
•scientific men throughout the world. To the zeal, accordingly, of our President, Mr.
Thomson, whose mere drudgery in office can never be fully estimated, do we owe
the inception and success of the Royal Geographical Society in Queensland, and on
him, therefore, we cannot heap too much honour.
“The Society was practically without home or habitation of any kind, save
the private residence of its founder, Mr. J. P. Thomson. For nine years Mr. Thom-
son had to do the whole Secretarial and Editorial work, and for six years of that period
the duties of Treasurer, in his own private dwelling house, where he had also to find
accommodatio r for the large and increasing collection of books, maps, atlases,
and other property belonging to the' Society. These necessarily occupied a great
deal of space in a private residence, and their custody, and that of manuscripts
and other documents must, I am sure, have given Mr. Thomson and his family a
great deal of anxiety. The labour involved from time to time in transporting to
and from the city the whole contents of our library of maps and books, which,
immediately after their removal from Mr. Thomson’s residence to our present
quarters, were insured for the sum of must have been in itself a tedious and
laborious task. This was rendered all the more so when it is considered that the
work had to be performed by the custodian’s own hands, without any assistance or
remuneration whatever. Even minute and cash books had to be handled in the
same way, and at every meeting of the Council or of the Society they had to be carried
backwards and forwards, with large parcels of books from the Library (so called)
to be laid on the table for inspection, and maps with which to illustrate papers to
be read. Those who see our Library room now, with table, chairs, iron boxes for
the safe-keeping of papers and letters, with cupboards and convenient shelves for
the books, can have but an imperfect idea of the labour and anxiety of the past,
and of the self-sacrifice of the Founder in his early struggles to establish our Society
and to further the interests of geographical knowledge in this Colony.
“ From the very inception of our Society it has been one of the aims of its
Founder to encourage the study of geography i.i the schools of our Colony and to
advocate its claim to a place in the Higher Education. Referring to the minutes
of our proceedings, I nd that Mr. Thomson had this subject so much at heart that
some few years ago he communicated his views to the Council of the parent Royal


Geographical Society in London, and urged that body to extend its system of
annual school examinations to this Colony, an 1 to grant prizes and medals to success-
ful students here, under similar conditions to those awarded by the Society to the
same class in England. In reply, Mr. Thomson was invited to furnish information
concerning the system of teaching geography in Queensland. This was obtained
from the Department of Education in Brisbane, and from the Boys’ Grammar
School. It was considered by the Council in London, but was not regarded as
satisfactory, and consequently nothing further was done in the matter. Again,
when the University Commission was sitting in Brisbane, Mr. Thomson furnished
the chairman with a copy of a memorial drawn up by the Royal Scottish
Geographical Society for the Scottish University Commissioners, urging them to
include geography in the curricula of these institutions. Shortly afterwards this
Society, in common with other bodies, drew up a memorial which was presented to
the Legislative Assembly in Queensland by one of our past presidents. Sir S. W. Grif-
fith, then Premier, advocating the establishment of a University. Finally, our
Council distributed, free, a special edition of Mr. J. P. Thomson’s last presidential
address to all the public and private schools of the Colony, at the same time offering
prizes for the best essays on the subject of the address.
"Mr. Thomson’s efforts to encourage and promote the study of scientific geogra-
phy in the Australian schools, and to lend his services freely, and always entiiely
gratuitously, to the diffusion of human knowledge, have been gracefully acknow-
ledged by the highest authorities outside Australasia. In this connection, the
United States Commissioner of Education in his Report for 1896-97, Volume 1, page
33, said : ‘ The subject (the Teaching of Geography in Central Europe) is continued in
Chapter XXXV., Volume 2 of the present Report with special reference to Great
Britain and France Following the consideration of Mr. Keltic’s report
is an epitome of a recent report by M. Levasseur, the eminent statistician of France,
upon the teaching of geography in the elementary and secondary schools and univer-
sities of his own country. Reference is also made to the development of the subject
in the Australian provinces, and especially to the efforts of Mr. J. P, Thomson, of
Brisbane, Queensland, to promote the study of geography, and by his researches
and publications to increase the knowledge of the subject.’ ”
Besides being the recipient of a Medal, awarded for “ Merit in
Science and Literature,” Mr. Thomson’s services to Geographical Science
have been recognised by some of the leading learned institutions of the
world, several of which have bestowed honours upon him. His contribu-
tions to the Geographical literature of the world have been much valued
and widely read. Several of his publications have been reprinted and
republished in the British, European, American, and Colonial Scientific
and professional Journals, receiving special commendation from the best
authorities. In this connection, mention may be made of his work on
“ Practical Suggestions to Travellers,” which was reproduced in the
Journal of the London Institution of Surveyors, and other scientific
Journals in Manchester, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, and Australasia. Several
other of his contributions to Geographical literature have enjoyed an
equally wide publicity. Another work, on the Physical Geography of Aus-
tralia, was considered to be of such value that a special copyrighted
edition of it was reprinted, and copies thereof sent to every public
and private school in Queensland. This has also been reprinted and
published by the Smithsonian Institution.


Mr. Thomson has given a good deal of attention to the subject of
Artesian Water Supply in Australia, and in Brisbane he has taken a
leading part in the discussion of schemes to prevent the flooding of the
city and neighbouring localities through the overflow of the Brisbane
River. His suggestions for the prevention or mitigation of this evil have
been discussed by the leading public Press, brought under the notice of the
Government, and his principal scheme eventually approved entirely and
lecommended by the great engineering expert, Colonel Pennycuick.
From a Geographical standpoint, he has also had under consideration the
subject of public parks, and open spaces for cities, having written an essay
thereon, advocating sufficient breathing space for citizens who live in
thickly populated parts ; he is an advocate of forest conservation and city
improvements.
In November, 1894, he undertook the important work of observing
at Brisbane the Transit of the planet Mercury across the disc of the Sun.
In this undertaking, which was fortunately the most, and practically the
only, successful one of the kind in Australasia, he had the honour of having
associated with him His Excellency the late Field-Marshal Sir H. W.
Norman, then Governor of Queensland, who took a most active and in-
telligent part in the work.
As one of the delegates representing the Scientific Societies of
Australasia, Mr. Thomson took an active part in assisting to form the
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science, at Sydney,
in 1886 ; and subsequently at the Brisbane Session of that body, in 1895,
he occupied the position of Secretary to Section A —Astronomy, Mathe-
matics, and Physics.
In the beginning of 1898, Mr. Thomson was selected by Sir William
MacGregor, from amongst the officers of the Survey Department of
Queensland, to accompany His Excellency to British New Guinea to
carry out some special work there. Owing to an attack of a distressing
local epidemic, he was, however, prevented from going to that Colony.
In all his Geographical work, Mr. Thomson has kept abreast of the
times, and being a recognised and well-known enthusiast, he has made
everything a success which he touched in his special line of study. He is
the possessor of Academic Diplomas, Professional Credentials, and
Testimonials of the highest order, and he has, besides, always managed to-
enjoy the good will and opinion of those with whom he has been associated.
He was singularly happy in the enjoyment of the friendship of the late
Field-Marshal Sir H. W. Norman, formerly Governor of Queensland,
who entertained a very high opinion of his work and ability ; and his
successor, Lord Lamington, now Governor of Bombay, has also fully
recognised and acknowledged the value of Mr. Thomson’s laboursQn
the field of Geographical knowledge.


For years Mr. Thomson’s services have been rendered gratuitously to
■every local intellectual movement in which his special knowledge enabled
him to impart to the public information upon particular subjects. In
■response to a requisition signed by the leading merchants and citizens of
Brisbane, Mr. Thomson instituted a series of lectures on Commercial
Geography at the Technical College, Brisbane, in 1894. This was also done
entirely by his own individual efforts, without remuneration or considera-
tion of any kind whatever. To the sublime science of Astronomy, Mr.
Thomson has always been an ardent and enthusiastic devotee, and much
of his labour in this department of knowledge has been singularly suc-
cessful. Besides his several illustrated public lectures on this subject,
he has established and equipped (with a very fine equatorially mounted
telescope and accessories) entirely at his own cost, a private astronomical
observatory, where he hopes to do some still further useful work in the
interests of science.
In connection with his Geographical work and observatory, Mr.
Thomson has established a private reference library of very valuable
works, to which many additions have been made by the liberal gifts of
Government Departments and public institutions and private individuals.
Indeed, so fully and widely has the usefulness of Mr. Thomson’s Geo-
graphical work been appreciated, that he has had no difficulty in filling his
library shelves with a fine collection of books composed very largely of
such valued gifts.
Mr. Thomson is the author of about one hundred published Geo-
graphical works, of which the following is a detailed list, with full par-
ticulars for reference and verification :
1. The I.ate Phenomenon after Sunset.—“ Suva Times,” April 23, 1884.
2. Total Eclipse of the Moon, April 10, 1884.—“ Ibid
3. Sketches on the Rewa River.’—" Ibid.,” Oct. 29, 1884.
4, Sketches on the Navna River.—" Ibid.,” Nov. 5, 1884.
5. The Late Hurricane, Fiji.—Brisbane “ Telegraph,” April 17, 1886.
6. Comets : Their Orbits, and the method of computing their elements, etc.
Read at the February (1887) meeting of the Queensland Branch of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society of Australasia. —“ Brisbane Courier,” February 8, 1887.
7. Objects of the Geographical Society.—" Proceedings and Transactions of
the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, Vol. 1., pp. 7-12.
8. Macuata, the North-west Coast of Vanua Leva, Fiji, etc. (with a map).—
Ibid.,” pp. 27-44.
9. The Rewa River, Fiji : Its Tributaries and District (with a map and plate)
Ibid.,” Vol. 11., part 1., pp. 29-61.
10. Report of the meeting of Inter-Colonial Delegates held in Sydney, Nov.,
1886.—“ Ibid.,” part 11., pp. 76-81.
11. Report upon the Preliminary Examination of a Hill of Subsidence in the
Redbank Plains District, etc., Queensland. —“ Ibid.,” pp. 119-122.
12. The Importance of the Teaching of Geography in the School.—" Ibid
Vol. HI , part 1., pp. 38-50.
13. The Comet.— “ Ibid.,” part 11., p. 72.


14. Occultition of the Planet Venus by the Moon, March 9, 1888.—“ Ibid.,”
pp. 72-73.
15. Sir W. MacGregor’s Ascent of Mount Victoria, and Exploration of the Owen
Stanley Range, British New Guinea (with a map and illustrations). —“ Ibid.,” Vol.
V., part 1., pp. 2-21.
16. On the Application of Astronomy to Meteorology.—“ Ibid.,” part 11.,
pp. 58-59.
17. Notes on the Brisbane River Floods. —“ Ibid.,” pp. 67-70.
18. Sir W. MacGregor’s Upper Fly River Exploration, British New Guinea. —-
“ Ibid.,” pp. 94-100.
19. The North-east Coast of British New Guinea, and some Adjacent Islands.—
“ Ibid.,” Vol. VI., part 1., pp. 32-42.
20. Universal Time Measurement.—“ Ibid.,” Vol. VII., pp. 30-37.
21. Practical Suggestions to Travellers (illustrated).—" Ibid.,” pp. 68-95.
22. The “ Melanesian Plateau ” : Notes on Mr. C. Hedley’s Paper.—lbid.,”
Vol. VIII., pp. 18-22.
23. Notes on “ A Governor’s Cruise in the West Indies in 1884.”—“ Ibid.,
Vol. IX., pp. 7—14.
24. Viti.—“ Ibid.,” pp. 22-51.
25. Commercial Geography.—“ Ibid.,” pp. 73-79.
26. As Others See Us.—“ Ibid.,” pp. 80-83.
27. A Survey of Recent Exploration in British New Guinea.—" Ibid.,” Vol..
X., pp. I—ls.
28. Presidential Address, 1895. The Physical Geography of Australia.—
“ Ibid.,” pp. 85-131.
29. The Alleged Leakage of Artesian Water.—" Ibid.,” Vol. XI., pp. 62-73.
30. Geography in Australasia : Anniversary Address to the Royal Geographical'
Society of Australasia, Brisbane, 1896. —•" Ibid.,” pp. 138-156.
31. Anniversary Address to the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia,
Brisbane, 1897.—" Ibid.,” Vol., XII., pp. 30-40.
32. Sir William MacGregor’s Journey Across New Guinea.—“ Ibid.,” pp. 43-45.
33. Mr. Thomson’s Reply to Dr. Forbes’s Letter.—" Ibid.,” pp. 47-50.
34. The Geographical Conditions of City Life. —“ Ibid.,” Vol. XIV., pp. 1-8.
35. On British New Guinea.—" The Scottish Geographical Magazine,” Vol..
111., pages 648-649.
36. On British New Guinea. —“ Ibid.,” Vol. IV., pp. 334-335.
37. On New Guinea and Adjacent Islands. —" Ibid.,” pp. 495-496.
38. On New Guinea.—" Ibid.,” pp. 613-615.
39. The Barcaldine Artesian Well, Queensland. —" Ibid.,” p. 333.
40. On New Guinea.—“ Ibid.,” Vol. V., pp. 271-277.
41. On New Guinea.—‘ Ibid.,” pp. 557-558.
42. Island of Kadavu (with a map).— ‘ Ibid.,” pp. 638-652.
43. Ascent of Mt. Yule.—" Ibid.,” Vol. VII., pp. 445-446.
44. A Survey of Exploration in British New Guinea.—" Ibid.,” Vol. VIII.,
pp. 367-375.
45. The Land of Viti.—“ Ibid.,” Vol. X., 1894, pp. 120-141.
46. Queensland (with map and illustrations). —“ Ibid.,” Vol. XIII., 1897, pp.
561-572 and 624-635.
47. The Blackall Artesian Well, Queensland. —“ The Journal of the Manchester
Geographical Society,” Vol. IV., pp. 168-169.
48. Sir W. MacGregor’s Ascent of Mt. Victoria, New Guinea.—" Ibid.,” Vol.
VI., pp. 184-193.
49. The Island of Kadavu.—" Ibid.,” pp. 194-205.


50. The North-east Coast of British New Guinea. —“ Ibi Vol. VII., pp. 57-62,
51. Practical Suggestions to Travellers (with maps).—“ Ibid.,” pp. 153-168,
52. Ascent of Mt. Yule.—“ Ibii.,” p. 94.
53. Exploration and Discoveries in British New Guinea.—“ Ibid.,” Vol
VIII., pp. 42-54.
54. On Sir William MacGregor’s Journey in New Guinea.—“ Ibid,” Vol,
XII., pp. £Ol-203.
55. Nouvelle Guinee.—"Bulletii de la Societe de Geographic de Marseille,”
tome XII., pp. 68-70.
56. Nouvelle Guinee.—“ Ibid.,” pp. 70-71.
57. Nouvelle Guinee.—“ Ibid.,” pp. 201-202.
58. Nouvelle Guinee. “ Ibid.,” p. 303-305.
59. Nouvelle Guinee." Ibid.,” tome XIII., p. 80.
60. Sir W. MacGregor, Nouvelle Guinee.—" Ibid.,” pp. 410-412.
61. Sir W. MacGregor, Nouvelle Guinee.—" Ibid.,” tome XIV., pp. 203-205.
62. M. MacGregor, Nouvelle Guinee.—“ Ibid.,” pp. 417-418.
63. Le Mont Yule.—" Ibid.,” tome XV., p. 405.
64. Exploration de la Papouasie Anglaise.—" Bulletin de la Societe de Geo-
graphic Commerciale de Paris,” tome X., pp. 204-205.
65. Un Nouveau Puits Artesian en Australasia. —" Ibid.,” pp. 449-450,
66. En Nouvelle Guinee.—“ Ibid.,” pp. 457-458.
67. Un Exploration de la Nouvelle Guinee Anglaise.—“ Ibid.,” pp. 656-657,
68. Nouvelle Guinee, iYiglaise et Allemande. —" Ibid.,” tome XI., pp. 143-144.
6 . Epilogue du drame de la Perouse.—“ Compte Rendu : Societe de Geo-
graphic, Paris ” ; Nos. 19 and 20, 1891, pp. 580-581.
70. Rapport Sommaire sur les Voyages et Travaux Geographiques en Australasie
(Queensland), au XlXe. Siecle.—" IVe. Congres International des Sciences Geogra-
phiques, tanu a Paris en 1889,” tome IT, pp. 103-119.
71. Exploration and Discoveries in British New Guinea.—“ Goldthwaite’s
Geographical Magazine,” Vol. 111., pp. 368-373, New York.
72. Practical Suggestions to Travellers (Illustrated). —“ The Journal of the
Tyneside Geographical Society,” May, 1893, pp. 113-130.
73. Queensland (with Illustrations). —" Ibid.,” November, 1897, pp. 21-51.
74. Exploration and Discoveries in British New Guinea since the Proclamation
of Sovereignty.—" Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science,”
Hobart, 1892, Vol. IV., section E, pp. 419-439.
75. Universal Time and t e Prime Meridian.—Read before the Royal Society
of Queensland, Friday, March 13, 1891.
76. “ British New Guinea,” with map, numerous illustrations and appendix.
London : George Philip & Son ; Brisbane : Muir and Morcom. Pp. xxviii. and 336,
1892.
77. The Geographical Evolution of the Australian Continent (with maps and
illustrations). —“ Queensland Geographical Journal,” Vol. XVI., pp. 1-23.
78. An Account of Lord Lamington’s Travels in Mexico, 1887. —‘‘ Ibid.,
pp. 91-110.
79. The Climate and Artesian Waters of Australia. —“ Ibid.,” Vol. XVII., p.
1-31.
80. " The Physical Geography of Australia ” : V., Geology, VI., Natural Pro-
ducts.—" Ibid.,” Vol. XVIIL, pp. 1-32.
81. Address : " The Exploratory work and Early Achievements of the Hon.
A. C. Gregory.”—“ Ibid.,” pp. 121-126.
82. Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland ; Historical Review.
■" Ibid.,” Vol. XXI., pp. 27-42.


83. The Transit of Mercury, 1894. Nov. llthEgress.—“ Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, London,” Vol. LV., pp. 316-319.
84. The Transit of Mercury, 1894.—“ Proceedings of the Australasian Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science,” Vol. VI., pp. 208-211.
85. Notes on Sir William MacGregor’s Recent Remarkable Journey Across New
Guinea and Re-ascent of Mount Victoria.—” Nature,” London, December 17th, 1896.
86. The Physical and Mental Energy of Man.—‘ The Queenslander,” April
24th 1896.
87. Occuitation of Alpha Scorpii by the Moon, 1897, 13th September.— ‘‘ Ibid.,”
October Ist, 1896,
88. Notes on Sir William MacGregor’s Journey Across New Guinea.—“ Ibid.,’
November 7th, 1896.
89. Early Australian Exploration.—“ Ibid.,” July 3rd, 1897.
90. The Banyan Tree.—“ The Brisbane Courier,” May 24th, 1897.
91. Our Explorers.—“ Ibid.,” (Commonwealth Number), January Ist, 1901.
92. Geographic Physique de I’Australie.—“ La Geographic,” Bulletin de la
Societie de Geographic, Paris, April, 1902, pp. 255-266, August, 1902, pp. 150-163.
93. “ Queensland : Its Material Progress and Natural Resources.” —Journal of
the Royal Colonial Institute, No. 1, Part 1, Vol. XXXV., pp. 35-46.
94. Queensland. —“ The Geographical Journal,” London, August, 1904, Vol.
XXIV., No. 2, pp. 168-191, Nine illustrations.
95. Notes on the Natives of Australia. —“ Queen’s Quarterly,” July, 1904,
pp. 1-15.
96. “ Round the World,” with map, numerous illustrations and appendices,
Brisbane : The Outridge Printing Coy., pp. xxviii. and 357, 1904.
97. Report on the Murrumbidgee Water Conservation and Irrigation Schemes —
Prepared for the New South Wales Government.—Parliamentary Papers, 1906.
98. Report on the Barren Jack Dam and Reservoir Sites. —Prepared for the
New South Wales Government. —-Parliamentary Papers, 1906.
99. University Movement.—“ The Brisbane Courier,” November 19, 1906.
The whole of the foregoing works and numerous addresses in manu-
script have been prepared by Dr. Thomson without any payment or
remuneration whatever.
To bring this list of publications up to date, from twenty to
thirty titles will require to be added, comprising Memoirs published
by Dr, Thomson since January, 1907.
For the Council
ROBT. FRASER, Vice-President
22nd January, tqoi
The Thomson Foundation Gold Medal Scheme.
At the Adjourned Annual General Meeting and Conversazione of
the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, on July 27,
1900, the Right Hon. Sir Hugh M. Nelson, P.C., K.C.M.G.. D.C.L.,
President, presided, and was supported by His Excellency the Right Hon.
Lord Lamington, G.C.M.G., Governor of the Colony and Patron of the




83. The Transit of Mercury, 1894. Nov. 11th Egress.—“ Monthly Notices of the
Royal Astronomical Society, London,” Vol. LV., pp. 316-319.
84. The Transit of Mercury, 1894.—“ Proceedings of the Australasian Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science,” Vol. VI., pp. 208-211.
85. Notes on Sir William MacGregor’s Recent Remarkable Journey Across New
Guinea and Re-ascent of Mount Victoria.—“ Nature,” London, December 17th, 1896.
86. The Physical and Mental Energy of Man.— 1 The Queenslander,” April
24th 1896.
87. Occultation of Alpha Scorph by the Moon, 1897, 13th September. —‘‘ Ibid.,’
October Ist, 1896.
88. Notes on Sir William MacGregor’s Journey Across New Guinea.—“ Ibid.,”
November 7th, 1896.
89. Early Australian Exploration.—“ Ibid.,” July 3rd, 1897.
90. The Banyan Tree.—“ The Brisbane Courier,” May 24th, 1897.
91. Our Explorers.—“ Ibid.,” (Commonwealth Number), January Ist, 1901.
92. Geographie Physique de I’Australie.—“ La Geographic,” Bulletin de la
Societie de Geographie, Paris, April, 1902, pp. 255-266, August, 1902, pp. 150-163.
93. “ Queensland : Its Material Progress and Natural Resources.”—Journal of
the Royal Colonial Institute, No. 1, Part 1, Vol. XXXV., pp. 35-46.
94. Queensland. —“ The Geographical Journal,” London, August, 1904, Vol.
XXIV., No. 2, pp. 168-191, Nine illustrations.
95. Notes on the Natives of Australia.—“ Queen’s Quarterly,” July, 1904,
pp. 1-15.
96. “ Round the World,” with map, numerous illustrations and appendices,
Brisbane : The Outridge Printing Coy., pp. xxviii. and 357, 1904.
97. Report on the Murrumbidgee Water Conservation and Irrigation Schemes —
Prepared for the New South Wales Government.—Parliamentary Papers, 1906.
98. Report on the Barren Jack Dam and Reservoir Sites.—Prepared for the
New South Wales Government.—Parliamentary Papers, 1906.
99. University Movement.—" The Brisbane Courier,” November 19, 1906.
The whole of the foregoing works and numerous addresses in manu-
script have been prepared by Dr. Thomson without any payment or
remuneration whatever.
With the object of recognising in a '* substantial and permanent
form/’ the eminent services gratuitously rendered by Dr. Thomson to the
Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, and to Geographi-
1 Science, there has been instituted by the Society “ The Thomson
mdation Medal.” in gold, particulars of which are hereto attached.
For the Council,
ROBT. FRASER, Vice-President
22nd January, 1901.
The Thomson Foundation Gold Medal Scheme.
At the Adjourned Annual General Meeting and Conversazione of
the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland, on July 27,
1900, the Right Hon. Sir Hugh M. Nelson, P.C., K.C.M.G.. D.C.L.,
President, presided, and was supported by His Excellency the Right Hon.
Lord Lamington, G.C.M.G., Governor of the Colony and Patron of the


Society. In addressing the meeting, which was very large and representa-
tive, the retiring Vice-President (Alderman William J ones) said ;
“ Sir Hugh Nelson, Your Excellency, Ladies and Gentlemen, —At the meeting
held last week mention was made of the long-continued valuable services gratuit-
ously rendered to this Society in various offices by Mr. J. P. Thomson, and a desire
was evinced to recognise those valuable services in some substantial manner. The
matter was adjourned to this meeting, and as it was so adjourned at my suggestion,
it is my duty to reintroduce it this evening. As Mr. Thomson is so well-known to us
all, personally, as well as by his works, it will not be necessary for me to say very
much, and in what little I have to say, I hope this meeting will bear with me, and not
think me tedious. Mr. Thomson is the Founder of this Society. It was he who con-
ceived the idea that such an institution as this was necessary and desirable in this
city. He performed all the work in connection with its inception ;he raised the neces-
sary funds, he overcame all the difficultes, and he it was who received and endured the
rebuffs in connection with the founding of this Society. Had he done nothing else-
but this, I think that the members of this Society should hold him in high honour,
and revere his memory. Since the Society’s foundation, Mr. Thomson has been most
indefatigable in his exertions for the benefit of the institution. With the exception
of the time that he was President all, or nearly all, the secretarial duties have been
performed by him, and anyone conversant with these duties will readily admit that
they are heavy, arduous, and important, requiring constant attention. And those
who have seen the work done by Mr. Thomson in this respect will also admit that he-
has performed those duties with marked ability and consummate tact. It is not too
much to say that the success attained by this Society is largely owing tojiis splendid
and enthusiastic devotion to the duties of Secretary. Not only has he performed the
duties of Secretary, but during the infancy of the Society, when the funds of the
treasury required special economy, and even nursing, he acted as Treasurer, and dur-
ing that anxious time he managed the duties of that office so skilfully as to give the-
fullest satisfaction to everyone. In addition to that, he has at all times prepared
for public .tion all the proceedings, all the matters relating to this Society, and they
are voluminous. He arranged all the details for the Press, corrected all the proofs,
and arranged everything, and the several comparatively bulky volumes issued under
the auspices of this Society are emphatic evidences of his energy and care. Mr..
Thomson has frequently appeared before us as an Author. He has time and again
appeared at our monthly meetings and read his own papers, and he has just finished
a series of articles at the request of the French Geographical Society, whose head-
quarters are at Paris. These articles will be published in the journal of the French
Society, and, no doubt, will be valued very much. In that way credit will come to
this Society, but the honour will be his. Mr. Thomson has at all times conducted
the correspondence of this Society, all of which has passed through his hands. Every
paper submitted for reading at our meetings has been critically examined by him,
and all letters from this Society are his handiwork. With regard to the latter,
everybody will agree that he has done his work remarkably well. Therefore, as
Founder, as Secretary, as Treasurer for a time, as Editor, as Author, and as Corres-
pondent, Mr. Thomson has rendered eminent services to this Society and to Geo-
graphical Science, and I think the least the Society can do is to recognise in some-
way or other the work done by him. All who have noticed this work will readily
acknowledge that in doing it Mr. Thomson has displayed conspicuous scientific skill,
extended scholastic attainments, and unbounded courtesy. The difficulty that
presents itself is how such services are to be properly recognised. Although the
Society financially is in a comparatively flourishing condition, if we were to take all
our funds and devote them to the purpose I am suggesting, they would not adequately


reward our friend. It was suggested that we should grant him an honorarium.
lam not so sure that that would be a fitting way of marking our appreciation. I
think, too, it would be putting it in a form that would be unacceptable. In order,
therefore, that fuller consideration may be given to the matter, I will ask leave to
refer it to the Council of the Society, with a view of their devising and executing a
scheme whereby the usefulness and influence of this Society may be extended in a
manner gratifying to our friend, and at the same time rewarding him in a small
measure in an acceptable form. I think this can be done by a trifling annual expen-
diture, which would provide for a small golden decoration, to be awarded to the au-
thors of the best literary contributions accepted by this Society, and read at its meet-
ings each Session. The first decoration struck off should be presented to our friend
whom we all wish to honour. I beg leave to move, Mr. President, the following
resolution :
‘‘ ‘ That, in view of the valuable services gratuitously rendered to this Society
in various offices since its foundation by Mr. J. P. Thomson, this meeting
requests the Council to devise and execute a scheme whereby those services
can be recognised in a substantial and permanent form.’ ” (Applause.)
The Vice-President (Mr. R. Fraser) seconded the motion, which was warmly
supported by the Hon. Arthur Morgan, Speaker of the Legislative Assembly, the
Hon. T. B. Cribb, MX.A., Treasurer of Queensland, and carried by acclamation.
See “ Queensland Geographical Journal,” Vol. XV., pp. 132 to 134.
This resolution was duly considered by the Council, and it was
unanimously decided that the most acceptable scheme for recognising the
eminent services gratuitously rendered to the Society and to Geographical
Science by Mr. Thomson, whose life-long devotion to scientific work has
been widely acknowledged, would be to establish a Foundation Gold Medal
with which his name would always be associated as the founder of the
Society, the medal to be awarded annually to the author of such literary
contributions to Geography as may be approved and deemed worthy.
The medal, of which the following is an illustration, was struck in
London by the famous medallist, Allan Wyon, F.A.S., Chief Engraver to
His Majesty the King :
THE THOMSON FOUNDATION GOLD MEDAL of the Royal
Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland.
The first medal was awarded to Mr. Thomson for his distinguished
services to Geographical Science, apart from his services to the Society,


the presentation being made at the Annual General Meeting of the Society,
August 9, 1901. In presenting the medal the President, Sir Hugh M.
Nelson, said :“ I have now a very pleasant duty to perform. I have told
you of the origin of the foundation of our Gold Medal. We designed it to
be an everlast ng incentive to persons, young or old, in any part of the
world, but principally in Australia, to devote their talents and energies
towa ds the Science of Geography. It was agreed when first instituted
that the cost of the dies and first impression of the medal, should be paid
for out of the funds of the Society, for the purpose, mainly, of its being
presented to our worthy Honorary Secretary, to whom this Society
from its inception has been very much indebted. By referring to the
resolution that was passed at last Annual Meeting, you will note the high
appreciation with which Mr. Thomson’s services have been received by
the whole Society. I can bear my testimony to his indefatigable zeal
in carrying out his duties and without flattering him to his face, in any
way, I can say that I hardly believed any man could devote himself to
the duties of his office as Mr. Thomson has done. Under those circum-
stances, then, it gives me the greatest pleasure to now present him with
the fi st impression of the Thomson Foundation Gold Medal of the Royal
Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland,” (Applause). See
” Queensland Geographical Journal,” Vol. XVL, pp. 141-142
In 1902 Mr. Thomson received the Peek Award of the Royal Geograph-
ical Society, London, for his great services to Geography in Queens-
land. The presentation was made by the President, Sir Clements R.
Markham, K.C.8., F.R.S., at the Anniversary Meeting of the Society,
in London, on the 26th May, 1902. In handing over the Award to Field
Marshal Sir Henry Wylie Norman, formerly Governor of Queensland,
for transmission to Mr. Thomson, Sir Clements Markham said :—.
1 he Cuthbert Peek Grant has been awarded to Mr. J. P. Thomson, the founder
of the Queensland branch of the Geographical Society of Australia, for the many ex-
cellent papers he has written on geography, and for his work in connection with
the founding of that Society. We naturally have a very warm feeling for the colony
■of Queensland, for the colony of Queensland alone has subscribed to our Antarctic
Expedition the sum of 1,000, while all the other Australian colonies declined to give
us anything ; and I believe it is due a great deal to the President of the Society and
to Mr. Thomson, and to their representations, that the Government of Queensland
was induced to act so generously towards us. Sir Henry Norman has kindly under-
taken to receive the award for Mr. Thomson, and to decide what form it shall take,
and I therefore now have great pleasure in handing to Sir Henry Norman, the former
'Governor of Queensland, the diploma for Mr. Thomson.”
Sir Henry Norman : “ On behalf of Mr. Thomson, and at his particular request,
I return you very hearty and sincere thanks for the honour that has been conferred
upon him. And from my personal knowledge he deserves this award, and I have
no doubt whatever, Sir Clements, that why Queensland was the only colony that
gave H,OOO was owing to the great unpaid exertions of Mr. Thomson for many years
past. I think perhaps you would like to hear that your estimation, sir, of Mr.


Thomson is borne out by two little extracts which. I will read. Sir Hugh Nelson,
the President of the Royal Geographical Society of Queensland, says : —' The
welcome news was cabled to the Press here, and Mr. Thomson has requested you to
receive the award on his behalf. When doing so, will you kindly express to the parent'
Society the extreme gratification the award has afforded to the Council, the Fellows,,
and Members of our branch. Such recognition by the highest authority in the world
of the work of one of our members we greatly appreciate and esteem a very high
honour, and I trust and believe it will be the means of stimulating all connected with
our Society throughout Australia to make more strenuous exertions in furtherance-
of the science in which we are devoted, though humble, co-operators.’ I also re-
ceived a letter from the Prime Minister of Queensland in which he says ; —‘ In
connection with this matter I have the honour to add my request that you will at
the same time state on the part of this Government that it is a matter of great grati-
fication to them that a member of its State has been thought worthy to receive
this honour, and to express their appreciation of the recognition therein implied of
the services rendered to science by a Queensland Society.’ ” —See “ The Geographical
Journal,” London, July, 1902, vol. xx., No. 1, p. 116.
This Peek Award, which took the form of a handsome piece of plate,,
specially selected by Field Marshal Sir Henry Norman, was sent out
f m London through the Queensland Government, and presented to
Mr. Thomson by His Excellency General Sir Herbert Chermside, G.C.M.G.,
the State Governor, the presentation being made at a very large and
representative special meeting and conversazione of the Royal Geo-
graphical Society of Australasia, Queensland, on the 31st Otcober, 1902.
The commodious hall of the Society, at the Public Library Building,
Brisbane, was crowded in every part. In opening the proceedings,,
the Right Hon. Sir Hugh M. Nelson, President of the Society, said :
“ We are met this evening on a very unique occasion and one unprece-
dented in the history of the Society—viz., to present to Mr. Thomson the
Award which has been given him by the parent Society in Great Britain,
the largest Society in the world connected with geographical matters.
Perhaps you would like to know a little about what the Peek Award is,
and what it is given for The Award is given in the first
instance to practical explorers, who, in many cases, take their lives in
their hands and go into new countries, partially survey them, and report
what their discoveries may be ; and in the second place to gentlemen
who have rendered signal service to the cause of Geographical Science.
And it is worthy of notice that the Award with which we are now dealing
is the first instance on record where it has been made to a gentleman
who was not actually engaged in the field of exploration and discovery
at the time. The Award has been made to Mr. Thomson by the Society
for his great services to Geographical Science in particular and Science in
general, in Queensland and Australia.” —See “ Queensland Geographical
Journal,” Vol. XVIII., pp. 137-138
The President then read a great number of communications from
kindred societies and eminent public men congratulating Dr. Thomson
on having received the award. These included letters of hearty congrat-


illation from Field Marshal Sir Henry Wylie Norman, G.C.8., G.C.M.G.,
His Excellency the Right Hon. Lord Lamington, G.C.M.G., Governor of
Bombay, and from the Federal Minister of Customs, Melbourne, with
cordial felicitations and an intimation that the Award would be admitted
to the Commonwealth free of duty. In concluding his letters Sir Henry
Norman said;—“ I congratulate you most heartily
on receiving this distinction, which I hope will be gratifying to you
and tend to encourage the cause of Geography and the success of the
Society for which you have worked so well in Queensland
It will be a lasting evidence that you obtained the complete approbation
of the Royal Geographical Society of England in your efforts to help
Geographical Science in Queensand.”
And Lord Lamington concluded “ . . . . . I congratulate
you on the receipt of the Peek Award, vhich is decidedly worthily be-
stowed in recognition of your unswerving fidelity to the advancement of
Geographical knowledge, and of its progress in Queensland
With renewed felicitations and best wishes for your health and
prosperity.”
The President (Sir Hugh M. Nelson) continuing said: “ The
Diploma and the piece of plate have now arrived, and I feel great
gratification in now handing to Mr. Thomson the Diploma which the
Society has awarded him. The Diploma bears the signatures of Sir
Clements R. Markham, President; Leonard Darwin and J. F. Hughes,
Hon. Secretaries, and is dated May, 1902. I have very great pleasure,
Mr. Thomson, in presenting to you this Award, and to express the grati-
fication of this Society, and I think the whole of Queensland, that it has
been awarded to the right man. (Applause.) I ask your Excellency
to be kind enough to present this piece of plate which accompanies the
Diploma to Mr. Thomson.” (Applause.)
His Excellency the Governor (Major-General Sir Herbert Chermside,
G.C.M.G., C. 8.) ; “ Ladies and Gentlemen, I am asked on your behalf
and that of the President, who has deputed to me the honour of this duty
to present to our Honorary Secretary this very handsome piece of plate
inscribed—
Royal Geographical Society.
Cuthbert Peek Grant for 1902 Awarded to
J. P. THOMSON,
FOR HIS GREAT SERVICES TO GEOGRAPHY IN QUEENSLAND.
I will not detain you by going over the ground that our honoured President
has just traversed. I think it will suffice to remark that all here present
recognise what a scientific and geographical enthusiast our Honorary
Secretary is. I have had the opportunity, as doubtless you have had, of
reading a record of his long labours in the cause of Science. The number
of his publications alone is very high ; it must be by this time nearly, if


not quite 100 ; for I remember I was reading one written in the early
’go’s, which bore a number above 80. I need hardly enlarge before an
audience like this, on the very great value to all nations, in the present
age, of Science and of scientific training. The accuracy given by scientific
training (and Mr. Thomson is scientific, not only as a Geographer, but
he has followed Astronomy, and Surveying, and is interested in Meteor-
ology, Geology, and kindred sciences, all of which require that accuracy of
eye and recording which causes scientific societies whenever they get
reports on interesting physical matters, to at once wish to know whether
they have been recorded by a trained observer), is always valuable, and.
is becoming daily and yearly a more indispensable part of that intellectual
equipment which is necessary to success in the struggle for life and in the
competition amongst nations. I am sure, therefore, that you, Mr.
President, and ladies and gentlemen feel here in Queensland that we are
honoured by being assembled to present to a representative Queenslander
here on this occasion, this Award of that grand parent Society which is,,
in its interest in its own particular science, omnipresent throughout the
civilised universe. Mr. J. P. Thomson, I have great pleasure in presenting
you with this handsome silver plate.” (Loud applause.) —See “Queens-
land Geographical Journal,” Vol. XVIII., pp. 137-145.
On the ist May, 1903, Dr. Thomson set out from Brisbane on an all-
round-the-world tour, visiting New Zealand, Samoa, Honolulu, the-
United States of America, Canada, the United Kingdom, and the Con-
tinent of Europe, en route. The results of which he published in illustrated
book form, entitled “Round the World” (vide list of publications, No. 96).
On the eve of his departure he was entertained at a Special General
Meeting of the Royal Geographical Society of Australasia, Queensland,,
the Right Hon. Sir Hugh M. Nelson, P.C., K.C.M.G., D.C.L., President,,
in the chair. In addition to His Excellency the Governor (Major-General
Sir Herbert Chermside, G.C.M.G., C. 8.,), Patron of the Society, there:
was present “ a large and distinguished company ” {vide report of pro-
ceedings, “ Queensland Geographical Journal,” Vol. XVIII., pp. 158-
165). On this occasion the President announced, amidst hearty applause,.
“ That in view of the distinguished services to science rendered by James
Park Thomson, the Senate of Queen’s University, Canada, had conferred
upon him the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws.” Continuing the
President said : “I think it is extremely pleasing to know and to feel that
the distinguished honours which Mr. Thomson —or, I should rather
designate him, Dr. Thomson now —has received, as this follows the Peek
Award given by the London Royal Geographical Society at a recent meet-
ing, have been won by him without any outside patronage or influence
whatever, and by sheer force of merit. (Applause.) He has devoted him-
self, and devoted those very distinguished qualifications which he possesses
all of a very high order, voluntarily to the cause of Science, and it is very


gratifying to me, and I think it must be so to the whole of the members of'
this Society, to know that these merits have been appreciated, not only
by ourselves, but also by others, who perhaps are more'qualified to judge
of the merits of Dr. Thomson than even we are. The very high honour
paid to him reflects itself upon this society, of which Dr. Thomson has been
the distinguished Honorary Secretary from its very foundation ; in fact,
he is the Founder of this Society ; and doubtless without the immense
exertions that he has put into it the Society would never have flourished
in the way it has. I have the greatest pleasure, Dr. Thomson, in con-
gratulating you on the distinguished honour which has now been conferred
upon you.” (Applause.)
(Sgd.) HUGH M. NELSON,
President.
In 1906 Dr. Thomson was invited by the New South Wales Govern-
ment to assist in the inquiry respecting the proposed Barren Jack.
Reservoir and Northern Murrumbidgee Irrigation Scheme. And about
the middle of that year he inspected and examined the site of the
projected reservoir and dam, reported and gave evidence in regard
to the geographical conditions of the Murrumbidgee basin and as to
the value or otherwise of the scheme generally for irrigation purposes,
his reports on the same being most exhaustive and comprehensive.
This great scheme, it may be stated, involves an expenditure of'
£1,574,008.
Extract from an Address by His Excellency the Right Hon. Sir William MacGregor, Governor
of Queensland, at the 25th Anniversary Celebration op the Royal Geographical Society
op Australasia, Brisbane, August 27th, 1910. —“ Queensland Geographical Journal,” vol.
xxv., p. 112 ;
His Excellency the Governor said:— “l have been asked to represent, on this important occasion,
certain learned bodies in the United Kingdom. First of all, I was invited by Sir Donald Macalister, the
principal of the University of Glasgow, to represent that institution. Then I was asked by Sir William
Turner, principal of the Edinburgh University, and also by the President and Secretary of the Royal
Geographical Society of England, to represent those institutions at this gathering. Now, I do not under-
stand that I was asked to represent those three great learned bodies simply to congratulate this Society on
having attained its 25th anniversary, but rather to compliment it on its splendid achievements. I take it
that my mission, if I may venture to so describe it, is very much more to express appreciation of the work
of the Society, than to congratulate it on its age. I myself have been connected with the Society in a measure
for over a score of years, so that I am able to form a fairly good opinion as to what has been accomplished.
In conversations I have had with the former President of the parent Society (Sir Clements Markham), and
with the secretary (Dr. Scott Keltie) they both have expressed very high appreciations of the work done
by the Queensland society, the principal credit for which they certainly were inclined to ascribe to the
indefatigable Secretary, Dr. Thomson, who not only had originated the Society, but had lent the motive
power to it ever since.
Extracts from a Letter written during the Great War, by the Right Hon. Sir William MacGregor
former Governor of Queensland, to Dr. J. P. Thomson :
Chapel-on-Leader,
Earls ton,
Scotland,
11th January, 1916.
My Dear Dr. Thomson.
May I offer you my congratulations on your wonderful success in not only keeping the Roya
Geographical Society going, but in actually infusing into it greater vitality than ever at a time when one
might have expected it to die of inanition. You have certainly achieved a very meritorious record, in having
created and nursed into years of discretion and honour a Society that is necessary to complete the education
of a well instructed community. I know that your work is appreciated by the Royal Geographical Society
here. It is very gratifying that you are able to have His Excellency the Governor as President. You were
also fortunate in Sir Arthur Morgan as a President.
I am at this address at present, as I have to resume the Chairmanship, at least for a time, of the Queen
Alexandra Field Force Fund, but my permanent address is at the top of page 1. lam sorry to say that we
feel the cold more than we expected, and I constantly long to be back in Queensland, but I fear I must wait
till this awful war is over.
Yours sincerely,
WM. MACGREGOR.


