

SUMMERHAYES
SHORTHAND
THE AUSTRALIAN
HIGH SPEED SYSTEM


SUMMERHAYES
SHORTHAND
BY
T. STANLEY SUMMERHAYES
Fellow of the Incorporated Phonographic
Society of Australia; I.P.S. (Honors) Pitman
Teacher’s Diploma; Licensed Shorthand
Writer to the Supreme Court of Victoria
(Melbourne, 1906); Holder of I.P.S. Pitman
Speed Certificates at 140, 170, 180, and 190
words per minute; Pitman Medallist at
200 words per minute (Sydney, 1907),


COPYRIGHT
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA, BRUTSII EMPIHE
AND UNITED STATES.


T. STANLEY SUMMERHAYES, F.P.S.A.
PRINCIPAL,
METROPOLITAN BUSINESS COLLEGE.
SYDNEY
Headmaster, Shorthand Department, 1902-1907,
Stott 5 Hoare’s Business College.
Sydney


CONTENTS.
The Story of the System 4
How to Spell Phonetically 14
First Lesson. —Single Consonants; The “A” Vowel Series 15
Second Lesson.—Long “E,” Short “E,” Short “I” 19
Long “O” and Short “O” 20
Third Lesson.—Long “U,” Short “U,” Long “OO,” Short
“OO” 23
Diphthongs “OI,” “OW” and “I” (or Long
“I”) 24
“W” and “WH” 25
Upward and Downward “T” 26
Fourth Lesson. —Double Consonants and Syllables 27
Fifth Lesson.—S, Ses, Ex, Rer, Rel, Ler, and Erl 31
Use of Tick “S” 31
“S” added to “S” 32
Sixth Lesson.—St, Ster, T and D Loop, Ed 37
Seventh Lesson.—Omission of Vowels 41
Eighth Lesson. —Abbreviations 45
Ninth Lesson. —Phrasing, Punctuation, Figures 51
Tenth Lesson. —Consecutive Vowels, Ter, Tor, Tar, etc, 55
Eleventh Lesson. —Prefixes 59
Twelfth Lesson.—The Syllable “Shun” 65
Thirteenth Lesson. —Suffixes and Terminations 69
Fourteenth Lesson. —Intersections 73
Fifteenth Lesson.—Abbreviations 77
Sixteenth Lesson. —Contracted Phrasing and Notes .. .. 85
Exercises .. 90-96


THE STORY OF THE SYSTEM.
After 20 years’ experience of Isaac Pitman Shorthand I have,
for the past three years, been searching for a system which would
give better average results than that method. I had become con-
vinced through observation of the results of many years’ teaching
that Isaac Pitman Shorthand has reached its position, not because
it is a perfect system, but because there was none better. Many
rivals had risen, but not one, with the exception of Gregg, had
ever seriously challenged the Pitman position.
I am able to look back over many splendid achievements by
brilliant students, but always before me is the greater mass of
experience among that larger portion of my pupils who were not
brilliant, and who found the learning of the Pitman system a task
that occupied a long time, made no inconsiderable demands upon
memory, intelligence and patience, and did not then give uniformly
satisfactory results. And when I had finally placed in the crucible
my own knowledge of the system and all the results achieved by
some thousands of students, and applied the fire of experience
and of critical analytical examination, there emerged the strong
conviction that there was a need for a better shorthand, a system
which would be :
(1) more easily learned;
(2) more expressive and therefore more legible, preferably
one in which the vowels could be shown in the outlines;
(3) as free as possible from the clashing of right and left-
hand movements;
(4) so constructed as to make at least some use of the long-
hand training already received by the hand;
(5) free from involved rules, duplicate characters, or com-
plications of any kind;-
(6) free from exceptions;
(7) capable of high speed.
VARIOUS SYSTEMS EXAMINED.'
With these as guiding principles, I decided to seek for an
alternative, and, as the first step, began to study some of the
contemporary systems.
During the search I found systems in which many curious
things were done. I found the thickened horizontal strokes of
the Pitman system excelled in awkwardness by the thickened up


strokes, both curved and straight, of the Sloan-Duployan method,
and by the backward and upward straight strokes, and the
perpendicular up strokes, of the Boyd system. These movements
are almost a physical impossibility with the pen, and are com-
paratively slow and cumbrous, even with the pencil. In neither
of these systems can the pen be used. The peculiar nature of
the Boyd characters, too, makes many of them awkward to write
even when written alone, and of very great awkwardness when
in combination with certain other strokes. Some of the characters
in that system, if they cannot be written from the usual com-
mencing point, may be started from the other end!
Neither the Sloan-Duployan nor the Boyd answered the
requirements of (3) and (4), no attempt being made to harmonise
conflicting movements. This neglect results in the production of
large numbers of outlines which cannot possibly stand the pressure
of high speed; that is, they cannot be written quickly and at the
same time retain their shapes. And in the writing of Shorthand,
if the shape cannot be retained, legibility disappears.
The Script and Gregg systems were both attractive from the
one point of view: each of them made considerable use of the
longhand movements. But in both systems the preponderance of
curves, the comparative lack of straight strokes, and the absence
of shading or thickening of strokes—so necessary to “put the
break on” and check or balance centrifugal motion—seemed to
me to constitute a very real difficulty. The placing of hooks and
circles outside curves in the Gregg system is also, in my opinion,
a serious disadvantage. Both of these systems, owing to their
construction, would appear to require special penmanship of a
very high order if anything like accuracy and legibility is to be
secured. I gave considerable thought to Gregg as an alternative
system to Pitman, but finding my impressions confirmed by the
experience of a class formed in Sydney for its study by a Business
Training Institution of good standing, I decided to place this
system on one side for the time being and to continue the search.
AN EXPERIMENT AND ITS RESULT.
I then imported an American “short” system, the literature
of which was full of the usual testimonials certifying to high
speed gained after brief periods of study. This system was to be
learned within seven days, and then the fortunate student was to


move rapidly into the realm of high speed. It is called in America
the Paragon or Lichtentag system, and in Australia is advertised
as Bradshaw’s 26-6-26 Shorthand. In order to thoroughly test
this system I decided to teach it to a Sydney school-girl, including
a full business training free of all cost, with the promise to
include Pitman Shorthand if the method we were testing proved
to be unsatisfactory. In seven weeks the defects and limitations
of this system were fully revealed, and I had become fired with
the determination to myself attempt the seemingly hopeless task
of constructing a joined-vowel system which would conform to
long-cherished ideals. Notwithstanding my experience of the short-
comings of the various “short” systems, I still felt that there must
be some solution of the problem, and hoped that ray general
knowledge of the language and of phonetics gained in twenty years’
work in studying and teaching the Isaac Pitman system, combined
with practical high speed attainments and professional reporting
experience, would qualify me in some measure for the task. I
knew, of course, the many points in which the Isaac Pitman system
fell short of the ideal, but I knew'also its great merit of brevity.
THE PROBLEM.
This, then, was the problem: to evolve a system as brief as
Pitman, free from disagreement in motion and using the left-hand
movements as much as possible, expressing the vowels in the
outlines themselves and therefore more legible, above all free from
exceptions, and easy to learn.
I was prepared at the outset to sacrifice a little brevity if I
could devise a system which would give greater expressiveness.
Experience had shown that the great need of the time in all
commercial shorthand work was not briefer notes but plainer—
more expressive—notes, a system in which each shorthand outline
would tell its own story and tell one story only; in other words,
a system which would make some difference in the outline itself
(without having to lift the pen) between words containing the
same consonants in the same order; between, for example, such
words as “butter,” “boater,” “betray,” “better,” “abettor,” between
“bet,” “bait,” “boat,” “butt,” and between “attest,” “test,” “toast”
and “taste.” I desired greatly to be able to create a system in
which the thoughts—the constructive faculties—of the student could
flow just as easily as in writing longhand, and I knew I could not


give the student this facility of thought by giving him several
ways of writing “r,” three ways of writing “1,” four ways of
writing “h,” a quantity of duplicate characters, and numbers of
rules subject to many exceptions—all of which are features of
the Pitman system; nor by giving the student characters so awk-
ward in themselves and in combination, as in the Boyd system,
that it would be impossible to get even fairly facile outlines except
by freely throwing overboard sections of words—in one case the
beginning of the word, in another case the second syllable,
in other cases the third or fourth syllable, in fact,
any syllable or combination according to the exigencies of the
moment. This more or less promiscuous jettisoning of characters
always .struck me as a most arbitrary and unsatisfactory method
of constructing outlines and as a prolific cause of hesitation,
delay, and illegibility.
THE TEST OF A GOOD SYSTEM.
I held fast to one strong belief—that the supreme test of a
good system would be its ability to write, if required, any word
in the language IN FULL, without ambiguity, and'with a reason-
ably short and facile outline.
Let the reader not misunderstand this. No system is expected
to write each word in full. It is necessary to devise what are
called contractions, speed forms, word signs, or
abbreviations, for very common words like “of,” “which,” “to,”
“in,” “an,” etc., and for some common words of greater length.
My point is, that if the system is at all well adapted to the
language it professes to represent, it should be capable of writing
any word in that language in movements approaching at least the
facility of ordinary longhand—it should not have to turn and twist
and double, now right and now left like a hare before the hounds,
in stringing together the various characters required for full
representation—and in the making of abbreviations, which are of
course absolutely essential in any system, a good system should
be capable of working on methodical lines, preferably the writing
of the whole of the beginning of the word up to the point of
distinction. For example, in words like “benefit,” “benevolent” and
“benignant,” it should write as much of each word as is necessary
to distinguish it from the other, words containing the same first
syllable, carrying the outlines only far enough past the point of


resemblance to make the distinction clear. This principle of
abbreviation, if it could be applied to all shorthand, would give
us “ben” for “benefit,” “benev” for “benevolent,” and “benig” for
“benignant.” It is a simple method which any student can follow.
But if the basic characters of any particular system give a badly
designed alphabet, he will find it impossible to apply this method
of abbreviation, for the simple reason that a syllable or character
or combination which works perfectly in one word will in another
word be absolutely impossible of execution because of its changed
surroundings. The worst feature of the trouble caused by badly
designed elementary characters, is that the student has no warning
of his difficulty until he is fairly within its meshes; he then has to
extricate himself as quickly as possible by inquiring and deciding
what is the best thing to do. This “best thing” may be the
elimination of the preceding syllable, the elimination of the difficult
syllable itself, or part of it, or he may save himself (in one
system) by writing one of the signs backwards. But the point I
am trying to drive home is that the construction of outlines in
such circumstances is all pure expediency and makeshift. It is
very trying to the student —and it is not good shorthand.
CONSTRUCTING THE SYSTEM.
The attempt to follow the course set by my ideals led me along
many difficult and troublesome paths. A full account of the
experiments, failures and successes would interest no one but a
shorthand expert. Gradually, however, prospects of success grew,
until in July, 1916, I was able to begin teaching my first pupil.
Further development followed, until now, after two years'
continuous work, I am able to say that in Summerhayes
Shorthand the component parts of all outlines can be
joined with facility in all circumstances, and one simple
abbreviating principle may be applied practically invariably.
Then, too, there are incorporated in the system those very necessary
qualities of compactness and balance which enable its outlines to
be written quickly and at the same time retain their shapes, the
peculiar character of the movements involved always allowing of
full control of the pen by the fingers.
As to brevity, I have fortunately succeeded in practically
equalling that of the Isaac Pitman system, not by arbitrary or
SUMMERHAYES SHORTHAND,


promiscuous, methods of contraction, but by the systematic
application of properly developed principles.
LIGHT LINES VERSUS THICK AND THIN.
For many years there has been much controversy as to the
merits and demerits of the “shading” or thickening of shorthand
characters. I will say at once that if there were a sufficient supply
of abbreviating material available in “light” or thin strokes only,
I would prefer all light lines, but when the supply of constructive
material is so strictly limited, as it is, to circles, parts of circles
and straight lines written in different directions and of different
lengths, it is possible for an author to pay too big a price for his
indulgence in light lines only. There is a good deal in the argu-
ments that it is natural to thicken down strokes, and that this
habit is acquired in any case by most people in the writing of
longhand. And there is nothing against “shading” in practice, for
if the Isaac Pitman system has proved anything, it has proved
that shading strokes does not preclude high speed, even though
its writers suffer under one disability at least, by being compelled
to thicken certain horizontal straight strokes, a proceeding only
second in undesirability to the thickening of upstrokes favoured
by other authors. I commenced with light lines only, but later
decided that rather than do without a quantity of really excellent
material I would use a small proportion of suitable thickened
down strokes. This proportion, though important, is small, so
small that in the first 200 strokes of the shorthand rendering of
this paragraph there are only 30 thickened strokes, and in 26 of
the 30 the thickening expresses a compound character, representing
not a loss of speed by such thickening, but a distinct gain through
increased representation.
POSITIONAL WRITING.
This device of the Pitman system —the writing of outlines above,
on and through the line to indicate predominant vowels—has
many difficulties and anomalies. It is quite unnecessary in the
Summerhayes system. Ruled paper is only useful to its writers
in the same way as it is useful in the writing of longhand. Unruled
paper may be used.


SHORTHAND CLAIMS.
Most readers know of the claims made by various
shorthand systems. One system claims to give proficiency in
thirty days; another claims to reach that goal in seven days or in
five lessons; some claim as virtues that they have only five rules
or three rules; some advertise the extreme fewness of the characters
to be learned. Summerhayes Shorthand claims none of these
distinctions. But it does claim to be a highly-developed system,
properly adapted to the language, a system which will enable the
teacher to turn out better operators. Better operators will be
produced for these four reasons alone;—
(1) it saves time in the learning of the theory;
(2) it affords longer time for speed and general proficiency
development;
(3) owing to its simplicity, uniformity and completeness a
speed of 100-120 words per minute is more quickly
acquired;
(4) the students are able to read their notes with greater
ease and sureness, because both vowels and consonants
are shown in the outlines.
EASY TO LEARN—PROGRESS RAPID.
In the classes of the Metropolitan Business College, Sydney,
Summerhayes Shorthand has shown beyond the possibility of
doubt that its theory can be mastered by the average student in
from three to six weeks (just half the average time taken to
master the Isaac Pitman theory), and a speed of 100-120 words
per minute attained in six months against the Pitman average of
50-70 words per minute in the same time. Not only is it capable
of a higher speed than Isaac Pitman in a short time; it definitely
gives the student greater accuracy in transcription because of the
greater expressiveness of its outlines; for example, in the words
“attest,” “test,” “toast,” and “taste,” it gives the student “a-t-e-st”’
“t-e-st,” “t-oh-st” and “t-a-st,” where the Pitman only gives
“t-st” for “toast,” “test” and “taste,” and “a-t-st” (by lifting
the pen) for “attest.” These words are purely typical, this greater
expressiveness applying to the whole of the outlines in the system.
The system has been learned in 28 hours by Mr. A. G. Sindel,
A. 1.1. A., and by Mrs. Walsh in 40 hours, these students being the
only ones of whom any detailed record has been taken. Three


weeks after finishing the theory, Mr. Sindel was able to copy from
Barton’s Accountancy text-book at a tested speed of So words
per minute. The most important results, however, are those
accomplished by average students, since exceptional students will
always accomplish exceptional results,
SOME DETAILED RESULTS.
Following is a brief summary of what has been done by
the five students trained by me in the theory of the system
during its construction, and then sent into the ordinary speed
classes of the Metropolitan Business College:—
Miss Lilian Dawson began by having to unlearn the Paragon
system. Her progress was then interfered with by many
changes made in the Summerhayes system. Passed 70 words
per minute at end of three months (17th November, 1916).
Census then taken of all students who joined the Metropolitan
Business College shorthand classes during the same week
as Miss Dawson, and for two weeks preceding; of these 36
students, only one had at that date finished the Isaac Pitman
theory. Miss Dawson passed too words per minute at the
end of the seventh month. A few further minor changes
were at that time made in the system, and Miss Dawson
finally reached 130 words per minute in twelve months, and
won the test in accuracy in the advanced section of the
Business Letter Competition held by the College. In this
test all her competitors used the Isaac Pitman system.
She was then placed by the College Employment Bureau
in a position as shorthand-writer and typiste,
Mervyn Ellerker, a lad of 17, after failing to reach practical
proficiency in the Orthic system, which he learned at King's
School, Parramatta, studied the Isaac Pitman system for a
few weeks. Disliking the Isaac Pitman method and having
only three months remaining of his term at the College, he
took up Summerhayes Shorthand, mastered the theory in
six weeks, and reached a speed of between So and 60 words
per minute in four months. He is now using the system in
business.
Miss Hinda Rosenthal learned the theory in four weeks, reached
130 words per minute in under seven months, and passed
in Shorthand in the State Typists’ Examination.


Miss Doris Tydeman learned the theory in four weeks, reached
100 words per minute and obtained a position in six
months; took daily lessons also in Typewriting and Book-
keeping.
Miss Jean Stark learned the theory in four weeks, and reached 90
words per minute in under four months. Studied Type-
writing also.
The above results are better than they appear on the surface,
as these students were turned out of my own office after from
four to five weeks’ preparation each, and practically left to look
after themselves in the ordinary speed rooms of the College, under
teachers who knew nothing of the system and from whom,
therefore, they received very little assistance. This fact is well
known to all their fellow-students. This method was deliberately
chosen, although its unfairness to both students and system was
fully realised. In addition, each of these students suffered more
or less from various changes made in the system itself, involving
the unlearning of certain signs and the learning of new ones
in their stead. None of these students had the advantage of
a regular text-book. It may, therefore, be reasonably concluded
that even better progress will be made when this text-book has
been published and students can be placed under the continuous
personal supervision of competent teachers of the system.
The system as laid down in this text-book, which has not
been published until the system has been thoroughly tested under
the supervision of other Pitman teachers, will, with the neces-
sary practice, carry the student to 200 words per minute. Further
aids to students, such as lists of advanced phrases and con-
tractions, special reporting expedients, reading and writing
exercises, and reading books in shorthand will be published
from time to time.
I now leave the system in the hands of its students. It is
too much to hope, despite the attention I have given it, that it is
yet perfect, and so that it may be made as perfect an instrument
as possible, I invite the co-operation of all. Suggestions and
advice will always be cordially received and acknowledged.
T. STANLEY SUMMERHAYES.
Sydney, December, 1917.


INTRODUCTION TO FIRST LESSON.
Although Summerhayes Shorthand obviates the drudgery
usually associated with the study of shorthand, it can not remove
the need for patient, honest and painstaking work on your part.
Shorthand differs entirely from longhand. In longhand the
faulty formation of part of a word will not wholly destroy its
legibility (there is so much left to suggest the word), but in
shorthand, because of the very abbreviated material used, the
faulty formation of an outline or part of an outline, may com-
pletely destroy its meaning. The raw material consists of straight
lines, hooks, curves, circles and ticks. The stroke for “B” is
only a very small portion of the downstroke of the longhand
“B,” and the shorthand “L” is only a portion of the upstroke of
the longhand “L.” A stroke of the same size and shape has
different meanings when written in different directions. Some
characters differ in length only; others differ in thickness only;
hooks and circles differ in size only. Because of this
brevity, much more accuracy is required in the writing of the
shorthand symbols than is necessary in longhand—and this
exactness must be practised from the beginning.
Great care has been given to the construction of the system,
and it is not too much to ask of you that you exercise the same
care in its study and application. If you are to succeed, it is
absolutely essential that you carry out all instructions when they
are given, not later on after faulty work has perhaps compelled
your return to an earlier lesson. Do not attempt to work any
exercise until you have mastered the preceding rules and carried
out the instructions concerning practice.
Habits of care and accuracy are quite easily acquired by the
exercise of patience and intelligence—by what may well be called
intelligent patience. And right here please accept a little word
of advice out of a very long experience. It is this: You will
lighten your labour; you will practically avoid all strain; you will
enormously increase your results, if you will only take an interest
in the work. Stand off and look at the system occasionally.
Watch its development. Whatever you do, do not treat the study
of Shorthand as a task. Remember that interest and attention
are the fundamentals of memory.


a
e
1
O
u and OO
pan
Pan
edge
«j
climb
klira-
ocean
oshn
thumb
thum
chasm
kasm
eager
egr
clip
kflfp
dough
do
fume
fum
labor
labr
ledge
3ej
resign
rain
foe
tub
tftb
pane
pan
league
ripple
rTpl
cough
ktff
tube
tub
neigh
na
leg
l|g
deny
dnT
poach
poch
full
fool
pall
p&l
leopard
leprd
divine
dvTn
botch
fool
fool
shawl
shal
people
pepl
psychic
sTuYk
oblong
oblong
rule
r5bl
gnaw
na
reason
resn
cycle
sTkl
polo
polo
move
moov
palm
pakn
knee
ne
fillip
Sim
loaf
lof
book
btfok
far
far
knell
nel
silly
sfir
hot
htft
love
l«v
Write the shorthand characters about the size given in this
book. Each character is written in the same direction whether it
stands alone or is joined to another stroke. F, H, J, P, G and D
are DOWN; SH and M (the horizontals) are written from left
to right; V, L and R are always UP. T is the only consonant
which may be written down or up according to convenience. J and
G are thick strokes.
Try and acquire a really good flowing style, accurate in
length, direction, shape and thickness. Think only of making good
outlines. Practise diligently. Speed will come.
HOW TO SPELL PHONETICALLY.
Summerhayes Shorthand is based on simple phonetics, In English
one letter may have many different sounds; for example, the letter “a ”
in “ mate,” “ mat,” pa.” ‘‘pall, 5 ’ “want”; “e,”in“end,” “her,”
“recent”; “i 55 in “ice,” “ill”; “o” in “note,” “not,”
“orb,” “worm”; and “u” in “put,” “up,” “urn,” “tube.”
In Summerhayes Shorthand each letter has one value only, and
each sound has therefore only one sign. “Love 51 is spelled “1-u-v,”
and “shove” “sh-u-v”; “ move ” is spelled “ m-00-v,” like “m-00-n.”
Only those sounds which are pronounced are written — ll announce ”
being spelled “ a-n-ow-ns,” “account,” “ a-k-ow-nt ” ; “arrange,”
“ a-r-a-nj ” ; “apple, 55 “ a p-1 ” But in “ennoble” and “wholly”
and in similar words, the double letters are written because they are
both sounded: —en-nobl, hol-Iy. The “w” in “wholly” and in
“ wrap ” is not written at all since it is not heard, and letters like “ t ”
in “wretch,” “ kitchen,” and “d” in “lodge” and “edge” are also
omitted, these words being written respectively : “r-e-ch,” “ k-i-ch-n,”
“ 1-o-j,” “ e-j.”
This simple principle of giving to each sound only one sign, leads to
the omission of some letters in the ordinary alphabet, and to the in-
clusion of certain composite characters like *■ sh,” as in “-rush.” ch ”
as in “chart” and “each,” “kw ” as in “quite” (kwit), and a
special sign for hard “ g,” as in “egg,” soft “g,” as in “age,” being
written as “j.”
The adoption of phonetic spelling, and the elimination of unimpor-
tant vowels, that is, vowels which are either very lightly sounded or not
sounded at all, give the following results :
„ MISCELLANEOUS.
Tomb (loom), rough (ruf), adjust (ajust), review (rvu), giacious
(grashtfs), (sTstm). pneumatic (numatik), wrought (rat), know-
ledge (nolej), gymnastics (jimnSstTks), thought (that), mother (muthr),i
pardon (pardn), evil (evl).


FIRST LESSON
SINGLE CONSONANTS.
SHORT STROKES .
B*/ OH I 3H —S C Z ) T (up or L (up; W <L/
LONG STROKES . (Arrows show direction of writing.)
p/ >•' FVh IH (t Dft V (up)_^r?
I ! / - I : \.
Jor soft G | | Hard G (ug or gu) Jj. H :Y \\
W CH" is used for the soft sound of "oh" heard in:- chase,
cheat, chop, itch, each, such, fetch.
"3H" is used in:~ rush, shut, Russia (rushea), ocean (oshn),
appreciate (appreshiate), assure (ashure), sure (share).
"TH" is used for heavy or light "th" in:- bath,they, wreathe.
"J" is-used for "J" or the soft sound of "g" in:- gem, age,
lodge, gypsum.
Hard "G" is used when "g" is hard, as in:- egg, go, goal,
give, rug, bag, Olga.
Practice,
■♦■Write the above until you are thoroughly familiar with them.
Make the short consonants slightly less than half the length of
the long consonants . Be exact in this. Write each consonant
at least twelve times . "L" and "R" are at an angle of 30 de-
grees from the horizontal. "P" and "B" are at the same angle
from the perpendicular.
THE "A" VOWEL SERIES.
In ordinary spelling the letter "a” -has several sounds. Com-
pare.the sound of “a" in the following words:- pane, pan, pa, paw,
want, said. Of these, the moat important are "long 'a'" as in
"pane", "short 'a'" as in "pan", "ah" as in "pa", and "aw" as in
"paw". The signs allotted for these are shown on the next page.
They may face in any direction ‘'coyawhen attached to consonants .
The dote and dashes used to denote .the shades of sound axe called


•distinguishers" . They are necessary only in single or isolated
■words , being seldom required in actual notetaking .
Slips •
u Long "a" heard in:- pane, mala. pale , pair, lair, rail.
v Short "a" heard in;- pan, man, pal . pat, lap, tat .
w “ah" heard in:- pa, palm . father, Shah . alms , ark.
0 "aw" heard in:- paw. law. fall, tall, mall, shawl.
Method of attaching the hooka to consonants .
The hooks are always written in a left-hand direction / ,
that is opposite to the motion followed by the hands of a clock.
Make the hook first In words like "oj:e" c yT*r "am" 41 —; where
the vowel precedes the consonant. Make the consonant first when
the consonant precedes the vowel . All outlines , whether they con-
tain one or several consonants , should be written without lifting
the pen. Careful observation of the example outlines and study
of their construction , combined with careful writing on your own
part, will soon give you facility in the execution of the various
shorthand combinations required in any word.
Commencing point for outlines .
The usual commencing point for outlines is that point at
which the consonant "f" begins in order to bring the end of this
consonant on the line. This must be regarded as a relative
point only as actually this system does not require a ruled line.
The point of commencement will be lowered in the case of outlines
which begin with a horizontal; obviously the commencing point-
for such an- outline will be Just about where the usual ruled line
is found .
Rule The "a" hook vowel , when it occurs between two conson-
ants, is usually attached to the first.
Write •• underneath outlines to show Capitals .
af afa afarX^/^ad aid Ada adage Adam
pa / pay / paw ( / //
mash than are
ray rail char Abe abate C-T
batch bash bane^~-—'
gash L bag f gale gape IT Jab L Jail Jack L
T I 1 /, 1 T'
Jan®U ✓ Japan L aimc ma 3 may 3 mail = mare
The "distinguishers" are inserted in only a few of the out-
lines given here , and then only in those cases where the outline
without the "distinguiaher"could be read for either of two worda
as "pan” and "pain" , "pale" and "pal" . Even in these words , if
they occurred iii a sentence , context would render misreading


unlikely. Note that two upright ticks are inserted under proper
names . Write each outline in the list given on the previous page
at least six times . “Learn by doing ."
Note that "r" must be shown in ALL words, although in words
like "tar" and "far" it is apparently of little consequence
phonetically.
EXERCISE 1 .
Write in Shorthand:-
Gap game gale vale name Jam gauge fate
jag gain gave gash fail fat shale fame
Hook attached to the second consonant ■
In some cases a more facile outline is obtained by writing
the first consonant without a hook and forming the hook as an
initial hook to the second stroke, e .g, instead of writing “man"
ma-n it is better written m-an. Test this matter of facility'for
yourself. By the time you'have worked through a few exercises
you will easily and surely select the best form.
Rule
Attach the hook to the second consonant when greater
facility is secured by doing so:
make shave —main "
EXERCISE 2 .
Read, copy, then transcribe the following:-
t O-C,
i t-l ( iSFi*
Note .
Occasionally it is not convenient to place the hook vowel on
either the first or second consonants. ' ; In such cases, which are
extremely rare, write the hook on the first consonant, and make a
small kink in it to show the point of junction with the following
consonant. Although in actual practice this kinked hook may be
usually omitted, its occasional insertion will be found extremely
useful in positively fixing the identity of a word:
Mab . r f shape lap jT cape map cap


TO THE STUDENT:
REVISION OP FIRST LESSON .
Before proceeding with the second lesson revise thoroughly
all the outlines in the first lesson. As a rule those students
whose perceptive faculties are keen, but whose capacity and in-
clination for detail work are not strong, wish to hurry on to the
exercises before they have practised the preliminary work and mem-
orised the rules given . Such students invariably find it easy to
read the Shorthand exercises , but difficult to convert longhand
into Shorthand. They naturally feel some disappointment .at this,
but the fault is theirs entirely. The student who will take the
trouble to write all the example words and also the outlines in
the "Shorthand into Longhand" exercise several times , and study
the method of construction of tne outlines , will find his trouble
well repaid in the sense of ease and sureness with which he is
able to do the "Longhand into Shorthand" exercises . Hasten slow-
ly" . Remember that EFFICIENCY cannot be purchased at any less
price than your own'careful labor.
WRITING AMD READING BY SOUND .
D-0 to the beginner usually suggests only the word "do"; U-S
suggests "us"; P-A suggests "pa". You must keep in mind the
fact that you are learning a system of Shorthand in which there is
a separate sign for each sound . and that P-A, to take only one ex-
ample, will be "pay" . "pa", or "paw", according to the "distin-
guisher" used .
You may also for a time make the mistake of inserting silent
letters. Watch these carefully.
Most students find little difficulty in learning to write "k"
for "c" in "cat", "traffic", "selection", etc.: and "f" for "ph"
in "phase" or "triumph" . Hard "g" or "gu" , and soft "g" or "j"
give more trouble, and you will need to watch these sounds care-
fully, but observation and care are all that is necessary .
TEACHER*S CORRECTIONS.
Unless you are quite unlike the majority of humans , you will
make some mistakes. It is indeed from your mistakes that your
chief lessons will be learned. * Do not fall into that bad habit
of excusing yourself lightly, of glossing over an error with the
assurance to yourself, so lightly given, that you will not be
likely to do it again. Treat each error seriously. and by ex-
amination, study and practice, eradicate the possibility of its
recurrence .


SECOND LESSON
LONG "E" , SHORT "E" , SHORT "I" .
All these vowels are represented by a small circle - a plain
circle for the short "e" , a circle with a horizontal distinguisher
for long "e" , and a circle with an upright distinguisher for
short "i".
Signs.
5 Long "e" Heard in:- peal, wield . people, weave , shield .
Q Short "©" Heard in: - pell, shell, red, debt, head ■ bed.
Short "i" Heard in:- pill, rip , rid , ditty, bid .
This short "i" is also the vowel represented by the "-y"
or "ey" in such words as ''folly'* , "valley", "bony", "honey", etc.,
for which the distinguisher is quite unnecessary.
Circle Vowels on Single Strokes .
Rule These vowels are written with the left-
hand movement
(a) On the inside of curves .
(b) On the right-hand side of straight
downstrokes. [f// P / f
(o) On the upper side of straight hori-
zontals and upstrokes.^.
Note: When attached to straight strokes the vowel should be
formed thuso b, the straight portion being part of the
consonant to which the vowel is attached.
Circle Vowels Between Strokes.
Rule .-
(a) Between two straight strokes running
in the same direction, retain the
left-hand movement.
(b) Between two curves, write it inside the first
s® 2 *-
(c) Between a straight stroke and curve, write it
inside the curve. When the two strokes closely
approach each other form the circle inside the
second stroke, as shown by the arrows.
t, u y-v-c


(d) Sections (b) and (c) of this rule apply to
all cases excepting the following combina-
tions , in which cases the circle vowels
are written on the outside of the "angle”
formed by the consonants ,y yy y y y
D with sh, m, r, 1, f yw —ay hy J
Gg with n and k £O' , ' —
’ (e) Between two straight strokes making an aiigle,,
write the circle outside the aagle.ck q/\/
Follow the construction shown in "reap”
and "league" when it is desired to more
clearly circle between two strokes
forming a very acute angle .
Practice: Write the following six times each:-
keep heed pen ditch men 9 filly* Ss V P
sheep jf* ship hill y pity 3, NelP^ wretch/^
keen shed hen L pill : *]f rich ninny v_s
keel heap L hem: pitch beak
deemdeal deer C> dim C- deaf ■c beam
LONG "O" AND SHORT "O" .
Signs .
O Long "o" heard in:- roam. 'phone, lone , road, pole.
O Short l, o" heard in:- rod, shod, froth, Tom, strong.
Rules
Same as for the "e" circles. It is important to be
able to write the circle vowels without curving the
end of the consonants to which they are attached.
Finish the straight stroke movement before beginning
on the circle ,then use part of the consonant as part
of the circle. Follow this idea not this^o
The straight end of the consonant really forms part
of an imperfect circle. In finishing the outline
for, say, "row ” let the final direction not
Practice.
hoe L loam "foal V shown roam
show -O hope y> moth C foam woe hob Jo
lore
obey arrow poll cnob gone bellow
Polly borne opaque


Lone "0“
Short, "o'*
Lone "e"
Short "e"
Short "i”
General
dome
bomb
keen
wretch
limb
shallow
opal
chop
lean
pell
gin
fellow
old
mob
peep
shell
, Jim
halo
poke
rob
mean
fell
nib
dado
bone
hop ,
ream
den
bin
pony
mole
lodge
reel
ledge
fit
daily
cope
lolly
deal
hedge
villa
tail
EXERCISE 3.
Bead, copy, then transcribe, the following;-
i. v.
EXERCISE 4
Write the following in Shorthand:- *
Note that outlines usually begin at the height of a "long"
stroke above the ruled line. The position of the line, (if work-
ing on ruled paper) is shown by the dots under the 3rd, 4th, and
sth outlines in Exercise 3.
Outlines which begin with on upstroke, or a horizontal follow-
ed by an upstroke, begin on the line.
Make the long strokes more than twice as long as the short
strokes . This will be of very great assistance to you later in
reading your notes . Nothing will contribute more than this to
the formation of a legible note.
SENTENCE EXERCISES .
You have already sufficient material to write some hundreds
of short words . To enable you to write sentences I • am giving you
on the next page the specially abbreviated signs for a few of the
commonest small words . This class of words will be more fully
dealt with in a later lesson .
Practise these abbreviations by writing them carefully, say, a
dozen times , mentally repeating the word each time. Then write
the longhand for all the words, put this book on one side, and
test your knowledge by writing the shorthand underneath your long-
hand. Re-practise any which you have the slightest hesitation in
remembering; and test yourself again . Then write in Short-
hand the following exercise, leaving a blank line for your teach-
er's corrections Write for the fullstop.-


ABBREVIATIONS
° J / \ S
The O, a , has or as ,to ,beor by / ,of\ , in ,
. 6
with or would O' , you U , will / , have , I , but <0
not , which I , an or and may
Write "I" well above the line and write it small.
EXERCISE 5.
Leave at least half an inch space after each fullstop.—
John Abbey and Tom Hall have to go by the back gate each day.
Both Amy Bell and Mary Neave will be at home to-day. Ella Beale
will wait on the porch of her home to see the lame pony and the
pen of sheep . The shed on the hill will be open to all the men
and will hold the hay. I will go to the big heap of shale to see
the array of tall men, and to help Jack to see and talk to Nellie
Cain . The hen has laid in a hole at the back of the dam . A
moth will go far, and fall alone. The rich man may be deaf to
her appeal . It will be a bad day. I will fetch you an arrow
and a shell. Say to the men you hope to see me bellow at the
rich ninny. He may have shown pity but not to the men. Keep
faith with man, and obey the law.
EXERCISE 6.
Read, copy carefully, then transcribe the following:-
(o o Q o o
5A' •'J—
-*> ° ° —'V/
U c/ V " o
( SILENT LETTERS.
Remember that all silent letters are omitted, as for example,
the “I" in "palm” (pahm) , "ugh" in "dough" (do) , "gh" in "weight"
(wat) , "d" in "lodge" (loj), "w" and "t" in "wretch" (rech) , "w"
and "gh" in "wrought" (rawt) . "s" in "isle" (II), "p" in "psychic"
(sikik) and "pneumatic" (numatik) , "b" in "tomb" (toom) and’thumb"
(thum), "g" in "gnaw" (naw), "gnat" (nat) and "gnome" (nom).


Long "
u"
Short
"u"
Long
"oo"
Short ''oo"
fume
V-
fun
V-
fool
foot
hew
nut
tool
shook —
few
K,
dull
rule
book
due
C
pun
loop
fully Xr*
/
puny
rush
moon
pull /r'
youth
\
bun
pool
£
hood y
use
c
bunny
6- — o
cool
ly
y
push U—
sue
G
cuff
loot
buBh'
THIRD LESSON
LONG "O" , SHORT "U" , LONG "O O" . SHORT "OO" .
Signs .
u Long "u" heard in:- fume, new, due . puny, youth, use
u Short "u" heard in:- fun, nut; dull, shun, us, such.
U Long "oo" heard in:- fool , tool , rule, allude , food
U Short "66" heard in;- foot, shook. book. full, pull
These hooks are twice the size of the "a" series, and are
attached in exactly the same way. Keep these hooks parallel
to the consonants, and preserve carefully the proper distinc-
tion in size between them and the "a" series.
Practice: Write the following outlines six times each:-
Although the spelling gives "oo" in "floor'* and "door , long
"6" is used in both cases. Compare the sound of "oo" in "floor"
with "oo" in "moor" (long "65") "0"in month-money is ’short "u"
EXERCISE 7 .
Read, copy, then transcribe . the following:-
1 j 4 4 (j— t-' &y 4 3
2 Vr \/ I ry [ry Cry Cry 47 L i 4 V ' ir
a \r-lyty


DIPHTHONGS "OI" , "OW" , AND "I" ( OR LONG "I") .
Signs.
0 "oi" heard in:- bov . cov . foil. annoy. .lov. allox, boil .
,(0 (O’ "° w " heard in:- all gw, avow, cow. bow . foul .
,f i'* heard in:- buv . sigh. mx, allx. shx, die . thigh .
The diphthong "oi" is represented in the spelling by "oi" or
"oy"; the "ow" diphthong, by "ou" or "ow". Where "ow" has the
sound of long '*o" (as in "snow", "throw'*, "grow") the long "0" sign
must be used. In such cases the "w" is silent and is not repre-
sented" in the Shorthand outline .
All these signs are written with the prevailing left-hand x
motion when on single strokes , and follow the same general rules
as other circle vowels. When "ow" occurs initially, as in "owl"
and "out" , mahe the "curl" first; when occurring medially or
finally, as in "power" or "how", make the circle first. Use the
little dot distinguisher for "oi" only when necessary.
The circle for long "i" is the smallest of the series -- half
the size of the "e" circle . Keep it small and use the dot in
addition whenever necessary .
Practice: Write the following outlines at least six times:-
"oi": voile.
"ow": allow sow owl power how I fow]X^
"i/* : ally like isle shy — D mile—— S'
pile tile ~ ice C sigh G
EXERCISE 8.
Read, copy, then transcribe, the following:- 1
/c /
E , Cp —4? jy O' & S
Write the following in Shorthand:-
1 . allow ally enjoy touch launch tinge
2 . honey toil money Lloyd loot loop
3. noon room moor bun new oil
4. bush hush pull full moon ' review
5. ahoy toy boil foil bull coil


"W" AND “WH" .
INITIALLY.
"W" , though apparently a consonant, Is really the vowel "oo"
Pronounce "00-et" quickly with the accent on the "et" Then try
"00-edding" , "00-orn" , "00-elthy" , "t-00-eezers" , emphasising in
each case the vowel immediately following the ,r oo". Keep this
fact in mind , and also remember that "w" unless it is sounded must
be omitted from the Shorthand outline , for example , "wrap" is
"r-a-p" , "wren" is "r-e-a" , and "wretch" is "r-e-ch" .
In providing legible forms for most words containing "w", the
vowel following the "w" is of little importance. In actual prac-
tice the "a" and "u" vowel series , also "o" and "ow" , may be in-
variably omitted . The small circle vowels may be freely inserted
because of their facility and the distinction which their inser-
tion will give in such pairs as "wage" , "wedge"; "went" , "want" .
wedge wage wig wag waggon watch^f
week walk
Distinguishers may be used if necessary, thus:-
walk wake
Before and , "w" followed by "a" . "d” , "oo" or "u" ,
may be written as an ordinary "oo" vowel hook:-
warp woman women 0 - —-"'wash <^—
(Note:- Europe wall (jf wail (f wool ($ )
Before and , the "w" sign reversed denotes "we",
"wi" or "wl" (long "i") . Use the dot distinguiaher for long "i"
and the perpendicular distlnguisher for "wi", only if necessary;-
well wile welfare 1 ton Wei ton.
WH O .
Vowels following "wh" may be omitted or inserted according to
legibility and facility:-
whale <y wharf while wheel
EXERCISE 9 .
Write the following in Shorthand:-
1 . Away , await , wait , wave , wail . wan, waggon .
2 . Well , welfare , whelp , whine , why, whip , whack.
3 . Weep , watch , wag , wire , wily , wild .
4 . Worn , woman , worth , worthy , worry , work , walnut
5 . Wharf , whom (hoom) , awheel , whale , whole (hoi)


UPWARD & DOWNWARD " T"
Rule:
INITIALLY write "t" up:
tuck —s^tame tour ten
Rule:
FINALLY and MEDIALLY, downward "t" usually gives the better
joining, particularly after when
"t" directly follows these consonants or is preceded by a circle
vowel: v
heart light featdenote (ip boat i got 9/ get^
Rule;
After all hook vowels or after curves running in the / direc-
tion followed by a circle vowel, upward "t" is written: '
fate gate /j hate debt
Rule:
In the ending "-tate" the vowel is omitted:
Irritate imitate °
EXERCISE 10.
Write the following in Shorthand, leaving at least half an
inch after each fullstop;-
Abbrevlation: Our or hour O .
Lloyd George would not allow our ally to pull alone. The
review of the booty which came in on Monday on the lorry will be
held in a day or two . Hush.' the launch nay touch the shore and
we might then get the new honey
EXERCISE 11 .
Read, copy and transcribe the following. In reading, try
the small circle medially as “e" or "i" in the longhand sense.
Context will tell you whether the word is "red" or "rid" , "head"
or "hid"; "distinguishers" are rarely necessary. When this cir-
cle occurs finally read it as the letter “y"; in tnis position it
seldom stands for anything else.
6 ? _
_c/ “ (o' J O
\•£ H 0


FOURTH LESSON
DOUBLE CONSONANTS & SYLLABLES.
The consonants "I* and "r" are called "coalescents" , because
they coalesce , or unite , with other consonants in the formation
of double consonants combinations which are- pronounced with
practically a single effort of the tongue ,• lips , teeth and palate;
for example:- "pi" in “play”; "gl" in "glue", "glide"; "ter" in
"crow", "crude"; "fl" in "flow", "fly"; "pr" in "pray", "price".
"L" and "r" are also very frequently found in combination
with other consonants in the formation of syllables usually un-
accented such as;- "nr" in "owner" . "finer" . "manner"; "mr"
in "h'umor" . "hammer"; "pr" in "wrapper" . "taper"; "pi" in "opal",
"apple". "people"; "kl" in "treacle" , "fickle"; "nr" in "nervous"
"energy" , etc .
Following is a list of special signs devised for these com-
binations. *ln words like "apple" and "upper", only one "p" is
written because only one "p" is sounded. The same thing applies
to most double letters , as In "inner" and "hammer" . In a few
cases like "coolly" , "wholly" , "solely" , "innate" and "ennoble" ,
both letters are sounded separately. and must be so written.
SHORT STROKES . (The name of each is shown in parentheses.)
fr (fer)N..fi (fel) \ ;kr (ker) (ber)C;dr (der)/” ;
dl (del ) f ;pl { ml (mel) ;nt ( entj 1 ; ng {eng) 'w ;
wh O' ;des, dis and dec')''"" (up) ; nl (nel) w .
or tl (tel)j
Notes . \ n
"TL" ig written upwards and used only medially or finally.
"WH" is thickened on the downstroke only. The "NO" sign is used
when these letters are sounded together as in "rang" , "anger" and
"lung" , but not for the "n-J" sound in "range” and "lunge" nor for
the "n-gu" sound in "engrave" and "engulf" . Use "a" and "k" in
words like "bank" and "rink". In "anger"’, "linger", etc., write
"ng-gr" .
LONG STROKES■
bl (bel) (up) ;qu ;thr (ther) (.; gr (ger) C ; nd (end) ;
vl (vel) ; vr (ver) ; mr (mer) —-snr (aer)w;
Notes.
"QU" is used only when "qu" has the sound of "kw" as in'Vjuitd*
(kwite); use "k" in such words as "toque", "mosquito" , "pique".
"ML" is used when no vowel occurs between "n" and "d".


DOUBLE LOMQ STROKES
Blur (sher) — ; ohr (cher) ; jr (Jer) j ; gl (gel) j ;
ngl (ingel) y: shl (shel) —; ns (ense) •— —.
STRAIGHT AND CURVED TICKS .
tr (up or down thin when g c or t> ; fit N ; str\ ;
con, com or cum - or i
Notes.
Make all the double-long characters nearly twice as long as
a “long" stroke. Keep the "ticks" as short as possible .
Practice .
Write the double consonants until you are quite familiar with
them. Be careful of the different lengths and thicknesses .
Thick curves must be thick in the middle only. When you can
write the signs freely and have memorised them, practise the fol-
lowing outlines , writing each one at least six times.
In these examples the "1" and "r" combinations are shown in
use in both capacities as double consonants and as syllables.
Some combinations , such as "nr" ,"nl" , "mr" ,"mi" , "Jr" , "dl" , form
syllables only , and may therefore be safely used even for accented
syllables, as in "delicate", "nurse", "nerve", "German", "nullify",
"Morman" , "north", etc .
PR: freak \__fray V
PL: fly raffle offal
KR: cram^ 3 crumb^ 3 maker crowd 1
KL: claim^ s clip trickle column *V
BR: broke breath grabber robber deliberate
DR: dream£__ drunk£_^ Is header feeder 'V dray.tT- hinder L-f
EL: idle delightful &K widely
NT: entail until A' mountain —*"fountain""* N< P anti-
NL; ^ S ' x o annual
NR: inner^*—nerve'^-- /^energy* W * ,
In words like "column", "Columbus" , "Columbia", where the
Vowel could be attached with equal facility to the first stroke ,
it may be attached to the second to show that it is not part of
the first syllable.


MB: mercy Xmoral '“mortgage / marine" 6^—^
ML: melancholy"^—"^enamel^ —camel malign |
THR: threat (p thrown brother gather leather
£R: green girlish
QL: glow gloom wriggle legal^^^
PL: play plume I? apple cripple
VB: over verandah lover lever
VL: rival value villain
BL; black loon marble
-t I o
CHR: charming teacher charity voucher
—c 1 1 I IP f
JR: lodger Journal I journey I adjourn! (a-Jer-nj
i * L
NS: chance U »" immense glance / dance,/
NGL: shingle~ <^ ~,‘ —bangle. -»- tangle j,
SHE: treasure 6—measure Q -— '^hrink.~^
3HL; martial'" officially inltlkr 9 torrential -^
NO: hungfy. hang anger long
ING: ring sting bring £ king ' v^_ c fling^ ll baffling ,
COM 8c CON: complaint % compan convince^
EXERCISE 13,
Write the following in Shorthand:-
-FR; Offer , affray , fraud , defray , inference , fragile , Friday ,
differ, loafer, freely.
FL: Flee, fleecy, flaw, flow, flown, baffle, trifle, trifling,
hopeful, hopefully, flushing, flash, inflame.
NT; Entail, maintain, front, hint, agent, flint, anti-, Auntie,
intend, entire.
PL; Play, plump, plain, apply, employ, employer, topple, nipple,
ripple, pledge,, imply, ample.
BR: Broker , brook , robber , brunt, brim , breach , bran , brawrjy .
brawl, brat, brought, broom, brook..


G-R: Grant, groom, grand, grinij green, grill, regret, grew, agree,
gravitate, dagger.
KR: Crew, crowd, cram, crumb, baker, croaker, crayfish, maker,
locker, rocker, recruit, poker.
KL: Claw, clue, clean, reclaim, reclaiming, clap, tickle, pickle,
clutch, clay, technical, clerical, clerk, clinch, incline.
DR: Drain , draw , drench , droop , dream , dreamy , rider , dreaming,
leader, reader, drip, drag, dragon, hinder, plunder.
DL: Idle, addle, puddle, huddle, ladle, idly, widely , hardly,
delightful, delicate, dilemma, handle, fondle, kindle.
THR: Throw, threw, throne, thermal, bother, gather, leather,
breather, three, thread, thrill.
NR: Inner, banner, honor, enervate, energy, finery, honoring,
nerve , normal , runner , manner .
BL: Able, blame, blooming, blunt, bland, blind, blindly, blight,
cable, double, rumble, doubly, doubling, blot, blue.
ML: Camel , enamel, melancholy, malign, malinger, homely, lamely,
malingerer, malingering, mollify.
MR: Hammer, rammer, numerical, plumber, mermaid, Morman, Morgan,
mercy, emerge, emery.
SHR: Measure, polisher, treasure, masher, Asher, Shirley, usher,
Sherlock, sheriff, shrink, shrine.
SHL: Initial, crucial, palatial, martial, official.
EXERCISE 15.
Read, copy and transcribe the following:-
1. L V* yf
2. * / f Ki, l
I v v VO- .1


FIFTH LESSON
S, SES , EX, RER, REL, LER & ERL.
There are two ways of writing the consonant “s":-
(a) By a small tick, written up or down f/ f/
(b) By a short thin stroke ( ,
The tick "s" is used for all those words which begin with the
sound of "s" , as in;- Sam, soot, sip, spy, snake, smite; except-
ing when this initial "s" is immediately followed by two vowels ,
as in "Siam" or "suet" , in which cases the curved or stroke "s" is
used.
The tick is also used in all words ending in the sound of "s"
or "z", as in:- James, sips, bees, cease, lease, abuse.
The few cases in which the curved or stroke "s" is used are
clearly set out later on in this lesson.
USE OF TICK "S".
INITIALLY.
Rule 1 For both facility and legibility, sharp angles are
best. In order to get these sharp angles, write whichever tick
follows the approximately opposite direction to that of the next
strike or movement: *.
-'V /'/
sk > ?~r —sn /A^ —' san ~sun sag /
Rule 2. Before a circle vowel write the same "s H as would
be used were the vowel not there:
seek seem o'— — seen seethe soap sobs sleep
slopes smack —&
Thoroughly practise the following
aaves-c^^savages summer t^~^ V ' sacred s** sad soothes y
X' /_ *0 /
sang same similar cease -Z 5 soda / spoil /,


Buie The small hook vowel end also the small circle
vowels may precede an initial tick ”s".
ask asleep essence** eschew
MEDIALLY.
When the principles underlying the preceding rules are grasp-
ed the student will have little difficulty in using the tick "s' 1
medially, as it will be written up or down according to what fol-
lows it; thus it must be written UP in “grasp”, down in "succeed”
UP in "risky”, DOWN in "recede", UP in "lesson”, and DOWN in "gro-p
cer" . Facility and legibility are the determining factors.
risky //?^’leB80n/5>^~r^rulBer^ ^// recede
FINALLY .
Rule 1. When the sound of “s" immediately follows a con-
sonant it is written in whatever form gives the sharper angle.
Rule 2 . If final "s" follows a hook vowel it is usually
written UP. It is written DOWN after "pa", "da", "ba", "pla",
"pu" , and similar combinations.
faceXf pace / 'days lace S grace deuce <r
Rule 5. If final "s” follows a circle vowel attached to
"k”, "kr", "kl" , "sh" , "m'Vn", write it DOWN, as shown.
noaevj? crows miss p close keys armies </
Rule 4. In other cases when "s” follow’s a circle vowel,
write it up. After the straight downstrokes and "d", "gr" ,
write the "s" from the top of the circle,
ties peace,guise I vice k po *e
Note.- When the vowel preceding final tick "s" ia not ac-
cented, its insertion is unnecessary.
leeches teaches hingesL^^famous^^V' — r
"S" ADDED TO ”S” .
There are many hundreds of words the majority of them
plural nouns and singulars of verbs in which the syllable "s-
--vowel-s” occurs. This syllable is principally "see", as in
“races”. “dresses” . “paces”, “rises”; but may be “sue” as in
“census”, "sis" as in. “basis” . “sas" as in “exasperate” . (eks-a-s) .
“saws” as in 11 exhaust” (eks-aw-s), or “sis” as in “precise".
This syllable also, occurs initially in a number of words such


as “season 11 , “cisternI*, 1 *, “sustain 1 *
Rule 1 . Represent “a-vowel-s" by two ticks Joined, the
first of which will follow the general rules concerning “s", leav-
ing the second tick to fall into palace in the opposite direction;
grace graces race races bless blesses r* 1
face V faces \, pose poses possess Jf basis
Rule 2. When “s-vowel-s" occurs as an initial syllable
select that form which gives the better Joining with the con-
sonant following it;
eeason^—■'cistern sustain
A third tick may be added in such words as
possesses jp successes recesses /S'** abscesses
“EX" AND "NS" .
"Ex" is represented by CX. a compound sign consisting of
"c—k**s" , but with the "s 11 upward instead of downward as is usual
after “k":
excellent tr 'l exercise exhibit example
”X" . Where '*x'* is preceded by any vowel other than “e” use
the sign for "ex'* without the "e 1 * . This sign will not clash
with "w” owing to the extreme rarety of the use of the **w , 'sign
medially:
mix taxpayer Mexican
"Ns” is also a special sign consisting of "n" and upward "a"
no attempt being made to show the Joining and the whole being
lengthened to prevent any possibility of clashing with "n". This
sign is generally used for the representation of the light sound
of "ns” (ence, ince, ense, aace, anse , etc.):
foncy\ sense * wince C? linseed "7^**
emergency | j^vldenoe^-
"nsr", "nsl 11 , are best written "
canceA. T dan°er ( /^ f /' answer
In words where "a" is followed by "sea" , "at", or "str" as
in “instruct, instant, incessant”, do not use the "ense" sign:
in-cess-ont S minstrel 9 in-stancc""


Owing to Its great convenience use the "ease" sign freely in
such words as
incinerate^^* insipid - i nsC ribe '''
"Kz" . This heavier sound is usually heard in plural nouns,
possessive case nouns, and singular verbs. In such cases add
the tick "a" to "n" .
gain/ gains/ man man's win (J- —wins C*- —•*
&
loans^S- —scene scenes,* ** ravens *
WORD ENDINGS:
Rule . In the word endings -uous, -ious, -ecus, or -oyous,
write the tick "s" down, taking care to complete the circle, and
to make the "s" with a separate motion.
Joys t Joyous Jtj pies pious [' virtue b/ virtuous
furies ingenious l u _£)
This greatly facilitates the addition of "-ly" in such words
as .
furiousljN v s' x^ P seriously strenuously* continuously
The ending "ious" after "c" and "t" is expressed by "sh" and
tick "s" , "clous" and "tious" being pronounced "ahus" .
gracious captious facetious Ns \?—*
STROKE "S".
Rule 1. Write the curved "s" whenever a word consists of
"s" and a vowel only, or in any case in which the curved "s" will
core clearly show a necessary vowel;
sea (o say C saying assume resume
Rule 2. Write stroke "s" when final "s" is followed by a
vowel, except when following "n":
fussy \ messy C infancy \ emergency L «
. /111 ) .
Rule 5. Use ' for stroke "s" after lIS
epilepsy tipsy legacy
■♦■Use for "ing" after a vowel:,
drawing Cs seeing flying N *-' rowing •''''^hurrying \f^
owing flowing^ 2 '' ploying carrying^/^


Rule 4. Use } for "z": (a) when, "z' 1 begins a word, as ins-
zenith ~ , zoo J ; (b) for "zy" ,as in:- laz,
breezy v L (c) whenever required for distinctiveness or facil-
ity, anxiety , ooze °) , citizen
EXERCISE 14.
Write the following in Shorthand:-
INITIAL 11 3 11 .
Write "a" 2£ In: some, satin, save, sable, sob, seek, soak, sale.
Write n a* l DOWN in: sago, safer, sacred, saddle, sane, sanity, sun.
MEDIAL "3".
Write "a" UP in: risk, reason, grasp, whisker, blessing, mask.
Write M a M DOWN in: grocer, greaser, hustle, wrestle, racer.
FINAL "S".
Face, grace, dress, annoys, Joys, race, toys, refuse, leaps, foes,
values, amuse, amaze, leaves, greets, less, games, -sense, orbs.
*SE3" . “SIS". "BUS" . "SAS 11 SYLLABLES.
Begin "b" UP in: faces, dresses, masses, abscess, elipsls.
Begin “s" DOWN in: sausage, season, society, necessity, assassin,
houses, sustenance, census, suspense, basis.
Insert vowels' in plurals of "sis": bases, analyses, elipses.
Final M s" followed by a vowel: spicy, grassy, fallacy, epilepsy,
busy, flimsy, tipsy, mercy, accuracy, intimacy.
WORD ENDINGS.
-uous; sinuous, tenuous, vacuous, ingenuous.
-io.us: furious, gloriously, nefarious, ingeniously.
-ous: famous, spacious, facetious, vicious, gracious, specious,
captious, graciously, consciously.
GENERAL .
Sleep, asleep, slope, aslope, espouse, spouse, tipsy, skip, essay,
escape, esk, assayer, said, seek, fatuous, sago, assagai, pose,
posy, Bess, Bessy, legacy, Teas, Tessie, case, Casy, skill, bases,
sickly, abscesses, lace, lacy, pass, aspire, essays, ask, assail,
ace', assailant, acid, Isaac.


RER. BAR. ROE. RIER. RIOR.
Use „—(double length "r") for these syllables, MEDIALLY
or FINALLY, as in:
mirror - 1 ftrVerlorlty
sneerer^—P^'"'^fairer N \ clearer
INITIAL *REL H .
Use —ilso for "rel-" Initially only, as in;
rely —''""’reliefrelieve relax
LER. LOR. LAR. LURE.
Use for these syllables , and take care to write it at
an angle of 45 degrees in order to distinguish it from the "rer"
sign. . / y> y y y—
feeler sailor as alarm </ failure \s learn/
The "ler" sign is not used where "ler" may be formed by add-
ing an l, r" to the primitive form;
s imple
o—7
simpler °* 7^' f
ERL. EARL. URL.
For this syllable use , a slightly bent upward charac-
ter , twice the length of "bl"
furl cmtl
Add the "a" vowel, if necessary, for "-arl" .
Carl V v>jJ^^^barley
EXERCISE 15.
Read, copy, then transcribe , the following;-
2. oS o' / ry' \ o - —3> L
*■ i 9 csi


SIXTH LESSON
ST, STR, & SW,
ED , T & D LOOP.
ST Initially.
Rule . Use the thin tick v for ST whenever ST commences a
word no vowel intervening between the S and T.
stem & story^^ 3 atone'Q starry g-titich'f* staunch
ST Medially and Finally.
Rule - Use the tick ST whenever the sound of ST or ZD occurs
medially or finally. These ST and 2D sounds are variously spelled
as will be seen by the examples , but the tick ST is invariably
used to represent them.
Sound of ST: massed faced^'V^
Jest based fast ><S \*
Sound of ZD; amazed ’'bruised gazed raised-^^araußed c " r
dozed sneezed —**■
Rule. When adding S to ST . write it down if it immediately
follows the ST , and up if a vowel follows the ST .
mists 9 vestasinvests'—^Augustus £
Rule . When a vowel occurs between S and T use tick S and
stroke T . The vowel may Be omitted.
No Vowel Between: taste faced 'Xjs, stay m lapsed^/*
Vowel Between: tacit —facet V city upset
S-VOWEL-ST j -CESSED. -SESSED . -SIST . BcC .}
The.se syllables are best represented by S-vowel-ST:-
DST . PEST ’— REST. FIEST .
Use the compound sign "dst" and "dest" , and the com-
pound sign' for "fest" and "fiest" , making both these charac-
ters about twice the length of a "long” character:
midst manifesto N ' N \^briefest


For "diest" add "st 11 to the primitive form , as in:
hardy W hardiest W handy |>. s handiest
STB Initially .
Rule . Use the thickened tick \ for STB whenever STB begins
a word;-
strayv
STB Medially and Finally .
Rule . Use the thick tick for STB medially and finally for
the treble consonant STB, or for the unaccented syllable -STER,
or -STOR.
Treble Consonant; unstrung*'"—nostril'' O'" pastry
, . / A
Unaccented Syllable STER; master" 'pastor £ bannister
Rule . Use ST vowel and R for accented syllables .
austere stern estuaryrestore
SW.
Rule . Express SW when preceding a vowel on a straight
stroke by changing the vowel to the other side.
itch F switch 1 arm swarm allow swallow
Rule . Express SW when preceding a hooked vowel on a curve
by writing a small circle inside the hook.
swan*' s—' 5 —' swagger r (Note:- sweet swing ts*- )
ED .
Rule . In forming past tenses ending in "ed" , write the pre-
sent tense form and add a dot .
fasted scented altered mastered N fenced''' S^Q__^. —"•
measured- stayed ''*■ ushered "'"'^repeated
Rule . The> use of the dot for -ED in past tenses does not
apply:-
(a) to verbs in which the present tense outlines end in tick
S, in which cases the tick ST is used.
face\*' faced\\ braize C braized (x


(b) to verbs in which the present tense ends with N.
e aln /_^S ained grained
attained '^remaine^/^
T 8c D LOOP.
Rule . When the sound of T or D immediately follows the pre-
ceding consonant, as in "rapt", "swept", "draft", "grand",
"standard" (st-a-n-dr-d) , "laggard" (1-a-gr-d) , the T or D may be
added by means of a narrow loop a little more than half the length
of the stroke to which it is attached. Past tense verbs ending
in "ed" are not included in this rule.
T: rapt-''^’^'draft swept J swift %
D: rend/^~ tJ bend c^ \ s^ > standard^ - if grand
Rule . This loop is not applied to M, adds T only to L,
and D only to B and N .
Rule . If a vowel occurs immediately before T or D , write
the full T or D consonants.
grandgrenade horrid
EXERCISE 16 .
Write the following in Shorthand:-
Graced .greased, invest, rooster, investor, swim, possessed, mist,
texts, Joist, refused , master, lobster, switch, subsist, mixed,
amazed, braized, bruised, monster, bannister, sweep, recesses,
faster, pessimist, west, Easter, oyster, swell, capsized, struck,
midst, oldest, hardest , hardiest.
EXERCISE 17 .
Read, copy, then transcribe:- (See Notes next page.)
£,7/ / - * £-7
.. i/l/T
<r> ~ \2_
s * ' -*


’ EXERCISE 18.
Write in Shorthand the following:-
Teamster, spinster, sales, mercy, fatuous, unsafe, monster, speak,
faster, streak, pansy, spurious, unsafely, strain, Samuel, struck,
epilepsy, seriously, plastered, swaggerer, sacrilege, intimacy,
famously, mastered, recessed, lobsters, subsist, savages, urgency,
specious.
EXERCISE 19.
Write in Shorthand the following:-
Quaffed, laughed, draft, lift, stitched, fetched, broached, roped,
sobbed, spiked, meted, loaded, standard, offered, occurred, moved,
baffled, raffled, bevelled, levelled, record, bathed, charted,
assaulted, gained , planned, end, demand, covered, aimed, ridged,
gathered, result, faded, plastered, plumed, stamped, groomed, old,
Jumped, smashed, famished, failed, felt, fold, fault, waste, want,
stated, wasted, wanted, invest, invested, mastered, strutted.
MOTES
f
In Exercise 17 and in all subsequent exercises, you will note
that unimportant vowels are omitted in the outlines; also that the
initial vowel may be omitted in words beginning with "in", "en",
"im" or "em" . **—and are used invariably for "en" and "em";
Q ando are occasionally used for "in" or, "im" when distinc-
tion is necessary, as in: - insure 0. > ensure
immigrant emigrant modest immodest
If you have any difficulty in reading any outline , write down
its longhand equivalent, for example, write 1-at-at; in
write 1-ee-st; write r-e-J-str; and for / write
d-ee-p-st. Mentally repeating r-d-u-st for the outline^may
not always suggest the word "reduced", but the writing of r-d-u-st
will immediately identify the word.
B-SR . B-SL.
After /' for the sake of facility ”sr" and "si" may be
written y as in:-
absurd Absalom £ obsolete Bf
These formations cannot be mistaken for "ar" and "al" , as the hook
in "bar", "bal" , etc., would be written on the first consonant.
THOROUGH PRACTICE NECESSARY.
When your exercises have been corrected and you know the out-
lines are right, practise writing them repeatedly and as neatly as
you can . This is the royal road to SfEED and ACCURACY .


SEVENTH LESSON
OMISSION AND INDICATION OF VOWELS.
Now tihat- you have learned •the double consonants and have
grasped the idea of their use, particularly in regard to the repre-
sentation of syllables , it will be apparent that the vowels which
/nay be omitted are steadily increasing. If you will look closely
into the matter you will find that the need for the insertion of
vowels decreases as the number of consonants in the outline in-
creases . In other words, the longer the outline, the greater the
probability of its having a distinctive outline of its own even
with the vowels omitted. With a view to writing the briefest
outlines, of course consistent with legibility, you must now begin
to study words from the following point of view: "What vowels may
be omitted , and what vowels must be retained?" The rules which
follow will be found helpful .
Rule 1 . Vowels which are lightly Sounded may be omitted,
such as the "e" in the first syllable in:- report, re-
pay, repeat, remove, remote, deny, delay, delight,
denote , depend, secure , demolish; the "u" in the first
syllable of;- sufficient, support, succeed, supreme,
suppress; the "o" in;- lesson, treason, reason, melon.
Rule 2 . In many words the vowel on which the accent falls
is the only one which need be retained*. Words like
"demolish, sufficient, maintain, mountain, phantom,
prodigal, legibility, defence, deafens, defines" are
unmistakable when written:- dmolsh , sfishnt, mntain,
mountn , fantm, prodgl , legblty , dfens , defns , dfins .
In actual practice words like "demolish" and "sufficient" are
quite unmistakable if their first syllables only are written, thus
"dmol" and "sfish", and they may safely be contracted to these
forms. This principle, however, will be dealt with later.
Rule 3. The initial vowel should be retained as it usually
forms a sure key to the word: it "gives you the hint"
as one of my first pupils put it. So useful is the
initial vowel that in many cases no other vowel is
needed . not even the accented vowel. Who”could mis-
read "amnd" or "amnt" although in both cases the ac-
cented vowel is missing? The words "apposite" and
"opposite" differ only in their initial vowel, and in
each case no other vowel is needed in the outline , the
vowel between the "s" and ,”t" being "indicated" by writ-
ing separate consonants for "s" and "t" instead of using


t-he Ir st" tick. The initial vowel is the “distinguish-
ing" factor in all such words as:- "test" and "attest"
"fare" and "affair", "regular" and "irregular", “leg-
ible" and "illegible" .
Buie 4. The accented vowel may also be omitted in any case
where the other parts of the outline sufficiently re-
present the word, e .g . "com-pl-shon" for "compulsion",
and "r-grd-ed" for "regarded". The use of the double
consonant "vl" for "vol" in "voluntary" is also an ex-
cellent example of an accented vowel rendered unnecess-
ary by the plainness, the "unmistakability" of the rest
of the word. If the outlines for "volunteer" and "vol-
untary" are reduced to the minimum, it will be found
that the only vowel really necessary is the final vowel
after "r" in "voluntary" to distinguish it from "volun-
teer" , making the outlines "v-l-nt-r" and "v-l-nt-ry" .
The accented vowel would be necessary in "completion" to
keep it distinct from "compulsion".
Rule 5. No vowels are necessary in any outline which
stands for one word alone. Such-outlines usually con-
tain more than two consonants, but many very short words
belong to this class. The following are examples:-
vl-nt-r f's’ volunteer , f-p j> fop . Jr-nl 1 journal ,
A n
sh-b "7 shabby, chrls Charles, vln ,
1-gl legal, mr-bl^ labour, rs-lt/^result,
// \ — 7
psh /- push, fsh fish, mrgn \ jpargin, m-b / mob,
jrm | germ, mrk' , "~~\_mark, chrt | chart ,chrm-ing J
Proper names or foreign words do not com© under this category
In such words vowels should be used freely, as "sh-b" would not be
sufficient for "Sheba", nor "m-b" for "Mab" or "amoebia",nor "mr-k
for" America" .
VOWEL INDICATION .
The presence or absence of certain vowels is,in many outlines,
indicated by the-particular form in which the outline is written,
and it is most important that the student should thoroughly grasp
this principle, called "vowel indication". Take for example the
words "tenet" and "tent". The consonants are the same, but in
one case the compound sign for "nt" will be used and in the other
(tenet) separate consonants for the "n" and "t" will be written.
It will be obvious that the employment of a separate "n" and "t"
indicates that a vowel occurs between the "n" and "t",and it will
be equally obvious that as this vowel is so clearly indicated. it
may safely be omitted.
until C'' plant C tent“f


The use of the final loop for "t" and "d" indicates that no
vowel immediately precedes these consonants. If such a vowel
occurs the stroke "t" or "d" is used, and the vowel, being thus
indicated , may be omitted .unless its insertion is necessary to
prevent the clashing of one word with another.
hoardhorridrapt repeat arid card
The use of separate consonants for "I" and "r" will often in-
dicate an accented vowel , and this vowel , particularly if it is a
hook vowel , may then be omitted. Take the words "rattle" and
"retail", "diver" and "devour", "differ" and "defer"; double con-
sonants are naturally used in the first of each of these pairs of
words , and separate consonants are used in the others because of
the accented vowel preceding the "1" in "retail" and the "r" in
"devour" and "defer" . It is of course a distinct gain in speed to
be able to dispense with the hook vowels , the large circle , the
"ow" and "oi" circles. Many students prefer, in the early stages
at any rate , to insert these accented vowels for the sake of the
additional ease in reading the outlines . Later on , however , they
are able to dispense with all vowels of this kind and insert only
those vowels necessary to prevent clashing with other words
chiefly Initial or final vowels , or those which , like the "e" in
"reveal", distinctly help in the "balance" of the outline and thus
increase its facility. -
Unaccented: revel ripple s"'' wriggle
Accented: reveal devour le
Omission of "I" .
Omit long "i" in both long and short words unless its inser-
tion is necessary to prevent ambiguity as in "fife" or to add
to facility as in "final and "blight"
f line shiny * 9 type yrf light
Vowels Sometimes Necessary for Facility.
Some outlines are distinctly improved by the insertion of a
particular vowel , although such vowel may not be accented. In
some of these cases the insertion of this otherwise unimportant
vowel gives Just that little pause or "rest" in motion which is at
times so necessary to the balance of on outline and so helpful to
the fingers . In other cases the insertion of the vowel enables
Joinings to be made which would otherwise be impossible.
Examples:
Stand Joining between "at" and "n" could not other-
wise be clearly shown.
/
Begin / Makes possible the Joining of "b" and "g" .
Vintage —Makes possible the joining of "nt" and "J".
Conference - "Improves the Joining between "fr" and "n".


SUMMARY.
1. Insert initial and final vowels and most accented vowels ,
unless the presence of accented vowels is shown by the form
of the outline as in and "avail n
2. Insert any vowel which helps in the facile formation of an
outline, as in ; or adds to legibility as
in "morally"-'' — the insertion of the "a" vowel dis-
tinguishes this word from "merely" , and in "adopt"/)
where the insertion pf the "o" distinguishes this word/from
"adapt" *
5. Omit unimportant or unaccented vowels, especially in first
syllables , such as "e" in "deny" , "denote", and "delay";
the "e" in "reply", "report", "repair"; the vowel between
"a" and "r" in "survey" , "service" , "surround"; the "u" in
the first syllable in "sufficient" , "support", "subject".
4. Omit those vowels which are not required for the facility or
legibility of the outline even to the extent of omitting
all the vowels in such words as "prodigal" (prdglj, "suburb"
(sbrb), "labour" (Ibr), "surrender" (srndr;
EXERCISE 20 .
Write the following in Shorthand
INITIAL VOWEL ONLY: Absence , another, analysis , oblige , abnormal ,
upon, admiral, apparent, ahead, even, unknown, opponents, essence ,
adapt, annual , evening, appeals, availed, opposite, apposite,
ignorant.
NO VOWELS NECESSARY: Female, nob, life, margin, fop, whom, club,
business, find, kind, line, result, single, fire, tire, mire,
mile, mind, signed, refined, file, learn, villain, pleasant,
knowledge, college, marble, success, normal, regard, suffer,
suppose, struggle, struggled, courage, courageous, learning,
ACCENTED VOWEL ONLY: Monotonous, insight, splendid, calendar,
delinquent, descend , mountain .
ACCENTED VOWEL UNNECESSARY: Umbrella, testimony, suspense, sorry,
serious, impatient, admittance, apprehend, occurrence, celebrity,
marble, record, voluntary.
VOWELS NECESSARY FOR FACILITY (underlined): Infringe , strenuous ,
ambiguity . vintage , elegant, gratify-, usuiy, thresher .
MISCELLANEOUS: Retire , entire , retain, savage, savagery, advance ,
threatens, rapacious, hastened, refrain, abolish, oblige, rougher,
refer, ample, impale, fegal, regale, apple, appalling, differ,
defer , morally, merely, censor, answer, insult, testimony, fiscal,
physical , philosophy, adopt, adapt, apposite, opposite, cultivate,
facetious, temple, dimple, tent, tenet, plant, planet, bonnet,
bent, lent, linnet, grand, grenade, grant, granite, punt, punnet,
flannel, flannelette, modest, immodest, immune, mobile, immobile.


EIGHTH LESSON
ABBREVIATIONS.
Small words such as "from, to, be, but, of, in, on, and, much,
which" , are £0 often repeated as to form from 60 to 70 per cent,
of all written or spoken matter. A further 15 per cent, is made
up of a number of larger but very common words , such as:- oppor-
tunity, provide, influenced, expect, valuation, remarkable ,
together, etc. If one ranges over all literature, one will, of
course, encounter every unit of the^language, but for all the prac-
tical purposes for which Shorthand’is used one has only to acquire
facility in-the use of those outlines which express current every-
day thought on current , everyday matters . This category will in-
clude the vocabulary used in leading and special articles in news-
papers , reports of meetings, lectures, political speeches, chair-
men's speeches on business matters, business letters and reports,
Royal Commissions , inquiries , and Law Court procedure . Special
vocabularies are in use in particular trades and professions such
as wool , paper, insurance, the Law, Medicine, Architecture and En-
gineering . These vocabularies and the Shorthand equivalents for
them may be quickly acquired when necessary . For the present they
may be put aside .
Returning to the very common words —• forming the greater part
of the language special forma are allotted to them, each .being
made as brief as possible consistent with legibility . These sym-
bols may be quite easily learned, chiefly owing to the fact that
in most cases they represent the beginnings of the words, e.g."abs"
is "absolute" , "infl" is "influence" , "ha" is "had" , "b" is "be" .
The method of showing by a dot the past tense of verbs represented
by contractions, as shown in the examples, is also extremely simple.
HOW TO LEARN THE ABBREVIATIONS.
Notwithstanding that the abbreviations may be easily memor-
ised, they should be thoroughly practised. Good Shorthand work
consists not of remembering a number of symbols but of the ability
to write the Shorthand outlines quickly and legibly. Repeat the
abbreviations as you practise them, saying: "abs" stands for "ab-
solute", "in-f-1" stands for "influence", and so on. This is a
very great help to memory, strongly assisting it by the associa-
tion of ideas . Remember , you must be interested and you must
give the symbols your undivided attention. Learn to concen-
trate your attention to focus your thoughts on the words and
outlines, not as one approaching a task, but as one keenly inter-
ested in learning Just how much of each common word is to be writ-
ten , aud as pne who is also keen on writing the selected symbols


a
B.bOUt
u
r
r
different
-ce
<r
in v^
, one
\ only
absolute-ly
influence-d
opportune-ly } I
acquire-d
difficult
inquire-d '
opportunity)'
according(to)
do
dear
r r
-ry
owe prl
world)
advantage
and or an
&
equal-led
-iy
enclose-d
instruct-ed
instruction
interest-ed f f*
please-d )
pleasure )
point-ed !
appoint
/7
-sure
\
Just ) I
question
attend-ed
attention
jj-
for
Justify £ J
-ied ) |‘
quantity
also
general
\ 1
(
quite
generally) },
Justice v
always
arrange-d
-ment
**
O
gentleman
" -men
give
T| know or-\ '■
J
qualify) I
-ity )
as or has
r
left
remark-ed,/** '
/
great
large
be or buy
0
remember/
greatly
Isxgely
but
n
greater
C'
require-d /V .
-ment
can, come)
country >
/
greatest
c
larger
satlsfy-iedxP*
-factory-tion
L L
may, more, }
charge-d
had, happy)
member)
shall
commercial
or happenj u
short or
moment Q
wish
constitution -
hand , high 1
or who I
most s
shortly —
-al-ally
have
Mr . ' n
signify-ied i
-cant-cance/’
certain ✓
. -ly, or Sir/r
his , is
much or) .
so or us C
i
which y
special-ly f
correspond
Y7
must n
-ed-ence
hour, our
o
nature-al N —?
strong or, ) s
could
strength-eri;
character
Vo
I
next
//■
deliver-ed
-y
rr
important
-oe
o
not v —P
of
subject-ed
subjective^^
exactly by writing them carefully.- A really good shorthand style
is well worth acquiring .
Learn the following abbreviations one column at a time . As
you complete the learning of each column turn to the next page and
write in Shorthand the corresponding exercise;-


suggest-ed
11
think
(
what
o
without (y-J
suggestion
V.
V
those
(o
when
(y
where
o'
suggestive
c c
to or
J
whether
CP
yard
thank-ed
time
\
or that
to-morrow
_want
°\
year
the
o
will
you or
u
(
true or
your
them
\
truth
J
with or
there
thing
(
c
under
valuation
would
word
within
O
young
yesterday \>
EXERCISE 21.
(a) Including abbreviations in first column;
John Thompson attended the sheep sales and also arranged tolbuy
cattle, but certain correspondence showed him in a bad)light and a
friend advised him to at once appoint}a deputy and take advantage
of an early train to[the country. He has now returned, but the
old firm]has disrated him and a final discharge has been ar-
ranged. | He certainly can see how foolish he has been. According}
to the Manager, he could be appointed even now if{he could keep
faith with the firm and pay attentionjto the moral duties every
man owes to on employer . 100 words.
This exercise and those which follow, should be used for
dictation practice. After you have your work corrected, re-
write any outlines in which mistakes have occurred, then go
over the whole exercise several times and when you feel per-
fectly familiar with it, have it dictated to you, say at 40
words per minute. It is counted into divisions of 10 words.
At 40 words per minute one division should be read in each
quarter minute . ' At 50 words per minute one division should
be read in each 12 seconds , and at 60 words per minute one
division in each 10 seconds. For reading at 60, put an ink
spot on the seconds-hand dial of your watch at 12, 24, 36 and
48 seconds. The minimum speed you should reach on each of
these exercises is 40 words per minute, but you should aim at
60, and work at the exercises, if necessary for this purpose,
at intervals during your study of the following lessons.
(b) Including abbreviations in second column.
How difficult it is for typists to learn the great | importance
of accurately at teeing to an enclosure. It. is a|very general
occurrence in commercial life to open on envelope, •{the contents of
which announce an enclosure, and to find|the enclosure forgotten.
The greatest annoyance is often caused through{these mistakes by
the clerks in charge of'the correspondence ,|and I am very doubt-
ful if this annoying error will ever cease. Excuses may be made


for some people, but in|the case of a typist who is charged with
a|certain duty, excuses fail to have any great weight.)
I can seldom leave the office, but a gentleman has | in-
vited me to test the different baths of a certain | holiday resort
and I intend taking advantage of his kind(offer within a day or
two. Other gentlemen say the(baths are equal to any to be found
in the|country, and indeed, have never been equalled in other
countries . l6O words.
(c) Including abbreviations in third column:
Mr. Hughes is interested in the large deposit of Guano) manure
in the Queensland caves, and hopes to make a)great success of the
industry. I know these hopes are|absolutely justified, for he is
influenced largely by a certain(telegram which reached him on Mon-
day. I have instructed him)not to forget me in the sharing of
interests, andlmust inquire soon about my chances. I am more than|
keen about Guano manure, and hope he will not disappoint] me.
Guano, in my opinion, is a most excellent manurelfor most crops
for flowers, fruit, wheat and all the|legumes; such as clover,
peas and beans and it is]certain to have a very great sale in
this and| other countries. 122 words.
(d) Including abbreviations in fourth column-.
On© does not often get the opportunity to secure Serge[in such
quantity and of such quality as I secured|in Sydney last week. I
am quite pleased about the] bargain and never remember having had a
similar opportunity. I(shall signify my satisfaction by making a
special gift to(the local hospital, and so help in the great work)
of making strong the many patients who are Just now ( subjected to
illness of different kinds. I shall shortly require! much more
than the quantity.l have Just bought,] and have pointed out to my
colleagues how pleased I(shall be if I can again with so little
difficulty(buy such excellent cloth so opportunely. Some seeming-
ly chance remark (on a certain subject may help in the attaining of]
my wish, and then‘l shell really be quite satisfied. l4O words.
(e) Including abbreviations on preceding page;
It has been suggested that to-morrow we ought to(go to Mosman
and thank the Mayor of that charming|suburb for his great courtesy
when our club visited him(last week. I con not say now whether
we will] go or what, arrangements could be made at such shortjnotica
and can not feel quite happy about the whole(thing. The truth is
that I have a valuation of|a yard to make in the morning, and do
notjwish to have anything clashing with it. The man for | whom I
am making the valuation, is a very young(and impatient fellow and
told me plainly yesterday that he(would brook no further delay.
Owing to this, I have( suggested that our visit to Mosman take
place at somejmore opportune time. The beginning of the new year,
which(is now so close , would suit me., as I would(then be under no
debt to my hasty young friend(and could certainly give my friends
more attention than now. \ You will agree that this arrangement
would be more satisfactory. lBO words.


above
ey
chaired
.
method
"1 .
their
(
approve
chart
/
1
mere
therefore
approved
cheer
[/
near i
third
i
nor)
N '
this
(
been
cheered
V
/
\
beli eve
during
o
put
/
yT
thought
i
v_u,
,
regard
call-ed
done )
down)
c
rather
A
till
y
>
case
from )
school
trad©
(
(
cannot
O form)
towards
(
care
gave
Is
schooled
upon
>
cared
given
A—'
sent
I
very
J
cart ]
court^
chair
gold
good
guard
Lord •
should f
small
southern
sure | J
share )
was
why-
wide
widely
c*
o
r
*
LIST.OF COMMON WORDS WITH VOWELS OMITTED .
The following are typical examples of common words in which
the consonants are a quite sufficient guide . It will be noted
that the " t" or "d" loop has been used in a few cases like ’taethod",
"good" and "thought" , the frequency with which these words occur
Justifying these outlines. If at any time it is desired to insert
a vowel to distinguish one of a pair of words , say "court - cart",
the vowel may be written after the double consonant, thus:
cart . These examples should be studied and the outlines
written, but it is not necessary to memorise them.
EXERCISE 22 ■
Read , copy, then transcribe , the following, which contains other
examples of outlines without vowels:-
„ '-f / I C
t v Sj-Z'S' "V I I
vC Z c


“' YC I VJ-/C
7 ' ( V"
..I o /°\
o/( *7 ~ " 'V l / /^ — i 7/
(yf^j/ P^' a 7* > \'\/<. / t
' 77 " t^r/°v_^ x -'„ /
V\/ ( V—i—y • '
r/ *i!—\« a i/
/A" C : I "_7 " Co/
' .i'y,
1? n / C 7/7 o „ C
y7 o\. f L
A <r< \:C / $ VJV /*V
O'n C / O' O f LkCo
fzi.
1 i v


NINTH LESSON
SIMPLE PHRASING, PUNCTUATION,
FIGURES AND REVIEW.
In Longhand a fast writer often strings several words to-
gether, showing the division between the words by a somewhat wider
space than between each letter. competitions too, good
phrasing the correct grouping of notes gains points for the
performer. In speech, those words which form natural groups run
together in the utterance, and are usually quickly spoken. The
shorthand outlines for these word-groups should therefore be cap-
able of being written quickly and to that end should be Joined to-
gether by the writer whenever possible . A good phrase-outline
not only adds to speed: it adds very greatly to legibility-, as it
is much more easily read than its component parts would be if writ-
ten separately.
Sometimes as many as five words may be Joined, but as a rule
the best phrases are those consisting of two or three words only.
Good "phrasing” is not simply the stringing of words together pro-
miscuously Just because their outlines are capable of being
Joined easily. The words comprising a good phrase-outline must
naturally run together when uttered, and they will not do‘this un-
less they are grammatically related. Common phrases like "there
is another matter", "we shall be glad", "few weeks ago", "for the
time being", "at the moment", "at the time", "if you will", "I am
glad", "please let us know", are invariably uttered very quickly.
The shorthand-writer therefore needs facile, brief and legible
forms to represent them.
Two or three words Joined together cannot be mistaken for a
single word, as there is always something peculiarly distinctive
about a phrase-outline, particularly in special cases where one
consonant is written through another, and what is called an‘inter-
sectiori* is made. Even in the case of simple two-word phrases
like "if you" the phrase-outlipes cannot well be mis-read.
Rule
Join words used in common expressions if the outlines
Join well. The words composing the phrase must Just
naturally flow together.' Do not Join words sep-
arated by a comma, or by the smallest pause. Phrase-
outlines should not contain more than from three to
five words.
In the following list the student is given a few simple,


at a
cT
in this
I
do not say
5s
at a time
in some way
V
I
will have
at the time
c/- 7
if you
I
have been
at any time '
if you will
be
I
know there
at all times
if you will
y i
cannot
o
have
I
think
(
at the moment
y
i
O'
I am
( A
I
think you
Dear Sir
I am not
will be
from a
N
O
I
think you
y
I am very
should be
>
from the
I have
r-S
I
should be
T
from that time '
X can say
N
I
know the
in a
V sv
I called
Vi
I
will never
s~f
in the
S
•I do not
Cq
I
will not
typical phrases, and phrase-outlineo. They must be thoroughly
practised. It will be considered an error in future work if any
of the words in these phrases are written separately.
It will be noticed that "I" is always Joined to the succeed-
ing word, and "the" to the preceding word whenever possible. When
writing "I" always begin at the top, well to the right, and begin
the next wqrd where the '*I M ends, without lifting the pen. "I"
commences phrases only; it is not used in the middle of a phrase.
In phrasing with "the" and "a" begin these characters where
the preceding stroke ends and write them so that it can be clearly
seen that they are separate entities, as in:- in a' in the
After\ v I I |/ * , “the" and "a” should be added without
breaking the continuity of motion, as in;- if the SSs v O , by the o .
which the (> ,if a ,bya v , which aL ; » this also / applies
to "the" following a vowel, as- in;- had the s that the(g
"The" must not be used as the first word of a phrase-outline .
Note that "time" is always written separately and close to
the preceding word.
In phrasing with "them" write "th" through the preceding
stroke: "to them" "from them" "above them"
Learn to think of common phrases each as a complete group so
that when the phrase "I have the" is heard you will not think of
the separate words "I" and "have" and "the", but of the group
as a whole. and as one outline: "I have the" Thorough
practice of these phrases is absolutely necessary and will be well
repaid.


I wish
( V
only too happy
we have the
It can only be
in the world
is/
this is a
tp a
we have not . Q
the (j-k
much more
. a
there will be
it
we have al^so^/Y
next day
Y
a
we will hav^a^/J
out of
<sA
there has
which we b
out of a
& \
been a
which we have
out of the
to have the
pleasure
which is not^v^P
out of their
to do so
k
you may not be___^p
out in the
q/ —°
very simple
you have been^^_^-
on a
very important
J—
yours faithfully
yours truly \J
on the
we have had
v-A.
Occasionally the Shorthand forms in some very common ex-
pression will not Join easily. In such cases write the outline
which will not join close up to the preceding word as in'' -
this country) . This has the same effect as Joining so far as
“grouping" is concerned. Note the common business phrased?
PUNCTUATION . FIGURES . fcc .
Express the full-stop thus ; the question mark
thus _——■; the exclamation point thus ; the hyphen
thus ■+■ ; the dash thus ; the colon thus : * the paragraph
thus £ ; semi-colon as in longhand; and capitals and quotations
by n " , writing this character below the outline to express a
capital letter and above the outlines to show the beginning and
end of a quotation . ,
Use a short horizontal tick after a figure for 3j - 3~ ,
above a figure for = 3 . and under a figure for 3f =*3 j
use -for million ,5,000,000- ; for hundred , 300 *. 3 (
for thousand , - 165,000 - This is only
to be used for round numbers, 3,465,178 would be writt 517 f
465,203 would be writt 178 would be written
Heavy dot for £: - two dots nonzontally for
lbs. 21 lbs .-21" 1 two dots perpendicularly for pence; 3d. -J ;
ordinary shilling mark for shillings; 7 S j /s- -4/5-
Express feet and inches in the usual way;- 2 ft .6 ins. 2'6";
sq. in . \dj sq. ft . ; sq. mile i Bq. ;
cwt ; qr . . ; initials thus: - L. C . sCcs ,JN c. R . f&tr t
T. L . Johnson (3 Monsieur * ; italics by neavy
underline ; underlining by light waved line ;


French nasal H en" (ong) by encore ,en masse Q-~ d^'
Scotch or German "oh" by \ Loch , Munich" —-f
EXERCISE 23
Write the following in Shorthand:-
3 tons 2 cwt ss.
ins.; 32 sq. ft.; 36 ft. 1 in.; ins.; 2f sq. miles; £375,000;
£5,000,000; £200,000; £sl; 6jd.; au revoir; encore.
EXERCISE 24.
Write the following in Shorthand. Phrase by Joining together
the Shorthand outlines for the words connected by hyphens:
Dear-Sirs:
X-am enclosing herewith account for £3: 7:|e for advertising
in-the Nurses* Journaljup-to-the 31st inst.
Arrangements have-been-made withjShipping Ltd., Bond Street,
Sydney, under-which that firm willjtake-over and manage the adver-
tising pages of-the Journal . | All money due for advertising from
this date will-be|paid to-them , and on expiry of existing arrange-
ments renewalsjwill-be-arranged by-them.
We-thank-you for-your(support , which-we hope will still be
accorded to-thejJournal under its new managers.
Yours-faithfully.. (?7 words)
Dear-Sir:
We-have to advise-you that as andjfrom October Ist next, the
rate for Business and Commercial j Col lege advertising inserted in-
the "Daily Telegraph" will-be 7/- |net an inch for casual notices,
but on those insertedjunder special arrangement our scale discount
will-be allowed.
Withjthanks for favors ,
Yours-faithfully , (55 words^)
When these exercises have been corrected and you have per-
fected your notes , have the letters dictated to you until you can
write the outlines freely and well . Try and work up a speed of ,
say, 40 words per minute on each letter. The | marks are placed
at the end of each 10 words to enable you to gauge your speed.
EXERCISE 25 .
Write the Shorthand for the following phrases:-
I think you should be ,at any time, to have the pleasure , you have
been , yours truly , only too happy , in some way , we have not the ,
you may not be , out of their , to do so , we have also , there will
be , there has been a , 1 shall be pleased, on a, at the moment.


TENTH LESSON
CONSECUTIVE VOWELS . TR . TER . TOE . TAR . TUBE .
There are many words in which two vowels, or a vowel and a
diphthong, occur together. It is not always necessary to insert
them, particularly in long words, but occasionally they must be
inserted if absolute legibility is to be secured. Owing to the
special care taken in the construction of the vowel scale in this
system.of Shorthand, any two sounds occurring together may “be eas-
ily written, and in extreme cases practically the whole of the
spelling can be shown if necessary. Where vowel sounds predom-
inate in a word, as they do in "Aeolian", most -systems are at a
complete loss.
Simple examples of two vowels and the benefits derived from a
method which shows them both clearly and easily, are given in the
words which follow. Note that when two vowels follow "s", the
stroke is used.
phial' s^ / dull (y" - Siam Q
In words like "lion" , "liar" , "iodine" , "phial" , the second
vowel is not definite. Whether the letter is "a", "u" or "o" the
sound is approximately the same, and may be represented by the "a"
hook after a circle vowel either written separately as in "iodine"
or "lion" , or attached to the consonant as in "liar". Care must
be taken not to write this hook beyond the end of the first con-
sonant in order to keep it distinct from "tr" . When this short
sound occurs after a hook vowel the small circle is used to repre-
sent it.
Columbia myriad
Violaalliance ‘ area e/fmllllon *"
In some cases the second vowel is the more important, and
while both may be shown fully and with facility, it is usually un-
necessary to write the first.
humiliate| J __^^ppreciate^/^' I= vitiate^/^initiaft -^l_tt satiate
In some common words the second- sound is so unimportant that
it may be omitted. In "Australian" the double vowel sound after
the ”1" may be omitted altogether.
higher overseer


Words in-which it is not necessary to writ©
both the consecutive vowels and why.
Words. Reasons.
obeyer Words cannot be misread. Both vowels would,
strayer however, be inserted in "stayer” to distin-
betrayer guish from "stare".
historian Ttie outlines representing "historin" and
spaniel "spanl" are sufficiently distinctive.
widower "Wid-r" denotes a strong sound between "d"
and "r" otherwise the double consonant "dr”
would be used, as in "wider".
saying k—" represents "ing" after a vowel -
These examples and the points involved in this lesson should
be very carefully studied , and the outlines practised , as this
study and practice will furnish you with the means of showing
readily in the outline itself the full spelling of proper navies,
and the full vowels of any word in which it is necessary to show
them. Do not over-use the joined double vowels. In long words
the consonants alone are generally sufficient, together with the
insertion at an initial or final vowel when present.
"W" f OR "OO") Am "WH" MEDIALLY .
that "w" and "oo" are interchangeable sounds . for ex-
ample "wet" is "00-et" , "languid" is "lang-rgoo-id" .)
When "w" (or "oo") and "wh" occur medially the signs & C/ may
b© reversed to S? O according to the facility secured. The vowel
following the "w" may be omitted unless facility demands its in-
sertion , as in "twill" and "twirl". --
"dwarf/ ! >^\ v overwhelming twilltwirl
In some cases where "oo" is not represented in the spelling
by "w" and also when "nw" occurs followed by or —*- , the
"oo" hook vowel is used and the vowel which follows it is omitted
or inserted according to convenience .
Q) Cs—'
assuage (as-00-a-j) T Assouan (as-00-a-n) „ sanguine (s-a-
-ng-00-in or s-a-ng-gwin) unwomanly (un-00-m-nly)
In other cases —-</' is more convenient for "nw"j-
unwatched^-- 7 !' unwelcome
The writing of C/ medially for "w" will not clash with ”x" ,
as (s for "w" only occurs after a consonant, while IS for "x" only
occurs after a vowel:- \ \
tax relax few fox wax


EXERCISE 26.
Write the following in Shorthand: -
1. Betrayer , Georgia , gruel , poetical , algebraic , reinforce ,
librarian .
2. Historian, Wesleyan, Virginia, lowest, tarrying , Marion, be-
stowal, acrimonious, piteous, furious, areas.
3. Staying, growing, following, betraying, straying, stewing.
Will iara , Cuneo, nucleus, folio, Roneo, ammonia, curious.
4. ' Copyist, obeyer, .strayer , stayer, idealist, alluvial, copier.
ceremonial , spaniel, Daniel , widower .
5. Languish, anguish, Gwendoline, guano, penguin, bewildering,
twelve, Unwarranted , twist, dwell, unwind, dwindle.
TR . TER . TOR ■ TAR ■ TURE -
INITIALLY.
Rule;
Use C for the double consonant "tr" except when it precedes
the large hook vowel:
train 6.—trim.<f — — tramO trace try €
Rule; .
When "tr" precedes the large hook vowel use and join the
vowel to it .
truant p trouble (j troops true O:
Rule; . /////^
Use r for "ter", "tor", etc. before // ( t
target tarpaulin turbid turps J
Rule;
In all other cases use > for "tar", "tor", etc. initially.
terra -l— — turn -i. tornado terrible
MEDIALLY AND FINALLY.
Rule:
Use J whenever convenient for*either the double consonant "ti"
or the syllables "ter" , "tar", etc .
central 3 ' —after entreat''
Rule: //ff/ff
Before// / ' and after "des" , the c form is best:
destroy Intrude disturb intrigue


Vowel Reversed to Add "ter" . "tar" . w ture w . etc .
Rule:
After straight strokes "ter" , "tor" , etc . when following a
vowel may be expressed by writing the vowel with the right hand--,
jnotion
ma matter 3 futuremeter 0 motors
motoring 'o~' letter so
better </ shutter —, shatter —d paternityfraternity
T 1 & rotary
Rule;
Where /the vowel is followed by the double consonant "tr" ,
use > 1
patrol patron (compare ) patriot
Rule:
Use upward "tr" / , a thin stroke , when the downward and
thickened form is not convenient, as in "Exeter" jL? ;
but in most cases the vowel before "ter" may be dispensed with and
the downward "tr" used , as in:
voter —alternator cultivator
Rule:
Disjoin ) for "ture" only when necessary:-
sculpture posture / pasture lecture ?
EXERCISE 27.
Read, copy, then transcribe, the following;-
/>
Vi d J / J
EXERCISE 23.
Write the following in Shorthand:-
1 . Trance, traycloth , trap , troops , truant, trudge .
2. Tardy, tarpaulin, turps, target, torpid.
3. Turn, terminal, tornado, terrible, terrify.
4. Internal, entrancing, extraneous, interim, intrigue, intrepid,
disturb, destroy, victory, texture .literature, salutary.
5. Orator, oratorical, thermometer, barometer, flatter, flattery,
fitter, batter, lottery, captor, capture, picture, writer.


ELEVENTH LESSON
PREFIXES.
PRE. PRO . PRI. PRA. PRU are expressed by an initial loop
written in the left-hand direction, and extending at least half
the length of the stroke to which it is attached. PRI may be
“distinguished*’ when necessary by a, dot, and PRU by a dash, as
shown in the examples.
provide preclude '^profoundpride
prolix prelude proclaim prophecy prune
' preface preside property prong pretty ■<^ f r
PER. PAR. POE. FOR are expressed by the loop written
separately. The next stroke is written from this loop without
lifting the pen. Where PER, PAR etc. is followed by a vowel, the
vowel may he inserted or omitted according t.o its importance to
legibility or facility. The examples will help you on this point:
~ v ' — pernicious
parachute/ ;;> ‘^ ? parcel purpose perennial S'
paradise paragon paraffin / lA \^ / purport sr'
Rule . The separate loop S? is also used for fRE or HU
when they are immediately followed by a vowel, as in:
pre-eminent^ 1 i priority
Rule . The loop is not used lor FOR in words of one syllable
sport porchport J pork
Rule. Before the tick "s" or "at'’, or before a vowel, the
loop is written for the double consonant "pr" as shown in the ex-
amples:
pray pry prose praise prow pressed
Rule. The separate loop may be used medially for any of the
above syllables and also for the double consonant “pr" .
unprovoke^~^ disprove unprepared C: ~^ / ‘


Initial
loot for PEE. PRO
. PEI. PEA .
PRU .
prevent
pronounce
practised
proclaim
pre-ordained
produce
producer
pressure
presage
pre-eminent
primary
practical
presume
pretence
priority
premier
precursor
product
preserve
pretentious
promise
preference
prejudge
prime
promulgate
proffer
prohibit
prolong
present
preliminary
Initial
loop for PER.
PAR . PUR . POR.
purport
paramount
perturbed
percolate
performance
parvenu
porcelain
paraphrase
perennial
paragon
pervade
persuance
perchance
pursuer
parliament
permit
parcel
purveyor
purchase
performer
purpose
perform
portray
pursuit
paraffin
pursue
pardon
porter
portrait
pursued
Medial loop
for PKE . PRO.
PER. PAR.
PUR. PR.
unpruned
depart
departed
departure
unpretentious
depress
depressed
supreme
report
inspiriting
reported
export
exported
corporal
supported
Rule. In words beginning with a vowel followed by PEE, PRO
or PER, the loop is not used:
appropriate appreciate approval />?
Rule . After the PER loop "tr" or "ter" is usually writ-
ten up:
porter portray portrait perturb,/^
Rule. Express PERS by thickening the loop on the down-
stroke:
' personaldisperse perseverance
peraonnel^-^perspire dispersed impersonal n
"Per cent." is written £ owing to its special legibility
when written with figures . The forms shown below are special ab-
breviations for terms commonly used in commercial work. The loop
must be kept long and narrow.
per cent, per annum per dozen per pound per day
per pair per gallon per ”per hundred
per head per yard per hour per annum
EXERCISE 29.
Write the following in Shorthand:-


Following an Initial Vowel.
appreciate apprentice approval
opprobrium
appropriate
Miscellaneous
prophesy
privacy
profanity
per annum
reciprocal
primal
province
per pound
periphery
paramount
profane
precede
proviso
per pair
provincial
port
profit
report
porch
per dozen
proceed
probate
per yard
paradise
paragraph
sport
porphyry
prepare
support
unpremeditated
OTHER PREFIXES .
SELF ia expressed by a disjoined ‘*3’' , written-' up or / down:
self-praise self-same •" >e
ENTER, INTER, INTRO are expressed by "at" Joined or dis-
joined, usually Joined:
intervene internal ■ interval^/
interview intermittent I -f inter-state
MAGNA , MAGNE , MAGNI and the MIS- are expressed by an
intersected V;
magnetise —■'**' magnetic ''V.Magna Charta misspell 7".
COUNTER, CONTRA, CONTRI, CONTRO are expressed by a compos-
ite sign an open loop of which the elements are "con" and
"tr" , thus LThe sign must be carefully made long and
thin, and practised until it can be made accurately and quickly.
It may be sloped to suit the following consonant as in"contribute"
and "contraband": -use whichever form gives the clearer Joining.
contravene (/'~^ L contribute contraband
contrite control contrast countermand M
CON, COM or CUM are expressed by a light vertical or hori-
zontal tick, as convenient. This perpendicular tick may be thick
ened for COM. The second "n" is not written in words like "con-
nection", "connive". The second "m" is not written in words like
"commence" , "commodore" . Use ~ before (L\\ I /// J *
and 1 before all other strokes . I// /r
connect content economy confer
convey condemn economical accommodate
commence 11 -""comfort complete constrained
encumber comply recommend


TRANS is expressed by disjoining < :
fv </
transform transfer N transpose / translate
FOR or PORE is expressed by Joined \ :
> ) w v
forbid foregoing A foresignt foreshadowed zf
CONS is expressed by the form always . If necessary
detach the following sign rather than use the form:.
z if .
consign consist consume consent 1 conspire
Note r* Where CONST or CONSTR occurs , write “\ or ;
construe “V constraint "'f constancy "V *
DISCON or DISCOM is expressed by disjoined; Z" :
iisconnect / X => discontinue ort discontent /<l>^
MISCON is expressed by disjoined ——- above the following
stroke;
misconduct misconstrue misconceive
OMISSION OP 11 T" ■
“T" is omitted when it is silent, as in "hasten" and "glisten",
or between "k" and "ing" or "k" and "-ed M ;
nasten [p coiiect^^_ a collected t^v^_collecting*''^_ < .
EXERCISE SO
1t f I
k % 0 y i j
3
EXERCISE 31 .
To the Student:
You will be pleased to know that you have nearly completed
the theory of Shorthand. It is now possible to give you as on
exercise a piece of ordinary newspaper matter .
The following letter appeared in the December 1916 number of
"Commercial Education" , an English magazine. Shorthand phrases


may be made by Joining together the outlines for the words which
are hyphenated. Write the passage carefully, observing the
proper distinction between the lengths and thicknesses of the
various consonants , and inserting only the necessary vowels .
Write on alternate lines. This will give space for any necessary
corrections. After this exercise has been checked and you have
corrected any errors, write it out again , and then ask someone to
read it slowly to you. Take it down from dictation several times
if possible . In phrasing, omit the words in parentheses.
Abbreviations: - Manufacture manufacturer
TYPEWRITER RIBBONS IN WAR TIME.
Dear-Sir, — The difficulty of obtaining satisfactory supplies of type-
writer ribbons has-become a serious problem to-all users of typewriters.
The increase of price has-been enormous, and in-many-cases this has-
been accompanied by-a great decrease in the wearing qualities of-the
ribbon—both wiih-regard-to-the wear of-the fabrics of-the ribbon and-
the quality of-the colouring matter used.
The question of-the fabric is no doubt ruled by-the present high price
of cotton (more-than cent, per cent. rise). This has induced makers to
try ribbon made from-a much lower grade of cotton, which-will-not stand
the heavy wear of-the hammering of-the type. This difficulty will-be
soon overcome when-the market is again restored to normal, as-the grow-
ing of high-grade cotton has-been very-little affected by-the war, and-the
supply of the real article will-be fully equal to-the demand.
The colour question is more serious, This-is a matter that-is worthy
of-the careful attention of-the firms who-are engaged in furthering-the
manufacture of dye-stuffs in-this-country, as no-doubt the high price of-
the colouring matter is due to-the stopping of enemy supplies. This has
increased the market value of-the colour material, and-it-must naturally
increase until an adequate supply is put on-the market. This increase of
supply should-not-be-a difficult matter if-the British manufacturer will
only give his attention to-the manufacture, as-the process of the manu-
facture obthe colours used is very-simple compared with some of-the
dye-stuffs used in other trades The manufacture of colouring matter for
typewriter ribbons should offer a profitable field for enterprise, as-there-
is naturally a great demand for-this article.
The foregoing leads to other thoughts. A more careful and economi-
cal use of ribbons is desirable, and-a lighter touch by-the operator in-
creases-the life of-a ribbon considerably. If-we examine ribbons put on
different machines at-the-same-time and with an equal amount of use,
we-shall-find that-some are worn a great-deal more-than others, the
result of-a heavy touch on-(the)-part-(of)-the operator. Hence the need,
from an economical point (of;-view, for operators to acquire a lighter
touch —Yours faithfully,
Coventry.
W.H.


EXERCISE 58
Write in Shorthand the following:-
1 Conclude, concur, conquer (kong-ker) , concave, conference,
confine, confound, confess, congeal, conjointly, comfort,
complete, complaint, complain, combine, compute, component,
converse, conversed, conversant, convalescent, concoct, con-
cocted, concocting, uncompromising, uncontrolled, encumbered.
2. Comrade, conductor, conscious, conscience, commute, contain,
content, convene, convince, comment, convict, convicting.
3. Concede, concern, consonant, consignee, disconnect, discon-
nected, disconnecting, discontinue, discompose, discomfort,
accompany, unconcerned, inconsolable, consensus, economy,
commence , connect.
4. Intervene, interwoven, intermediate, entertain, magnify,
magnanimity , magnetic , self-defence, self-denial, self-possessed ,
translated , tranship , transport, forgotten , forgiven , transmit ,
forewarned, misfire, misdeeds, misdemeanor, misconstrue, mis-
hearing , misspell .
EXERCISE 33 ■
Toil the Only Source of Wealth
7 vo i c*
o/* y/' C {f* -yi Zs
p c x
tf " V V Vi ,
"" \ 1 v S' 7
v V )° '/ 77 - - —
— VC(/


TWELFTH LESSON
THE SYLLABLE "SHUN".
The syllable SHUN is spelled:
"ehion" as in "fashion"
"ssion" as in "mission"
"cian" as in "physician"
"tion" as in "donation"
i "aion" as in "fusion" .
This syllable is expressed in the following ways:-
Rule 1. By a disjoined "sh":
motion —Q_ fashion''^— potion nation' 0 —
decoration distension
insertion'' &£f tuition insinuation
Note ■- After the tick "s" or a loop , a vowel may be prefixed
to the disjoined "sh"; also after "x":
disposition pulsationvexation
desperation ^ ,^ ,^,^,
Rule 2. In longer words, where the syllable immediately
preceding the SHUN consists of a single consonant followed by a
vowel , express or indicate the SHUN by detaching this syllable
from the outline . Note that in the examples vowels are omitted
where the outline is sufficiently plain without them. For ex-
ample , in "exmnation" , "restration" , "agrvation" , no further
vowels are required than those shown . The syllable which is dis-
joined is underlined in the longhand:
partition submission D admission A- ope rati on
expirationrestoration
Note.- This rule does not apply to words in which the "r" or
"1" preceding the vowel before SHUN is incorporated in a double
consonant, as in:- de(cor)ation , li(ber)ation, fe(der)ation.
See examples in Rule 1.


Final "b" , "r" and "1" ore added to the disjoined syllable.
Read the "s" , "r" or "1" last:
partitions admissions limitations
petitioner . practitioner traditional
Rule 3■ When SHUN immediately follows "k" , express it by
doubling the length of the "k" , . and treat this doubled "k" as a
compound sign .
action actions eviction
affection ;S
SHUN in Long Words Disjoin for SHUN when making abbrev-
iations for very long words . The SHUN will then indicate that
the outline preceding it is abbreviated, and will in that way help
to suggest the word: .
* I 1 - \/
generalisation k - Justification I hallucination I r
organisation nationalisation —- ;7 "^modification”^/^ 0
Adding Syllables to SHUN In adding syllables to the ter-
mination SHUN the "sh" which represents SHUN must be left intact,
that is, final hooks must not be attached to it. The whole of the
syllable following the SHUN must be written Just as it would be if
the SHUN were not there .
dictionary revolutionism
progressionist £
sectional petitioner reactionary
OMISSION OF "P" .
Whenever "p" is omitted in the pronunciation, as in "empty"
and “redemption" , it may be omitted in the outline .
empty" 21 aJ redemption exemption presumption G
EXERCISE 34.
Read, copy, and transcribe the following:-
x. a ' e_ P- ?- (?<>s-
2.
3. V,_ / *■
4


"Sh" disjoined for SHUN.
fashion
mi s si on
illusion
ablution
passion
session
lotion
occasion
notion
ration
option
elation
distension
potion
accretion
fusion
portion
deception
nation
aberration
adoption
inclusion
assertion
distortion
proportional
on
inception
execration
decoration
mensuration
creation
attenuation
recreation
delineation
insinuation
tuition
situation
fluctuation
affiliation
coercion
SHUN exoreased bv diB.1oin.ed Bvllable .
libation
ag/tation
excavation
limitation
recitation
cohesion
education
exultation
suffocation
dissertation
logician
im/tation
deputation
retribution
exhortation
magician
partition
hesitation
dissipation
exploitation
adhesion
operation
exhibition
navigation
duplication
legation
irritation
i nve s t/gati on
invitation
dislocation
K-SHUN.
action
affection
recollection
sectional
attraction
diction
di ssection
infection
dictionary
eviction
selection
reflection
affectionate
auctioneer
sections
Vowel joined
to SHUN.
cassation
plllaation
authorisation
decision
civilization
.depression
exasperation
opposition
supposition
physicians
General.
fruition
positions
passionate
accession
sensational
nutrition
seditionary
stationary
petitioner
anticipation
diversion
dentition
veneration
duplication
insurrection
portion
possession
lubrication
approbation
installation
renovation
educational
dispassionate
starvation
amelioration
intuition
recreation
revision
pollution
attrition
musician
absorption
graduation
obsession
demarcation
sanction
oration
prohibition
optional
incision
EXERCISE 3R.
Write the following in Shorthand, omitting the vowels which
are struck out in the letterpress:-
Proae Passage.
Quite frequently the first smill sample orders are paid for
In cash, then a credit is granted and when the sales of the agent
are not as anticipated, he is not in a position to pay. Or, if
conditions are cash against delivery of goods , by the time they
arrive the agent has not been able to collect his outstanding ac-
counts , and cannot tjilce. possession of the goods, which go in stor-
age with all 10ids of expenses to the charge of the exporter.


EXERCISE 36.
The following is the reply to the letter la Lesson 11, also
published in "Commercial Education" of December 1916. Write it
in Shorthand on alternate lines, and'when it has- been corrected
and you have properly attended to any, errors, use it also for dic-
tation practice. Phrase the words connected by hyphens. Show
the italics by drawing a heavy waved line underneath the Shorthand
outlines. In phrasing, omit the words in parentheses. •
TYPEWRITER RIBBONS IN WAR TIME.
We submitted our correspondent’s letter to Mr. Walter J. Read,
of-the Read Manufacturing Co. (London), Ltd , who replies as-follows
(Ed., Commercial Education): —
Dear-Sir, —I-have-received-(your)-letter of-yesterday. The following
comments and information may-be of-interest to-your readers.
Our experience—l refer to-the firm—does-not follow altogether that
of-your friend. The cost of-the fabric has certainly more-than doubled,
but we-can obtain, and-have recently bought, a large quantity of English
fabric quite as-good-as anything that Germany has ever turned out. In
proof of-this I-enclose a remnant of-a German fabric seven years old
and-a piece of new English fabric. The wear of-the latter should-be
greater than-that of-the German fabric. We-know, of-course, that a
great-deal of rubbish has-been put on-the market for typewriter ribbons,
but there has so-far been no real necessity for-such-a step, apart from-
the gain of more profit, to-which-the manufacturer with a sense of honor
will-not descend.
The colour question has no-doubt been very-serious, and-is still not
solved. The average user of typewriter ribbons does-not know of-a tithe
of the difficulties in-this-respect We-know of-a rise of i,600 per cent,
in-one-case, and-of-an offer of £ 165 per pound for-a certain red of exces-
sive concentration. The average rise has-been some 500 to 600 per cent.
We-may-not have suffered so much in-this way as other manufacturers,
owing to-the discovery by-our Managing Director of new processes
which-have helped us considerably in-the manufacture of ribbons and
carbons, from-the colour point-(of)-view, so-that we-have-been enabled
to-keep up our-quality without increasing the price. We-may add that
we-have-not-the slightest intention of reverting to-the use of German
colours after the War. One fact that-is-not commonly known is that
some of-the very finest colours have always come from France.
The manufacturer of dye-stuffs has probably not given much-attention
to dyes for typewriter ribbons, because such-a small-quantity is used for-
this purpose in comparison with-the quantity used for dyeing cloths, for-
example.
One other point should-be interesting to-your readers in-connection
(with)-the fabric of ribbons. It-is-this; the finest ever made have-been oj
English manufacture. Moreover, as-much-as seven-eighths of American
supplies of fabrics for typewriter ribbons have-been drawn from English
mills. —Yours-faithfully.
WALTER J. READ.


THIRTEENTH LESSON
SUFFIXES AND TERMINATIONS.
Special devices are used for the representation of the common
suffixes and terminations:
I
SELF. -CITY. -SITY.
Disjoin the tick "s" ' (up) for SELF, -CITY, -SITY Join
or * for SELVES:
herself yourself ourselves audacity c
vi (
paucity c y himself 1 themselves v. university falsity vs
SIDE
Dis3oin the upward tick and write it on the right side of
a downstroke or upstroke, and above a horizontal stroke or an ab-
breviation expressed by a vowel:
that side C outside inside'"’ beside
MENT. MATIC. MATICAL . MATICALLY.
Disjoin "m" . Place it near to the preceding character.
Study examples on this point:
judgment||
MENTAL, MENTALITY.
Disjoin
departmental
ING.
Join c or for the syllable ING when ING immediately fol-
lows a consonant:
p
singing flings bringing reaching
i * /'// J J V
After // y y ? is the more convenient:
creeping being urging nursing recovering


CATE . MATE . NATE . NITE.
Express the terminations -CATE, -MATE, -NATE, -KITE by a dis-
joined 'o) . Add the small circle for -LY
delicate delicately a intimated f' 7 infinite^
LESSNES3 . LESSLY . FULNESS.
Disjoint for -LESSNESS and \ for -FULNESS, Join for
-LESSLY;
carelessness S/' carelessly carefulness artlessly
FtTL . FULLY . ■
Join \ for the termination -FUL and \) for -FULLY . Disjoin
"fl" after "st" .
artful carefully wistful C%\ trustful
ABLE . IBLE
Disjoin itsjf in this direction only, for -ABLE or -IBLE: add
the small circle for -ABLY and -IBLY &
readable--'^X 7^ cre(ii k l - e dependable
ILITY , ALITY , ELITY ,
ARITY . QRITY . ERITY . IDITY .
These terminations are expressed by intersecting the first
part of the outline with the consonant and vowel immediately pre-
ceding the -LITY , -RITY , -DITY (or by writing close alongside if
intersection is not convenient). The intersecting portion is
underlined .
p \9 O
fidelity Q\ aspen tv 3* fertility minority —^
ma.lon ty "t stupidity futility plausibility
hilarity \p lucidity cupidity -^
\o p / 7^
barbarity fatal! t.v prosperity Y principality C
NOUS . NESS
-NOUS and -NESS are disjoined after grammalogues, and whenever
it is more convenient to do so:
vastnesa
TITUTE . TITUDB
-TITUTE and -TITULE axe expressed by disjoining -V =
institute" : -


SIVE-LY . TIVE-LY . TIVITY .
Express -SIVE by a stroke "s'* ( , and -TIVE by a "t" ,
written through {or alongside) the preceding stroke: add the "y"
or "ee" vowel for -SIVELY , -TIVELY and -TIVITY .
captive activity expensive conclusively
SHIP.
-SHIP is expressed as a suffix by intersecting "ah" through
the preceding part of the outline .
tranship clerkship^^^ l " shipment 7° fellowship\^
HOOD . HOUSE . HAND ■
-HOOD and -HOUSE are expressed by writing "h" through the
preceding or following stroke . -HAND is expressed by Joining "h".
livelihood summerhouse**”" j' household underhand
DENT . PANT . GENT . HENT , ■
Pinal -DENT, -DANT , -CENT and -BENT are expressed by a dis-
joined heavy tick: • This tick may be followed by the "y" vowel
for -LY or by "1" for -AL , as in "cogently" , "accidental" and
"accidentally"^
accident — rt accidental's'll/ accidentally^ —?\P cogent —*
cogently ''^ s —b impudent student m incidentally"
sergeant tangent-/*"
abundant attendant '/ recumbent
VATE . LATE . PLATE . PLATE.
Thpoe terminations are represented by written at the end
of the preceding stroke; and -LATOR or -DLATOR by disjoining
enervating^—/^percolated i: '7'v Q regulator/^ 5
EDDY
Express -EDLY by disjoining the "y" or "ee" vowel :
hurriedly aasUredl y presumedly G —o
ISTIC . ESTIC . ASTIC . OSTIC . STONE.
These terminations are represented by a disjoined "st", placed
about midway after the last consonant for -ISTIG, -ESTIC, -ASTIC
or -OSTIC, and at the extreme end for -STONE: .
majestic |\ realistic socialistic s Huxlstone \(


EXERCISE 37 .
Paucity, capacity, university, elasticity, multiplicity,
duplicity, capacities, adversity, intensity, complicity,
rapacity, diversity, rusticity, density.
Outside, inside, your side, on that side, one side, beside.
Yourself, herself, himself, themselves, yourselves.
Sacrament, adjournment, automatic, condiment, sentiment,
resentment, discernment, judgment, diplomatic.
Instrumental, instrumentality, fundamental, sacramental,
elemental .
Singing, flinging, carrying, growing, brewing, flowing,
sowing, saying, knowing, crying.
Carelessness , hopelessness, uselessness, senselessness.
Carefulness, hopefulness, usefulness, gracefulness .
Affable, fashionable, possible, preferable, measurable,
culpable, referable, sensible, reasonable, dishonorable,
crucible, dependable, uneatable, ineffable, traceable,
risible, disable, noticeable, noticeably, reasonably
Expensive, expensively, extensive, extensively, pensive,
abortive, coercive, attractive, expressive, expressively,
passive, passively, excessive, excessively, alternative,
active, actively, activity, elusively, effusively.
Finality, fatality, locality, brutality, personality.
Fertility, ductility, Juvenility , possibility, sensibility.
Fidelity .
Disparity, popularity, barbarity, solidarity, vulgarity
Minority , majority .
Prosperity, dexterity, asperity.
Stupidity, cupidity, lucidity, rapidity.
Fellowship, amidships, relationship, penmanship -
Pungent, stringent, tangent, strident, evident, student,
effulgent, indigent, ardent, sergeant, urgent, impudent,
cogent, intelligent, redundant, president, resplendent,
resident, respondent, despondent, dependent, expedient,
rodent, abundant, attendant, incumbent, indent, lambent,
recumbent, accident, accidental, accidentally, urgently,
pungently, stringently, evidently, ardently, obedient.
Implicated, intricate , reciprocate, allocate, estimated,
subordinate , co-ordinate , prevaricate , isolate, desolate ,
fortunate, eliminate, definite, infinite , stipulated,
legislate, articulate, postulate, congratulate, modulate.
CITY
SITY
SIDE
SELF
MENT
MATIC
MENTAL
MENTALITY
ING
LESSNESS
FULNESS
ABLE
ISLE
SIVE-LY
TIVE-LY
TIVITY
ALITY
ILITY
ELITY
ARITY
ORITY
ERITY
IDITY
SHIP
DENT-LY
GENT-LY
DANT
BENT
CATE
MATE
NATE
LATE


FOURTEENTH LESSON
INTERSECTIONS.
The principle of Intersection or "cutting through" is a very
old device in Shorthand work. Rightly used it is of great ser-
vice, an intersected outline having a peculiar distinctiveness and
legibility. Added to this advantage is the gain in speed.
For intersectional purposes select the first consonant or
movement of the word to be represented, and write it through the
last consonant of the preceding word, or the first consonant of
the following word. If it cannot be written through the outline,
write it alongside as close as it can be written without touch-
ing .
Unimportant words such as "of" and "to" may be omitted in
phrases made by the intersectional method:
Is*
Bank (of) Commerce ® Commercial Bank
Union Bank Bank (of) N .S .ff .
A consonant may be safely used to represent more than one
word, for instance "mr" may be used for "mark" and "market"; and
"m" for "mention" and "month" .
. j~~
water mark ,6-^ —- good market / above mentioned
thi e month
The following list la suggestive of what may be done,and will
be found very useful in general work. Frequently-occurring words
in any special work are always best dealt with by means of intell-
igent intersections:-
Company Represented by intersected.
Johnson {&} Co to the company
—V
in the company company matters —•
company manager * manager of the Co *
Country Represented by "k" alongside,
—r v—
in this country S-\ from the country


Conclusion Represented by ' intersected.
that conclusion to a conclusion
Concluded Represented by intersected.
we have concluded they concluded
Company Ltd. Represented by intersected.
Johnson & Co. Ltd {g -K, Metal Co. Ltd.
Council Represented by intersected.
Municipal Council Shire Council
Executive Council Council Meeting
Them Represented by C intersected .
improve them give them
for them in them
carry them with them
to them free them
Convenient-ce-ly Represented by intersected.
great convenience your convenience ”
our convenience their convenience
inconvenient a-b (your) convenience
at (your) early convenience would be convenient
Inconvenient-oe Represented by v ” intersected.
very inconvenient " great inconvenience'^^*'
Mark-ed. Market Represented by intersected
market rates water mark *
goodimarket ff falling market
' —
in the markets excited market
(of the) world
control (of the) market!/
Federal Represented by N \ 0 intersected:
Federal Ministry Federal City' V^>?)


House, hood, head Represented by | intersected
summer house greenhouse
livelihood hardihood Kf
girlhood boyhood T
19 H
overhead ~Y forehead •
blockhead priesthood
Position Represented by ”p" alongside .
satisfactory position in position /
// -y
good position in a position /
Period Represented by "p" intersected.
during that period corresponding period
shorter period longer period
Bank, book Represented by / intersected.
Commonwealth Bank * r yf Savings Bank
/ *
pattern book J letter book 7°
Mention-ed . month Represented by —— intersected
this month few months
I have mentioned has been mentioned
o l
above-mentioned before mentioned
Depart-ed-ment Represented*by intersected
Silk Department
-y:
Grocery Department Cf
Music Department Millinery Department
Church Represented by j Intersected.
Methodist Church (I Roman Catholic Church 'M-
a. 1
Church of England I Church of Christ j
Cheque Represented by I intersected.
*—H" Q)
I enclose cheque cheque enclosed


Govern-ed-ment Represented by / intersected:
State Government >y/ Federal Government
good government Local Government
Require- d-me nt Represented by alongside:
our requirements your requirements L//*
will be required 'P' I will require
Respect Represented by intersected:
in that respect in every respect
our respected very respectable
Railway Represented by intersected:
railway matters Railway Commissioner
railway fares railway rates
PRACTICE .
It is absolutely essential that ALL the foregoing inter-
sectional phrases , after they have been memorised, be taken down
from dictation by the student many times. No variation of this
method is permissible unless it is quite impossible to get a
reader. In that case the list should be constantly practised and
re-practised until instant, legible and fast reproduction of the
symbols is assured .
EXERCISE S 3.
Write the Shorthand for the following phrases:-
in one respect
market value
I have mentioned
City Bank
very convenient
Federal Minister
very good market
very long period
he mentioned
church matters
overhead charges
the position
if you require
railway charges
Rubber Co .
in this market
from them
Federal City
City Council
I have concluded
same period
Silk Department
womanhood
headquarters
the railway
you will require
quiet market
General Carrying Co. , Ltd
to that conclusion
satisfactory conclusion
would be mentioned
great inconvenience
Executive Council
in a good position
Government position
overhead
the government
he was respected
business requirements


FIFTEENTH LESSON
ABBREVIATIONS.
The following is a list of words contracted by writing the
first part of the word only, in some cases the first syllable, in
other cases the first two or three syllables. In each case the
aim has been the briefest possible outline and yet sufficiently
suggestive to be easily read .
The principles underlying the construction of this system
enable most long words to be contracted -in this way, giving at
once legible forms easily memorised.
Students should study the methods of contracting words in or-
der that they may be able to devise serviceable abbreviations when
necessary for words not in the lists given in this text book.
Students should, however, use this permission sparingly,as, for the
sake of uniformity in notes, it is advisable that the contracted
forms be limited to such lists as may be published from time to
time by the author. In the creation of further “standard'' lists
suggestions from students will be cordially welcome .
Note that “ben" la sufficient for “benefit" , but this syll-
able having been selected for that word, it cannot be used for
“benevolence" or "benignant", and therefore the contractions for
those words must show more of the spelling "bchev" for “ben-
evolence" and “benig" for "benignant" , the unimportant vowel after
the "b" being omitted in both these words .
It must also be noted that the contractions for many words
are governed by the form of the full outline,and not by the spell-
ing, for example "estab" would be quite sufficient in longhand
for "established", but as in the shorthand outline the "bl“ would
be in the form of a double consonant, the outline “estbl" is writ-
ten . Just as you would contract the longhand by cutting off cer-
tain letters, so in the shorthand outline you contract it by
cutting off a definite part of the outline . Obviously the word
could not be written in the contracted form by "estb" when in the
full outline the single "b" consonant has no part.
"Enthusiasm" may be contracted to "enth", because no other
word in the language begins with "en" followed by "th" . In "en-
thrall" the "en" is followed by the treble consonant "thr" for
which the thickened sign would be used. If there were another
word beginning with "enth" , the "us" could be added for "enthus-
iasm" , and still give a quick, facile contraction; but there


being no other word of the kind, the addition of the "us" would be
useless and time-wasting.
The student's attention is also drawn to the very large num-
ber of words, such as "amalgamate-d-tion", "govern-ed-raent", "ad-
ministrate-d-tion" ,in which the contraction may well represent the
verb, its past tense, and the neuter noun. Care must be taken in
words like "baptise-d-ism-ist", that the fourth inflexion or what
might be called the second-noun, is not represented by the same
contraction, otherwise "baptist" might clash with "baptism", and
"legislation" with ."legislator" . Throughout these contractions,
in words of this class one simple rule has been followed, viz. , to
allot the contraction to the impersonal or neuter nouns "legi-
slate-d-tion" (not "legislator" or "legislature"), "baptise-d-ism"
(not "Baptist), ”administrate-d-tion" (not "administrator"),
"demonstrate-d-tioh" (not "demonstrator") , "arbitrate-d-tion" (not
"arbitrator") . Following this line will also lead to the use of
one contraction for "accept-ed-ance", and another for "acceptation'
formed by simply adding a disjoined "shun".
"Shun" is added in "objection" and "subjection" and "-ed" in
"objected" and "subjected" as "object-ed" , "subject-ed", "object-
ion" and "subject-ion" are peculiarly liable to clashing.
A contraction may safely stand for both adjective and adverb,
as "mechanical-ly" , "regular-ly".
In forming your own contractions later on, do not go further
in the outline of any word than is necessary to positively iden-
tify the word. Very few words carry a resemblance past the first
syllable. Always carry a contracted outline far enough into the
word bo include and thus show the point of difference. This can-
not be better illustrated than by three words already given;
"benefit" , "benevolence" and "benignity" .
When the prefix "un" or "in" precedes a word beginning with
"s", the "ns" compound sign may be used as in "insubordinate" /'un-
seen" , "unsatisfactory", "unsubstantial" .
Learn the contractions by carefully copying them, and as you
write them repeat mentally so much of the word as represents the
whole, thus: "ad-min" is "administrate-d-ticyi"; "agri-cul" is
"agriculture-al"; "amal" is "amalgamate-d-tion", Continuously
repeat this until you have finished the practice of each contrap-
tion. Each contracted form should be written at least 12 times
—24 if possible . Remember that outline practice of this kind
is a very great help to speed.
When you have thoroughly practised the contractions TEST YOUR
KNOWLEDGE by covering the longhand and translating the Shorthand
column. Then cover the Shorthand and write the Shorthand opposite
the words exposed. Mark the words or outlines which you hesi-
tate over, and practise them again before beginning to work on the
next column. When notetaking you must be instantly ready with
these contracted forms.


ABBREVIATIONS .
Always insert the dot to show
the final "-ed" .
abandon-ed
c
arietocrary
comprehensiveness^
-ment
-atio
c.
co-operate-d I
abstract-ed,
associate-d
-tion -tive
-tion
- A
abundant-ly-ce < ''
consistent-ly $z
e
astonish-ed
cr
-oy
accept-ed-anc
-ment
/
conspicuous-ly 7
accomplish-ed
baptize-d-ism
/
-iracy
-ment
benefit-icial
/
' constant
acknowledge-d
-ment
beneficent-ce
. constitute-ed ~
-tion -al -ly
admini Btrate-
benevolent-ce
-tion
circumstance-ial v
S'
benignant-ity
advertise-d
r
deficient-cy
-ment
/
campaign
>r-
V
aggrandisement £*.
ca ndidate-ure
democrat-ic -cy
agriculture-al
capable
v >
demonstrate-d
-tion / O
a . m .
- —
captain
>
denomination
-al C_Q
amalgamate-d
catholic
department f
-tion
0
certificate
antagonist-ic
/
coincidenceV
describe-d
-tion
anybody
/
congest-ed-tion |
dignify-ied P
anything
" —
-ty /
applicable
-ility
<_
contradict-ed
-tion
dilapidate-d X
-tion A
contribute-d
discharge-d •
apprehend-ed
//]
-tion
-sion -sive
confident
\
disinfect-ed-ant \
arbitrary-ily
dissatisfied
s*-
concomitant
■ I
arbitrate-d
-tion
commercial
dissatisfaction
archbishop
common
1
distinguish-ed
arohite ct-ure
-al
c omp r e hen d- e d
-sive -sion
1
district
doubt-ed


ecclesiastic-
-al
fortnight
indemnify-ied-
-ty ~X~
efficiently
V
frequent-ly-cy T
influential
-cy
electnc-i ty
I
handicap
hesitate-d i
innumerable
insignificant
encumbrance
-ce
enthusiast-ic 7
-iasm '*
haphazard r
humiliate-d j
'
inspect-ed
-tion
environment
identical-ly <3—
instant
—
Episcopal-ian X
immediate-ly f
insubordinate"
especial-ly
7
impatient-ly
-tion
/ v
insufficient
esquire
imperfect-ion "
s -ly -cy
establish-ed
imperturbable
intelligent
f
-ment
-ly i -ce
impracticable N —
evacuate-d
impregnable
interest-ed
-tion
evangelical
incapable
interrupt-ed
-tion
1
exchange-d
inconstant '■
introduce-d
b-
e*
-tion
existence
incorporate-d N
i T CP^
/S'
-tion
investment
exorbitant-1:
expect-ed
inexhaustible
inexpedient /
irrecoverable
irregular-ly
expedient-cy
X
indefatigable /
-ly \>
-ity
expenditure
X
irremovable <
extemporaneous &}
independent-ly /
irresistible
-iy
i
-ce
irrespective
extinguish-e<
indescribable" 1
X
extraordinary
indignant-ion t>
/
irresponsible
-ility
extravagant
indiscriminate' s*
January
1
-ance
familiar-ly
-ity -ise •
-d
indispensable
individual-ly
Jurisprudence
legislate-d
!,
February
\
inhabit-ed-ant'
magazine
~A
financial-ly
inefficient-ly \
"" -cy V-
magistrate
I


mail
—
perspective
Z
recognizance
manufaeture-d
•* platform
reconstruct-'
ed
mathematical-
mechanical
potential-ly
-iality
' 2^
/
-tion
regular-ly
-ity
yf
popular-late
-<a h
minimum
~3
* -lation
r
r el inqui sh-e d^-^^
mortgage-d
practice-al
/•
V
reluctant-ly
neglect-ed
z,
-iy
practised
V.
-ce
remarkable
negligence
predominate-
'A-
remonstrate-i
a -Q -
nobody
-ant
-ance /
nominate-d v
• preliminary
repres,ent-d
-tion
prejudice-d
reproduction
nonsense-ical
-ial
i.
November
e
prerogative
repugnance
-ant
f
object-ed
Presbyterian
resemble-d
obscure-d-ity
preponderate'
-ance
tz.-
-ance
resignation
observe-d-ant
-ation
e
prior
resistance
obstruct-ed
-tion
probable-ly
-ility
f
responsible
-ility
z
optimist-ic
-ism
f
proficient-ly —
-cy
retrospect-ive
organise-d
promulgate
satisfactory
/>
situate-d-tion —S'
orthodox-y
propaganda
y
participate-d
A
proportion
V
somebody
/
peculiar-ly
-ity
c
proportionate jt?
-iy A
something
subscribe-d
L
perfect-ed
A.
prospect
A
-tion
-tion
substance-tial /
A
prospectus
>
-iate
perhaps
%
permanent -ly^
p. m .
zl.
subetitute-d
-tion
I
perpendicular
reoeive-d-pt
recognise-d,
A
) sufficient-cy


suspect-ed
sympathy-etic
-ally
/•
unanimous-ly unpleasant
un P rinci P leti
undoubtedly Q unquestionable
temporary-ily -
n k "/ unsatisfactory 7
universal y
together
L
q
unconstitutional
un symp athe tic
c /
triumphant
unhesitatingly vegetable
Following are the special abbreviations for the
Australian States:-
various-
New South Wales
South Australia /V Tasmania
ii
rt
Victoria
Western Australia C/f New Zealand
Queensland
V
Northern Territory „
<?
ii
SPECIAL ABBREVIATIONS
For various reasons the beginning of a word is not -always a
safe contraction. For example "veg" may be used for "vegetable"
but if used for "vegetarian" there would be confusion. In the
same way "ob" would not be safe for both "object" and "objection" .
In a few cases a much better contraction is obtained by a special
device , such as the use of "fl-fl" in "fulfil" and the special
method of showing terminations like "-monious" , "-gram" , "-graph"
and "-ology" .
The abbreviations in the following list are typical of those
which do not consist of the first part of the word only. Careful
study of them will help you in building similar ones whenever nec-
essary in your own particular work. In making abbreviations,
those parts should be retained which most readily suggest the word
— usually the first one or two syllables and the end of the out-
line . The essentials of a good contraction are Brevity , Facility
and Suggestiveness.
Note particularly the difference in the method of expressing
"-ology" after a vowel, as in "biology" and "zoology".
"-Scopic" may be represented by a disjoined , as in
"telescopic"^ /, "t" may be omitted in words like "directly"
and "exactly" €s\s> .
accompany acrimonious - autograph
accommodate-d n ’ antagonism bankrupt S'
authoritative X anthropology X, bankruptcy 1


cablegram heterogeneous |J prospective C
consequence \ . . A —-i
V — injustice I poor }
considerable f appear) "
r injudicious Ar-r sf
consideration C F representational-
competitor investigate-d^^—^' ju'
conscription investigation
r, I subjective
disinterestedness Tj /
P v superintendent
electrical mimeograph Z
r/ _ v. telegraph —st
expectation yL~ myatify-ied
\£z y underhand I
expeditious-ly mortgagee / I
unionism
mortgagor // Jr^ >
£>. vegetarian y
fulfil-led W objection n
y>j y vegetarianism
fulfilment \\ objective j. '
k/O workmanship
opportunism jr — v
j whereabouts
headquarters participation ty
cr i in inology Q
hesitation philanthropy
| v — terminology *■—
hesitancy /O
heterodox Presbyterianism zoology )0
Intersection as a Means of
Contracting Single Words .
This principle may be effectively employed for contracting
the outlines of single words where better forms are secured than
could be obtained by the ordinary method. In such cases, care
must be taken to ensure that the outline adopted is suggestive of
the word. To intersect the first one or two movements by the
last movement in the full outline or by the accented syllable ,
will be found the moat satisfactory method .
infinitesimal" u ’ tili ' fcari unparalleled
vegetarianism unfortunately obnoxious £
Note French "zh" . Use ) for the "zh" sound in "protege" ,
"regime", etc. For the somewhat similar sound of ."zh" in English
in "vision", "measure”, exposure", use the "sh" sign provided in
the ordinary alphabet.


EXERCISE 59.
Write the following in Shorthand:- ,
Last Monday a party of gentlemen left Sydney for Richmond by-
the morning train their object being a visit to-the Hawkesbury
Agricultural College . The trip had-been organised by Captain
Shipley, an enthusiastic and distinguished member of-the New-South-
Wales Electrical Company, and-who-is acknowledged to-be-a capable
administrator of commercial and financial affairs. The party was
truly a representative one, and included a visiting Archbishop
whose extemporaneous and sometimes indignant utterances at Eccles-
iastical functions are almost always of-a democratic and denomin-
ational character; Mr . Henry Jackson of-the Society of Amalgamated
Architects whose architectural attainments are widely recognised,
and-whose work is-to-be observed in several of-our large business
establishments, and-who-ls also a very active worker for-the benev-
olent society; Mr, James Ployd, well-known in - the Arbitration
Courts of Queensland, and-who has often expressed his indignant
disapproval of-the arbitrary manner in-which-the supposed delin-
quencies of-a certain trades-union were dealt with by- a Judge
well-known in aristocratic circles. Such expressions of-opinion
caused astonishment and indignation among-the aristocracy at - the*
time , and-it-was expected that Mr. Ployd would send in-his resig-
nation, or-that-he-would-(havq)-been discharged from his position.
It-would-be difficult to-find a man to-carry out the responsible
duties of-the office in-such-an efficient and indefatigable man-
ner. There-was also in-this merry party a distinguished Catholic
clergyman whose antagonistic views in-regard-(to) -the amalgamation
of-the churches have excited considerable attention. Whilst ad-
mitting that-the ultimate object of-all churches ehould-be identi-
cal , he imperturbably and unsympathetically asserts that we-should-
not-be governed by-any worldly prejudices or hope of personal
aggrandisement in-our prospective observations of what - is - to - be
gained by living a true Christian life, and, should a union of-the
churches become an accomplished fact, the determining of what doc-
trines should or should-not-be taught would unquestionably cause
indescribable disputes and much indignation among Evangelical
bodies
I-had also on-that occasion the pleasure of meeting Mr. Ralph
Ferguson, who, it-will-be remembered, relinquished his position in*
manufacture of mechanical appliances in-a
large well-known firm, which, during January last, perfected a-new
mathematical instrument remarkable for-the delicacy of - its work-
manship. He-says that-his resignation was-a remonstrance against
what he considered the introduction of investments which, he main-
tains, are outside-the terms of-the prospectus of-the company, and-
he still charges the directors with negligence and irregular pro-
cedure , although it-is understood that when called upon to-do- so
he could-not substantiate his charges. He-should recognise that
to promulgate nonsensical charges of negligence and thus perman-
ently and arbitrarily prejudice innocent people is-not-only unfair
to-them but prejudicial to-his-own interests. Prior to-this un-
fortunate outbreak he-was-a respected and prominent member of-the
firm.


SIXTEENTH LESSON
CONTRACTED PHRASING. NOTES.
Contracted phrasing is the method of expressing by suitable
abbreviations veiy common phrases in which the full outlines do
not Join well , or in which the ordinary method of phrasing does
not provide sufficiently brief forms. Good examples of such
phrases are:—
at the present day in the ordinary,course of events
at the present time in the first place
in the first case we beg to say
The "cutting through" or intersectional method may be freely
employed in building contracted phrases, more particularly to show
the omission of unimportant words , that is, words which nay be
safely omitted because they must be supplied to "make sense". In
constructing contracted phrases , care must be taken to retain suf-
ficient of each word to suggest the particular phrase for which
the outline stands and yet prevent confusion with single v/ord out-
lines ‘
The following list should be carefully studied so that you
may be able , not only to write with facility all the phrases here
given , but so that you may, when occasion demands, be able to con-
struct other similar phrases for your own particular use .
If in the omission of unimportant words the intersectional
method is not convenient , the device of writing outlines closely
together may be used. A study of this list will show also that
in some cases parts only of wordsare omitted, as in the outline
for "in the ordinary way"
Words which may be freely omitted are those which always
occur in combination with certain other words, for example , the
words "in connection" and "in conjunction" are always followed by
“with" , and the words "by reason" are always followed by "of".
In such cases words like "with" and "of" must be supplied, and may
therefore be omitted
The sign for "a" may be reversed after downward tick "s", as
in "there is a"
In phrases of the "special" class like "one way or .the other"
where O is turned one way and •O ijj turned the other way .


"all over tne world'* O where "all" is over the "world" , it may
be said at once that "the end Justifies the means" . Such phrases
make an irresistible appeal to the imagination and humor of the
student, and are not easily forgotten. At the same time, they
are brief, legible and distinctive.
In practising the following list learn to think of each
phrase as a whole. Do not think of the separate words. Words
omitted are shown in parentheses .
AT. ,
at the (present) time at (an) early date
at the (present) day at (the) earliest O
x> O possible moment
at the (present) moment
AS .
as soon (as) convenient as early (as) convenient
as soon (as) possible aa i as ) possible
BY.
—yhQ /
by (some) means By Order (of the) Board
/y— J^°
by wire (at) once by reason (of) the
CIRCUMSTANCES .
extraordinary circumstances Cs** peculiar circumstances
FACT.
fact (of the) matter is notwithstanding (the) factT”^
as (aj matter (of) fact ° in view (of the) fact
owing (to the) fact °\ in point (of) fact
1 >
I have (no) hesitation ° \ lam (in receipt of your)
inquiry ✓
I have not (the slightest) «
hesitation I am (in receipt of your) '
cheque
lam (in receipt of your) g- n
favor am (instructed to)
inform you
lam (in receipt of yo ur) r 7 rj
letter I am directed (to)
r / state
I am (of) opinion /


I (beg to) ask *V_ I hope (you are) satisfied^'
I (beg to) say I naturally concluded
I (beg to) state I think (you will) agree Jf*
I will (arrange the) I thank you (in) f «
matter anticipation
IN.
in (due) course v in one way '
in the ordinary course " —in the circumstances
in the ordinary way in respect (to)
in the matter v 3 in relation, (to)
in our own in reference (to)
in our own time in regard (to) the Y
in (the) world in regard (to) the matter'^^
IT.
it (will be) inconvenient ia ver y inconvenient^^^^
it is convenient it has been
it (will be) very a it appears to be
inconvenient
ONE .
one (or) two one way or the other CssO
once (or) twice one side(or the) other
PLEASE.
please (let me) know please acknowledge
(in due) course , (in due) course
please (let) us know please (let me) know 'V" —^
SIDE.
on (one) side Q— on all sides
on (the othea) side side(by)side
there is (another) matter there (have) been


TIME .
for the time being for a (long) time past
for a (long) time from (time to) time
up (to the present) time Js some (considerable) time
WE .
we snail (be) obliged we are (in) receipt
(of your) favor
we shall (be glad to) - L_ ✓ • . . . . . aa ad
CS [X we are < in ) receipt
n ar 6 (of your) letter
MISCELLANEOUS .
all over the world round the world O
in (the,) world through the world Q
by parcel post with compliments
end (of the) month with beat wishes
In (the near) future we w* ll (take into) (J^(>
consideration
as will be <j"/
q will be (taken into) -rfC
on (the) contrary » consideration
£L /
about (the) matter that you, think you, (
thank you
for (the) purpose (of)
* one side (or the) other V
take (it for) granted \ iT~ /^L
take (for) granted i ' by registered mail "T-
-taken (for) granted / f
'-w. in connection (with)
in his opinion / v
I first of all
general opinion \o
/ i*' accomplished fact
Report and Balance Sheet v|_
v Joint Stock Company C
Fire Insurance Co . \/
condition of things lC r
our attention has been j/
called to the fact Governor General
in his , in as and is , and has
few days ago quarter of a century
few weeks ago No. 3, large number 3


NOTES.
Adherence to primitive Forma .
In the construction of outlines of derivative words, it is most
desirable to adhere as closely as 1 possible to the primitive form,
e.g. the outline!for "historical" should follow the outline
for "history" , where the * sign is used for Jtheunaccented
syllable "stor"; and the outline I for^" hysterical"should
follow the outline for "hysteria" , where the separate "st"
and "r" strokes are used because of the accented syllable "ster" .
(Phis gives a natural and necessary distinction between these two
outlines . This principle must also be followed in words like
"wistful", the pen being lifted to write the termination "-ful" .
-sen . -son .
v /T r
After and Iff , "-sen" or "-son" may be written with
a downward tick "s" immediately followed by "n" . • As in the case
of "sr" and "si" after "b" , there will be no possibility even in
rough notes of this "sn" being mistaken for "an" , as in such com-
binations the "a" would be written on the first consonant.
Omission of Vowels.
Apparently important vowels may be freely omitted if the out-
lines without the vowels cannot be mistaken for other words. The
student must remember that in order to follow speakers and dic-
tators , he must reduce brevity to the minimum consistent with
legibility, and that from this point of view every superfluous
movement of the fingers is so much waste of time. Unnecessarily
full outlines are permissible only in corresponding with learners
and in writing comparatively low speeds , but plain common-sense
should tell the writer that in such words as "ruddiest" , "rudest"
and rowdiest" he must insert some vowels for the purposes of dis-
tinction, and that being so, he should insert the easiest and omit
the hardest, as in:- ruddiest* rudest , rowdiest ;
or in cases like "class" and "clause" , "case" and "cause" , he
should omit the vowel in the commoner word and insert it in the
less frequent one in order to get the briefest forms for the com-
monest words:- class * , clause , case , .
"A" and "awe" ° v are also illustrations' of this principle
It will be necessary, of course, to distinguish between two ad-
jectives like "fiscal"' N ' v "physical” student
should not waste time in constructing special distinctive forms
for words having the some sound where they represent different
parts of speech, as such words are unlikely to clash.
Compound Words: and Re-
Write compound words in two pieces close together; common-
sense , unless they are otherwise provided for, as in;-
hard-headed \Jf? Express "re-" before a vowel by a disjoined
"r": re-adjust* \ * re-appear , re-consider


BXERCISg_AQ,
Write the following in Shorthand:-
ffithin-the the Union Bank will start to re-
build and renovate its premises . The subject of-such-a recon-
struction was fully discussed as-soon-as-convenient after the bus-
iness of dealing with-the Report-and-Balance-Sheet was completed
at-the General Meeting. Federal-matters cropped up in-the-course
of-the Meeting, and-the general opinion was thoroughly in accord
wlth-that expressed by - the City-Insurance-Company , the Royal-In-
surance-Company , the Mutual Fire - Insurance-Company, the Bank-of
Australasia, and other Joint-Stock-Companies of-the State.
For several-months past there- has-been- a difference -of-
opinion in-the temporary Federal-City among some authorities that-
the present Government would-not for long hold the reins of
government, and-it-is to-be hoped that during-the next few-months ,
a definite settlement will-.be arrived at •
In-response-(to) numerous inquiries touching upon Federal*
matters irrespective of party consideration , there - has - been - a
stout denial that such-a state-of-affairs exists. Nevertheless
there-is-a feeling that tension does exist owing to-the Federal-
authorities’ actions in-xegard-(to) Railway-matters and other ar-
rangements which, according tb-a well-known legal authority, are
outside-the scope of-the Federal-Government, and which some assert
should-be dealt with by-the State-Government.
Notwithstanding-the-faot that such-is-the oondition-of-things
at-the-(presentj-time, the Labor Party now in-power have kept matters
going, and for-the-time-being we-must-be content to wait and see
what-will-be forthcoming at-a later period .
fact that-the Federal-
Government House in-this City will in-future not-be used as-a resi-
dence by-the Governor-General and will revert to-the State-Govern-
ment , and-the opinion expressed that it-will-be used as-a National
Museum has come in for-a large share of attention.
. The leader of-the Government, who-is incidentally the - leader
of-the Labor Parly has, it-is stated, visited Germany and- has
given close attention to-some of-the national works of-that- coun-
try, and if-it-can-be arranged no-doubt he will lecture on what he
saw when-he returns home . Undoubtedly such-a lecture would prove
extremely interesting, and-we-have no-doubt that-he-will-be in-a-
position to-give advice that-will-be useful in-view- (of the)-fact
that-the Commonwealth is erecting a Small Arms Factory, to provide
the necessary requirements for-the future defence of Australia.
A pleasing feature of-the recent celebrations in Sydney was
the honor conferred upon-the Lord Mayor. Many members of - the
City-Council, aa-rwell-as Suburban and Shire-Councils were present.


EXERCISE 41 .
Transcribe the following:-
\/ O' G /o' jf £>• "
I r (S Is 1 >S V \nr s~
„ c -tv, e?TC,^\
7. C
°f r ll ( '■: I p
C " v_i2? C s /K ~e ts
y. o
y " I /"
/■“ W
< - j/} v~
CN V \
\ f <777^
\ /
) \^
°


EXERCISE 42.
Write the following in Shorthand: -
The butter-making and grading is-in-charge of-a young-man who
gained his first-class certificate for dairy instruction at-the-
College . He takes a great interest in-the work of-the students,
and-has evolved a process which reduces the difficulty of grading
butter to-a minimum. The applicability of-this process was
demonstrated to-us by one-of-the students , who explained that even
if-the operator neglected to-watch-the operation the most insig-
nificant obstruction would-be sufficient to-cause the machine to
stop, thereby rendering it impossible for-any deleterious matter
to-pass into-the box.
After leaving the dairy we-had an opportunity of-watching
some students engaged in filling a silo with green maize , the work
being expeditiously performed with-the aid of-an electrically
driven chaff-cutter and elevator standing On-a raised platform.
The silos are perpendicular and built of wood. This wood under-
goes a special preparation before erection making it impervious to
wind and rain. Should-the construction of-the silos, in-any-way,
be imperfect, it-is probable that-the ensilage which they con-
tained would deteriorate and rot, and-the loss occasioned would-be
practically irrecoverable.
Passing on to-the Fruit Drying and Canning Department, we-
were introduced to-the officer in-charge, an expert in-the manu-
facture of-all kinds of preserved fruit and vegetables . As-the-
time of-our visit was the off-season for fruit much
opportunity of seeing-the various operations of-this-Department in
full swing, but-we-were cordially invited to-pay another visit
during January or February .
Then-we-had a brief glance at-the experimental plots where-
the reproduction of certain species of wheat created by Mr. Farrar
was being carried out.
As-it-was now time for-us to leave in-order-(to) catch the
afternoon train to town, after expressing our appreciation for-the
hospitality extended to-us , * we renewed our acquaintance with-our
driver, who amused himself in-a philanthropic way as-he drove-us
to-the train by throwing pennies to-the children by-the road-side.
We arrived back in-the city a little after nine after having spent
a very pleasant as-well-as instructive day, and-here I-must-say
that I-was very glad I-was-a Shorthand-writer, as I-was-able-to
take notes of-many interesting little conversations with-the in-
structors of-the College.
Efficiency in Shorthand work also makes one confident of
belng-able-to discharge one's duties as - a commercial amanuensis
and ensures the possession of-a constant and remunerative position.
To acquire such ability in-the system which I use, all-that- is
necessary is interest, average intelligence , a sound general edu-
cation and regular study.


EXERCISE 45.
Transcribe the following;-
o s* \y , \
~kjz> Ls I, o\y \,
\ 60-c^^A
n C_9\ C
" 'T' o~ c ~'"
_y , (T/ °~s
.M Wk
.
i
~y/ \ -
v = v^-- /(^[ ■ v rr
| r 7*
( v ' ' '
V 4*/^


EXERCISE 44.
Write in Shorthand the following letter;-
Dear Harry:
We-have-Just returned home from-our annual holiday. I-wish
that-you had-been with-us but as-you-could-not spare-the-time to-
come , I-will try and give-you a brief account of-our trip.
On-the 20th we took train to Penrith and arrived late in-the
afternoon. As-it-was too late to start up-the river we engaged
rooms at an hotel, and after tea we walked round the town. We
visited the local Picture Show and were surprised to-see such-a
large audience in-the hall . We learnt that-the population is
largely composed of railway employees . Early next-day we took a
boat out-of-the local boat-shed for-our trip up-the river, but here
our holiday was nearly cut short, for on getting out-in-the stream
we collided with-a motor launch, but beyond-the oars being knocked
out-of-their rollicks no damage was done . We were lucky to get
out-of-a tight corner so lightly. The river here is-a beautiful
straight stretch of water, extending for over three miles, and-it-
is claimed to-be-the finest course in-(the)-world for-the deciding
of-the world’s champion sculling tests. Gliding up-stream we
passed into-a deep gorge where-the river has broken its way
through-the mountains. The Government some-time-ago proposed to-
throw a dam across the river here , which-would-be-a comparatively
simple engineering feat on-account of-the narrowness of-the gorge,
in-order-(to) conserve the waters for irrigating-the plains below.
When-it-is-done it-can-only-be-a matter-(of)-time before there-
will-be-a very-important and flourishing agricultural centre es-
tablished in-the vicinity. High up on-our right, seemingly
clinging to-the mountain-side runs a train bound for-the Blue
Mountains , and undoubtedly there-has-been-a great-deal of-money
and care expended to safely bring-the line around suoh-a precipi-
tous bluff.
A little further up, on-the right bank of-the river, we
landed our stores and pitched our tent. We-wefe fully occupied
for-the rest of-the day in putting-the camp in proper order and
overhauling-the sporting material whioh-we had brought with-us.
The rest of-our holiday was spent in real holiday fashion a swim
in-the early morning before breakfast and-the rest of-the day de-
voted to snapshotting, shooting or fishing. The snapshots, whidh-
we-have developed and printed will describe better than my pen
what a Jolly time we-have-had . We-have-also a-number of fox and
wallaby skins, the result of-a couple of shooting trips farther up-
the river.
We hope next-time to-have-the-pleasure of having you and-your
brother make-the trip with-us. Should-you care to-do-ao, we-
should-be-pleased to-share our camp with-you both, and I-am-sure
we-wlll-have-a splendid holiday.
Yours-faithfully,


EXERCISE 45 - _
Transcribe the following:-
C '
M\.v kC'C
\y lx 6 f i*lx
L f
[<y\' V /<!,
<X ({—j'^'£'V oi 'r.y''z
<i 1 C p C ~~'~l
/\yf V^j^
'"X '^fL, v v ‘
l/?/ *- —- ' 'T'' VZ—
/ Ks~
' q o r s>^


EXERCISE 46.
Write the following letters in Shorthand:-
Dear-Sir;
Under-the New-South-Walea “Workmen'a Compensation Act 1916“ ,
which comes into force on Ist July, 1917, the following heavy
liabilities will-be imposed on-you in-(the)-event of-the death or
injury of-an employee (receiving £312 per-annum or less) through
accident occurring in-the-course of employment in-this State .
Death.- Where an employee sustains an-injury which termin-
ates fatally, the maximum compensation payable to de-
pendants is £5OO and-the minimum £3OO.
Temporary Disablement Where an employee sustains an Injury
which results in total disablement the compensation is
equivalent to half wages , with-a maximum of £2 per-week,
the total amount payable being limited to £750.
This-is-a class of risk which business prudence suggests
should-be passed on by-you to an Insurance-Company such-(a)s-the
Mutual Life and Citizen's Assurance-Company-Ltd.
If-you desire to avail yourself of-an M.L.O. policy of in-
demnity will-you kindly sign and retum-the enclosed provisional
cover request and-we-shall immediately issue our official cover.
We-shall-be-pleased to-give-you any information you-may de-
sire .
Yours-faithfully
Dear-Sir;
"Doncaster" Motor Pump.
I-have-Just-reoeived a reply from Langwill Bros. & Davies
Proprietary, Melbourne , stating;-
Terms £4O cash, balance in four equal quarterly
promissory notes payable Melbourne, interest
6)6 -per-annum.
They also state the sprayer is ready, and-that-they-are
awaiting instructions to-ship.
Kindly let-(me)-have your definite instructions at-(your)-
very-ear(liest)-convenience,
4e_' Yours-faithful ly ,
Ltd.
EXERCISE 47.
Write in Shorthand "The Story of the System" beginning on
Page 4 .
BUSINESS CORRESPONDENCE AND REPORTING
An additional book containing a vocabulary of common words,
speed expedients, special exercises and notes, entitled “The t< Speed
Builder—Helps in Business Correspondence and Reporting. Is in
course of preparation.
