

f- zyc
SUNDAY SCHOOLS.
OUR SENIOR SCHOLARS.
FOR GRATUITOUS DISTRIBUTION.
SYDNEY:
Published by John Mailer, 256, George Street;
PRINTED BY JAS. READING AND CO.,
BRIDGE STREET.




fb ttss/r Sfe>f
1(5-7?
OIJR SENIOR SCHOLARS.
We esteem the Sabbath-school to be the child of the Church,
and from it the sanctuary must always be in view. It is
an evidence of the outgrowth of love for souls, and of the
Church’s being a fruitful bough, whose branches run over
the wall, valuable clusters beyond its precincts.
And we should be wanting in gratitude to our mother
did we not return to her bosom some to be her future
strength, and light, and hope, in her grand evangelic
mission to the world. Our teaching is therefore the pre-
liminary training for Church fellowship, and this aspect of
it directly influences us in the treatment and culture of our
senior scholars.
We shall consider this subject from an outside point of
view—merely from a teacher’s point of view. Classes for
senior scholars are now acknowledged as one of the Church’s
most important auxiliaries, though, as compared with the
infant and intermediate departments of Sabbath-school
work, they are recent, and present new features, and
require peculiar privileges. Special accommodation and
special teaching pow'er are recognised as desiderata to
success. But so important is our object—the endeavour
to imbue young persons with love for God when embark-
ing upon the troubled sea of life —that whatever is essential
should commend itself.
(Special accommodation is necessary, for “ young people
are men and women in notions sooner than they are in
years and they regard it as an indignity to be treated as
boys and girls, and naturally object to be grouped with them.
(Special intellectual provision is indispensable. Any tyro
can hew a block of marble, but it requires a heaven-born
artist to make it seem to breathe. “ A sedate being without
energy, however good his motives, or extensive his
scholarship, is of no service here. An ardent devotee,
without judgment, or of little weight of personal character,
is also useless.” A merely well-intentioned teacher will not


obtain common respect. One wlio commits errors in gram-
mar, or makes mistakes in mathematics, physics, or natural
theology, will receive less toleration than one who fails
to give a clear and. concise definition of justification by
faith. And in Scripture history, chronology, and topo-
graphy ; in the zoology, botany, and geology of the Bible,
many senior scholars are equal to the age, even to an
acquaintance with the recent excavations at Jerusalem.
Then success, as we esteem success, does not depend
entirely upon the scholastic or studious character of the
teacher, but somewhat upon the moral power he brings to
the teaching vocation. He must not be pedantic or
clownish —he should possess good tastes, must be original
—not the undefined shadow of another—must combine
i( parental tenderness, wisdom, and a sense of responsi-
bility ; ” must be earnest without noise, precise without
fastidiousness, kind and conciliatory without being obse-
quious ; must possess dignity without pomposity, inde-
pendence with sympathy, and must exhibit a disciplinary
devotedness to his work without being harsh or censorious;
and these qualities must be natural, not assumed for the
nonce. He must personate the attractive kindliness of a
sunny thought expressed in equally sunny language; a
heartfelt, forcible, and irradiating welcome for all who are
under his care, who are his study, and who must be to him
a fountain of delight. Then it is impossible to satisfy the
mental expectancy of such a class, unless fully prepared
with the most recent and authentic information, explaining
and transparently illustrating the subject, even to throwing
a positive charm over it by appropriate incident, particularly
where it impinges against the controversial topics of the
day. Members of the class soon ascertain the depth and
acumen of their teacher, the character and extent of his
reading ifhe ; happens to possess a sore spot, they will not
scruple to irritate it on every available opportunity; they
will double upon an open question a score of times if the
explanation given does not coincide with their
conclusions. While Lyell’s “ Antiquity of Man,” Huxley’s
“Protoplasm,” and Darwin’s “Development Theory,”
possess positive attractiveness to the youthful mind.
But when it is for souls the teacher is labour-
ing, love for souls will smooth many difficulties; it
will make him enthusiastic, give life to his language,
infuse vigour and point into his illustration, and develop a
sincere, ardent, and zealous energy; and implicit depen-
dence upon God will awaken and keep alive sympathy,


keep vigilant the conscience, and help to app.y saving
truth. Senior scholars require yet something _ more. The
teacher may labour ineffectually unless qualified to offer
suggestions for mental culture and moral deportment. He
must exercise a wise discrimination in piloting them over
the quicksands and rocks which fascinating company, and
smart, but suoerficial books,create. His own conciuct must
give edge to his endeavours to win them from lethargic, care,
and time-killing, and often pernicious pursuits, that con-
tribute nothing to the formation of the true man or the
Christian ; and in which our young people indulge with a
zest that would be highly commendable if devoted to the
attainment of some object of real life-work. _ To win and
then lead them, he needs clearly to ascertain their indi-
vidual idiosyncrasies, and all our classes disclose an
instructive variety. One member reveals regal power and
symmetry, another impetuosity and force, a third serenity
and exquisite loveliness —a bubbling spring, cooling and
refreshing ; there are also the witty, and the morose, the
genial, the captious, and the peevish, the learner, and the
critic. The tastes of these it is .his privilege to assist m
moulding, suggesting literary and recreatory pursuits, in
fine, he must think out and _ act. through Ins scholars,
supplying known mental and spiritual exigencies, tor allow-
ing them to live in utter disregard of Christs oners,
without direct personal and unmistakable warning or the
consequences, or to warn them in general terms, is higj y
culpable ; but this cannot be effectively given in the class
—class opportunities are invidious and deceptive. io
offer encouragement there, exposes the recipient to the
jealousies and rivalries of his fellows, and direct reproof
involves a sacrifice of personal dignity a low estimate of
self —or sets his judgment in opposition to his teacher s. A
stroll, if only for a few yards, will enable a teacher judiciously
to effect much that could never be prudently attempted
in class; for while he admonishes firmly and kindly, he
willfsuggest the remedy ; while he stimulates to a better
course of conduct, he will 'make it palpable how beneficial
it will prove, as <£ virtue is its own reward ; and this so
privately and generously as to be unknown to every one
but themselves. The loving teacher will always welcome
the members of his class with an encouraging smile,
whatever their vocation or employment: he will promote
their interests in everyway within his sphere, and urge
them to faithfulness as servants, to diligence, and to be
observant as artisans, and induce them to emulate a high


standard of excellence, and so discreetly as not to raise in
them a spirit of discontent; and should dissatisfaction
with their spheres of employment manifest itself, he will
counsel them honestly and hopefully, resolutely but
dispassionately. And thus the faithful teacher will exem-
plify his love to his class individually and collectively, and
will aim to win their souls to Christ, for Christ is the prize
he ever keeps in view.
How may our classes be efficiently sustained 1 License
and self-will so pervade the minds of the youth in these
colonies that we resort to solicitation in order to maintain
the numerical strength of our classes, and even then
our fairest prospects are frequently blighted, for our solici-
tations are met by objections singularly amusing. The
lightest and most genial bonds of a sacred character are
spurned by some, who submit to the direst worldly enthral-
ment. An objection was urged some eighteen months ago
by a son and grandson of ministers—a youth of a very
lovable and liberal disposition, kind, generous, ardent, and
hopeful ; of natural talent, well educated, and, though
young, his company is both a pleasure and a privilege. The
pretext is doubtless supercilious and flippant, but it was
spoken as quietly, naturally, and sincerely as possible.
Having inquired why he did not give himself to Sabbath-
school work, he renlied, “ I have already been called
to account for strolling in the open air on Sabbath after-
noons, and' I made it my business to inquire how the old
fogey who did so, spent his, and found, after piling it, on
in the most approved style, and beguiling it with luscious
wines, he took a book, and reclining upon a sofa
his sound theology was soporific enough to put him
into a sound sleep. And now,” said my young friend,
“ 1 submit to you that my conduct was the more
enlightened and intelligent of the two.” I am sorry to
say this is no satire ; it demonstrates that the gainful
commercial activity which keeps vigilant all the physical
and mental functions during six days should be exchanged
for equally watchful and intense mental and spiritual action
on the seventh. But excuses such as enjoying the fresh air
and admiring the landscape are frivolous, though constantly
made ; or, by some; extraordinary mischance, I never met
with a conversion by nature’s agency alone, however potent
its attractions. On the contrary, instead of innocent or
beneficial recreation, Sabbath rambling usually launches the
scholar on a tide which hurries him to ruin. Still, after a
careful study and scrutiny of my scholars, I have found


many who thus wander to be like King Solomon’s galleons
—they are freighted with gold, silver, and ivory ; apes and
peacocks ; and the latter being the most lively, showy, and
amusing, are landed first, and give character to their owner.
But get a quiet chat alone, and we become delighted to find
the presence of fine gold, which has unconsciously been
employed and treated as ballast, so that nature’s action was
impotent to discover it, and it could only be manipulated
for a more useful purpose by a patient earnest toiler. Many
of our young men are full of life ; they live lightsomely, gay,
and triflingly ; to laugh and chaff are the utmost limits of
their mental recreation. This is distasteful to us, and
with but little inquiry we dub them as careless and
improvident, and regard them as hopelessly worldly;
and a first glance seems to warrant this conclusion. But
the ape and peacock characteristics are not the only ones
they possess, for invite them to spend an hour in calm
thoughtful consideration, and we soon ascertain there exists
also powerful common sense and rational qualities under-
lying the more jovial and ridiculous, but unless we are
willing to brave their foibles we can never expect them to
make confidants of us, or allow of our discovering the very
valuable properties which have hitherto lay hidden.
Another powerful antagonism is of a social character.
Those who are wanning to affection’s behest often deny to
the Sabbath-school its claims, rather than stultify nature’s
aspirations. This dissolves the sanctity of the Sabbath in
their minds, distributes to the winds esteem for teachers,
and robs the Church of its much-prized scholars. Our
dilemma is in its extreme delicacy. It is an emergency
when faith must be in lively exercise, acting in the most
conciliatory manner, and nerved by fixed principles. It is a
misspent Sabbath —a sad parody—viewing God’s work in
ourselves, in place of meditating upon God’s will in His
Word ; and anything short of sanctified passion will, con-
tinue to prove an insuperable obstacle to the progressive
usefulness of our senior scholars. We sincerely regret so
little control appears to be exercised by parents in forming
the habits of our young friends, for it is only an affectionate
regard for a teacher, and the exercise of much watchfulness
not to abuse their confidence on his part that retains them.
Few seem to feel a vested interest in the institution, or that
very estimable degree of attachment we witness in students-
for their Alma Mater, and this license which has been per-
mitted to grow so luxuriantly is the most insidious adversary
the teacher has to battle with.


How may we secure our senior scholars to the Church 1
The present Charles Dickens wrote, “ It is better that every
kind of work honestly undertaken and discharged should
speak for itself than be spoken for.” Our object is not to
parade the success God has bestowed, but to demonstrate
the efficiency of the means employed for the encouragement
of others. Man cannot rise superior to himself, except by
Divine aid; relatively, he is his own ideal ; and all success—
even spiritual—is stimulating. The Rev. Thomas Yasey
said recently, “ I am a fisher of men, and when I let my net
down into the deep sea where there ought to be fishes
enough, I like to bring my net to land and count my fishes ;
that is a blessed arithmetic—the Lord give us more of it.”
When our elder Brother, Jesus, visits my class, with, “ Well,
brother, what are you doing for me 1 ” I desire to be able to
point to this soul and to that whom I am endeavouring
to lead to the Redeemer’s feet as the evidence of realized
faith in this vocation. Oh yes ! I am confident that the
Saviour’s influence will be extended—the lustre of His
crown increased by priceless gems—and His honour ex-
tolled by the faith and holiness of others through our
instrumentality. Yery early in my teaching life I met
with the following incident : —Soon after the appointment
of a young person to a class all her pupils became con-
verted, and being subsequently changed to second and
third classes, similar results ensued—all her scholars became
members of Christ’s Visible Church to the surprise of her
fellows. Dying in the midst of this employment her secret
and its sequel were made known; in her diary, at a date
corresponding with her first appointment, was found the
resolve, “ I will pray for all my class until they are con-
verted.” Agreeing in date with the second and third
removals were resolutions of a similar but increasingly
emphatic character. Following this teaching, it has been
my habit to take my class to the “ Throne of Grace,” and
knowing that no teacher goes from his closet to his class
but is personally and abundantly blessed. “To have
prayed well is to have studied well” was a motto of
Luther’s. We have not been without evidence of the
efficacy of faithful prayer among our respective scholars.
About thirteen years ago several teachers met together to
pray for the conversion of their classes ; a revival of pure and
undefiled religion was experienced and about seventy from
the elder school joined the Church. I had charge of a
senior class of thirteen very intelligent girls, of whom
twelve avowed themselves to be the Lord’s, It has for some


years been the practice of several of our classes to meet
for special prayer weekly, and we find that no right-minded
young man can long resist the importunity of his associates
on his behalf. The first meeting of my class, at the com-
mencement of last autumn, was composed of twelve
persons, half of whom were Church members. A psalm
was read, a few exegetical remarks followed, one brother
described the profound peace enjoyed since giving his
heart to God, all prayed, we sang five times ; all our engage-
ments being brief and to the point, we concluded within
an hour. It was a soul-reviving meeting. These are continued
weekly, and we frequently witness tangible and gratifying
results to follow pleading for a special object. All engage,
and we have some delightsome prayers, illustrating simple
faith, depicting personal wants with a directness, appro-
priateness, and liberty, which produce the conviction that to
the mind of the petitioner God is no critic,” he prays
without the fear of man perturbing him ; and like the
bursting rosebud developing a rich, natural bloom that is to
the soul as perceptibly fragrant as living incense. From
these petitions we often ascertain the hindrances to
accepting Christ, and then it becomes our privilege to
remove them so far as practicable. We also endeavour to
make these meetings subservient to the higher and more
permanent interests of the Church, and invite members to
select for special meditation portions of Scripture with a
view to exposition, and the cultivation of youthful talent
and energy, though hitherto with but little success. .Ex-
perimental illustration is sometimes given, but explanatory
or hortatory remarks are studiously avoided. Thus believing,
prayer has been the most powerful and primary'auxiliary to
such earnest and practical teaching as we are capable of
offering.
May we believe for youthful conversions ? As a timid
retiring youth of thirteen, I received my first-class, when—
with a simplicity of faith and a purity of joy, I now o'ften
long for —I—by the grace of God —achieved my greatest
triumph, the offering of myself a living sacrifice to Christ.
How dare I then refuse the enjoyment of like privileges to
others ? No !it is my bliss to sing as a page from my own
experience—
“ ’Twill save us from a thousand snares
To mind religion young.”
Further, about two years since, one of my class, of insigni-
ficant appearance, and who looked young, was being


admitted to Church fellowship, when a member inquired if
he was not too young ] That young man is nobly employed
in the charge of a class in our Sabbath school, and my
interrogator may be frequently met debased by drink.
Some of us do believe in youthful conversions, and con-
stantly pray for them ; but the canker-worm that feeds
on the vitality of our schools is, persons become teachers
who not converted, or converted, do not believe in the
conversion of the young ; —teachers who never foster
religious impressions or cultivate tbe dawning of religious
life in the soul. A scholar approaches Calvary and is told
—by our indifference—that it is a myth ;he meditates on the
passion of Gethsemane, and is convinced it was suffered for
him. and we reply—by apparent unconcern —that he is too
credulous and visionary ; and hence our real nower is
mournfully incommensurate with our numbers. But some
young men, who—l am sorry to say—are too often children
of Church members, object to Church fellowship; first because
of doctrinal difficulties, they have been induced to puzzle their
brains with quibbling dogmatic distinctions and abstract
definitions, instead of first seeking Christ, and then trusting
to the Holy Spirit to harmonise His own declarations.
Then we meet the moral question, that better men are
outside the Church than some who are within it, a gyration
round the pivot of inconsistency. We do not disbelieve in
the moral rectitude of some, but, wrote Michael Faraday,
at the age of twenty-one : —“ I appear moral, I hope [am
so, though at the same time I consider morality only as a
lamentably deficient state.” This is the best that can be
said for it. Then we are assailed with the worldliness and
excessive activity of the Church in things of time and
sense. Some time since T asked one —a late scholar—why
he did not walk in the footsteps of his parents, and he
replied, “ I do not question their goodness, for I have a
brother a minister, whom they trained, but I have lived
with-many in the highest walks of the Church, and if Thad
seen that religion had had that influence upon their lives
which it is supposed to have, I should have been a member
of the Church, but those lives influence me.” My in-
formant continued, “ I found upon inquiry, that when they
were converted they were earnest men of God, first in every
good work, and making everything subservient to that, but
as they advanced in years they became as worldly and
grasping as mere worldlings. This I knew of men at home,
with whom I have been intimate, and I have said to ray
parents if this is your religion, I think I am as well without


it as with it ; if it only makes men clamorous for this
world, well I don’t wish to be, I prefer not to be tarred with
that brush.” This is most absurd as an objection to fellow-
ship with Christ, for like John Bunyan’s tubs, each one
must stand on its own bottom. Christians must not, and
do not, forget to be “diligent in business,” their Chris -
■ tianity makes them earnest. To suit envious minds
John Newton’s shoeblack—who was the better shoeblack
because of his Christanity—must no longer be so good,
but because he is a Christian he must degrade his pro-
fession by blacking shoes indifferently. It is impossible that
a man devoid of aesthetic perception can interpret a work
of the imagination ; spirituality is of a deeper nature than
aesthetics, and is certainly beyond the grasp of pupil world-
lings ; while commerce is tangible and gross, they who have
been industriously successful because of their Christianity,
like Messrs. Samuel Budgett, George Hitchcock, and Sir J.
Crossley—monuments so elevated, well-defined,and majestic
—arouse the enmity and draw out the ascerbity of the
splenetic, the drivelling, and the sceptic, who use their
utmost endeavour to influence the young to torture, exag-
gerate, and denounce every apparent weakness. They would
like religion to be free from muscular and rugged life, if it
exhibited calm tenderness, the fair show of modesty, the
equanimity and composure of womanly emotion only, they
would' demonstrate to the young its inherent superstition
and senility. Free thinkers now pique themselves on ob-
serving that our honourable women are not a few. lam no
apologist for worldliness or hypocrisy, but am sensible that
all who are thus diligent may—if not grovelling—be emi-
nently “ fervent in spirit” for one ruling principle—earnest-
ness —directs and animates both. But pray how is it these
objections thus crop up in our families'? Is there not some
deficiency, or something irregular or faulty in us 1 It fre-
quently happens that the sons of distinguished Christians
become outrageously wild and wicked though possessing
very brilliant minds ; is not this the result of much light
with a negligent, or, without a judicious and generous train-
ing] Certainly there must be something in us very incon-
gruous and not squaring with our profession. The dissect-
ing of a man’s religious character will not initiate a high
tone of piety in the hearts of our children, and a prudential
or expedient walk not emanating from fixed Christian prin-
ciple will not commend our avowed faith and love to the
affection of our own flesh ; but we rather arm their youth-
ful minds to systematically parry the Sabbath reproof, and


to stifle the pangs of a probed conscience. Mere temporizing
begets a disdain for Scripture truth, and a qualified respect
for Divine ordinances. This is the furnace in which gospel-
hardened sinners are forged, not in the House of God ! not
in the Sabbath-school! but in daily intercourse and associa-
tion with men of the Church.—“ Home is a school where
there are no holidays, and from which there are no truants.”
and such can never again possess the simple faith of child-
hood, they will never be awakened under the ordinary means
of grace, or by the ordinary providences of God. We rightly
decide to train our sons to an acquaintance with the
thousand gems that bedeck philosophy—with the
harmonious chords which are struck by the highest strains of
poetry—with the refined delights of art—and with the
lustrous corruscations of science ; but these acquisitions will
prove excrescences if not adorned and crowned with the
comeliness, the grace, and the beauty of a holy life. A holy
walk is essential to success, and holiness must be lived by
parents as well as by pastors and teachers.
How then may young converts be secured to the Church 1
By employment. The late Lord Mayor Lesley said, “To
make a successful man, wholesome work is the only true
path.” “ The busy man is troubled with but one devil, the
idle man with a thousand.” An indolent Christian is grave
irony—a buried talent. New Testament principles presume
every soul will work. “ A healthy Church has a whole
army of labourers who would sink into respectable medio-
crity and laziness if they did not work. The condition of
that Church is the healthiest where there is found a use for
every talent, and a talent for every use. Exercise is as
necessary for the health of the soul as for the health of the
body.” For deliberation, for arrangement, for management,
we must invariably rely upon experienced Christians, but
for departments where activity and elasticity are needed,
where warmth, and earnestness, and sympathy are essential,
none can so aptly execute such missions as the young from our
senior classes, none are so capable of knowing the wants of
scholars, none more_ competent for successfully distributing
tracts; and we believe many might advantageously, and
intelligently embrace, and very usefully improve, the kind
offers of our City Missionary, who promises to afford oppor-
tunity at the cottage meetings for brief expositions and
exhortation a privilege that may not be lightly esteemed
by young converts. Placing honour upon them confers a
heartfelt interest in the work—it becomes theirs ; and suc-
cess is a chain which binds us to Christ during despondency ;


—in hours of doubt, it, like a star, pierces the gloom, and is
an evidence of our acceptance. At the period of the revival
mentioned, of thirteen years ago, I was tract secretary, and
ten young men were brought to me for employment as dis-
tributors. I sent them out—not singly, but in twos—
receiving their several reports once a month. Two of the
ten are of the Church triumphant, and six of the Church
militant, two of the latter being ordained ministers. Work
tests the sincerity of the change of heart. “ Sloth like rust
consumes faster than labour wears.” So far our school-
converts sustain a good reputation, and I am sure there is
less backsliding among those who enter the Church by the
school portal than among adult converts. Their attach-
ments are based upon a conscientious regard for truth,
although their profession may be an impulsive effort of
faith. Then lambs will not bear overdriving. Snub an old
servant of God and he will credit you with ignorance, or
impertinence ; but treat chufflly a young convert, and he
esteems it to be the act of the Church. Aged members may
have attained to such self-confidence as to neglect to look
back occasionally upon their day of small things : and incon-
siderateness has driven many of the noblest—because the
most sensitive—minds to sceptism. If loving care had been
bestowed in a genial spirit upon the retiring meditative
schoolboy at Harrow, he would never have been renowned
for accomplishing in mischief what the wit of Voltaire, the
popular ribaldry of Paine, and the subtlety of Hume had
failed to achieve; and the dazzling radiance[of the death-
dealing paintings of “Don Juan” had never burst the bonds
of imagination, but instead his genius might have afforded
us rapturous delight by an Epic as majestic and
sublime, and more direct and practical than the “Paradise
Lost”—
“ A pebble in the streamlet scant
Has changed the course of many a river,
A dewdrop on the baby plant
Has warped the giant oak for ever.”
Let us then send our young converts into fields of labour
that will arouse their dormant powers, will whet their
faculties, will enable them early to grapple with the diffi-
culties of the Christian life, and test the inestimable value
of our Saviour’s most precious promises ; will mature their
fondest hopes, nourish the graces of the Holy Spirit, and
increase the joy of meeting their glorified Redeemer. Let
us do this is no envious, niggard, or eleemosynary spirit, but


■with an earnest and heart-felt desire to give them the best
and most favourable opportunities of becoming the foremost
men of our day in the work of bringing souls to Christ.
As teachers we are grateful for this honourable employ-
ment ; it affords many glorious encouragements to faith-
fulness, it enables us to appreciate many holy gratifications ;
it precludes our indulging prejudices and old school fallacies’
which but for the polish our younger acquaintances give, we
should helplessly and hopelessly imbibe; it preserves us
from being laid aside like some antiquated coin, or gem, or
enamel, or Dresden shepherdess, to be coldly admired, and
to exist on a past reputation. This contact demolishes
crotchets, repels crabbedness, rubs off' eccentricities, keeps
the teacher young in feature, elastic in mind, liberal, bene-
ficent, and aspiring in deportment, and thus aids in
ripening and embalming youthful beauty, to be developed
into beaming age, when snowy locks fitly crown the expe-
rience of years of arduous but loving toil. For such work
we need the elite of the Church—men the most noble,
richly endowed, highly cultivated, distinguished, and
eminent ; men of commanding talent, combining depth and
precision, with broad sympathies and enthusiastic loves.
Such there are, who, worse than the sordid miser—whose
gold, though unproductive in life, is utilized at death—fail
to communicate their intellect or attainments to others,
and leave tUe world mere grubs. England offers for this work
her Lord Chancellor, and honoured statesmen. America gave
her late President —Andrew Johnston, her Judges, and most
illustrious patriots—while Australia rests satisfied with self-
educated artizans and employees—persons without social
weight, but desiring to be taught the Divine Will, engage
•in this work, because it is the shortest path to acquiring
Divine knowledge, and attaining the Divine blessing.
In conclusion, the Sabbath-school should be esteemed a
national institution ; its work, its acts, its hopes should com-
mand for it warm greetings, assiduous care, and self-denying
solicitude ; but frequently it obtains only a secondary
position in the deliberations and mind of the Church.
In many places, especially in America, the Sab-
bath-school divides the indefatigable labour, spiritual
oversight, earnest thought and time of the mem-
bers with the Church itself ; everyone feels it to be an
honour to maintain the school efficiency and numbers ; but
in this land—where in many instances it is the prop of the
Church—the Church disavows all spiritual responsibility,
and repudiates all moral obligation. In some instances this


is mutual, there is the minimum of cordial co-operation
with the maximum of indifi'erentism. Its spiritual life is
no longer a Church interest, but is relegated by the Church
to the crude operations and incongruous machinery of the
school ; and because of this want of intelligent sympathy,
the school occasions frequent heart-burnings, but singularly
few'heart-yearnings and prayers for its success. The im-
portance of this mission demands for it much consideration.
Our mission is to ingenuous youth, not to prejudiced, per-
plexing, and rigid age, and success should be ours. We
long for the glorious consummation of our work and labour,
in the implicit belief that not only tract distributors and
teachers, but loveable leaders of God’s worship, and
magnanimous expositors of God’s Word, will rise from
our midst. The Lord help us to pray, and not to faint.
G. D.
J. Reading and Co., Printers, Bridge-street, Sydney.


TO SUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHERS.
At the Depot of the Religious Tract and Book Society,
Bible Hall, George Street, there is always on hand a
large and carefully selected stock of Books suitable for
Sunday School purposes.
The publications of the London Sunday School
Union. “ Notes on the Lessons,” &c.
Various “ Lesson helps,” Tracts for Teachers,
&c., &c.
Sunday School Hymn Books ; Bateman s Hymns ;
Curwen’s Hymns ; The Union Hymn Book; The Sunday
Scholars’ Hymn Book; Gems of Song for Sunday
Schools, The American Sacred Songster, &c., &c.
Sunday School Tickets; Reward and Picture
Cards ; Small Books in Packets ; Periodicals for Sunday
School Teachers and Scholars.
Liberal Discovwts to Schools.
JOHN MAILER,
Depository,
256 George Street.
_ ..i m vajiMri
