

SUNSHINE
FARM IMPLEMENTS


SUNSHINE HARVESTERS (8 ft.) AT WORK IN RIVERINA.


Sunshine Farm Implements
———--— —— Manufactured by ——
H. V. McKAY
SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS
SUNSHINE
Head Office and Works:
Sunshine, near Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
Branches:
Stanley Street, South Brisbane, Queensland.
27-39 George St. West, Sydney, New South Wales.
Cof. Collins and Spencer Sts., Melbourne, Victoria.
56 North Terrace, Adelaide, South Australia.
36 Pier Street, Perth. Western Australia.
Registered Address for Oversea Cables :
“Sunshine,” Melbourne.
Codes Used :
ABC, sth Edition, and Bentley’s.
Australian Telegraphic Addresses:
McKay, Sunshine, South Brisbane. McKay, Sunshine, Sydney.
McKay, Sunshine, Melbourne. McKay, Sunshine, Adelaide.
McKay, Sunshine, Perth.
All of the Implements, Machines, etc., illustrated in this book are made at Sunshine.
Separate Catalogues are also issued describing the Sunshine Harvester, the “Sun” Grain
and Fertilizer Drill, and the Sunshine Petrol Engine. These Books are sent
post free to any address on request.
Inspection invited at all Showrooms and Agencies.
Quotations for any item in this Book mailed promptly
—— on receipt of request. ———
The Sunshine Harvester Works are reached in twenty minutes by train from Spencer
Street Station, Melbourne, and Farmers visiting the Victorian Capital are always cordially
welcomed to inspect the largest Implement Factory in the Commonwealth,
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by D. W. Paterson Co. Pty. Ltd., 495 Collins Street, Melbourne.


The Sunshine Harvester
| ~ f UNSHINE Harvesters
| V I reap from half to
| | two-thirds of the en-
v tire g ra j n cro p 0 f the
Commonwealth every year.
The} 7 are unexcelled for light-
ness of draught, solidity of con-
struction, and ease of manage-
ment. They get all the grain
and make a perfect sample in
wheat, oats, or barley. Four
sizes are manufactured, viz.,
with 5-ft., 6-ft., 8-ft., and 10-ft.
Comb. The 8-ft. and 10-ft. sizes
have the famous Spiral Knife
Beaters, and also automatic gear
for raising and lowering the
The 6-ft.
Sunshine
Harvester.
Comb. With this equipment the large sizes are as easy to handle as the small machines, and the
demand for them increases year by year. The 8-ft. and 10-ft. sizes can also be supplied equipped
with a Petrol Engine of special construction for driving all the mechanism of the machine, so that
no work is left for the horses except to pull the harvester through the crop, and consequently- only
half the number of horses is needed. This system has proved a great success, and the Engine-harvester
is undoubtedly the machine of the future.
The 8-ft. Engine-
functioned
Sunshine
Harvester.
A handsome illustrated
detail catalogue of the
Sunshine Harvester is
now available, also a
booklet giving the opin-
ions of 600 successful
farmers of the merits of
the machine, together
with many pictures of
the harvesters at work.
These books will be sent
post free to any address
on request.
H, VI McKA Y, Sunshine Harvester Works $ SUNSHINE


The Sunshine Engine
j IHE growth of the demand for Sunshine
!| | Engines has been so great in recent years
I that a new building, containing 55,000
■ S q^ re^fee t 0 f floor space, has, had to be
erected for their /manufacture. It
finest machiningLshdp in Austfalia/&nd alstomers
are cordially invited t the equipment of
up-to-date machine tools which make possible the
production of a high-grade engine at a moderate price.
Last year upwards of 500 of these engines were
supplied to Australian farmers, and provision is
now made for trebling this output.
The farmer requires an engine that can be started
instantly, run for short or long periods on a low
consumption of benzine, give off its full rated power,
and one that is so simple in construction that it
STATIONARY TYPE.
can be managed successfully by an ordinary unskilled farm hand. The Sunshine Engine complies
with these conditions, and hence its great popularity for farm work. Provided proper attention
is given to lubrication with suitable oil, it will do its work for years without need of skilled attention
or repairs. Duplicate parts, if needed, are always available for immediate despatch.
The Sunshine Engine is made in
3,5, 7, and 10 h.p. sizes, and in Station-
ary and Portable types. It is specially
suitable for chaffcutting, pumping,
wood sawing, and similar farm work,
but is also largely used for a great
variety of other power purposes.
■PORTABLE
TYPE.
A separate catalogue is issued, giving
sectional illustrations and a complete
detailed description of the construction
of these engines. A copy of this book
will be sent post free to any address
on request, together with a booklet
containing testimonials from a large
number of satisfied users.
H, V, McKAY \ Sunshine Harvester Works , SUNSHINE
3


The "SUN”
Grain and Fertilizer Drill
I IHE “Sun” Grain and
if 1 F er i^ zer Drill is en-
|| ! tirely manufactured
I I at the Sunshine
v Works> ]y } ias been
on the market upwards of
twelve years, and has estab-
lished an enviable reputation
ior durability, lightness of
draught, and uniformity of
■sowing both in grain and
fertilizer. It differs in con-
struction from most other
drills in respect of having the
Wheels mounted on Stub Axles
bolted to a solid bed of channel
steel. This does away with
HOE DRILL—Rear View.
the use of a revolving axle, which is so liable to sag and bind. Instead, an independent spindle,
driven from both hubs, gives motion to the sowing devices. The Grain Box is fitted with the vertical
■saucer type of distributors, and will sow from 18 to 270 lbs. of wheat per acre. Provision is also
made for sowing oats, barley, peas, maize, etc. When required, a separate box is fitted for sowing
lucerne, rape,, and the like. The Fertilizer Box has the reliable “star” feed, and distributes from
26 lbs. to 290 lbs. of superphosphate per acre. The Lifting Lever works laterally, and is convenient
for the driver, whether he is standing on the footboard or sitting on the box. Helper Springs are
provided, which balance the weight of the Hoes and make the lift so easy that a boy can operate it.
These drills are made in
10, 14, 16, and 20 row sizes,
fitted with either Hoes or
Discs, spaced 7 inches apart.
Only best selected materials
enter into their construction,
and each drill is run' on rollers
before delivery from the
factory, and is not passed for
despatch unless it works
smoothly and correctly in every
detail.
“Sun” Drills in all of the
above sizes are also supplied
with Grain Box only, for use in
those districts where fertilizer
is not sown with the grain.
DISC DRlLL—Showing Lucerne Seeder Attached.
A separate catalogue of the “Sun” Grain and Fertilizer Drills, with sectional illustrations and full
description of construction, will be sent post free to any address on request.
H. V. McKAY $ Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


The Sunshine Travelling Chaffcutter
I I HIS Plant stands unrivalled for
I if 1 simplicity °f design, solidity
I Jl I of construction, accuracy of
I fitting, ease of management,
****** and endurancef or hard service.
THE GUTTER is the No. 2
“Maxim," which has been well and
favourably known to Australian farmers
for twenty years past, and is in use on
thousands of farms. It is a 3-knife
machine, with 9|-inch mouth, and is
equipped with Safety Lever, operating
the Stop Motion and Reversing Gear.
The Safety Lever extends across the
Feed Box, and is a great boon to the
man feeding the machine, as it makes
him almost immune from accidents.
The Feed Rollers are lathe turned,
ensuring even feeding. The Top
Roller Spindle has a link joint which
self-adjusts to the rise and fall of the
roller. Moving Slot Plates are provi-
No. 2, DDB.
With Double
Dumper Bagger.
ded, which automatically close up the Cheek Slots no matter what position the roller is in. The
Mouthpiece and Cheek Plates are of best cast steel, and are easily replaced when necessary. The
Knife Wheel is heavy and accurately balanced, and is securely keyed to the Spindle. Best Sheffield
Knives are supplied, and are bolted to the Wheel by three bolts, and accurately adjusted to the
mouthpiece with four set screws each. The Bevel Pinions are of cast steel and are almost unbreakable.
The Cutter Spindle has three bearings, the centre one being a roller bearing.
THE RIDDLE BOX is suspended on hickory hangers, and is driven by two pitmans from a disc
and pin at each end of a cross shaft; this gives a steady and even motion to the Riddle, and practically
obviates wear. The Riddle is of best beech wood fitted in sections. It runs lightly, and has ample
area. The Shoot below the Riddle is provided with perforations through which all dust is extracted.
For lucerne a Sheet Metal Riddle can be supplied.
THE ELEVATORS are of large capacity and positive in delivery ; the long Elevator conveys
the chaff to the top of the cylinders in an even stream. The short Elevator returns the cavings to
the Feed Box.
THE DUMPERS are driven by crank shaft, which is provided with a heavy flywheel to ensure
steady running. The Cylinders are used alternately, and the chaff is directed from one to the other
by a simple deflector. The Bag Stands are counterbalanced, and a weighted lever, acting on a friction
wheel, controls the pressure, which may be varied at will up to the greatest strain the bags will stand.
The Dumpers do not pulverise the chaff, and on this account make a better sample than that produced
by a Screw Bagger.
THE UNDER-CARRIAGE is strongly constructed of well-seasoned timber, and has heavy axles
and wheels. It is equipped with a pair of shafts for transport, and is easily moved from farm to farm.
Cutter has three change pinions, to cut | inch, | inch, or | inch chaff. Average capacity, 35 cwt.
per hour. Power needed, 10 B.H.P. Speed of Cutter Spindle, 375 revolutions per minute. Normal
size of fast and loose pulleys, 16-inch diameter x 4-inch face. {Note.—These Pulleys suit for driving
with a Sunshine Petrol Engine. If to be driven by another make of engine, state diameter and speed
of the engine pulley.) Leather Belting is supplied at an extra charge, the usual specification being
40 ft. of 4-jnch single ply.
SAFETY FEED DEVICE. —This machine is fitted with Soule's Patent Safety Feed, which stops
accidents by preventing the feeder's hands from reaching the rollers.
H, V, McKAY 9 Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


The “Maxim” Chaffcutters
Unexcelled for Farmers’ use. Built to last, of large capacity, and fitted with Soule’s Patent Safety
Feed,<|'which;,.makes the work of the feeder absolutely safe.
| THE ‘"Maxim” Chaffcut-
| fin I ters are at work on
||| thousands of farms
I | throughout Australia.
J Many of them have been
in regular use for close
upon twenty years, giving no
trouble to their owners, except for
■oiling, and costing nothing for
repairs. The sample produced is
•clean cut and marketable without
sieving. If the knives are kept
sharp, the machine does the rest.
The Safety Lever is located in such
;a position across the Feed Box that
idle feeder can work it under all
■conceivable circumstances. It also
gives him a perfect insurance
against the possibility of serious
accident, as the Feed Rollers
reverse immediately this lever is
moved. No sacrifice to cheapness
is allowed in the making of this
machine. The Frame is of selected
seasoned timber, morticed, bolted,
No. 2. Stationary. Gan also be fitted with Elevator.
and stayed to a complete rigidity. The Knife Wheel is heavy, correctly balanced, and is securely keyed to the main
spindle. The Knives, of best tempered steel, are secured to the arms by three bolts, and in each arm four set screws
are provided so that each knife may be accurately set to the mouthpiece. The Feed Rollers are lathe-turned and mesh
exactly, so that even feeding is made certain, and winding and choking is prevented. The Bevel Pinions are of cast
steel. The link joint of the top roller spindle ensures even driving as the roller rises or falls with the feed. A lever
and weight are provided to adjust the rollers to the necessary grip.
Nos. 4AX, 2X, and 2XP have
extended rail, lengthened spindle,
outside bearing, fast and loose pulleys,
and belt shifter, also “stop’' motion
and reversing gear, with safety lever
extended across the feed box. They
are suitable for engine drive.
No. 2 has all the above features
except that it is not fitted with ex-
tended rail and loose pulley. It is
recommended for use with a horse gear.
No. 2XF is a portable outfit.
The four wheel undercarriage is sub-
stantially built, and is fitted with a
short pole for towing behind a waggon.
Shafts can be supplied in lieu of the
pole at £1 extra. It is equipped with
a short elevator and double bagging
spouts.
No. 2XP. Portable, With short
Elevator and Double Bagger.
H. V, McKA Y 9 Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


Type.
Number of
Knives.
Width of
Mouth.
Lengths of
Chaff cut.
Usual Size of
Pulley.
Power Needed.
Approx. Capacity
per hour.
Norm. Speed
R.P.M.
No. 4AX
Stationary
3
8 Jin.
f, J, and f in.
16 in. x 4 in.
5 B.H.P. Engine
25 cwt.
350
No. 2
,,
3
9 Jin.
|, J, and f in.
12 in. x 4 in.
2-Horse Gear
20 cwt.
260
No. 2X
,,
3
9 Jin.
-|, J, and f in.
16 in. x 4 in.
5 or 7 B.H.P. Engine
35 cwt.
375
No. 2XP
Portable
3
9J in.
f, J, and f in.
16 in. x 4 in.
5 or 7 B.H.P. Engine
35 cwt.
375
Chaff Elevators
All of the Stationary Chaffcutters can be supplied with elevators, 10, 12, 14, or 16 feet long, equipped with plain
hopper spouts for delivery into a bin, or with short elevator and double-delivery bagger spouts for bagging. Sieve
gear and attachments can also be supplied if required.
Soule’s Patent Safety Device
This is fitted to each Chaffcutter. It is of sheet metal construction, and is connected with the feed box in such a
way that it does not obstruct the feeder, and at the same time makes it impossible for his hand to become caught by
the rollers. No user of a chaffcutter can afford to be without this splendid device for preventing accidents.
Dimensions, etc., of “Maxim” Chaffcutters
Pulleys of other diameters can be supplied to special order. If customer already has an engine, the diameter
and speed of the driving pulley on the engine should be stated, so that the proper size pulley may be fitted to the
chaffcutter. The average capacity per hour is stated above, but this can be greatly increased by heavy feeding.
Best leather belting for driving chaffcutters is supplied at reasonable prices, usually 40 feet-of 3-in. belt is needed for
these cutters.
The Sunshine
Firewood
Saw Bench
As the illustration shows, this
Bench is mounted on a very sub-
stantial seasoned hardwood frame,
and is built to withstand long years
of hard work. The Spindle is
1J in. diameter, with solid collars.
It runs in grooved white metal
thrust bearings. The fast and
loose pulleys are 6 in. diameter x
4 in. face. Saws supplied are 26 in.
or 30 in. diameter, to crosscut
respectively 7-in. or 9-in. logs.
H. v. McKAY, Sunshine Harvester Worfo, SUNSHINE


The Sunshine Spring-Tine Cultivator
(HIGH WHEEL)
This Implement is a necessity on every farm for the rapid cultivation of fallow land
before seeding, or whenever a growth of weeds appears on the surface. In principle it
is not a novelty; but the strength of construction of the Sunshine make (permitting the
great width of cut in the larger sizes) has brought it Into favour as
one of the finest tools for the wheat growers’ use.
I IKE other Sunshine Im-
I* T I pl emen t s ; this Cultiva-
JL-i | tor is built with ample
I strength for the work it
.v ca u e d U pon to per-
form. The Wheels are heavily
spoked and tyred, and an extra
long axle bearing is provided.
The Stub Axles are reversible,
giving double wear, and they are
set to give creep and gather to the
wheels. The Axle Bed of X steel
gives immense structural strength,
and leaves no possibility of sag-
ging. To it is solidly braced the
Front Frame of angle steel, which takes the pull of the Tines. The Floats are constructed of spring
steel of heavy sections so designed that five Tines can be mounted on each and spaced 4 inches apart
(centre to centre) right along the implement. This ensures that all the land is thoroughly pulverised
with the ordinary 2f-inch points. When specially ordered for weed cutting, a set of 4-inch or 6-inch
points can be supplied, and no weeds are missed. Powerful lever pressure is provided, operating on
the Floats through long spiral springs, and ample jump is allowed for clearing obstacles. The lever is
pulled towards the driver when applying pressure, an arrangement which is approved by all users.
The Forecarriage is of angle steel, forming a splendid bracing to the frame of the machine, and
the two front wheels are pivotted to permit them to adjust to any inequalities of the ground or to
ride over stones, etc. A simple wedge coupling allows the front of the frame to adjust up or down
on the vertical axle, so that the depth of cut may be regulated as desired, and all Tines made to cut
the same depth. A further adjustment is provided by giving optional holes for the cross bar which
attaches the front end of the Floats to the frames, so that they may be raised or lowered as required.
A good seat is provided, also a large footboard, making comfortable conditions for the driver.
The Spring Tines are made of good, tough steel carefully tempered, and each one is subjected
to a very severe test before it is passed. A spring steel helper is provided, and materially strengthens
the Tine at the point of greatest strain. The Tine is secured to the Float by a very simple one-bolt
clamp, which holds it firmly at any pitch at which it is set. The points are reversible, and are firmly
secured by one countersunk bolt.
SIZES MADE;
15 Tine (3 Floats) cultivates 5 ft. 25 Tine (5 Floats) cultivates 8J ft.
20 ~ (4 Floats) ~ 6J ft. 30 ■,, (6 Floats) ~ 10 ft.
35 Tine (7 Floats) cultivates Ilf ft.
H, . r » McK* • . Sunshine Harvester Works P SUNSHINE


The SUNSHINE High-Wheel Spring-Tine Cultivator
WITH Grain-Sowing Attachment
| | HEN it is not desired to
I I sow artificial manures
| \fy I with the grain, there
| IT | is no more efficient
I seeder than the Grain
4»mwh4 Box attached to the
Sunshine Cultivator. It drops
the grain just in front of the
Spring Tines, which can be set
to cover it to any desired depth with
a mellow mulch of newly stirred
top soil. The mechanism which is
used is a replica of the seed dis-
tribution system of the famous
“Sun” Drill.
The “vertical saucer” dis-
tributors are employed, and by
means of the various change
speed cogs supplied they can be
made to sow from 18 lbs. to 270 lbs.
per acre of wheat and other grains
in proportion. There is no guess-
work in the sowing, but positive
■cog changes as in a grain drill.
n- The saucers are set only seven
inches apart, and when the hang-
ing tubes are used, the seed is
dropped in perfect rows as with a drill. When broadcast sowing is preferred, these tubes can be removed, and a
complete scattering of the seed is then obtained.
The vertical saucer feed does not grind or crush the grain, but goes on sowing the desired quantity with perfect
uniformity and with no injury to the seed.
The method of changing cogs to alter the quantity sown is simple and quick. No more effective or durable seed
sower can be procured, and it gives lasting satisfaction to ail users.
When the implement is to be used as a cultivator only, the grain box can easily be removed if desired.
Cultivators are supplied with grain boxes in 15, 20, 25. 30. and 35 Tine sizes, sowing respectively 5,6 f, Bf. 10,
and Ilf feet at each passage.
THE Sunshine Low-Wheel Spring-Tine Cultivator
This is a splendid two-horse tool for light cultivation
in orchards, vineyards, and market gardens, or for stirring
and weed killing on fallowed land. Its framework is of
the same strength as is used in the wide, high-wheel
Sunshine Cultivators, so that it is amply strong for a two-
horse implement. The Floats which carry the Tines are
of spring steel, a hollowed section of this metal being used
for the cross bars, which are double rivetted to the frames.
The Spring Tines, with their helper springs, are of highest
grade spring steel, each one being carefully tempered and
tested before use.
A powerful lever applies pressure to the Tines, or lifts
them clear for travelling. When working in stony country
the springs permit the Floats to jump, to assist the Tines in
clearing. As the Tines are set only 4 inches apart from
centre to centre, the ordinary 2J-inch reversible points stir
the whole of the soil, but when necessary 4-inch or 6-inch
points can be supplied in their place, and will cut out all
the weeds.
The Cultivator is supplied with Pole and Neck Yoke
(Swings extra). The working angle of the Pole is easily
altered, also the regulation of the working depth of the
Tines. As a two-horse Cultivator it is the best implement
on the market.
No. 33, 10 Tines, cuts 3 feet 4 inches (no extensions).
No. 34, 12 Tines, cuts 4 feet 2 inches (2 Tines on exten-
sions), as illustrated.
No. 35, 14 Tines, cuts 5 feet (4 Tines on extensions.)


The SUNSHINE High-Wheel Rigid-Tine Cultivator
When equipped with the Special
Narrow Points it is unequalled for
renovating Lucerne Paddocks.
With the “Duck-Foot” Points it is
splendid for shallow cultivation on
Fallow, and. cuts out ALL the
Weeds.
|HE Main Beam is of stout
I fTTI I I section steel, to which
| the Reversible Stub Axles
I A j are bolted. To the same
I I beam the front frame of
angle steel is secured, and
this frame takes the pull of the Tines
and is amply strong for the purpose.
There is no possibility of twisting or
sagging in this construction. The
Wheels are high and are heavily spoked
and tyred. A broken spoke can be
removed and replaced in a few minutes.
A very long Axle Bearing is provided,
also ample provision for effective
lubrication.
The Floats, which carry the Tines,
are made entirely of spring steel, the
cross members being hollowed (convex on top) to give the maximum of strength without increasing the weight.
The Floats are double rivetted to give extra strength, and their dimensions are such as to permit of an even spacing of
the Tines right along the implement.
The 'Tines.—Special attention is directed to these, as they are of unique construction and excel all others in rigidity
and strength. They are of spring steel, wrought to a hollow shape and tempered. They will withstand both direct
strains and side strains better than any other rigid Tine previously devised. They are firmly secured to the cross
members of the Floats by a one-bolt clamp, and can be removed or their working angle altered in a few moments.
They are spaced 6 inches apart, centre to centre, right across the Cultivator.
THE POINTS.—For renovating Lucerne Paddocks —Narrow Points are supplied, which penetrate readily
to a good depth. They take out almost all of the surface weeds, make.a fine tilth, and promote the vigorous
growth of the lucerne.
For Weed Gutting in Fallow.—Broad “Duck-Foot” Points are supplied (either 4 inch or 6 inclTwide), and these
effectually kill all weeds and leave the fallow in good shape for seeding.
SIZES MADE :
For Lucerne Renovation.
12 Tine (3 Floats) cuts 5 feet. 16 Tine (4 Floats) cuts 6J feet.
For Working Fallow.
12 Tine (3 Floats) cuts 5 feet. 20 Tine (5 Floats) cuts 8J feet.
16 Tine (4 Floats) cuts 6J feet. 24 Tine (6 Floats) cuts 10 feet.
At a Government Field Trial of Lucerne Cultivators held at Tongala, Victoria, the First Prize Twas award ed.'to
the Sunshine Machine, and its work is best described in the words of one of the judges, who writes as follows : —-
“As one of the judges at the recent Tongala Trial of Lucerne Cultivators, and as a
large lucerne grower who has experimented with many types of cultivators, I am very
pleased to be able to recommend your winning implement to farmers. It is the best I
have seen. The judges awarded it points for lightness of draught, thoroughness of soil
cultivation, destruction of weeds, simplicity of structure, and other minor details. Your
implement was easily first in all material points ; it (12-tine size) can be drawn easily
by three medium draughts, cuts out practically all trefoil, grass, and weeds without
unduly damaging the lucerne, and stirs the soil thoroughly to a fine tilth. Its original
cost is moderate, and the cost of upkeep is likely to be very small. I hope to see many in
use, more especially in the stiff soils of Northern Victoria.”
(Signed) FRANK G. CLARKE, M.L.C.
At this trial the Sunshine Cultivator was awarded 89 points against 65 points secured by the nearest competitor.
//, V". McKAY 9 Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


The Sunshine
Low-Wheel Rigid-Tine Cultivator
For Lucerne Renovation on small areas.
I I HIS is a very valuable tillage implement
■l* | for orchardists, lucerne growers, and
I I farmers cultivating small areas. It is
j I built with great strength, having as its
S | S foundation a stout steel X beam, to
* which the angle steel frame is bolted.
The two Floats which carry the Tines are made
entirely of spring steel, the cross bars being of
convex section to give greater strength without
increasing the weight. The V section Tines are
also of spring steel, their shape giving them enor-
mous power to resist all strains. A simple one-bolt
clamp holds the Tines to the Floats, and any altera-
tion of spacing of the Tines can be accomplished
easily and quickly. The illustration on this sheet
shows the Cultivator equipped with extra narrow
points. These are specially designed for renovat-
ing lucerne paddocks. They penetrate well, make a
good tilth, puli out most of the surface weeds, and
do not unduly disturb the roots of the lucerne.
The Tines are set 6 inches apart, centre to centre.
For orchard work or for weeding on fallow land
the Cultivator is equipped with Duck-foot Points,
either 4 inches or 6 inches wide, and with this rig it is
a splendid weeder and shallow cultivator. At a small extra cost a pair of extensions are supplied, with an extra Tine
on each, so that the wheel tracks may be cut out.
No. 31.—2 Floats, 8 Tines, cuts 3 feet 2 inches. No. 32. —(With Extensions), 2 Floats, 10 Tines, cuts 3 feet
10 inches.
Note the powerful lever for applying pressure to the Tines, also the simple method of altering the set of the pole.
The equipment includes Pole and Neck Yoke (Swingletrees extra).
The “SUN QUEEN" Straddle Cultivator
RIGID TINE or SPRING TINE.
This is beyond compare the finest riding Cultivator for cultivating between the rows of Sugar Cane either for weed
cutting or for deep or shallow tilling. It is built with enormous strength, is perfectly balanced, has high clearance for
growing Cane, and is easily pulled by two horses. The application of pressure to the Tines is unique, as the com-
pound levers act with a parallel movement, and the working depth of the front and rear Tines is the same at all times.
A commodious seat and good footrests are provided so that the driver works in comfort, is well placed for seeing the
work, and has the depth-regulating levers within easy reach. The low hitching point of the swingletrees gives a direct
puli on the Tines—which is the most effective for the work and is lightest on the draught. An arch of channel steel
forms the backbone of the machine, and takes all the strains. The Floats are made entirely of spring steel, the cross
bars being of a convex section, double-rivetted at the ends, and providing ample strength to carry the Tines without
twisting. A simple one-bolt clamp secures the Tines, and holds them firmly for all work, but permits of their quick
removal for altering their spacing.
For working close up to the row in young Cane an extension piece is provided so that one Tine may be placed on
the Cane side of each Float, and the Leaf-guard supplied protects the plant from injury. The section of the Rigid
Tines is unexcelled for strength, and they are set at the best angle for penetration.
SPECIFICATION.
Eight Tines (4 on each Float) either Rigid or Spring, with 2inch points. (Sets of 4-inch or 6-inch points are
supplied as an extra.) Rows straddled 4 feet apart. Vertical clearance for Cane, 3J feet. Width of cut, 19 inches
each side of row, or 24 inches each side when using extensions. Pole and Neck Yoke included.
ft, V. McKAY \ Sunshine Harvester Works 9 SUNSHINE
11


The “SUNFLOWER” Disc Cultivator
(PATENTED)
Reduces to a fine tilth a larger acreage per day than
any other Implement*
I j HIS Cultivator was in-
IT I ven t e( i i n 1907, since
| J[ j when many thou-
| sands have gone into
*** ,mmm ~ m,> ** use throughout Aus-
tralia and in other countries.
On fallowed land it cuts and
buries all weeds, and will work
successfully in rank growths
sufficiently heavy to pull up
any tine implement. On
stubble land and in light to
medium soils it is used as a
plough, and will turn over the
soil to a depth of five inches.
In both eases it thoroughly
pulverises the earth, and leaves
the surface smooth and ready
for the grain drill. The Discs
are 18-inch or 20-inch diameter,
and are spaced only six inches
apart. Their working angle,
in relation' to the line of
draught, is sufficient to ensure
that all the soil is turned over
—none being missed. As the discs work all one way, there is no ridge or furrow left, and the groundds
kept level. There are three sizes. The 7-disc requires three horses; the 10-disc, four horses;
and the 13-disc, five horses. The horse-power stated is for shallow work on fallow. In heavy
soils, and when used as a plough, more horse strength is needed. One acre per disc per day is a fair
day’s work, but there are authentic records of as much as twenty acres per day with a 13-disc.
In construction the “Sunflower” is solid and of ample strength for its work. The three wheels
have oil-retaining, dust-proof bearings, and the stub axles are renewable at small cost. The disc-
gang bearings are recessed in order to resist the end thrust, and this construction also enables the wear-
ing surfaces to be run in a continuous oil bath. Two powerful levers and racks provide for exact
depth regulation and for lifting the discs clear of the ground when travelling.
In the 10 and 13 disc sizes the wheels are supplied with bolted-on centre weights, one or both of
which may be removed when it is desired to reduce the weight of the implement for work in light soils.
By a unique patented device it is easy to work either size with one, two. or three discs taken off. By
shifting the rear wheel along the back beam this wheel is made to track in the desired furrow, and the
line of draught and disc working angle is not disturbed. The rear wheel is provided with a simple
and quick adjustment to permit it to ran exactly in the line of draught, or to give it more or less “lead.”
By means of a bevelled face bearing, the rear wheel may also be inclined more or less from the vertical
to give it the desired “bite” in the furrow. Powerful hand steering gear is provided, which enables
the driver to steer easily, and gives him perfect control of the implement.
Scrapers are supplied only when specially ordered at a small extra cost. They are easily adjustable
to work as near to each disc as may be required. They are of great value for keeping the discs clean
in wet and sticky soils.
fj, V. McKA 1 Sunshine Harvester Works , SUNSHINE


The “SUN DERCUT”
Stump-Jump Disc Cultivator
PATENTED
TWO OUTSTANDING FEATURES OF THIS IMPLEMENT ARE:
The use of alternate Discs of different diameter, so that the Discs may be
set with sufficient undercut.
The use of the famous Differential Cog Jump, which allows of a high
Jump without increase of draught.
I I HIS Implement is made in three sizes, respectively—lo-disc, cutting 5 ft.; 14-disc., cutting
I | 7 ft.; and 18-disc, cutting 9 ft. It is adapted for Mallee country, or work amongst stumps
j or stones, which it will pass over without difficulty.
two Discs on one jump are alternately 20-inch and 18-inch diameter, set with con-
siderable undercut, to reduce the draught. Both Discs cut to the same depth, but the varying
throw of the two diameters leaves the surface in that granular state wherein most benefit is derived
from the rainfall and atmospheric conditions. All the ground is cut out, and more soil is cultivated
per horse than with any other disc.
It is equipped with complete Team Steering Gear and handy Lifting Levers, and the rear wheel
adjusts for more or less land and “bite,”
The work of this Cultivator and its light draught are a revelation to all who see it in the paddock.
H. V, McKAY I Sunshine Harvester Works , SUNSHINE


“SUNSTAR”
SINGLE-FURROW PLOUGHS
I HE “Sunstar” Single-furrow Ploughs are constructed entirely of steel, and are built on lines
I I that will be admired by all good ploughmen. They are perfectly balanced and easily held.
| The Mouldboard is of the best hard-surface steel, and is correctly designed to turn the sod
“■'*** completely over, burying the weeds and, setting up a good comb. Special attention is
called to the construction of the beam and foot, which are bent and forged from one piece of steel
in such a manner as to make them practically unbreakable. The hitch is reversible and gives wide
adjustments for draught. Both sizes take D shares, which are procurable at all stores —a feature
which all farmers will recognise as a great advantage. They are light, but strong, and do good work
in any class of soil.
“SUNSTAR” No. 1 (as per illustration). — A one-horse plough for orchard or garden. Mould-
board, 27 inches long. Cuts furrows up to 5 inches deep x 8 inches wide. Weight, 128 lbs.
“SUNSTAR” No. 1 M.H. (as above), but with movable handles for working close to trees in
orchards, vineyards, etc.
“SUNSTAR” No. 2. — A two-horse general-purpose plough. Mouldboard, 30 inches long
(No. 1 Australian pattern). Cuts furrows up to 6 inches deep x 9 inches wide. Weight, 163 lbs.
STANDARD EQUIPMENT, —This includes Knife Coulter, Depth-regulating Wheel, and one
Wrought Steel Share. Disc Coulters are supplied at an extra charge.
K V, ; McKAY : ; Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


The “SUNLET”
Single-Furrow Mouldboard Plough
A LIGHT PONY PLOUGH for small orchard and garden work. Has Steel Beam, giving ample*
strength for this class of work. The short Handles are well stayed; the Plough is nicely balanced and
comfortable to work. The Steel Mouldboard is of the digger type, with a quick turn for covering weeds-
and trash. The Wrought Steel Share is reversible, giving double wear. The bridle is of ample range,
and is reversible, so that the horse may walk either on the land or in the furrow. Cuts furrows up to
7 inches wide by 5 inches deep. Weight, 68 lbs.
The “SUNGLEAM”
Single-Furrow Mouldboard Plough
A STEEL'S PLOUGH-of great strength, suitable for the draught of two or three horses. Con-
structed with Spring Steel Beam and Steel Handles. The extra long handles give easy control, and.
they are strongly braced and stayed. The Mouldboard is of polished soft-centre steel and will clean
in any class of soil. The Chisel-pointed Share is also wrought from soft-centre steel, giving very
lengthy wear. The bridle is of neat design, and allows ample adjustment both for land and dip. The-
Mouldboard is removable, so that the plough may be used for sub-soiling or ditching work. The-
plough cuts furrows up to 12 inches wide by 10 inches deep, and is specially recommended for sugar,
maize, and potato country.
Weight—With Depth-regulating Wheel only, 161 lbs.; with Wheel and Knife Coulter, 177 lbs.;;
with Wheel and 20-inch Disc Coulter, 196 lbs.
H. V. McKA Y f Sunshine Harvester Works , SUNSHINE


The “SUNSTAR”
Double and Treble Furrow Plough
I “iH I UNSTAR” No. 14 is a light-weight double-furrow Plough, specially suitable for orchard
I and vineyard work, but is also largely used on irrigation areas and on ordinary farms in
| I light soil districts. It cuts furrows either 7| inches or 8 inches wide, to a depth of up to
—. v g i nc hes. As it leaves the factory it is set on the 8-inch cut, and the reduction in the width
of furrow is simply made by removing a distance piece from the centre of the spacing bars.
It is supplied with a Shifting Bridle of great range, giving the means of keeping the team well away
from trees or vines on either side.
Another special feature of this plough is the construction of the Lifting Levers, which are “down”
when the plough is in its working position, and the highest part of the plough is then not more than
2 feet above the ground. This feature is specially appreciated by orchardists who desire to plough
close up to the trees.
It is manufactured with Spring Steel Frames, and its strength must not be judged by its lightness.
In light soil it is easy work for two horses, but it is amply strong for a'three-horse team when used
in heavier soils. The Mouldboards are chilled, ground, and polished, and the finish of the whole
plough is such as to take the eye of a keen ploughman.
In the ordinary way it is equipped with Knife Coulters and Wrought Steel Shares, D pattern,
but Cast Shares can also be supplied if preferred. It is direct steered by rod and rack, and is a plough
which can be handled with ease by a boy. Weight, only 4 cwt.
“SUNSTAR” No. 15 is a light-weight treble-furrow plough, built on exactly similar lines to the
two-furrow size. It is a popular plough for light soil districts, and is offered at a price to compete with
foreign importations, which it easily eclipses in durability and working qualities.
//. V. McKAY \ Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


The “Sunlock” Mouldboard Plough
A Plough for the Ploughman who takes pride in clean even
furrows. Its polished Mouldboards are glass'hard on the face*
and clean in the stickiest soil.
I T is a favourite in the Riverina and in all parts where the sticky nature of the soil demands
I ll * s p^” c^ board. The greatest, care is bestowed on the. shaping, tempering, and
I I polishing of its soft centre mouldboards, which are renowned for non-clogging, even under
the most difficult conditions. The width of furrow may be altered .at will from 7| in, to 9 in,,,
or to any intermediate width. This is accomplished in the simplest fashion by sliding the body beam
clamps along the diagonal frames. The adjustment is effected in a few moments, and is a very great
convenience. The compound lever steerage device enables the ploughman to vary the width of the
front furrow instantly, and to keep the work even and straight. When finishing, the front furrow
can be cut out entirely if necessary. When it is desired to reduce the number of furrows, either the
front or back body may be detached from the plough, but for work in hard ground it is preferable to
remove the front body.
The Frame is made of warranted spring steel, and will resist very severe strains. The body and
foot are forged from one piece of toughest steel, and are wrought to an accurate fit for mouldboard and.
share. The feet take “D” shares, and one set of Wrought Steel Shares is supplied with each plough.,
A strong adjustable rear-stay is fitted to each mouldboard.
A set of Knife Coulters is provided with each plough ; but Disc Coulters are supplied instead when
so ordered, at a small extra charge. Each plough is equipped with a seat for the driver.
The differential Cog Lift on the levers of this plough makes it so light to lift out at the headlands
that a youth can work it without effort. Every practical farmer will appreciate this feature, and also
the ease with which the depth can be regulated while the plough is in motion.
The three Cast Iron Wheels are fitted with removable boxes with chilled wearing surfaces. They
are dust-proof and retain the oil.
The “Sunlock” Plough is made in 2,3, and 4 furrow sizes, and each plough is fitted and finished!
by skilled workmen under the best expert supervision obtainable.
The Land Wheel is fixed on the 2-furrow size and swivel on the 4-furrow, while the 3-furrow may be
ordered with either fixed or swivel.
H* VI McKAY \ Sunshine Harvester Works , SUNSHINE


The “SUNRISE”
Stump-Jump Mouldboard Plough
The Mallee Farmer’s Plough. A necessity in all roughly cleared districts.
I' M |hE “SUNRISE 55
I HP I Stump - Jump
| 1 | Mouldboard
Plough is known
all over Australia
for its first-class work in
stumpy and stony ground.
By its use many thousand
acres of roughly cleared
land have been tilled years
before they were fit for
cultivation by an ordinary
“set 55 plough.
The Frames are made of
best spring steel. They are
solidly and rigidly braced to
give ample strength to the
foundation of the plough.
The four wheels have
wrought iron rims and
spokes, and removable boxes which retain the oil and are dust-proof. The front wheels (coupled)
are swivel, and respond automatically to the steerage control of the team, and a hand-steering lever
is also provided, and is of great assistance in straightening the furrow and in turning at the headland.
The rear of the plough, even in the largest sizes, is easily raised by the long compound pressure lever,
which also has an adjustment to give a specially high lift when travelling on the road. The front of
the plough is also raised and lowered by a conveniently placed lever and rack. The jump beams and
bodies are of spring steel, and special attention is directed to the superior construction of the jump
hinge, which is composed of an accurately fitting turned steel spindle working freely in a pair of bear-
ings clamped to the frames. Mouldboards are of hard-surface steel of most approved curve and shape
for stump-jump work. The jump control gear has compound adjustments to provide for easy jump-
ing where stumps and stones abound or to hold the shares firmly to their work in hard soil. An ingenious
device provides for giving more or less “dip 55 to the shares; this consists of an adjustable slotted
connection between the jump arm and the rear member of the plough body, and by varying the position
of the bolt in the slot an
extra half-inch of “dip 55 may
be applied to the shares
when necessary or, vice versa,
the amount of “dip 55 may be
reduced. The whole con-
struction of this plough
makes it easy of manage-
ment, and its shares and
boards ensure first-class
work in all kinds of soil.
Width of furrow, 8| ins. The
short-board plough takes
P.N. shares, and is made in
2,3, 4, and 5 furrow sizes.
The long-board plough takes
D shares, and is made with
3,4, and 5 furrows.


“SUNSHINE”
Wrought Steel Plough Shares
PIVOTED CLIP CONSTRUCTION.
The Share with the Flush^Top—no recess for the soil to accumulate on.
P.N. Pattern
D. Pattern
I These Shares are made from the finest steel procurable for the purpose. The cutting edge
I HIT I is hardened by a special process, and will give long wear even in gritty soils. The under-
-1 I I point is dressed with special hard chilled metal, giving much extra resistance at the point,
! A I where wear is greatest. Being made with automatic machinery, every share is an exact
duplicate and a good fit. They can be relaid by a blacksmith when worn.
Special attention is called to the simplicity and solidity of the Pivoted Clip Construction, which is
well illustrated above. Observe that the top of the wing is flush and offers no obstruction to the pas-
sage of the soil—-a feature not to be found in any other wrought share. The solid forged Landside
Heel on the C. and D. patterns is more symmetrical and gives greater strength and rigidity than in
other makes in which the heel is made by merely bending the plate. The Clip and Rivet are one
solid forged piece, and the pivoting permits the socket to adjust itself to differing tapers in the various
makes of plough feet—a feature of great value to the farmer.
The following Styles and Sizes are supplied:
Mark on Share. Width of Wing. To Suit Plows with Sam® Fitting as
P. .. 7 inch . . Howard’s P.N. foot . . Shearer’s P.
L.P. .. 8 inch . . Howard’s P.N. foot . . Shearer’s L.P.
B. .. 7 inch . . Hornsby D. foot . . Shearer’s £■
L.B. .. 8 inch . . Hornsby D. foot .. Shearer’s 0
0. .. 7 inch . . Hornsby C. foot . . Shearer's ™
L.O. .. 8 inch .. ' Hornsby C. foot .. Shearer’s 10
S.V. .. 7 inch .. Meadowbank V. foot .. Meadowbank M.V.
A new plant has recently been installed at Sunshine for the production of these Shares in large
quantities and of exact duplication.
Note. —-Cultivator and Plough Discs of best makes are always available at best current prices.
H. V. McKAY 9 Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


The “SUNNIE” Disc Plough
RECOMMENDED FOR DEEP OR SHALLOW DISCING
IN LIGHT TO MEDIUM SOILS.
I***** | HIS Plough is built with that solidity and strength which characterise Australian-made
| || | implements, and yet it is sold as cheaply as the lightly constructed disc ploughs of foreign
| | manufacture. It is largely used in maize-growing districts, and in all parts where loamy
lands require deep tilling and thorough pulverisation. It has great clearance between the
discs, and consequently will work well in rank weed growths and bury them satisfactorily. It is light
in draught, convenient to handle, and invariably gives satisfaction to those who use it.
It is made in 1,2, 3, and 4 furrow sizes, and the leading disc may be removed to reduce the number
of furrows by one. The discs are 23 inches in diameter, and the width of furrow is adjustable for either
6| or 8 inches. By a patented device the set of the discs may be simply and quickly altered for more
or less breast or more or less undercut, as desired. This is effected by the use of a, semi-ball and socket
connection on the disc carriers, and by manipulating the clamp bolts the desired set is obtained without
loss of time.
The Frame is of best spring steel braced in such a manner as to give rigidity and strength. The
three cast iron wheels have rims of ample tread, and are set at the angle which gives most grip. Each
wheel has a removable box, which has a large chilled wearing surface, and is dust-proof and oil-retain-
ing. The front wheel is adjustable to regulate the width of furrow, and is solidly supported in all
positions. The rear wheel is free swivel when the stop is lifted (by foot pressure), and enables the
plough to turn to near or off in its own length. This stop is adjustable to give the rear wheel more or
less inclination to land as desired. The Levers are admirably placed for convenience in steering and
for raising the discs clear of the ground in travelling* and for adjusting the depth of the work. The
Discs are made of the best steel, and are tough and strong to give good wear and prevent breakages.
The Disc Bearings have large chilled surfaces; they are oil-retaining and have dust-proof caps.
Disc Scrapers can be supplied at a small extra charge, also a hillside attachment for the rear axle, to
facilitate working on sidelings. When necessary, this plough can be fitted with 26-inch discs.
ft. K McKAY 3 Sunshine Harvester Works 9 SUNSHINE


The “Sunray” Disc Plough
(PATENTED)
With this Plough there is no need to wait for rain before ploughing;
it is guaranteed to plough the hardest soil.
| I ARMING conditions in Australia have made it necessary that a plough be available which
I* I P enetrat ® an -d turn oyer the soil when it is baked stone dry and almost brick hard.
JL I The “Sunray” will do this work, and hence is largely used for fallowing. It will work
| successfully where the mouldboard plough is useless. In ti-tree, grass tree, or in tussocks,
ft does surprisingly well, and in all cases it thoroughly pulverises the soil to any reasonable
depth and buries grass or weeds.
The sizes made are 3,4, 5, and 6 furrows ; the Discs are 23 in. diameter ; and the width of furrow
is adjustable to or 8 in. In all sizes the front disc may be removed, and the number of furrows
reduced by one. Hand Steering Gear is provided, but for bullocks or traction engine work Automatic
Steering Gear is recommended, and is supplied at a small extra charge.
A special patented feature of this plough is the adjustability of the Discs for more or less undercut
and more or less angle to land. This is accomplished by the aid of a semi-ball and socket device on the
disc carrier. Any adjustment is quickly and rigidly made by merely slackening or tightening the clamp
bolts.
The strength of this plough is enormous, and is obtained by using spring steel of heavy section for
the frames, which are cross braced to meet great strains. It is mounted on three cast iron wheels of
ample weight, provided with renewable boxes which are dust-proof and retain the oil. These boxes
have large chilled surfaces, ensuring long service and free running.
The Levers {three in number) for steering, and for raising and lowering, are all placed handy to the
driver’s seat, and have the most ample leverage for their work. The rear wheel is free-swivel as soon
as the driver’s foot is applied to the Stop Lever, and the plough may then be turned to the near or the
off in its own length. The rear wheel stop is adjustable to allow more or less angle on this wheel as
desired. The front furrow wheel may be set in or out to suit either width of furrow, and its carrying
arm is strongly supported. The disc arms are of great strength, and are warranted to be equal to ail
reasonable strain, and to them are clamped the disc carriers. Scrapers for the discs are rarely required,
but can be supplied at a small extra charge when specially ordered.
H. V, McKA Y $ Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


The “SUNRISE” Stump-Jump Disc Plough
(PATENTED)
The Plough of the Pioneer. Enables Mm to plough Ms paddocks
before they are completely cleared of stumps, stones, roots, etc.
| I ANY thousands of acres of Australian soil would remain unploughed but for the fact that
| %/i | this implement permits the farmer to get to work in many cases years before his ground is
|IfJL | su fp c iently cleared to allow' of the use of a set plough. It will break up virgin ground of the
4.*—.hm-h4* hardest nature, and will do perfect work in mellow soil. It is in large demand for traction
engine ploughing, and has no equal for that class of work.
The are I, 2,|3, 4,5, and 6 furrows, and the width of furrow may be set to either 6| in.
or 8 in. The Discs are 23 in. diameter. In all sizes the front disc may be removed, and the plough
reduced in size by one furrow. The Discs are set with just the amount of undercut and breast which
experience has proved to be the best. Automatic Steering Gear goes with each plough, making it
suitable for bullock or engine ploughing. It is easily handled, and may be turned either to right or
left in its own length.
The jumping device is perfect. The resistance of the heavy spiral spring is adjustable by nut and
thread to suit the hardness of the soil. The spring pressure is conveyed to the discs by means of a toggle
joint in such a way that it receives the greatest pressure when in the working position. As the disc
rises to clear a stump or stone, this pressure is neutralised by the increased leverage of the toggle plate,
so that the strain is diminished until the obstacle is passed, when the disc immediately returns to its
work, and no soil is left unploughed.
The Frame is best spring steel, rigidly cross-braced. The three cast iron wheels are fitted with
renewable, oil-retaining, dust-proof boxes, which have chilled wearing surfaces. The front wheel
adjusts in position to regulate the width of cut of the front furrow. Powerful convenient levers provide
for depth regulation, steering, and to lift the discs clear for travelling. An adjustable stop on the rear
furrow wheel axle regulates this wheel for more or less inclination to land. The disc bearings have
large chilled wearing surfaces, and are provided with caps which retain the oil and exclude dust and
grit. Mouldboard Scrapers, which clean the discs and also assist to turn the soil and bury weeds,
can be supplied, when specially ordered, at a small extra charge.
H. V. McKAY, Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


The “SUNCOG” Stump-Jump Disc Plough
The Jumping Device is mechanically perfect, and wear on its moving
parts is reduced to a minimum.
I Ml I KIS Plough is warranted to plough the hardest soil that any plough will touch, and to work
| I | satisfactorily in the most stony or stumpy paddock that is worth ploughing. It is built
| | with strength and jumping capacity to fit it for the roughest and' toughest ploughing work,
anc [ the same time it is equal to the best set disc plough for work under ordinary con-
ditions on mellow soil. Its outstanding feature is the method employed to convey pressure from the
powerful Spiral Springs to the Discs, viz., by means of differential cog gearing. A set of cogs on the
end of the jump arm is in mesh with a similar set on the lever to which the spring is attached. Both
these moving parts are pivotally mounted on a strong bracket attached to the frame, and any move-
ment alters the leverage of the one over the other. Thus, when the Disc is in its working position,
the spring has the greatest amount of leverage in its favour ; but, when an obstruction forces the Discs
to rise, the differential device gives the leverage advantage to the Disc. The effect of this is that
jumping over obstructions is accomplished without waste of power and without jarring the horses.
The sizes made are 2,3, 4,5, and 6 furrows. The Discs are 23 in. diameter, and cut furrows 7
inches wide to a depth of 6 inches. The Depth-regulating Levers are easy to operate, and the Discs
can be lifted well clear of the ground for transport. The three wheels have renewable boxes, which are
oil-retaining and give long wear. Both Hand and Team Steering Gear is provided, and the plough
will turn short in either direction, as the rear wheel is free swivel when the check hook on the back axle
is raised (by foot pressure). The spring steel Main Frame has great strength and rigidity, and the
balance of the plough is maintained by placing the springs and their attachments on the near side of
the beam.
This Plough is light in weight, having wrought steel Jump Arms. It is built with a big clearance
between the discs to facilitate working in weeds and trash, which it covers well. Its high jump and
light draught make it specially suitable for work in Mallee country.
//, V. McKAY, Sunshine Harvester Works s SUNSHINE


SUNSHINE “No. 40” Disc Plough
With 28-inch Discs. Made in 1 and 2 Furrow Sizes.
For Sugar Cane, Maize, and other Deep Cultivation.
| HIS Plough, being built for the deepest cultivation, has a very high frame, which gives ample
I I clearance for weeds and the ever-present surface trash in sugar cane country, which it
| “““ I buries successfully. It will cut furrows 14 inches wide by 14 inches deep in sugar cane land,
t—r-v an( | f or m aize and potato cultivation it cannot be equalled. All Wheels have removable
chilled boxes, which are dust-proof and oil-retaining. The Discs are 28 inches in diameter, and the
range of cut varies from 8 inches to 14 inches in width of furrow.
The set of the Disc for undercut and breast cut is such as has been proved the best by years of
experience. The rear wheel is free swivel when the check hook is released by foot pressure, and the
plough will then turn in its own length to either the near or the off side. This check hook is also
adjustable to regulate the width of furrow and to give the rear wheel more or less inclination to land,
according to the nature of the soil at time of ploughing. Powerful levers control the steering, lowering
and raising of the Discs, and all can be operated from the seat of the plough. The position of the
adjustable draught plate enables the team to be yoked up close to the head of the plough, thus diminish-
ing the draught to a considerable extent. On the latest model a powerful Helper Spring is fitted to
the land lever, making a very easy lift. When desired, effective Scrapers can be supplied for the Discs
at a small extra charge.
H 1 VI McKAY, Sunshine Harvester Works $ SUNSHINE


The “SUNRISE”
STUMP-JUMP HARROWS
Avoid breakages by using Stump-Jump Harrows. On stony or stumpy land they are
a necessity. In well-cleared paddocks their work is as good as that done by “set” harrows.
I IHE Teeth are of tough steel If in. x | in., and are 7 ins. long. This gives immense strength
IV I and ample clearance. Each section is flexible, being hinged at every joint. This permits
| A | any row of Teeth to jump when an obstruction is met with, and ensures long life to the harrow
♦BSh-°— an( i e asy work for the team. Each section has 20 Teeth, cutting If inches apart. The
hardwood Draught Bar is strongly braced, and has an adjustable hitch. It is supplied with or without
Wheels. Sizes made :
One-section covers 2| feet. Four-section covers 10| feet.
Two-section covers 5 feet. Five-section covers 13| feet.
Three-section covers 7| feet. Six-section covers 16| feet.
FIRE HARROWS
The “Sunrise” Stump-Jump Harrows are greatly used in
Mallee districts as Fire Harrows for burning stubble, etc.
For this work they are equipped with Tubular Steel Bars
(instead of Wooden Bars), and are unequalled for this purpose.
Ji , V. McKAY \ Sunshine Harvester Works ■ HNE


SUNSHINE Diamond Harrows
FOR WEEDING, LEVELLING, AND SMOOTHING.
I IHESE Harrows are of exceptionally strong construction, giving great durability and long
T service. The Beams are of channel steel, into which the shoulders of the Teeth fit exactly,
I | and are prevented from turning, so that the nuts do not loosen. A Spring Washer is placed
un(^er eac p nu t for greater security. The Teeth are of f-inch square steel, 20 Teeth per
section, spaced If inches apart, and warranted not to track. Each set is equipped with a selected
seasoned hardwood Draught Bar and adjustable Hitch. The six-section size is supplied with two
three-section bars and a spreader.
SIZES MADE :
One-section, covering 3 ft. 2 in. Four-section, covering 12 ft. 8 in.
Two-section, covering 6 ft. 4 in. Five-section, covering 15 ft. 10 in.
Three-section, covering 9 ft. 6 in. Six-section, covering 19 ft.
//. K McKAY \ Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


Sunshine Swingletrees for Ploughing, etc.
MADE IN 2 S 3,4, AND 5 HORSE SETS.
3-Horse Set.
4-Horse Set.
SUNSHINE SWINGLETREES are made of the best selected seasoned hardwood, neatly finished
and varnished. They are heavily strapped with steel bars, and the hitch-centres are adjustable.
All hooks and loop's are best forged. For strength and service these Swings are unexcelled.
Sunshine Metal Team Spreaders
No. I—For 5 or 6 Horse Team.
No, 2 —For 7 or 8 Horse Team.
H. V. McKA Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


Sunshine Steel-clad Swingletrees
Lightest and Strongest.
Supplied in 2,3, and 4
Horse Sets.
These Swingletrees are unique in construction, as they combine the lightness of wood with the
strength of metal. They are composed of best selected seasoned Blue Gum or Beech encased in Steel
and firmly rivetted together. The end and centre Eyes are of stout pattern and practically unbreak-
able. The Coupling Hooks are of special pattern, making it impossible for them to be detached acci-
dentally. The 3 and 4 Horse Main Bars are now made of tubular steel, and will stand enormous
strains. Thousands of these Swings have been accepted by the Defence Department in connection
with the transport equipment of the Commonwealth Expeditionary Forces.
Note the Light Weight.
2- Set .. 21 lb.
3- Horse Set .. 51 lb.
4- Set .. 63 lb.
Sunshine Equalizing Horse Yokes
The advantage of using tandem
equalizers for big teams is more
fully recognised each year. For
pulling large Ploughs and Cul-
tivators this rig is specially re-
commended, and it is also fre-
quently adopted for wide Har-
vesters. Great strength is pro-
vided in the bars, which are of
hardwood with a backing of steel.
The pulleys are neat in design and
of ample strength, and best
selected short-link crane chain is
used throughout. They are
supplied in 4,6, and 8 horse sets,
with or without swingletrees.
H. V. McKAY, Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


This is a wonderfully useful invention for the farmer.
Many thousands have been sold throughout the Common-
wealth, and all users state that they would not be without
it even if its cost were ten times greater. It is a device
whereby the horse is used instead of the man to load wheat
on to the waggon. It does away with the most back-breaking
labour of harvest time. It is made in two sizes, to suit high
or low waggons. It is supplied at a low cost, and should be
found on every farm.
McKAY'S IMPROVED
SACK-DUMPING TRUCK
This Truck is designed to simplify the work of bagging grain, and,
in addition to making the work easier, enables it to be thoroughly
done. The mouth of the sack is held wide open by the spiked ring.
The bag may be shaken up as often as desired by means of the lever,
which, when not in use, is firmly held by the bracket, as shown in
the illustration. The construction is extremely rigid, and being of
iron tubing, the truck is very light, and is not affected by the weather.
The wheels are large and wide tyred, thus being adapted to rough
stubble land, and easily moved when fully loaded.
McKay’s Tubular Sack Track
This neat little Truck is
a general favourite. It is
particularly adapted for
field work and general work
about the farm. The
wheels are large and wide,
being 11 inches diameter and
2\ inches tread, and pass
smoothly over rough, un-
even surfaces.
McKay’s Bag Loader
H. V. McKAY, Sunshine Harvester Works. SUNSHINE


Sunshine Metal Gates
FOR FARM AND GARDEN.
Sunshine Metal Gates are
handsome, durable, and
strong. They are construct-
ed entirely of steel and iron,
and defy all conditions of
climate. The joints are
chill-moulded, and will not
work loose under any circum-
stances. All gates are sup-
plied complete with hinges,
fasteners, and the necessary
bolts or coach screws, ready
Style No. I.—Bar Gate, 6,7, 8, 10, 12, and 13 feet wide x 4 feet high.
for erection. They are well painted, ornamental in appearance, and impart an aspect of prosperity
wherever used—in garden, park, or paddock.
Style No. lis a six-bar gate of very solid construction. It is a great favourite with cattlemen.
With its diagonal braces and chilled joints it is proof
against sagging and twisting, and will outlast a
generation of ordinary usage. It is 4 feet in height and
is made in seven sizes, viz., 6,7, 8, 10, 12, and IB feet,
with diagonal stays; also 3| feet, without diagonal
stays. The catch is a strong casting, which may be
embedded into the post, leaving no projection to injure
a horseman’s leg. The wrought iron latch is adjustable
to project further forward in case the gate post shifts—
a feature which commends itself to all users. It is
self-latching when the gate is pushed to. Eye-bolt
hinges are used, and can be supplied of any length to
suit the hanging post. For openings of 14 or 16 feet a
pair of 7-ft. or 8-ft. gates is used, equipped with a centre
chain fastener.
Style No. 1. — Bar Gate, 3J feet (only)
These Gates can be sup-
plied with or without
ornamental scrolls.
Style No. la.—ln 2 leaves, for 14 or\l6, feet openings.
H. V. McKAY, Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


Sunshine Metal Gates
The Tubular X Stay Gates,
though of light construction,
are so scientifically braced
and stayed as to give lengthy
and satisfactory service. The
X Stay gives the vertical
rigidity of a bicycle frame and
prevents all sag, while the
three vertical and five horizon-
tal twisted cables make the
gate ■stock proof and add greatly
to yits strength. The joints
are 3 all butted and chill-
Style No.s.—X Stay Gate, Gable Braced 6. 7, 8 10, 11 12 13, 14 ft. wide x 4 ft, high.
moulded, so dispensing entirely with sockets and threads which weaken and injure the pipe. Style
No. 5 is equipped with heavy split-pattern cast iron hinges, with bolts to suit any diameter of post.
The latch and catch are the same as supplied with the Bar Gate (Style No. 1).
Sizes 13 and 14 ft. have Double X Stay as illustrated on next page.
Style No. X Stay Gate Cabl« Braced and Rabbit Netted, 6 7 8,10 12, 13 and
14 ft, wide x 4 ft, high,
Style No. 6 is the same con-
struction as above, but is
covered with best galvanised
rabbit-proof wire netting 3 ft.
high, Ij in. mesh, 17 gauge.
Many farmers prefer to hang
rabbit-proof gates on the sides
of posts; for this purpose a
special catch is supplied when
ordered.
Sizes 13 and 14 ft. have Double X Stay as illustrated on next page.
For rabbit-infested districts it is not only necessary that a gate should be wire netted, it must also
have square bottom corners, as rounded-off corners leave space for young rabbits to pass through.
Particular attention is called to the square bottom corners of the Sunshine Gates, which are achieved
not by threads and sockets,
but by -chilled moulded joints,
which increase the strength of
the gate. Sunshine Gates
never sag. If properly hung,
the}' will remain in position for
years without any sign of
sagging. They never decay,
and will outlast many sets of
wooden gates.
Style No. 137, Driveway
Gate, is also of the X stay
construction. It is a very
ornamental gate for front
entrances, and gives the ad-
vantage of a wicket gate (3 ft.
wide) without additional posts.
A tower bolt secures the large
gate, while the wicket is held in
Style No. 137.—F0r Openings of B|, 9f, 10} 11} 12}, and 13} ft.
position by an old-fashioned, but very effective, loop fastener, as illustrated. This gate is
covered with hand-woven ornamental wire netting of heavy gauge.


Sunshine Metal Gates
Style No. 7 is also of the X
stay construction, but is com-
pletely covered with galvanised
wove wire 6-in. x 3-in. mesh,
and is stock and fowl proof.
It is a very handsome gate for
front entrances.
All gates can be supplied
with ornamental iron work
scroll on top. The 13-ft. and
14-ft. gates have Double X
Stay.
Style No, S 3 Gate, 3,
3J, and 4 ft. wide x 4 ft. high.
The very wide gates, viz.,
13 ft. and 14 ft. wide, in styles
No. 5, No. 6, and No. 7, are
made with a Double X Stay.
This feature gives absolute
Style No. 7.—X Stay, Wove Wire, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 13, and 14 feet wid®
x 4 feet high.
The Frame Gate, Style No. 13, is a light and ornamental
hand gate for garden, lawn, etc., or to use as foot passenger
entrance at the side of drive gates. The frame is of great
strength, having but one joint. The galvanised wove wire is
5-in. x 3-in. mesh, making it dog and fowl proof ; but, when
so ordered, the lower half is woven to I|-in. mesh, making the
gate rabbit-proof also. The same hinges are used as for X
Stay Gates, but patent self-closing hinges can be supplied
if desired. The latch is a fixture, and the catch is a patent
double-tumbler fastener, permitting the gate to be opened
either one or both ways.
Style No. 5.—13 feet and 14 feet sizes only. With Double X Stay,
rigidity to these extra wide sizes, which are much used where wide farm implements must
be moved from paddock to paddock.
In all cases the width stated is the width of opening from post to post, allow-
ance being made for the space occupied by hinges and fasteners. Hinge
bolts are supplied to suit any' diameter gate post, A leaflet giving latest
current prices will be posted to any address on request.
H, V, McKAY \ Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


The Sunshine Cane Fertilizer Drill
The Latest, Most Effective, and Most Reliable Machine for Manuring
Cane ever offered to the Planter.
It is the outcome of years of practical
experience. It is simple in construc-
tion ; built oh a very strong Steel
Frame, with strong Stagger Spoke
Wheels, with reversible Stub Axles,
which means long life and small repair
bill, as it is capable of withstanding the
roughest of work that this class of
machine is required to do.
The Fertilizer Box is made to hold
2 cwt., and is so arranged as to be easily
filled without having to lift the manure
unnecessarily high. The shape of the
box is such that there is no sticking to
the sides, and a powerful agitator keeps
the fertilizer moving down to the stars.
This is absolutely necessary in the hot,
humid climate in sugar districts.
Back View.
Front View.
The Stars are of improved pattern,
and the Conveyor Tubes are of ample
size to prevent choking, and they run
in a straight line into the Disc Openers,
which are adjustable from 18 ins. to
28 ins. wide, and can be used for either
in-throw or out-throw.
The quantity per acre can be varied
from 50 lbs. to 8 cwt. by simply sliding
the gate opening one way or the other
with a lever provided for this purpose.
This does away with extra Stars and
Sprockets, One lever raises and lowers
the Discs and also automatically throws
the machine in and out of gear. Every-
thing is simplicity, and no detail has
been omitted in bringing this machine
to its standard of perfection.
All planters contemplating manuring
will do well to inspect this machine.
H. V. McKAY $ Sunshine Harvester Works 9 SUNSHINE


Strokes.
Pulleys.
Threaded for Pipe.
Suction.
Discharge.
Diam.
Face.
No. 81
No. 82
Inches.
7 and 9
(7, 9, 11.)
(13 & 15 [
Inches.
20 x 4
24 x 4
Inches.
2—li
2 — 2
Pump Cylinders extra.
Centrifugal Pumps
These Pumps are especially suitable
for Irrigation or wherever large
quantities of water require to be
raised to not more than 50 feet of
“total head.” In conjunction with a
Sunshine Engine, they form the
most efficient and economical Power
Pumping Plant on the market.
By the special construction of the
Pump all unnecessary friction has been
eliminated, and the design of the runner
is such as to reduce end thrust to a
minimum.
The swivelling device permits
the body of the Pump to be turned
to any position to suit the direction
of the discharge pipe.
Provision is made for priming. The Special Lubricators at the bearings ensure cool running at high speed.
For solidity of construction and accurate machining they are not excelled, and they can be relied on to pump
a maximum quantity of water with a minimum expenditure of power.
Size , Gallons H.P. required Size of
of per hour for each 5 ft. of F. & L. Pulleys
Pump. (approx.) “Total Head.” Diam. Face.
2 inch . . 5,400 . . i H.P. .. 4 in. x 3 in.
3 inch . . 9,000 . . i H.P. . . 5 in. x 4 in.
4 inch . . 16,000 . . 1 H.P. . . 5 in. x 6 in.
5 inch . . 27,000 . . 1J H.P. . . 6 in. x 6 in.
6 inch . . 36,000 .. 2* H.P. . . 8 in. x 6 in.
The 2-inch Size is Threaded for Pipe ; Larger Sizes are Flanged.
Quotations are promptly supplied on request, including Engine, Pump, Retention Valve, and all Pipe and Fittings.
In order to give a correct estimate, it is necessary to know :
1— The quantity of Water required, in gallons per hour.
2 The Vertical Height from the Water Level to Highest Point to which the Water is to be raised.
3 The length of Pipe to be used from the Water Level to the Point of Discharge.
4 Give a Rough Sketch, showing contour of ground for the Pipe Line, with Measurements.
The outlay for a PUMPING PLANT of this class is a trifle in comparison with the 1 | I J !
increased results obtained by irrigation, as has been effectively demonstrated in I |jj
many parts of the Commonwealth. ■ iij J| I
PUMP WORKING HEADS 11
For operating Cylinder Pumps by engine power on Wells, Bores, Creeks, etc. JIIIIBIIIfcv B H
Strongly constructed and backed'geared, sto 1. Equipped with fast and loose Sm HImI |
pulleys. Designed so that' pump plunger can be withdrawn without dis- ||
turbing any parts except guides and stuffing box. Normal pulley speed,
// t y. McKAYp Sunshine Harvester Works•, SUNSHINE


“We fflliSt diminish the consumption of
imports, and maintain exports on an increased
scale. The more we do this the more we con-
tribute to the country’s resources, from which
the Nation can pay its gigantic war expenditure.”
Mr. Asquith, Prime Minister of England.
“In these times especially it is most desirable
that we should keep the profit from our own
business in our own hands. The profit we
send out of the country reduces the income of
Australians, and that adds to the amount of
tax which has to be borne by the Income that
remains behind. In other words, every Aus-
tralian who lets somebody outside Australia
make a profit out of him instead of giving it
to an Australian adds to the amount of war tax
which he must pay himself.”
—Sydney Newspaper.
Sunshine Farm Implements
are Made in Australia
//. V. McKA Y, Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


Date 191
Adch '-ess ..
P.O.
To the Manager H. V. McKay's Office
at
Dear Sir , — Please send me


THE SUNSHINE STUMP-JUMP DISC PLOUGH AT WORK


MV M C KAY r
ftunshine
SuMSHINE
“SUN’’ Oram and Fertiliser Drills
