

Vji
r . i i At f t ? 7 S * /.V iVv1 T \ ,*r
aOM^,
fJfc-Hax vVu. r
-*-. c ■’» \ A:
- i 5 . - -j.
JC/I
C K IJ hi jCiv \i'f v< 7
f K , ki
r i


A\
V f
I jM /
. *
.♦






SUNSET HILL


%


ELIZABETH POWELL
Author of The Beehive
AUSTRALIA:
CORNSTALK PUBLISHING COMPANY
89 CASTLEREAGH STREET. SYDNEY
1929


, M-TH NAT,o
*
8 C3Tir-:* r
A, £
Whelly set up and printed in Australia by
Halstead Printing Company Ltd.,
Allen Street, Waterloo
for
Cornstalk Publishing Company
89 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.
Registered by the Postmaster-General for
transmission through the post as a boos


70289
TO MY SISTER




CHAPTER I
Hear me, for 1 will speak, and build up all my sorrow with
m y son 9-
Tennyson
Shredded beams of sunlight fell through the pines
and flickered golden fingers over four young people
talking on the sand. There was an old house near by,
rambling and large, the wide verandas looking out
comfortably through an untidy hedge of tamarisks
to the gulf waters tossing green and blue under the
warm sun. Waves slapped gently, saying, with the
air and the light, that it was a day for dreams.
Three girls and a small boy proved this, idling and
chattering of whatever entered their heads as they
reclined in lazy ease in the shadows.
Barby, the crisp, the virile and abrupt, the athlete
and enthusiast, mostly spoke of swimming, of the
yachts to race in the coming season, or the idiocy of
the car which refused to behave itself when good
behaviour was essential. Brenda, her sister, as
slender as a young tree, with smooth honey-
coloured plaits so different from Barby’s wild dark
locks, was as gentle even as their mother, the
beloved chatelaine of the house called The Beehive.
Brenda talked that day in sketchy reluctant
fashion of the book she was trying to write, queried
by Beryl, the adopted sister who had been adopted
so long ago that she was quite one of them. The


sunlight seemed to take a deliberate delight in
picking out the gold and grey of Brenda, the
brown and wild-rose of Barby, and the shining
black and deep-blue of Beryl, as they dreamed
and wondered and planned and dived back into
fading retrospect. Sunbeams might enjoy point-
ing shimmering fingers at small boys, but all they
drew into prominence on Bubbles were freckles,
untidy hair, and a pair of honest dark-brown eyes.
Naturally the sunbeams would not be so unkind
as to call attention to grubby fingers and a button
hanging loose on a jersey—a “cub” jersey, with
sleeves rolled above the elbows.
Brenda stopped in the midst of a sentence, for
Barby was staring with as much blankness as was
possible in one so vivid. “Well, I’m blithered!”
she exclaimed, and three more pairs of astonished
eyes turned to the gate at which she was gazing.
It was being shut emphatically by a stocky woman
m tweeds, a rakish felt hat on her head, a collar
and tie beneath her chin. “If that’s not Susan
Loftus I’ll eat . . . my . . . hat”
Beryl wondered who Susan Loftus was, and
asked without any delay, for association with the
newcomer must have been before Beryl’s advent
at the old beach house. The drive gate had never
before been so meek and reasonable. Susan was
evidently one of those persons before whom head-
waiters and porters quail— not only gates!
A visitation,” Barby murmured unkindly. “She
turns up once in about every five years. We’ve
not even thought of her since you’ve been here,
Beryl. Barby continued, out of consideration for
the blue-eyed girl s curiosity. “She’s travelled all
over the world, and would rather shoot a lion than
give a dinner-party. You know—purposeful, blunt,


and quite brave. No fuss, just like
the blood, of course, travel and all that.” Barby
waved a hand. “Even fortieth cousins can have
the same tastes. Well, you may be sure that if
she’s come here, she’s come for something. She
has a reason for everything she does . . . even
chopping off her hair. Fashion! Don’t be cranky!
Convenience,” added the speaker darkly. “Good
for her.”
“Hadn’t we better drift,” suggested Beryl after
a pause, “and make sandwiches? Mrs Pent leaves
the crusts on, and they look like paving-stones.”
As the girls and the enthralled and silent small
boy “drifted” housewards, Barby rambled on in her
energetic staccato, which needed no reply. “I
expect she’s heard that Dad’s contemplating that
trip into the interior! I shouldn’t mind wagering
she wants to go too. Heavens! But she’s been
there once . . . and she never goes twice to one
place. I expect she thinks there are so many to
use up. When you were peering into those old
Arunta books of Dad’s, Beryl, did you think the
Never-Never very interesting?”
The other’s eyes shone as she held open the wire
door of the lobby for the others to pass through.
“Interesting? Rather! Camels, desert, mountains,
plains, camping, horses, stations . . . and the
blacks themselves. Mystic ceremonies and queer
old rock. . , . Interesting ? Why, I’d walk, to
see it all.”
“I say,” remarked Bubbles, with a pathetic
droop of his mouth. “You wouldn’t go without me,
would you, Berry?” He took everything so seri-
ously that conversation was often rather trying.
“That was a joke,” explained Beryl fondly.


“Like a ‘some day’ story. I shouldn’t like to go
away a bit, without you.”
How about promising ?” suggested the lad hope-
fully.
It’s easy to do that, for I’m not going,” came the
soft voice of the girl, who understood the small boy
and his characteristic solemnity. “Now,” she
warned him, knowing him, “you must promise not
to worry Mum with questions. We don’t even know
if Dad is going, and as for me—l told you it was
a joke. Promise.”
“I won’t worry her, on my honour as a Bee V a
Cub.”
Beryl was satisfied, Barby sniffing and saying
“Sloppy!” under her breath.
They were interrupted by a soft voice at the door-
way, Mum popped her pretty head into the
room. “Girls, are you bringing tea in?” A twinkle.
Tea for all of us, Bubbles too. Susan hasn’t seen
us for a long time.”
I knew it, announced Barby grandly, waving
the bread-knife about. “She’s got something to say
to us. Hasten, knaves . . . and let’s to the fray.”
“I rather think,” said Brenda dreamily, “that
Susan has sense, not to go twice to a place where
camels are used like trams. It must be frightfully
strenuous.”
“Camels!” snorted Barby loudly. “Give me
wheels, or sails!”
Beryl was very thoughtful. Weeks of typing for
the Major and of research in the city library had
given her a little glimpse into the mystery of a big
country’s heart, and she sighed. “Camels seem
fairly glamorous to me,” she said slowly.
As the three girls, the little boy, and the tea-tray
filed into the big old sunny living-room with the sea


showing through the open windows, Susan cut her-
self off in the middle of a long sentence about Pal-
ermo, and frankly stared at the pretty trio before
her. Somehow they found themselves eating cake
and drinking tea, Susan waving a sandwich to and
fro as she said: “Well, I heard all about the
part Beryl played in bringing you home to the Bee-
hive again, John, but I didn’t know I was to meet
a beauty. What are you going to do when you
grow up, child?” she asked crisply. “Travel?
Write? Run a beauty parlour, or marry?”
Beryl flushed. “I’m not clever at all,” she tola
the kindly questioner in confusion. “I can’t write
like Brenda, or draw houses like Bob, or mend
things like Barby, so I expect I shall have to marry
—some day, I mean,” she added unnecessarily. “I
mean,” she amended slightly, with deepened colour,
catching Barby’s amused eyes, “as I can’t run fac-
tories or compose poems, I expect I shall just
housekeep.” She added slowly: “I like housekeep-
ing, though.”
“And she’s my secretary,” supplemented Dad;
“and a jolly good one too.”
Susan examined the facts for a moment, and
arrived at a satisfying conclusion. “Well, ambitions,
when realized, are very gratifying, but if you haven’t
got any you can’t be disappointed.” To the room
in general she said with a nod: “All poems are not
composed upon paper, either.” She paused. “Now,
John, what about this Never-Never business?”
The atmosphere of the room changed at once,
even the cat in Bubbles’ arms stifling a loud squawk
of anguish under the boy’s autocratic management
of claws and sharp teeth. “Hush,” he said. “Be-
have y’self, Wizzie; company’s here.”
“You are like a bombshell, Susan,” said Mum


suddenly. “You blow peace and tranquillity to
pieces. Now you’ve put the finishing touch on
John’s latest desire. Soon I shall be a grass-widow
again. But,” she told the other woman, with a
little brisk nod, determinedly cheery, “at least he
won’t be shipwrecked or marooned in the heart of
the country.”
“You’ll be safe from that, without a doubt,” re-
marked Susan, in the direction of the Major. She
turned to the girls huddled in various attitudes of
grace and interest on three deep chairs in the
corner. “Perhaps if I explain this visit to you young
folk, the story might be coherent. I’ve half told
your father. ... It commenced a long time ago,
this rambling tale, and I’ll ask for your patience
till I get it over. You’ve guessed, perhaps, that
I’ve come here with an axe of my own to grind,
and this journey of John’s has a lot to do with it.
That is so, isn’t it?” she inquired of him. The Bee-
hive, en masse, pricked up its ears as he replied
gravely: “It appears to be my duty to wander in
the direction of Sunset Hill ... but proceed,
Susan; the electricity of this company is alarming.”
Susan, with a wriggle, rubbed her chin for in-
spiration and resumed. “I quarrelled with my
brother Philip, a man like flint and iron. He is
silent and unimaginative, with a strict conscience
and a strong sense of fair play, hospitable and
generous . . . but stubborn. As I’m stubborn also,
we didn’t get along very well. Not only that, but
Philip was a fool. A helpless fool I’m sorry for;
a deliberate fool makes me see red. He lives on
the Finke River, in the so-styled Never-Never,
which a lover of waterfalls and ferns would thor-
oughly detest. The country is eminently suitable


for your father’s next work, and he won t be dis-
appointed. He is to stay with my brother, who will
be delighted to welcome a white man of his own
kind.”
Barby nodded, and Beryl felt her breath come
quicker as Susan dropped her voice to go on more
slowly. “When Philip was a very young man he
left his station—not Sunset Hill, but another place,
much smaller, up in the ranges —and went south,
then on to Scotland, which is Home to him. From
there he went to Europe before returning to the
Inland. In Brittany, where his youth and the novel
scenery awoke him to a little softness, he
met a girl called Marie Veers —met her at a
large hotel, and three days afterwards dis-
covered that the beautiful little creature with
the milk-white skin and green eyes was the most
famous woman violinist of the day. She was
resting —a fragile, gentle, tawny-headed piece of
Dresden china, and . . . with all the impulsiveness
of his age, Philip proposed. It was an impertinence
which few men would dare, but Marie Veers was
attracted by this strong young man with the hard
face and keen eyes, and rather amused by his fierce
jealousy there at the hotel. He was not so wealthy
as he is now, but he lavished gifts upon her, and
it ended in a swift romantic love affair, between
a girl as bewitchingly delicate as the figure on an
old fan and a man whose eyes held the strength of
the land where he lived.”
Susan sighed, the room forgotten, “It was a
headlong affair. Marie had interrupted a career
which had already placed her upon the highest pin-
nacle in the musical world of London and the Con-
tinent. The famous Toccopelli had helped her to
this, on the strength of her own genius. Philip


Loftus took Marie and her violin from the culture
and luxury which had been about her always, to
the barren reaches of the Inland; took her with her
five languages and her exquisite trunks full of
frocks, to the crude yabber of natives and the
screech of the crows!” Susan’s mouth was grim.
It held no appeal for her; it was like another
planet.”
The blinds flapped softly as a stronger puff of
breeze brought in the smell of the seaweeds on the
beach. The voice went on, with a kind of strained
thickness in it that the girls felt and were vaguely
distressed by. “Marie used to play her violin when
the long days grew too monotonous. Philip hated
music, for in his heart was a passionate jealousy
of the thing which he knew shared Marie’s love with
him. Only a fool would have tried to prevent her
playing, as he did. Scene after scene . . . the
young wife forcing back her longing to return to
the life she knew; the man breaking her spirit with
his cold disregard of her passion to play. Music
was her soul. Old Toccopelli, in his tall old house
in Italy, said she was dead; to him, she was dead.
Heaven knows why, but she stuck it out, and that
year was to her a kind of long-drawn nightmare
of bewilderment, sickening frustration, and isola-
tion.”
Flap-flap—the blinds again, and the salty smell
as the curtains stirred. Susan lifted her voice
to another tone, the girls listening with lumps in
their throats. “Two children came during the next
three years. I saw Marie when the little boy was
a baby; she was thinner, her face almost haggard,
but her arms held tightly to the two small mortals
that made her look younger and more fragile than
ever. She loved them as all good women love


children, but Marie was not only wife and mother
—she was artist, and a stranger in a strange land.
Over those babies she seemed to mourn for the
time when they could not hold her any longer. That
time came . . . very soon. Marie Loftus died, and
Marie Veers was reborn, when her husband took
her violin and smashed it against a veranda-post.”
There was a silence in the still room, until Susan
laughed with bitterness, pulling out her glasses,
but keeping them in her fingers. Nodding, pursing
her lips, she went on: “Smashed it, and smashed
the last hold the babies had on her, when the
splinters of the violin fell to her feet. David was
about four, then, and Jill two years or so older.
Marie went away. There was nothing else to
do, but she dare not take the children; they
belonged to my brother. The hour of leaving
those babies left its mark on her for ever . . .
but she went. Back to Toccopelli, who intro-
duced her again with a flourish to the public.
But Marie was not the same, although her music
had been refined by the cruelty of suffering—re-
fined to such perfection of technique and emotion
that her position was even more unapproachable
than ever. She moved quietly to the applause and
compliments of a genuinely admiring circle of
friends, but back on the Larapinta she had left her
other self; she was not complete. A misty, beautiful,
lovely thing she was, with a manner which held not
one scrap of positiveness. Hard to explain. It was
as if she moved in a conscious trance . . . waiting
for something. It came. She had known for a long
time that she was ill, and had done nothing to
remedy it. She could have.” Miss Loftus moved
the hand that held the glasses, and managed to


articulate clearly; “So died Marie Veers . killed
by Philip.”
“Not quite that,” corrected Mum, with a little
shake of her head. “He could never understand the
genius of that girl.”
He could have held some compassion for her,
and refrained from . . . breaking up the violin,”
Susan stuttered. “In my heart, Philip killed his
wife.”
In my heart, said Mum firmly, “her genius
killed his happiness too; it was a tragedy of mis-
understanding.”
You might say that of the indiscretions of
Mephistopheles,” supplied Susan dryly, but fondly.
However, I shan t forgive Philip; I knew Marie,
and ... I was very fond of Marie.”
Mum smiled rather waveringly. “Tell the girls
°f/our real reason for being here to-day, Susan.”
Well, it w r as not to have hysterics on the win-
dow-seat, ’ said the little woman gruffly, pushing
back a billowing curtain as it wrapped itself round
the back of her head. “Bother the thing!”
The Major fixed the curtain back with a loop, as
he listened. ... I was with Marie when she
died, six months ago. Her last request I intend
to see through, if I have to hang and quarter my
brother to do so. But to explain . . . Jill, as a tiny
girl, showed plainly that she was as great a musi-
cian in embryo as her mother was in reality. It
would be astonishing if Marie’s children did not in-
herit her talent; it was her very being. That small
Jill, a microscopic replica of her mother, had played
her old violin from the time when the baby could
scarcely hold it in her hands. Down by the
lagoon, out of hearing of the house, the mother who
was like a tall child herself would go with the


babies, and Jill was taught to play—there _ was
hardly need to teach her. David was the audience.
He was shy of the instrument, putting his hands
behind his back when Marie would laughingly ask
him to play her a tune. ‘You play tunes, Mother,
he would say. ‘l’d rather listen.’ But Jill would
seize the violin confidently and nuzzle the thing
under her chin, and weave her fancies then into
bars and phrases. Marie used to talk about it a lot
—before she died.”
Beryl’s eyes filled; she saw it all so plainly.
“Now,” said the speaker briskly, “I’ve given my
word to Marie to see what Philip is doing for Jill-
Marie beseeched me to see that the child had her
chance ... for she knew Philip so well, and knew
the baby’s passionate temperament so well too,
that she feared for them both. I must find out
what is happening to Jill, up there at Sunset Hill.
If her father has stamped out her desire to play,
well and good; for it wouldn’t be worth developing,
if so easily crushed. If the child wants to play and
study, and follow in her mother s footsteps, then her
heritage gives me the right to see that she realizes
her wish. It might be that she’s happy and con-
tented; then, that is excellent. But if she is not, I’ll
alter it, if it takes me years. My first step is a little
investigation, through you, John. You have sym-
pathy and human kindness, and will help me in this
if only because of the mother’s broken life. Jill
might go on where Marie dropped back. Marie
knew that the little girl had exceptional talent even
then. A kind of rebellion helped Marie towards
fostering it, too,” added Susan with satisfaction.
“She was as human as the rest of us.
“Marie Veers must have loved you,” remarked


Beryl astutely, “to have put such a delicate trust
into your hands.”
Tosh, child, snorted Susan, but she was not
displeased. She turned to the man: “My head will
rest easier on my pillow to-night, but Heaven
knows where my baggage is. Still on the boat, I
expect. I hose agents are dunderheads. When do
you leave, John ?”
This little woman’s decisive energy took the
pr s breath away. The Major was not perturbed,
owever. fter all, they were fortieth cousins, and
had a great deal in common, evidently. “As soon
as I wme to Loftus. You can leave it to me, Susan.
II do my best for all concerned. I can’t interfere
with a man’s dealing with his own children, but I
can see what life is doing to them . . with no dis-
loyalty to my prospective host. What I may not
do, you can, later.”
Absorbed as in a play, Beryl, Brenda, and Barby
were enrapt, until with a start they realized what
Susan had just said : “What is to prevent this young
secretary going too—and giving Jill a little 'white
company of the right kind?”
Beryls eyes widened to a terrific blueness but
she dared not look at the others. She remained,
an exquisite stunned little image, her gaze fixed on
the visitor.
At last, after what seemed an eternity, the Maior
spoke. “That’s rather a splendid idea,” he said
calmly. But there are drawbacks.” Beryl’s lone
sigh seemed likely to last for ever, as she became
aware of the determined light in the snapping eyes
of Miss Loftus. Bubbles sidled near and whispered •
Beryl . . . you promised. Beryl.”
‘ S^e not looking down at him
We ve never been parted yet,” remarked Barby


crisply. “But I for one think that’s jolly fair to
go with Dad. You’ve helped him with those awfu
old books, and typed yourself stiff, while we ve gone
about our own affairs gloriously. You re the one
to go all right, if he takes any of us.”
The Major was silent, deep in thought.
Brenda then voiced her sentiments, in the house
where each was expected to supply a contribution
towards all problems as they arose.
“Well, Dad,” she drawled lovingly, her dreaming
eyes lit up by some flash of compassion or affec-
tion, “I think Beryl or one of us should go, for that
lonely little Jill’s sake. Really, Beryl should be the
one, because she’s so jolly sensible, and doesn t side-
track like us. Apart from typing, and helping you,
she ought to take advantage of a trip now, because
she has flatly refused to go away with us when we
go to Europe. If Barby and I go, and Bob perhaps
before us, then it will be a long stretch of house-
keeping for Beryl, even if she does like cooking
cake. Too much cake can smother even a good
stick like Beryl. As for me, I’d shriek . . . to cook
cake for years on end. Beryl hasn t a hobby, either,
not a real one. And Barby would positively
gloop on to the car while you were away, and
I’d finish my story; I should hate to interrupt it
now.”
“I like ‘wet places’ best, too,” chuckled Barby,
“apart from adoring poor Sophonisba.”
“And who,” asked Susan, “is Sophonisba?”
“The car,” Barby explained with a laugh. To her
father she said anxiously; “I suppose you’d let me
have control of her, while you are away.”
“j expect you’d let yourself, said the man com-
fortably.
“Barby’s my third son,” Mum explained with


foolish adoration, as that young “son’s” eyebrows
lifted quizzically. “Cheer up, Mum,” she advised
reezi y. We can t all be domestic gems or moon
over stories.”
Susan managed to get a word in at last: “How
about asking Beryl what she thinks of the proposi-
tion ?
“1 should love it,” she gasped. “I should adore
it, but I did so want to be home with Mum always.
f course, this is for about six months, isn’t it?
And, then. I’d hate to be a bother to Dad; a
woman might be a fusspot on a big journey, in such
country.”
‘‘Not this little woman,” came quietly from Dad,
who sat back to light his pipe.
It seems so mean to go away alone . . .” fal-
tered Beryl, her cheeks aglow. “And . . . oh\”
Her face fell in such dark dismay that all were
alarmed. Then the occupants of the room suddenly
became aware of a small boy huddled down in the
darkest corner behind Beryl’s chair, snuffling into a
large and ink-smudged handkerchief.
Beryl squirmed round and pointed. “Dad, we
were joking about this very thing, and Bubbles
thought I was serious when I talked about going
too. I told him I’d not go up there without him.
You see, I never imagined I could ever go.” Dismay
and disappointment dimmed her eyes and altered
her voice. “Bubbles and I . . . sort of understand
each other . . . Dad, Cousin Susan . . . you see
• . . ’ Beryl choked, and was silent, her chin quiv-
ering as she looked helplessly from one to the other.
e little boy was still making faint sounds in
the corner, behind the handkerchief; but he was
istenmg, and glancing up between sniffs to Beryl’s
tace, which somehow reproached him. Dad frowned


in puzzlement as his small son rose with a scuffl
and stood gulping in indecision beside Beryl s chair
Then, trying in vain to pretend that his face wa
not swollen or scarlet, with a bravado obvious y
to peter out very soon: I made her tel me ta ,
he stuttered wildly, glaring for no apparent reason
at Barby, who was staring at him blankly. bne
didn’t know all this fuss was coming. She . • •
I promised too, not to worry, so I s’pose I can let
her take back her ole promise if it comes to that.
He sniffed heavily. “I don’t care, anyway. Arrun-
ters mus’ be silly.” .
Bubbles swallowed a large lump, which, oddh
enough, slid back again. He did this quite often,
until with one terrific gulp that the others all heard,
he vanquished it. “I don’t mind not going to the
old Neverwas ... I s’pose.”
He stood, a gallant little figure stamped with
determination not to give in to this cataclysm whic
had descended upon him. With his disappomtmen
and bewilderment was a woeful acceptance of the
inevitable. “Grown-ups” had decided this thing, and
their word was law. Of course, a Cub couldn tbe
a baby, either, however he felt inside. And Bery
had tried not to go. . . . He choked again made a
strange sound, and stared terrifically at the inno-
cent Barby, who quite understood, however, and
privately thought that her young brother had a
bit of pluck.” __ . « T
Beryl, in a fierce whisper, said to the Major, i
can’t leave him, not after talking as we did. He
wouldn’t forget it, Dad, and even if I did it in ignor-
ance, I did say I wouldn’t go without him. So . . .
you see,” she finished, lifting her hands elo-
quently. The boy caught the gesture and heard
the explanation.


Go on, Beryl, you couldn’t help it. I suppose
" silK to want to tag me on to you wherever
you go.” With a sniff of contempt for the beha-
viour of the Fates, he added: “You’re sort of grown-
up. It was explanation to himself, and to the
others.
I see, remarked the Major thoughtfully, smok-
ing slowly as he witnessed the small scene. He
saw many things, among which was one prominent
truth. Beryl, in some mysterious manner, held the
ke\ to his small son’s nature. Moreover, her strict
code of honour and loyalty was creating in the boy
a lovalu and sense of justice which was far more
important now than anything else in life. Even
more important than a few automatically absorbed
school-lessons! Major Campbell cleared his throat.
“Come here, sir,” he ordered Bubbles.
Upon the boy approaching listlessly, but with
his chin stuck out, his father gravely pounded his
son s chest, his back, and felt his arms. Prodding
about his shoulders: “Eleven, eh! Just! A Cub,
too. \ odels through the swamp like an avenging
demon in shorts, swims in the sea and doesn’t mind
duckings, boils billycans in the hills, tramps miles
through the bush, and camps out of doors! Above
all is learning the meaning of chivalry, and the
value of a given word ... I suppose ...” The
man dropped his voice in deep consideration. “I
suppose . . . that such a fearsome warrior in the
making would be afraid to ride a camel through the
Xeverwas, eh?”
The silence of the living-room was something
which hurt. It pressed them all into immovability
as for two minutes Bubbles stood perfectly and ter-
ribly still. The first sign of animation he displayed
was when his eyelashes blinked; then he swallowed,


and after that his tongue chased round his hps,
faster and faster. With a slow wriggle his hands
had dived into his breeches, and his feet spread a
few more inches apart. A breath filled his lungs,
then was brought back again, as the brown eyes
suddenly glowed, and met the Major’s, brown and
glowing too.
“Not me . . • Dad?”
“I asked you”—with a smile.
“I’m not a grown-up,” came quavenngly. it s
a joke, Dad.”
“I wouldn’t joke like that, old man.”
“Oh, Dad . . . with Beryl?”
“Well,” said his father, with a great show of
careful deliberation, “I had thought of it that is,
if you’re not timid over riding a camel.”
“Dad,” choked Bubbles, almost stuttering in his
excitement, “I ...I- • • I d ride a cow. With
a jerk he swung round. “ ’Scuse me, every one, I m
afraid I jest must go and chase Wizzie.


CHAPTER II
Land of the rainbow gold,
For flood and fire and famine
She pays us back threefold.
Dorothea Mackellar
The Loftus dwelling - was not visible from the
main track that led precipitously from the plateau,
being - sheltered down in a bay facing - west, where
the red and white strata of the promontory broke
off. A sun-scorched Sleepy Hollow was Sunset
Hill, drowsing in the summer light; sheds, saddle-
houses, storerooms, cottages, and a motley collec-
tion of native wurlies composing the microscopic
village in the glare that rippled over the red sand
about it.
When the light fell from the west at the end of
the day, the fierce rays conjured every shade of
scarlet ever known from the face of the broken-off
rock which rose vertically from the river-course a
few dozen yards from the house. The brightness
and vividness of the streaked stone of the cliff-face
had been exposed by time and the action of the
floods, which gradually cut it down from the
layer of brown at the top to the last pack-
ing of red, whose folds were as fine as tissue-paper
and as red as blood. Nothing exaggerates so
flauntingly as nature in her most lavish moods.
Nature had painted the station surroundings with
all the sombre loveliness of the Colorado canyons.


It was these that Philip Loftus had whimsically re-
called when he wondered what to name the pro
perty whose central point was the dramatic c
of the river round Intircha. Each warm night the
sunset lights drenched the place, throwing a ca^et
of indefinite pink over the white sand of the river
bed, splashing wedges of red upon t e
coloured gum-trunks lining it, and s P r^ dl £ g
flections that moved and multiplied until the sun
slipped down behind the purpling horizon whose
rich dimness so quickly dyed to black
The symphony in scarlet and gold had its g l
lights in the windows of the house at the sunse
hour, when each pane was a glowing rectang e o
livid gold, the luminance in all its smouldering ov -
liness transforming an ordinary scene into a fan-
tasy from a fairy-tale. The rises of Intircha leaped
upwards in bold sweeps whose steps and terraces
mounted towards the sky. Behind the house rose
the less steep ground, which nevertheless ad o
be mounted by way of a zigzag road cut crudely
in the pale face of the plateau-edge.
In the morning, the tall rocks threw long shadows
over the dwelling, far after the sun had flooded the
plains with heat; fires from the camp releasing t m
spirals of yellow, white, and tender grey smoke, to
rise slowly in the motionless air and blot out
patches of purple shadow or brown hollows.
A blind man could have told the hour at bun-
set Hill through the medium of the sounds
emitted by that strange little community so far
from what the world calls life. The barking of
dogs, the shout of a native, the rustle of a lizard in
the grass! Night-birds in the lagoon made chort-
ling and sweetly shrill interpolations for the hidden
orchestra chirping in the dark. In the brightest


of bright moonlit nights a magpie or jackass would
suddenly pay tribute to the silver peace by spill-
ing his ecstasy from the branch of some black tree
etched in ebony against the sky; the mopoke, too,
at dark, illusively baffling with his sudden chopping
note, now here, now there, but never where one
might suspect.
Bell-birds in the daytime, ringing as if a little
sih er-toned scrap of metal w r as placed in each
throat, and the eternal harsh caw of the crows
whose voice was the voice of waste and death. The
thunder of the hoofs at the wells, the cries of
natives on horseback, wheeling in their beasts from
the plains, and the slow chop of the axe out at
the wood-pile! Creak of donkey-harness, camel-
bells tinkling, cries and thumps from the kitchen,
the shot of a gun at “killing” time in the yards,
or the homely squawking and clucking of hens!
Ordinary sounds, and sounds full of music, part
of the life of the station out back, mingling with
it, and expressing the spirit of it, fitting in with
the sunrise, marking each hour with significance,
and touching the crimson stain of the day’s end with
a mystery and wonder!
There were two tracks to the station-house, one
over the plateau by which the camel-mail came, the
other, almost unknown, by the river. The view
presented from the track above the community was
dramatic and spectacular, station and river-bed
lying as if seen suddenly from an aeroplane.
Down by the river, which was the track,
the mode of approach was more intimate and
a less surprising entry than the hairpin wind-
ing way down from the plains. Onlv gradually
could the dwelling be viewed here; the western
desolation of wide horizons, hidden by the gums


whose trunks stood like columns in a corridor of
peace and beauty, led direct to the wave of green
and grey which broke against the foot of Intircha<
It was the river-road that Jill Loftus loved. She
was riding along the sandy bed on the afternoon
before the Campbells were expected. In this
manana land they might arrive next week, or in
an hour, but as Jill rode she knew that to-morrow
would more than likely see the arrival of the new-
comers; telephone advice a few nights back, from
the Charlotte, had let the station know when the
Major had passed by.
That day in early summer Jill was thoughtful.
She had no eyes to notice the egg-shell green
and white of the gums dappled with sun-flecks
while the coloured shadows flickered over the
bone-white sand. Strangers were coming! With
his usual reticence her father had not told her this
until a week before their possible arrival. Jill’s lips
curled scornfully as she wondered whether this girl
who was coming would want to spend her days re-
clining upon the veranda, sewing or reading. Jill,
in her kingdom, was subconsciously afraid of the
newcomers. Without realizing this, her apprehen-
sion expressed itself in an entirely erroneous and
exaggerated description of such a set of people that
they even startled herself into laughter now and
again. From books, and a very casual and brief
acquaintance, she had learned of the ways of city
folk. Three only she had met hitherto, other than
the people of the Inland who went south regularly.
In her deliberate expectation of the worst there was
an insurance against disappointment: Jill usually
anticipated the w r orst, for that same unrealized
reason.
Her face was transfigured with animation, the


Campbells forgotten, as a moment later she gave
Prince Bill his head and allowed him to career joy-
ously up over the bank to a small park-like space
which led to another point of the Larapinta two
miles away, marked by a small deep lagoon, steeply
banked and cool.
With superb ease the chestnut raced across the
sun-baked ground, Jill watching the logs and
stumps which he insisted upon leaping in his stride.
ith hat flying behind her on its elastic, her un-
bound tawny hair loose about her head, the rider
was magnificent. Jill, in a frock of the kind she
had worn until she forgot about frocks altogether,
was thin, angular, and plain. Her plainness was
e\ ident when she was in repose, w r hich happened
only after her head touched the pillow. Hair that
shone to rippling life in the sunlight and clouded
her head in gleaming softness in the moonlight,
together with green eyes smudged in with black
lashes, helped to improve Jill’s looks. Each hair on
her head seemed to grow in an entirely original
twdst of its own; it w r as not w r avy or curly, yet round
her face hung a hundred wisps and scraps which
themselves seemed imbued with life. The red in
their shadowed loveliness made the bright locks
conspicuous, and it contrasted satisfyingly in a
unique colour-scheme with the green eyes and
creamy white skin which could not be sunburned.
At first sight, in her old felt hat, and wdth her ugly
riding-clothes tumbled upon her body, Jill was
ordinary, but when her hat was dragged off, her
skin washed free of dust, and her eyes lighted by
some whimsy or anger, she caught one’s breath
with her vivid positiveness.
Positive, and alive. If she could have remained


still long enough to be painted, the artist would
have delighted in the strong spirit and definite lines
suggested by ever}' flash of her eyes and movement
of her body. The artist perhaps would have flat-
tered his subject by risking the hackneyed, and
placing the chestnut horse behind her warm body,
its challenge and courage one with hers. But only
one artist had seen Jill, and that when she was thor-
oughly untidy and streaked with dust from a mus-
ter, her hat tight down on her forehead, her mouth
mutinous over some order of her father’s; even in
that ensemble of grubbiness she attracted him
strongly.
Careless, untidy, she did not care w'hat she wore
or how she wore it. In her composition was a con-
trariness that was very satisfying in its complete-
ness ; she did everything thoroughly. Shirts from
the storeroom, boys’ inartistic underwear, felt hats,
boots, and leggings allowed her a maximum of
freedom and a minimum of trouble in dressing and
undressing. Besides, there was nobody to see her.
Had there been somebody to reprove her or criti-
cize, Jill would have taken an unholy delight in not
only wearing the same clothes but probably rolling
in the dirt as well. She, like Susan Loftus, was sat-
isfied in doing a thing because she wanted to,
without considering exactly why this brought
pleasure.
David would often watch his sister, his wise
young mind dwelling regretfully upon all that she
was missing, and he unable to remedy it. Their
father was merely the man who lived at Sunset Hill,
and no companion of either girl or boy; and al-
though there had been a Miss Briggs for a few
years, she had departed; then just Jill again. David


was lonely in his passion of longing for Jill’s com-
radeship ; but Jill was difficult, and he was lame, and
often sick —weary when Jill was bursting with
vigour and life, pulsating with the desire for
movement, and impervious to fatigue. His head
ached too intolerably for a door to slam
without the sound echoing through his
head. So often he was unable to ride when
Jill went out unconcernedly whistling the boys or
shouting for her saddle and bridle. At dawn his
sister was out watching the boys who watered the
lawn and garden, or bullying the donkey-boy at the
well, who had to be bullied to keep him moving:
Jill could always manage it. Often she would pass
David’s window on her way to the kitchen to
hasten the girls into serving breakfast, when he
lay between the sheets, too listless to rise, too
spiritless to begin or even plan the morning’s
occupation. Crippled and hurt, his body was un-
able to obey the willing orders of his eager heart
. . . and Jill did not know. Jill would never know,
maybe, for she had the body and spirit of a race-
horse, all fire and haste and nervousness.
When he was ten, David had been badly thrown
by a new horse, a young thing fresh from the bush,
tried out in daring during his father’s absence at
another station four days north. A rough attempt
at bone-setting by an old stockman hardened in
mind and body by a life in the out-back had resulted
in a stiff leg and a pain that drove into David with
the persistence of an auger. The wistful little boy
with the quiet gentility of manner had accepted with
set teeth the blow fate had dealt him, bearing the
agony of the crude surgery with no anaesthetic
other than a stiff dose of brandy, administered by
the well-meaning “surgeon.” In those days there


were no Inland Missions to do their godly work.
His father had returned to find a sick boy, almost
delirious, feverish and whimpering in turn, sur-
rounded by blacks and half-castes frightened to
imbecility by the violent agony which they did
not understand.
By the time that a doctor, delayed a week by
storms, had been secured from beyond the rail-
head, the boy’s strength was almost spent.
Another operation, upon the dining-room table in
the station-house, had resulted in a further period
in bed, but in comparative comfort this time. Slowly
the wan-faced child had recovered, to limp months
later into the open and lie about with eyes closed
in his white face, his health damaged irretrievably.
Loftus had taken the blow as he took all blows,
grimly, with no blame for God or himself, and no-
body to know how it affected him. It was but
another knock; he could stand it. He might have
remedied it in some measure by taking David to
the city and a specialist, but the damage had been
done, and the Will of the Creator had marked him;
so the matter stood.
David had not gone to school in the south as
most boys did. His health had prevented it, and
Philip Loftus had his own particular views upon
this matter also. Miss Briggs, a kindly, brittle
soul with a strict conscience and a deep under-
standing of the beauty hiding in books, had been
persuaded by a city employment bureau into accept-
ing this remunerative post, despite the undeniable
drawbacks. Some appreciation of the finer things
of life had led David unerringly to Miss Briggs’s
heart. Miss Briggs frankly disapproved of Jill, who
shrugged and said that the old Panjandrum was
probably jealous of her because she was young.


It was Miss Briggs who had persuaded the chil-
dren’s father to allow David a free rein with books
from the capital, for she saw that the expenditure,
which was nothing to Loftus, would be life to the
lonely lad. David quietly defended Jill, smiling
sadly at her quick outbursts in the school-room,
but allowing Miss Briggs to hold her own firm
opinion of Jill’s wilfulness. The little boy under-
stood; poor Briggy didn’t. In David’s mind,
it ended there; discussion was useless, for if people
did not understand, there was no eloquence which
could make them. Sheer waste of time.
At table Loftus Senior was usually politely con-
versational for her benefit; but, when Miss Briggs
left, he dropped back into the silence which had
reigned at meals before her arrival four years
before. David, at ten, had for a year been removed
by his accident practically out of Jill’s life: she
had learned to do without him, and then to tolerate
his company as he grew well again; later, to despise
him for his weakness. A wisdom which perhaps
came from the extensive reading that filled his
spare time, told him that all there was to do was
to carry on, and remain where Jill had put him; she
was the stronger.
David had set his teeth and borne it somehow,
his fiercest agony not in being incapacitated, but
in Jill’s readiness to confuse his will with his deeds.
A discovery that he made when very young was that
Jill, in her most bitter moments, struck out at
others. Through this David arrived at a conclu-
sion of which the satisfaction was entirely spiritual
and very lonely—that when he bore Jill’s thrusts
and resentments he helped share her pain and disap-
pointment. David knew, too, all about the ache
that devoured Jill, and that would continue until she


came back to her own again with a violin in her
hands.
His hurts he was able to bear: they were pas-
sive; but Jill’s whirlwind and dogged fighting
against the inevitable awoke every scrap of pity in
his generous young heart. Jill’s hurt was always
with her; his own, only sometimes. Every year
Jill was losing a little more of the life she was des-
tined for, while every year added a little to his
bodily strength. It was his part to subdue himself
for her sake. He could do nothing but that, and say
nothing. The tears that were in Jill’s voice some-
times, even in anger, made him, a boy of sixteen,
long to go away and hide and weep.
The boy remembered their mother with the vio-
lin in her hands; Jill, the violin with her mother
behind it. They discussed her in hushed voices,
awed by the memories which to childhood are so
overwhelming. But it was the fiddle that the girl
recalled with the anguish of other memories. David
himself dwelt upon the sweetness and fragrance of
the little mother whose lacy frocks and delicate per-
fumes had stolen into his soul. It was the touch of
her hands that David longed for; but with Jill, of
course, it was the violin.
There had been laughing eyes and rippling
merriment then, when the three had run of! to
the slopes of the shady lagoon to weave fancies,
and talk with the birds’ tongues, and imitate
on the old violin the sounds of the station. The
little fragile woman, a child herself, at whose
feet a world of music-lovers had worshipped,
had her beloved audience of two, whose small
clapping hands and joyful eyes filled her with
both sorrow and gladness. Then had come the


tragedy from which the children recoiled even
years after, when Philip Loftus had taken the in-
strument and broken it before them, the splinters
falling at Marie’s feet as she stood there, shocked,
hurt, and stunned.
Jill had understood without being told, far more
than the mother had realized, when, before that
momentous event, the latter had often hidden
tear-stains with a brushing of face-powder, and
had taken the children off to the waterhole,
where, in moonlight or daylight, she would play.
Different music then, when there were marks
about her eyes; music which made Jill clench her
tiny hands and force back the tears only because
she did not quite know why she was so hurt. The
splinters that had fallen to the stone floor of the
veranda, and the broken strings which were looped
up with a scrap of ivory, had pierced the small Jill
to the soul. With a shrill scream of rage and
terror she had started forward, but the white hands
of Marie had pulled her back.
Marie had said nothing then. The two children
had waited beside her until they drifted away,
afraid, when their mother stirred herself to go in-
doors with steps listlessly decided.
Jill, sobbing soundlessly outside the drawing-
room window, had heard a voice say dully; “You’ve
broken the last of my heart, Philip; but I have a
soul, and that’s left to me. I . . . am going.”
Jill had heard no more. Going! Panic-stricken,
she had raced to David, who was hiding in the store-
room and crying miserably over the tragedy that
had come down upon them. He had not understood
it at all. But their mother had not seen them; her
eyes had looked beyond them. She had not noticed


them creep away. Going! The word thudded on
the tiny Jill’s mind in her terror and dismay.
Then there was no mother —that was what she
had meant by “going.” She had gone for ever, and
there was no mother and no violin. Between the
child and her father arose a barrier, its first stones
built when Marie left. From that moment the man
saw in the little girl such a staggering likeness to
her mother that he was grimly determined not to be
troubled twice by the sweeping resolutions of an
“unmanageable temperament.”
With the violin and her babies, Marie could have
held on to her shattered love-story until the time
came when they could go back to Europe, if ever,
but hope went, and all things went, when Philip
broke the fiddle and her heart at the same time.
Without her music, there was not enough to keep
her at Sunset Hill. She was a stranger, in a stran-
ger’s house, his ways not her ways.
At nineteen Jill’s hands ached for the violin, just
as they had ached during the weeks after her mother
had gone, and had ached, too, all through the long
years while they waited with childish faith for her
to come back, or for news of her. It was the fret-
ting and craving for the beautiful thing she had
known for a little while that at last sent Jill alone
to seek the solace of the plains and plateaux to ride
until she was too w r eary to want anything but sleep
after weeping until her eyes could not see. This
David understood and, because he was David, he
added no weight to his sister’s already over-
burdened shoulders in her strange unrest and grief.
When direct action claimed Jill, the unrest was
at bay; when she was still, her fingers and whole
body called for the instrument whose touch was
like the touch of a ghost on her hands. The passing


of the years did not alter this yearning in the girl
who was so much Marie Veers’ daughter.
Sometimes Jill would come in from a hard ride
quiet and distraite, to show idly a friendliness to the
boy, who awoke with a mad thumping of his heart,
wondering if she was discovering what she meant
to him ; but an hour or so of haphazard reading, of
turning the pages of old magazines, would send her
away again with perhaps a careless: “I’m going
out . . . don t worry; you’d be tired.” Down again
into the abyss of dejection would go David’s hopes
as he closed his book, all desire for printed words
going in the pain of this long, slow, deadening
conflict. And the girl whose lips were daily be-
coming more solemn and unsmiling, had no other
means of actual comfort than the lonely riding
off into haunts known only to herself, amid the
paths of the mountains days away, or the illimit-
able empty plains.
Jill had once, when younger, allowed herself to
obey an almost hopeless impulse, and had dared
to plead with her father for “just a cheap one, please
just any violin at all. But David had seen the
expression on their father’s face, and had stepped
forward swiftly as the man moved to thrust her
out of his way. “Don’t touch her,” the boy cried.
“Why don’t you buy her one; you’ve got pots of
cash.” David was a sturdy unafraid youngster
before his accident.
. Pots °f cash!” came the swift repetition. “It’s
time you had a few lessons, young man; we start
to-morrow.
So Jill s frantic appeal had ended in a result
which brought long wearisome mornings of lessons,


and the children’s definite schooling had com-
menced. Tasks which were set dared not be neg-
lected, and corrections were made with scrupulous
regard for errors and carelessness.
Never again had David interfered between their
father and Jill; it was too dangerous, neither help-
ing the position nor achieving her object for her.
It was like bruising oneself against the stone walls
of a prison to try to break Loftus’ iron will on this
subject; it could not be done. Tears and storms
followed, between calm days when the girl was
more often following her lonely pursuits, rebel-
liously weaving impossible fancies relating to what
she would do some day. She was alternately sullen
and insolent, her natural sweetness being trampled
upon cruelly, in her curious life amid the horses and
the open country. Black children trailed after her,
a gallant little figure, wild-headed and free, as she
lived the games which to her were not games at
all, but swift little dramas and comedies, with her
father the villain and herself a rather extravagant
heroine. She would stand, her hair flung about her
in the wind, crying aloud in histrionic abandon-
ment to the dark children who, with awe and flat-
tering silence, listened and watched. The little
Arecuthca was possessed of spirits, as she forgot
even the natives and threw her hands aloft in some
impassioned appeal. Then she would suddenly re-
member, and with a quick “Come on,” she would
grimace, and stamp down the slopes again, perhaps
to crack branches to find widgedees in their hollows,
perhaps to build a fire, or to trap rabbits, or thrill-
ingly respond to the wild and weird cries of a
native child in imitation of his father’s corroboree
cry. There was one cry that Jill was fond of; it


released some of the ache for expression that was
in her, although sadly lacking in restraint:
1-tar pukuluna pur-turlinga appin-aa-aa-a
“May your heart be rent asunder,” howled Jill
with a significant glance towards the station, as the
children took up the wail and continued it with
pleasing force and venom. But soon she knew that
this form of hatred was piteously useless.
She waited, until at fifteen an idea sent the red
blood racing madly through her. It was an impulse
born of fevered days of unrest following a severe
chastisement for something which she—this time—
had not been guilty of. One night she rode out of
the station yards in the gayest moonlight of the
month, with one black boy, three horses, and rather
an elaborate array of food, enough for a week. Four
days south, and a day from the train, Loftus caught
her, ordered the boy back to the station with pack-
horse and food, and then took charge of Jill and the
situation.
“I suppose this laborious method of transport you
call ‘running away’?” he had inquired unemotion-
ally, surveying the camp-litter and the drooping
figure of the white-faced girl.
She met his cool gaze without flinching, but her
eyes gleamed in a way Loftus thought it wise to
ignore. She stood erect at his words, like a trapped
animal, defiant and at bay, too thin in her rough
shirt and breeches, too pale and intense altogether.
Her demeanour, however, was as cool as his, and,
despite the circumstances, a faint sensation that
was half admiration and half regret travelled
through the man. It was quickly dispelled, how-
ever, when she replied in tones almost venomous.
“Why should I stay up there with vou? You


drove my mother away; I can go too. Why not?
You want to do to me what you did to her . . .
hurt her, and hurt her . . . but you shan’t, I can
tell you.” She had laughed, an odd sound to come
from the lips of so young a girl; her voice as cut-
ting as a whip-lash as she continued with unyouth-
ful poise and deliberation: “You want to stop my
playing. But I’ve played, and I shall again. Not
you, or anybody else, can stop me. \ou shan t
break my heart, though.”
Loftus was apparently unimpressed by the girl-
ish trouble which shook Jill like a fever. He
shrugged, lit his pipe, then waved a hand towards
the paraphernalia about him, with a swift glance at
his boy, and the natives began to break camp.
Four days later they were home again, having
travelled during that time with scarcely a remark
passing between them. When they had almost
reached the station, Loftus pulled in his mount
and pointed to Intircha, rising like a scarlet flame
solidified from the sunset-flooded hollow. He said
curtly: “There’s your home; you have all you
need. Will you promise not to run away again?
I am too busy for periodic excursions of this kind.”
Jill replied disdainfully. “All right. I’ll find a
better way of managing- things some day; that’s my
reason for promising. I’m not afraid of you, or
anything.”
“A threat, eh?” The man was white round his
nostrils.
She nodded calmly, though her heart was racing
with sickening thuds against her ribs. “If you want
to be dramatic, you may,” she retorted, looking from
his face towards the house. “I didn’t make myself.
I’ve been given the same want as . . . Mother
had, and . . . you’ve sent her from us.” Jill’s tones


thickened and blurred. The strain of the week had
told upon her. Hoarsely she stammered: “We
don’t even know if our mother is . . . alive.”
The man stared ahead, his face blankly unrespon-
sive. “I can tell you that much,” he said slowly,
while Jill’s body seemed to throb with a sensation
that left her weak and sick. “She’s alive,” he
added, but as her eyes lit up and her whole being
was transfigured, something made Loftus flush.
His voice altered. “That is all; the subject is
closed; please remember what I say.”
That night, in her plain little room, Jill ended up
an evening of devouring unrest with a collapse that
left her, without life or energy, in a tortured heap
down by the window of the bedroom. Her arms
rested on a chair standing in a patch of moon-
light that glinted dully on a face wet with tears, as
with hands clenched she stared up through a spark-
ling mist in her eyes to the moon-path and
the wonder of the sky. “God . . . tell me what
to do. If I didn’t always believe you, I’d not come
crying now to you. Is music wicked? Is it? Is
it wicked to want to say with a violin all the things
you say with your trees, and winds, and the throats
of your birds? Is it wicked to want to make songs
too? Can it be wicked to want that? Please
some sign, God, to tell me . . . please . . .” Locked
fingers twisted tighter as the quivering face stared
into the moonlight, and there she waited, tense,
wracked and questioning, until a night-bird down
by the lagoon suddenly piped madly through the
stillness. Jill’s skin crept with superstitious de-
light as she heard it, then she sighed and relaxed a
little.
She stayed there motionless in the patch of silver
light, until, with a knock on the door, David


crept timidly in. Still she did not move, for she
had not heard him. Jill was far away. With a
gentle touch the slight lad in faded pyjamas made
his presence known. “Jill,” he whispered awk-
wardly, “I . . . missed you. Don’t , . . do it
again, Jill, please.”
Moved into action with a suddenness that made
the boy start back, the girl swung round, her face
angry and wet. “Why have you come now to tor-
ment me?” she cried. “Can’t I be alone even in my
own room? Briggy will be the next. Have you
come to tell me to stop playing, for ever?”
Almost inarticulate before this onslaught, David
stood back, his natural courtesy sending him at once
to the door, where he stood with his fingers on the
handle. “I beg your pardon, Jill.” Then with a
boyish gulp; “I love music too, Jill, the kind
mother played. But ... as beautiful as it is, I
shall never . . . make it.” He added swiftly: “I’d
give worlds for you to play.”
“Make music,” she reflected, with the startling
change of manner characteristic of her. “That’s
it. I could make it, out of anything, if I had
Oh, you know, David ... I want one . . . the
want of it is worse than starving.”
“It is starving, Jill,” replied the boy slowly. She
looked sharply at him, then folded closer to the
floor again, in an attitude that stirred the boy into
forgetfulness of his own retiring ways. He kneeled
painfully, as he bent over and lifted the hot hair
from her neck and shoulders.
“I know every bit of it, Jill. It’s because I know
all I do, that I never defend myself. You think I
am an idiot ... I might be, but I’m not idiot
enough to add to your misery. Jill, do take care
of yourself; you haven’t the resistance of a rabbit


now. You’re thin and pale, and it’s awful. I , . .
can do nothing but sit back and keep silent, and
stew at lessons, and read . . . read . . . about
people who all do things.” He swallowed, but
smiled as he lifted the heavy hair absently from her
neck, touching the soft tendrils lovingly. “It’s all
right for me, Jill, I’m out of things, anyway, but
... for you, it’s . . . wretched.”
Curiously, the weeping girl stilled her sobs. Pre-
sently she broke a deep silence by saying sud-
denly: “David! Mother is alive; he told me.”
“He . . . told you that ?” came the incredulous
query from the son of the man who seldom spoke.
“About her?”
“Yes; he wouldn’t lie. I didn’t ask him, either,
exactly.”
“What did he say? Every word, Jill, please.”
“Nothing more. Just that she is alive. ” Jill
nodded to emphasize, her face a blur in the room, a
shaft of silver light charging her hair into softly-
glinting life.
She heard a sound in the boy’s throat, then felt
her fingers pressed fiercely, and the boy was gone.
She was alone again.
On through the months the fight had waged,
until Miss Briggs’s salutary reign ceased, the father
distant and scornful, the girl driven daily more
deeply into the shell whose hardness began to re-
semble the rock-like exterior of her father. David,
still excluded from his sister’s comradeship, found
his aloneness unbearable.
Now, there were strangers coming—a man, a
little boy, and a girl. An exultation that cannot be
understood by those in cities filled the gentle lad
with such an ecstasy of anticipation that he grew


terrified for fear something might prevent their
appearance.
“Jill,” he remarked soberly, not long before the
Major’s arrival. The boy was looking about him
at the bare living-room whose floor was without
rug or covering. “This room is rather . . . stark,
to bring nice folk into. To-morrow they’ll be here,
probably. It will be strange for them after the
pleasant homes down town. Isn’t there some white
stuff somewhere, with lace round it? When Briggs
was here . . .?” He limped to the mantelshelf.
“And look here—pipes, inkpots, pens, matches, to-
bacco, and old letters. Is that decent, Jill?”
“It’s all right,” replied his sister gruffly. She
was doubtful herself, but on the defensive because
of it. “If they don’t like it, they can ‘go bush’ again.
There’s plenty to eat, and clean beds, and I rather
think that will be an improvement on camp —for
new-chums.”
David was not satisfied. He smiled at the scorn-
ful young figure scowling at the shelf. “You’re
like a native, Jill. But they’ve probably left a nice
home and nice friends, so can’t we fish out some
of those things in the locked storeroom? They’ve
all drifted out of sight since Briggy left.”
“Want to impress them?” taunted Jill.
“Impress them! Good Lord, Jill!” answered the
boy, disgusted. “But we don’t want them to feel
self-conscious on our account.”
“They needn’t be,” came swiftly from Jill. “The
essentials for living without starving are here, and
the necessities for sleeping and washing. Go and
knit some lace, if you want it so badly. It would
suit you better than out-of-door work, anyway.
Make some nice frills for your shirts at the same
time.”


Leaving the boy half inclined to laughter and
half wincing with chagrin, Jill went out. In three
minutes she was on Prince Bill, careering at break-
neck pace through the sand marked by herds of
cattle.
She had paused in the river-bed only long enough
to speculate upon the possibilities of the morrow;
then she gave the chestnut his way, and tore across
the two-mile natural park to the waterhole that
promised cool and tender shadows.
She dismounted under a magnificent gum, loop-
ing the reins over a bough, then threw herself
face-down on the sand close to the pool, propping
her chin up with her hands, her heels kicking. It
was a transfigured girl who, a few moments later,
turned over on her back to gaze up through the
mesh of branches overhead, glitteringly transferred
on a milky blue sky sopped of all cloud by the still
heat. In a soft whistle she was repeating the notes
of a bush-bird that rippled its scale of simple joy
from the green roof over her. The feathered song-
ster answered again, then again, the silence being
unbroken but for this melody, the horse motionless,
the girl without movement but for her dancing eyes
and pursing lips. It was a magical moment for Jill,
one of many spread over just as many months
of error and blind stumbling towards her desires.
“Beautiful thing,” she murmured, as the bird
hopped and turned on its twiggy perch. “Gladness
of being alive. God made you . . . and into your
throat put that song ...” Her face changed as
she glanced at her fingers, stained and brown. “My
hands can do nothing without . . . the one thing
I want most. I suppose God made me too . , .
but the bird’s a better job.”
She twisted over, and the tree was empty above


her. “It’s all wrong, all wrong. Perhaps it will
never be right.” She stood up and brushed angrily
at her breeches, tugging on her hat. “I suppose that
girl from town will giggle and say: ‘Oh, how won-
derful !’ to everything up here, and . . . Oh, bother!
I’ll go bush if she’s that sort.”
Riding languidly back, the horse cantering with
the suppleness of a willow twig through the intense
heat, Jill suddenly shrugged. “Of course, she
might mean it . . . Then . . . maybe . . . but how
could anyone from town call the out-back wonder-
ful? It would scare them stiff.” She sniffed. “I
won’t kow-tow, that’s certain.”
Jill was plainly disturbed.


CHAPTER 111
The hill-tops are no longer close, hut speak of roads to climb.
And morning turns to afternoon, then—Once Upon a Time.
E. P.
“It’s quite stupid,” said David, flipping over the
pages of a periodical devoted to the whims and fan-
cies of a fashionable world. “Nobody could look
like they do —seven feet tall, as thin as a whisker,
with feet like poniards.”
“I suppose somebody reads the idiotio mush,”
contributed Jill doubtfully. “Anyway, fashion mags
are about as useful here as submarines.” She gave
the despised journals a little push, watching them
glide lingeringly to the floor, one by one. “Best
place for them,” she grimaced. “Perhaps the
new girl will sigh and gloat over them; better not
tip them out. I wish ...”
But what Jill wished was not to be known. The
pair were interrupted by a rush of shuffling feet, as
Lina and Bell ran in excitedly from the kitchen,
crying out that “Camel irrima obber ribber .. .
enamel come . . . irrima camel. . . .”
“Very well, old fusspots,” returned David indul-
gently. “Go and finish the cooking, old kurna
good-for-nothings. We’ll see to the camels.
Scoot.”
Giggling happily in the fun of new arrivals where
newcomers were almost as rare as the submarines
Jill mentioned, the girls darted back to finish their


gar.” Then: “New boss,
quic , wei, come home
long-a wurlie . . . long-a .
. . wurlie . . . long-a
. , . wur . . . lie-e-e.”
“Pah!” spat Bell fiercely,
casting a look of deep
scorn at her amiable mate
of the pots and pans.
“You more silly beggar . ,
. . plenty.” Lina was
baking. Jill rose and plunged through the long
curtain of red Territory beans which swung, click-
ing faintly, behind her. The boy flushed a little,
wavered for a moment upon his feet, then saun-
tered casually to his room, excited and half afraid
of what the people might prove to be, thinking as
he brushed his hair that, whatever they were, the
virtue of novelty would be attached to their per-
sonalities. He sat on a chair, astride, with his arms
on its back, as he watched through the windows,
waiting for the first sight of the strangers.
“Inderoda . . . indefoda . . .” chanted Bell
melodiously in the kitchen as she chipped the shell
from a hard-boiled egg and kicked the cat accur-
ately with an elastic-sided boot at the same mo-
ment. “Agggghhh !” she scolded. “ Kurna .” To
her companion: “Felix him steal kurra.” The dis-
gusted feline was spitting so viciously that it backed
in a series of buck-jumping leaps to the door.
Lina was more lenient towards the animal, mur-
muring gently: “No! No stealum ! O’ny silly beg-
undisturbed, and did not refute this statement. She
proceeded to place a large enamelled tea-pot upon
a tin tray which had once been black but now re-
sembled patchy aluminium through wear and tear.
The tea-pot was flanked by a brown sugar-basin,
its sides clotted with heavy lumps as hard as
stone, tea-cups quite unmatched by their saucers,
and spoons made very blunt-nosed through the
stirring of stews, soups, and gravies. Lina clat-


tered joyously with the crockery, completely drown-
ing Bell’s muttered undertones. Heavily pitted
fruit-cake was Lina’s piece de resistance for the
welcoming feast, and this she placed lovingly
upon a deep soup-plate cracked into an imitation of a
seismograph by being baked so often under tarts
in the oven. She stood back and surveyed the
array with conscious pride.
David suddenly appeared at the door, tall, pale,
slender, and sleek in a spotless white shirt open at
the neck, his drill trousers creased from careful
ironing, his hair damp. He eyed the tray with
mingled emotions, holding one hand behind his
back. Something was wrong. With one finger he
touched the soup-plate, smiling at the two women
who loved “Daveeee.” “Lina.” he suggested un-
easily, no got cloth, eh? Pretty cloth—lace—
makum tray look more better—properly nice.”
“No got cloth,” stated Bell flatly. “Boss he put
cloth long-a Arecutcha box, long time.” The Are-
cutcha had been Marie.
Then, said the boy awkwardly to Lina, “an-
other plate . . . better plate, see, Lina.”
With abrupt intuition Lina saw, all at once drop-
ping to her knees before the ancient, massive dresser
laden with cheap crockery and tinware, pepper-
pots, salt-jars, and up-ended baking-dishes. The
doors of this piece of furniture she flung open,
wildly burrowing to the back, where her efforts
were rewarded by something which brought a
grunt from her. “Plenty dust,” she muttered com-
placently, then drew out some oddments at which
she blew noisily. The boy pounced upon these, for
the objects were nothing but the long-ignored china
which they had used when Marie had been there,
gold-rimmed plates, delicate and semi-transparent,


cups which stood on small legs, saucers of such
fragile loveliness that he gasped at their present
environment. The soft colouring pleased him, and
Lina saw this. In a trice she had plunged the
pieces into a bowl of hot water drawn from a
gigantic black “fountain” simmering on the stove,
and in ten minutes the tray was not recognizable.
An unfolded table-napkin was pressed into service
as a tea-cloth, another as a doily. Dusting an
old tea-cosy made from henna wool, badly faded,
David dropped it self-consciously on to the table,
and departed, whistling. Outside, he tossed away
the small bunch of bright geraniums he had taken
for the tea-tray; they were not needed, with that
glowing graceful china.
Jill, in faded shirt quite clean, but her threadbare
breeches stained with cart-grease at the knees, had
made no great attempt towards beautifying herself.
Her green eyes had lost all their greyness in the
persistent nervousnesss that dominated her, now
that the Campbells were so close. Her hands, deep
in her pockets, had received a surreptitious scrub-
bing in the bath-room, this giving her an odd sen-
sation of shame and pleasure. Restless, unable to
wait the ten more minutes or so before the camels
could arrive from where they had first been spied
by the sharp-eyed natives, the girl wandered out,
seizing a felt hat from a peg in the hall as she
passed through, beating it elaborately on one hip
as she charged into the open to saddle and mount
Prince Bill, She took the river-track, and in five
minutes sighted the party approaching and looking
about them.
From a point of vantage on a rise behind some
stunted grey bushes Jill with set face critically
examined the newcomers. The man was loose-


limbed and brown, with a pleasant bony look about
his cheekbones, his hat at a pleasing angle, his
shoulders giving the lie to her visualized picture
of a “professor sort of person, all weedy and sickly.”
He was smiling at a girl close beside him, all
three riders abreast in the sand ahead of the pack-
camels and the black boy, who had come with them
from the rail-head. Jill peeped with breath-
less anxiety through the screen of foliage in front
of her as they came close into sight. She heard
the girl say with a soft laugh of sheer enjoyment:
“Dad, look at those gums—as white as moonlight
against the green. And see the little donkey over
there quirking his ears on the knoll . . . look,
Bubbles! .. . and the well! . . Dad, it might
have come out of the Bible. See, it turns like those
ancient wells did, and has even a jar beside it . . .
Oh, it s a kerosene-tin I” The disappointment made
Jill smile. She then heard: “Look at the red rock
. . That is Sunset Hill, really.”
Jill flushed ever so little. She found that all her
absurd pictures were wiped out in a flash by these
folk who saw the inland through the right glasses.
Beryl s voice had a timbre in it which even the bush
girl recognized as belonging to a place where care-
ful enunciation was considered, and the young blue-
eyed creature in the tan silk shirt sat her saddle in
ease and comfort. The girl of the station remained
without moving as she took in the solid appeal of
the little lad with the eager voice, staring round
him with enough delight to bring gratification to
even Jill’s turbulent heart. In her sudden relief
she realized that she was spying, and, flushing
heavily, carefully moved the chestnut off at a walk,
until with a wild scamper she turned him and sent
him through the bushes down into the river-bed.


“Look,” said Beryl a minute later, “there’s the
house.” As they rode, their gaze devoured the ram-
bling old building with the red roof. “Oh! . . .
and here’s . . . Jill.”
As she rode forward the blood rushed to and from
Jill’s cheeks. She was in an agony of distress and
embarrassment, not knowing what to say to these
people that some impulsive courtesy, or impatience,
had bidden her come out to meet.
It was easy after all, for, as the big red horse was
pulled in, snorting beside the now motionless
camels, the Major leaned over and held out a very
brown hand. “I’m sure you are Jill,” he smiled
to the speechless girl, who withdrew her fingers
slowly. “These two have been looking forward for
many a day to seeing you and Sunset Hill. This
is Beryl, and my son, known as Bubbles.”
Bubbles dofifed his wide, dirty linen hat with
laborious courtesy, uttering a careful “How d’ you
do?” while he absorbed the splendid appearance of
the beautiful horse which pawed the sand and rolled
its eyes at the camels.
Jill found herself nodding shyly and murmuring
an incoherent something that presently she managed
to guide safely to: “And . . . I’m pleased to see
you safely here. I . . . make yourselves quite at
home, Beryl, and ask for anything you might need
. . . and . . . make yourselves at home ...” She
swallowed hard, twitched the reins, and was off
in a flash, gulping, her eyes angry, her mouth
curved in scorn of herself. “Idiot!” she muttered.
“Idiot . . . and I’ve toadied and fawned and acted
like a kitchen girl asking for a job. Now, like a
dashed lunatic,” she said, to her own surprise, “I’m
going to belt in and see if the tray’s set properly.
Oh, blow! I’m as bad as David.”


Meanwhile Beryl, staring, said to the Major:
“Well, isn’t she a surprise! Why, she’s like quick-
silver.’’
Jill flew into the house, bead curtains swishing
and clinking wildly behind her as she tossed her
hat to a hall peg and darted through the rooms to
the back quarters of the roomy old house. The
tray was standing on the table ready for the
infusion of the tea, In amazement Jill stared, her
mouth open. “Lina,” she asked sharply, “this tray
properly good—which way, eh?”
“Which way ?” to the girls meant anything in the
form of a query. They grinned with pride, Lina’s
more wide than Bell’s.
“Davee do that,” announced Lina. “Davee come
this way makum tray properly nice; plenty nice
dish longa cubberd.”
Jill grunted. “Make tea,” she growled under her
breath. She added fiercely: “Not as black as ink —
and not milk from a tin, see. Belli”
“Hearum first time,” snapped Bell, who was
smarting over Lina’s swift rise to aesthetic fame.
“Plenty good ilpa.”
“Yes,” murmured Jill. “I know your ears are
plenty good—when you like.” She was outside in
a flash, the wire door resounding with a clash be-
hind her, and was across the stone court that led
to the actual dwelling before the clash had died
away. With slightly dragging feet she went next
to the small untidy room which Philip Loftus used
as an office. Saddles, files, books, and papers filled
the place to bursting point. A riding-whip and
some guns rested on ten-inch nails driven into the
plaster above the mantelshelf, and the fireplace was


packed to the arch with dust-filmed stock-and-
station journals and live-stock bulletins.
The animation faded from her face as she met
the glance of the man who turned to inquire the
reason for the intrusion. Her white skin resumed
its normal pallor as he faced her. She said coldly;
“Perhaps, as your guests have arrived, it might
be polite to welcome them in.”
Loftus made no response. He placed his pen on
the blotter, screwed a cork into an ink-bottle, folded
a ledger precisely, then rose to brush past the girl
as she stood aside. Jill smiled and glanced about
her. Then, with a sneer, she followed him, hands
in pockets, her booted feet deliberately imitating his
heavy tread. The nails rang on the stones, which
never would be eaten by the white ants whose pesti-
ferous qualities have reduced so many inland homes
to literal shells.
As she walked through the dwelling, Jill frowned
at the rugless floors, the walls whose pictures, when
Marie left, had been taken down as useless ex-
pressions of effeminacy, and the scant furniture
which had once been supplemented by the more
graceful articles now deteriorating out in the far
storeroom. There was something wrong with the
house, to bring the Southern folk into, stripped as
it was of all but the bare necessities of existence.
“It could almost be swilled out with buckets,” she
said as she strode through the living-room, “without
hurting a thing.” Half-shamed, half-defiant, and
wholly disturbed in a somewhat unnerving fashion,
she went out to the veranda again, breathless and
oddly weak, to where the baggage was being un-
loaded from the squatting beasts near the stone


steps, an audience of deeply enthralled blacks fill-
ing- the air with low-pitched but shrill gabble.
Beryl was fully aware of the momentous occasion
which their arrival created, for even her eight days’
experience camping through the inland had told
her how rare guests are. She was putting her-
self in Jill’s place, and arriving at a fairly accurate
idea of how she felt. This gave the newcomer her
almost casual air of detachment, for she knew Jill
could not unbend at once; she was flooded with
embarrassment. Beryl felt this, and divided her
time for a few moments between looking out at
the river from the veranda and talking to Bubbles,
frankly curious about everything and every one.
Philip Loftus and the Major met without any out-
ward emotion, but their hands gripped firmly, and
the hard face of the owner of Sunset Hill broke
into one of its rare smiles as the new arrival con-
\ entionally made some lightly courteous remark.
In secret relief at having a white man of this kind
in his house once more, Loftus was saying: “Come
indoors, I believe there is tea on the other veranda.
Is that so, Jill?” —he did not smile at her—“or in
the living-room ?”
Beryl caught one glimpse of a sullen flash of
anger at the man whose face was now as imperturb-
able as an Oriental’s, as Jill said flatly: “On the
veranda; it’s too close inside.”
Where is David?’ asked the father unemotion-
ally. “Please call him, Jill.”
They were seating themselves about the table
placed against the stone wall under the galvanized-
iron veranda, when Jill returned from a short quest
with a delicate-featured lad, who, upon being pre-
sented, bowed slightly from the waist. The genu-


flection was oddly fascinating - in the boy, who some-
how moved in an old-fashioned atmosphere quite
foreign to the simple station-house with its grim
spaciousness. Bubbles immediately noticed that
the boy in long trousers was lame. Beryl inter-
cepted a long look from the little lad, cutting off
with her glances the query which was about to
follow.
“I was wondering if you were away,” remarked
Beryl almost shyly, holding out a friendly hand to
David, who took it and pressed it gratefully. Beryl’s
perceptions were keen enough to detect this grati-
tude, and she was warm-hearted enough to respond
to it with a smile whose lingering sweetness made
the boy her stanch supporter for ever. “I knew
Jill had a brother, of course,” she volunteered,
rather warm in the cheeks, “but pictured someone
quite different from you. Visualizations are such
waste of time, aren’t they?”
“What did you imagine?” asked the boy quietly,
gladly curious about this girl from town and her
gracious ways.
“I imagined him to be a frightful tomboy, and
dreadfully superior, crushing me into imbecility
with his knowledge of the bush—not at all likely
to make me feel so much at ease as you do.”
“Oh, good,” said the Major to himself. “The
boy is worth a little feminine flattery—in that
cause.”
“Must I call you Miss Loftus?” broke in Bubbles
anxiously. “I don’t want to, thank you.”
“I’m certain I shan’t want you to,” asserted Jill
with emphasis. “I don’t feel a bit like a young
lady.”
“No,” agreed the little boy comfortably, intending


to pay her a warm but truthful compliment. “You
don’t look at all like that.”
“Oh, Bubbles,” frowned Beryl; then, in a quick
confession to the others: “He says exactly what
comes into his head: it’s so awkward at times.”
“Rather nice, I should imagine,” drawled Jill,
liking more and more the startling sensation of
being hostess to these pleasing folk before whom
one could just be oneself. “I like people to tell
the truth.” The speaker smiled faintly at the boy
whose plump face was beaming over a very large
slice of plum-cake. “Bubbles, do you know that
I’m nineteen and have never seen a tram?”
“Goo’ness,” said the youth with the cake, as it
was held poised before his mouth for a moment.
Then, consolingly: “But they’re not much to see.”
A deep bite, and hasty mastication; then: “What
else haven t you seen, Jill?” This was a new version
of make-believe, infinitely satisfying.
“Oh . . . streets, big houses,' and . . . boats.”
Boats'.” The boy placed the remainder of the
cake upon his knees. Do you mean to say you've
never seen a boat, Jill, with sails and spinneker and
all?” He lifted the cake. “On water.” The cake
rose towards his lips. “An’ everything.”
Jill nodded nonchalantly, but not without fun in
her eyes.
Crumbs! What a way to be brought up!”
Uncomfortably aware of not being what one might
call diplomatic, he healed the breach hastily. “Of
course, you’re a long way from the water, that’s
why. I expect I was brought up all wrong too, to
know nothing about camels. There aren’t any
camels in town, Jill. I say, Jill ... is that what
makes you so thin, not going boating: it’s very
healthy, you know.”


“I know,” meekly agreed the girl. “But . . with
a sudden flash of some inspiration: That s not
what makes me thin.” Her attitude invited a query.
“What then, Jill?” The last crumb of cake was
forgotten as the small boy waited.
Jill averted an immediate reply by saying dar-
ingly: “Do you like music, Bubbles?”
Her father’s displeased gaze met hers, but she
tilted her chin higher and allowed her mouth to
curve rebelliously. “Yes,” replied Bubbles inno-
cently, “everyone likes music.”
“Not everyone,” returned Jill, enjoying this subtle
mode of warfare which an audience made possible.
“People without imagination or sympathy don’t
like anything beautiful.”
Bubbles licked his fingers thoughtfully, and
sighed. “S’pect they don’t know it’s beautiful,” he
suggested casually, saving the situation from deeper
discomfort. “Please, I suppose it must be a thirsty
sort of day, could 1 have another cup of tea?”
During the light remarks that followed and cir-
culated without further fireworks from Jill, the
Major suggested that they young folk should ex-
plore round the house, and the owner of the station
seconded this welcome attempt to make the children
known to one another. “Show them the house and
yards,” Loftus said quietly to his own girl and
boy. “And the horses. But don’t ride before lunch ;
there isn’t time. There’s a donkey out there, young
man, a cream one, which you might like to call
your own while here.” A faint smile curved the
thin lips as Bubbles looked up happily.
“Does he buck, Mr Loftus?” came expectantly.
His face fell as the man replied gravely: “Some-
times, if you sit too near his tail.”
After due thought the boy asked with a terrific


blinking up at his host: “Does a fellow have to sit
on the front end all the time?”
“I should advise you to try the middle,” said
Loftus dryly.
The girls found it difficult to talk, as they walked
outside. Jill was unhappily aware of having been
insolent to her father, and discourteous to her guests,
by making their strained relationship too evident.
She was just as miserably unable to speak of her
chagrin to the rest. No tactics familiar to her could
be used to dispel the horrid thought that Beryl
might judge her rude and crude.
With her horses, however, Jill was herself, bright,
eager, and all woes forgotten as her hands fondled
the beautiful creatures which whinnied as she
approached.
“Prince Bill,” she said with pride, “is my best
horse; I have seven in now, all in ripping condi-
tion, but this fellow is the king of them all. I got
some extra ones in from the plateau, Beryl, for
you. We saw them when we were out a week
ago on the Ridge. Can you ride horses?”
“Not a scrap,” confessed Beryl, her face lighting
to laughter. “But I’ll soon learn, if you’ll trouble to
give me some tips. I’m not afraid, and love them;
they are beautiful. What is that pretty fellow’s
name, with the white blaze and curved neck?”
“The little bay?” Jill glanced appreciatively at
the other girl as they stared through the rails. “You
have a good eye, if you picked him. He’s like a flash
of lightning, but hasn’t a speck of vice and doesn’t
know what shying is. You can amble round a bit
on one of the ancients, and then see if you can
manage Coppita.”
“I love Coppita already,” returned Beryl, unable
to take her gaze from the trim little bay with the


sturdy build and proud head. She pressed closer
to the wooden rails.
Jill replied casually, watching the other girl. What
an ass this girl from town would consider her, if
she, Jill, were to pass her hand over the warm
cheek that reminded her in some fragrant illusive
way of a rich red rose, scented and sweet. “I’m
like a piece of dough beside her,” Jill flung at her-
self in self-scorn, and then answered the girl who
had just said: “When shall we ride?”
this afternoon, until dark if you like,”
came lightly. Jill’s voice was perfectly controlled,
but she was thinking: Beryl was exquisite, a crea-
ture to be surrounded by cut glass, damasks, and
rich hangings, and people whose quiet voices and
serene manners held nothing of Jill’s wild ways.
She was rough, uncertain of herself, and sure to
offend sooner or later. A crushing sense of loss de-
scended upon the station girl then, for she felt
terribly removed from all that other girls accepted
as their right. But . . . some day . . . some day . . .
and the light came back to her eyes. She w r as in
a state of chaos, but her independence of spirit came
back as she saw how utterly uncritical was Beryl,
with her gentle interested delight in all that lay
about her. Jill admitted to herself, then, that she
was not sorry the others had come—a statement far
below the true value she was already putting upon
the other girl’s company.
David was rather quiet out by the stock-yards,
but he listened to the girls, and spoke now. and
again to Bubbles, who was climbing up and down
the rails. Beryl presently glanced towards the big
lad. “David, I know so little about the interior:
I’m terrified of being thought a new-chura.”


Jill looked away guiltily, but she said with
dogged truth: “You are not like what we should
call a new-chum; but ... I thought you might be
a bit soft, living away from this rather hard life.
I’m sorry—and you’re not a bit soft.”
“Soft,” scoffed David with a glad ring in his
voice. “You’re not anything like that. You’re . . .”
he hesitated, then with heightened colour he in-
clined his head towards Beryl, avoiding Jill alto-
gether, and added . . . “beautiful.”
“David!” It was Beryl who spoke, correcting
him. But the boy lifted his chin. “Beautiful,” he
said quietly. “The most beautiful thing I’ve seen
up here. That is the truth. I should like to hear
that, if I were such a lovely creature.”
“Hundreds of girls,” gasped Beryl, confused and
adorable, “are so beautiful that beside them I should
be a mouse.”
“A beautiful mouse, then,” insisted the boy,
whose words were quite without offence or absurd-
ity, so gravely did he utter them. Jill interrupted:
“I suppose it’s rotten manners to tell anybody that,
David,” she said curtly.
Beryl saw the quick drawing back of the boy
and the sensitive flicker of his lips as Jill called
attention to his lack of finesse; Beryl called it a
boyishness which was not spoiled by conventional
veneer. But she did not believe it. The naive
and spontaneous admiration had, of course, been
brought forth because David had never before
seen another white girl, unless by chance when one
passed through the station property —he could not
have seen enough to compare them, for certain.
Beryl tried to change the charged atmosphere
which struck David dumb and Jill into a restless


unease. Beryl took the other girl’s arm and started
to move off. “Well,” she laughed, “to be paid a
compliment is a compliment in itself, so I’ll bow
nicely.” She released Jill, and, with a quaint little
flourish of two inches of loose khaki on her hips,
she bowed with slow and exaggerated humility.
“Sire, your gracious notice stirs me deeply; I fear
me a young maiden is foolishly confused.”
Jill stood back in open-mouthed astonishment as
the quiet boy swept his old felt hat from his head
and with a grand flourish drew it to his chest. His
eyes twinkled, and, as he bent over and lifted her
brown fingers to touch them with his lips, Beryl
saw how good-looking he could be. “The con-
fusion is imaginary, and it is myself that would
protect you with my life.” Old satins, and velvets,
and the whisper of feathers seemed to touch David
for a moment, until Jill, fighting a quick stab of
some inexplicable pain, recovered herself to say
abruptly: “Better protect yourself .. . against the
sun. It seems to have touched you, anyway. Don’t
act, David, you are quite cranky.”
The wistful fun on her brother’s face was wiped
off in a breath when Beryl broke in quickly; “I sup-
pose you ride a fair amount, David, if these four
are your horses.”
Jill intervened before the boy could respond. It’s
the only thing he can do decently,” she remarked
swiftly. “And that not often . . . because of his leg.”
As she spoke, Jill would have given worlds to recall
the words which she saw could not be uttered be-
fore strangers as they could to David himself.
Beryl’s one desire was to spare the boy the blunt-
ness of Jill’s tongue, unconsciously cruel. With a
quick prayer for help in this awkward moment she


said quite casually, glancing down deliberately at
the short leg: “David, it is bad luck. How did you
do it?”
For the first time for years the boy found him-
self speaking naturally of the accident which had
rendered him such an object of pity in his sister s
sight. Presently the strain lifted, and all four were
seated on the ground beneath a slender gum which
threw a light shadow over them.
. and of course the old stockman thought he
was performing a miracle of bone-setting. It
hurt a bit.”
“Hurt,” cried Beryl sharply, touched deeply. “I
should imagine it would hurt. And you bore it all
without chloroform! David, I think that was
awfully brave.”
“Nothing else to do,” supplied Jill impatiently,
“but to bear it.”
“Bear it courageously,” corrected Beryl with a
nod.
“Jill is right,” replied the boy briefly. “There
was nothing else to do. Needs must, you know.”
“If I were to award prizes for courage,” stated
Beryl unswervingly, “I should give first ones to
those who bore things with nobody to applaud.”
“One for me, eh?” asked Jill savagely. “Sorry
that I didn’t stand on the roof and cheer.” But
her thoughtless words were not in accordance with
the new train of thought started by Beryl.
Fifteen minutes later Jill was standing with
sinking heart at the door of the bedroom which
Beryl was to use whilst at Sunset Hill. The small
unadorned room did not, however, appear to disturb
the newcomer, for all she said was: “I like the
stone floor; it is cool.”


Jill shrugged. “Ants,” she explained briefly.
“They can’t eat rock, although they’ve had a jolly
good try, no doubt. There’s no washstand. We
all use the bathroom to wash in. We had it made
bigger before Miss Briggs came, and it needed it.
It was an awful shanty before, and had a snake
under the floor. We got the snake, black, about
seven feet long, and had the place rebuilt with a
stone bath. The boys bring hot water whenever
you want it, and there’s a tank outside always kept
filled, and a tap inside over the bowl. David
rigged up another set of rails, for your towels, and,
I say . . . Beryl . . . this room is like the rest of
thing, not very frilly.”
“I hate frills,” said Beryl emphatically, “except
in their proper places.” She tugged at the straps of
a pair of suit-cases, while Jill sat on the window-
sill swinging one foot. “Look at the dust on my
frocks.” Beryl shook them briskly. Jill looked,
as she was asked, but did not see the dust. All
she saw was Beryl visualized in those frocks, whose
transparency might have been simple enough, but
was bewitchingly tempting to touch.
“I don’t wear frocks,” supplied Till eaily.
“Never?”
No, what’s the good? I haven’t for ages. Silly
business, dressing up.” But Jill’s eyes followed
the sheen of a slippery, dusky red silk which glinted
with every movement of Beryl’s busy hands.
The station girl waited perhaps ten minutes be-
fore she spoke again; Beryl did not speak either;
she was one of those comfortable mortals who do
not find unease in silence. All at once Jill shat-
tered the stillness explosively: “I suppose you think
everything here is awful . . . and me, mad? I


5 g SUNSET HILL
don’t know anything about other girls, and ... so
I don’t know what to say or do.” Jill curled her
mouth and glared. “Briggs said I should come to a
bad end ... so I expect I shall.
“Why?” laughed Beryl, still unpacking, and ex-
amining each article minutely.
“Don’t know. It doesn’t matter, anyway, as long
as there is an end ...” Jill gulped. She did not
realize that until now the lack of all feminine com-
panionship had kept back the thoughts that now
assailed her with quite a new dejection behind
them. Beryl saw this, and was preparing her-
self for a talk with Jill that would be one of the
most difficult things she had ever attempted.
Her silence, as she folded clothes away and threw
aside articles for the laundry-bag, was not one
of blankness, but of dismay. Jill was stumbling
almost fiercely, in her piteous desire to unload
her strange mind of its burdens. “You’ve come
to a house of lunatics, Beryl. I don’t know
other girls. I don’t know myself. I made up my
mind to dislike you, not knowing that nobody could
do that. I . . . always say the wrong thing, but
Oh, I expect I am cranky. Miss Briggs said
so, and she ought to know; she was here for
four years. But, Beryl, she didn’t understand
nobody understands. You . . . you . . . might.
I don’t know that either. You see, I’m rambling
like a fool.”
“You are not. What you really are, Jill, is far
better than being ordinary. I’m just ordinary, so
you can say what you like to me. It was you,
really, who made me come here, without your know-
ing it, of course. I shan’t clash with you, I’m sure.
We are too different in temperament. I like people


with character, which you have.” Beryl saw
the other girl’s eyes cloud, but went on, choosing
her words carefully. “You are not a bit like other
girls I’ve known, and I like that. Perhaps being
up here has done that ...” The speaker faltered,
and then went on, forgetting to be discreet. Per-
haps it’s the gift you have inherited from . . .
from Marie Veers, that makes you so virile and
unusual.”
“Gift?” echoed Jill dully. “What do you know
about that?”
Beryl’s reference to Jill’s dynamic inheritance had
not been entirely unintentional; she had waited all
through the long journey from the beach, and all
through the hours of to-day, for the chance to
insert the thin edge of the wedge to open a con-
versation awkward and painful. She sat down on
the edge of the bed, and Jill slid down from the
window-sill, to stand in indecision and then drop
into a cane chair. The restless movements of her
hands fascinated Beryl. “Pm sorry if you think I’m
interfering, Jill,” Beryl began carefully, aware of
treading upon ground not only dangerous but
sacred. “Your aunt, Susan Loftus, came to see
us before we left for here —she came several times.
She wrote a lot of letters to you, but tore them
up, as she said they were inadequate, and asked
me to talk to you instead. She . . . she told me to
tell you that I was to answer any question you
asked me, within my power, and told me to talk
freely to you of . . . everything.”
“Aunt Susan . . . must have had reasons for
that,” came slowly.
Beryl looked up quickly. “Yes, she has reasons


for everything she does, hasn’t she? Do you re-
member her well?”
“Not exactly . . . but an impression. Beryl,
there’s some disclosure behind this funny way of
telling me about her, and you—you look as if
you’ve been dreading it, too.”
“I have,” admitted the girl. “Oh, I have . . .
you’ll see later how frightfully hard it is to tell
...” she gulped.
“Yes, to tell . . . ?”
“Things your Aunt Susan trusted me with, to
pass on . . . Jill, I’m afraid I’m going to say some-
thing that will shock you terribly.” Beryl’s voice
was dropping to a whisper of breathlessness.
“I’m used to shocks,” Jill said bluntly. “Please
don’t consider any imaginary feelings of mine.”
“I must. You don’t know what it is. Jill, how
long . . . has your father . . . when did you last
hear from your . . . mother?”
The silence was endless to Beryl as she waited,
until the other replied in tones that shook a little:
“We . . . don’t hear.”
“Jill I” In pity for the young thing now twist-
ing in her chair as if wounded, Beryl cried out
more sharply than she realized. Jill winced. “Go
on, Beryl: it’s about my mother, perhaps.”
“Hasn’t your father—forgive me, but I’m not
really inquisitive—told you anything at all about
. . . her . . . lately?”
“As usual, nothing,” came curtly from Jill. Then:
“For heaven’s sake, tell me. I know it’s about her,
and I know you’re perfectly miserable about try-
ing to tell me something painful. Whatever it is,
you can’t help it, and are not responsible ... so
go ahead. I can stand it.” She lifted her head
defiantly: “I can stand anything.”


Beryl, pale and unhappy, made the plunge. “Did
. . . has nobody told you, that she . . . that your
mother is . . . not here any more?”
The words came in an undertone, but Beryl
found courage to go on, in Jill’s need of her. For
a while there was silence, a stunned empty silence,
while Jill struggled under a bewildering blow. Then
she was on her knees in front of the other girl,
rough thin hands catching at hers, and great green
eyes filmed over with anguish upturned to her.
“She’s dead?” came thickly. The finality of the
word dropped with such agony in the still room
that all Beryl could do was to nod and nod again.
She had been charged with this duty, and it was
not completed yet.
Tears stung her eyes, and her fingers gripped Jill’s
fiercely. “Jill, when she . . . left . . . she was
showered with flowers that spilled almost into the
street, tributes from the people who loved her,
and her music. But she had a letter, and a leaf
pinned on it, which you and David once sent her
. . . and these . . , went with her. Oh, Jill,” burst
from Beryl’s heart, “I’m sorry I had to tell you this.
Somebody should have told you before.”
Jill had dropped back, and was sitting on her
heels, her hands hanging limply at her sides, her
face like chalk. She was staring into space, her
eyes startlingly alive. At last, after what seemed
an eternity, she spoke; her voice sounded strained
and tortured. “My father knew of this: he must
have. He knew, and didn’t tell us. Who should
have the right to know that more than we? All
the time I’ve been picturing her playing her songs
to people, and bowing in her beautiful frocks
and she’s been . . . dead. All this time!”


Beryl did not speak: she could not. Leadenly
the other went on, still staring, still limp and
motionless, so unlike Jill. “And the platforms
where she played have been used by others
they’ve clapped, but not for her.” Jill was look-
ing at Beryl now as if trying to solve a puzzle
through her face. “I found a clipping in father’s
office once: I kept it, but it got lost. It described
a frock she wore, and said that she was like a
drooping white camelia. Beryl, where is the
Strad?”
“It . . . Susan Loftus has it,” came numbly.
“She told me to tell you that your mother left a
message, to . . . use it some day. It is yours
now.”
The green eyes glowed as if a lamp had been
lit behind them. “She sent that message to me?”
she cried passionately. “She knew, and she didn’t
forget. I’m glad she went away, even without
us. I know now what my father has done to her.
I'm glad she went on playing . . . glad . . .
glad . . . and didn’t stay to listen to the crows.
She tried so hard to make this her new life,
but she couldn’t. He sent her away, when he broke
her violin: it was a far greater sin to do that than
to want to make sweet sounds. He was jealous of
those sounds ... I saw it in his face, often. I
remember now. Oh, I’m glad you’ve come and
told me.”
“It was terribly difficult, Jill,” faltered Beryl.
“I know.” But Jill was triumphant now even in
her grief. “I know all that, and thank you for not
putting it off. I am shivering to think that you
might so easily not have come. You’re the kind
who can tell things, because you understand.” An


expression of blankness spread over Jill s features.
“I must tell David to-night. How shall I do it.
“David won’t make a scene,” came unhesitatingly
from Beryl. “Like you, he’d rather know about
her than go on thinking she was . . • here.
“Yes, that is so. Beryl, he loved my mother,
dreadfully. He weaves romances round everything,
and thinks the oddest things. He reads and reads,
and once said that he always puts our mother in
the place of anybody particularly sweet and graci-
ous, and so enjoys the book better. He has ne\er
given up a dim hope of seeing her again. The
tawny head bent low at last. “Now . . . we shall
never do that.”
Jill lifted her head again, and sat back more firmly
on her heels. Her eyes narrowed, and she smiled
unpleasantly with a sardonic twist at which Beryl
winced. “My father hid this. He surely must
know. He’s kept up communication with her some-
how, or with some one she knows, for he told me
once, when I was about fifteen, that she was alive.
He’s not mentioned her since. I’ll write to Aunt
Susan when you next write, and tell her to keep
the Strad for me; it isn’t safe here . . . and I’ll
play it some day. I’ll play her songs, and my
own, too. Beryl!” The word was almost a sup-
plication. “I must play.”
“Yes. You must.” It was complete agreement,
without examining the reason for belief in Jill, as
Beryl regarded her new friend with a quiet little
air of resolve. “I can see that, Jill, but .. . you
won’t make it more difficult for yourself, will you,
now I’ve told you what I have?”
“I ran away once,” came with grim satisfaction,
“and took the string of pearls that were mother’s,
to sell them and get me South, but he brought me


back. It was just before Briggs left, and I never
heard the end of it. But I have more sense now,
and I can wait. I’ve proved that, and later I’ll
find another way of achieving my object. Every-
body has the right to his own career, and I want
to play the violin. I can play, however absurd
that sounds. Mother taught me from the time
that I was a baby. I . . . there’s nothing like
a violin, Beryl. Nothing. The very first chance
that presents itself, I’ll take it . . . the first
chance ...” A long breath moved the finely
cut nostrils, and the troubled eyes filled with
heavy tears w r hich did not fall. “My father says
it’s a stupid obsession and all artists are mad.
He calls me mad, too, and said once that I
shan’t follow in her footsteps if he has to cage
me. I’m caged now. Beryl, what do people think
about, who only sit and knit? What goes on in
minds which never want anything? Life is a great
adventure, full of mystery, and always something
waiting round the next turn of the road. I can’t
stay still. Nothing happens if you sit down and
vegetate. I’m ignorant, too, and want to know
people. I don’t even know what it means when
David talks about the unattainable. But if it is un-
attainable, it must always be so. It is so trying
to know nothing.”
Jill was releasing some of the queries which had
lain hidden for years: never before had she bared
her soul to a human being. Her secret entreaties
for understanding had all been made in the silence
of the open, when she felt a little nearer to the
hidden meaning of the mystery of all things, or in
the transcendent hours in her own room, the house
quiet, and no living being near ta witness the
anguish of being lost in a wood whose darkness


she could not penetrate. Beryl sensed some of this,
shaking her head slowly, her face grave and pen-
sive, as she replied: “I’ve thought, too, about such
things, but I don’t fully understand. I wept one
night out on the beach, because I could not think
how everything began. But the unattainable has
been named that by thousands of thinkers, so we
must listen to their reasoning. Perhaps it means
that those who seek and seek get their glory
through their searching. People like you and others
who want to find out how things work, must have
more in them than those who just go on accept-
ing everything just because it’s here. I think that
if we found out why everything exists there’d be
no goal any more. I . . . can’t explain it, either,
but I want to see why the wheels go round, and
I can’t discover the reason. So, like the little girl
with the big clock, one goes on and trusts the
wheels to do their work” —a smile here —“without
her help or criticism.”
“So,” said Jill thickly, “the penalty we pay for
wanting to find out, and wanting to create, and
wanting to be something more than just flesh, is
. . . a kind of mental dark room, with a kind of
dull lamp in it called faith. I’ve always tried to
throw out nets to lassoo a star which has always
moved on to another place. The lamp is less
bother.”
“Wicks need trimming,” replied Beryl gravely.
She was thinking very hard. Similar conversations
at the Beehive proved to her that most people
sought the reason for things. “But a distant star
is far more beautiful than a planet close at
hand—all rocks, cold to the moon and chasms filled
with still shadow.”


Jill stared at her companion with half-awed re-
spect. “That . . .is so true.”
“I’d rather keep on flinging out my nets than
catch that beauty and find it ugly, close at hand.
Jill . . . once I tried for hours to catch a beautiful
jelly-fish, full of colours, that moved and shifted,
and spread out like silk, waving things hanging
softly down under it in the sea. I caught it —but
a dirty lump of gluey stuff stuck with wet sand
was all I got. I don’t try to catch jelly-fish now:
I like them better where they belong. It’s like an
ideal,” she added doubtfully, afraid that her simple
philosophy might sound very idiotic.
“Ideal,” Jill mused, tight in the throat. “That it
is, too. Stars and jelly-fish.” She laughed rather
harshly. “Bitter, isn’t it?”
“No, I don’t think so. It’s rather frightening, to
know that we think ourselves so important and yet
can’t understand why a leaf grows like other leaves
upon the same tree. Mum told me that when we
stop trying to grasp the impossible we find content
in the possible. She says that the whole scheme of
life is an endurance test, made by some Master-
mind we are not even supposed to understand or
conceive. Those who become bitter and angry will
never understand: it puts them out of the running;
but the strong in heart keep going because they
trust. Mum says that the one safe thing in life is
Faith . . . and without it we reach nothing. Even
lassooing stars needs faith . . . quite a lot, in fact.
Of course this sounds very pi., but it’s not really.
It’s very wonderful to know that such silly lumps
of flesh as people are can even have the uplift to
want to lassoo stars.”
Without sound or movement the girls sat, busy


“Everything . , , has been taken
. . . from me
. . even my . . . mother ...”
Beryl caught
with channels of thought that carried them to the
same goal over different paths. At last Jill looked
up from the spot on the floor which had held her
attention, her face smeared and wet. “I didn’t
know how lonely I’d been,” she said simply, “until
now.” In a flash her mood changed. “All these
years I could have been with people, studying, play-
ing . . . climbing towards my star, although I
might never get near enough to lassoo it. I think
the climbing would be more satisfying than trap-
ping it, anyway. The waiting is ... an eternity.
Waste of time. Waste of thousands and thousands
of tunes that can’t come out. He’s done it all.”
Jill could speak no more. Her throat had
swelled until the last phrase had been squeezed
into a thin wail, her eyes aching with the strain
of keeping back the passion of tears that threatened
to disgrace her for ever in the eyes of this serene
little personage with the regal head. Jill did not
know that passionate tears had shaken Beryl be-
fore to-day, and would again. “Barbarian . . .”
Beryl heard in tones that broke into a hiccup.
Then Jill crumpled down into an inert heap upon
the stones.
in stifled accents, as she saw the other girl’s thin
shoulders stiffen in a last effort at self-control—but
the anguish was too great. Jill’s body quivered as
deep sobs tore through her throat, shaking her from
head to foot, while she faced hard facts and lost
her courage before them. Beryl waited awhile, bit-
ing her lips, her own face expressive of her pity
and sympathy, but there was no help for Jill under
the shadow of black-winged despair and irremedi-


able loss. Her wild hair fell over her face, her
hands clenched fiercely out on the stones beneath
her. Beryl glanced once at the disconsolate figure
on the floor, then crept out, shutting the door behind
her, without a sound.


CHAPTER IV
Waters and stars and the lone moods of men
Are cool green echoes of the voice that sings
Beyond the verge of Time.
Harindranath Chattopadhayaya.
Beryl, steadfast in her opinion, but attentive to
the ideas of others, created an everlasting impres-
sion upon the other girl, so inclined towards wild
impulse that ended in regret afterwards. Jill
felt vaguely the restfulness of Beryl’s character, as
unruffled as the still waters of a cloister pool, and
found a consolation in seeking the other in troubled
moments, when her own mind was too chaotic for
level-headedness. Yet Beryl rode and walked and
laughed with the rest of them, spilling over with
ready laughter at the slightest absurdity, teasing,
exploring, experimenting in the kitchen, or busily
helping with the table.
Beryl had the blessed gift of being able to pour
oil upon disturbed waters, with no conscious effort
on her part: the fragrance of the sweet mind of
Mum had given its perfume to the girl who had
once despised all simple things as “common.” The
clay, at its most plastic-stage, had in Mum’s hands
been modelled into pleasing shape and design, but
the material had been worthy of her artistry. Un-
consciously the spirit of Mum was moving at
Sunset Hill, stealing through the medium of her
adopted daughter to touch and soften the rough


contours of the station girl. Beryl’s attitude to-
wards life and people was that anything and any-
one had the supreme right to character. In Beryl s
estimation one might as well try to grow a fig upon
a rose-bush as want a dancer to learn to crochet
doilys for a living, or a dressmaker to branch out
as a soubrette. The world was there: people were
there: each person was an individual, and each one
was governed by a different set of ideals, inherit-
ances, beliefs, and tastes. Why be angry if the
next person did not like radishes just because she
liked them, or dislike caraway seeds because she
disliked them? So, in her beautiful faith in the
world and its rightness, Beryl found nothing start-
ling in either her young host or the station.
And Jill felt that Beryl was not comparing the
crude old house with carpeted dwellings at the
sea, or despising the kitchen-maid’s handiwork with
visions of neat-capped maids. In that was a com-
fort which made Jill speechless, for she had no way
of expressing it, other than in a blind acceptance of
all the theories worked out long ago between four
earnest young folk at the Beehive in the sound of
the sea, and repeated by Beryl.
Beryl’s effect upon the house could be summed
up in a sentence: she brought back much of the
fineness that was dropped when Marie went away.
Loftus knew it, and said nothing. David saw new
dishes creep out, linen appear, different foods and
pretty ways of serving it, and he glowed, but said
nothing, either. Jill, half ashamed at enjoying it
all, apparently took little notice, gruffly replying to
Beryl’s queries as to whether this or that was “out
in the far storeroom.” A rug or two crept in. A
silver teapot was found, rubbed into gleaming life


by the girls and the boy, all as interested in the
newly-discovered article as if it were a find of
national importance. It became “the” teapot. The
array of brown cracked ones in the vast old kitchen
were just teapots. A chair was placed in the dining-
room, and a couch beneath the window. The cur-
tains were taken down, washed, and placed in
David’s room, new ones of cretonne being hung in
their place. Lina and Bell clucked their tongues
over such magnificence, which came gradually,
generally following upon lazy hours where there
was “nothing to do” but talk.
Jill had again called herself “barbarian,” but it
was Beryl who shook her head and laughed as she
corrected it. “No; gipsy.” This had pleased the
other extravagantly. It was a word that filled a gap
she had not been able to fill for years. “That’s it;
lam a gipsy, even to my clothes.” With almost
conscious pride Jill had glanced down at the tom-
boyish and ill-matched ensemble which had not
beautified her slight person at the time. She flushed
suddenly, and became uneasy. “I should hate to be
a fashion-plate,” she said crossly.
“I was, once,” chuckled Beryl, “before I was
adopted; and the most horrid little prig in the dis-
trict. I was so engrossed in being a prig that I
saw nothing but clothes, money, and . . . veneer.”
Jill frowned. “You’re not a fashion-plate now,
anyway, but I believe you could look nice in a few
handkerchiefs sewn together. It’s a gift, Beryl. I
am a gipsy, and hate dressing up.”
“When I’m dressed I forget it,” supplied Beryl.
But it s rather nice to feel . . . well, groomed.
But it’s glorious to get thoroughly grubby, too —


when there’s a hot bath at the end of it,” she
laughed.
“It’s a waste of time to prink,” sniffed the other,
but, when she went to her bedroom, she found a
half self-conscious, somewhat angry satisfaction in
buttoning up the collar of her shirt and fixing be-
neath it a tie taken stealthily from David’s bedroom.
Imbued by some impulse which she privately called
“softening of the brain,” she cleaned her boots and,
with many mutterings and a badly stabbed finger,
sewed the band on her latest felt hat, the ribbon of
which had for some weeks been hanging down like
the tabs on a Scotchman’s bonnet. “There,” she
said, sticking the needle into a cushion on the table,
and eyeing the hat as if she would like to consume
it with contempt, “that’s the sort of fool I am : if
they laugh, I’ll tear it off and never wear a band
at all again.”
With set face and deliberation, Jill came to the
table, the tie seeming to announce its soft blue
presence as soon as she entered the room. Nobody
stared, nobody laughed, and nobody passed re-
marks; so Jill grunted and her hatband was safe
for the future. The meal ended with Jill rather
liking the look of herself as she saw her reflection
in the sideboard mirror. What is more, she bent
down slightly to include the tie in the picture.
“You’re a born home-maker,” Jill remarked to
Beryl one afternoon, when they were both in the
living-room while the latter placed flowers in a low
bowl rescued from the storeroom. Petunias and
a long native leaf dotted with red berries splashed
crimson and purple in the centre of the room. “I
shouldn’t have thought of that: I’ll bet that’s the
first time this room’s been decorated since . . .


my mother went away.” Quickly; “She loved them
. . . flowers, I mean.”
“So do you,” said Beryl quietly. “You love every-
thing beautiful, Jill, or you couldn’t be like her.”
“It’s . . . effeminate.” —ungraciously.
“Well, you are not a boy,”—with a nod of final-
There was no denial of this, so Jill flipped a flower
with one finger, and unintentionally broke it off.
In a moment she was contrite. She picked it up,
looking ashamed, and then said with a rush: “I
didn’t mean to do that. If she loved this sort of
thing, and you do, then I expect it’s all right. I’ll
. . . get ... a thing to put it in.
Jill took it away to her own room, where Beryl
found it later, floating, a purple smudge, in a
cracked old saucer stained with boot-polish. She
made no remark.
The outcome of these small but significant re-
minders of Jill’s femininity was a sudden resolve
that brought to Jill a wild contempt of herself, but a
purpose to see this new ambition through even if
she “squirmed.” She strode determinedly to her
father’s office one afternoon, bluntly asking for the
near storeroom key.
“Why do you want it?” he inquired mildly, “I’ve
rationed the camp blacks, and issued the week’s
tea and stuff to the girls.”
“I want,” said Jill fiercely, then faltered. This
was all so foreign to her former ideas of the fitness
'of things, that she found it hard to proceed. But
she summoned up courage and went on forcefully:
“I’m tired of looking like a hobbledehoy. I want
to see if there’s anything I can make a dress out
of.”


“Oh, I see.” A swift yet long look measured the
slim figure from head to foot. “Fripperies are
already making their appeal to your feminine heart.
You will be manicuring your nails next.”
“It would improve them,” came doggedly from
the daughter of two such diverse beings as Marie
and Philip Loftus. “Although I’m not fretting to
do that.”
“I suppose this little Miss from town has in-
spired you with thinking your appearance . . . un-
sightly?”
“Well, isn’t it? But the little Miss from town
wouldn’t do anything so crude as to tell me about
it.” retorted Jill crisply. “She would like anybody
just the same if dressed in sacking, and wouldn’t
be ashamed of me whatever I wore, but I find I
am a pig in these slipshod bought-by-the-dozen atro-
cities. I arrive at the table every night looking like
a travesty of an American cowboy. Worse, I’m
not even picturesque. Not that I want to be,” she
added hastily. “So you needn’t sneer. I just want
to be decent.”
“How long is it since you’ve been overcome by
this desire for decency?” the man asked quietly.
“Since I’ve compared myself with Beryl. I feel
like a shambling idiot beside her.”
“Inferiority complex?” asked the man with ap-
parent interest.
“No. Reversal to type.”
“Be good, sweet maid, and let who will be hand-
some . . .” Almost Loftus made a joke, but cov-
ered it quickly. “When Miss Briggs was here you
took a rather extravagant pleasure in defying her
in this same matter. Why the change now?”


“She said I was unmanageable, so I didn’t care
to disappoint her.”
“Am I to take this present ambition as an indi-
cation of your growing-up? The transformation is
not evident otherwise.”
“Oh . . .’’Jill set her teeth, then lifted her chin,
a sudden flash illuminating her mind upon many
small crudities purposely ignored by him, but with-
out apparent consistency with the rest of his strict
tuition. She said flatly: “I see ... Of course the
more of a hoyden I am, the less I am like Marie.
That is quite obvious ... at last! Well, if I can’t
get some stuff for a frock I shan’t come to the
table again until I get a dress from somewhere.
I’ll cut up some sheets, rather.”
“We are not precisely overladen with sheets at
the moment, having three extra rooms in use.” The
hard lips curled. “You are suitably dressed as you
are.”
“I’m ashamed,” returned Jill thickly. “I’m like
a beastly grubby boy, instead of a girl of nineteen.
Why, lots of folks are married at nineteen. I’m
ashamed, I tell you. I know nothing, other than
the book-stuff Briggs taught us. I’m ashamed the
moment we come in from riding: it’s all right out
of doors, for Beryl is the same as I am, in her
breeches and shirts, but even they are tan silk, in-
stead of striped galatea. Hideous stuff! Beryl
wears her clothes to ribbons, too, and canters until
she’s wet through and streaked with dust, but at
night she is fresh and tidy after her bath . . .
and I . . . haven’t a thing to put on but shirts again,
boots, leggings, and pants. I see how you’ve
always encouraged it.” Jill’s voice tightened. “My
mother wasn’t a hoyden.”


“I think I prefer you as a hoyden, rather than
being hung with lace and ribbons.” The old ex-
pression of unwavering bitterness touched his
mouth, as always when the subject of Marie was
introduced.
“She wasn’t hung with lace and ribbons. She
was beautiful.” Jill forgot to be discreet in defence
of the woman who could not defend herself. “She
was exquisite.”
“Why,” asked Loftus with a searching glance
at the thin face and trembling mouth, “do you
speak so very definitely in the past tense —of her?”
Jill clenched her hands until the nails bit into her
palms. She muttered incoherently: “We know
she s . . . dead. You didn’t tell us. If I knew how,
I’d kill you for that.”
Even the man accustomed to Jill’s passionate out-
bursts was slightly aghast at the venom in her
thick voice and the burning light in her green eyes.
He moved instinctively, but spoke coldly. “Yes, I
expect you would. But then, we always hate those
whom we cannot understand. You find me inexor-
able in many ways, one in particular. That mat-
ter I intend to keep as it is; the subject we both
know without painful reiteration. I’m paying a
tribute to your sudden grown-upness by saying this,
but your Mother ruined my life . . . and it is gone.
What is left is not my life. It is an existence only.
\ou stare. You see, you don’t understand. Well,
I can t say that I wish you to, wholly. However,
my ways I adhere to, as I fully believe them to be
right. You have all you wish for, apart from the ob-
session which is turning you into a vixen. It is that
side of you—the fatal Veers blood—that I want to
stamp completely out. Peter Veers, her father, was


a crazy old violinist, spending his days with a
fiddle while he neglected his wife and pampered
his daughter to what she became. He ruined the
family with a passion for snuff-boxes and first edi-
tions, and helped into iniquity every puling would-
be musician who sought him. He watched his wife
die, and it’s said that he played a light love-song
as she closed her eyes for the last time. I want
to stamp out the Veers blood from you, who are my
daughter.”
As the long speech became staccato, then stopped,
Jill came back from far-away pictures of the old
man who had been her grandfather. She had not
heard of him before. “I like him,” she said bluntly.
“And if I died I’d rather be played out of life than
snivelled over by a lot of musty people waiting for
my money. I like him.”
“His blood is dangerous ” murmured Loftus
stubbornly.
Jill laughed aloud, so stridently that Loftus was
startled. “And you want to get rid of blood like
theirs?” she cried. “And you, with your experi-
ence and intelligence say that. Father, you are in-
tensely humorous. How can blood be stamped
out?” Into her pockets went her hands, as in
favourite defiant attitude she stood, feet apart,
shoulders braced, like a shock-headed boy as she
leaned slightly forward. “And I wouldn’t stamp it
out if I could. I’m proud of it. I am Marie’s
daughter in two ways ... by inheritance, and
taste. I am Marie, all over again.”
For once Loftus felt baffled. Hitherto, with
strength and taciturnity, he had managed Jill, with
various interludes that might have led one to doubt
it; but now she was eluding him. Moreover, he was


this time in the wrong, for he had deliberately with-
held the news of his wife’s death. Also she had
hit the truth with uncanny precision when she had
accused him of wanting her to be a hoyden. He
saw plainly that this at least was one turn of events
where he was helpless. Jill would just as readily
chop up all the sheets in the household as she had
once openly and successfully defied the governess
over dressing in frocks. Loftus found that he
was not able to fight his daughter in this new reso-
lution of hers, and that she would not stop until
she had her way. His face was oddly grey as he
half-rose from the chair and then reseated himself
heavily. Leaving her at this juncture would mean
a reopening of the subject later; he could not face
that.
Jill was waiting, watching him shrewdly. To
herself she was saying: “I won’t give in ... I
won’t. I will be what my mother would have made
me, somehow.” Aloud she said coolly: “We seem
to have digressed. I asked you for the storeroom
key just now. May I have it?”
He hesitated.
Then without a word he handed her the key,
the absurdity of refusing this petition being almost
as great as the victory Jill had won unconsciously.
Not quite unconsciously, though. For she knew
that in her hand was the grudging permission to
take her place as woman of the household.
As she glanced back through the doorway, she
stood very still. Her father was leaning forward
on his hands, his face dropped into a mask which
was almost of age. Silently she stepped forward a
pace.
“Father . . , .?”


He started and looked round. “Well?”
“I ... I wish you . . . understood.” Jill moved
impatiently. “I can’t seem to show you . . .” and
she paused.
“Show me what?”—coldly.
“Oh, nothing . . . nothing.” She turned again,
but from just outside the door she addressed him,
looking him full in the face. “Some day, perhaps,
you’ll be satisfied in killing two people . . . instead
of just one.”
It was a disturbed, thoughtful man who sat at his
desk through the fading afternoon, his ledgers
neglected. Marie seemed very close to him to-day,
and in his ears was ringing; “You’ve broken the
last of my heart ...” Loftus waited until his
troubled soul forced him to speak aloud, to himself
maybe: “And you’ve . . . broken mine, at last.”
Jill had flown to Beryl, and the two were now
rifling the storeroom near the house, poking among
the dim shelves which held coarse calicos, prints,
and twills, ready-made articles of apparel used by
the men on the station, and comestibles in bulk for
the people of the camp, kitchen, and dwelling. Frag-
rant packages of coffee and tin-foiled boxes of tea
scented the place with a strange aroma, suggesting
the East, and pictures far from Intircha.
“There seems to be nothing,” Jill was saying
heavily. “We needn’t go to the other storeroom,
because there’s only old furniture there. Even the
trunks that she left are taken from there since we’ve
been diving among the things. I expect he’s de-
stroyed them. Beryl, how can one make a dress
out of calico? It’s an offence.”
Tugging doubtfully at its blue-white stiff dura-
bility, Beryl wriggled her shoulders with distaste.


“It couldn’t result in anything very artistic,” she
admitted, “even in Poiret’s hands. Wouldn’t he
loathe it, too? But here’s some blue print with
little yellow squiggles on —and red twill.”
“The girls wear that: I’d rather use sacks.”
It seemed hopeless. Beryl moved among the
packages on a shelf. “Here are some white
shirts. You could take a half-dozen of those out,
and give your striped ones to the camp. You could
use some of these boys’ socks, too, instead of leg-
gings, for indoors, until something comes from
town.”
Seated on the floor, they spread the articles round
them, completely absorbed in their problem. Eating
boiled sweets from a tin, Jill mumbled: “I suppose
I shall have to give up trying to be handsome. It’s
impossible, anyway —but I’ll wear something dif-
ferent, or have my dinner alone every night until
old Wingiebuck comes with his van. Could I make
a dress out of curtains?”—blinking hopefully.
“Not Sunset Hill curtains,” replied Beryl with
uncomplimentary candour. “Then the windows
would be worse than you . . They laughed.
“Here’s the curtain stuff that we cut the dining-
room ones from. See, obese peacocks, magenta
cabbages, and water-jugs made from putty—appar-
ently. Who designs cretonnes . . .?” With a rush
and a whisper the big parcel of cretonne started to
fall. “Jill . . . quick!” In a moment they had
eased the bundle and its broken paper to the floor,
but Jill was holding Beryl’s arm in a painful grip.
A bewildered expression was chasing over her
features. “That’s my mother’s big box; he hid it in
here when we started rummaging in the other
room. We’ve never dared touch it . . .” Solem-


nity entered the speaker’s voice as she pointed to
the trunk uncovered by a heap of papers and the
cretonne. Almost in a whisper she queried: “I
wonder what’s in it?”
Beryl said nothing.
The two remained very still until Jill squirmed
away from where she was sitting, to touch the
lock lovingly. “I’ll have a peep —if it’s not locked.
Look, it’s been undone recently. There are scratches
on the rust. Beryl, I must look.” The padlock
was partly unclasped, and was easily forced up by
Jill’s strong fingers.
“Is it fair to look in there?” asked Beryl doubt-
fully. There was a look on Jill’s face that Beryl
had begun to recognize: the other girl would do
more than peep. The young Pandora set her mouth
and lifted the lid. “Jill!” cried Beryl. “Your father
might be angry!”
“She wouldn’t be; that is all that matters.” The
tawny head was bent slightly as Jill peered at the
top layers of papers before investigating.
Then, with swift movements, she darted her
hands towards the yellowed sheets of paper
marked with fine pen-work—musical scores, notes
in fine handwriting, and folded letters in a bundle.
The letters the girl lifted reverently out, placing
them aside. The manuscript was soiled and torn at
the edges, yellowed with age. Jill softly blew
dust from the sheets as she carefully lifted them one
by one.
“Her songs,” she said quietly. “Her writing.
See, this is in French . . . look! Her ‘Little Song’
and . . . ‘The Faltering Tune.’ ”
Jill gulped, her eyes shining. “ ‘The Faltering
Tune’ was written here —see the date! Her falter-


ing tune rang out again, though, when she left
here.” A sudden thought inspired the restless
fingers to feverish action, as the excited and stirred
girl tossed garments and linen, programmes and
photographs, into an untidy pile. One Beryl lifted,
and looked at solemnly, as the heap grew higher.
Almost hopelessly Jill allowed her hands to rest
at last on the trunk-edge, turning to glance at the
other with a long stare of disappointment that
changed to a grim smile of acceptance of the in-
evitable. A bag of lavender exhaled a fragrance
that came to them like a perfume from the past.
“I wondered for a mad moment if there was a
violin there . . . but, of course, he smashed the
only one she had.”
The abject droop of Jill’s shoulders awoke sharp
pity in the other girl. She dumbly held out the
photograph in her hands, and Jill took it slowly.
Together, folded on the floor among the dead vio-
linist’s possessions, they gazed in silence at the
picture of the fragile little woman who had on her
face a haunting look of sadness. She was dressed
in some long-forgotten style, a fiddle held lightly
in her thin hands. The frock was a miracle of
grace, falling in ruffles to her feet, where small high-
heeled shoes just showed under the frills. Marie
Veers’ hair was drawn back over her ears, shining
in the light above her, a long fringe touching her
brows. Straight out of the picture she looked, and
it was Jill who said brokenly: “I remember her like
that ... in other frocks.”
‘‘The frock in the picture is here,” Beryl volun-
teered presently, breaking the still silence that fol-
lowed Jill’s statement. She glanced at the garment
Beryl was selecting, a soft delicately-coloured thing


touched with black velvet ribbons. “It . • • was
a stage frock,” Beryl ventured again. A copy of
a Victorian maiden’s dress. I expect she wore
things like that on the platform.”
Jill was holding it to her, her chin quivering, but
her eyes glowing with some strange idea. She stood
up suddenly, draping the soft muslin against her
hip, peering over the ruffles at the neck with such a
look of mingled pain and gladness that Beryl bit
her lips and could not speak.
“I’ll try it on,” Jill said shortly, to force back
threatening tears. “I’ll see how much I look like
her —in her things.” Doggedly she lifted small
black shoes with great tarnished buckles, long white
silk stockings which she touched respectfully, and
a crushed, rose-ringed hat with two long-looped
ribbons hanging from the brim. Propping the photo-
graph on a shelf, she eyed it for a moment, then
in a flash had torn her shirt over her head, and
was unfastening her boots. In two minutes she
stood erect, a slim fragile figure in boy’s shorts
and vest, her hair tumbled to a mop.
Her face was still set as she pulled the frock
over her head, allowing it to fall to her feet with-
out comment, but the touch of the fabric, and the
scent of it, made her shiver with delight. It fitted
loosely round her waist and reached to the floor,
billowing outwards with the late sunlight touching
the tiny hem-stitched frills. Jill sat down on the
trunk, whose lid she closed softly, and slipped on
first the stockings, then the shoes, which were
almost too tight. She turned to Beryl, spellbound
by the transformation, which gave a new grace to
her friend’s slender figure and a new look to her
face. “Where’s your pocket-comb?” asked Jill de-


The photograph Beryl consulted gravely until
she nodded. “You haven’t any idea how beautiful
you look, Jill,” she said warmly. “That fringe, your
little bare white ears, and the hat . . . Take it in
your hand . . . Oh, Jill, you are the image of
Marie, all but the . . . Beryl stopped dead.
terminedly, holding the photograph for a moment.
Beryl hesitated for an instant, and then said
eagerly: “I’ll do your hair: I must.”
Beryl’s poetic soul drove a mist to her eyes as she
stood back a moment later in the shadowed old
storeroom to enjoy better the picture Jill made.
Her wild hair was combed back from the white,
sombre face and caught into a knob low on the
girlish neck, the soft masses lifted from the small
ears. The fringe, which usually stood on end, was
combed flat down on the forehead of the girl, who
had stood like a manikin while the other put
the finishing touches to the beautiful creature who
was Marie, re-created.
The girl in the old frock stirred to life. “All
but the violin,” she said bitterly. “Marie Veers’
ghost, with the essential lacking to complete her.”
She swallowed, and then asked numbly: “Am I
very like that picture—really?” They both re-
garded it intently.
“You are the picture, Jill,” Beryl said gravely at
last.
“Then”—proudly—“l am glad of that.” She
laughed, a sound Beryl did not understand, until
the glinting green eyes flashed sideways, while Jill
said: “What would father think of the blood he’s
stamping out —if he saw me now?”
“ Jill,” cried Beryl hastily in alarm. “What do
you mean to do?” But Jill, skirts flying, was wind-


ing past counters and bins to the door, on the wave
of such a wildly glorious notion that all else was
forgotten. “ JUl\” Beryl called.
The girl in the doorway turned, holding her skirts
out with both hands, the hat hanging from her
wrist. She paused for a fleeting moment to announce
dramatically; “I’ll show him how ashamed I am of
belonging to the Veers.”
Beryl, chagrined and dismayed, remained in the
storeroom only long enough to create a little order
about the trunk; then she moved aimlessly to her
room after turning the key in the storeroom door.
While Jill, uplifted and trembling, ran indoors,
passing nobody as she hastened, frills rustling, hat
flying. Her face was stained with bright pink, her
mouth scarlet, as she held out the hampering skirts
from her ankles, retarded by them and the tight
little shoes. She reached the office without encoun-
tering even a servant. She hesitated as she turned
the door-knob, faltering for just one moment as she
stepped inside.
Loftus was there, writing again. As the door
opened, a red flood of light from across the hall was
admitted behind Jill. She waited, outlined and
drenched in the gold of early evening, without
sound or motion.
In a little while, which seemed a year to Jill, the
man and the girl were facing each other, both as if
carved from stone. Loftus broke the agonizing
silence with a dull mutter which Jill could not catch.
There was something in his attitude that for one
second made her recoil, afraid and aghast, but she
recovered as he stood upright abruptly and pushed
back his chair with an angry jerk. But he faltered
as he moved towards the girl, surrounded by the


brightest of light from Sunset Hill’s most vivid
hour, standing motionless, not speaking. As white
as paper, her father caught his breath, and said one
word: “Marie! ...”
He did not know he had said it. Jill herself had
no idea of the faithfulness of her masquerade; out
of his thoughts of Marie had stepped the dead wife.
The apparition was ethereal to his harassed mind.
But rapidly mind and senses asserted themselves.
He held the chair-back, however, as he asked:
“What does this mean?”
His voice was unsteady. Jill, swallowing a lump
which would not be persuaded into control, mes-
merized by the look she saw on Loftus, moved at
last, gathering her skirts for a headlong flight. The
frills moved, and the eventide glow out on the In-
tircha flooded the little room, painting Jill in fluffy
scarlet, lingering in a livid mist on her hair. In-
stead of flying, some instinct made her wait, until
the long look from her father fell and he turned
his head away.
“So, memories have long fingers,” she mocked
daringly, thinking now with shrewd reasoning.
“And I rather fancy those fingers are not pointing
at you with admiration.” The red lips parted into a
smile that was wholly scornful, as other sensations
were quelled. “I’m becoming too big a problem
for you, you see.”
Loftus said nothing, his face heavily bitter, his
gaze fascinated by her. “And you see that there’s
enough of your composition in me to prevent my
heart being broken. You are fighting a bit of
yourself, you know, when you fight me.”
“Wait ...” came thickly from the man. She
had turned again, to go. A hand reached out to


touch her, although she was three yards away, and
he did not step nearer. Jill closed her eyes for a
moment to the infinite pathos of the sight of her
father standing like a blind man feeling for a wall.
But he sent her back into her pitiless hatred at
once. “Where did you get that dress?”
“I found it.”
“Will you promise never to wear it again?” he
asked quickly. She noted the significance of the
request, which once would have been an order.
“There is no other dress for me to wear,” she
replied relentlessly.
“The key . . . .” said the man hastily.
“The key gave me nothing I could use, other than
the stock rubbish,” Jill said stolidly. “But it un-
locked something very precious that I did not know
I possessed. ’ She paused for a moment, smiling
mysteriously at her father.
Loftus was insistent in his predicament. “You
must not wear that dress,” came heavily from him.
He spoke like a man not wholly awake. “I’ll get
you some more, from the city.”
A sensation of triumph invaded Jill intoxicatingly.
“You can’t do that for some time,” she answered
swiftly. “And I’ll wear this until you do. Why
should a dress make such a disturbance, when the
owner of it did not matter at all?”
The man’s mouth twisted. “Perhaps,” he replied,
still in the detached fashion that struck Jill with a
little compunction, “there is something you don’t
understand altogether.” His skin was waxen, with
all its tan.
“We both need understanding, it seems,” Jill
said with a shrug. “And this frock is mine, and


I’ll wear it. Have your meals brought here, if
it hurts you to see me in it.”
The emotions which had held Loftus now
changed in a flash to the blind anger which sees
no reason. A mist came before his eyes as he
made one swift stride towards Jill. Before she
could move he had seized her, and with his strong
fingers was deliberately ripping and tearing at the
old fabric and soft lace. She twisted wildly away,
but with one hand he held a thin arm, while with
the other hand he stripped the garment from her,
a shred at a time, until it fell, a heap of scattered
rags, about her feet. The last scrap he tossed into
a corner.
“You will perhaps obey another time,” he said
hoarsely. “You will not wear that dress again.
Loftus found that he was trembling too badly
to stand without support. He sat in his chair
abruptly, his breath coming quickly. Through nar-
rowed eyelids he regarded Jill, who stood without
apparent concern in the middle of the floor. She
met his stare with a composure which even in his
present condition he noted grimly. It was getting
beyond his power to control ... by that he meant
his existence. And Jill’s. She stood, weak but de-
fiantly cool, in her cellular shorts and sleeveless
vest, the long stockings and black shoes striking a
burlesque note that her father noted suddenly. He
seized upon it abruptly. “Go and put something
on,” he ordered.
Her answer was to stoop and lift the rose-sewn
hat from the floor, and offer it to Loftus with a
glint of sarcasm in her eyes. “You forgot to tear
this up,” she said sweetly, then turned and liter-


ally ran from the room—not from fear, but because
she would not let him see her weep.
Ten minutes later, still in her abbreviated under-
wear, like a bather in a loose white suit, and quite
forgetful of the fact, she staggered into Beryl’s
bedroom with a big heap of linen and garments,
which she threw to the bed.
Beryl pointed blankly at Jill’s long bare legs and
arms, the stockings folded down like pirates’ boots
about her ankles. She laughed suddenly. “I forgot.
I’d wear them to the table every night for two pins
. . . but for these." These were the remainder
of the fanciful dresses taken from the trunk, and
the yellowed hand-worked lingerie.
While Beryl stared and listened with growing
amazement, Jill in picturesque speech and with
many gesticulations related the episode of the last
half-hour. Beryl was wide-eyed and silent until the
last word. . . And as I can’t wear the ruined
one, 111 wear these. Will you keep them in here,
for he wouldn’t come here for worlds.”
Beryl shook her head. “I shan’t look after them,
if you create scenes again.”
“That’s my business.”
“I won’t help you scheme against him,” replied
Beryl unwaveringly. “It’s a rotten thing to do
. . . on my part.”
“Mine, too, I suppose?” inquired the girl angrily.
“That is your business,” she was reminded
gravely, but Beryl leaned over and took Jill’s hand.
“Don’t be a chump, Jill: you’ve too much to plan
for you to spoil yourself by being petty. I’ll help
you make these old dresses into little frocks. The
handwork is so beautiful that the work is half done,
and should be easy, if David will oil the old machine


again. The underwear you can use as it is: con-
vent work, I think.” She fingered it lovingly. “Poor
tired eyes.”
Beryl had not released the hand she held, which
had tugged so vigorously at first but remained pas-
sive now. She smiled at Jill, who, under her fringe,
returned a watery edition of Beryl’s glance of warm
affection.
“Don’t you think,” remarked Beryl a little later,
in the midst of folding the lavender-scented clothes
into tidy heaps, “that you’d better put something
on before dinner.”
“I won’t go to the table unless I wear a frock,”
replied the other stubbornly. Beryl walked to
the door, and unhung from the hooks a pretty
white voile dress and a silk petticoat. “Keep the
shoes and stockings on, and borrow these until we
make up the other frocks.”
“I don’t borrow.”
“I do,” came complacently from Beryl. “Barby
and Brenda and I always borrow . . . from one
another.”
“That’s different.”
“Not very . . . Now, Jill, let’s startle the room
by introducing Miss Loftus of Intircha, instead of
Jill the Gipsy.”
Anything in the nature of a scene caught Jill’s
vagrant fancy. “I’ll change here,” she agreed
hastily, before she should change her mind instead.
“Will you do me up? I haven’t worn one for
ages.”


CHAPTER V
For all the world belonged to me
When I zvas six years old.
Zora Cross.
“Bubbles,” said Beryl a few days later, “you
must write a letter home. You’ve not sent a word
since we came, and Pve written reams every fort-
night. Tell them about the corroboree.”
“You’re doing that in your letters, Beryl.”
“I shan’t be able to tell them everything.”
“No.” A deep sigh. “I couldn’t either —but
a’course I might fit in the bits you don’t.”
Beryl nodded with relief. “That’s it. Now go,
like a good boy, and get pencil and paper. There’s
a writing-block—a blue one —on my dressing-
table.”
“In your bedroom?”
“Of course.”
“And your silver-handled pen that Bob gave you
last Crissmus?”
“Well . . . Yes. Now run along, for old Pete
will be along with the camels to take the mail
on to-morrow. Don’t upset the ink.”
The little boy vanished obediently, if reluctantly,
charmed into movement by the thought of the fas-
cinating silver pen, which felt so heavy and smooth
in the fingers. He was very much averse to writing
letters, their laborious construction being a work of


necessity rather than love. But he wandered into
Beryl’s bedroom, courageously inclined, with a sigh
or two. On a hot day, too! He admired a coloured
dressing-gown extravagantly, breathing heavily as
he touched a bright bird embroidered upon it. He
stroked the silk of a blouse, and puffed twice upon
the mirror to see “clouds come,” then arranged the
pins in a hanging pincushion to form the initials
B.C. in straggling letters. With Beryl’s brush
he attended to his hair in deep contemplation, then
sprinkled some drops of eau-de-cologne over his
blue shirt. These time-killing diversions ate up all
the possibilities of the room; so, after a searching
glance to see what next to do, he resigned himself
with a long breath of martyrdom to his original
purpose when entering. At the door he pondered,
laden with ink, pens, and paper, reflectively gazing
down at his filled hands. Envelopes! Nobody
could write letters without envelopes! He went
back into the room, and out of a packet of twenty
or so spent five minutes measuring each one against
the next, selecting one precisely like its fellows
in every particular, and then, armed with his
burdens, made for the window.
Climbing through with some difficulty because
of his occupied hands, he slid from the sill and
found Lina seated on the stone floor outside, clean-
ing a row of indoor and hurricane lamps. Flipping
her duster at him, and spreading the tang of oil
through the air, she laughed with uncomplimentary
amusement at what he carried. “You too little
fellow wei write longa paper-book . . . eh-h-h-h?”
“I can write letters,” asserted the boy solemnly,
wriggling into the lounge with the articles of pen-
manship clutched to his tie. His person arranged


more or less to his satisfaction, he deposited the ink
on the arm of the lounge and flourished the pen
grandly over the opened writing-block, long let-
ters I can write,” he added. “Terribly aportant
letters, full of . . . all sorts of things.” He breathed
laboriously, and unscrewed the pen-top, frowning
under his straight brows at the black girl. “Letters
that some day might be in a biography book . . .
like my father’s writings.” He ended this verbal
embroidery with a short scolding word which Lina
understood well. “Kurna.”
“No, no kurna, Lina good one,” but her tone was
not very emphatic, for the grown-up native child
of thirty was sometimes as contrarily mischievous
as the youngest imps about the camp. Bubbles
sniffed his doubt, then put his tongue in one cheek
and deliberated with weighty thought. The ink-
bottle wobbled as he wriggled again, his feet up-
lifted and braced against the rail of the lounge to
form a table for the solid block of paper. “Lina,”
he asked ingratiatingly, “don’t you think a cushion’d
make me write better letters?”
“Lina kurna,” she grunted.
“No, Lina properly good one: oh, go on, Lina.”
The half-caste girl arose, chuckling, swaying
clumsily along the veranda until she withdrew into
a room ten feet away. Like an Eastern sultan in
his air of expectant superiority, Bubbles waited, an
inviting gap between his back and the cane-work.
Into that gap presently the girl slipped a bright-
hued monstrosity purchased by Jill, in a fit of
extravagant contrariness a long while ago, from
the itinerant Afghan whose van was a stuffed
Aladdin’s cave to the women of the interior. With
a languid expulsion of another long breath, the


small boy sank against the softness arranged behind
him, then dug the pen with an alarming and sudden
squeak into the ink-pot.
Lina rescued it with a cry, and placed it more
securely. Bubbles rewarded her with a lofty smile
and a far-away look that told fibbingly of inspira-
tion. Alas! No word would come to the end of
the dripping pen. The girl watching him, he passed
a hand wearily over his forehead, closed his eyes
for an unutterably languid moment, then allowed
his gaze to wander to the orange and cinnamon
cliffs, where the blue spirals of the camp-fires rose
unwaveringly upwards. The faint reverberations
that came from that section of Sunset Hill were
the last of the reluctant settling down after the
corroboree of the day and night before.
“You writum properly longa paper-book?”
prompted Lina with a deep and insulting chuckle,
her face wrinkling from eyes to chin. Her squat
figure slid down a trifle as she bent further over the
oil and the lamps, to hide her face under the thick
curls which fell forwards over her forehead and
cheeks.
“ ’Course,” replied the boy. Plainly something
must be done about it. Jerking his cuffs back from
his wrists with the air of one about to sign a peace
treaty, he commenced. The date of the month at
least was not too heavily fraught with creative
ability. The ink-bottle squeaked in anguish under
the onslaughts of the long-suffering nib, the lounge
making a duet with its protesting bars as he
wrote.
Much later, in another part of the house, Beryl
remembered Bubbles and the task she had ap-
pointed him. Jill and David stared as she started


swiftly for the side veranda, the small boy s favour-
ite haunt. . ,
“He won’t move until he finishes it and I look
at it,” she stated in half amused dismay. “He’ll stay
there till midnight if I don’t see him.”
The three trailed through the house from the
kitchen and its pleasant odours to the other side
of the dwelling. They found Bubbles still deep in
thought, his energies evidently over, the block
closed, the pen, inky to the top of the handle, stick-
ing upright in the ink-bottle, which, strangely
enough, had “gone and splashed over.” Beryl
seized bottle and pen and placed them safely on
the window-sill, after scrubbing furiously at the
silver with a scrap of Lina’s cleaning rags. “You
are a grubby insect,” she remarked. “Is your let-
ter done? You could have written a novel by this
time.”
Bubbles looked very proud of himself, but also
very guilty, as Beryl took the paper and read it
slowly. It took exactly five seconds to do that.
The masterpiece was straggled in large hand-
writing over one page, the date filling up most of
that.
Beryl composed her features as she read:
Dear Mum and Barby and Bob and Brenda,
Yesterday there was a corrobry here yesterday. The black-
fellows got very aggsited and it was ridiclous.
Your loveing son,
Respeckfully, Bubbles.
Beryl passed the missive to the other two, retain-
ing her gravity by a miracle of discretion. Swal-
lowing hastily, not daring to glance at Jill or
David, she turned to the small boy and asked
sternly: “Have you been two hours writing that?”
“O-o-o, no.”


Nonplussed, Beryl took the block and looked at
two or three pages, but they were all blank under
Bubbles’ concise letter. “What, then?” she asked
gravely.
“I . . . things were int’resting,” he confessed
shakily. “A black over in the camp hit another
biack man, and the lady squawked just like the
chook did what Bell caught this morning for din-
ner to-night. And my skin went prickly, and I
sang a song, and so did Lina, and Lina forgot to
clean the lamps because we sang a song, and then I
helped Lina clean the lamps, and the black lady
ran up the hill.” He thrust out his hands suddenly,
to within an inch of Beryl’s unappreciative nose.
They smelled terrifically of kerosene. She started
back.
“Beryl, don’t get sad, please, Beryl.”
“I’m not sad, son,” she replied quickly. The
boy’s lips were quivering. “But I’m sure Mum
would love a nice long letter from you. Will you
try again? I’ll keep this one. Think of all that
happened yesterday, looking down from that baking
cliff on to the natives below—just for all the
world like marionettes on strings, dancing in the
river-bed. Tell Mum how they yelled, and how
the Alice Springs tribe hid in the bushes while our
mob got ready for the dance. Tell her, too, about
the funny prancing goose-step, with their knees
coming up to their chins, the dogs all yelping and
barking, and the children following.”
“And,” added Jill, entering into the spirit of it,
“you might tell the Beehive that both the visitors
and our own mob were daubed all over with oily
clay and yellow ochre.”
“Also,” said David, smiling into the round eyes


of the small boy listening with lips parted. “You
might interest your folk at home by saying that
the half-caste station girls were not allowed to per-
form, because of not being completely black. Tell
your mother how we teased the girls because their
black husbands had forgotten their ‘white-fellow’
clothing, and were as wild and unclothed as the
rest.”
“O-o-o-o,” said Bubbles, squirming. “And what
did you say to Bell, David? Tell me again.”
“I said, ‘Look at Murra, him dance longa mob:
no clothes on: properly Iriorum.’ ” David nodded
weightily and lifted his eyebrows.
“And what did Bell say then?” prompted Bubbles
breathlessly, for the fifth time that day.
“She said,” continued David indulgently, “ ‘Him
blackfellow; no learn not to first time;’ which,”
said David, addressing the other two, “is perfectly
true. Their customs are no more strange to us than
ours to them.”
The letter was forgotten, Bubbles enthralled.
“Yes,” he added gleefully, “Lina giggled until she
nearly split her bodice, because her Ishmael wore
red clay instead of trousis, and waggled his spear
all over his head, and hopped up and down, and
gurgled to himself. Then he made out to be shy,
and the others made out to be shy, and the Alice
mob made out to be shy . . . and they weren’t.”
A fierce nod as assent. “ ’Cos if they were they’d
have worn trousis.”
“The dogs were the funniest,” laughed Beryl,
now talking reminiscently, and not for the benefit
of Bubbles. “Did you ever see so much ado over
nothing?”


“Bridge parties would be funnier to them,” re-
marked David.
“The dogs?” chuckled Jill.
“The blacks,” corrected David.
“I like to see the pink tracks their feet make in
the white sand,” soliloquized Jill, looking out at
the reddening cliffs. “I like watching their sprees,
anyway, from away up on Intircha: it seems un-
real then. Close up, they’re nasty . . . too much
noise and grease. That string which they wound
and unwound is quite a sacred part of the ceremony,
by the way, and it’s made from human hair, blood,
and clay.” At Beryl’s “Ugh!” Jill smiled. “I’ve
seen a lot of jamborees, but when they start the
howling stage I look behind me for Kurdaitchas.”
“What’s k’dyshers?” asked Bubbles, devouring
Jill’s face with such an intent and unceasing gaze
that she wriggled uneasily.
“Sort of native ghosts,” explained Jill good
naturedly. “Nothing living, nothing dead, or in
the water, or the air, or upon the ground. Nothing
fish, flesh, or fowl, yet everything that can’t be
blamed upon human beings or the elements is laid
at the door of the poor Kurdaitcha.”
“Serves him right,” came from Bubbles, who had
been stirred to the marrow by this recital of Jill’s.
David ended up a casual remark with “And better
not go near the camp for a day or so, until
they recover finally from their protracted social
amenities.”
They all laughed at the lofty description of the
chaotic and complicated revelries which had ren-
dered the previous night hideous. Into the laughter
came a welcome sound, the tinkle of tea-cups on
a tray carried by Lina, shy, and beaming upon the


young people whose doings filled her with endless
delight.
“Tea,” cried David enthusiastically, “Splendid!
Good for you, Lina! You good fellow, eh?”
“Plenty,” replied the girl with a conceited swish
of her red skirts, and vanished.
Pouring gravely, David passed the cups round.
“Here, Beryl, weak and no milk. Sensible person!
Milk spoils the tea when the wretched stuff is
curdled almost before it’s out of the cow.”
Bubbles accepted his cup with a brutal lack of
polish, sniffing suspiciously at the liquid that, for
him, was nearly all milk. “Is this curdled?” he
asked politely and frankly of his host.
No, old chap. Now drink it up and fortifv your-
self for that missive you’ve got to compose later.
Jill, sugar in yours—don’t get spots.” David
sometimes forgot his limping leg and the heart-
ache that did not assail him so strongly now that
Beryl was present with her quiet contentment
and ready friendship for each of them. Gradually
the boy was finding a new confidence in himself,
and to him Beryl was a window through which he
could look out upon life and see it painted in pleas-
ing colours, a new landscape, fresh and beautiful,
with roads leading on, not aimlessly, but with
definite purpose, not so strewn with stones and
flints as when he looked at them alone. This was
one of David’s joyous hours. He chattered and
laughed, quoted and parried, handing the tea round
with an exaggerated courtesy that made the others
smile at his absurdity—Jill reluctantly, frowning
oddly enough at the same time; Beryl with spon-
taneous chuckles that might have come from a girl
of ten. It was a glimpse of the boy who might


have been and of the young man who could be,
later, as David uttered his swift stream of delicate
nonsense. He turned now to Bubbles, who was
dubiously regarding his cup, in an attitude of deep
contemplation which had held him for the last five
minutes. “. . . And it’s me who says it’s good
tea, say it as shouldn’t. Even self-praise is sweet,
however, when others sit back and solemnly refuse
to throw compliments my way. Well, old man,”
—to the small boy—“why don’t you drink it up?
Here am I, waiting in completely servile humility,
bearing aloft ‘the’ teapot, yet you glare into your
cup as if seeking fortunes in the tea-leaves that
‘the’ teapot presents. Come, O Sombre One, tell
me thy woe.”
The little boy was gazing, as David had said, into
the depths of the very pale brown liquid only partly
diminished. His eyes were far away. He came
back slowly to say with utter gravity: “David, what
I want to know is, when anything goes wrong with
a cow, do you get a plumber?”
Nobody tried to subdue the howls that met this
query, the disgusted small boy sitting back blink-
ing as the others laughed and laughed again. Their
combined mirth was overheard by the two men who
were walking across the yards to the house. The
presence of tea upon the side-veranda table sum-
moned all the white folk on the station in the
most mysterious way. The Major nodded towards
the building. “Our youngsters appear to fraternize
very well, Loftus.”
“They do, indeed,” replied the sombre-faced
man with a slight show of enthusiasm. “I’m rather
relieved, I admit, for I feared friction with Jill.”
Stirring in the cause of the girl who was so buf-


feted by her own stormy temperament, Major
Campbell replied, with a careful regard for the
words he used. “To be quite frank with you, Lof-
tus, I’ve been wanting to speak to you about Jill.
She is a splendid, fearless creature, with a spirit just
a shade too forceful for her slight body. Every
action betrays the intensity of her emotions. But
she is truthful, sincere, and loyal, even if she is
rather lavish with those virtues. Forgive me .. .
she is a born artist.”
Loftus was silent as they strolled homewards.
The Major went on, introducing the matter for the
first time since his initial observations at Sunset
Hill.
“The divine spark is in her, Loftus: an inheritance
whose strength we can’t pit our minds against. You
can no more stifle that passion for music than you
can still the winds. Certain satisfactions we get
from life, as mysterious and strange as a bud in its
sheath, belong to what we call ‘expression’: music
is the only way Jill can express her odd person-
ality. It holds much of beauty, too, and has a
compensation for all the other pains that same per-
sonality promises for her. The world, to her, is
music. Jill is one with the winds, the things that
move in the night-time, and the thunder of storms.
The urge she has is a grandeur of soul that few of
us realize. My apparent discourtesy in speaking
like this is nothing but a desire to rescue something
precious from being smashed ... as a Ming vase
would be rescued by you, should you see it totter-
ing on its shelf.” The Major, slightly touched by
a brick-red at the cheekbones, ended with a laugh.
“Perhaps when you feel a desire to sing in your


bath, you feel a travesty of Jill’s urge . . . as I do,
much to the chagrin of my household.”
Loftus had been listening with grim mouth and
frowning brows. He essayed a thin smile, however,
which he could not prevent, for he had detected a
warm sympathy in the other man, not for Jill
alone. It was impossible to be offended with this
man, who lived, spoke, and thought so gently and,
Major Campbell had spoken no untruths. “You
see, Loftus,” he continued slowly, “the girl has in-
herited two powers, entirely at war with each other,
and she is the battleground.”
“I don’t look at it like that,” replied Loftus stub-
bornly, but the hard mouth allowed the thin smile
to appear again.
“You mean,” corrected the Major with a glance
of kindly interest that took most of the sting from
the words, “that you have shut your heart to that
fact.”
“It’s hard to say which, Campbell,” half assented
the other man. Jill’s father broke up a stiff reserve
of weeks to say earnestly, with a shade of scornful
bitterness: “I should like to live my life again. I’d
sacrifice a great deal to alter many of the things
I’ve done.”
“Do you think you are alone in that prayer?”
asked the Major quietly, lighting his pipe and paus-
ing in the sunlight as his gaze searched the haggard
face of his companion—but not critically. “The sad
part of it is, Loftus, that we are not endowed with
enough perception to recognize mistakes until
we’ve made them.”
Jill’s father made no response, and they walked
on. “Jill is an odd child,” the Major continued
casually, “fighting, as one would for life, for her


right to express herself. Quite modern, am I not,
with those glib phrases on my tongue? However,
it is correct.” Blue smoke came from the speaker’s
lips as he surveyed his pipe and paused. “Yet
beneath her apparent hardness is something not
difficult to name: the other day she came to me
with her soul in her eyes, asking me if I thought
you were well. It was after the frock incident.
She said you looked as if a ghost had you.” He
laughed. “Said it, and meant it, too. She under-
stands rather more than she receives credit for.”
The Major smiled again. “Poor child!”
“A ghost has me: she is right,” came almost care-
lessly.
“Yes,” said the other, comprehending perfectly.
“That ghost would lose itself in the shadows if you
brought to life the musician in Jill.”
“Try to destroy one, and compensate with an-
other, eh? A clumsy attempt at conciliation with
the angry gods.”
To these severe words the Major made no re-
sponse as they moved on towards the house again.
The stony face of Philip Loftus was touched by
something gentle. He gave a short laugh that held
no happiness. “I’m lost, Campbell, lost in a
thicket of my own misguided planting. It’s growing
too high for me to manage, and I’m in the centre
of it. As well as other things . . . I’ve allowed
David to ruin his body and warp his mind.”
“You should not blame yourself for circumstance,
man. David’s accident was no fault of yours, and
you are grievously mistaken when you say that
boy’s mind is warped. He is sensitive to a degree;
a fine nature like his would be. He is introspective,
as are so many people who are driven to books


and quietude rather than the hurly-burly. He will
grow stronger. He needs massage, and advice
from a specialist. You might consider that later.
I can give you the name of a man in Sydney who
is a miracle-worker in all orthopaedic work. With
Beryl’s and my small son’s company, he is daily
returning more to his normal light-heartedness.
I’ve watched and observed. The lad is well worth
consideration —indeed, to be proud of —living a
courageous life under his lonely star. Be tolerant
with them, old man; they’re infinitely worth it, and
neither of them common clay.”
The pride of the man, who had been touched
and uplifted despite himself, came back abruptly.
“And give Jill a violin, to listen to her caterwauling
and screeching round me all day long, forgetting
her duties, forgetting to ride, forgetting everything
she has been taught to accept as her lot? She has
everything she needs.”
“Hard cash is a poor substitute for what Jill really
needs,” supplied the Major daringly.
“If she had a violin, providing I could stand the
noise . . . she would not remain long with me.”
This, to Major Campbell, was the secret underly-
ing all other reasons which Loftus believed to be
right. So her father was afraid of losing her! As
he walked across the hard earth the man from the
beach felt more hope for Jill than ever before: fear
of loss was realization of value. Loftus was a
strange man!
When the two men reached the tea-tray they
were told at once of the reason for the young
people’s laughter, Bubbles being thoroughly dis-
gusted with their stupid amusement at such a
simple question. The afternoon meal was oddly


flat after the men joined the young folk. Presently
Jill drifted away, and the others sat in silence. The
Major and his host drank their tea, also in silence,
each rising then to go to different parts of the
station.
“I wish ...” Beryl was thinking. “I wish they
could be friends.” She was thinking of Jill and her
father. She was interrupted in her silent story-
weaving by Bubbles shouting joyously: “It’s done !”
She jumped. “What is done?”
“My letter.” He waved it over his head, pre-
sumably to dry the ink, as Beryl turned to take it
from him. “How much have you written?” she
asked severely.
“I did a whole page, but I couldn’t help the
blots. Blots always seem to pick my letters to get
on, somehow or other.”
The little boy settled down with the satisfaction
of one whose work is nobly done after long strain
and deep purpose. But Beryl saw Jill’s father re-
turning, so she said hastily: “Come into my room.”
They scrambled through the window, Beryl
throwing herself flat on to her bed, her ankles
crossed, Bubbles perching himself on the counter-
pane beside her, rather too close to her warm body
for comfort. She surveyed him for a moment, but
did not tell him to move, then applied herself to
the important missive again.
Dear Everybody, (he had written)
I wrote another letter but it wassent long enough. I can
ride now, a donkey, a horse, and a goat, but of course not
all at once. I like to go out in the evenings, to see the goats
be fed, and there are a lot of little goats which Jill said are
kids. That sounds disrespeckfull. They have beards, which
makes it more disrespeckfull.
There are donkeys that make noises like Dr Morden’s
motor-car, and a little kangaroo that ate an onion down in


the fowl house and died. It didn’t died because of the
onion,, because it liked onions. He was buried in a petrol
tin out by the place where Murra chops the wood in the
morning.
This place is very ammense. You ride and ride and never
get anywhere till you come home again. Dad goes away a
long way looking for things. Sometimes he finds pickshures
that blackfellows drew on rock once upon a time, and Dad
can’t carry all the rocks home so he makes tracings of them,
on paper, but I can draw better picshures. Some have one
eye and goannas that look like doormats with no stuffing in.
Beryl says tell you about the corrobry. The corrobry was
jest ridiclous, and I don’t think they are polite, too.
With love from your loveing son, Bubbles.
Beryl folded the letter and the blots and the
description of the “corrobry,” pulling the little lad
closer to her side.
“You like it here, Bubbles?”
“In this room?”
“No, at the station.”
“I like it wherever you are, Beryl, but a’course
I love the other Bees, too. But you’re like an
extra.”
“Thanks,” replied the girl dryly.
“Now, don’t go and be worried or anything, be-
cause when I said ‘extra’ I meant extra nice, not
the sort of extra like spare tyres. Don’t be sad,
Beryl.” The girl had turned her head away. It
was not good policy always to allow the small
boy to see the effect of his naivete. “Beryl,” he
cried sharply ; tugging at her arm, “look back at
me.” He drew a big sigh as he saw she was smiling,
“You know, Beryl, I like you more than all the trees
in the world”—a nod —“and all the stars in the
sky. That’s true.”
“It’s an awful lot to love anybody, son.”
“I can’t help that,” came doggedly. “I know
what I know.” Bubbles sought wildly for another


“Beryl . . . honour
bright ... I didn’t mean
to say that. I didn’t
even think it. It just slipped
out. I wouldn’t have
said that for anything . . .
about . . . ” —the voice dropped low —“Him.”
He scrambled to his knees on the bed, sitting back
on his heels. “Don’t be shocked. I love you like
anything, but God is
. . . different.”
simile to express his devotion, and said impulsively:
“Why, I love you more than God.”
For a dreadful moment the boy remained quite
still, then struggled until he sat upright, his hands
clapped over his mouth, his horrified eyes looking
over his fingers at the girl, who waited to see how
he would extricate himself from this blunder in
enthusiasm —a blunder into the sanctity of the
world of beauty hidden in the strange little mind.
From the pillow, her hands behind her head, the
girl asked softly: “Do you know what God is?”
The child nodded. “Everything good and beau-
tiful,” he replied with sturdy belief in his voice.
Beryl smiled.
Presently the boy leaned forward. “Beryl, say
the tree verse to me.”
Beryl slowly recited the poem, ending with a
low-toned:
Poems are made by fools like me,
But only God can make a tree.
Some mysterious satisfaction emanated from
Bubbles. He nodded energetically. “That’s it,”
he stated, his voice vibrating with the ecstasv of
“talking like this” with Beryl. “That’s the differ-
ence, Beryl. We can’t make trees —not even a
leaf.”


CHAPTER VI
Is it the loneliness of spirits set to unknown keys.
That finds in all life’s melodies
Something a little wanting as they go?
Mary Gilmore.
One hot, close morning, when all out-of-door pur-
suits were not to be thought of, an ominous hush fell
suddenly, as if the air had been shut off by a great
screen. The sky was a formidable mass of blurred
purple and brown, with rolling masses of bronze
swirling upwards. At breakfast-time Mr Loftus had
received news from “down the line” that there was
an alarming fall in the barometer, while from “up
the line” came tales of spinifex fires and terrifically
stagnant heat.
Trees whispered into the silence of deatn, while
a strange pallid glare hung over house and rocks,
the garden listless, rooms like steam-baths, roofs
gleaming uncannily in the extreme stillness. The
household drifted about, reading aimlessly, chatter-
ing without animation, eyes continuallv turning to
gaze out at the thickening sky and the unearthly
light which Beryl likened to the radiance that falls
through mica on a sunny day.
Lunch was served casually, nobody hungry.
Without speaking, the man at the head of the table
sliced beef and chicken, passing plates without com-
ment. The Major was away on a week’s trip
towards the James Range, whose dull, sombre con-


tours were gashed with valleys which promised him
many an anthropological treasure. September had
played traitor to-day, for the clear dawn and crisp
beauty of bright middays had changed into a sullen
atmosphere of threat which everybody sensed with
vague unease.
“Big duster come quick,” said Lina, hovering
behind the girls at the luncheon table. She was
right, for even then the first advance particles of
some terrific disturbance were sifting down upon
the table-cloth.
“Beef, David?” his father asked of the lad, whose
delicacy was that of porcelain to-day.
“No, thank you, father —just salad. Beryl knows
how to make salad palatable even in too-previous
monsoonal weather. I say, Jill, are the tomatoes
ripe yet, down at Jinny’s well?”
“I expect so. It’s hot enough to hatch rocs’ eggs.
You’d better go down and 100k —if the heat’s not
too much for you.”
David made no reply, lifting his fork without
apparently hearing the remark, which savoured
strongly of irritability. He watched his sister anxi-
ously, with a glance now and again at the man
whose nerves were obviously ragged too. David
dreaded scenes as he dreaded his own bodily aches.
Beryl, her forehead and upper lip covered with
minute globes of moisture, her skin prickling as
if rubbed with salt, served David with salad-
dressing, then smiled at him to pass back his plate,
as she lifted out some stray beans of which he was
fond. She nodded towards Jill. “I’ll go down
and look at the tomatoes to-night: it is stifling now.
I wonder how Dad is getting along?”
Conversation ! Artificial and meaningless, merely


words which covered her fear of Jill’s strange mood,
evidenced by her lowering brows, her quivering
chin as she attempted to eat, and the brittle remark
which came with the sharpness of a report into the
languid room.
David helped her. ‘‘He’s on the Murramurra
Plain probably by now,” he replied slowly. “Or
at the rock-holes at Utirna Pool . . . quite dry I
expect. It s a barren stretch up there on the roof
of the range. But quite safe from this possible
duster.”
V\ hooo-o-o-o-o! cried Bubbles excitedly.
“What’s that?”
Jill rose and rushed to the window, turning to
beckon to Beryl. “Come and see a study in bronze-
red and henna, she invited. Her eyes gleamed
with the curious ferment that the turmoil of the
elements invariably roused in her. “The inland
under a pall, ’ she added crisply.
The panes were hot to the touch. They saw the
river-bed in a cloud of red, the trees hanging without
movement before the flood of dust already a few
hundred yards from the dwelling. In a mighty, in-
definite wall it tore forward, the roaring increasing
to a deep swishing boom, like the surf upon a shore.
Beryl literally flinched as the trees suddenly
bent sideways from the first breath of furnace-like
air that swept upon them. With a screech of rage
the gale shook the house, rattling timbers and gal-
\ anized iron, flapping the sacking on the servants’
shanties, whipping the ragged brown fabric out like
sails which clapped frenziedly, beating against the
posts with sharp reports. Kerosene-tins and boxes
were tumbled over and over in a mad race for a
fence, where they clattered into clumsy immo-
bility, half-shrouded by flying grit.


Cries came from the kitchen and shouts from the
men outside, Loftus remarking dryly: “If you don’t
eat your food, it will be hidden under a layer of
grit in a little while,”
But the meal was singularly boresome. The
noise of the storm created unrest, the heat being
unusually enervating. Jill relapsed into the gloom
which had held her since morning, the rest of the
occupants of the semi-dark room being unable to
make an effort towards dispelling her ill mood.
“Wantum lamp?” asked Bell, poking her head
round the doorway to goggle her eyes in fear and
excitement.
“No, tea,” replied David.
The girl had turned, and, in the din, could not
hear. Jill flushed heavily, and called: “Bell . . ,
tear
Beryl caught a sharp glance from under the
brows of Jill’s father, as the girl tapped impatiently
on the cloth already peppered with dust. Pursing
her lips, she rose angrily, and at the kitchen door
cried in Arunta: “Bring the tea in, silly idiot!
That’s three times you’ve been told. You’re like a
swarm of hens, running under cover from a storm.
Hurry now, and be quick!” With a sniff Jill re-
turned from the door to her chair, waiting, her
hands cupping her chin, her eyes mutinous and very
very green. Her father was displeased at the ex-
hibition of brittle temper, and showed it by his
unusually animated tones. “Jill, if you wish to look
and speak like a tragedy queen in a sixpenny drama
—you’d better do it in your room.”
A flash from his daughter’s expressive eyes was
all the answer he received.
He raised his voice amid the booming of the


hot wind in the rafters. “Do you hear me?” he
added with ominous calm.
“Yes, it would be difficult not to hear you —even
in this clatter.”
The man’s skin seemed to tighten over his bones.
He put his fork from his hand. “Will you kindly
go to your room?”
“No, I won’t. My room is like an oven, and I’ve
not finished my lunch.” She met his stare with a
slight glint of amusement: “You forget that I have
grown up . . . surely.”
With startled glances the kitchen girls placed
tea, cheese, and biscuits on the table, then retired
to their more happy quarters. Beryl devoutly
wished, for five seconds, for the cool peace of the
Beehive and Brenda’s quiet presence, but the wish
was dispelled by sympathy with Jill.
“Jill,” her father repeated with icy emphasis,
“will you go to your room, or . . . shall I carry
you ?”
Even Bubbles appreciated the insult of this. Jill,
hesitating for one second, caught sight of Beryl’s
troubled gaze as she watched her tea-cup. The
station girl then rose to her feet, her face painfully
flushed, her eyes drenched with shame and misery.
“I’ll leave this room ...” she muttered, her hands
clenched, “but not to go to mine ...”
The unbearably long meal dragged to a close
somehow. The three young folk sauntered wearily
to the window to gaze at the mocking spectacle
outside, the beloved river-bed drowned in swirling
henna grit, the half-transparent dust-curtain film-
ing the well-known scene into something horrible:
an inferno, with disconsolate motionless donkeys
standing by the wells, the wedge of gums seen in-
distinctly, leaden and without detail.


Low rumbles came through the murk as Beryl
stared out, and she said dully: “It’s enough to set
the place on fire without a touch of flame. Like a
scirocco ...” She clutched David’s arm in a fierce
grip, her voice rising. “David . . . Jill. It’s Jill,
out in it. Where is she going? Oh . . . what is
she thinking of?”
Startled eyes turned upon the boy, who looked
quickly through the closed pane, to see his sister,
like a dark red ghost, blindly leading a stubborn
camel over the whirling rise to the river-bed. Their
outlines were just discernible, and then, slightly
closer, the watchers saw a black man, on another
camel, his head down, his shoulders bent against
the grit. As they sat, stunned to silence, the young
folk saw Jill “ooshta” her beast to the ground, fix
a strap, and mount heavily. “The wind tore at her,
and the sky seemed to rest on her back.
“For the first time since you’ve been here,” David
volunteered dully, “he’s driven her away. She’s
going off again, and it’s no good trying to stop her.
She’ll ride and camp and knock the devil out of
herself, and . . . that’s the way she goes ... all
alone.” The boy’s delicate face puckered into a
smile that was a pitiful attempt to fight his deep
dejection. Beryl was staring with horror at the
wraith-like cavalcade now being swallowed up by
the density in the river-bed.
She whispered: “Is she . . . safe?”
David didn’t hear. He was gazing sickly out,
huddled forward. “It’s enough to break a fellow’s
heart, to see her and not have enough strength to
fight on her side.” He turned to the girl, whose lips
were quivering. “A fellow ought to go after her,
and stay with her through all those awful journeys;


but I can’t . . . she’d have to carry me home,
probably.”
“Don’t, David,” begged the girl. “How can she
do it? It isn’t safe, all alone.”
“She’s not afraid of anything,” came with mourn-
ful pride. Listlessly he added : “She’s done it often,
since she was ten or twelve. She knows the bush
a sight better than she knows her own face, and is
as safe as a magpie. Safer. I think it was Boom-
erang who went with her: he’s one of our few faith-
fuls, and would look after her through anything.
But it’s wrong ; Beryl, all terribly wrong and not
natural for a girl like her to go off seeking solitude
like some hermit, beating herself to a pulp in a
melancholy I can’t even conceive. The camp-fire
. . . and Jill . . . like a female edition of Faust,
staring over her red flame and thinking of God and
the . . . evil one.” Swallowing, the boy blinked at
the empty forlornness out of doors, desolate and
grim in its fiery caress. “She’s taken camels and
water-drums. That means the West. Were she
going up into the Ranges, she’d have used horses,
where there are a lot of soakages and waterholes.
She’ll stay to-night at a little place called Tittra,
just a log hut at a well on the plains.”
Beryl was too dumbfounded for coherent speech.
At last she stammered: “To go like that . . . just
walk out . . . not even saying good-bye.” She
paused. “But how silly that would be, and stu-
pidly grotesque, wouldn’t it? She knew I should
understand . . . But I don’t really. Should . . .
ought you to tell Mr Loftus?”
David shrugged, his face still piteously troubled.
“What use?” he replied lifelessly. “He wouldn’t
go after her, for she won’t run away. He knows


Boomerang is safe. He’ll find out to-night at din
ner that she’s not here.”
“David!”
“What, Beryl?”
“What is there at that place you mentioned,
Aid . . . A 1 . . . ?”
“Aldorla,” the boy finished for her. “It’s a sta-
tion about ninety miles in a direct line west from
here, right away over bleak harsh plains and miser-
able patches of skimpy scrub. A white woman lives
there, quite young, and her little boy. Husband,
too, of course. Aldorla is a money-getter for Alec
. . . Arlec we call him! Alec Frazer! Under-
stands cattle better than he does women, or he
wouldn’t keep his wife there year after year, with
not as much as a trip to town. The house is im-
possible. Ours is like a barn, but at least we have
good food, wire doors and windows, and boys to
keep the garden wet. No garden there, no tele-
phone. If they were ill, they’d be dead before we
could get to them, and buried before a medical man
could as much as start on the journey to them.
We want flying doctors up here. Any station be-
tween the southern border and the Katherine has
more conveniences for its blacks than Arlec has for
little Jean.”
“Jean,” repeated Beryl. “Is she like her name?”
“She’s like some one out of the Brontes’ tales.
Washed-out looking, nice eyes, always with a smile
in them. Heaven knows what recipe she uses to
induce smiles. I’ve been there four times, and each
time she’s been as flustered as a city woman going
to the Opera.” He smiled thinly. “Not that I
know much from experience about operas or their
effect upon women.”


“You think Jill has gone there ... I mean to
Aldorla ?”
“I’m almost positive. I hope this storm blows
out quickly.” A spasm of pain crossed the sensi-
tive mouth as he lowered his eyelids to hide from
his companion the naked betrayal of his own an-
guish and shame. “Jill despises me, really,” he
blurted breathlessly. It almost stifled him to
say it.
He looked up suddenly, appreciating Beryl’s
silence when it would have been so easy for her
to deny conventionally what he had said. “She
despises me,” he repeated, with one shake in his
voice. Firmly he continued: “Yet underneath I’m
sure it’s different. We were comrades when we
were little . . . when I could beat her at games,
and riding. I, too, want to fight out my devils, but
they’re not the same kind as hers, and they can’t
be demolished by fatigue in the open.”
The trees outside lashed and whined in a fever
of terror under the blows of the wind that buf-
feted and clanged on the roof, the two young people
talking solemnly, Bubbles on the floor in a corner,
reading a magazine. Beryl leaned one elbow upon
the gritty sill and traced marks on the pane with
one finger, which quickly became capped with
brown. “The other night Jill heard Lina’s Loo
coughing with croup. She went out, and was half
the night nursing that baby and getting stuff from
the bath-room for it. She didn’t even tell me, but
I heard her towards morning, and Lina told me the
rest.” Beryl made a round-faced man on the pane,
adding two eyes, a nose, and a grinning mouth.
“She just doesn’t know what to do with herself,
Davy.” The speaker used the familiar abbreviation


unconsciously—the abbreviation of the old jolly
days when he and his sister were comrades in fun
and mischief. His eyes stung. Beryl was saying
slowly, as she added a cottage-loaf body to the
window-pane man: “You stand it all, without once
striking back. Self-control is the greatest strength
of all, David.”
“Maybe.” The boy was watching the “drawing.”
“But a man sees it in a different light, my dear.”
Almost a man, was the slight lad then, correcting
the viewpoint of the girl beside him. “You see, a
man likes to be strong . . . and it doesn’t make
me shout with joy to know I might never be.” His
face was stern, his eyes hard. “A hopeless wretch
limping from bed to table, from the yards to the
indoors again, unable to believe in himself, unable
to go to town as others do . . . never to play
tennis or football, or . . . dance. Proving himself
to be a misery to all who come near. Beryl . . .
if I ever failed in courage through the weakness of
my body, I think I should want to die.” To the boy
the end of all things lay in being exposed as
a coward. He did not know if he was. There
was no way of showing him exactly what he was,
other than a semi-invalid.
“You don’t know yourself, David,” came quietly
from Beryl. “You are courageous, by instinct and
choice. You are manly and kind . . . with
that sweetness that makes one better to be with
you- You . . . you’ve got your crown of thorns,
too.” Tears stung Beryl’s eyes, her throat con-
tracting as she tried to put into words the ineffable
nobility of the boy. “It is not stupid! I know
what you are, and what you'd do, if the test came.”
The lad smiled wanly, but his face was glowing.


“I’rrt afraid Jill will never have that opinion of me
—an opinion formed in your generous heart, Beryl.
“I’m not generous. It’s the truth.”
“The truth is too great a generosity for many
people,” came almost with gaiety. Beryl knew that
it was mostly assumed, for her sake. He added,
still laughing with that sad-eyed laughter that lent
an infinite poignancy to his words: “I’ve got a
secret place where I keep all your sweetness, Beryl.
It shines, and I’ll never lose it. I’d rather lose
my life.”
“Life wouldn’t be worth much, without a secret
place for . . . gems,” responded the girl softly.
They fell silent.
“David,” came a voice from down in the corner,
“does Jill think you’re a coward ’cause you can't
swim ?”
The lad started, and Beryl turned her scarlet
visage to behold the neglected small boy, seated
flat on the stones, his shoes and socks off, his arms
filled with a large and spiteful cat. It was one of
a pair of hideously speckled animals named by
David “Ire” and “Satire.” Bubbles could calm either
of the unholy pair into contentment after five min-
utes of magical handling. Satire was asleep, his
chin out over the boy’s arm. “Don’t squash him,
said Beryl, because she found it impossible to say
nothing.
With his arms across his chair, the bigger boy
watched the small one, thinking of his remark.
Beryl moved, her chair scraping noisily on the
stone. The cat awoke with a jerk, fastening
his claws in Bubbles’ legs. “All right,” said
the boy, “be a pig if you want to. I thought you’d
have enough sense to keep still on a day like this.
Go under the chair then, silly, if you want to.”


With a bound the cat vanished, Bubbles, un-
abashed, brushing- back his hair and sneezing voci-
ferously. “Think it must be moulting time,” he
announced. Then: “Beryl, why don’t you teach
David to swim in the waterhole ?”
A similar thought had been moving in the mind
of the girl for some moments, but she started as
David asked eagerly: “Would you? I should be a
frightful mug, with my stifflletg t but it’d be some-
thing on the credit side, anyway.” His face sobered
as he eyed her speculatively. “I don’t know
whether I could learn . . .?”
“Of course you could learn. Thousands of the
jolliest and happiest of men are limping a bit after
the war, and swim quite well. But I’d feel so im-
portant teaching you that I’d probably explode like
a puff-fish. Although I can swim. I’ve always been
the one to receive instructions, at home. Barby
is our crack swimmer, next to Bob.”
David braced himself as he said with a whimsi-
cal air: “I’m sorry I aired my woes this afternoon,
but the moths have blown away, and now I feel
better . . . but worried over Jill. I’ve got some
dreams . . . That’s the rub,” he added ruefully.
They decided to keep the swimming lessons a
secret from the rest, and, with many threats of dire
punishment, Beryl cautioned Bubbles to silence.
The second waterhole, a mile from the house
lagoon, was deep, clear, and, being upon a rock
ledge in a hollow, was free from the touch of
cattle. David was at first shy of giving his reasons
for holding secret his attempts—as he said—to out-
rival the Olympic men, but at last confessed un-
easily that “He’d look very foolish before Jill if
• • • he couldn’t do it.”


The hours seemed to drag that afternoon when
at five the storm blew itself out gradually, leaving
behind a leaf-littered yard, dust-draped rooms, and
the river-bed swept free of hoof-marks. The horses
that Beryl and David rode, intending to try the
upper waterhole, left pink-grey tracks from the
slope by the house to the scrub, where they entered
a space to ride up-stream. But there was no stream,
and would not be, until after the monsoonal rams.
The problem of bathing-suits was not so difficult
after all, for Beryl’s had naturally been included in
her suit-case, since she knew there to be a river at
Sunset Hill. David’s garment was an ancient one of
his father’s which had been hanging without use for
years behind the bathroom door. The waterhole
was comparatively cool and transparent, marked
on the rocky bank by a green ring which showed
its last level. In their bathing-suits the two young
people might have been posing for a study of
youth and loveliness. David’s stiff leg was halt
hidden in the water, where he sat on a rock and
watched the girl, tall and beautiful, poised on a
stone with her toes curling downwards with sheer
ecstasy, her arms uplifted, as she waited like a bird
ready for flight.
Slender arrows of gold appeared through the now
still foliage, touching reflections here and there
with down-dropping branches, while fiery patches
ran to the bottom of the pool, where the stones
showed plainly.
“It’s like floating in the air,” Beryl called, after
cleaving the water with hardly a splash and coming
up four yards away, sleek, black-headed, and hung
with drops. “The water’s invisible, and heavenly
after the heat.” She turned on her face and looked


down through it, while the boy waited, smiling, his
eyes filled with the sight of the girl and her lithe-
ness. “After you, Beryl, I’ll look like a caricature
beside a water-colour.”
“Nonsense i”
Serious business commenced as the young
people, laughing, chattering, and chuckling, moved
in a splashing revelry which brought life to David’s
sombre eyes and gladness to his heart—strength,
almost, to his limbs, in the cool touch of the brac-
ing water. She was careful not to tire him: soon
he moved willingly to the stones again.
They dressed in a moment, in the caves made by
the hanging boughs of the bushy trees, and emerged
wet-headed, stung to hunger, and eager to come
again. “You see,” explained Beryl, as they cantered
lazily homewards, their wet suits hanging from
their hands, “If you’re afraid, you sink. If you
feel no fear, you stay up and swim. There’s a
symbol in that. She glanced sideways, but the
boy was not hurt; he was interested.
“There’s a symbol in everything, even to-day’s
storm, for now, the restful calm and double appre-
ciation of the stillness! You alwavs inspire a fel-
low with live thoughts, ... a Crown for the
Happy Enthusiast.”
“And a dunce’s cap for the Base Flatterer,”
chided Beryl, lifting her chin in mock dignity. The
tilt of it delighted the lad, who had to touch Red-
legs sharply to catch up to Coppita.
Jill had been forgotten in the joy of that easy
nde homewards with David, a gay lad with laugh-
ing eyes once more, the girl lightly teasing him
just for the joy of seeing his lingering smile. But
as the house came into sight round the tall face


of Intircha, David’s face sobered. “I wish Jill
would come back.”
Not for that night, or the next, or the next
after it, did Jill return. It was on the fourth day
of her absence that Beryl, unable to bear the sus-
pense any longer, broke through the taciturnity of
Loftus by asking steadily: “Mr Loftus, do you
know where Jill is, by any chance.' I m sick with
worry over her.” Only on the day Jill went away
had the man made a query about his daughter s
absence, and on that occasion he was answered
pithily by David.
He now looked at Beryl, wondering with half-
amused scorn how anxious she really was. Some-
thing of this she felt. With heightened colour and
a little extra dignity she spoke again. “1 he whole
thing seems so incredible that I can’t help imagin-
ing dangers which you know, perhaps, don t exist.
Beryl paused, then added: “Is she safe.''’
“Perfectly,” replied the man, “Jill is well, and
comfortably housed with the Frazers. She is in
the throes of worshipping a new infant, ten days
old, which is Mrs Frazer’s additional care just at
present.”
David stared, and Beryl did not move. “How
do you know?” she asked in frank astonishment.
“Have you ever heard of bush-wireless, little
lady?” came the query, and, upon the girl nodding
doubtfully, Loftus went on: “My bush-wireless is
through the medium of one Murra, whom you have
perhaps missed. Jill was only a few miles ahead
of Murra all the way to Aldorla. But she didn’t
know that. The natives talk, and . . . that is all.”
As Beryl heaved a sigh of profound relief, he added
gruffly, with irresistible pride: “It was not a
comfortable journey even for a seasoned drover


. . . but she managed it.” As David looked his
way again, the man added placidly: “She is no
weakling.”
David winced perceptibly, his father not noticing
it, nor the awkwardness of his remark. Beryl
smiled coolly: “You are very thorough, Mr Loftus.
I shall be glad to see Jill again.”
On the fifth day Jill came home. A mad squeal-
ing and racing in the kitchen heralded her return.
Beryl was left gasping upon Jill’s arrival. The
girl from town had been dreading an awkward and
painful readjustment to life at the station, with
Jill slowly returning to normal, with some shame
or defiance, or both, as evidence of the impulsive
flight. However, the eventful tour was ignored by
Jill, who had nothing to say about the journey, and
no word to explain her reasons for going—which
were partly known.
There was no apology for the abrupt departure,
and no sign that there had been a departure, other
than some torn and filthy shirts which would never
be white again.
After being aw r ay for days, Jill had greeted Beryl
with a quiet: “Hello, Beryl.” An hour later, she
had entered the town girl’s bedroom singing softly
and smiling. Clad in a remade frock, lace at her
neck, her long legs in white stockings, Jill was far
from being the sombre creature who had mutinously
ridden out the week before into the open mouth of
a volcano.
“Afraid!” she ejaculated now, to Beryl’s half
angry query. Her worry and anxiety had been
such a waste ! “There’s nothing to eat me; no lions ;
no elephants. This country is singularly devoid of
bities, other than the kinds which nip your ankles,
or fall into your tea.”


“Snakes?” asked Beryl feebly.
“More afraid of me than I am of them,” re-
turned Jill. “But I hate the brutes. They ought to
have legs. It’s uncanny to whisk as they do,
without so much as a big toe to their credit.”
“Jill?” —a puzzled frown from Beryl, perched on
the edge of her bed. “What did you say to the
Frazers, when you walked in?”
“I didn’t walk in ... I almost crawled,” Jill re-
plied, with a flicker of amusement. “I said: ‘How
do you do, Mr Frazer? It’s Jill Loftus, under the
dirt. I’ve come to see Jean.’ ” Jill’s air of pains-
taking mockery ceased as her mouth sobered.
“He’s a pig, but she’s a dear. She handles tinware
and cheap crockery in such a way that you almost
imagine it to be silver and fine china. And she
paints.”
“Pictures ?”
“No—not exactly. She says they’re daubs, and I
agree, but she calls them her Bogie-Chasers, and
when she runs out of canvas she paints over the
old ones. Some of them are very thick. She says
the effect is rather futuristic when she has half done
a pine-tree on the former picture of a child having
its bath.”
“Oh, Jill!”
“Perfectly true. She’s quite happy in her own
way, and loves her Arlec . . . but I don’t know
why. He’s got a face like a mask, with a ruler stuck
on sideways for a nose. I believe he cuts wood
with it, to save the axe. But ... I suppose any-
body could love even a ruler —with enough imagin-
ation.”
“Jill, you say the oddest things.” Jill was away
from Beryl, somewhere, in a mood which was as elu-
sive as a mopoke’s call. Beryl did not know what


to attribute it to —pain, bitterness, or resignation.
Jill replied carelessly: “Do I? Sorry.”
She dropped the bantering tone and fell into
silence, standing over the dressing-table, first
watching her own white face and drooping mouth,
then transferring her gaze with an odd slow smile
to a little silken pincushion hanging beside the mir-
ror. This, with one finger, she stroked lovingly.
“Beryl . . . Jean let me hold the baby, often.”
In the mirror Beryl saw Jill’s whole face soften
and glow as some tender memory stole through
her. “The tiniest little thing, so helpless and frag-
rant. I’ve never seen a white one before. As
sweet as a . . . bud. I’ll make a song, some day
about a little soft baby.”
The pincushion suddenly swung madly as Jill
knocked it impatiently with her finger. “I’m bored
to death.”
“Why?” One’s brain, thought Beryl, had to pos-
sess the agility of a racehorse, to leap the mental
hurdles Jill set.
“Everything’s such a waste . . . without work,
and effort.” Jill’s voice thickened. “And I suppose
if I ever find myself able to make songs about
babies, I shall never have any of my own. People
don’t, I fancy, when they make songs. They leave
the babies to those who don’t want to lassoo
stars. And I guess the ones that have the babies,
win.” Jill sniffed, some echo from the lives of
others reminding her for a chill moment of the sad
difference between singing of life and—living it.
“Compensation! Oh v come along, Beryl, or I’ll
shriek.”
“I’ll stay here, if you don’t mind,” replied the
other girl evenly. “I shan’t shriek.”
Jill sauntered out with a swagger to hide the


touch of fear which had come with the clinging of
Arlec’s baby’s fingers—fear that she might miss
such sweetness herself. In the hallway she met
her father, for the first time since the day of the
dust-storm. His brows dropped a trifle, but he held
out a hand to say curtly: “I’m . . . er . . . sorry, Jill.
I forgot you were not a child . . . when I drove you
out into the storm the other day.”
Jill did not hesitate, although her lips twisted.
She took the proffered hand coolly, in one second
placing her father in the position of a small boy
pleading forgiveness for something not worth con-
sideration. She was startlingly older, as she stood
on the doorstep, her hair in a twist at the nape of
her neck, her mother’s frock cut down to suit the
brevity of modern simple styles. The man noted
that she was not only taking care of her hair but
growing every tendril of it, like Marie’s in the
photograph.
“No, I’m not a child,” she retorted carelessly.
“But it’s over now. What makes you think you
drove me out? You only sent me to my room,
where I didn’t go to.”
“You won’t do it again?”
She did not misunderstand. “I can't promise any-
thing, so don’t ask me. There are some things
quite outside every sane law and order, and my
wanderings come under that description.”
The absurdity of trying to make friends with his
own daughter struck Loftus like a blow. “Com-
munion with the out-of-doors?” he asked scoffiingly,
but quietly. “Is that a pose or a gauntlet thrown
down for me to pick up?”
Jill moved to brush past. “Neither.” she replied
as she walked away. “Only a means of escape.”


CHAPTER VII
So long as I live these joys will remain,
I have touched the most primitive wildness again.
Hamlin Garland.
After an exciting morning in the stock-yards while
Jill had started to break in a big honey-chest-
nut fresh from the Jagged Plateau, the two girls
had risen from the luncheon-table to ride leisurely
towards the river-path. Jill was restless, and
Beryl acquiescent, and the day was beautiful in
its hot stillness and fragrance. Beryl wondered
why the other was not tired after the long hours of
strenuous discipline meted out to the new horse,
suitably named Diabolo, but Jill’s tireless energy
seemed never-ending. They rode slowly through
the shadows until they came to a double bend of
the Larapinta, where a waterhole, badly diminished
during the last month, lurked almost hidden under
some gums. An hour on the cool bank would suit
both Jill and Beryl, but at a few hundred yards
beyond it, on a circuitous route that meant easier
riding, Beryl suddenly pulled in her mount and
pointed blankly to a dry stretch of sand very wide
at that part, sheltered by shallow banks laced over
by she-oaks and peppermints.
Jill followed her gaze, staring too, unable for a
moment to collect her thoughts. Had a fully
manned battleship sailed the dry sand, they could


not have been much more surprised than upon be-
holding, in the middle of the crossing, an appar-
ently deserted motor-car.
Recovering together, both girls cantered their
steeds forward at a brisk pace. The Five Mile
was a well-known trap for the rare adventurer who
chose to wander through the inland on tyres in-
stead of on the legs of animals. Scraps of dried
boughs and twigs placed in a track from bank to
bank, scattered by the weather, bleached and half
buried, spoke eloquently of former difficulties by
some other petrol-powered nomads. The car was
sitting lopsidedly in the centre of the indefinite
corduroy pathwav, and had obviously “run off the
line.”
“The Ridgeways up at Singletree Hill use cars
always, remarked Jill as they approached the
nearer bank, “but not with the back part left on;
they strip them to positive buckboards.” As they
walked their mounts down the hard slope to the
sand, two figures stood upright, spades in their
hands. A litter of baggage was strewn about, in-
dicative of some attempt towards lightening the
burden of the vehicle.
The two girls rode startlingly into the white
light from out of the gum shadows, nearing the
marooned motor. One of the men was young, thin,
and tall, the other short, heavy, and much older.
“My hat!” they heard the young man say. “Angels
of mercy, in riding-breeches.” “Pardon,” he said
hastily, seeing that he had been overheard. His
greyish eyes looked out from a lean face, crink-
ling infectiously. Beryl smiled. He removed a
felt hat with a gesture that betrayed a familiarity
with social amenities, although the hat had prob-
ably never been removed in similar circumstances


before. “But I imagined myself to be in what is
called the Never-Never —not in Rotten Row.
Beryl’s dignity restrained the smile to its first
careful proportions, but Jill frankly laughed aloud.
She reined in Prince Bill, who was plunging badly.
Beryl thought they had better explain their presence
in that isolated spot. “This is Jill Loftus, from Sun-
set Hill,” she said precisely, indicating the girl on
the active horse. “And I’m Beryl Campbell, and
I live at the shore, below Adelaide, not here.”
“It’s a deuced long way from the shore,” re-
marked the young man, rubbing his chin ruefully,
leaning on his spade with one hand. “Now it’s my
turn: This is Mr Ginger Pollard, a benevolent of
the outback. Mrs Pollard you see over there under
a tree, taking a siesta.” The girls looked at the far
bank, and indeed beheld a woman now scrambling
down the slope. “We are on our optimistic way
to the rail-head, but in classic parlance we are
stuck.”
Jill dismounted, hooking the bridle reins over
one arm. She stepped nearer the car, the horse
following with obvious reluctance. She concen-
trated upon the vehicle and its plight. “You could
dig here for a week,” she announced scathingly,
“and never move. The only means of getting out
is by a team of donkeys.”
“So now I rub my little lamp and call for don-
keys in er . . . flocks, is it, or batches? Droves,
maybe . . . however ...” He waved a hand, the
grey eyes holding an expression of whimsical dis-
may. “By the way, I forgot to tell you my name,
and it’s vital that you should know, for I dislike
being called Mr Mmmmmm . . . Always embar-
rassing.” Beryl chuckled spontaneously; his man-


ner was inimitable. “My friends call me Timothy,
and my enemies . . . well, I’d better not say. The
rest of it is Reed. Timothy Reed, at your service.
Or vice versa; I am not quite sure.”
Pollard found his speech all at once, having stared
open-mouthed until his wife came nearer. “This
young fellow is an Englishman,” he explained con-
fidingly, as if that excused the whole situation.
“You’ve heard of my place at the Alice, a tidy
store, Miss, if I say so; and this is my first trip in
the car. Hi, Emily!” he interpolated, with a know-
ing grin and a wink. “She’ll come out of her shell
now there’s something to gossip about. Hi, Emily!
Here’s Miss Jill from Intircha, and a pal o’
hers. As I was saying ) this young fellow being an
Englishman, he came up to stay with the Goslings,
them being English once, too. But Ted Gosling
having gone and died a month or so back made
this fellow’s trip a wash-out, so to speak. Well,
there being no Gosling ; this cove’s making tracks
to the Oodna again, and this is as far as he’s got.
Of course I gave him a lift.”
“Of course he gave me a lift,” repeated Timothy
with a warm nod. “The spirit of this big place,
Miss Jill and Beryl, even though the lift was to a
stranger, for some hundreds of miles over impos-
sible motoring ground, with camping, tucker, and
a few conveniences apart from all that.”
“He paid his whack for stocking up,” assured
Pollard readily. “And gave the kids some cash too.
Don’t forget it.”
“I see,” said Jill unemotionally. She held out
a hand to the visibly perspiring Mrs Pollard, who
wore a long tussore-silk dust-coat crumpled and
rubbed in dark bars across the back, and intro-
duced Beryl on her horse. Then, with no more


ado. Jill was astride Prince Bill again. “I’ll go and
get donkeys,” she remarked briefly in a tone which
meant “more donkeys.” “And we’ll try to get you
out before dark. Beryl, there’s no need to take
Coppita twice over the same ground. Will you wait
here? So long.”
With a crazy plunge of relief. Prince Bill was
away like the tail of a rocket, red in the afternoon
sunlight, vanishing through the trees within two
minutes. Reed screwed up his eyes and looked
after her. “Does she always travel like that?”
“Not always,” smiled Beryl. She dismounted
and strolled to the bank, where she hitched Coppita
to a tree in the shade. Returning, she suggested
to the others that the trio, excluding Mrs Pollard,
who had relapsed into the siesta again beneath a
tree, might do well to remove the weight from the
car, anticipating the arrival of the donkeys.
Pollard called loudly to his wife, however, and
soon all four of them w r ere laboriously and slowly
dragging suit-cases, boxes, tins, and rolls of rugs
to the bank, piling them up against a log. Beryl
lifted from the car a long-shaped bundle wrapped in
canvas, wondering idly what it contained. It was
not at all heavy, and was preciously covered. Reed
was at the moment lifting out rifles and a box of
food.
The articles having been placed together in sur-
prisingly elaborate array, he and Beryl by mutual
consent seated themselves upon the ground, Reed
taking out his pipe as he contentedly leaned back
against a box, Beryl tucking her feet under her and
catching one ankle with a brown hand. She suddenly
noticed how grey and sick he looked, his spare
frame, and the dew on his forehead and lip. He
was trembling slightly, but trying to control it.


Seeming to detect Beryl’s friendly interest in his
appearance, he said carelessly: “Not very obese, am
I?”
“Perhaps,” replied the girl, wondering if she had
been staring, “you’ve been ill.” She had blundered
upon the truth in one sentence.
“I have. I was so ill that I came out to this sun-
drenched land to get well again. I’m nearly on
my feet, and but for the untimely death of poor
Gosling, whom I knew and liked as a club acquaint-
ance, I should have completed my violet-ray cure.”
Beryl nodded.
“Sunlight in quantities. No shivering, and no
chills. Drenching warmth that eats into sick lungs
and heals them; air that stings like wine in nostrils
slightly sick of fogs and the smell of rain.” Now
that the others were not near, Timothy Reed had
dropped his tone of frivolity, completely avoiding
nonsense. Then irrelevantly: “Do you know any-
thing of Oodnadatta?”
“I came through it on my way here with Dad
and Bubbles,” replied Beryl with her gracious little
air of courtesy. “Bubbles is my adopted brother
—I mean to say, I am their adopted sister.” She
was rather confused under the steady regard of
the grey eyes, which were very dark in the face that
looked as if fresh from a bath, the slightly sun-
burned skin melting down in faint tan to the white
flesh under the open shirt-collar.
“Lucky brother,” said Timothy to his pipe. “I
w r as wondering if you knew of a place where I
could get diggings . . . sort of farm-paying-guests,
if such a thing exists here. Is it too absurd, in
this country?”
“I really don’t know,” answered the girl doubt-
fully. “There is the hotel at Oodnadatta, of course,


but that s not what you want.” She was sure of
that. ‘You see, the Inland is synonymous with
hospitality, but if you offered to pay anybody,
you’d hurt them most horribly, and feel awfully
bounderish. They are like that, up here. I don’t
mean bounderish, I mean hospitable.”
Oh, I know that, from my own experiences. It’s
difficult, I admit. Well, let’s talk of other things
That can wait ... in this land of wait-a-while,
eh?” He smiled without taking the pipe from his
teeth, the girl noticing how white and even they
were. ‘‘One more summer up here, and I should
be able to tackle a man’s job again,”
What did you do in England, before you came
out here?” asked Beryl reflectively, then flushed
with the rose-stain that was one of her chief beau-
ties. Oh, I m so sorry. That was rude and inquisi-
tive. I’m afraid I’m very childish at times. It’s
hard work to grow up as one ought to.”
Or as custom says one ought to,” he corrected
quietly. He settled sideways on one elbow, his long
legs crossed in comfort on the ground. “Do you
know, Miss Beryl, this sunlight has got into my
brain as well as my lungs. I’m thinking, lately.
One of my thoughts is, why should not two people
talk to each other, eh? Reticence has been a fail-
ing of mine, so let me contradict that now. Here
goes . I was a lawyer ... a failure. I’m afraid
1 don t care for argument. Why not let the other
fellow have his way? One must be a tenacious
bird, even a plausible bird, to convince a jury that
a broken-nosed gentleman with a cauliflower ear
is addicted to growing roses for his livelihood.”
Beryl smiled.
ou see, for the sort of fellow I am, a job must be
less strenuous than proving black is white, or


white black. I like white, the whiter the better.
Black is a dingy shade, anyway. Crows, mourning,
and dress-suits, eh? White ... flowers pretty
frocks, and cool clean sheets when you re ill.
quality, whiteness. Even when applied to a fellow s
character. I’m really a lazy individual at best.
Beryl did not believe this, and let him see it. tie
nodded. “I am.”
“I'm sure you are not,” she replied with a shy
smile. “You haven’t got the kind of face that lazy
people have. And your hands are not lazy hands.
Hands are very tell-tale, you know.” She looked a
his, one holding the pipe, the other lying on his hip
“Your hands are very nice.”
There were seven generations of elegant fingers
behind Timothy’s, so Beryl might be forgiven for
commenting upon their shape. He smiled at the
spontaneous remark, which pleased him might! y,
for Timothy was tired of artificiality. For the first
time in many years he was talking natural y to a
girl who might have been Margaret, his sister,
missed rather badly since his search for sunshine.
“Speaking of the warmth,” he said: “I couldn t
live without it. Ambiguous, that, and confound-
edly true.”
“Well, there’s plenty here,” she told him with a
nod.
“So my scorched back tells me,” he said wryly.
Almost talking to Margaret, was Timothy, with
Beryl curled up, slim and lissom, in just the pose
Margaret had favoured when they had ridden to-
gether and rested in the long grass by the sea not
five miles from their home. “111 tell you what my
somewhat vague plans are.” How like the days
with his sister, he thought again, with a stab of
pain—she intent, eager; he dreaming with his hands


behind his head; their horses standing near by.
“That is, if I go ahead in the way I want to . . .
health and all that, you know,” he added with a
faint shade of embarrassment, remembering that,
after all, this was not Margaret who sat beside him,
blue eyes turned to his. I want to stop and buy
every farm and idiotic scrap of land there is for sale,
but so far I’ve escaped from disaster just because
there has been nobody in evidence with a paper for
me to sign. I’ve reached these ranges twelve
months after leaving . . . home, and breathed in
the air, and if I hold out and recover, I want to
buy plump white chickens—swarms of ’em, like a
paper-chase —lots of plump white eggs, and a plump
white cow, and a blue house.”
“HeavemTl” cried Beryl, vastly amused and a
little bit touched. “Why not a plump white house?”
“It might not stand the weather very well,” came
gravely. “You see, chickens, cows, and eggs have
their own coverings already: not my idea at all.”
“There are speckled hens, too, and queer-coloured
cows ( and even brown eggs.”
“I’ll ignore them all,” Timothy replied airily.
Despite the levity in the air, Beryl detected more
than a slight undercurrent of bitterness in the
stranger in a strange land. With a forefinger she
traced a weird pattern in the dust—even as Mar-
garet had once done—and said thoughtfully: “It
must have been hard, to come so far, with a. . .
worry in your heart.”
“With a torment in my soul,” he answered
quickly, but he repented the harsh touch, and added
lightly: “It was rather staggering to cut loose, say
good-bye at home, hand my flat over to a fellow-
struggler in law, and give the cat away, as it were.
But faint heart never won faire ladye, or any other


dashed thing, so here I am. And of course I have
my fiddle.”
Beryl started as if shot. The young man puck-
ered his brows as to the cause, as she leaned for-
ward earnestly, her face paling. “Your fiddle?” she
asked. “A violin ?”
“Yes, but don’t be alarmed: I shan’t play it to
you.”
“Oh, please ...” Beryl was so perturbed that he
decided in favour of her having good reason for
it.
“It whiles away a good many hours. Like Kip-
ling’s banjo, it can go anywhere—by virtue of
size, weight, and convenience. I’m not a Kreisler
—notice my sombre tie; sorry, haven’t one at all
. . . greater argument there. But I enjoy fiddling,
mostly old songs I . . . remember.”
“A violin! Here!” exclaimed Beryl, almost
as if she had said, “The moon is lost.” “Was it
that long light bundle I carried from the car?”
“It was—and is.”
“Then . . . oh, dear. Please listen. I shouldn’t
talk about Jill, but I must. Will you promise not
to think me horribly impertinent if I go on?”
He promised readily, watching the animated face
and its sweet sincerity. “Go on, then, for Green-
eyes might be back at any moment with some red
horses . . . or is it donkeys?”
“They’ll take ages. You mustn’t think I’m mad
to blurt out Jill’s story like this to a perfect stran-
ger. I know it isn’t done, but it can’t be helped this
time. You see, some things can be done, if there’s
sufficient excuse and honest reason.”
“Quite.”
“Well . . .” With startling abruptness this
girl, in one of the most remote parts of the conti-


nent, asked of Timothy: “Did you know Marie
Veers?”
“Of her. Who hasn’t? But I’ve never heard her
play, I’m ashamed to admit.”
“Marie Veers was . . . Jill’s mother.”
This time it was Timothy’s turn to be aston-
ished. He sat erect, removing his pipe as he asked
incredulously: “What did you say?”
With swift glances he listened while Beryl gave
a quick outline of Marie’s history and all that had
occurred since Beryl had arrived at Sunset Hill.
“So now you see, Mr Reed, why I received a shock.
If I asked you, without explaining all this, not to
let Jill know you had a violin in your possession,
you’d have thought it all very curious wouldn’t
“I believe so.”
“The fact that remains is that Jill mustn’t see the
fiddle or know you have it. There would be such
a scene at the station that I know she would suffer
through it. She mustn’t be hurt by going all over
that again. It’s dormant now—as a volcano is, I
expect —and I don’t know, nor dare think, what
Mr Loftus would do. You’ll be there only a little
while, so don’t you think it’s better not to stir
everything up again.' She will play some day, but
only through her father, and not through rebellion.
Nothing ever comes through forcing it. If it does,
it’s not any good.” Beryl was terribly earnest.
“Jill’s rather a problem, eh?”
“Yes, but problems are far more interesting than
proved facts: there are no surprises then.”
Timothy half agreed.
“TH give her the fiddle,” he said presently.
Beryl caught at his sleeve. “No, you don’t
understand. Mr Loftus could buy fifty without


turning a hair: it’s the spirit of the thing.”
“Is he such a . . . er . . . Perhaps he doesn’t
understand her.”
“l think he’s trying not to, for fear of losing her,”
came astutely, and Reed decided that she was prob-
ably very near the mark.
“Very well, I’ll hide the fiddle while I’m at Sun-
set Hill, but it seems a brutal thing to do, some-
how. However, there are shades which I can’t
comprehend as an outsider, so I’ll leave it to you.
I’ll help by keeping it quiet.”
“It’s awfully good of you,” replied the girl sol-
emnly. “I love Jill, and she’s been hurt enough.
I shouldn’t interfere If I didn’t know it to be
right.”
“This is not interference, if I’m any judge,” re-
plied Reed slowly. “Well, the donkeys are com-
ing.”
Rising, Timothy pulled Beryl to her feet, and
they strolled towards Jill, who loped on Prince Bill
ahead of the team. “My father says please come
straight to the station,” she announced at once.
“Dinner will be kept waiting until we get you out.
You can sleep in beds to-night, then.”
Beryl threw a long look at the canvas-wrapped
object which Reed at that moment was carefully
rolling in a rug and placing behind a suit-case.
He patted it fondly as Beryl caught his significant
glance towards Jill.
In a business-like manner made perfect by similar
repetitions of much the same occurrence, not always
with cars, Jill, with Beryl and Reed as helpers and
the Pollards hovering round the vehicle, started
the donkeys towards the chains. These having been
fixed to the car and the harness, the little beasts
were urged forward.


With the black children who had come too,
armed with long sticks, Jill with a riding-whip,
Beryl “standing by,” they prepared. The donkeys
stirred themselves languidly, the men digging in
front of the tyres as they moved and pushing behind
the vehicle alternately with digging. Amid a clatter
and gabble of native voices the motor started re-
luctantly forward.
To the black children from the station this inci-
dent was an unexpected picnic, and for half an hour
the commotion was intense, until after a final effort
which strained muscles and lungs, the car trundled
safely out of complete obliteration in the Five Mile.
Moisture was dripping to the sand from Reed’s
face and chin, as he stood in indecision for a mo-
ment and then sat down abruptly, coughing with a
rough sound that shook him through. Beryl ran
for the small water-flask on her saddle, returning to
hold it to the young man’s lips, which were stained
slightly with crimson. He rubbed furiously with his
handkerchief, but refused the flask. “I shan’t drink,
thank you, little lady,” he said huskily, grey with
the results of the pain. “I’m not quite so well as
I fancied, though. Don’t look so concerned!
I shall be all right in a twink. This is no novelty.
I’m becoming an expert in managing myself now.”
He smiled, but Beryl’s eyes were full. He touched
her hand. “I said I was a lazy fellow.”
She rose suddenly, moving towards the others,
who were mercifully afflicted with sudden blind-
ness and deafness. After a while of lifting and
hauling, the car was reloaded, and the donkeys
moved away slowly through the trees. Reed rose
to his feet, Beryl beside him in a moment.
“Exit the hero,” he murmured, as he moved to


the car. “Accompanied by loud clapping and other
applause.”
“This is not the last act,” she said serenely. He
caught the message of hope which she dared. He
smiled . . . and nodded whimsically.
As the two girls mounted their horses, tne cai
roared into life. A motionless car Prince Bill ob-
jected to, although he stood it nobly. But a car
which throbbed and spurted and jerked and
thumped he would not consider for a moment.
With a snort of disgust he sprang away, Beryl
with a call saying: “Come straight to the house.”
Then Coppita was pounding after the chestnut,
tossing his head as wildly, and almost as fast flew
his hoofs.
“They’ll see it in the sunset,” cried Beryl loudly,
as they crossed a bend of the river at a gallop.
“What?” answered Jill, her hands and eyes oc-
cupied.
“Intircha,” replied Beryl, laughing. “It’s such
a lovely spot to come to in the evening.”


CHAPTER VIII
Time hath no tide, but must abide
The servant of thy will ;
Tide hath no time, for to Thy rhyme
The ranging stars stand still.
Rudyard Kipling.
It was a radiant night, the cliffs as if cut from
black velvet against a languid smear of stars, while
moths and night creatures singed their wings
against the spurting flame of the acetylene lamp
carried to the garden. Quietude rested not only on
the bodies of the tired travellers who had halted at
Sunset Hill so thankfully, but on their somewhat
weary minds as well. The day had been full of inci-
dent and accident; so much so that even Jill reclined
contentedly in a cane lounge, her hands behind
her bright head, her hair a nimbus in the harsh
brittle flare of the light.
Timothy Reed felt at peace: he drank in the
serenity of the still evening whose atmosphere had
caught the pervading tranquillity of summer nights
at home, where lingering soft twilights were yet
so different from the swift sub-tropical fall of the
curtain of night at Intircha—differences of climate,
but somehow not obtrusive to-night. This clearly
cut country, whose twilight was but a closing down
of the dark on a still warm dry land, was definite
and decided: outside the station and its camp there
was nothing but earth, cliffs, and winding parallels


of trees: at Brexmere there had been soft glimpses
of the village, smoke rising above the ground-
mists in a soft spiral from the gamekeeper’s cot-
tage beyond the park, a distant suggestion of roofs,
and a tower beyond the coppice. At home,
thought Timothy with a fond smile, the country
was absurdly small and perfect with its hedges,
ditches, and glimpses of far-off blue sea or rolling
country-side, a country folded in its beauty and age
to a pocket edition: this vast stretch of sunny land,
was a place too immense to realize, even with startl-
ing statistics which verged upon the grotesque. The
young Englishman found himself visualizing a map
of the world; placing a mental finger, almost with
surprise, upon the centre of this great continent
as yet in the shadow of to-morrow. Sunlight,
blinding, flaunting, seldom ceasing, heat and dar-
ing skies at sunset, keen and cutting dry mid-
night air which brought blankets quickly to the
chin after the hottest of days before: the contrast,
a softly smudged memory of the reluctant eventide
at Brexmere, smeared skies laden with indefinite
cloud-shapes, beautiful and tender. At home, at
this hour, maybe nine in the evening, Margaret
would be perhaps standing at an upstairs window,
with the last grey sky saying adieu to the elms in
the garden indistinct below her. She would . . .
Timothy shook himself, and replied to a remark of
Jill’s.
Reed’s preconceived ideas of the outback had not
led him to expect this home in the most remote
part of the Territory, where distance was counted
by days, and time did not seem to matter much at
all. Conversation at Sunset Hill shifted easily
from one subject to another, as effortless as long
talks at home with half-a-dozen people collected in


low chairs round a tea-table on the lawn, English
sunlight dappling the ground and lifting into delicate
beauty each line of grass and ordered garden-bed.
From horses to politics, politics to poetry, poetry
to travel, with the smooth versatility that betrays
acquisitive minds, these station-folk courteously and
simply included their guests in the chatter that
moved idly in the silence only broken by voices,
a distant camp sound, or the wail of a far-off
curlew.
Almost it was home, the dissimilarities lending
glamour because of their complete lack of artifi-
ciality: David, the girls, the solemn little boy, the
quiet couple who owned the car, and Loftus, all
grouped in utterly restful poses which lent intimacy
and communion to the little company of white folk,
perhaps the only ones within fifty miles or so —more
likely a hundred! Timothy found himself satisfied
by the completeness of the whole thing, station,
environs, and inhabitants. They needed no
theatres, these folk: life was their theatre, while
from the pages of a widely comprehensive range of
books they took their mental enjoyment. David
might have been fresh from a big public school, so
vivid was his knowledge of the world outside In-
tircha : Jill, on her lounge, might have been sketched
by a Shepperson, so gentle was every suggestion
emanating from her shining head, soft muslin frock,
buckled shoes, and silent grace. Beryl, another
type, so like his sister that Timothy found Mar-
garet much in his thoughts that night. Margaret
had moved like Beryl, had lifted her head like
Beryl, and had graced the tea-tray even as Beryl
graced this gigantic, wooden, silver-handled oblong
of old oak bearing coffee-cups, a tall Victorian pot,
and a scrap of linert which Reed vaguely thought


was like some they had at Brexmere—very white,
very finely edged, with the air of slender fingers
and embroidery frames lingering about it. He
thought; “Of course, it was Marie Veers’.”
When at home, in the languid round of engage-
ments, obligations, ceremonies, and a little work
amid the calls of golf, cricket, and hunting, Timothy
had given little thought to the Commonwealth.
To him, then, it was a place mentioned allur-
ingly in printed pleas for emigration, vaguely a
background for large stations which were rumoured
to eclipse England or Ireland, or perhaps both,
in size—a comparison which was treated as other
rumours were, without investigation or great in-
terest. A place which held vast wheat-lands, cattle
in uncomfortably big and dusty droves, cities where
electric trams trundled up main streets, some blue
hills, a number of snakes, and too many blundering
politicians! There had been a visitor from Vic-
toria staying at a home not far from Brexmere,
and Timothy during a dinner at that house had lis-
tened idly to the conversation of his host and the
guest from the Antipodes. The Australian was tall,
bronzed, and very muscular, with slightly crinkled
skin at the corners of his eyes, and very brown
capable hands. At that time Timothy was a very
sick man, having rushed down that same afternoon
from London to dress in time for this party of
Carping’s, practically “next door.” Timothy had
found it difficult to listen to the speeches of the
winsome girl placed next to him, or to enjoy his
food, for that morning a Harley Street man of some
fame had issued his grave verdict on the state of
Reed s badly-behaving lungs.
Innocently, the Australian had concluded a hesi-
tant, brief description of his own station home,


with a swift resume of the recovery of a man simi-
larly afflicted with the first stages of consumption.
Reed’s ears had strained to catch the last sentence
of the Victorian: . . this fellow, a splendid chap,
picked up completely, living in the mountains
where winter is brighter and hotter than your
summer, and the summer is a dry sunny stretch
of months punctuated by occasional thunder-storms
and a few dull days.”
Timothy had been lifted out of sick despair by
this sentence. The following week he lunched with
the man from Australia, further encouraging him
to talk of his own country. Reed liked the man
and did not find it distasteful to help him unbend.
Sunshine, heat, and renewed life! Perhaps the Vic-
torian understood, perhaps he did not, but his in-
formation was in detail. “But,” he concluded one
remark on their last meeting in London, “there’s
no gold in the gutters . . . It’s mostly in
the air. No pun there. Of course, the very best
place to get sunlight practically all the year round
is rather out of the beaten track. I went across
from Queensland once, with a mob of cattle, to the
McDonnell Ranges and the plateaux thereabout.
Blue high peaks, in the heart of the country, dry,
barren, and harsh most of its time, flooded with the
rains, shattered by storms, but grass two feet high
as soon as the showers fall on the ground . . .
you need not smile, Reed. I assure you, I’ve seen
grass a foot high a few days after the rains came,
and in a few weeks stony, barren creek-beds were
filled with white lilies. Yes, the Never-Never.
Strange name! No! Few adventures beyond sun-
burn and burned damper . . . maybe a grass-fire
. . . maybe a mislaid waterhole ...” the man
had smiled. “And miles . . . miles upon miles, un-


touched and so completely gigantic that England
looks like a jolly little dew-drenched garden laid
out with a set-square and combed and brushed into
place. Australia is new: England is old. The dif-
ference is the difference between a sunny-cheeked
‘flapper’ lass in her first adult dress, and a gentle
grande dame quite satisfied with grey, old-fashioned,
but exquisitely embroidered silk . . . the dame
slightly haughty ...” the speaker smiled —“but
a darned nice old soul to know —and respect.”
Followed for Timothy a hasty exit from the
country whose fading grey shores had made the
grown man almost cry aloud for their familiar
soil.
Here, in the quiet night whose beauty was a liv-
ing thing, he inhaled the air that was laden with
the scent of the eucalyptus, stealing in cool breaths
from the riverway, and the wild fig whose big white
flowers made blurs in the dark beyond the garden,
still seeping with infinitesimal sounds after a
drenching half an hour before.
An oasis in the wilderness, thought Reed admir-
ingly, was this stretch of garden, kept alive through
the heat only by continual watering from a well
whose winding wooden frame turned for hours on
end. Against odds which would bring despair to
many men, Loftus had fought for his patch of
fragrance in the hot dry earth, its incense rising
in the night, its cool green smoothness a delight to
the eye when all the world was harsh, cruel, and
livid. Here, in the stone-floored station-house
whose simplicity somehow reflected both the big-
ness of the out-of-doors and his host’s personality,
Timothy had conversed with the daughter of Marie
Veers; the girl was unique, of no type, cut from no
pattern, gloriously alive, superbly unconscious of


her own rich charm. Charm! Reed laughed at
the word. It belonged to cities, not to her. The
word was out of place, absurd. She had more than
charm, for she was herself, gloriously herself, from
the chiselled features and green eyes under the
tawny silken head down to the long narrow feet
which were hidden in rough boots during the day
but graced by slender buckled slippers at night.
Marie Veers’ son, too, with his delicately-cut
nose and sensitive mouth, his proud eyes and slight
body; entering the dining-room with all the in-
visible appurtenances of tradition and birth behind
him and surrounding him, a few pleasantly spoken
words and a smile giving the young stranger the
same sensation of warmth which had invaded him
at home, when houses far different from this had
welcomed their guest gladly. But a swift glance
of appraisement had been all that David had needed
to tell him that here was a man one could talk to,
and laugh with, and feel better for it.
Marie’s husband, too, in simple language whose
sincerity had no need of glib support, had with a
handshake made the station home Timothy’s own,
with a smile that did not reach his eyes, although
those eyes had looked appreciatively at the new-
comer. The crimson glory of Intircha had with
its lavish richness seemed to spread satisfaction
through the man who had stepped from the motor
that evening expecting anything but the utter
accord of mind, body, and surroundings, which
had been created at once. He was not a stranger!
Intircha had flared for him! The white folk had
said in various silent ways that Sunset Hill was
waiting for him, and in Timothy there was not only
peace but a vaguely poignant wistfulness which he
fought valiantly; his feelings were too akin to those


which afflicted him when returning to Brexmere
after a spell abroad to be allowed to take charge of
him now, so far from Brexmere, so soon to move on
from Intircha.
It was pleasant to draw comparisons, half pre-
sent, half absent, a low-voiced conversation pre-
serving the peace from too great a sorrow, the two
girls near by, Jill away in some ship of dreams,
Beryl listening to David’s half-timid expounding of a
theory found in a book the night before and rather
beyond the reach of his partly developed intellect.
You see, it’s this way . . . The voices moved,
rose and fell, and the smoke of pipes rose upwards
as the effortless intimacy continued, unmarred and
uninterrupted. The two Pollards were very still.
Coffee-cups were scattered about after the long
meal indoors which had ended in the garden, a
black girl with a tray, Beryl busy with a tall shin-
ing pot, Jill content to have her friend pour the
liquid into small cups opportunely summoned from
town by the last mail. The coffee was excellent,
said Timothy to himself, with a sigh of extreme
content, as were the dishes which the girls had
cunningly concocted from the apparently depthless
grocers’ case in the storeroom. Beryl, the home-
maker, had arranged for cushions and chairs to be
placed in the garden, revelling in the small cere-
mony which to-night seemed to be doubly worth
while.
The life at Home was both misted and sharpened,
this odd day, since passing the Five Mile in the late
afternoon. To retire from his own thoughts at the
moment as he watched Jill in serious contempla-
tion of the sky, Reed asked for more coffee, passing
his cup with a smile to Beryl.
Behind all this was the story of Marie, moving


fragrantly, tragically, but always with glamour and
grace, the touch of her slim hands left behind her
in a dozen ways which Timothy recognized through
the evening: in Jill’s quaint frock, hand-sewn by
Belgian peasants; in the plate from which Bubbles
ate biscuits; in the solid old coffee-pot whose
age Reed could only guess at, standing in dignity,
its silver winking and blurring under the flame of
the lamp ! Pleasing, hauntingly sad : beautifully sad
—for Timothy had imagination, as well as stanch
appreciation of the best in his fellow-beings.
David unconsciously stirred deep and sharp
memories, as the silent man near him overheard a
fragment of the lad’s discussion with Beryl. It
was a night for poetry. David was saying: “It’s
rather difficult to grip at first, but it has imagery
in it. I think it goes:
In that enchanted land of noon? My heart faints
And my tongue falters; for long ago, Myvanwy,
Deep in the east where now but evening gathers,
Lost is my country.
Reed waited with his breath almost suspended,
while something seemed to lean out of the dark and
brush him as it passed by. He saw, under his
lashes, Beryl move slightly, as she looked swiftly
in his direction. So the perception and fineness of
this girl-woman was even as those of the Margaret
of his “lost country”—but a country found, in echo,
not counterfeit, here to-night!
Timothy knew the next verse of Ghose—knew
it well, although poetry in words seldom appealed
to him. But . . . there was a phrase which had
for some reason caught at him. He said it to him-
self, closing his eyes to the magic of the stars and
velvet blackness behind the sharply black-and-white
scene close at hand. So like a play . . . unreal
almost, unexpected, epoch-making in his love of a


new land: one could love two lands, in different
ways.
Lightly an exile, lightly leagues I wandered
Over the bitter foam: so Fate led me
Only to love thee.
Timothy winced, so hurtful had been the effect
of the words upon his consciousness. Flying ahead
of himself, he blundered into a remark which made
safe his nostalgia for that evening: “How many
of these curious animals,” he asked of nobody in
particular, watching the insects flying about the
flame and falling on to the table, “kill themselves
each night? Is it their evening off from domestic
duties at home?” Facetious, stupid, but it kept
something at bay. Jill replied nonchalantly,
“Seems so.”
Lina came out of the shadows to remove the
cups, severely scolding the moths and beetles which
had fallen on the tray. Suddenly Reed smiled. The
ache had gone as mysteriously as it had come; it
was all very delightful.
Jill’s tranquillity to-night was as complete as her
vim and restlessness of the day. Even her voice
was composed, the slightly husky, rather deep voice
which held so many vocal shades and lights. In a
soothing lull in the chatter which re-awakened with
Lina’s advent, Jill nodded towards the cliff-tops:
“The Pipes of Pan are calling to-night, and his old
hoofs are clicking over the stones of Intircha.”
In one sentence she had caught the spirit of the
evening, with the world away somewhere—it did
not matter where —forgotten. It did not exist just
then.
“The moon will soon be up like a burnished tray,”
she said next with a quick smile at Reed and the
silent stolid Pollards waiting for bedtime. “Then


this light will look foolish.” Timothy, watching
Jill, regretted almost passionately that she must
grow up and come into contact with the sharp
stones of experience. Would that the beauty of
Intircha could always keep her sheltered, as clois-
ter-walls protect those who renounce ugliness and
life outside. To escape from his own fancies, which
Reed decided at that moment were rather “biffed
by the night-time,” he crossed his legs and moved,
addressing Mr Loftus directly. “You chose a mar-
vellous spot for your homestead, sir.”
“It was irresistible,” responded Loftus. “Shelter
for the house was my first consideration, the near-
ness to water my second. Both are here.”
They fell to discussing idly the route to and from
the rail-head, and the modes of travel over the hot
miles. Loftus inquired with interest of the jour-
ney to be continued next day. “Won’t you find
going on rather irksome, if you feel cheap?” he
asked in kindly grimness. “At this time of the
year?”
“I anticipate that,” came with a cheery nod from
Reed, who spoke the truth, but should have added
“with dread.” “I must get down to the little town
again, for I want to inquire about diggings.”
“Why didn’t you stay in the ranges?”
“I . . . er, I’m rather a poor hand, Mr Loftus, at
proposing myself as a paying guest in a home which
might object to . . . my indisposition.” Reed felt
his ears filled with rushing sounds, in the acute
agony of thus speaking of the terror of his soul.
Blindly he hoped the others were not listening, but
did not dare turn to see.
Loftus had already summed Reed up as an ex-
ample of one of the best sons of fine British stock.
The elusive quality of his speech alone proclaimed


his origin and upbringing. His deferential air of
respect, which stopped automatically before it
could change to humility, pleased Loftus, who knew
men and their ways in the new world and, in lesser
degree, the old. Timothy had an air of pleasantly
mocking at the whole world for being the world
it wasn’t, while taking off his hat with a gallant
bow for the world it was.
The others now drew their divided attention to
one subject, as they heard Mr Loftus say without
any show of emotion: “I am . . . interested in your
recovery, Reed. The Inland has plenty of breath-
ing room in it, without your tracking over miles
of impossible country. That is quite needless. Will
you make Sunset Hill your head-quarters until you
feel well enough to go lower and buy your . . . er,
white chicken ?”
Reed was lifted out of his tranquillity with a
suddenness that took his breath away. The invi-
tation was given as naturally as one might ask
another to lunch in a city. Loftus had judged
Reed keenly, in a region where men are valued for
what they are rather than for personal possessions
or prowess. The fresh-faced, hollow-cheeked, grey-
eyed man from overseas had caught the stolid fancy
of the man whose body, at forty-three, was strong,
sound, and virile. A swift surge of emotion made
it difficult for Timothy to speak for a moment.
“Thank you sincerely,” came with even less ex-
pression than Loftus had shown a moment before.
“I shall value that ... at its worth. But ...” In
the hard light the girls saw him hesitate, swallow,
and his cheekbones stain as he fumbled for his pipe
which had gone out. “I’m afraid I can’t enter a
home full of young folk . . . with my present dis-
ability upon me.” A match was scratched, the flame


spurted and wavered tremblingly against the pipe-
bowl. “Lung infection is no respecter of persons.”
It cost no small effort to utter this.
Loftus’ eyes kindled, although his mouth did not
smile. “Perhaps,” he said, “we might be able to
alter the suggestion somewhat. I have a shack,
old Jack’s cottage, out there half-way to the water-
hole. It has one unornamental room, with a lean-
to veranda round it. Furnished in Jack’s style,
it’s rather crude, which means a rough bunk and a
ledge for his pipe. But there are plenty of articles
with which the girls could make the place more pre-
sentable. Old Jack has gone to a place where,
presumably, houses are not needed, and he will not
return. One of the kitchen girls could keep the
little dwelling in order, and we should be glad of
your company at meals . . . rather dull, occasion-
ally. How does the proposition sound to you?”
Reed baffled his first instinct to rise and bolt like
a schoolboy, and managed the situation without
obvious disturbance. “I can’t tell you what it
sounds like to me, he answered, suddenly feeling
weary, yet at rest. “If I might impose upon it . . .
then 111 remain for a while. You make it possible
for me to accept it by pretending it is nothing for
me to accept. Very subtle, am I not?” A short
laugh, rather shaky. “By the way,” he added with
a lightness which concealed something far more
dangerous to composure, “will you let me amuse
myself with a hammer and nails about the place?
I want to paint a barn too ... or anything re-
sembling it.”
Loftus understood. A difficult moment was
skirted safely with a touch of flippance which, be-
tween men, says more than sentimental vows' and
assurances. Loftus nodded with satisfaction, which


was as sincere as the relief he felt to know the
stranger was not going on to-morrow : he needed
bed, rest, sunlight, and a little of the flood of light
that reflected, hot and bright, from the vertical walls
of Intircha.
Pollard’s face brightened a little. He and his
wife had been oddly stricken into immobility and
dumbness since arriving at Sunset Hill. The dumb-
ness had begun when the coffee-cups had been
passed round. These people were in some way
almost foreign to Mr and Mrs Pollard, who sat and
wondered why such shadowy words and elusive
little speeches formed such a rich communion, con-
taining laughter, silence, and repartee which to them
was quite meaningless. Why did people talk “poy-
try,” or Reed want to paint a barn, or grow white
chicken when he meant fowls? Why would not
black ones do? But he had been queer all the time
since first lounging into the store at the Alice to buy
tobacco and matches and ask for news of the Gos-
lings and their station farther north. Perhaps,
thought Pollard, with the Englishman’s unfamiliar
personality still jangling upon his matter-of-factness
and solidness, the car wouldn t get stuck again,
lightened of its extra load. But the good people
were honestly pleased with what they termed
Reed’s “luck” in finding a “place to stay” so soon.
Had Timothy gone to the other store in the micro-
scopic town in the ranges, decided Pollard shrewdly,
he wouldn’t be here now, which, “as I’ve always
said, proves that things are for the best. ’ Mrs Pol-
lard said this to her husband, and he to her, often
during the rest of that trip to the rail-head. After
all, it is quite a good philosophy.
Reed, too, was pleased with his “luck,” although
not calling it that in quite such a callous way. He


was delighted with Sunset Hill, its appearance,
position, and inmates, and for the first time since
arriving in Australia looked forward to writing to
Margaret a really long, honestly cheery letter. He
vowed with silent enthusiasm that, if he could re-
turn this splendid gesture with another, he would
do so . . . remote as the chances were of consum-
mating this ready resolve. Gravity seized him as
he remembered the violin. The fiddle must lie
perdu.
Beryl too was thinking of the fiddle, which
seemed desperately present at the moment —almost
as if it could walk up to them and play
itself, she thought, with a slight movement of
her lips. Timothy reassured her as he detected
the meaning behind her wavering smile, saying
with ambiguous intent: “Things right themselves
in the most astonishing manner . . . Beryl
eh ? The ways of the Creator are strange and
mighty,’’ he continued, glancing with a slight frown
of intensity towards the cliffs that were nearest.
“To make Intircha and those striped beetles at the
same time: even ... to make us.” Timothy
laughed now, towards Philip Loftus. “The greatest
farce of all, sir, the greatest comedy.”
But one can seldom feel tragic enough,” com-
mented Jill unexpectedly, turning sharply in her
lounge, “to regard life as a joke.”
Timothy narrowed his eyes slightly: Jill thought,
then, as well as obeyed impulses! She was a lovely
thing, with her eyes shadowed, her pointed chin
touching the frills at her collar, slim hands locked
and tight among them. Reed looked away: to-
night one might be trapped into dreams, and, so far,
dreams had dealt him some curious blows. Day-
light was more dependable. He uttered some


inconsequential remark, and moved to hand his
tobacco pouch to Pollard, who was still ruminating
upon white hens and inopportune poytry.
So Timothy stayed at the station, the Pollards
having left in the early morning with their light-
ened car chugging away up the hairpin roadway to
the red sand and golden spinifex bright in the
dawn.
Old Jack’s dwelling, which had stood many an
inland storm undamaged. Timothy at once dubbed
“The House That Jack Built.” Rummaging with
the younger folk in the biggest shed beside the
blacksmith’s shop, they found blue paint, and the
House that Jack Built was refreshed inwardly and
outwardly. This formed a satisfying diversion for
a day or two, Reed not needing even conversation,
so absorbed was his being in this strangely satis-
fying occupation.
“There’s no shop round the corner here,” Beryl
warned him as he flourished a laden and dripping
brush, slapping it with leisurely enjoyment upon
the faded woodwork. “The only other colours out
there are brown and white and red. There’s the
other side to do yet; you don't want to make it like
a camouflaged ship.”
“I refuse to paint with anything but blue,” he
insisted complacently, a piece of sacking tied high
round him, his felt hat turned down, his pipe at
an upward angle which suggested content. “I’ve
wanted all my life to do this, and I refuse to be
stingy with the paint. What I lack in artistry I
make up in lavishness, what?”
“In extravagance,” said Jill from under her bat-
tered hat. “Out here,” she remarked painstakingly,
with a severe glance at the array of new nails, paint,
brushes, screws, scissors, pincers, step-ladder, ham-


mer, scraps of linoleum, and a chair or two repos-
ing in the shade and in the sun, “we do things
with what is on hand . . . old nails out of kero-
sene cases . . . anything ... a hammer, of course;
maybe, a hairpin. You are too elaborate for the
bush.”
Slap went the brush, and Jill bobbed back. “I
enjoy it, and so do you,” said the artist. “So really
it’s an excellent arrangement.” He stood back with
head on one side. “Rather nifty, that.”
“It yells,” Jill asserted.
“Good.”
“But you can’t stretch that pot all over this cot-
tage,” Beryl remarked, anxiously peering into the
messy tin. “Shall I send Bubbles for some white
to mix with it?”
“No, I’ll keep going. This shade of blue suits
my complex. Or my aura —if I’m blessed by an
aura. I’m sure it’s blue, although I don’t quite know
what an aura is.”
A cane chair, blankets; curtains made by Beryl
with the hand sewing-machine turned and oiled
by David; sheets in a box; cretonne cushions of
bilious hue; a yellow dressing-table pounced upon
and painted blue by Timothy, all helped the House
That Jack Built into conspicuous smartness. The
paint lasted after all, even reaching as far as the
mantelshelf and the edges of the thick bunk. In
speechless pride—or maybe some other glory—Tim-
othy finally stood yards away to survey his home
in suitable perspective. Presently he looked round
for more articles to paint, but ruefully tipped the
pot upside-down : it was empty.
“Superb,” he announced to the others, the sack-
ing apron still tied round his chest with string.
“The acme of convenience and artistic finesse: I


have been blue fairly often, but never before have I
had the joy of living in a blue house. Well, some
dreams come true, they say. Who are the mythi-
cal ‘they’ responsible for such remarks? . . . And
now I should be content. I can reach my books,
shut the door, or find the matches, please note,
without getting out of bed. Excellent! A model
house.”
“Muddle house,” murmured Jill, but her eyes
were lit with fun also. Certainly the House That
Jack Built was impressive. In conscious brilliance
it shone, seen from the top of the clififs. From
across the river it was a blue beacon that called the
young people homewards. Horses shied at it, while
natives grinned at it in speechless delight: a house
after their own hearts! It assailed the eye and
afflicted the sensitive like a blow beneath the waist,
but the owner of it spread his deck-chair before
his front and only door and proceeded with pomp
and domestic importance to read a month-old paper.
Loftus, having arranged for Reed’s semi-inclusion
in the household menage, shut his eyes to blue
paint and all else that followed. Jill had behaved
well since the stranger’s arrival, and the others
were obviously happy in his presence. There was
no doubt that the Major would respond to the
stranger, and, as for Loftus himself, he had summed
up his man and was satisfied. Philip Loftus there-
fore accepted Reed as part of Sunset Hill, even as
successfully as Timothy accepted Sunset Hill as
part of himself.
During the weeks which followed his arrival at
Intircha, Reed had given a great deal of thought to
Jill and his own fiddle. Once or twice, in the seclu-


sion and privacy of the House That Jack Built, he
had unwrapped the violin to touch the strings lin-
geringly, his fingers bringing forth only a ghost of
a tune as he held it on his knees. He understood
Jill’s craving for the solace of this instrument which
held all interpretations of mirth and sorrow in its
wooden self: he understood Jill so well that he
often found himself anticipating her next move-
ment —and was invariably right. It was not pos-
sible to help Jill at this stage, out of respect to his
host, whose wishes in the matter had to be studied.
But Reed knew what the absence of a fiddle meant
to Jill. One night a strange depression gripped
him so badly that even a walk through the still-
ness of the riverway did nothing to banish his
complete sense of isolation and forlornness.
He almost reached the inferior stage of pitying
himself, as he walked the soft cool sand and
watched the stars sketched over by dark boughs
and graceful scraps of foliage. Strange that, this
time, the stars and the beautiful night could not
help: nothing but the blue cottage again, and bed!
So he turned his feet in the direction of the
House That Jack Built, just as the moon slipped up
behind the knife-edged sharpness of Intircha’s edge,
terrifyingly grim before that polished sovereign,
who faded and cooled as she rose from the clinging
touch of the rock’s ramparts. Timothy climbed the
river-bank slowly, watching a red flare at the camp
and listening to a slow melancholy drawl of melody
which broke out for ten minutes and then died away
with the distant lowering fire. Music . . . the
primitive ache for expression that seized civilized
men in similar ways, if stranger forms! The wail
of a dying race was in every swaying song sung by
the natives who chanted round the camp-fires: even


he, to-night, hungered curiously for sounds. He
had no voice. Expression ! Strange relief for over-
burdened minds and breaking hearts! The sea
with its roar, the cry of a child, the yelp of a dog
in pain, and the sounds which came from piano or
any other instrument when made to speak through
the medium of fingers which told the heart’s own
story. Lord! Intircha held too much beauty to-
night. It made one introspective. One could
not search too deeply into the whys and wherefores
of creation without suffering with one’s own sense
of smallness and ignorance!
Jill? To Jill Reed’s thoughts flew, as the moon
sailed higher and her light picked out contours
hidden a while before in the grey-black of the
dark. He glanced at the house. It was ten o’clock,
late for the household to be about, unless on mail
night or before it. Windows were dark, no sound
rising that told of conscious humanity. Lonelier
than ever, the dark house striking a cruel note in
his weighted mind, which was rather too busy
this evening with comparisons and with forebodings
about his own condition. Reed bit his teeth savagely
into his pipe, and shut the shack door quickly. The
moon was closed away: the sight of the dead house
was not for him to-night. Undressing slowly, he
glanced down once or twice at the bundle under the
bunk, then drew it out reflectively. One could at
least touch the strings in faintest melody, now that
the dwelling across the clearing was quite silent,
all lights denoting sleep and oblivion.
In his pyjamas, his pipe in his mouth, Reed leaned
back against the mantel base as he sat flat on the
floor, his head back against the woodwork. Lightly
he touched the strings and black shadows flitted


and discontent was replaced by something sweeter,
as he half smiled over an old tune beloved by Mar-
garet. Jill vanished, and the English girl with the
blue eyes and honey-golden hair smiled out of the
dark. Margaret—of his lost country.
Jill herself was not asleep, although her room
was in darkness. Under her pillow was an old
crumpled concert programme, its gold lines faint,
her mother’s name printed across the thick shiny
surface. Inside the folder were the ravishing names
of the compositions Marie had played that night of
nights, with two Queens and a Princess in the
Royal box. The scene as Jill imagined it, lying
on her back in her favourite position with her
hands clasped under her tumbled head, was not
greatly in excess of the actual happening, but the
anguish of visualizing it all was almost unbearable.
Unconsciously she was putting herself in her
mother’s place, moving at ease across a platform
under the applause that rose from among a sea of
faces beyond.
As she ruminated in this world of fancy, which
was but prophecy, the girl twisted sharply. There
would be people whose superiority would crush
her —crunch her under the weight of their own
worldly knowledge and familiarity with all that
the world taught, all that Jill was ignorant of in her
secluded, remote life where culture came only from
books or from contact with the previous few whom
they met and liked. Timothy! Jill frowned and
grimaced as she pondered upon Reed. Timothy
was . . . different. His quiet corrections were
almost jests, but Jill valued them. His slight
words of casual praise she almost craved for, and
cherished them in the secret place which held so


many odd treasures. His glance of disapproval,
quite unconscious, sometimes imaginary, plunged
Jill into a burning flame of disgrace that made her
angry, brittle, and silent. And Timothy was sad.
Yet he laughed and joked, treating his sickness in a
way that caught at Jill’s throat. He said so
little about himself and his desires or dreams that
every scrap which he dropped in conversation she
seized upon avidly. His eyes . . . His lips smiled,
but his eyes seldom. Some day Timothy would be
proud of her if she rose to Marie’s pinnacle of fame,
ashamed of her if she failed. A moment of abysmal
horror flooded her. But only for a moment. Her
head moved on the pillow as her spirits lifted: she
was her mother’s daughter, and those who knew
Marie would know Jill: all the world knew Marie.
Fantasy, fact, dreams, and visions mingled in a
symphony to which Jill’s heart beat time as she
lay in bed watching the dim light which first
touched the door then rose, an inch at a time, to the
upper wall, growing in blue brilliance as the
minutes sped. Ever-present facts, hard and un-
alterable, supplied the minor key to these dreams,
which left her numb with impatience and frus-
tration ; for the other world was far away, and the
puzzle of her father and herself was not yet solved.
In baffled surrender she discarded thoughts of
Philip Loftus, dwelling with a kind of stabbing
glory upon what she knew was locked away in
her, ready for release. Someday! Blessed words
of youth, the will o’ the wisp that guides stumb-
ling feet through many a morass and dark field as
they march forward by strange and devious tracks.
Someday! So Jill murmured. Some day it would
all come, simply because she was herself, and it
must.


Slowly, delicately, like a thin thread, stole to her
consciousness a sound which was impossible: she
lay as if dead, as the incredible, faint, distant aerial
melody lifted on the wings of a faint breath of air
from the riverway, then fell again as the breeze
died. She did not move; she was stiff and breath-
less, afraid of the reality of the little fragment of
tune which might have walked alive out of her
visions. Listening with straining ears, she gave
a long weary sigh, for there was nothing but
silence. She turned on her side, and the sound
came again, delicately, threading timidly through
the stillness like an errant wind in a pine.
Not knowing why or how she did it, the girl,
with heart racing madly, slipped from her bed
and through the window with not a sound.
Outside she stood erect with her lips parted, and
shivered. Not with cold, for the night was warm
and still. Reaching inside the window automati-
cally, she slowly dragged a silken kimono from a
chair and pulled it about her.
Tracking the invisible delight which now awoke
again, Jill crept over the ground as stealthily as
an Indian, moving like a wraith through the blue
and silver radiance which drenched the night with
beauty. As she walked, her shadow moved gro-
tesquely, chasing up over posts, along a wall, and
on to the ground again. Then she ran, silently,
with her bare feet in the dust, for there was a light
in the House That Jack Built, and from it came, not
an ethereal mystery, but a very # human little chan-
sonette played in semi-hushed sympathy by the long
fingers of the man who loved blue paint.
The little shack was stark and solid, etched in
black, the window an oblong patch of bright yellow,


a live contrast with the pictures painted by the
serene moon. On flying - feet, soundless and fleet,
Jill followed the music’s call, impervious to every-
thing but the bewildering presence of a violin at
Sunset Hill.
The enormity of her intrusion did not occur to
her as she burst the door open. Timothy, in pyjamas
and an old patterned dressing-gown, was sitting
with his back to the fireplace, his pipe at that
moment hanging somewhat limply, the fiddle
dropped to his knees.
Reed was completely limp. The temptation to
play had resulted in a delicious hour that had made
him forget many things. This contretemps was
unexpectedly devastating, knocking him flat for
a moment. Jill’s appearance was in the nature of
an apparition. She might have stood for an ap-
parition, so white and wild was she, with her green
eyes lit to uncanny brilliance by something burn-
ing within her. Reed groaned under his breath.
Jill was startlingly lovely, there in the doorway,
poised for a helpless moment against the blackness
of Intircha, the moonlight outlining her and the
lamp-light flooding her with yellow. It caught
at each strand of her hair, and glowed on the ver-
milion of the old kimono which Beryl had given
her.
Still she could not speak. Words had deserted
her as she became immovable just inside the door.
The inside of that shack would be printed on
her mind for ever, she thought, as she opened and
closed her lips and felt her face grow paler. Out
of nowhere had come the strains of a fiddle: out
of nowhere had come this instrument! With
a quick movement, all grace and eagerness, Jill


dropped to her knees on the floor before Timothy,
dumbly holding - out her hands, which shook. Just
as dumbly he handed her the violin.
She did nothing more than hold it, breathing
sharply, the wood pressed to the scarlet kimono,
her hands clutching the fiddle fiercely as she looked
over at the man who was frowning with the dis-
comfort of the whole affair. Discomfort, as when
a gripping play traps one into a small betrayal of
the emotions which are usually camouflaged. Jill
camouflaged nothing: she had forgotten everything
in the one delight which now was sending waves of
colour to her forehead. Reed watched her neck
dye scarlet, then fade, and her cheeks flush, glow,
and grow like wax again as she bit her lips in an
agony of half-incredulous excitement. Jill was
stripped to the soul: his flesh crept with super-
stitious dismay as he visioned her, “some day,”
clinging to all that her music meant and letting
the rest of the world slip by. Would she? It was
possible. She was all artist. His eyes darkened
as he visioned himself, old and sick, with no Jill
near. If he lived, that must happen . . . His soul
felt dead as he waited there in that unconscionable
moment.
At last, half smiling, half weeping, she lifted
a transfigured face to his. “Timothy! Where did
it come from?”
He tried to smile—absurd attempt! Then, as she
demanded an answer, imperious, eager, he said
lamely; “I thought you were asleep, cara nUa.”
It was not an explanation yet. “That’s nothing
to do with this," she protested thickly. “Timothy,
have you had it for long?” She leaned forward


i 66 SUNSET HILL
slightly, huddled over the object in her arms as she
knelt before him.
“Yes, old thing, I’ve had it all along. I brought
it here in the car from the Alice, and took it there
with me from . . . home. A long way for a
fiddle to travel, you see.” His gaze sought hers,
and held it. “There was nothing else to do, Jill,
but to hide it.”
“Nothing else to do,” she choked, her eyes filling
and spilling. “Nothing else to do, but keep this
from me, when it’s the one thing in life I want.
Timothy? Why?” The query was almost a
prayer in its breathless fervency. He did not reply
immediately, so she swallowed back threatening
woe, and went on: “Tim, you could have made
me so happy all this time. Why did you starve
me of it . . .when you know . . . how I . .
Again she struggled with an emotion almost too
great for her to manage. “Tim,” she cried sharply.
“Do you think it’s not right for me to learn to play
properly? Do you think I should go without it all
my life ?”
“Good Lord, no. It’s a gift.” He was surprised
into ardent support of her, although Loftus and his
hospitality lingered at the back of his mind. To
Jill came the unusual sensation that accompanies
the real meaning of a word hitherto used automati-
cally. Her mind raced. A gift! Music was a
gift. Something given one ... to hold . . . cherish
to treasure, and protect from damage. A gift!
from whom ? She choked, winking the tears blindly
from her lashes, as her face tightened and her
mouth trembled. “Tim . . . you do understand.”
The statement was made softly, dawning wonder
replacing the piteous fight for control. She looked


She
closed her eyes tightly for
a second,
as her
voice
; dropped to a slow husky
staccato.
“And
. . .
here ... it is. It’s here, in
my hands.
Tim-
othy
. . . I . . . can’t believe . .
. it’s true.
99
down at the thing in her hands. Twisting side-
ways, the lithe figure in scarlet leaned against the
foot of the bunk, her head tilted against the upright
as she talked. The stemmed torrent which
had once been released for Beryl now broke out
again for Timothy, with a freedom added that came
through her ecstasy over the violin. Her voice
dropped and fell. One moment a woman, with a
woman’s reflections and sweetness, the next a wilful
child uttering some absurdity that Reed noticed
with a hidden appreciation of its utter unworldli-
ness. Husky one moment, ringing with satisfac-
tion the next, she spoke of a hundred things,
sketching little scenes swiftly, until the years from
when she was an infant were drawn for Timothy
from the original viewpoint of the girl herself. Her
hands rested lovingly on the polished wood as she
talked, expressions chasing each other from her face
so quickly that the man was held and fascinated.
That part s true enough, Jill,” said the young
man soberly.
Her face changed again. “You’ll let me have it?
You won’t send it away?”
“As you’ve discovered it, it’s beyond my power
to keep it from you, and beyond my strength to try
to.” His mouth moved wryly.
She nodded, her lips trembling. She was shaking
with the fever of excitement that held her, her
hands restless on the wood, which caught the lamp’s
glow winkingly.
To tell you the truth,’ Reed continued care-


fully, “this is not a very welcome affair. This in-
strument is likely to cause the deuce of an upset
in your home, and your father has been awfully
fine to me. Do you see my unwillingness to be
party to a kind of . . . unwilling deception?”
“I see.” Jill thought it out swiftly. “You de-
cided that I must suffer in this, rather than he.”
“Something like that.”
“But now,” she cried triumphantly, “I’ve found
this by accident, and it’s not your fault. Timothy,
what will you do?” She held the fiddle uncon-
sciously closer as she asked the query of whose
answer she was defiantly afraid. But Reed shook
his head, his lips kind. “I’ll not deny it you, little
girl. Go and make your music, but don’t hide it
from your father.”
“Timothy,” came with a burst from her swell-
ing heart, “I’ll make myself tell him, soon. Will
that be right, if I do?” At his casual nod she said
weakly: “Will you . . . stand by me?”
“At your service, Mam’selle,” came jocularly
from her companion. He was retiring behind some-
thing too gigantic for solemnity. “Let’s bury it
in the sand as Ponto does his bones . . . and dig
it up for enjoyment occasionally.”
“You are foolish.” Jill lowered her brows at
him.
“It is wise to be a fool —occasionally,” he an-
nounced softly. With an abrupt change of man-
ner he addressed her solemnly. “Make happy
music when you can, Jill.”
She nodded, taking the bow into her hand, her
thin fingers meeting over it lovingly. She lifted
the instrument to her chin and snuggled it into
position with a shiver that Timothy saw and


almost felt. But the bow did not touch the strings.
Jill suddenly dropped the fiddle to her lap, hiding
her face in her hands, sobbing as if her heart would
break, her head bent low, with her hair falling over
her shoulders.
“Jill!” Timothy touched her shoulder, then
seized her hands to draw them from her face. But
she clenched them fiercely against her eyes. “Jill
child! What is it?”
Reed was afraid of the mysterious anguish which
had her on a rack, her slight form quivering in the
inexplicable misery which tore through her. “Jill!
You’ll be ill, child. Don’t sob like that . . .” Reed
felt bewildered, and suddenly very helpless.
Presently into the shack came a stifled voice, so
thick that the words were muffled: “Tim . . . I’m
afraid that . . . the sounds inside me won’t be
like that when I . . . try to play.”
Shuddering, Jill fought with the emotion which
came from the fear of pitting the real in battle
with the ideal. Perhaps, in lassoing this star, she
might find the chill plains all stark to the moon.
The ecstasy of secret whispers might change to
harsh sounds, crude and unformed, if she touched
the strings! Jill was afraid . . . afraid of what
the fiddle might not hold for her.
Her shoulders shook as she tried to compose
herself, knowing that such weeping would distress
Timothy. Still with her face covered, tears trick-
ling to her wrists and sticking to sprays of vivid
hair which the man lifted back tenderly, she waited,
each sob coming slower, as the man searched his
mind for the right words to comfort her in this
dangerous release of accumulated hunger. “Jill
. . . dear heart . , . don’t tear yourself to pieces!


ijo SUNSET HILL
What’s in you must come out. Don’t smash up
just now. Remember that you want every nerve
whole and sound, and your body strong and taut,
for the career which must come ‘some day.’ ” He
smiled sombrely at Jill’s favourite expression.
“Now let me wipe your face. It’s rather a hot
face, isn’t it, and very damp. Where’s your hanky?
Not? Well, you are a careless young woman.
Cheer up, little lady. As soon as you touch
that fiddle I’ll crawl away like Dismal Desmond,
my tail between my legs most abjectly, and my
face all looped up in despairing folds. My technical
twiddles on the fiddle will seem like a barrel
organ’s skirlings in comparison with what you will
produce from my highly honoured instrument.
Now, Jill old thing . . . dry your eyes . . . look
at me.”
Slowly she hicupped to silence, her face swol-
len, her voice disguised by the weeping which had
shaken her. “I love you, Timothy, for giving me
this, and for understanding. But do you mind
. . . if I go away alone, to . . . try this, first time?”
Something which hurt Reed ridiculously moved
his features, but he nodded almost gaily. The
waterhole was her destination, without a doubt,
where long ago she had sat in the sunlight and the
moonlight with Marie.
“The very thing,” he exclaimed, pretending to
misunderstand. “Somebody might hear you if you
tried the thing here. It must be kept secret for a
while. And I’ll leave it to you, partner in in-
trigue, to tell your father all about this at the
first reasonable opportunity. Is that a posh idea
. . . or the contrary?”
“It’s gorgeously posh,” replied Jill seriously, her


stained face forgotten as she rose to her feet,
slightly cramped from crouching on the floor. In
her hands, which curled about it lovingly, was
Timothy’s fiddle. “Tim,” she asked huskily, “if I
find I can remember and catch some tunes, will
you . , . listen to me, some day?”
His voice was none too steady as he propelled
her to the door with a soft touch on her shoulder.
“Go,” he smiled, “and catch your tunes. They’re
meshed already, if you but knew it, meshed in
silver and gold and scarlet . . . and, like mine,
in grey.” The latter he said only to his own soul,
as Jill slipped out into the dark and he knew him-
self to be terribly alone.


CHAPTER IX
How difficult is the thorny way of strife
That man hath stumbled in since time began!
And in the tangled business of this life
How difficult to play the part of man!
Ghalib.
About three weeks after the eventful evening in
the little one-roomed cottage, Reed approached Jill
with his mind made up on one point, of importance
to his peace of mind. A subtle alteration had taken
place in Jill during the last weeks, and the stars
and winds were no longer out of tune. Watching
her, Timothy had wondered more than once how
soon the dangerously inflated bubble would burst.
Jill had slipped in and out of the House That Jack
Built upon pretext after pretext, each time either
taking the fiddle from beneath the bunk or return-
ing it, no comment from either its owner or herself
making the man wise as to her progress with it.
Now, he felt more than a little unrest over the
situation, which so far was withheld from Loftus.
“Look here, Jill, you’ll have to get it over,” he
warned her seriously. “You can’t keep up this
deceit: it’s not cricket.”
“I’ll try to tell him to-morrow,” she said faintly.
“But I’m afraid. Not of him, but of having it taken
from . . . us.”
“It’s my fiddle, technically, and he’d hardly do
that, you know. You needn’t alarm yourself about


once , . . er . . Timothy coughed.
“What he once did to . . . hers,” she completed
that, I’m positive. He wouldn’t do again what he
for him with a thin and grown-up smile at his
momentary embarrassment. She moved sharply,
as if to shake off a fear. “Tim, let me do it in my
own time. I’ll not evade it; but let me choose
when. You don’t know him as I do.” Then, shyly:
“I remember a tune or two. One, in particular
. . . Will you listen, to-night?”
“I will, indeed.”
“Then I’ll go down to the lagoon as soon after
dinner as I can escape without notice. It’s dark
then, and I can play better in the dark . . . just
now.”
“Splendid! I’ll be there.” His air of approval
and agreement was somewhat assumed, for he was
not comfortable.
So when dinner was over Jill vanished. She had
vanished often of late, but her whims were too
many and varied to cause undue comment. Down
to the dark lagoon, where the cliffs threw their
blackest shadow, she crept, penetrating the silence
stealthily, the stillness broken only by twigs under
her shoes or the rustle of birds in the reeds. Once
a beast stamped through the shallows higher up,
the echoes rippling round the rocks, crashing away
faintly into a deeper silence than before. She seated
herself on the cool, dry sand, and waited.
A dim figure, distorted by a large bundle under
one arm, called softly: “Where are you, Lady of the
Lake?”
“Here, near the water. Mind the log. Give it
to me, Timothy.”
“Sorry, can’t lift it,” he replied facetiously.


“ Silly, I mean the violin.” She took the fiddle
from his hands, unwrapping it swiftly. He saw the
white blur made by her face, and the sketchy move-
ments of her hands in the gloom. She was very
intent and very solemn, as she slowly lifted the
fiddle to her chin and paused with the bow poised
lightly.
“I can play ... a little. This ...” She did
not complete the sentence, but drew a long breath
which he heard; then she touched the strings.
Reed did not know what he expected. He knew
she had fought out the fear of her inability to play,
through long evenings filled with nobody knows
what joy and pain, and that there would be no
discord. Jill was too conscious of ridicule to at-
tempt to play the fiddle if she did not know that she
had mastered the little she remembered about it.
And it was as natural as breathing for her to speak
with the violin. Reed was not prepared, however,
for the sweet quality in the three single notes which
came from the instrument which he could not
discern in the blackness.
Three notes, and Jill had come into her own.
The song broke in a sheer mastery of touch that
belonged to a destined musician, a little melody
repeating itself, first gaily, then in minor key, fol-
lowed by an echo of such heart-breaking poignancy
that Timothy stirred under pressure of the sounds.
The notes sobbed into silence on one exquisite
throb, which hung, curiously incomplete, in the
stillness. The tune left behind it a desire almost
strong enough for him to say, “Go on. It’s not
finished.” But he did nothing of the sort, for
the beauty of the song was in its incompleteness.
A little song, whose notes were few and simple,


me ... I cried
. . . but last night ...” She
breathed quickly.
“I knew I was not mistaken:
I shall play . . .
some day.”
yet whose delicacy had been called back over a
long span of years, trapped at last by Jill’s sure
fingers. A few moments, and, to Timothy, Jill was
suddenly Marie Veers’ daughter, proclaiming her
right to follow in her mother’s footsteps, whether
the path be strewn with flints or petals. “And
that,” she said now with tightly controlled grimness,
“is the thread that ran through her Faltering Tune.
It came back to me last night. For a long time
I made discords, and could not feel what was in
Tim was expressionless. “You’ll need somebody
well up in the game to guide you, with this as your
heritage. The world demands accuracy of technique
as well as intensity of emotion. Somebody
who understands you must teach you to bring out
the best that a fiddle holds. He misquoted with
a little laugh. “A fiddle holds all music, ours the
choice.” Jill moved as he added: “Choose well!
I wish it were I to teach you, Jill.”
The violin was at her chin again. Timothy’s
ready speech, even if disguised by matter-of-fact-
ness, lifted her to crazy heights. She was inspired
by some desire which sent the bow almost leaping
to the instrument. A chord whose cry of triumph
raked through Reed was followed by a wild cascade
of notes rippling to a peak of gladness that hurt
the man unreasonably. Little breaks and catches
dropped the tune down again to a single note of
rapture. “Timothy,” she cried, breathless, laugh-
ing, but with tears not far away, “some day I’ll talk
with this thing . . . like that . . . and stand where
my mother stood, and carry on her story.” She


dropped the violin to the frills of her skirt, and
leaned forward, her hands seeking his. “Timothy,
I love you, best of all.”
The man did not move. This moment to him
was a pinnacle from which led two roads —both
downwards. The dark waterhole gleamed faintly,
a polished obsidian set in black cloth. He re-
leased his fingers gently, leaning carelessly back
against the log behind him. “I am honoured,
Jill, beyond words.” Reed thanked Heaven for
the darkness, which hid his working face: all he
wanted in the world was Jill, and health, while all
she wanted was the music which was almost as
great a necessity. The timbre of his voice dis-
turbed her into swift repentance of her impulsive-
ness. “You are laughing at me,” she said angrily.
“But I’m grown up, even if I’m not twenty. I’m
not a child, Tim.”
He was silent, fighting, fighting, and he won.
“I’m not a child, and I love you,” she repeated.
“You mustn’t say that, little lady. What do you
know of the meaning of the word?”
“I know,” she said again, doggedly. “I read
books. And why are you so horrid to me? Should
I have waited for you to tell me that? It’s
very silly to wait when I know it, and I know
that you are fond of me, too.”
His voice sounded harsh now. “Fond of you!
Why should I not be, Jill?”
She choked back her reply. Since the night when
she had first taken the violin, Jill, in her gratitude,
had toyed with the pleasant sound of loving.
Timothy was “fond of her,” and perhaps was afraid
of not being strong, therefore would not speak to


her of this important matter. She would not allow
it to make any difference —his not being strong.
As if that mattered! As if anything mattered when
you were “fond of people.” Jill did not know it,
but what she was most “fond of” was the violin
and the scenes her dramatic young soul revelled
in. Nobility, as Timothy at once realized, and
martyrdom (he smiled wryly) were behind her
simple avowal, whose very lack of restraint proved
its mistaken origin. Jill now felt angry and baffled,
and very much like a tiny girl who has been
smacked. She did not like the sensation. Slowly,
haughtily, she repeated Reed’s words. “Why
should you not be fond of me? Well, why should
I not be fond of you?” She sniffed. “Of course,
it’s probably because you are the only one near
enough to be fond of.” Jill, in her sharpness, had
touched the truth eloquently. But the man felt no
ease come through it.
“See . . . the moon’s coming up,” he said irrele-
vantly.
They fell into silence, with the charm of the bush-
land quiet doing something to both of them. Jill
ached to reassure Timothy concerning the awkward
speech she had made. It did not sound at all
romantic, with his cool acceptance to chill her de-
sire for martyrdom, while, as for the man, he was
finding it difficult to remain still, so persistent were
the memories and visions which were crowding
out of the past. It was as if a door had been
opened to-night, and forgotten demons had flown
straight at him—demons almost dead. The pair
did not move Reed thought his blue house
singularly uninteresting and pallid in comparison
with the strange emotions brought to life in the


shadows of the cliffs. He moved abruptly, as one
vision touched him with almost physical pain.
“What is it? An ant?” she asked sarcastically
of the man who detested ants. Jill usually brushed
them off and forgot them : he called them “animals,”
and suspected each and every specimen of bearing a
pair of tweezers on its fore-portions.
“No . . . something else.” The man knew that
his voice was not normal, and now Jill frowned. She
was outlined faintly, as the moon swung above the
clinging edge of Intircha.
“Was it something you thought of?” she asked
frankly.
“It was.”
“What kind of thought? A memory?”
For the life of him Reed could not lie, or evade
Jill to-night, and in his mind was forming an idea
which might benefit her if carried out. To say
she . . . loved him! Jill! He retreated from his
feelings by saying: “A deuced unpleasant memory.”
The girl nodded, but asked invitingly: “Tell me.
You and Beryl are the only ones in the world, I
think, whom I could talk to about under-the-surface
things. Was the memory a . . . regretful one?”
“All unpleasant memories are regretful ones,” he
fenced.
“No, I don’t think so,” said the girl-woman,
struggling among the depths of her dawning values.
“Sweet memories could be more painful—of things
that are gone.”
“You are a baffling infant, Jill. Are you a
woman, or a baby?”
Very still, she said slowly: “Would you speak in
different language to me if I were a woman?”
Reed was surprised, despite his knowledge of


Jill, by the form of her query, quite bereft of
the crudity which is forgiven to youth. He replied
gently, making up his mind in one moment, while
he plunged boldly: “I should like to tell you what
my memories are about, Jill —if you are enough
of a woman to appreciate them and enough of a
child to forget.”
“I could never forget anything you told me,
Timothy. Why, how could I, when it is you who
have given me this?”
Knowing he must go on, for her sake, and tread
delicately, also for her sake, he shrugged unhappily
and continued: “Jill, long ago, when I was about
your age, and full of the joys that make up care-
less youth, I was just from school, and slightly
aware of my own importance in the scheme of
things. Nothing could go wrong with me, because
I was myself. The old argument of those who
are too young. I studied law for a time, but had
enough money for it not to interfere greatly with
my life—a round of various pursuits not very
serious. To cut a long story short, I was a roman-
tic young idiot, and fell headlong in love with a pair
of dark eyes, a pretty face, and . . . love itself.
She wanted what I possessed in the bank and a
few securities. She was not wealthy, and I was
a ‘catch.’ Unpleasant, isn’t it? For such a delicate
and winsome young creature she was very clever.”
He paused, lost in something which almost stifled
him, but he went on leadenly; “I married her; I
wanted it, of course. I disregarded every word of
advice older ones proffered, and . . well, youth
is rather crazy, Jill, and I had a series of’visions
which in themselves were all right. A wife in my
home . . . round my garden . . . and so forth.


But there was no companionship for me, only
the sensation of having suddenly been made
banker for a woman who called me ‘old-fashioned
when I wanted her to stay at home. It was rather
a decent home, too. Dreams fade. Mine vanished
at once. They didn’t even have time to fade. We
all have them, in different forms, but the ashes of
those fires cling to a man s feet all his life.
He stopped abruptly. Then he continued; It
was on a night something like this, in an old
garden drenched with dew, moonlight on her hair,
when I asked her to marry me. You see, per-
haps, the danger of rushing in too soon. I had
met few other women, and was too fresh from
school. The danger of telling people you
them, Jill, has perhaps not occurred to you. It’s for
life, child, not for a few hours of moonlight.”
Timothy sought his inevitable pipe, and lit it.
She saw the flame on the match rise and fall. It
went out, as Jill leaned over and pressed his arm,
dropping her hand until it fell on one of his and
curled up under his fingers. The friendly little fist
of this music-soaked child was a bitter-sweet panacea
for the pain of baring his soul for her enlighten-
ment. “You understand, Jill? You’ve got a career
ahead: a darned fine one, if I'm any judge, and
you’ve got to be fully aware of that awkward com
plex of yours, which sends you sky-high into
absurdities on every w r ave of emotion. Perhaps a
few paternal words won’t come amiss, but ... I
don’t know. Try and remember this, Jill, and don t
make any fatal mistakes.”
“You wouldn’t like me to do that?” she inquired
thinly. .
“I’d suffer a lot to prevent it,” came with an odd
inflexion.


“I’m almost scared of the way you say that,” she
faltered. “As if you couldn’t prevent it. . .
“Who can prevent youth from its folly?” asked
the man lightly, “any more than age from its . , .
foolishness ?”
Jill considered for a moment, then said with a
rush; “Timothy, just now I said I loved you. Some
people would have asked me to marry them,
wouldn’t they?”
“Yes”—coolly.
“You might have.”
“Yes.” He laughed shortly. “But I didn’t.”
T . . . I didn’t quite think of that when I said
it, she stammered. “I ... I just said it, because
I felt as if I wanted to.”
“And I just told you a bit of my history because
I felt you needed it —as an example of what not to
do,” he retorted in her tones.
“But . . . ”
“Now, look here, young lady. You’ve got that
darned awkward characteristic which we call, for
want of a better word, temperament. Whatever
the name, it can t be explained, but it’s aggravated
by youth and intensified by suffering, which is age.
Do you follow? Good. You’ll be tempted many
times by your temperament into releasing some of
it through pity, sympathy, or generosity, but if you
value the best life holds, stop and consider wisely
before you rush round telling any man you love
him. Jill, if my shadow could go with you
and protect you, I’d sacrifice myself to send it;
but it can’t. You’ve got to carve your destiny’
and you owe the world a lot. It’s waiting to wor-
ship before beauty and talent, and the divine spark
is warm in you. You’ll win out, but be sure before
you think you . . . love.” He swallowed. “I wish


I had the power to brand your soul with a fear
of making errors in that direction.”
“Timothy, you understand me so well, and know
exactly the things I’m likely to do, and you always
feel how I feel. Why is that?”
“Because you’re so dashed lavish with your feel-
ings, my dear,” he lied purposely.
“Timothy! I’m not vulgar or nasty, and I can
see what a fool I am, but if you . . . took me
away, soon, you’d he able to help me look out and
keep from making errors.”
He laughed aloud. “Jill, what a baby you are!
The greatest error you could ever make would be
to go anywhere with me. The world is a closed
book to you. You know nothing of it. God! the
pity of it!” he said to himself. “And the awaken-
ing,” he added with dry lips.
“I read a lot, and I know that people must be
good, or others scorn them.”
“If they find them out, yes,” smiled the man.
Then he remembered that it was Jill to whom he
was talking and who was the object of his remarks.
“Jill, the world is full of fools even greater than
I’ve been. You are remarkably attractive, and as
soon as you get out among people you’ll be sought
after and paid homage to. You need not say
‘Tommy-rot.’ It’s painfully apparent, to me. But,
remember, that marriage lasts for ever . . . ever
and ever ... on and on.” He asked curtly: “How
should you like to spend a fortnight in a house with
some one you detested?”
“I should shriek.”
“Then, how about your whole life, eh?”
She saw, and was silent.
“No escape, except through pain and torture. On


and on . . . Jill, black despair because of only-
having one life. Denied the sweetest in life because
of having taken the counterfeit too soon. Unable
to give your best to the right man when you find
him, because of plunging hastily into a marriage
that ties you—binds you hand and foot, and you
cannot go to him.”
“I should go to him.”
“How?”
“I’d run away.”
“Where?”
“The world is big.”
“Not big enough for that, little girl. I’d give a
large slice of it, were it mine, to help you find the
right man . . . some day, Jill. Some day, my
dear, not now. People don’t select choice objects in
the first little village shop they came to: they must
wait, or blunder.”
Reed s face was wet, in the warm evening, with
the strain of trying to show Jill to herself. Every
word he uttered cut into him as a knife might.
Will you recall to-night, Jill, when you are tempted
to say T love you’ to any man?”
I couldn t help it,” she said with truth, knowing
that she must always remember. “Although to
you it seems different.”
“It seems different to anybody, Jill.”
‘‘Yes ... but Timothy, I still wish that you
could take me away.”
His reply was so muffled and hoarse that she
hardly caught the harsh words flung at her almost
angrily. “Are you aware that my wife is still
living?” he asked.
She shrank back, dismayed and shocked, then felt
the pulsing of his agony. “Don’t!” she whis-
pered. “You break my heart.”


“So, you see, Jill,” he managed to articulate,
outspreading his hands and dropping them to his
knees, “in my desperate attempt to clear your sight
I’m doing nothing but relate my own sordid story.
Has it taught you nothing, or have you gleaned a
little fear from the example of my sorry self?”
“I . . . have been nothing but a fool,” she choked.
“And now you pity me,” he concluded lightly,
but she saw his face grimace.
“Why should I pity you?” she asked sickly. “Its
too huge a thing for that horrid form of patronage.
He smiled at her words, but in the wry smile
was a shade of relief. He thought she saw some-
thing of what life meant, but the effort of showing
it to her was almost too great.
For a long time neither moved or spoke, until
Timothy said warningly: “Next time you think
you love somebody, my dear, make sure that it is
the woman in you who loves, and not the artist.
His tones were crisp and final, but she was not
afraid of anti-climax, and continued thoughtfully:
“How shall I know?”
“When the woman in you loves, you’ll recognize
it. The desperate pain of it is that we have to
commit so many fool blunders before we reach
that stage of superior judgment.”
“Is that why you feel so about it all?” she in-
quired innocently, out of curiosity. “Perhaps you've
found the real love since.”
“As most men have, Jill, I’ve found it too late.”
The girl was motionless, and then said slowly:
“It’s because of that, that you don’t want me to
suffer. Timothy ... is that it?”
“You’ll hurt me, if you are hurt in that way,
Jill.” He was deliberately evasive.


“I’ll remember to try and not hurt you like that,”
she vowed. Timothy felt that his evening had
not been wasted, although he was sick and sore.
It might have been a comfort to him had he heard
what Jill breathed to herself in the silence that
followed: “Oh, Tim, you’ve been hurt far too much
already.”


CHAPTER X
First love, I can hear your footsteps pass
Beside me in the clover and the grass.
Patricia O’Rane.
For the first time during her eighteen years of
life, Beryl was finding it necessary to dissemble:
slowly the need of it had dawned upon her con-
sciousness, beginning with a sprightly letter from
Pat Brent, whom she had thought to be in Western
Australia. The steady little deception of her strange
feelings for him was wrapped round a little motif
which said: “Pat is Brenda’s —Brenda is Pat’s.”
Over and over it ran, punctuating happy hours and
intruding upon dull ones. For there were dull hours
at the station, mostly due to Jill’s withdrawing into
herself more and more, and to David’s increasingly
studious ways. Bubbles would be over the hills and
far away most of his daylight hours, riding ahead
of a dark band of mounted followers, himself on
the cream pony which he had named Lambeen.
The Major was away periodically, but, even had
he been at home more, Beryl could not unload the
faint but troublous disturbances of her own heart.
It was a secret thing, to be wondered at, thought
over, and fought with alone in her room, or when
no conversation claimed her attention. Pat was—
Brenda’s. Therein lay the sorrow whose first hints
hurt Beryl abominably, without her quite knowing
why; shaming her, flogging her into misery; re-


minding her upon every possible occasion that the
beloved pal of the beach days, when she and he
had walked the wet sand discussing school and
home and whimsicalities, belonged by right of
common interests to Brenda —practically a sister.
Never would she, Beryl, interfere with Brenda’s
happiness: Beryl owed the Beehive so much. Never
would she let Brenda even guess that Pat had crept
into her regard in the way he had. Beryl’s regard!
Crept in, not as a young writer whose words were
deliciously interesting, and whose ways were all
to be desired, but as a human being with whom she
would always like to be. Beryl, in her wise, gentle
soul, analysed this situation thoroughly, summing
it up with her usual percentage of commonsense at
work.
She had always loved Pat; so had they all. Now,
a letter had aroused in her a sensation akin to
jealousy—jealousy of the Beehive en masse, be-
cause of the beauty of those seaside nights with
Brent among the young folks on the beach. Jealousy,
in particular, of Brenda, who shared his thoughts,
spoke his language, and was part of his life of
writing, books, and interests which Beryl dwelt
upon only from the uncritical viewpoint of the lay-
man.
Of course, she said to herself, it was very stupid
to think that Pat could ever notice her otherwise
than as a pal of school days, when he was not too
old to enjoy their schemes, joys, and sorrows. But
—Beryl’s eyes filled, and her lips quivered with
the vague, inexplicable woe —something had gone.
Something had gone which could never be brought
back, and Brenda was Pat’s.
Some day they would all marry: most people
N


married, unless they were human machines devoid
of the love of comradeship, or had dawning
careers to swallow up their time, or were sick,
like Timothy. In her heart Beryl knew that Tim
cared deeply for Jill, in a way that was protective
and unselfishly splendid; but he was sick, and could
not marry anybody. Beryl knew nothing of the
deep tragedy of Reed’s youth, which, like all such
tragedies, lasts on and gathers heartache as the
years pass by. Some day Jill wight marry: Beryl
was not too sure on the point, but she herself
should like to marry. Whom, she did not dare
wonder. In her wavering unease Beryl had not yet
connected Pat Brent definitely with the “some
day” husband who sounded so remote and far off
—almost absurd. But people did marry, and when
that time came it would be wonderful to be loved
and cared for, protected and thought for, and con-
sidered to be the most beautiful creature in the
world.
That is what marriage should be, Beryl said pen-
sively to herself, her eyes far away on scenes far
removed from Intircha. A beautiful thing, shared,
always shared! Laughter, smiles, sorrow, sunshine,
and shadows all shared! To give one’s love and
comfort, faith and worship, in return for another
kind of worship, rich and true. Marriage was like
the opening of a golden door in a long silver path
—which was suddenly changed, as the hinges swung
back, into a road of mingled beauty, not silver, not
golden, but containing a little of all things—hunger,
pain, sacrifice, and a wealth of giving. Joys would
lie by that roadside, flowers bloom for the picking,
but it must drop into narrow declines and wind
through dark woods, just as all roads did. Beryl


had not read a hundred romances for nothing.
There was Margaret, in The Cloister and the Hearth,
surely the most wonderful book ever written, and
the wife of Othello the Moor, Katherine the Shrew
so many others. Life and marriage were
one. There was no life before marriage, for there
was nobody to share it—just a silver path leading
onwards to the big closed door which opened to
so much.
Some day there would be big hands to hold hers,
a table for two people, perhaps a car for two people
to roam the hills and shores in, and perhaps other,
sweeter things, all waiting, tremulously, frighten-
ingly lovely, in the Future. No one could see
farther than the moment they lived in; nobody
could live another moment if it were decreed other-
wise. But one had to live on . . . had to . . .
even if Brenda and Pat were married.
Still Beryl did not visualize herself as the wife
of Pat. There were two separate compartments in
her mind, one grey and shadowy, holding Pat and
Brenda, the other gloomy and quiet, with herself
there, alone. But she was jealous of the hours
Brenda and their old friend were now spending to-
gether, beautiful hours —and she far away. Here
she shook herself, chiding herself for “meanness”
in daring to exhibit, even to her secret self, emotions
unworthy of honour and loyalty. Because she was
the splendid little woman she was, Beryl succeeded
in some measure in banishing what she called
“jealousy,” but the lingering ache continued, and
worried at her consciousness with that persistance
which comes from too-busy thoughts. The activity
of her mind was stupendous. Every spoken word
somehow held a double significance for her now,


connecting in some absurd fashion with the won-
derful days that were gone. Days when Pat was
at his cottage near the Beehive. Now he was down
there talking and roaming with Brenda, she, Beryl,
hundreds upon hundreds of miles away, at the
lonely outback station called Sunset Hill.
Mail day, last week, had not brought the comfort
and anticipated joy as usual, for Brent’s letter had
arrived in £he bundle of fascinating missives which
always came Beryl’s way—from school friends;
from a lad or two known to the family; from Mrs
Morden, the doctor’s wife, and from Mum and her
charges. In Bob’s letter, Jill listening avidly, Beryl
had read:
Brenda is deep in the throes of finishing her story. She
has worked hard at it, applying herself in a way that promises
well for the future, if application means success. I expect it
is part of it, for without hard climbing there are no heights
reached. What I like about old Bren is this: she never gossips
about her “prospects,” and seldom says she is tired. Her bally
old typewriter very often clacks from when I go to the office to
when I arrive at home. Even a box of strawberries plonked
down beside her doesn’t seem to bring her back to the
ordinary, everyday, mundane earth she lives upon. Her
cup of joy is full this week, for Pat Brent turned up
unexpectedly, breezing in with a kind of half-shy grin, his
hat tucked under his arm, and with eager inquiries for the
Major and Beryl. Both had vamoosed,, I told him, to the
Never Never, and explained then sufficiently for him to
realize he had come to meet only half the Beehive. He’s
digging in at the local pub, he says to finish a yarn he’s
concocting for his publishers, but I rather fancy it’s to
wait for your return. He wants to see what’s happened
to you while he has been in the West. I don’t know
whether he expects you to have developed white hair, or
a taste for vers libre, but gloomy glances prophesy some-
thing dire.
Cleo has deserted him, the base hussy: of such stuff
are sisters made! She married a soap-manufacturer with
pompous instincts and ideals. Sounds impossible, but it’s
true. Now she’s settling down to wash infants for the
remainder of her life . . . wnth their own soap I trust, in
the interests of marital and commercial fidelity. Not


infants, exactly, although there is one branch of the family
tree —or rather, a bubble—named lone. Pat says it has
eyes like raisins and a nose like a press-button. Faithless
uncle!
So Cleo being disposed of, as it were, with a few gables,
a chauffeur, a conservatory, and a nursemaid with a white
bonnet, Pat finds himself at a loose end. Says he could
stand nephews by the dozen, if Cleo so chose, but not red
gables and a Chinese temple in the middle of a sunken
rock garden. The latter afflict him sorely, even worse than
the gables, I infer. Cleo in the offiing, bows to sea; leaves
Pat at a kind of loose end; the bend the harbour where
his barque is anchored. Lord, I’m catching the literary
instinct for similes. Help! In other words, he’s at the
pub, but spends most of his time here, bless him. There’s
another novel simmering. I says it as shouldn’t, for it’s a
sore spot with him; Bren’s story is a sore spot with her
too, if we as much as breathe over her shoulder: why this
lit’ry thusness? Pat can’t get his heroine. I suggested
you, on account of dark-blue eyes and* “hair like the
raven’s wing’’—ahem! But the old lunatic dried up like a
week-old railway bun. No go: I’ve tried, but it seems
that you are not to be immortal. I expect you’ve too
much of that brand of sense misnamed “common” to be
introduced to readers of mushy novels. I beg his lord-
ship’s pardon. His Bloom of the Peach was not mushy,
as I was one of the “dear readers” to screw my eyes open
at two a.m. to see what happened to Elaine. Romance
seems to be in the air. Painful business! Of course they’ve
all got you paired off for me, evidently because we’re the
oldest and the other two are “born” sisters. But somehow
or other I can’t see you sighing odes to a tea-rose for my
benefit.
Pat looks ripping, his skin rather more brown, which
makes his hair look more bleached than ever. I think
he’s spent more time surfing at Cottesloe and Rottnest
than wielding the weighty pen over eternal triangles or fear-
some foursomes. Finding a heroine must be a putrid pro-
cess. His argument that the real rests in the ideal, and
vice versa, seems to depend now upon a character-study
from a living person. He wants the lady for his book,
and when I said “heroine?” he shouted, “No, you ghastly
idiot: they’re as out of date as velocipedes. I want some
one to paint with words . . . chump!” The chump humbly
bowed his head and said there ain’t no sich animal, mean-
ing lady-heroines, not velocipedes, for there are some of
the latter in the museum ... or should be. But all the
chump received for his pains was a scowl. I suggested,
with a deep desire to proffer my valuable advice, that if


he pounced upon this person I insist upon calling heroine,
and wrote at express speed without drawing a breath, he
might get her sketched before she got tired of living up
to it. He says I am not only a chump, but a cynic, and
doomed to a morose end. I am a failure as a literary
helpmate. Woe isn’t me 1
Well, Beryl of the Neverw r as, my fountain pen is like
I am, dry, and running out of words. Not being Brenda,
or this star of the west now in our midst, I will hie
myself to a partly finished drawing of the front elevation
of a suburban bank building, which does not, thank the
kind mercies, need any heroines.
Pat and Bren are busily discussing plot and counterplot
on the front veranda. The moon is very proficient this
evening, so perhaps it might be counterplot. Au ’voir,
Berry; hurry home, and let me whisper it, I miss you
horribly, although ... I refuse to propose. If you pro-
pose to me, naturally that is a different matter. I never
could refuse a lady anything, let alone such a small matter
as the remainder of my life. Honestly, Berry, the family
try to look sentimental when I say I am writing to you.
For heaven’s sake dispel this sickly business with a thump,
as soon as* you come home again. Say you’re in love with
the King of Beegums of Woozley Hill, or something excit-
ing like that, to take their concentrated hopes from me.
Yours in ridic’lous . . . but fraternal affection,
Bob.
Jill had laughed heartily at this letter, saying
with a shrewd smile: “Bob is determined to make
his own romances, instead of having them thrust
upon him. Do they expect you to marry some
day ?”
“Not Bob, I hope,” said Beryl, flushing warmly,
her eyes vaguely troubled. “It’s absurd. He’s my
brother.”
“Not really,” Jill reminded her.
“I’d never marry Bob,” protested Beryl thinly,
wildly struggling with her disturbances over Brenda
with Pat. “I couldn’t. It would be like your
marrying David.”
Jill was convinced. “Oh! Heavens!” she said
meekly. “Read some more to me.”


The other girl slowly shuffled the envelopes,
drawing out one sprawled with Barby’s firm hand-
writing, more like that of a grown-up schoolboy
than that of a slip of a girl. Her voice came waver-
ingly into the hot stillness of the veranda:
Dear Beryl,
Pat is here again, and Brenda is stupidly silly about it. One
might think they were responsible for each other, the fuss they
make over their respective scribbles and ideas on the mis-
behaviour of the universe. Sophonisba came back from the
local garage yesterday: old Hennypenny has turned his
blacksmith’s emporium into quite a tidy petrol store, with
a lathe and all the other etceteras. I like the smell of it.
Sophonisba had to have a new battery. The wretch phutted
out right in the main street near the tram terminus, in the
path of a stationary tram. The conductor pinged the bell
like a lunatic, for it was just starting time. The people all
craned their necks in a peevish, quizzical sort of fashion,
and I whirred at the accelerator, but nothing happened. So
I got out, thinking things, and took the starting handle, and
wound. I wound, and I wound, until drops fell off my
nose to the asphalt, and she wouldn’t even kick. So, as the
tram driver was still playing O Sole Mio with his foot,
I walked up to the thing and said, “Perhaps you’d be more
useful if you tried to wind for me.” He climbed down like
a lamb, and every one chuckled, but he got Sophonisba
going. Cheers! In a moment I was a mile away, more or
less, and the tram on its way to town. I felt terribly
Mussolini-ish over Sophonisba’s behaviour, and that very
afternoon got old Hennypenny on the job.
Cousin Susan comes down occasionally for a bulletin
about Sunset Hill, and we gravely have tea over your pos-
sible doings.
The weather’s rather sickly this week, sticky nights, for a
wonder, and north winds. Good swimming, though, and a
dash now and again in Pirn Udell’s speed-boat: I prefer
driving on land. There’s something to dodge, there. Of
course Bob’s a full-blown member of the Yacht Club now:
Did he tell you he’s bought a share in the Silver Moon, a
fourteen footer, and will be going with the crowd to Sydney
soon, I expect. Hope she wins. I’ll put my last bean on
her chances, as she’s a pretty sight.
Isn’t convention ridiculous? The other day I came in
from a run round the three-mile buoy, and, being a bit
chilly, soaked through in the wind, I slipped Bob’s tweed
jacket over my bathers, to go up the street and buy bananas
for all of us on the boat. The trouble was, my bathers had


shrunk a bit, and Bob’s coat covered them, so when I passed
the parking place outside the bandstand enclosure, an old
lady saw me—vision: me, one knitted cap with tassel on
top, one pair of bathers completely hidden under old tweed
jacket, and one pair of sandshoes, very waterlogged. She
had hysterics in the back seat, and I didn’t know what for
until I saw myself in a shop window. Then I took off the
jacket and was all right. So, aren’t conventions just utterly
and 1 scrumptiously mad?
Nothing else to w’rite about: I’m not a poet, praises be.
Come home soon,
Barby.
Jill wriggled with joy. “Beryl, how lovely . . .
how absolutely crisp she sounds! Is she like that
really?”
“Yes, she’s splendid. Barby says exactly what
she means, and you could depend upon her until
the end of time, but . . . she’s rather energetic.
Something like you, in a different way.”
“I should love to meet the Beehive,” gloated Jill,
her eyes gay. “Who is the next one from?” She
nodded to the letters.
Beryl had then lifted one whose handwriting sent
the blood to her cheeks —long, slender writing, very
firm and free from ornamentations. “I . . . Jill,
do you mind if I leave this one for my room, to
enjoy slowly? After, I’ll tell you what is in it.”
Jill, frankly unashamed of her deep interest in her
friend’s correspondence, nodding briskly. “Tell me
every bit. It’s like reading a book and knowing
your folk to hear their letters. Are there any others
you might like to read to me first?”
Jill was so eager, so intent, and so wistful in her
enjoyment of second-hand news that Beryl smiled
at her lovingly, and with a small sigh placed Pat’s
letter at the bottom of the pile. Throughout the
hour which followed there on the veranda, inter-
rupted only by the arrival of the inevitable tray of


tea —this time lemon squash as well, in honour of
mail day—Beryl sternly thrust all thoughts of Pat
and Brenda behind her. Jill had no letters, and
there was all the rest of the day for Brent’s to be
read. As Jill rose reluctantly at last to go indoors
she cast a long glance at the one unopened enve-
lope. “Beryl,” she asked with apparent irrelev-
ance, “one of these days, when you get married,
what kind of a man do you think you’d like to
choose ?”
“I hope,” said Beryl demurely, “he’d choose me.”
Jill grunted. She was uncomfortable, but Bob’s
letter had set her mind working, and Jill was too
thorough to leave internal queries in the dark.
“You know what I mean,” came gruffly, with
heightened colour. Raising her voice a trifle, she
added: “You want to make sure before you tell any
man you love him. It’s not for a fortnight, but for
always, remember.”
Beryl turned a blank countenance upon the other
girl standing with one foot upon the deck-chair near
her. Jill nodded.
“There’s no changing. It goes on and on . . .
for ever. You want to be horribly certain before
you give your life to anybody. You’ve only one.”
“Gracious,” gasped Beryl, half in amusement.
“You’ve been reading a yellowback povel.” But the
truth of what Jill had partly quoted from Timothy’s
well-remembered words struck Beryl with a force
that was sickening. With Brent’s unopened letter
tightly held, for courage to keep on smiling, Beryl
added: “It doesn’t sound like you at all to be so
cautious. But, of course, it’s very true. We have
only one life . . . Jill ...” Beryl swallowed,


despite her determined composure. “How awful if
one never met a companion for that life.”
Jill grimaced. “The world’s full of people.”
“Yes, but ...” Beryl was thinking, “of what
use is a world full of people when only one is
wanted? A world of waste and emptiness, with
crowded streets a mockery.” She choked back
something she was about to say, altering it to:
“. . . but you can’t marry more than one person.”
“Whom would you like to marry?”
Honestly Beryl replied: “I don’t know.”
“What kind of man?”
“Oh ...” Dumb was Beryl’s tongue, for she
knew then what kind of man: the kind Brent was,
whimsical, strong, happy, with the joy of life
lurking in every smile, and his eyes gleaming with
tenderness for every informity and sorrow. Tall,
boyish, with a man’s power to make his own full
life; capable and earnest. All that Beryl could
reply was a weak: “A man, and a gentleman.”
“What do you mean by gentleman?” Almost
distressing was Jill’s probing, a whim the other
girl could not quite understand.
“A . . . somebody who . . . who would act when
alone as he would in company, and put honour be-
fore anything. Kind, quiet, never boasting, nor
hateful to his family. Out-of-doorish without being
like a . . . Oh, I don’t know. Something like Tim-
othy,” blurted Beryl wildly.
Jill’s eyes softened. “Timothy is all that,” she
said with an enigmatical glance sideways at the
other. “Except the out-of-doorishness.”
“That’s there,” said Beryl indignantly. “It’s be-
cause he is so sick that he is shut out of things
so. He daren’t be rough. Look at his life at home


. . . and the bravery now. Quiet bravery and
cheeriness.” Beryl choked. “Anybody would be
lucky, and blessed, to marry a man like Timothy.”
“You told me on one occasion,” said Jill slyly,
“that there were points of resemblance between
Timothy and your Pat Brent.”
Inside, Beryl was in turmoil. “Not my Pat . .
she was about to say, but she couldn’t manage it.
She nodded twice, and looked blankly at Jill, who,
with a swift flash of intuition, suddenly perceived
her friend’s deep discomfort. Jill said then, slowly,
portentously: “Is Pat odd, like most authors? The
last one I read about wore velvet jackets and burned
incense at his desk, and ate only from orange-
coloured bowls. They agreed with his inspirations,
he said. He married a lady with a lot of money,
but murdered her because she interrupted his cre-
ative urge. Has Pat Brent anything queer . . .
whiskers—a craze for postage stamps —colour fads
—or anything at all?”
Beryl, laughing despite her whirlpool emotions,
looked helplessly at her green-eyed tormenter.
“No,” she replied significantly. “He’s quite normal:
he hasn’t even a temperament.”
Jill struck herself on the breast with an exagger-
ated gesture of self-effacement. “Touchee!” she
cried intensely, and vanished.
Beryl, in her bedroom, a chair under the door-
handle, tore open the strong deckle-edged paper
of the envelope not yet unfastened. Biting her
lips for fear of what she might find in the missive,
she screwed her eyes shut for a moment, and began
reading.
My Dear Beryl,
Like a bad penny I’ve returned to the Bend, only to find
that the bird in the hand has flown to the bush. I’ve man-


aged to survive, but only after deep and bitter grief. Have
you had any encounters with wild blacks, snakes, or prin-
thies? I assure you that the Beehive provides less sensa-
tional diversions. They tell me you are emulating Paul
Revere: take care of yourself, and look out for rabbit-holes
while you’re tearing round the Never Never. They are
the limit, if your nag breaks through them: I had a nasty-
spill in that way, up near Carnarvon, last year. Collar-
bone, and a sand-papered face. I was anything but hand-
some ; one glance in the mirror sufficed to tell me that.
Don’t let your pretty self be sunburned out of all recogni-
tion. The cave-woman pose wouldn’t suit you at all —not
at all.
The beach is an oddly deserted place, now that there is
no Beryl to paddle through the shallows with me, and dis-
cuss pros and cons while munching chocolates. Nor do I
drag parcels of limp sausages and knobby cakes to the
cottage along the shore, which is deserted even as the
beach seems to be—but for a few people who do not count
at all. The cottage always will be empty, I expect. I should
like to buy it, and keep it as a sentimental memento of our
jolly teas there, with a typewriter lid for an extra seat, and a
vase uplifted to social glory by taking the part of a necessary
tea-cup. Well, all things pass, time not the least among
them. The gulls seem to be the same ones as were m
attendance upon the tail ends of my meals . . . and there
are rumours of a bus-route to wind past your back garden.
How do you like the sound of that? Intrusion of the
ridiculous into the sublime. And won’t the frogs be
annoyed? . .
Brenda is working well towards her distant horizon: the
story she has practically completed is a fanciful little tale,
with a thread of almost mystical beauty running through it.
The conception is novel, the treatment simple and sincere,
and the slight fault of immaturity will go—sorry to say—
with experience. Beauty is always to be regretted, when
gone, as other sweet things are. Immaturity, as far as
loveliness goes, is a gift of the gods; but the gods’ gifts
grow stale, and are exchanged for more bitter treasures
whose hall-mark is one word: cleverness. What has eighteen
done to you, Beryl? I wonder, sometimes, with the smell
of wet seaweed in my nose, and gulls wheeling and cheeping
overhead. Eighteen can do such frightful things to those
whom we have regard for, that I wonder as I said and
wonder? Could you come back and paddle on the shore
and name the seabirds as they settle for crumbs, and—
greatest test of all—could you still defend Brenda’s fairies
from the mater-of-fact disgust of our tame chauffeur? A
Dutch uncle, am I not? A morbid old bird. I think, how-


ever, that you cannot be changed over much* for Mum still
smiles over you, when we have competitions to see who can
say the nicest things about our Bee of the inland. Talking
of ages I was, wasn’t I?—I shall soon be twenty-seven.
Ancient old dodger, eh? Senile decay— to eighteen. Yes
. . • or no? Take care of yourself, little pal, . . . Thine,
Pat
Beryl murmured the last words softly to herself,
her face aglow with loveliness. Had Brent seen her
then, he would not have criticized the treatment of
the years between the old beach days of school-
time and now. Her lips trembling, she gazed out
at the riverway, then again read the letter—
and reread it. That quiet hour had been the seed
from which had grown the unrest that altered the
fragrance of the bush, the beauty of the sunlight,
and the doings of the household of which she was
a part. Brenda, obviously, was “made for” Pat:
she herself was the “little pal” of schooldays, when
Brent had shown her how contemptible it was to
bribe schoolmates in school warfare. Brenda, with
her books and her writing, belonged to Pat. But
• . . neither of them should ever know that there
was a fervent, almost fierce, wish that she Beryl,
could write too. Write, and analyse, and weave
stories whose airy fancies caught Brent’s mind so
surely. To talk, and talk, and sit with him, plan-
ning, sharing, and being adored! Beryl rose
sharply, and thrust the letter into a drawer. She
could not bear to think of it any longer.
The days went by, and whatever “jealousy” Beryl
felt, it was banished in a series of letters to those
at home, while she wrote away her strange dolour,
and re-created interests about her on the station.’
Beryl had power that was to stand her in good
stead now, the acceptance of fate’s tricks with an


outer calm and an inner philosophy that had its
present glory in knowing that Brenda, her almost-
sister, would be looked after and helped in her work
by Brent. It was absurd to expect Pat to prefer
a companion of her own type, for she could
do nothing outside the ordinary humdrum existence
that lay like a sombre tapestry behind the lives of
most girls and women. Of course she must grow
up! Beryl’s mouth set somewhat, there. Grow up,
and keep a lamp burning within her, whatever hap-
pened, even though she were alone.
Beryl had not connected her misgivings and an-
alysis very strongly together, or she might have
perceived the anxiety and disappointment behind
the tone of Brent’s two pages of handwriting. More-
over, pride in Brenda, while it was sincere and evi-
dent, did not include one-tenth of the close commu-
nion which Bob, Barby, and Brent himself had
innocently exaggerated. All that Mum had written
about Pat’s return was:
I suppose the others will have told you that Pat Brent
is with us again. He is a dear boy,, and I always thin o
him as having been part of bringing Dad home tip us, witn
you. He speaks of you very fondly indeed. It is warmly
appreciated, as you can guess, for I cannot afford to be
without one of my three girls, for even this little time. .. .
Wonderful Mum! There would always be Mum,
sweet, serene, and patient, smiling when others
smiled, trying to smile when others grieved, and
standing behind them with her slim hands ready
to help with whatever offered in their lives. Pas-
sionately Beryl cried to herself: “I love her .. •
and will be satisfied to have her. That kind of love
is beautiful, and hasn’t any pitfalls.” Already Beryl,
in her stumbling among the first shadows of a new
and strange mind-country, had discovered where


one height was always to be found, alight with
comfort for the bruises of rough roads and path-
ways.
Like a little girl of ten, she said almost angrily
to herself: “I will be good: I must be patient:
I must not be selfish.”
It became less difficult, as the days went on, to
include herself naturally in the doings of the rest
of the house, although Jill’s irritable temper and
odd ways were becoming less manageable in the
heady glory of having the fiddle to go to. Her
growing success with her “tunes” was mounting
to her brain like strong wine. Timothy watched,
and became afraid, wondering what would happen
to her if later she actually tasted real success . . .
fame. It became an art with Reed, the surveillance
of the girl whose welfare was almost a fetish with
him. Her moods he followed carefully, but with
such visible indifference that all but Beryl were de-
ceived. One afternoon there commenced a scene
which ended drastically for Jill. Beryl forgot her
own small pain in her anxiety over Jill’s wild be-
haviour and unreasoning rebellion. Over such a
simple matter, too —to begin with.
All four, Jill, Beryl, David, and Timothy were
lounging in the shade of the eastern veranda, the
out-of-doors a still furnace of reflecting heat,
weighted down with the metallic suggestion of a
sunset thunder-storm. Bubbles was riding on Lam-
been away up over the cliff, his usual dark follow-
ers straggling about him. They saw his white
shirt, and heard his voice through the still air sing-
ing with abandonment: “She was tying apples on
a li-lac tre-e-e-e-eeeee.”
“Singular youngster,” remarked Timothy hastily


from the depths of a cane chair, his legs sprawled
out before him.
“Nice kid,” commented Jill, but looked half-angry
and wholly perturbed when Reed asked unemotion-
ally : “Jill, have you told your father about the vio-
lin?”
Jill flushed. The delay had been unforgivable,
but Loftus had been away a great deal of the time
lately, and had not unbent at all when at home.
Her task was not an enviable one. There had been
comparative peace since the date of finding the
fiddle, the days being filled in with gentle household
occupations, expeditions not so gentle, and stolen
swimming lessons in the second waterhole. Jill
vanished often enough to make this very easily
managed, and David was proceeding rapidly to-
wards his absurd boast of “soon being able to swim
to England with his feet in a sugar-bag. Jill,
in reply to Timothy’s quiet remark, said with honest
regret: “I have tried, Timothy. I went out riding
with him one afternoon, just trailing along with a
kind of set expression, until he thought I was mad,
and I galloped back calling myself a fool the whole
way. I even wrote to him about it. She scowled
at the flicker of laughter that circled the group,
adding; “It would take a whole Complete Letter
Writer to break that news.” Jill did not say that
she had consulted the Complete Letter \\ riter,
whose pedantic stiffness had at last brought snorts
of disgust from her. “You know,” she said now,
in part confession, “ ‘Endeavouring to unburden my-
self of a load too great to bear without expression,
I take my pen in hand . . . Oh! mush !
Reed howled until his eyes streamed: he visual-


ized the scene, and it pleased his whimsical sense
of the absurd.
“You needn’t laugh at me,” wailed Jill. “It’s
tragic.”
Reed sobered at once. “It is a stiff fence to take,
old thing,” he admitted with a kindly glance at
her.
“Of course,” came in slightly mollified tones, “I
don’t precisely make it easy for him, so can hardly
expect him to fall on my neck and weep tears of
joy over the fiddle. I can see his side, a bit, even
if Ido behave like a lunatic sometimes.” She
sniffed. “A monkey gets on to my back the moment
I go near him.”
“The monkey has not been so evident lately,”
returned Reed dryly, “although you have been
celebrating your satisfaction with a few fireworks
better left unlighted.”
It never troubled Jill to be made the centre of
a discussion: she rather enjoyed it, if the truth
were told. When she was openly discussed, she
listened as she would to an analysis of a character
in a book, disturbed even to glowing in defence, or
against herself, as she kindled in her own —histrioni-
cally disguised—cause. Now she tossed her head
“He won’t give in—nor shall I.”


CHAPTER XI
Clear pipes of Pan, I take your call for token
That one brave singer holds the Fates in scorn —
But sad it is the reed must first be broken
Ere music may be bom.
R. H. Croll.
Jill’s challenge seemed to stir her into a raging
discontent that showed in every twist of her lithe
body, her eyes flashing from one to the other with
alert defiance. Nobody criticized, however. They
knew Jill would not give in, just as they were un-
comfortably aware of her father’s imperturbable
hardness. . ,
“It’s difficult,” Reed admitted, for the fortieth
time during the last fermenting weeks of subdued
inquietude, and swift exultations. Tres difficile,
mon enfant.”
“I’m not. Don’t be silly.” To balance this,
the speaker added: “I m over nineteen, and on the
verge of a career.” The eflFect of this remark and
her attitude vaguely suggested that the word “hys-
terics” might have been employed instead of
“career.” At her inimitably naive protest, limothy
roared frankly, until he rocked his chair so peril-
ously that he upset it, sprawling on to the flags.
Jill tilted her chin. She felt better immediately.
“That serves you exactly right,” she announced.
“You are too lofty, Timothy Reed.”
She rose, some decision kindling her eyes to


brightness and curving her mouth in a smile half
provocative, half mysterious. “Now,” she sug-
gested a little uncertainly, “I’ll go and get the violin,
to bring it here, this time, and play a little thing I
made up last night.”
David glanced with unease at that part of the
river-bed across which his father might ride at
any moment. “Should father arrive, Jill, you’d put
us all into a dashed unpleasant predicament. Your-
self in a tangle even more so. For him to discover
you playing here, in this way, would be nothing
short of deliberate insult . . . insolence, at least.
Forgivable for you, maybe, but unforgivable for
us. See it, Jill, do.”
Jill smiled strangely, but did not reseat herself.
She slowly edged towards the end of the veranda,
daring Reed with her eyes, a taunting smile clinging
about her mouth. Reed did not choose to accept
the wordless challenge made apparent by each
move of Jill’s body; instead, he supported David’s
view whole-heartedly.
“Sorry, Jill, and all that, but you can’t bring
my fiddle here. David’s opinion is mine; I might
be wrong.” But his manner showed her plainly
that he considered himself very right.
“Your fiddle,” she flung at him.
“My fiddle,” he replied quietly. “Upon this
occasion.”
Jill stood, wavering, but not towards submission.
Her cheeks were very pale now, her forehead puck-
ered into an angry little frown which the shining
silky fringe partly disguised. She wore a rather
long, befrilled frock, with ruffles round the neck
and at the tops of her bare arms. Reed almost
groaned at the comparison between the picture she


unconsciously made and her attitude. She tossed her
head higher. “My father and the Major are at Long
Well yards, and can’t possibly return before dusk
if then.”
“It’s the spirit of the thing,” her brother replied
uneasily, looking at her without faltering. “This
is rotten, Jill. Please drop it.”
“And your opinion?” Jill asked imperiously ot
Beryl.
The dark-blue eyes met the hard gaze with a quiet
fearlessness. “If you must defy your father, Jill,
do it, but not behind his back when he can’t retaliate.
It isn’t like you to fight unfairly.”
For a passionate moment the slender girl swayed
in indecision, torn between giving in gracefully, if
reluctantly, to those she privately loved intensely,
and following the dictates of her own untameable
will. She had been the centre of most disturbances
lately, and now found it just a shade too difficult
to give in quietly. Excitement to Jill was like the
smell of blood to a horse in battle. She burst out
bitterly. “I seldom get a chance to play it, and
can’t wait until after dinner. There’s no literal harm
in playing a fiddle. There’s nothing else to do, be-
fore dinner. Tim” —she swallowed, breathing fast,
and retired behind her rising desires, to say with
honeyed appeal in her husky, softened voice: “Tim-
othy . . . will you get in for me?”
“ ’Fraid not, Jill.” Reed was immovable. This
sent Jill back into an angry resentment which
showed in her clouding eyes and sullen mouth. She
said thickly: “You’re all afraid of him. And you”
—flashing a glance at Reed —“told me the fiddle
was mine. It isn’t, or I could do what I like with
David stood up, pale and chagrined over a dis-


play which to him was beastly—and pathetic. His
hand reached out to touch her, as she stepped to-
wards Timothy for a moment, but she struck it
away sharply, moving in one stride out of his
reach. She walked rapidly towards the end of the
veranda, looking back over her shoulder as she
paused by a post, one hand on the woodwork.
Mocking, but disturbingly attractive in her forget-
fulness of courtesy and kindliness, she smiled at
Reed. “I ’m going to get it.”
The gauntlet was thrown down properly. With
a muttered excuse Timothy rose, moving swiftly
after the girl, who ran ahead as she had spoken.
The young man caught her at the door of the blue
shack and, despite her quick wriggles, pinned her
arms to her sides. In that stiff and ignominious posi-
tion he held her, although her eyes blazed in her
chalk-white face. Timothy did not release her, sick
as he was at the sight of her torment and rage.
Reed’s grey eyes held more sorrow than criticism
as he spoke gently to her.
“Little girls in the nursery behave like you,
sometimes, Jill. How would you relish a thorough
spanking?”
She choked, a sharp terror invading her. The
shame of Timothy speaking like this to her! “If
. . . if you do,” she half sobbed, “I’ll . . . I’ll . , .
hate you all my life.”
“No, you wouldn’t . . . not at all. Now keep
still, and I promise you I shan’t whack you.”
“You whack me ?” she asked in such well-directed
scorn that he winced and suddenly let her go.
Slowly her body relaxed, as she stood, unable to lift
her feet to move away. Wave after wave of remorse
swept her from head to foot, as she became limp


before the long look that held some quality which
brought a lump to her throat.
“What would you think, Jill,” he asked with
sombre gentleness, “of somebody entrusted with a
precious possession, if they marred it beyond re-
pair?”
“What do you mean?” jerked the girl awkwardly.
“In my clumsy way I’m trying to tell you of your
own destruction,” he remarked with tired mildness.
“You say you must express yourself—but what
would the world think if you told them through
the medium of a violin, that you were a vixenish,
uncontrollable little wretch?”
She gasped with fury, and stamped her foot, but,
as her swift retort formed, it died away. She sub-
sided into a mysterious defeat made complete by
the mesmerism of the steady questioning in the
grey eyes which then seemed shadowed with some
deep pain. She waited, her glances moving from
his face to the ground and back again. Taking a
step forward suddenly, her mouth quivering, she
held out her hands in silent apology.
The man felt his throat tighten at the sweet re-
pentance which had followed less worthy emotions,
then started back, for Jill had wrenched herself
a yard from him and was saying wildly: “I
wouldn’t touch your old fiddle for a fortune —it’s
best days are gone, long ago.”
She had gone; the sunlight was blazing into his
eyes, and all that offered peace was the closed door-
way of the blue cottage. In a moment he was inside,
where he laughed, laughed loudly, with such poig-
nancy and mirthlessness as to make the angels weep.
He dropped heavily into a chair, lifted the fiddle to
where he rested it on the bed, and watched it with-
out expression for five or ten minutes. It might


have been an hour, for all the man knew, wounded
so swiftly and deeply by Jill’s careless tongue At
the inanimate object he stared, finally saying softly:
"So your best days are done . . . long ago—and
mine. We are a useless pair.”
He did not appear at dinner that night. Bell came
in from the cottage to gabble a long excited tale
of the "sick boss,” relating some incidents which
paled Jill’s face to the colour of paper. Avoiding
the others assiduously, she wended a devious, re-
luctant, shamed way to the cottage which had been
standing in the glaring heat all day. A low rumble
of thunder came from the north, the air stifling.
She crept miserably into the small room, almost
drawing back at the close heat. Whatever she had
been about to say was destroyed by a gasp that
sent her to the window, which she tugged open
wildly, drawing back the curtains, with her gaze
on the man lying limply in the bed, his face glis-
tening, his hands supine.
She opened the door widely, still watching him,
his eyes closed until he became aware of her pre-
sence and stirred from a half doze.
Timothy, she cried, dropping to her knees be-
side the bunk, one arm across him. “Tim
The cr} had been uttered with a sob, in which the
man heard a plea for forgiveness.
"It’s all right, Jill, old thing. I’m a crock, any-
way, so why distress your pretty self?”
I was a beast,” she mumbled, scarlet.
“Very feminine, you mean.”
To scratch, and show mv claws?”
"Never mind, little girl. Get up from the floor;
you’ll hurt your knees.”
Tim ! Ive done penance inside of me since


this afternoon. Can you forgive me?” she faltered
earnestly.
“It’s easy to forgive you anything, Jill.”
“Tim, was it my fault that you are ill?”
“It was not.”
“I ... I didn’t expect you to cough again so
soon . . .”
“Nor did I,” he answered dryly. “Now run along
and leave me. This hot room won’t do you any
good.”
She lit a candle by way of reply, the summer
lightning being less conspicuous now. Shading the
flame with an upturned book on a chair, she dropped
to the floor, curled on a cushion, facing him with
one arm caught over the bunk-edge. “Could you
enjoy a lemon drink?” Then, with a burst of muf-
fled words that seemed to choke her, she said in
desperate haste: “Timothy, I’m sorry I called the
fiddle names —I think it is beautiful. Oh, I’m so
sorry.”
“Called it names,” he repeated softly.
“Timothy, what is temperament,” she asked now,
doubtfully.
“A darned nuisance,” he retorted evenly.
“Beryl said one night that it is bad temper
dressed up in stage clothes.”
“She’s not far wrong,” smiled the man from his
pillows. “All people who—in your words —do
things, are charged with an almighty unrest that
drives them towards all sorts of queer things.
Creative energy, some modernists call it. Mental
fireworks is my name for it. Seriously, tempera-
ment, as far as I can see, is the eternal grasping
after that which is out of reach. Unrest has ma-
terialized beauty and vision down through the cen-
turies since the world began.”


Jill was silent, not quite satisfied. “That’s one
side of it; but there’s another,” she said, watching
the face before her with keen anxiety in her eyes.
She almost wept as she added: “Say anything, so
that I shall know myself better.”
“You never will. But there’s one thing you
might try to remember. You are susceptible to at-
mosphere, and we, I’m afraid, in a body and singly,
have supplied the demand for your . . . what shall
we call your particular form of le (liable ? . . . tab-
leaux? Eh? Well, by sheer auto-suggestion we
intensify your desire to play to a crowd —and you
do it. That’s all.” He tried to shrug, his thin
shoulders moving under the striped pyjamas.
“That’s the danger of temperament. Make it your
slave, Jill; don’t let it master you.”
“Must I repress myself, then, as an alternative?”
she asked firmly.
“No, control yourself,” was the smooth correc-
tion. “It’s rotten form, old thing, to hang all your
moods and rages on the clothes-line for passers-by
to behold.”
Jill ruminated. “Yet to be sincere, we must be
ourselves.”
“But there’s no need to underline that sincerity
with red ink. Don’t froth, Jill.”
“Oh, dear,” she sighed lugubriously. Then
“Tim, where’s the fiddle?”
“In its coffin, under the bed”—a badly suppressed
twinkle lit Reed’s face for a brief moment. He
started as the girl grasped his arm. “Tts coffin,"
she almost wailed. “Timothy, you haven’t . . .?”
“Good Lord, Jill,” he reassured her, detect-
ing her concern and fear, “you expect the whole of
creation to behave like members of an Italian Opera
Company. It’s under the bunk . . . the fiddle, I


mean, not the company,” he corrected gravely;
“although considerably chastened by your criticism
this afternoon.” He broke off; Jill was deaf. She
had lifted the instrument and was asking him, her
face glowing: “May I just play very softly, Tim?”
“Go ahead, then,” was the almost ungracious
permission. His head was not throbbing quite so
badly now, and in a moment he was not sorry that
Jill had come upon this forlorn little visit of con-
trition. The night air was stealing in as she played,
very quickly forgetting to keep the sounds subdued.
She suddenly laid the violin on the floor. “Tim-
othy, you don’t know how ...” But she had
stopped abruptly, her face stricken with a desperate
fear, as with one swift motion of her foot she thrust
the fiddle under the bed.
Philip Loftus, his eyes narrowed and his mouth
in a cruel line, stood in the doorway.
From the sick man to the girl his gaze travelled,
and back again. With scorn he regarded Reed for
a long and breathless moment, then glanced down
at the rounded edge of polished wood showing
under the bunk. Jill remained petrified, her heart
thudding even to her throat, which felt dry and
bitter.
“So,” Loftus asked in cold precision, “you man-
aged to secure . . . that thing.” The clipped tones
paused as he kicked contemptuously at the fiddle.
Looking at Reed, he said calmly: “Reed, you have
been very subtle.”
Jill opened her lips, but her father swung round
and silenced her before she could speak. She was
crushed and bewildered, dismayed as she never had
been before. She had delayed her confession just
one day too long. With an inflexion in his voice
that made his daughter wince for the man in the


bed, Loftus said to Reed; “You have proved my
trust of you in a charming manner.”
All that Reed could do was to remain quiet, silent
and still, a dogged helplessness arousing Jill to
passionate misery. “Father,” she cried. ‘‘Timothy
Stop! IVe seen enough. Not a word, thanks,
Jill. She dropped back, as her father spoke again
to Reed, the pillow now no whiter than his thin
face. Explanations are unnecessary, as you per-
haps realize.”
Timothy, his face stony, did not speak. He
could not, without wounding his host or throwing
more blame on Jill.
But Jill was awake now to the false position of
the man who chose to remain quiet and condemned
rather than make her suffer. She flung herself for-
ward, regardless of both her father’s quick order
and Reed’s upraised hand. “He had the violin
before he knew me. It came here with him, and he
kept it hidden out of decency to you. I heard him
one night late, and made him give it to me
don t stop me . . . I’d have stolen it, I tell you, to
have got it . . . when once I knew it was there.
It’s true . . . it’s true.”
She lifted a shaking hand and pointed to Reed,
as she sobbed on, hoarse and almost breathless!
You dare to look at him as if he’s a thief!
He s good .. . You don’t know how good;
and he’s given me the happiest moments of
my life. Jill s voice broke in earnest as she faced
the two men. a tempestuous creature swaying and
shaking. “And,” she said huskily, lifting her chin
to stare at her father, “if he’d been a cad I’d not
have been here now. I . . . told him I loved him.
I thought he loved me too, a bit, and didn’t know


. . . didn’t understand . . . anything. He told
me . . . what you’ve never told me, and . . . how
people don’t do things like that. I . . . and told me
what a fool I’ve been.”
Loftus was tense, frowning heavily, regarding
Till as if he had never seen her before. She shrank
back from the strange, searching look that missed
nothing, her hands flattened, palms inwards, against
the woodwork of the wall.
At last, after what seemed an interminable time
of waiting and sick suspense, the older man spoke
—not very evenly.
‘‘Reed, is this all true?”—incredulously.
“Quite correct, and true.”
Out of a silence which seemed to drag Loftus’
shoulders down somewhat, he spoke definitely to
Timothy, a queer thickness muffling his speech. “I
suppotee I must acknowledge my indebtedness to
you; I can see how deep it is. Will your courtesy
allow you to forget . . . this incident?
“It’s forgotten, sir, gladly,” came Reed’s reply,
a little proof of the gladness in his relieved tones.
“But . . .’’he shot a significant glance at the
quietly weeping girl, “be lenient with Jill, Mr Lof-
tus, if I’m not asking too much. She has not been
let down lightly over this, and hasn t played the
coward.”
A keen glance was exchanged between the two
men, as Loftus nodded and gave a kindly conven-
tional “Good night, Reed.” Jill, although her eyes
were streaming, had her head tilted high, and saw
all that passed between her father and Timothy.
She shivered as the former beckoned to her to fol-
low him from the shack.
She trailed after Loftus in the pitch blackness,
lightning flickering sketchily over the north, the


hurricane lantern in her father’s hand making a
yellow, wavering circle on the harsh ground. The
house was silent, the rooms dark but for a low
flame which burned in the office.
“Reed would die in town ...” Loftus said with
apparent irrelevance, turning the lamp-wick higher
and (sitting down to face Jill. He leaned back and
picked up a pencil, dabbing it on a blotter as he
spoke. “Scenes follow you, like foam behind a
ship.” He waited for ten seconds. “So you are
Marie’s child, after all.”
“I belong to both of you,” said Jill loudly, sud-
denly losing her fear as she regained her composure.
After all, he hadn’t broken Tim's fiddle. “But go
on; I’m not afraid. What do you intend doing?”
“Extracting a promise from you not to play
again,” came the calculated reply.
For a moment Jill was awake to a wild bewil-
derment, which changed to derision. She was com-
pletely on her mettle, the man noted with a slight
shock, as she said; “What? You must be crazy,
to think I’d promise such a thing.”
Tap-tap went the pencil on the paper. To re-
lieve the tension which seemed all at once filled
with ominous threat, Jill said again: “I shan’t pro-
mise you.”
“Then,” replied her father, weighing his words
as if enjoying their value, “I shall ask Mr Reed
kindly to move on —to-morrow.”
The girl, whose lips had parted, collapsed a sec-
ond after into speechless anguish. He wouldn’t do
that! But ... he might! She dare not risk it.
Timothy! “You’d do , . . that?” she said hoarsely
at last.
“Without the slightest compunction. I could ex-


plain something to Reed: I owe him that. As for
you, you’ll learn to obey.”
“You cant do it,” Jill cried again, unable to be-
lieve her ears. “I’d do anything, anything, rather
than send Timothy away from the House That
Jack Built ...” The wail flickered on something
bare and raw in Loftus’ soul, but he kept his careful
smile at the same deliberate ruthlessness.
“Reed could go to the hotel down lower,” mur-
mured her father. He had used a trump card, and
knew it.
“Reed . . . shan't," she flung at her father. Jill
knew, too, when she was beaten, the injustice of it
flaying her to venom. “You’ve been very adroit,”
she announced with biting sarcasm, that added five
vears to her white face. “But anybody can win,
when they cheat.” She smiled, her eyes hurt, bitter,
and hard. “It takes a man to play a fair game.”
With that, Jill’s mouth closed grimly, and, fight-
ing her weakness of body with a terrific strength
of mind, she walked slowly, proudly, across the
room, pausing unconcernedly at the door to turn the
handle, leaving behind her a man who had watched
every step she made and who had found in his
empty triumph more bitterness than Jill in her woe.
He could have borne what she had accused him of—
had it not been true.
The outcome of Jill’s interview that night of
storm was a grim retirement into silence, out of
which she emerged only to flog at David with swift
and carefully judged bitterness. There was a scene
which neither she nor her brother, nor those who
witnessed part of it, were ever likely to forget. As
with all storms, this upset was created from a very


small cloud indeed, merely an ill-timed criticism by
Jill, of one of David’s favourite stories. With swift
responses his sister had fenced cleverly, until the
discussion became personal. “Vulgar,” cried Jill.
“If the girl in the book is vulgar, and she’s like me,
then I’m vulgar; is that what you mean ?”
“Yes,” came suddenly, the word bitten off sharply.
Jill s chin was thrust out as she sneered at David.
If I am vulgar, then you are: you are my bro-
ther.” J
One would hardly think so, Jill, to hear you
speaking to me,” came wearily from the boy.
Then, if you don’t like the way I speak, go out,”
snorted the girl, fretting under the chagrin of her
defeat over the fiddle. “Go on ... go out of the
room, and leave me.”
But the boy w r as at the end of his endurance, an
expression somewhat like his father’s settling
on his face. As you’ve so often pointed out, Jill,
you re more capable of easy movement than I am
—so perhaps you’d better go.”
Jill was in a cul de sac. She could hardly lift the
boy and carry him, nor would she retire herself.
She resorted to words for her retaliation. “Per-
haps, then, you d better stay behind. You always
have been, anyway.” Carelessly she flicked David
on the raw, but he did not move a muscle. This
flayed Jill to fury. “You’re afraid of me . . .
weakling . . . coward!” Her eyes glittered as the
boy did not flinch. “Afraid of me, David the Great.”
Afraid of you?” he asked contemptuously at
last. “You flatter yourself, Jill.”
“It’s because you can’t be hit, that you say these
things,” she gasped, white and tense. “Do you
know my opinion of you?”
But even Jill was subdued at the expression which


spread over the boy’s features. Slowly he drew
himself to his feet, limping towards the door, where
he paused, looking round at her as she glared
angrily at him, standing so dreadfully, unboy-
ishly still. “I know what you think of me, Jill.
Foolish of me . . . but . . .I’ve always wanted
to do brave things to convince you that a coward’s
heart doesn’t necessarily lie in a . . . feeble body.”
He moved back a step, pausing again, one hand
against the lintel of the door. ‘‘l hope you never
realize what you’ve done to me . . . to-night.”
David was gone.
Jill was left at the table, her body throbbing with
this unexpected action of her brother. The empty
room reproached her with a sharpness that brought
tears to her eyes, her lips caught between her
teeth. Everything had gone from her . . . every-
thing. She could not even fight her father. She
scrambled to her feet, only to drop into a quiver-
ing helpless heap on the stones, for in the doorway
was Reed, watching her gravely.
He crossed the floor without speaking, tapping
his pipe on the grate as if formally to announce his
presence. Jill sat huddled up, her hands over her
face, in the shadow of the table.
Jill chafed and fumed as the man moved round
the room, while she watched his legs through her
fingers. At last she muttered; “Go out, Timothy
Reed: I don’t want you.”
“Sorry: I prefer to stay.”
“David sneaked, I suppose.” Still the muffled,
choked voice behind the clasped hands.
“I unwittingly heard the boy’s reply to what I
can guess you taunted him with. By Jove, Jill,
that was rather fierce. The boy’s a man. Pity
you can’t recognize it.”


Silence.
“Well,” came in the man’s cool—very cool —tones,
“what are you going to do about it?”
“Do about . . . what?” Jill snapped.
“Conquering your rotten complex,” came with
the same studied coolness which hurt Jill more
than any anger.
Jill was speechless. Without preamble the man
stepped near her, taking her arm in such a way
that she had to rise to her feet. He propelled her
to the couch, seating her with a little thump beside
him.
Jill’s lips quivered: it was so muddled, and every-
thing was wrong. “I ... I didn’t mean to hurt
David,” she said at last.
“No?” That’s what the boys in the fable said
about the frogs.”
“Timothy .. . don’t” —a thickening appeal.
“Why not: I don’t mean to hurt you.”
“I • • • it’s awful, Tim. I don’t know what to
do . . . with myself.” A deep sob hiccupped
through Jill, but the man shook her arm. “I know
that, Jill; that’s why I’m treating you like a grown-
up being now, instead of a naughty child.”
“Don’t be nice to me: I deserve nothing but
horridness.”
“You ask for it, you mean.” Reed puffed smoke
into the quiet room. “Well, what are we going
to do about it, eh?”
“Will he ... do you think he’ll ever let me have
a fiddle?” she asked breathlessly, waiting for a
reply with her gaze on the man’s expressionless
features.
I don’t hold out much hope if you behave like
a prima donna whose pet Peke has been stolen.”
Jill could not smile, but she twisted uneasily, not


realizing- that she had been trapped deliberately
into beholding sanity and reason. “Tim, tell me,
how can I do . . . that?”
“What?”
“Conquer myself.” It was a shamed, tiny
utterance, but the man’s heart lifted. Whatever Jill
did, she threw herself into it whole-heartedly. If
he could but move this conversation into the
right direction to throw glamour over it, for her!
“I’ll tell you presently. Jill, I’m curious over
one matter, and it’s a mystery. How did your
father extract that promise from you, not to play
again. I’ve thought of every threat under the sun,
and every persuasion too, and can’t arrive at an
idea that holds water. So what was it?”
“I . . . nothing.”
“You always mean a dashed lot, when you say
‘nothing,’ my child.” Reed thoughtfully blew
smoke away from her. “It must have been a
threat —rather a big one, I should imagine.” He
paused, then added, “Your father wouldn’t plead
or persuade.”
“It was ... a threat,” came stubbornly. “That’s
all I’ll say.”
“Well, you know how to keep promises, so how
about giving me one. Now look here. What
would you like to do to your father, over this little
contretemps.
“I should like to kill him,” said Jill murderously.
“But I’ll get my revenge some day . . . you’ll see.”
“How about having it right away?” asked Tim-
othy. Jill sniffed, for she thought he was joking,
but he repeated the question with a small addition
to it: “As soon as you care to do it.”
“What is it?” she gasped. “What do you mean?”


“You consider him your enemy, don’t you?
You’ve said that often enough to me.”
“He is my enemy”—doggedly.
“Well, if that is so, do you know the finest and
best way to baffle an enemy?” asked Reed with
almost a cocksure gaiety.
Jill considered for a while, watching Reed specu-
latively. What could he mean, and had he reason
for baffling Loftus? Jill stirred with a faint, inex-
plicable sense of unease. But she shook Reed
fiercely. “Tell me,” she demanded.
Timothy lifted his chin, removed his pipe, and
regarded her with a long glance that crinkled his
eyes and parted his lips. Then he said slowly:
“Find out his dearest wish and ...” Jill leaned
forward, but started erect as the astonishing, un-
believable completion came, “help him to it.”
For a long time there was no sound in the room.
Jill could not think. Relief, disappointment, frus-
tration, and hatred mingled in such a ferment that
she felt dizzy. The pipe was back between Reed’s
teeth once more, as he waited patiently. Jill
screwed her face up. “IVhut did you say?” she
asked carefully.
“Great idea, you know,” the young man said
softly. “But the trouble is, it isn’t original. Ever
heard this, Jill?” And to her, watching her face
steadily while permitting no flinching or turning
away, the man quoted in semi-serious manner: “ ‘Be
sure that, the day you lingered to follow a ray of
light through a crevice in the door of life, you did
something as great as though you had bandaged
the wounds of your enemy, for at that moment did
you no longer have any enemies.’ ”
Jill’s face was a study in mingled emotions, as
even in her turbulent and chaotic state she recog-


nized the bell-like clearness of the notes of truth
and beauty in the sentence. “Maeterlinck,” prof-
fered Timothy, nodding. After what seemed like
an hour of rapid thought, Jill curved her lips. “It’s
not my way of retaliation,” she managed to say
unsteadily. “But I can see, now, that it’s your
way.” Her eyes met his fearlessly. “That’s been
your life, Tim.”
He made no denial: he was w r aiting for Jill’s
decision.
“My father is my enemy; but I’m my own enemy
too. I should have found that out if you hadn’t
shown me. To . . . bandage the wounds of my
enemy, which is me, I can bandage the wounds of
my enemy, which is . . . my father.” This odd
reasoning he followed. The symbol was strange
to her, but had caught her fancy as surely
as he knew it would. She shrugged. Perhaps,
if I go about this bandaging business ... I might
kill two birds with one stone.” She laughed at the
paradox, her eyes misty.
His hands reached out and took hers. In his
smile was an approval whose quality thrilled her
with a desire to be good . . . good . . . and try to
fight herself, for his sake. “Do you know, you’ve
taken the biggest step in your career to-night, old
thing?”
“I? How?”
“A career is not what one does —but w r hat one
is. Think over that for a while, and find out how
true it is. So, while you’re waiting to ‘do,’ just ‘be.’
Do you follow?”
“Yes.”
“It won’t be easy.”
“No. But I’ll promise, Timothy, to look out for


a chance to ... do what you say. Honest Injun.
I’ll see what effect that has on my being.”
Reed’s own eyes were not very clear as Jill bent
over and laid one cheek on his hand. “I don’t know
what I shall be able to do, to help my father to his
dearest wish . . . rather a hopeless business, I’m
afraid.” She lifted her head and met his gaze
steadily. “But I’ll try it, even if it kills me.” She
grimaced. “I’m sick of fighting the other way,
anyhow.”


CHAPTER XII
And with toil of their To-day —
Bought for us To-morrow!
Rudyard Kipling.
Through the quiet stillness of the out-of-doors
sounded a name which made Jill lift her head
sharply from the rug where she was lying —a name
which puckered her brow for a moment, then drew
a disturbed expression to her face. She struggled
with a far-off memory, until the vignette sharpened
its edges and words were recalled.
“Glenark,” Jill repeated silently. She was finding
it hard to talk to the others, these days. After
the night when she had talked with Timothy in the
dining-room, Jill had been mortified to shame, for
Beryl was the only one to whom Jill could
bring herself to speak normally—with the subcon-
scious knowledge that she deserved no considera-
tion from anybody. David was outwardly the same
gentle lad with thoughtful eyes, but he seldom
spoke to Jill, and relapsed farther still into his
books, almost living in his room, which was hardly
a bedroom.
The abysmal depths of humiliation brought Jill
first to secret denunciation of all about her, then to
tears of contrition. Poor Jill! As Timothy had told
her, it was the turning-point of her existence, al-
though it seemed but a black tangle of mistakes and
happenings which took her nowhere. Seared on her


heart was the look on the face of her brother, as
he had said : “I hope you’ll never realize what you’ve
done to me to-night.” She was finding, as we all
do, that the spoken word can never be recalled,
and the bitterness of that stung her in all direc-
tions. Timothy had flogged her in his gentle, be-
nign and whimsical fashion, and she had taken the
flogging well, as a boy will take another kind of
after a misdemeanour which he knows is
not trivial. But the boy smarts more from the igno-
miny of the whipping than from the physical injury.
So with Jill; she was smarting, writhing, under the
mental whipping Timothy had administered, and
all the others knew it. That was her chief re-
sentment; all the others knew she had been lec-
tured, and, because none of the others knew the
quality of the lecture, or of the ineffable something
which had rested its cool hands on her soul, Jill
was angry. Baffled too, for she wanted them to
know all, and yet there was a barrier which, with
David in particular, was stronger than any wall of
masonry.
Talk over the dinner-table, slightly reminiscent,
widely comprehensive, had awakened in Loftus
an old nostalgia, which had been expressed in one
word: “Glenark.”
Jill wagged her head, as with lowering brows she
recalled a conversation between her mother and
her father. She puckered her brows fiercely to
remember the actual words which had faded unim-
portantly into the years; then they came in a flash
to her. Her father had said almost with despair:
‘‘l’d S iv e years of my life, Marie, to clear up that
Glenark affair.”
Marie, fragrant, lacy, bewitching, had risen to
touch him on the side of his dark head, ungreyed


then, saying softly: “It was not your fault, Phil;
let’s talk of something else.”
That was all. A vignette plucked out of the back-
ground by Jill’s mind. What a wonderful machine
it was, she pondered, as she watched her father’s
face; a machine whose mysteries could never be
solved by man.
The men were talking in low tones, the young
folk either disregarded or forgotten, the chairs of
the men slightly apart from where the four figures
sprawled on the big rugs thrown on the grass.
Timothy had been mending chicken-runs all day and
was tired in consequence, and therefore quite satis-
fied with accepting whatever conversational titbits
were dropped. Loftus’ manner, however, and his
reluctantly troubled speech as he mentioned Glen-
ark, told quick-minded Reed that his knowledge of
Jill’s father was far from being complete, and that
now he was to know more of his host.
“Glenark,” repeated the Major. Jill’s ears pricked
to attention. “I’ve never heard you speak of the
place before. In the Ranges, you say. You mean
the McDonnells?” With a soft laugh Major Camp-
bell continued: “It is difficult to connect you with
another place away from this, Loftus.”
“Glenark was very small, and people know it by
another name now,” replied the owner of Sunset
Hill. “With a shack upon it no larger”—Loftus
turned to Reed with a suspicion of amusement on
his mouth—“than your decorative dwelling, Reed.”
“How did the transition stage evolve?” asked the
Major with deep interest. “This is some distance
from the old Glenark.”
Philip Loftus spoke in the slightly sedate man-
ner of one who guards his emotions with his
words. “Very simply,” he said, “In the early


days up there I had a partner —Adam Croft —
and we struggled together to stock this small place
above the Missionary Plains. It was under the
peaks of the highest points of the Ranges, a mag-
nificent place, wild, tangled, crude, and plentifully
besprinkled with wilder blacks than we see
now.” Loftus smiled, and his voice melted. “Croft
was a strange fellow, suspicious and hasty, while
I, I suppose, was rather too taciturn and slow of
speech for him to understand well.”
Nobody contradicted Loftus, as with a faint lift
of his shoulders he resigned himself to the role of
story-teller, his face slightly scornful of his rise to
eloquence, but his mouth not unhappy over it. He
went on: “Croft was always complaining that ‘other
men had luck with their stock,’ while we continued
guarding ourselves against the blacks and trying
to keep our cattle alive. Continually he wanted
to sell his share of Glenark, and tried in various
directions, but in those days men were few and far
between. We talked of our future in the little
dwelling, but Croft was very doubtful about ever
seeing a return for our investment.”
Philip Loftus was watching the quiet river-bed
as he spoke, his voice altering in some indescrib-
able way as he wandered reminiscently through the
scenes of bygone days, over countries whose recol-
lections were plainly both affectionate and disturb-
ing. “I received a small legacy from Angus Loftus
—my uncle, you remember, Major—and, knowing
of my partner’s one obsession, I offered to buy him
out. He jumped at the suggestion, but I was left
in a doubly difficult position, not financially, but
with the holding. I was planning a trip home, too,
to see my people and a little of the world; I had
not been in Scotland since I was twelve. Now


here,” Loftus remarked, suddenly arresting a deeper
attention from the others, “is the curious coinci-
dence which had so many small troubles to follow
it. Three weeks after the papers were signed which
made Glenark solely mine, a stranger arrived with
a large outfit, a number of blacks, and a good string
of expensive horses. This man, with a blindness
which made me finally shrug and give in, wanted to
buy Glenark. He had been prospecting, and some-
body, for the sake of appearing clever, had told
him of the payable quantities of mica on my place.
There was mica; it glittered evilly at me from every
ridge, but the stranger was not quite so well aware
as I was of the transport difficulties in the then raw
country. He was an American , . . with two hob-
bies, burning money, and following the call of what
he called The Everlasting Whisper. A queer per-
son, likeable, but as foolhardy as many other
adventurers. His Whisper”—smiled Loftus with a
glint of humour—“led him and his dollars to me.
I explained what the transport problem meant, but
with a wave of his hand he dismissed it. In a few
days Glenark was his, a fair profit mine. The man
from Texas eventually made his fortune, but in oil,
and not at Glenark.”
The speaker leaned forward in his chair, and
pointed at the Major with his pipe. This is the curi-
ous part of it. Croft was away at the time, and did
not meet Harmer, who by then had gone on to the
Alice, or what it was then, to fix up some matters
of private concern. Croft returned. I shall not
forget that hour. White with rage and disappoint-
ment, he burst into the shack, and before I could
recover my speech or sense, he had burst out again,
wildly dragging a gun and a few belongings from
a shelf, and denouncing me all the time. I tried


to explain; I admit that I cursed him for a blank
fool . . . for I lost my temper too, but before the
rage of Croft I was comparatively inarticulate.
Through the sentences which he flung at me I
learned that he had been told farther up of my sale
—bush wireless is not always so correct —and
accused me of knowing of the American’s offer
before I bought Croft’s share. You see . . . ”
Loftus lifted his brows and made a thin grimace,
“the evidence was against me.”
The man who now looked down at his pipe ex-
amined it thoughtfully. His face was partly hidden
as he continued: “I was alone until Harmer’s
return, and rather . . . er . . . lonely. I was fond
of Croft.” Loftus cleared his throat, and Jill stared
up from the darkness where she was partly con-
cealed. “The hut was unbearably empty. The
strange part of it was,” he went on with an indif-
ference which must have been assumed, “was that I
had been preparing a surprise for Croft, in the form
of a gift of half the profit I had made on Glenark.
Had he waited, he would have shared with me, and
we should both have been clear, better off than when
we went there. It was Croft’s misfortune that his
haste made him sell a while too soon. The share,”
continued the speaker blandly, “is still in trust for
Adam—swelling considerably, I know. My soli-
citors have strict orders regarding that separ-
ate sum. Er . . . the matter is one which . . .
well, my own inward ideas of fair play, however
extravagant, were responsible for the placing aside
of that money; Croft’s, not mine.”
Major Campbell nodded.
“Croft galloped out of my life. I have had friends
since, but none like him.” Loftus moved slightly.
“I advertised in every paper in the Commonwealth


a stammer, Jill’s father said abruptly: “I . . . er
... in fact, I should like to be able to tell him
personally about the whole wretched affair. I’m
. . . er . . . my soft spot lies in Croft and Glen-
and New Zealand, with a guarded explana-
tion of the affair at Glenark, and signed it
by a nom-de-plume which Croft would at once have
recognized. I waited. Perhaps he saw the papers;
perhaps he did not. Then I bought Sunset Hill,
enlarged it, and —as you see, lam here now. That
is all about Glenark.”
There was a silence of a few moments, while Jill
said numbly to herself: “He forgave Adam Croft.
After ... all that.” Staring into the dark, Jill
found some of her settled convictions slipping, and
her sternly judged values altering somewhat. She
was in a maze which lately had at every corner
shown her a fresh problem that had to be consid-
ered, worked out, and weighed before she could
proceed. Her father had forgiven Adam Croft. Jill
looked wildly towards Timothy, but he was re-
garding the Major as he spoke: “Am I right, Lof-
tus, in thinking that you still feel the same friend-
liness for your partner?”
“Yes, quite,” came briefly. With what was almost
ark, lam afraid.” There was something infin-
itely touching in the confession of the man who now
frowned heavily to deny all possibility of sentimen-
tality.
Awaiting his chance, Reed now made a startling
statement; “Mr Loftus—Adam Croft is at Inter-
pitna.”
Loftus turned as if shot. “What?” he asked.
“A thin chap,” continued Reed, as explicitly as
possible. “Stooping, rather. Grey; has been tall
and lean, with the most piercing pair of slate-


ark.”
“Croft was over forty then,” said Loftus curtly.
“I am that age now; he’s an old man. Maybe
a failure. Always a rolling stone, always too hasty,
always the adventurer. I hope . . . er . . .”
coloured eyes I’ve ever looked into. It was his eyes
I noticed first, when Pollard and I drove into tht
hotel yards at the Alice. He had come in—Croft,
I mean—from a station out eastwards, from
Queensland, with his camels, and his son.”
“Croft!” ejaculated Loftus, shaken out of all im-
perturbability for a moment. “Can it be? And a
son, you say?”
“They were making- for Interpitna. Talk circu-
lates freely up there, and over dinner we learned
all about the man. The boy, a big stern-faced lad
with a long upper lip and a body of iron, attracted
my attention strongly. Seldom smiles, I should
say, but when that boy smiled at me, I was . . .
biffed.” Reed chuckled.
“Croft ... at Interpitna?” Loftus was stag-
gered. Then: “I wonder is the boy as big a fool
as his father was?”
“ That boy is no fool,” answered Timothy softly.
He struck a match, but let it die out as he went
on. “The two of them had a rare understanding,
very obviously, but the old man is on his last legs,
I should, say. I suppose,” went on Reed, lighting
another match with precision, and applying it to
his pipe between speech: “He is having a last peep
at the romantic place of his youth. By the way,
he can’t have been very young, sir, when at Glen-
Loftus paused, glanced round him, and seemed to
find how he had betrayed his feelings to all about
him. “I hope he’s realized what he’s done for him-
self.” But the stern indictment rang falsely.


Loftus was not speaking with his customary
control as he leaned back, legs crossed, in a cane
chair. “Interpitna is a barn of a place, occupied
just now by a friend of the owner, generally away
in the city ... or some other city. Victor
Mallaby comes up once every year to paint a
collection of rather strange aquatints and water-
colours, highly imaginative, but catching the elu-
sive spirit of the ranges. They sell well enough to
give him a few months of attractive idleness at the
cottage on Interpitna, and his wife comes with him.
Then Croft and his son must be residing with the
Mallabys, what? Er . . . Reed, did you hear
if that is right, or are they camping in the valley?”
“I merely understood that Interpitna was their
destination.” Timothy was unable to tell more.
“No fool like an old fool,” Loftus rated quietly,
but his voice was not angry, nor were his eyes hard.
“I wonder if he remembers Snowgirl, a half-Arab
mare we had. Snowgirl once unlatched a gate and
let out the goats. Ever chased goats into a place
they object to entering, Major?”
Was this her father ? Jill was asking. He now
pointed with his pipe again, and his eyes were
almost soft. “Reed, Mallaby is fond of painting a
bare blue mountain which throws its shadow across
the border of Glenark —impregnable, remote, and
as loftily untouched by civilization as the mountains
of the moon.”
Jill could not stop staring. This was the man
Marie had loved . . . Her daughter felt her eyes
burn and sting. Some of the sorrow of Loftus’
broken life came then to her, refined, and she flayed
herself under the blow of circumstance. Marie had
gone. There was nothing now for the man who
found no happiness in his daughter, and whose son


after him would perhaps be unable to take up the
exacting duties of the station. All that Loftus had
was the forlorn hope that some day Croft might
understand and —admit it. The thing her father
wanted most in life, was to feel the grip of Adam
Croft’s handshake. Jill paused in her thoughts,
then gasped, and over her face spread a rapt ex-
pression that came from some secret exultation.
Beryl watched the other girl uneasily. The
change of emotions which had played across Jill’s
features unconsciously had held Beryl in thrall
What was Jill contemplating? Something more
mad and wild than usual, if that almost transfigured
look meant anything! Jill was now wriggling, hei
hands deep down in the linen pockets of a gingham
frock created by both girls some weeks before. Her
eyes were snapping, and she seemed imbued with
some terrific impatience that was almost electric.
But she could not question Jill, Beryl decided, for
of late Jill’s lips had been as annoyingly sealed as
the shell of an oyster.
For the first time in many days Jill addressed
her father directly, he, in his thoughts of other
things, answering in a manner quite ordinary.
“Father,” she asked swiftly, “you surely haven’t
still got those newspaper clippings, have you?” He
replied: “Why not?” It was enough, and the girl
spoke no more.
Loftus w'as saying absently: “Of course, that
money in trust would be very handy for the son,
failing Croft’s acceptance of it.”
“You know, Mr Loftus,” remarked Reed firmly,
“I consider you’ve behaved in a jolly sporting way
over the whole transaction.”
“I agree,” said Major Campbell. Loftus moved


uneasily, and the subject of Croft and Glenark died
a natural death.
Jill suddenly uttered a clear, shrill call that
sounded like the old Jill come back. Lina appeared
from the kitchen, and clung to the pickets of the
gate with both hands as she grinningly waited for
her order. “Lemon squash . . . lots,” called the
girl. “Longa pantry shelf . . . big fellow jug.”
The girl grunted and turned, her figure emerg-
ing from the darkness a while later, bearing a
tray, which she set down with a satisfying thump
that made Beryl groan for the sake of the delicate
glasses—new glasses, up from town. Jill rose
slowly to pour the liquid from the big crystal jug
that sparkled in the flare of the lamp, while Beryl
collected coffee-cups and deposited them on the
veranda-table a few yards from them. The glasses
clinked to a little refrain which burst into
a strange, beautiful song that swelled Jill’s heart
to bursting-point. Through the song was running
a motif, holding the words delicately—“as great
as though you bandaged the wounds of an enemy,
for at that moment did you no longer have any
enemies.”
And Jill, as she handed glasses and the song re-
peated itself, was saying within her soul . . .
“Enemy! Timothy says I am my own enemy.
In binding the wounds of others I bind mine
own . . . and no longer do I have any enemy.”
Stars shone again in Jill’s ecstatic young self, as
she breathed passionately the words that seemed
to ache in her body. “God ... let me do it;
let me keep my promise to Timothy . . . some-
how.”
Beryl touched her on the arm. “You’ve had no
squash, Jill.”


Jill started, and flashed such a beautiful smile
upon the world that the other almost dropped the
glass she was holding. What was happening to
Jill? But she drank deeply, and lay flat upon her
face on the rug, staring at the motionless river-bed
fretted in black. “Soon it will be running, Tim,
and then look out for excitement. Rubbish hurt-
ling down on huge masses of froth and scum, and
the flood galloping down with great logs careering
like canoes gone mad. The Larapinta on its way
to the Salt Lake . . . and rain hissing, swishing,
and bringing wet scents from the hot ground.
Beryl, I hope you see the monsoon weather before
you go home.” Jill stopped dead, arrested by some
thought whose immensity made itself felt to the
others half listening. Over Jill crept such an ex-
pression of abject blankness that she realized it,
and excused herself with a laugh. “But not too
soon. They mustn’t come too soon.”
“Why?” asked Beryl over her lemon. “We have
only a few weeks more.”
But Jill made no response; she continued to gaze
down into the blackness, whence came a mopoke’s
cry and the rustling twitter of some night-birds
in the reeds.


CHAPTER XIII
High places that knew of the gold and the white
On the forehead of morning.
Now darken and quake, and the steps of the Night
Are heavy with warning.
Henry Kendall.
Beryl started out of her sleep, staring into the
unyielding blackness of the room. She had heard
a sound, a cautious sound that even to her subcon-
scious self had suggested an intruder. But con-
scious reason now told her that, while it might
not be a marauder, it certainly was somebody
creeping past her room. With her heart thudding
unpleasantly, she slipped from the bed, to pace
slowly to the door on tiptoe.
Through the cranny of the door she saw that
it was Jill in the corridor; Jill with a candle in her
hands, the light striking upwards on her face, her
fingers making a red shade round the flame. On
the girl’s face was a tense excitement and a little
fear. She moved slowly, taking big steps over the
boards which she knew creaked, until, reaching her
father’s office, she vanished smartly into it. The
watching girl saw the wide beam of flickering light
on the floor get narrow, then decrease slowly to a
thin slit.
What was Jill doing in her father’s private room?
Beryl, with one idea in her head, that of preventing
Jill from some foolishness she might regret on the


morrow, hesitated for one moment only, then, silent-
ly dodging the creaking boards as the other had
done, Beryl followed her friend. The impulsive Jill
might be doing something “cranky” again, and per-
haps might be dissuaded from causing more upset.
Jill did not hear the other girl enter, or the door
move, as she searched with obvious haste on the
desk before her, illuminated by the candle, which
threw uncanny shades upon the walls and window.
In her long white nightdress, the folds caught up
with one hand, her hair in a soft shower round her
shoulders, Beryl looked very lovely, but it was not
her beauty that Jill noticed as she swung round
when she was touched on the shoulder. Jill gasped
soundlessly, and drew back with her face livid, one
hand flat against her chest as if shrinking from a
blow. But it was Beryl, and not Philip Loftus
who stood there, and Jill breathed evenly again.
With one forefinger against her lips, and an elo-
quent nod towards the adjoining room, Jill stepped
towards the amazed Beryl. In a low whisper,
she breathed: “I’m not doing anything beastly;
will you watch by the door? It’s all right, Beryl,
honest Injun.”
Beryl nodded. There was no doubt then. Jill
had said “Honest Injun,” and in matters of per-
sonal honour Jill was immaculate. Beryl, with
anguished glances at the shadows in the hall, trod
to the door again, keeping her gaze glued on the
openings along the hall, as she heard the soft rustle
of papers, the cautious scrape of a lock, and the
soft dragging of a drawer being pulled open. Then
the light ran swiftly over the walls, the moving
shadows galloping in grotesque fashion down the
door, until the glare was on the woodwork before


her eyes, and Jill said close to Beryl’s ear: “Got
it! Hurry . . . your room.
In a moment they were breathing in the strong-
hold of Beryl’s bedroom, cool and fresh in the
night-time air. On the tumbled bed she threw
herself, her knees up inside her nightgown, the
cambric stretched down tightly to her toes. Jill
in her untidy pyjamas looked like a parody of a
pretty boy, hunched on the pillows, with her
back against the bed-rail. “I must speak softly,”
she said almost in a whisper. “I wasn’t going to
tell anybody, but I must now. Beryl ...” She
paused, then rushed on, her eyes bright, her face
eager. “You heard what father said about Glen-
ark?”
“Rather.”
Jill smiled triumphantly, and from her pocket
drew some folded scraps of paper, tied round with
thread; newspaper, yellowed, slightly ruffled at the
edges. She spread these on the sheet, and Beryl
then saw what Jill had searched for. They were
clippings of a uniform size, marked carefully in
fine handwriting, which both girls saw was that of
Philip Loftus. “They are the advertisements father
put into the papers to tell Croft about that affair at
Glenark,” she said to the subdued Beryl. “See
. . . Brisbane . . . Perth . . . every capital in the
Southern Hemisphere.”
“But Jill,” faltered Beryl dismayed, “your father
must treasure them. Why have you taken them ?”
“Silly, can’t you see?”
“No, I can’t,” retorted Beryl crisply. “Jill , . .**
Beryl’s hands reached out protectively over the
pieces of paper. “You shan’t destroy them,
you ...”


“Destroy them!” echoed Jill aghast. “So that’s
what I’ve made you all expect from me.” With
a catch in her voice she whispered brokenly : “Beryl
I am so sorry for being so rude. I ... I
. . could you. . . try and forget it?” It was
a bitter fight which had brought Jill to this. A
fight won, not lost. Beryl’s quick action with the
papers had added its weight to the winning side.
She nodded, and said quietly; “I’ve known all along
how you felt; I’ve been through it. It s forgotten,
Jill. Please go on.”
With an incredulous sigh of delicious relief, Jill
collected her thoughts and continued with a gulp:
“I’ve . . . hung all my woes on the clothes-line
instead of being . . . decent,” she jerked. Tim-
othy told me about . . . enemies.” And very
hastily, somewhat shy, Jill rattled off the quota-
tion which had crept into her soul: “ ‘for at that
moment did you no longer have any enemies. I
don’t know why, but . . . it alters one, to look
honestly at things that way. Timothy says that
I’m my own enemy, and I think father is, as well,
so I’m making an experiment, and am . . . going
to try to . . . get him the thing he wants most;
and in some way the two seem mixed. I . .
—the eager, strained voice broke in its own per-
plexity —“I’m catching at a straw ... to save
myself ... and ... and .. . Beryl, please don’t
think me utterly mad.”
“No, Jill, you are not mad,” said Beryl slowly.
“I can see what a big gesture it is, and I think I
see what you want to do, but . . . how?”
“I want to go up there and prove to that stupid
Croft that my father is not a sneak. We must
stick together, even if we row like Billingsgate fish-


mongers at home.” Bitter denunciation of herself
rang true there.
“It’s not so bad as that,” Beryl assured her hastily.
“Thanks,” Jill sniffed.
“I never know what to expect next, from you,”
Beryl went on. “You are like a . . .” but the
speaker had no suitable comparison ready, so she
shrugged, smiled, and said: “I don’t know what”
“An escaped lunatic,” supplied Jill readily. “Well,
if this piece of lunacy fails, I’ll take to knitting
socks for the poor, for without the violin . . .”
She stammered upon a subject made tabu by her
own pride. “And without my father’s approval
I can do nothing. I’ve found I can’t fight for it;
I’m defeated, but not squashed.” She wagged her
chin. “I’m stupid. Let’s talk about these.” With
a swift series of taps she indicated the row of clip-
pings on the uneven surface of the sheet.
“Well?”—a faint smile, and a warm glance from
the girl who had her friend again.
“Will you promise to keep this a secret until I
come back?”
“Back? From where?” gasped Beryl.
“Interpitna, duffer.” Jill was supreme in her
self-assurance. “I’ve met Mrs Mallaby, and like
her. Mr Mallaby too. He’s tall, and wears white
that absolutely shines, and has eye-glasses on a
black cord. When standing among the natives he
looks like the negative of a photograph. They
stayed here for three days, on the way up, last time.
Mrs Mallaby is like a Kate Greenaway picture,
but very modern, and just worships him. Now
he’s the kind of man anybody could marry and feel
quite bucked over it.” Jill had forgotten to speak
softly, and her voice rose and fell as she sketched


the Mallabys for Beryl, who also had forgotten
that the house was asleep and it was midnight.
“She goes wherever he goes, and he does the
most stunning pictures. Dabs like mad, and there
it is. He loves the pools in the ranges, and has
a perfect craze for painting the blue peaks and
valleys near Interpitna. That means fish, a kind of
bream found in the rock pool there. The blue
depths and high-lights he makes aquatints from
—bewitching things, with little Pan-like figures
drifting about in the shadows. Of course the
colours up there, in the Gorge, are a kind of Sunset
Hill multiplied by ten, added to purple, bronze,
magenta, and bright orange. He gets them all,”
said Jill with pride and a little amazement. I
saw some; hardly a bit of work in them, appar-
ently” Her last word was heavy with sarcasm.
“The scenery round Interpitna is staggering, and
he comes every year to be settled before the storms
come; he revels in the colours the storm gods put
into the sky, he told me. Near the station-house
is an escarpment, almost overshadowing it. This
escarpment is like a huge high wall, all colours.
It has one opening, and that is filled with water,
and in flood-time is part of the Finke. Just above
there is the real commencement of the river, the
stream then bolting down through giant canyons
and gorges which must have taken a billion years
to cut through. It’s like a giant’s playground. Mr
Mallaby painted one picture—l read in the paper
about it—which people raved over, and it was called
‘Thor’s Stronghold.’ But nobody would believe
that colouring . . . until they saw it.”
“Jill,” followed the other girl swiftly, “I believe
you’re a gipsy after all. You positively vibrate


when you talk about those wild places.” She wrig-
gled. “Go on.”
“What a perfect pig you are for a story,” specu-
lated Jill affectionately. “There’s no more, except,”
she added grimly, “that I shall have to go like
smoke to get through to Interpitna and back again,
without being caught in the Gorge by the flood.
This hot-house atmosphere we’ve had lately is just
promising a big rain, and we can’t have Turkish-
bath nights much longer without something hap-
pening.”
“Jill!” protested Beryl. “You shouldn’t go.”
“I’m going. Now, you’ve been held by a promise,
remember. Don’t break it, whatever happens. I
shall be all right, and after all, I didn’t tell you all
this —you found it out.” Jill sniffed loudly. “I
suppose that, whatever I do, it’ll be attributed to
crankiness, but it isn’t this time.”
“No, indeed it isn’t. But he’ll know where you
go to. He always does, almost before you get
there.”
“What do you mean?”
Beryl hesitated before continuing. “Didn’t you
know that he tracks you all the time, by Boomi
or Laz’rus? Jill, don’t glare so. I don’t track you.
Can’t you see that he admires you for that part
of your composition, but at the same time protects
you, even at a distance. It’s really that, Jill. His
side of the family comes out in you when you do
plucky things, but he won’t let you run into danger
because of it.”
“No danger,” mumbled Jill, folding her arms on
her bony knees. She was thinking. So he had
protected her? She shrugged and thrust her bare
feet out suddenly, upsetting the cuttings on the


bed. Beryl gathered them up neatly, and held them
as Jill said gruffly: “So my martyrdom was a myth,
too. Everything is a myth . . . perhaps his hard-
ness is. I’m getting some surprises, so perhaps the
gods will relent, and have him bow and hand me a
violin to play next.” She blinked at Beryl. “My
hat, it must be the late hour, or I’d never have
dared to imagine that. Now Beryl, about this
tracking business. This time I shunt be tracked.”
“You can’t help it,” announced the other with
some triumph.
“I will,” came curtly. “He’s riding to Aldorla
to-morrow, and taking your father to look over
Arlec’s next mob for South, and take some flour
that came with ours. Father will be out there four
days at least, coming and going, and I’ll slip away
as soon as he’s out of sight. I’ll take four good
horses, riding-and-pack, and one for the boy ; Boom-
erang, I think. He’s used to me. I shall be at the
Missionary Plains in about two days, and at Inter-
pitna in about one or two more ... if I’m lucky.
Then for the doughty deed.”
“/»//,” said Beryl, stifling her laughter with part
of the counterpane, “you are . . . dreadful.”
The answer to that statement was a grin.
“However,” remarked Jill, her voice dropping as
she remembered the hour, “I’m going, and if I
fail, and Croft thinks I’m crazy, and father thinks
I’m an interfering hussy, and the Mallabys think
I’m tiresome, then I shall just have to end by
becoming a nun.” She sighed heavily. “It would
be an awful trial.”
“To the nunnery,” remarked Beryl dryly.
Next morning Philip Loftus most opportunely
left for Aldorla, and Jill immediately became very


busy in her room among her shirts and linen. The
monsoon was obviously nearing, the muttering each
night at sunset, and the steel-edged clouds which
rose in flickering balls of vapour from the north,
holding threat and portent. The two men who
rode off that morning eyed the sky anxiously,
Loftus saying; “We’ll get Frazer’s flour over
quickly before the rains come, or they might have
to wait for it a long time.”
But the brazen, clear sky of morning held little
hint of coming heavy weather, and Jill did not so
much as glance upwards as she scouted round the
station, diplomatically interviewing Boomerang in
the saddle-house, scuttling out to the yards to in-
spect the horses, smuggling bundles, pack-bags,
and a suit-case down to the river-bed by the willing
Lina, who, above all, loved intrigue.
“Good luck, Jill,” said Beryl, under the shade
of the trees on the river-edge. They had avoided
Timothy, circumnavigated Bubbles, and escaped
from David, as the horses, one by one, were taken
in different directions to the slope that dropped
to the crossing. This was a precaution which
could not lead to the natives talking, so betraying
Jill’s adventure to Reed or her brother.
Beryl held up a strong hand to the other girl,
who leaned over, gripped it, flashed a warm smile,
and gathered up the reins again in her ungloved,
sunburned fingers.
Jill was off. The big chestnut had swung about
and was pounding after the pack-horses which were
being driven through the thin scrub towards the
north of the house. Jill, in one respect, was a worthy
daughter of one of the pioneers of the inland, and,


as she rode, her colour rose and her blood pounded
with the joy of riding - .
Beryl, wandering disconsolately back to the sud-
denly empty station-house, wondered how she
would endure the time until Jill should return.
The conjectures, schemes, dreams, and romantic
denouements which assailed Beryl’s agile mind as
she walked back to the dwelling would have flat-
tered Jill’s ego immensely, had she known. But
Jill would perhaps have objected a little to Beryl’s
philosophy, which savoured of both pessimism and
optimism, as she ended her soliloquy at the hall
door, saying to herself: “Well, she’ll enjoy her
visit to the Mallabys, anyway.”
There were inquiries at dinner that night, from
both Timothy and David. Beryl, presiding at the
head of the table like a gracious little queen, in
spotless blue linen, smiled uncomfortably as she
perilously avoided telling lies. David saw at once
how matters stood, and veered the discussion safely
away from the danger of forcing Beryl to say too
much. “It’s another whim, of course,” he re-
marked with kindly intent and some shrewdness.
“Jill is so chockfull of them that it becomes tire-
some in trying to follow them up. Scones, Tim-
othy?”
“Thanks.” Reed nodded, selected a flaky one
from the dish, buttered it, and bit into it before
saying: “Yes, no doubt. But Jill gleans a
great deal of glamour out of life, which we com-
paratively ordinary mortals know little about.
Wherever she is you may be sure that she is dra-
matizing the scenery, and turning every sound into
song, and every perfume into a wordless poem.”
“Let us hope, then,” said David with a flash of


dry humour, “that she doesn’t pass the Long Water-
hole —about ten cattle lie dead there now.”
Reed chuckled, but he was eager to explain Jill.
“I’ll have the fig jam, please, young man,” he in-
terrupted himself with, eyeing severely the dish
not an inch from Bubbles’ plate. That is when
you’ve finished navigating the bowl with the
spoon.”
“You navigate boats, not bowls,” said the pre-
cise gentleman with the buried bump of humour.
“I stand corrected. Well .. • now. what about
Jill? Where is the most likely place for her to go
to . . . now?” Timothy asked.
Beryl looked appealingly at David.
“She wouldn’t go far,” he answered, meeting
Beryl’s gaze with a twitch of his lips. “Don’t
worry over her, Timothy; Jills all right.
“I say,” came a concerned ejaculation from Bub-
bles. His face was long, his mouth solemn. A
tragic thought had just penetrated his odd little
mind. “You don’t have the fishman up here,
David.”
“I’m afraid the fish would go bad before we re-
ceived it,” explained David willingly, to turn the
talk from Jill. “But in the storeroom there are
a lot, in tins. Which do you prefer, eh? .. .
Sardines, salmon, herrings, or whitebait?”
“Whitebait have their eyes in,” came heavily. “I
say, Timothy, I wish we had some fish, don’t you?
“Not exactly, but it’s very terrible, I admit. I
shall write to the papers about it,” promised Reed
with mock sympathy.
“They wouldn’t print it,” replied the boy, large-
eyed. “You’re not an author.”
“I humbly admit it,” sighed Timothy. “Even a


long letter reduces me to tears. I sometimes chew
my pen-handle down to a stump, seeking inspira-
tion.”
“Timothy, so do I.” A glad look of amazed
surprise struck Bubbles motionless. “I just look
and look, so I just keep on looking. Well, I never.”
He breathed deeply, then attacked the jam again,
saying with bewildering irrelevance: “Who’s going
to shoot the bullock to-night?”
“What bullock?” asked Reed with forgivable
bluntness.
“The dinner one. It’s all cooped up ready, and
the gun’s in the office, I expect. Mr Loftus isn’t
home, and there’s only a mingy steak out in the
meat-house. I looked,” he confessed frankly.
“Did you let the flies in?” asked Beryl firmly.
“No, not one,” he vowed. “But there were an
awful lot under the veranda outside the meat-
house, and near where the hens were pecking away
at a hide stretched out there. David, doesn’t it ever
rain up here in this Never-Never?”
“Rain?” echoed David with extravagant emphasis.
“You wait, old son. This is a sensible country.
It doesn’t send down showers at any old time —
just now—and drive us hunting for umbrellas. It
saves it up through the hot weather, then gives
it to us all at once.”
“I see.” Bubbles ate a scone with great delibera-
tion, then remarked with gravity that it must be
a great saving in mackintoshes to live in the Never-
Never. Unfortunately he added: “Did Jill take her
mackintosh with her, I wonder?”
Jill again. David almost groaned. But at that
moment Jill was not thinking of the rain, or of
mackintoshes, for she was riding northward with


an eye ready for the almost obliterated tracks that
led to the knoll where she must turn off for camp
that night. Boomerang sang and whistled on his
horse, and Jill sat loosely in her saddle, her thoughts
roaming towards Interpitna.
She rode until dark had almost descended, un-
saddled, and made a fire in a rocky creek-bed
with tall trees lining the watercourse. The horses
were hobbled, and the billy was boiling. Jill fell
on to a rug and pensively ate bread and meat, one
elbow propping her upwards, her ankles crossed in
the red glare of the lowering fire. It was not an
unhappy girl who an hour later rolled into the
same rug and fell asleep with her face upturned
to the stars, smudged and blotted out towards the
northern horizon, where faint reverberations stirred
amongst the rocks, to echo down to the circle of
trees which nestled at the foot of a pile of stone
whose formation was as strange as a goblin fort-
ress.


CHAPTER XIV
Blind eyes that will not see;
Their sight is twice as bright.
When vision conies again.
With a crash that startled Jill out of her sleep
that first midnight on the way north, a peal of thun-
der rattled along the gap where she was camped.
In the silence which followed the startling cres-
cendo of sound she could almost hear her own
heartbeats. Boomerang emerged from the dark to
add wood to the dying coals, and this action re-
stored her equilibrium again. She was too much ac-
customed to the pranks of the weather to be afraid,
but she looked nervously at the depthless sky which
now and again was slashed by a blinding ribbon of
light. Her flesh crept, as out of the uncanny still-
ness following the thunder came a sound, the rising
of a whining, wailing wind. It gathered from a
hushed whisper to a shrieking din that swelled as
it came nearer, swishing the boughs of the trees
and sending the leaves to the ground in fluttering,
whirling showers. It was useless to expect sleep
again, so the girl in the creek-bed sat up, wrapping
a rug round her shoulders, to stare into the flick-
ering fire, which cowered at each gust as if afraid.
Once there were some soft hisses on the ashes,
and a few drops of rain fell, but no more. Pre-


sently the wind tore away into the dark; the trees
grew lifeless again, and the gap was still.
In the dawn the little procession moved off, the
fresh keen morning wind whipping Jill’s pale cheeks,
until the rising sun brought the heat again and
sopped the opaline light from the eastern sky. The
next night Jill was again heralded by a storm,
which did no more than threaten, grumble, and
mutter away again. During the afternoon the
Mission Station came into sight, a foreign-looking
cluster of white roofs, native houses, sheds, and
long buildings made from stone. She ate languidly,
with her pleasant hosts eager to hear what small
news she had to impart, then, refreshed and washed,
went on again, crowds of aborigines watching her
in silence as she and Boomerang, with the horses,
wound towards the Ranges.
The following afternoon, after a gruelling ride on
the different horses of her string, Jill arrived at
the Gap at Interpitna, the surface of the pool
ruffled by a gusty wind, the sand blowing in eddies
against the baking surfaces of the strange up-ended
rocks that told a topsy-turvy geological tale of re-
mote upheavals.
The gateway which nature had made in a long
uniform escarpment was negotiable now only be-
cause of the low level of the water, which exposed
a splintery, crude ledge that entirely prevented
a camel from passing by but was just possible with
a horse. Scrambling, plunging, whinneying, Prince
Bill got through, slipping sometimes to his saddle
in the shallows which sloped into a depthless
lagoon, Jill leading him, herself scrambling, with a
due regard for his wild hoofs. The other horses
refused to follow the great chestnut, so Jill gave


a crisp order which began the unloading of the pack
saddles. A party of excited aborigines from the
house and yards came to carry the paraphernalia
through the gap, and Boomerang, with the re-
mainder of the animals, turned to camp a short
distance down the gorge and so be ready for Jill’s
return journey.
The half-hour’s dangerous climbing and persis-
tent coaxing of Prince Bill saved Jill a detour of
twenty miles, and time was valuable with the
nightly storms coming nearer. She rode up to
the house, spinning with fatigue, to see a small,
slight figure on the veranda, alert to greet the
newcomer. Mrs Mallaby had tumbled out of a
hammock, delight and surprise on her small fea-
tures. Grape-vines hung, green and heavy with
almost ripe fruit, above Judy Mallaby’s head as
she stood on the veranda steps with both hands
held out to Jill.
“Jill Loftus! Will the heavens fall? Dear,
you must be dead. What good fortune brought
me a white visitor? And how thin you are.
Vic-c-cl Just when I am reading Nicholas Nickleby
for the tenth time. Oh, Vic, I want you-u-u-u-u.”
A boy took the red horse. The little sun-scorched
dwelling, sitting in a naked sand-patch facing the
escarpment and its shallow pools pitted with the
marks of rising fish, was exchanged for a cool dim
interior, which however, was only cool by com-
parison with the blazing out-of-doors. “Isn’t Vic
tiresome?” Judy asked with love and pride. “And
he’s always in my way when I don’t want him.”
She pressed Jill’s arm. “He’s probably . . . Oh,
here he is. Vic, look who’s here.”
“The Dryad!” With a quick smile Jill recalled


Mallaby’s name for her while at Sunset Hill. He
approached quickly, placing a paint-brush on a
shelf as he passed it, and rubbing his hands
together as he walked. “Well, well. Do you
always descend from nowhere in this fashion?
Great! Right in the nick of time! Judy was
becoming morbid.”
In ten minutes the girl was seated before a silver
pot of tea, fragile china, a silver dish holding
scones and cake which melted as she bit them, and
sandwiches which were invitingly damp and neat.
With her hands stained and grubby, Jill ate, enjoy-
ing every morsel which the two warm-hearted city
folk pressed upon her. As she satisfied the appe-
tite which she had not known was so ferocious,
she told the couple, quite without reserve, all that
she had come for. Mallaby listened intently, his
meticulous apparel making Jill feel very untidy
indeed, but it did not distress her. Judy, as usual,
was poised and glowing, quite unaware that she
looked as if just out of a pillow-fight. Her bobbed
hair was partly on end, rough and wiry, her eye-
brows two arched interrogation points, as she sur-
veyed Jill. “I understand,” remarked Mallaby at
last. “Quite! A victory for you, Jill, if you man-
age this affair diplomatically. Croft is out to-day,
wandering about, so you won’t see him until even-
ing.”
Victor Mallaby put his eye-glasses on his nose
with a wriggle of that organ, and leaned over to
pour more tea for Jill. “You’ll like the son. The
father . . . well, he’s an odd man. You’ll have
difficulty in your novel task, for I cannot as much
as mention your father without Croft freezing
into a tense anger. We’ve heard his side of the


story —told reluctantly and briefly—but are glad
to hear the other side. There usually is another
side. The boy is a fine man in the making, but
his father is ruining him. Sheer loyalty takes the
lad where his father goes . . . but the son’s steady
type needs settled employment, and he doesn’t
share in the slightest degree his father’s nomadic
tendencies.”
‘‘Does Croft junior blame my father for the Glen-
ark affair?” Jill asked as she broke a piece of cake
in two, dabbed it with jam, and ate it in two bites.
‘Ts he the kind to listen to explanations? Or
is he cranky too?”
‘‘He’s loyal to his father,” volunteered Mallaby
doubtfully. ‘‘But I think he’s the kind to remain
neutral unless there is definite reason for fight.”
Mrs Mallaby smiled at Jill from behind the tea-
pot. ‘‘We’ll conspire, my dear, and give you every
chance to get the elder Croft alone. But he’s diffi-
cult —tres difficile —I’m not exactly envious of you.
I feel positively guilty, and quail, if he doesn’t eat
my puddings.”
“I shan’t quail because of Croft," stated Jill with
a frown at her hostess. ‘‘But I shall be awfully
savage, and say things I shouldn’t, if he’s rude
over . . . father.”
‘‘That’s the spirit,” replied Mallaby jovially, see-
ing that the girl was beaten and done. ‘‘More
cake? No. Then more tea? Another scone? I
helped make them. No? Well, well, and after
I thought they’d be irresistible. Then how about
a tub, eh? . . . and a change of togs?”
Jill rose gladly. In a few moments she was
splashing in a literal tub, filled almost to the brim
by an old lubra who, as Jill scrubbed herself, prof-


fered towels and hairpins. Grinning, the old
woman helped Jill pin her hair high, then from a
can gave her a “shower,” whose cool caress made
Jill shiver with pleasure. Fresh and clean, in a
simple green and white gingham frock, her hair
caught behind her ears and down in a fringe over
her white forehead, she appeared before the Mal-
labys again.
They stared, and Victor, with pardonable frank-
ness, asked briskly: “What have the fairies been
doing to you?”
“Fairies?”—Jill looked puzzled, then her face
cleared.
“Of course,” she chuckled, “I was a kind of grubby
barbarian when you were at the station. Beryl—”
Jill explained her in a few enthusiastic sentences —
“made me do my hair in the way my mother did,
and wash it in smelly soap, and we made frocks. I
suppose I do look more presentable now.”
“Well, slightly,” said the artist, whose impres-
sionable and creative soul was quivering with eager-
ness to get Jill on to canvas, as she stood there,
tawny-headed, silken-crowned, slim and lissom, her
green frock turning her into more of a Dryad than
ever. As she moved, Mallaby drew a long breath,
wistful and impatient, for he saw Jill through
the medium of his own colour-loving personality
—delicately lovely as an apple-branch in Sep-
tember. Judy frowned with mock fierceness at him,
then turned to the girl. “When he loses himself in
that lost-soul expression,” she explained with a
wag of her chin and moue of finality, “he’s planning
more pictures. Help! I stumble over them where-
ever I walk now. Jill, don’t let him.”
“Let him what?” asked Jill innocently.


Judy blinked, with her tongue in her cheek, then
saw that the girl was quite unaware of her own
fragile beauty, and changed what she had intended
to say to; “Don’t let him bore you with them.
And with a glance at her husband, which he un-
derstood and obeyed, she signalled: “Don’t spoil
her . . . whatever you do.”
So Mallaby reluctantly refrained from offering to
paint Jill. . .
The dinner that night was not an enjoyable meal.
Croft senior and junior came in at sunset, along
with a muttering storm that vibrated through the
gap. Even this first attitude of Croft senior
towards Jill made it very obvious that her task
would not be simple. She talked mostly to Victor
Mallaby, who had a sympathetic and adroit way
of removing conversational stumbling-blocks and
chasms from the path of the speaker. With a
flow of casual talk, which had its art in relating
nothing at all, the artist kept Jill from complete
dismay. Judy, being a devoted wife, and herself
having been steered out of verbal dangers by her
agile-witted husband, aided and abetted him in his
scheme to keep Jill at ease.
Jill liked Rex at first sight. When they had first
met, the boy with the flat upper lip and the big
frame had held her hand in a cool firm grip, then
released it with a commonplace remark which at
once cleared the air in his direction. Whoever Jill
was, and in whatever way she was conspiring with
Philip Loftus, the young man plainly bore her no
ill-feeling. She sighed with relief when she found
that she could talk naturally to Rex. He liked
horses, too, and this founded a conversation of
mutual, if stilted, enjoyment.


Outside after dinner, where chairs had been car-
ried to the sand by the lubras, and hurricane
lanterns placed at intervals as a precaution against
the snakes which were not unusual at that time of
the year, Jill fell silent. Mallaby stage-managed
the after-dinner hour very well, but Jill was stunned
into dumbness. She and Croft senior sat side by
side, with the boy a few yards away. The artist
with his wife strolled down the slope to the pool.
“What a fool I am,” Jill said to herself, as the
two Crofts smoked in apparent bliss and she
writhed with the torture of her discomfort. “Why
did I come? What can I do with him?” The close
air was breathless, Jill moist and hot. At last, with
an abruptness that to her ears sounded like a chal-
lenge, she voiced some trivial remark about the
weather.
Rex replied, quietly, and a monosyllable from the
father sent her back into silence in a panic. The
young man waited for a moment, until the strained
atmosphere was too painful to endure, then rose
and murmured something about cigarettes. Jill
found herself alone with Adam Croft.
“What a fine fellow Rex is,” she heard herself
say with such sweet insincerity—which was yet the
truth —that she recoiled. (“That’s how people be-
have at society dinners. Fool! Idiot!”)
“He’s a good lad, Miss Loftus,” came reluctantly
and gruffly. Croft senior plainly disliked the tete-
a-tete with the daughter of his old partner.
“He’s .... fond of the bush?” Jill insinuated
carefully. (“Idiot! Blockhead! Say something
original.”)
“He is.”
It was not promising. Jill bit her lip in such


an agony of nervousness that she felt the perspira-
tion trickle down her neck. Why had she not
guessed how hard it was to be? Why had she
come upon the stupid expedition? And then . • .
going home, to admit failure to Beryl, and explain
her faux pas to her father! She could have wept,
there and then, into the handkerchief that rested
in her frock pocket. But Jill was of different fibre
from that, and she made a grimace at herself and,
if the truth be told, at her companion also, then
rushed in, in a way to take him unawares, and
startled herself considerably.
“He should be a bush-lover,” she stated warmly,
her heart pounding with thuds that she felt in her
throat, “for my father has spoken of your love of
the Inland, and everything in it.”
“Everything—but not every one, I hope he
added,” came churlishly. Then a little louder:
“Your father has no doubt told you many things
concerning me.”
Jill glanced in apprehension at the house door,
but Rex was evidently remaining inside purposely.
“Oh, yes,” she replied, hot with embarrassment,
but her voice cool and serene. “Of course —for you
and he were pals for many years, weren’t you?”
“Yes.” A surprised and curt “Yes,” but nothing
more. Croft was finding that the wits of even a
young creature like Jill must not be underestimated.
What she was driving at he did not know, but he
knew that when a clever woman, young or old,
wishes to discover the secret of one’s innermost
soul, she does it, somehow. Rather afraid of him-
self, and very much aware of the slim girl, who
was leaning back, a soft blur in her chair, Croft
grunted, and said “Yes” again. He had not meant


to. He jambed tobacco into his pipe, and swore
under his breath.
“Oh, did you burn yourself?” asked Jill sweetly,
for unease in another always arouses poise in one-
self, oddly enough.
“No ... er ... I didn’t.”
Under her breath Jill murmured, “What a pity!”
but aloud she said; “The Glenark days were very
wild, I believe. Isn’t Glenark in that direction from
here?” A long arm lifted, and the man turned his
head, slightly mesmerized. Another “Yes” was
spoken, of such ferocity and bluntness that Jill was
now genuinely nonplussed. He looked away from
the black smudge that meant the peaks in the west,
and recrossed his legs as he sat back once more.
“I wonder if you still remember that mare you
had . . . Snowgirl?” Jill’s words held a smile in
them, a smile that made her tones soft and winning.
Croft knew that this child with the husky, honeyed
voice and very feminine persistency was deliber-
ately playing upon his heart-strings, in some game
understood only by herself. A reluctant admira-
tion stirred within him, for his harsh manner had
often been used skilfully to quell grown men into
silence. Yet the girl had gaily knocked down the
barrier he had made by his attitude, and had just
as gaily refused to recognize his distaste for speech.
If he had known of Jill’s sick dismay and black
fear of failure, he would perhaps have admired her
the more. But to retreat from the peril of being
betrayed into anything that might praise Loftus,
Croft only nodded to Jill’s query about the white
mare.
“Rex likes horses, too?” she asked with an aplomb
that utterly contradicted the actions of her fingers,


which were screwing her handkerchief into rags.
With a half sniff of amusement, the man ad-
mitted without words that he was losing ground,
then for a while gave in with a swift flow of
answers, elaborated, drawn-out in a last attempt
to silence her: “Very fond of horses, and dogs,
and cattle, and of remaining in one place for
an uncomfortable length of time, and of blue braces,
tan shoes, pretty girls, detective tales, and . . .
silence.” The rebuff stirred Jill instead of sub-
duing her. This was a challenge; the man was
human after all! She wriggled down lower, and
said quickly; “Yes, Rex would like all those. How
nice of him to like silence. So many people have
a fearful habit of chattering, haven’t they? So
boring when one craves peace.”
Croft was surprised into a grunt, which Jill
ignored completely, continuing with such apparent
enthralment of her subject that he was beguiled
into listening. “Rex, you know, Mr Croft, should
be up here on a station, instead of wandering round
and ending in some horrid little office in the city.
That would hardly suit him, anybody can see. He’s
so out-of-doorish, and just the type to be on the
land.”
Croft turned in such a blaze of quiet resentment
that Jill was almost crushed, as he forgot he was
addressing a girl and said bitterly: “He would be
on the land—up here on his own station—had I
not been cheated out of my rights by a scoundrel.”
“He believes it,” Jill thought frantically. “He
really believes it. Why, he sold Glenark.” Jill for-
got, too, that she was but a young girl, her voice
taking on an edge that even Croft in his dis-
turbance noticed, and responded to. She leaned


forward, her hands locked loosely over one knee.
“Mr Croft,” she asked with firm disdain, “if I could
prove to you that you had cheated yourself, would
you have the courage to admit it?”
The man stared sceptically, his anger fading as
with boredom and amusement he asked casually.
“What do you imply by that, Miss Loftus?”
A sound came from the house, as Rex stooped
under the vines and emerged into the night. Jill
dropped her voice hastily: “I’ll tell you to-morrow
. . . here they all come back. Mr Croft ...” Jill
was herself now, thrilling with the necessity of his
seeing reason. “Please don t think about it to-
night. Please don’t worry. I’ll give you my word
that I can prove what I said. I have the proofs
with me, and . . . you cheated yourself. Nobody
else cheated you. Oh, Rex, did you find the
cigarettes ?”
Jill deserved the faint smile of applause that the
elderly man turned in her direction, but it was
quickly wiped out by a scowl, as more bitter
thoughts assailed him.
“Yes, thank you. I say, that was a nasty
rumble!” A low mutter had risen, vibrated, rolled
round the gap, and died away reluctantly, while a
flicker whipped across the rocks. The swift flash
of light showed Judy Mallaby and her husband ap-
proaching, before they were swallowed up again
by the dense gloom. Then they were seen drifting
through the garden gate, which protected no gar-
Under the magnetism of the strange girl, who
was both disturbing and oddly intriguing despite
her mysterious errand, Croft was silent. To his
amazement, and to his vague chagrin, for the first


time since he had ridden away in angry haste from
Glenark he found himself playing with a doubt of
Loftus’ rascality. The girl had been so sure —
certainty had rung in her voice, as she had
said she could prove it. Pshaw! Croft moved
sharply in his chair. What could she prove? What
could be proved? It was possibly a romantic tale
invented by a girl at the worst age of all
for finding sentiment in that which held nothing
but hard fact. With smiles and girlish fervour she
was, no doubt, attempting to persuade him that
her father’s soul was right, and therefore he was
right. Some such trash ! Perhaps for his own bene-
fit he had concocted some scheme in which this girl
of his was to take a hand . . . But there Croft’s
imagination failed him, with what was almost
shame, for in Jill’s frank green eyes had lurked no-
thing of duplicity or cunning. Daring, maybe, or
defiance, and a shade of magnificent self-assurance,
but not cunning. Whatever the girl was doing, she
was doing from some motive with which only she
was familiar. It remained to be seen what were
the workings of her mind. Perhaps, thought Croft
with a motion of scorn, some busybody had
instigated her to a fevered desire to right the
wrongs of the world. Well, this was one wrong
which would remain a wrong . . . and Croft felt for
more tobacco.
“Confound the minx!’’ he muttered an hour later,
after having told himself for the fortieth time that
he would think no more about the matter. “I
can’t hate the girl, anyway.” There was something
in Jill’s unstudied eagerness that put hate and ran-
cour into the list of evil things.
At eleven o’clock next forenoon Jill sought Croft,


Rex informing her where to find his father. The
son was neutral, as Mallaby had predicted, in this
campaign of Jill’s, and he took her hands into his
as she approached the door to go out into the yel-
low sunlight.
“Good luck, Jill,” he said with a smile that started
at the corners of his strong mouth and ended in his
eyes. “But I doubt whether your proofs will be
sound enough for him.”
“Only a lunatic or a rogue would doubt printed
proofs,” returned Jill swiftly and firmly, tugging
her hands sharply from his. She tapped the pocket
of her white shirt. “I have them here. Thanks,
all the same, Rex, but he must listen. She scowled.
“I’ll make him.”
“Lord, you’d make anybody listen, even a man
with no ears,” volunteered Rex elaborately.
“Now you’re being absurd,” came curtly from Jill.
“I like you as you really are, thanks.”
Rex flushed. “I apologize, Jill. You are quite
right. I hate extravagances, too. The resort of
liars, usually.”
“Or poets,” murmured the girl as she moved
away. “Down by the water; I’ll find him, if he’s
there.” Jill smiled brilliantly back over her
shoulder. “Thank you, Rex.”
Judy Mallaby was touching his elbow. They
looked after the girl as she walked down the sandy
slope. “What do you think of her?” she asked with
a twinkle.
“Think?” the young man replied with an affec-
tionate grin down at the little woman beside him.
“How can one think . . . when she’s near? Lord!
She’s lovely.”
“Odd . . . lovely . . . and as sweet as a blossom,


under the streak of granite she gets from her
father; what a furore she’d create in town!”
“What a furore town would create in her,” re-
turned Rex, then added thoughtfully: “But I’m
not so sure about it; her head’s screwed on jolly
tight.”
“That’s my opinion. Now r come inside and ham-
mer up that shelf for me before we go out.”
Croft was seated, smoking, otherwise unoccupied,
and staring down into a tiny bay of motionless
water, brown and marked with shadow. “We are
all going for a short ride presently,” Jill told him
pleasantly, “and I should like you to come too.”
He rose, impelled by some inner power that was
too strong for his first wish to refuse. “I’ll put
some leggings on, in the cottage,” he told her
crisply. “I can’t very well ride without.”
“No,” replied Jill meekly, as she strolled on, but
her riding switch beat against the leg of her
breeches, until it stung through the cloth.
For two miles they wound, the party of five,
along the valley which Victor Mallaby loved paint-
ing. It was as weirdly formed as any castle created
by Grimm. As a long park-like space replaced a
rocky defile, Rex and the Mallabys dropped behind.
Jill drew in Prince Bill until Croft caught up with
her; she had been riding ahead, absorbed in the
wild, strange scenery and her own sombre thoughts.
She plunged at once into the subject interrupted
the night before.
“Mr Croft, I feel rather dreadful over my be-
haviour; it seems worse in daylight.”
“Yes.”—noncommittally.
“It’s , . . awful, to try and say things to you
about your secrets.”


“I have few secrets.”
“Well, you know what I mean. Probing into
things gone by, and all that. To begin • • •
didn’t know anything about Glenark until the other
night my father seemed to unbend, and he told us
about it.” , . - ((
“Would you mind,” asked Croft patiently, ex-
plaining briefly exactly your reasons for this pre-
posterous excursion?” .
Jill, rather pink, baffled for a beginning to her
odd reasons for coming to Interpitna, and yet loath
to relate the undercurrents which had led to it,
nevertheless entered into a vivid, but brief and curt,
story of the violin; Timothy, and the House That
Jack Built, leading up towards the aesthetic influ-
ences behind her wish to “conquer herself” and her
“enemies.” It all sounded very stupid m the glare
of daytime, before this man who showed no interest
at all in her account. But Jill doggedly explaine
herself, as the horses walked abreast, till she came
to the night which had been distinguished by her
father’s betrayal of his love for Glenark. ‘‘His voice
altered,” said Jill with a last rush. “He still wants
to see you ... to tell you everything that happened
then. And I came up here to . . . try to tell
you. Of course,” she added with a short laugh,
“it’s only crankiness, disguised under nobility;
that’s all.”
Croft did not speak for a time, as they rode side
by side at walking pace. Presently he broke Jill’s
agony of silence with a quiet query which she
thought was sarcasm. “And so you are finding
comfort in doing something for your enemy?”
“I don’t know,” replied the girl in grave doubt.
“It hasn’t been properly tried out yet.”


Croft laughed. At the unexpected and almost
friendly sound she stared, then smiled faintly, not
quite seeing what amused her companion. “Mr
Croft,” she said at last, “will you listen to me?”
“I thought I had been doing that particular thing
for some time,” he replied dryly. “Please go on.”
This girl was more than a minx, she was an engag-
ing minx, with all the wiles of Eve at her finger-
tips.
“Well,” said Jill with some difficulty, trying
again, “he was grievously hurt by what you did,
you know.”
“What I did?” came in sour accents.
“What you did,” repeated Jill firmly. “And my
father is more anxious than even he knows to see
you.”
“If,” returned the man slowly, “he sets foot within
a mile of Interpitna, I’ll be off the other end of the
property. You can tell him that, with my compli-
ments.”
“There is no need,” said Jill bluntly. “He wouldn’t
come. I’m the idiot that’s done that. And,” she
said severely, “I should think you’d realized the
silliness of running away in a temper by now.”
“Eh?” he inquired feebly.
“ You need not pretend you didn’t hear,” she
scolded, “for you did. And if you hadn’t flown
away from Glenark in such a tearing haste you’d
ha\ e been good friends yet.” Jill eyed him sus-
piciously. If you make your horse canter, I’ll
chase you. I didn’t come all this way to be
crushed by a frown.”
In this new experience of being browbeaten by a
slip of a girl, with great eyes devouring holes in


him, Croft relapsed into a passiveness that would
have amused Rex intensely.
“You’ve clung,” rated Jill with a pursing of her
lips and a nod, “to a perfect bogie for about twenty-
five years, and you and father would have been
partners ...”
Croft felt his blood stirring, and he took refuge
in speech anything but courteous. Miss Loftus,
you are very plausible, and very charming, and no
doubt you believe all you say, but I can’t listen to
what might have been. I’ve been telling myself
what might have been —for Rex —for many bitter
years.”
Jill bristled. “If you keep on side-tracking,” she
announced stiffly, “how can I finish what I m
saying? You can straighten matters for Rex now,
if you like, but if you’re not polite I’ll just ride
back to the Mallabys, and go right home this after-
noon.”
For the life of him the man could not speak. The
experience, while novel, was not altogether enjoy-
able.
Jill’s eyes were a little damp now, and the man
suddenly became aware of the ordeal she was going
through. Her severity had not been impudence,
but a camouflaged sensitiveness. With dignity, and
not a little pathos, she explained further, her voice
thickening somewhat. “You went away, and
deserved it all. My father happens to have a
quaint sense of honour over money matters, and
realizes that when you sold out to him you were
unlucky, for had you waited three more weeks
you’d have shared his profit. To-day that money
lies in trust for you, accumulating interest, to be
untouched by any of us. You sold Glenark because


you wanted to sell, not because father wanted to
buy” Jill’s tones were vibrant with truth. And
he knew nothing of that American’s approach. How
could he?”
“He could have known,” stubbornly argued Croft,
but his heart was sinking.
“Would father have advertised for you in every
paper in the country if he had wronged you?
“He might have. There is such a thing as
conscience.”
“And there is such a thing as loyalty,” Jill cried
indignantly. “He felt that you had been cheated
by circumstance of that sum which would have
made such a difference to you then, and father
couldn’t bear you to be injured. You were willing
enough to unload the property on him, and had
he not sold it again you would have thought how
smart or lucky you had been in getting rid of it.
You see, my father cared for you enough even to
advertise for you. He hated you to think him
a cheat. Which,” said Jill, “he is not.” Jill had
forgotten the violin.
“Here,” she said, her head high, one hand fumb-
ling at the buttoned pocket of her shirt. She held
out some fluffy-edged, crumpled scraps of news-
paper, yellow with age. “Take them now. Its
not too late to reply to them yet.”
Croft took the clippings from the sensitive hand
held out to him, and, as he rode, scanned them like
a man in a trance. The proofs, as Jill had said,
were there, but more were they in Croft’s own soul.
No man can deny material evidence when it lies in
his hand. But even stronger than conclusive
evidence is the silent voice that cries out to a man


that he has been mistaken. He put the papers into
his pocket slowly, without comment.
“You ...” commenced Jill sickly, glancing side-
ways at the man, suddenly aged and worn, who was
watching so oddly his horse’s ears. “You
see,” she ended lamely.
Croft’s hand shook as he moved the reins. “I
. . . see . . .” he admitted, with a half bitter laugh
at his sudden sight. “Yes, I see . . . twenty-five
years too late.”


CHAPTER XV
Rank upon rank, unbridled, unforgiving,
Thundered the black battalions of the Gods.
Rupert Brooke.
Two nights after Jill had left Interpitna came the
big storm of the season, to be long remembered by
the isolated few who watched its progress with
foreboding. At Interpitna the chaos raged until
dawn, which was scarcely perceptible in the grey
vapour that took the thin light of the East and
filtered it slowly over a drenched world. Trees fell
to matchwood under bursts of brilliant white light,
and the ground shook intermittently, the rain roar-
ing like hailstones on the iron roof of the cottage.
Suffocating nights and thick humid air had given
warning to Jill and her hosts, but none of them
had expected the shattering explosion which
seemed to shake the torrents from the clouds. The
dry river sand hissed into a sheet of sombre damp-
ness, set hard, and gave way to the trickles which
gathered force and width as the deluge continued.
Spray rose a foot high from the ground scarred
with rivulets, while through the din of the elements
came long vibrating detonations which told those
at the station-house of farther-off storms, too, of
unusual violence.
Judy Mallaby and her husband, in striped py-
jamas and thin dressing-gowns, stood under the


narrow, mist-filled veranda peering into the thick-
ness of the rain, asking each other desultory ques-
tions as to Jill’s probable danger or safety, specu-
lating upon the amount of blame which would be
credited to themselves should the storm have caught
her in the Gorge. In the massive canyon from
which there was no escape on horseback she would
have slender chance of shelter or relief. But they
were not to know what had become of her, depart-
ing quietly upon her journey under the leaden-hued,
steely skies, and calling a clear “So-long” to those
whose regard she had won in very short time.
“If anything happens to her,” remarked Judy sol-
emnly, with a quick clutch at Victor’s arm during
a blinding orange-coloured flash that slit the drift-
ing moisture about them, “I shall never forgive
Mallaby laughed, but was not easy.
The Crofts, too, were not at all composed about
the girl who had ridden so gloriously to Interpitna
in the cause of the man whose appreciation of it
was problematical. The elder Croft tried to hide
his anxiety as he stood upon the “front step” of the
tiny shack which he and his son occupied at Inter-
pitna. Quiet thoughts during Jill’s short stay had
not spared the older man: marks of mental travail
showed on his face and in his keen eyes. The son
understood, and felt a twinge of admiration for the
rover who had given in without any drama to the
undeniable sanity of what Jill had related. Croft
had taken the blow of his long mistake with more
calm than other knocks administered by fate. Per-
haps he had realized through Jill’s sharp indictment,
that bolting away from trouble did not lessen it.
A grim admiration, and something greater, led the


old man now to clear his throat and speak to his
son, as the rain poured heavily on to the warm
glistening ground. “I shouldn t like the little maid
to be hurt, son,” he remarked with a suspicion of
a tremor. . ,
The boy passed an arm round his father’s bent
shoulders, also watching the thick rain through
which neither of them could see ten feet. “I’m sure
she’s all right, Dad. She’s great. As much at
home with horses as . . . you are.”
“True,” came the very level tones. “Er ... it
was rather a big thing to do, to come here as she
did.” He cleared his throat again, and half angrily,
half with shame, made an admission that rendered
him almost incoherent. “Son, we’re going down
to . . . see Loftus.”
The boy had hoped for that. He swung round.
“I say, that’s just ripping. So you’ve decided, after
all.” He questioned his father with his eyes.
“You promised her that?”
“Yes” —gruffly.
Rex was triumphant. “Then she’ll make Intircha
without being swamped. She’d forge through
a watery inferno to complete her task. She’s fright-
fully strong, you know, despite her wiry slimness.”
“Her strength is of another kind,” came awk-
wardly. “She gets it from . . . him, I expect. I
. . . regret having tried to poison your mind
against him. He was a white man. Now, forget
it. We’ll ride down as soon as I feel able, when
the break-up is over.”
That night fourteen inches were registered on
the amateur gauge at Interpitna, while at the Alice,
seventy or eighty miles east, not two inches fell.
Jill. as she battled southwards through the sticky


closeness of the silent gorge, which had seemed to
hold its breath before the storm she knew must
come, thought wildly of what might happen to
Prince Bill if the rain came just there. But the
next day, haggard and worn, she was out on the
plains again, the gigantic canyon left behind, a
sullen, metallic-edged puff-ball of cloud fraught
with ceaseless lightning peering over the brow of
the range behind her. The muttering and rumbling
had followed her with almost a conscious persis-
tence, her eyes turned to the north fifty times an
hour, as the round, solitary, scalloped edge of the
monsoonal cloud thickened, spread, and darkened
in a murky fan across the sun and twilight. She
was riding harder than she had ever done before,
from the first still greyness before dawn to the last
streak of lemon in the west at dark.
The horses could not be driven past their
strength, but she cut out many hours by short-
cutting across dangerous rocky declivities with
Boomerang to point the way unerringly, and missed
hours of rest by eating as she stood while the boy
changed saddles and packs, rather than camp as she
would have done but for the ominous weather. At
night she continued onwards until stones could not
be distinguished from hollows, or grass from earth,
then fell to the ground to wait for the boy to make
the fire, too weary to eat the last crumbs of badly
smashed bread or wash her burning, streaked face.
Grime stayed thick upon her, her body soaked again
and again with heavy perspiration, which the slight-
est movement would start and which riding in-
creased to trickles that dripped from her chin and
ran down the hollow of her back. Tea, quantities
of it, hot and strong, without sugar, was her one


relief in the nerve-wracking journey. She won-
dered what people did who were lost —and how
they felt. She thought dizzily of the folk at Inter-
pitna, and wearily, longingly, of her room at home.
The violin did not occur to her. As her weariness
increased she forgot to think of anything apart from
the primitive hunger for food, rest, and sleep.
There had been one delay which had fretted her
into actual tears, the tracks of the very human
weakness making small clean lines down through
the smudges on her cheeks. With her finger-tips she
dashed the wetness from her eyes, as she waited
and waited, in the brightening sunrise, for the boy
who had come into camp to cry out that Prince
Bill was lamed and limping in slowly from a park
between two rises near by. “Him walk long way,
all time walkum long apperta leavum no track,
hurtem inga ekurrira,” was the alarmed explana-
tion.
Jill knew that her favourite could not be ridden
that day, but she would not leave him to find his
way home alone later: to her mind that savoured
of treachery, as she crouched over the greying fire,
the horse coming nearer, but the air gathering to a
sullen lividness which she dumbly knew meant a
violent outburst before long. At so early an hour
she was wringing wet, shirt, breeches, and hat-band,
her skin prickling and sore, her feet blazing in her
hardened boots.
“I’ll ride Munnamun,” she announced briefly,
rising to her feet to examine Prince Bill’s sore foot
with anxiety. He whinnied, and she smiled. “Leave
you, old fellow? No fear!” To the boy she
added: “And Whitefoot this afternoon.”
“Whitefoot ’kurna ’kurna in ribber, Jeeecl.”


“No river yet,” replied the white-faced girl, pull-
ing down her hat-brim against the metallic glare,
and eyeing the boy with quickening apprehension.
The natives always knew what the weather would
do. “Not for long time. Only little bit quatcha
come.”
“Plenty quatcha come, plenty quick . . . pro-
perly soon,” replied the boy cheerfully, and Ji
answered with a sniff that said volumes.
While the people at Interpitna were moving m
a subdued excitement under the fury of the first
of the storm, Jill was arranging over the saddles
placed on a stone near by the small scraps of can-
vas which she carried. The horses were hobbled
not a hundred yards away, grazing in a space that
contained no trees. The ground trembled, the black
sky was scribbled across by a thousand hiero-
glyphics that were blotted out by spurts of white
flame, as the rain started to fall real rain, thick,
strong, and heavy, gathering volume as the deto-
nations overhead broke with increased vigour.
Watery bullets stung the girl’s thinly-clad back
as she sat hunched over the fire, watching it
flicker and hiss, then fade to nothing in the gloom.
Without a fire any camp is desolate. Upon
this night Jill felt as if she were in the centre
of some strange world of noise and light, beating
her senses from her, the rest of creation blotted
out. At last she could not think, but turned at
each blinding flash and roar near her, moving
uneasily in the puddles which formed under her
feet, closing her eyes to the most sickening of
reports, then opening them again as some fas-
cination kept her from missing any of it. A tree
splintered into fragments not far away, a sulphur-


ous smell stealing through the scents of earth and
wet rock. Every now and again the black boy wan-
dered uneasily from the wurlie nature had com
manded him to erect this night of storm—but a
bough shelter with one slanting wall is a very in-
adequate protection against the venom of such
weather.
Jill at last shouted to the boy to light a fire, the
cringing terror of the lad somehow restoring a htt e
courage to her wet and shivering self. Entering the
darkness of the trees, Boomerang remained there
for some moments, until Jill wondered for an
agonized moment if the best of all the Sunset Hill
boys had “gone bush” in his terror. But Boomer-
ang returned, emerging from the cave-like black-
ness at a run, shown up sharply in the almost con-
tinual lightning that cut the air into bright sec-
tions. In the native’s hands were bundles of dry
leaves and dead wood, scratched from the hollows
of logs not yet soaked by the deluge. In this
fashion, Jill shielding the tiny flame with her body
and her hat, they spent two hours in coaxing damp
wood to burn, Boomerang vanishing and reappear-
ing with startling abruptness, glistening and active
in his fear and excitement.
Thin chill penetrated the air about the sorry
camp, as the rain thickened to a fury that made
speech impossible. Automatically the white girl
and the black lad boiled tea and drank it. Tea
flavoured with eucalyptus smoke and sprinkled
with ashes; but it was hot and there was a lot of it.
Presently, despite the rain, the fire leaped higher,
with wood piled beside it, smoking and spluttering
as the boy fed the glowing heart an inch at a time.
Jill stretched and yawned, swaying for a moment


against the nausea that gripped her at the thought
of the last stage of the journey on the morrow.
At dawn, feeble and sickly, she unfolded herself
and shuddered. The river was ten yards away,
hidden by a wedge of tall gums, the ground like
a sponge beneath her feet, ponds forming in every
hollow, branches dripping a shower of moisture
upon her at every movement of the air. It was
almost still, ghostly, grey, wet and depressing, the
light reluctantly revealing an appalling desolation,
thick heat-mists already slipping in swirls among
the trees. The rising sun made a mugginess that
fought with the rain, and added to the extreme dis-
comfort of the girl, whose legs were behaving
strangely, whose clothes were stuck to her already
heated body, and whose hair was brushed back in
a flat cake over her scalp, drenched wisps dropping
globes to her shoulders outlined sharply under the
once-white fabric of the shirt she wore.
A sibilant whispering and gurgling told her, be-
fore she reached the bank, that even more terrific
rains must have fallen in the ranges. She stood for
one moment deliberating hazily, as she watched a
narrow, swift stream cutting its way through the
pitted sand, tiny sharp-edged banks forming as the
river gathered force. In the unearthly radiance of
this early hour she shrugged heavily, knowing that
six more crossings were to be negotiated before
reaching Sunset Hill, the river already gathering
rapidly, and a lamed horse in the string. But no
more nights, this trip, in the open ! She must reach
Intircha that day. The storms and the rain would
not stop yet.
At the camp again, Jill unstrapped her suit-case
and deliberately tossed it into a hollow between two


stones, then followed it with blankets, water-sodden,
and the canvas. The horses now carried nothing but
the pack-saddles and some crumbs of food for mid-
day, the quart-pots bulging in the stained leather
pockets of the pack.
Jill knew that fatigue was not permissible that
day, so urgent was the need of reaching home before
dark. The river was rising rapidly, and she had
no food to allow of camping, which yet would be
imperative should the flood keep her from crossing
the Fifteen, the Ten Mile, and the Three Tree Dip.
The hours were filled from late dawn until midday
with ploughing through oily mud, bending against
sudden downpours which blotted the whole land-
scape into flat monotone sketched feebly in shadow,
skirmishing after the horses, and managing her own
steed as well. Munnamun did not like the rain, and
let his rider know it.
When at midday it was physically impossible to
ride another yard, Jill gave the word to halt, slip-
ping from her saddle to throw herself flat on the
muddy ground, impervious to everything but the
spinning, dizzy, relief of cessation from voluntary
movement. The boy watched her curiously as she
stayed motionless in the glare, with the rain stopped
for a while, flies clinging to her sticky back. “Jeel
. . .’’he dared at last, touching her shoulder tim-
idly as he held open the tucker bag for her inspec-
tion. “Bag plenty empty?”
Tipping her hat to the back of her head, she sat
up slowly, unable to move her tongue to speak, ac-
cepting the bag automatically, peering into it, then
handing it to the boy, retaining for herself only
two crusts of bread, which she dipped into her tea
and ate absently. The tea revived her somewhat,


as the fire brought spirals of steam from the front
of her, while the sun did the same at her back. She
had gone past discomfort. She had reached the
stage of physical exhaustion that accepts anything
without query, and only battles on.
A half-hour or so at the cork-wood plain, and
they were on again, Jill mounted on Whitefoot, a
nervous creature at his w r orst in wet weather.
Prince Bill remained level, now walking, now stum-
bling behind them, then cantering to catch up with
the string of tired animals winding through scrub
and mud. At each crossing the w r ater was higher,
the torrent more swift. At the Fifteen Mile the
flood washed over the stirrups, and Whitefoot
plunged badly at the slimy bank. Setting her
teeth, she managed the horse somehow, each hour
meaning so much that her face became ashen and
strained, her lips bloodless, with the continual con-
centration that eliminated by careful deviation
even the shortest of delays. Jill forgot caution,
making a bee-line for Intircha, over swamps not
seen before, through scrub never trodden by her,
and across the river at points she did not know
existed. Boomerang knew, travelling as all natives
can travel, without error, in a line as straight as
taut string from one place to another. Jill was
depending upon the native boy, who nodded and
showed his teeth with pride as he cut off a mile
or so and charged across a place hitherto thought
to be impossible. Perhaps it would have been, but
for the courage of desperation and the luck that
attends the daring.
At last, through the film of thin rain that now
commenced to fall again, came the shadowy yellow*


outlines of Intircha, rising like the walls of a fort-
ress from the galloping flood. Intircha meant Sun-
set Hill, round the other side. Jill was whipped to
final effort by the sight of the towering cliffs, and
then she saw the red roofs of the house, and the
scarlet frocks of the kitchen girls racing out from
behind the tanks.
Through Jill now was coursing a wild excite-
ment which sent the blood to her face and strength
to her limbs. She was home . . . successfully, with
only the last crossing before her. She had raced
the swollen Larapinta, and had broken a horseback
record from the escarpment station to Sunset Hill.
Food . . . safety . . . comfort . . . rested in that
old dwelling across the river, flanked by a blue
smudge that shouted aloud of Timothy. Never be
fore had Jill been so elated and crazily happy. A
jubilation and triumph made her swing her hat on
high, shouting, then throw it into the water, where
it was carried downwards in the fragment of a min-
ute, out of sight round the curve.
This sobered her, as she regarded the racing
stream while Whitefoot skipped reluctantly nearer
the bank. Had she watched the house one second
longer, she would have seen David wave his arm
in reply to her , . . wave it with a loud, long cry
of warning, and had the river not been boiling and
hissing at her feet, she would have heard what
Beryl shouted from the veranda steps down which
the boy and girl plunged.
The panic-stricken Whitefoot needed careful
handling at this stage of the journey, for Jill saw
with a swift sensation of fear that the river was
deep and wide, the old sand-bank apparently moved
by the running flood. David had cried this fact


aloud to his sister, whom he had seen riding gaily
downwards to the oily slope, apparently about to
plunge into the very spot which had become a
deathtrap in the last few hours. Boomerang and
the pack-horses were behind, Jill having ridden
ahead at a brisk canter as soon as Intircha reared
through the mist.
Now Jill was alarmed in reality. There was a
curve at Sunset Hill which sent the water in a
sweeping swirl from the rock face opposite, and
Whitefoot was plunging so madly that it was almost
impossible to guide him along the bank. Suddenly
Jill felt her body slipping, as the horse tried to
recover and slid with a snort into the water. She
clung on, unstrapping the reins in bewildered des-
peration, kicking the stirrups from her feet. There
were no thoughts of home now, or of David or
Beryl —of anybody but herself, in her peril. She
had underestimated the danger of the Sunset Hill
crossing, or else the ranges had spilled the rain
water so heavily that the river had swollen terri-
fically during the last hour. In that country of
dramatic weather, Jill tried to fight the stream
which the day before had been hot, dry sand.
Whitefoot was maddened. Fearing the flying
hoofs as the horse almost rolled over, Jill let go,
knowing that all she could do was to hold to a
stirrup and swim; but she misjudged, and her weak
fingers missed the iron as the horse snorted out
of her reach and swam in frenzy to the bank, up
which he clawed and galloped over it as Jill was
swept downstream.
She tried to call out, tried to pull herself towards
the mud that was not ten feet away, but, weighted


with heavy clothes, weakened and almost ex-
hausted, she felt herself dropping into a penetrat-
ing turmoil that filled her ears, her brain, and her
lungs. A roaring oblivion brought one bubbling
shriek to her lips, as her blood-shot eyes caught a
glimpse of David . . . David . , . flying from a high
bank through the air near her, beating towards
her, his face white and tense, in the midst of a
thudding pain which broke thousands of white
pointed lights before her eyes. Down through the
ranges had come a log, riding towards the flats on
the lowlands, not stopping on its mad course as it
struck the helpless girl on the side of the head.
only three feet away from her brother’s hands.
It seemed to David that the whole station emp-
tied itself of people, black and white, that hour of
horror at Intircha. In ten seconds Philip Loftus
was dragging Jill from the boy’s arms, as she almost
slipped from the grip which could not hold on
much longer. Jill had gone into the stream at the
old crossing, but it was an eighth of a mile down
where her father had carried her over the slimy
mud to comparatively dry land and turned to see
Laz rus drag David out, choking, spent, but un-
harmed. The white boy had reached an infinite
glory in the scum and froth of the Larapinta, for
there was no longer any need to doubt himself:
his spirit had won, and his weak body was beaten.
Laz rus half carried him to the house, towards
which Loftus was striding, his teeth set grimly,
his arms closed tightly round the slight— too slight
—figure of the girl whose face was deathly, with
a thick smear of blood spreading over a gash
and a purpling bruise behind one delicate eyebrow.
Beryl and Bubbles, with a subdued, wailing


crowd of natives, followed swiftly behind the man
whose mouth was pressed together in one thin
line, water streaming from his clothes as he hast-
ened towards the dwelling, his eyes watching the
girl against his breast, a frown puckering his pale
face heavily. Loftus’ heart was contracting with
a stark fear that Jill —also —was lost to him. Some
words came sketchily, fleeting through his mind
as he hurried with his death-like burden: Perhaps
some day . . . kill two people . . . instead of
just one.”


said: “I got through ...” She tried to move,
but could not. In trouble and distress she opened
her eyes fully, to stare at her father seated beside
the bed, Beryl gazing anxiously over the foot of
it. “It . . . hurts ...”
Her father moved with a jerk, as if he were hurt
too, as he took one of the dazed girl’s hands in his.
He waited, his throat moving, as Jill clung to his
fingers weakly, not knowing him. “Prince . . .
Bill . . . ?” she murmured.
CHAPTER XVI
It was almost evening, a thin, wet, orange-illumined
evening, when Loftus saw Jill’s lips move. One
hand lifted and fell heavily, as she frowned and
“He’s quite safe,” Loftus recited mechanically.
“Quite safe, Jill. How—how do you feel?”
“All right, thanks,” she replied vaguely. Then
the sight of Beryl leaning over the bed-rail seemed
to awake something in the other girl’s stunned
mind. “I did it,” she said heavily, closing her eyes.
Loftus moved a hand, and Beryl slipped silently
out, a wave of terrific relief making her breathless.
The father remained at the bedside for a moment
after Beryl had vanished, noticing the thin arms,
transparent flesh, and the dark hollows under Jill’s
closed eyes. The lubra who had helped Beryl un-


dress the helpless girl had taken the nightdress
for which Beryl had run, and in the soft lawn and
fine lace Jill’s delicacy was accented to a pitiful
degree. The man all at once stood sharply on his
feet, groaning audibly, then choked back the fierce
imprecation that must have been delivered at him-
self.
All that night Beryl watched, now and again tip-
toeing to David’s book-lined room where he was
mercifully sleeping away the effects of the strain
and shock he had suffered that day. In the light
of a small lamp Beryl saw that; but Jill was restless,
feverish, and tossing wearily as she lived through
the torment of the last part of her journey from
Interpitna. In his office her father sat, his hands
spread over his desk, his ears attuned to the slight-
est sound that came from the rooms along the hall.
He found it impossible to go to Jill’s room again,
unless for a moment as he passed by. He did not
undress that night, remaining in the wet clothes
which gradually dried upon his body, as he ex-
plored some secret corners in his consciousness, and
found them cobwebbed, ghostly, and dark.
The pounding of the rain outside seemed to shut
them all in the house which at other times was used
more as head-quarters. To the girl from the sea
came a little realization of the strength of purpose,
the courage and blind faith, which are part of the
grand spirit of the pioneer, medical attention not
to be thought of, with the Inland Mission so far
away, cut off by the rain-flooded miles and shat-
tered, littered scrub and scum-filled tracks between
the Alice and Intircha. Rain falling . . . falling
. . . leadenly persistent, behind which the river
chuckled and gurgled, gleeful on its frenzied way
to the far-off salt lake. The dark night went


slowly while the lamp-light shone softly on the
pale face of the girl in the bed.
At midnight, and at four in the morning, Timothy
had come in slippers and dressing-gown to inquire
miserably after Jill. He had been ill for a day or
two and had been sleeping all through the swift
little drama in the river. Awakening at dark, his
ears had been greeted with the unusual noise of
swiftly running water, and rain . . . after the
detonating storms which had seemed to shatter the
country into fragments. Then had come news of
the accident and rescue, gabbled hysterically by a
lubra whose wide mouth opened and shut like a
coal-scuttle as she related the details with a great
deal of embroidery.
The House That Jack built had suddenly been
deserted, when Timothy, with a dull fear in his
heart and his voice oddly unmanageable, raced
through the thin sunset rain to the big house, to
find Jill unconscious, injured, and David heavily
asleep after a stiff dose of brandy administered by
his father. Loftus was a figure of stone, carved
into his office chair; Beryl at the sick girl’s bed-
side, relating the tale in a whisper, with forced
cheeriness of manner because of Reed’s white fea-
tures and shaking fingers.
At dawn, Reed watching for an hour in the still
room, Beryl slept, first blowing out the lamp whose
rays were so useless against the pale flush of a
yellow-red morning. Jill was sleeping uneasily,
and the other girl found it impossible to keep her
eyes open longer.
It was noon on the day following the big break-
up before Jill became properly aware of what had
happened. Beryl, with a bowl of beef-tea on hand
at once, was persuading her to take a spoonful, as


Reed, dressed, but worn-looking j entered the bed-
room. With a slow smile he propped the pillows
higher while Beryl helped Jill to take the food.
“Drink it up, old lady,” Timothy advised in gentle
firmness as the sick girl pushed the spoon away
petulantly.
She tried to shrug while she obeyed Timothy, the
dazed light in her eyes going as she tried to think
clearly and partly managed it. “My head hurts
. . . and hurts ...” almost wept the girl in the
bed. “It’s just a cave filled with hurt. But . . .
Beryl . . . that river ... I never realized . . .
it must have come down feet after I crossed the
Fifteen Mile . . . What . . .?”
Reed interrupted, patting her thin hands quietly:
“Don’t worry now. We nearly lost you, old thing,”
he uttered thickly.
“Mightn’t have been much loss,” came the reply,
with a shadow of the old spirit behind it. Jill
winced and closed her eyes for a moment, then
opened them to stare fixedly at Reed. “1 feel silly
My brain is going like the blacksmith’s shed
and I never knew a river could taste like that
one.”
The over-bright eyes queried both Beryl and
Timothy, as Jill followed up her own vague mem-
ories of the accident with questions that were
briskly to the point. “What happened when I
went under? How did my head get biffed like that
. . . Oooh! ...” she had touched her forehead
with a finger-tip. “I can’t recall it all . . . but
” she frowned. “Tell me, Tim. I can’t connect
up all that with being here in bed sipping broth”
Reed, speaking carefully, and choosing his words.
told her the tale as Beryl had related it. Jill did


not interrupt him, until he came to the pause that
followed David’s splendid action. She suddenly
reached out and pulled at Reed’s sleeve. Tim-
othy,” she cried piteously, “I couldn’t remember it
but ... I can see it in front of me now. I
must be mad, for I remember he swam . . . and
David can't swim.” Bewildered, suspicious of her
own sanity in the whirl of emotions that almost
choked her, Jill lay very still, her hand on Reed’s
arm, imploring him with her green eyes, shadowed
now, and twice as big as they should be, in her thin,
pale face.
Beryl, with a glance sideways at Timothy,
nodded. “David can swim quite well, Jill. I taught
him, up in the second waterhole. You . . .he
. . .” She collapsed into confused silence.
For a long time in the bedroom there was no
sound, as Jill wrestled with yet another set of prob-
lems and saw more new values placed upon long-
gone incidents. At last, with her face wet and
her mouth quivering, she spoke: “I taunted him —
yet he risked his life for me. And ...” Then
aghast, petrified into a blanched whiteness, she
lifted herself from the pillows. Eyes anguished,
swallowing the question she dared not answer, Jill
pressed her hands tighter round Timothy’s wrist.
Reed moved involuntarily, for Jill was ghastly; but
she finally asked in a husky voice that he hardly
recognized: “Where ... is David?”
“Dear ...” broke from the shocked man’s lips
as he realized the fear behind her torture. “He’s
quite safe, and sound . . . quite well, Jill, and
probably sleeping.”
Beryl started forward as Jill quietly relaxed, her
head falling forward as Timothy lifted her back


on to the pillows before she pitched sideways
against him. Tenderly, his eyes damp, he lifted
some strands of hair from her neck, then wiped
with a big handkerchief the beads of weak-
ness and nausea that had gathered on her lip and
forehead. “I was a fool,” he muttered angrily. “I
should have told her gradually . . . never thought
she might think David dead. Poor ...” but it
was Reed who swallowed as he was about to pity
Jill. There was no need to pity her. She was an
oddly triumphant figure even in her sickness and
pathos. “Fool!” he said again, thickly.
“I was the fool,” came from the pillows, “to
expect anything to go right. It’s all wrong. Every-
thing is . . . grotesque . . . and I . . .” Jill
opened her eyes to gaze steadily into Reed’s, misty
with sympathy. “Tell me, Timothy. You are not
thinking to comfort me, because I’m . . . whacked,
by saying David is . . . all right. Tell me” she
cried sharply. “Is David . . . drowned?”
“He is in his room,” replied Reed gravely, “sleep-
ing and well.” A smile wavered along his lips.
“And that is what you should be doing.”
Jill curled her mouth into an expression that held
no happiness. “He did that . . , for me,” she said
numbly, “after I mocked him, and taunted him,
and teased him. I called him coward. Oh\” —
with a quick, short cry of anguish, Jill covered
her eyes with both hands pressed tightly over her
face in well-known attitude. “Go away ... I
can’t bear anybody to look at me. He will never
forgive me . . . and never forget.”
As Reed sought for an answer. Beryl touched
him, pointing to the door. David, tall and pale,
was standing in the opening, a dressing-gown of


faded towelling making him appear taller than
ever. He motioned them to silence as with a half
smile he nodded towards the bed. Reed nodded
back, and together he and Beryl crept out.
“He’ll never forget . . . and I shall never forget,”
Jill said under her fingers. “Tim ...” She un-
covered her tear-marked face to stare blankly at
the boy seated on the chair close beside her, then
with a sob she moved towards him. “Davy
Davy ...” she wept, stammering. “I . . . am
sorry.”
David —who was Davy again—leaned sideways
to put his arms round Jill, and together they clung,
wet cheek against wet cheek, no words spoken.
It seemed hours later —ecstatic, strangely won-
derful hours —when David moved. In reality,
twenty minutes had passed. “You’re ill, Jill; I
mustn’t tire you.” The ring in his voice brought a
quiver to her mouth: its gladness shamed her for
what had gone. But her own voice broke with the
joy of what had come. “That doesn’t matter,” she
murmured heavily, “Davy . . . It’s silly to say
it in words . . . sentimental and all that . . . but
you are brave —splendid in every way —
twice as splendid because of being sick so often.”
There was no reproach in that, but a new under-
standing. The boy’s chin lifted. Jill belonged to
him again. Too full for coherent speech, he pressed
her thin body tighter to his side, as they leaned
against the pillows in the glorious discomfort of
this moment. At last he managed to enunciate with
more or less clearness, “Of course, father really
saved you, Jill, and Laz’rus pulled me out.”
“You saved me . . . first,” argued Jill, with
reasonable logic. “I should have been gone but


for you. You were quick, and on the spot. Davy
. . . ” Jill stumbled upon a small, shamed, and
very humble: “Can you really forgive ... all that
I’ve been?”
The boy’s face was beautiful as he said simply:
“I’ve done that long ago, Jill —although you didn’t
know it.”


CHAPTER XVII
Life and death and a little song.
These are my store of plunder . . .
Llewellyn Lucas.
Timothy and his host were talking one warm
damp night towards the end of November. The
Major was away. There was deliberate design in
this conversation, which Reed had begun, and
Timothy was not finding it easy to broach his sub-
ject. He squirmed from touching upon personal
matters which were outside his right to criticize,
but in this case he felt unable to remain silent a
day longer. The young man was faced by an ordeal
which not only lay in making bare his emotions to
Loftus, but in putting them into speech for his own
particular pain.
The inland was like a great garden, the grass many
inches high, small flowers trailing over the sand-
hills. The river had settled into a modest trickle,
leaving the waterholes and rock-pools cleansed and
full, cattle fattening rapidly, and the house-tanks
and wells splashing over. No longer did the
plateau blister under the heat, but it was clothed
with verdure as the interior came to its own again.
In the house garden nasturtiums, petunias, and
geraniums flaunted their colours amid a welter of
leafage, called into new life. But the sun was
hotter than before, in this season of prolific growth
and luxuriance.


Philip Loftus had been very quiet since Jill’s
accident, seldom referring to the affair. More and
more he had become accustomed to retiring to the
office, which surely did not require so much of his
attention. Of Jill he said nothing; to her he said
little. It was as though his lips were sealed by
some inner power that made speech almost impos-
sible. Beryl, noting all this, grieved for Jill, for
after all the stress and weariness, and the glory of
the ride to Interpitna, everything was much the
same as it had been before. A few more weeks and
Beryl would be at the Beehive again, with Jill left
behind at Sunset Hill, alone but for David. Uplifted
wildly at the thought of being at home once more.
Beryl could not rid herself of the vision of Jill, going
on again, picking up threads and . . . for what?
For her father was no different; the accident and
Jill’s close call had seemed to make no impression
at all upon the hard exterior of the man, who be-
came grimmer day by day. Jill was still in her
room, weak in body, broken in spirit, hungry for
her violin, depressed over her fruitless effort to
right matters between herself and her father —and
too tired to fight any more. Too tired to think, as
she lay staring at books whose pages she scarcely
saw, or out at the river which had nearly ended her
life.
It was about Jill that Timothy was struggling to
speak. But Loftus, seated opposite Reed, suddenly
broke the blank silence which had come between
them to say a strange thing. His face seemed more
haggard than ever before, in the light that struck
down crudely from the hanging lamp around which
flying things beat and buzzed. “You’ve been trying


for an hour, Reed, to speak about my daughter.
What is it you wish to say?”
Reed started, the wind completely taken out of
his sails. With more or less evenness he managed
to speak, retaining his composure only because of
Jill. “I have, and deucedly hard I’ve found it. It’s
not very appealing—to interfere, and it’s making me
writhe like the dickens.”
Loftus’ mouth curled slightly. “Well, why not
shorten the agony?”
Uncomfortable, but firm in his intention of help-
ing Jill, Reed thanked Providence for the absence
of daylight, and plunged into his subject. “I want
to discuss Jill, and her . . . music.”
“Is it still an obsession with her?” the older man
asked in tones which struck Reed with chill. “I
am rather weary of the whole subject; can’t we
postpone this . . . harangue?”
“An unfortunate word to use, sir,” replied Reed
quietly. “But with your permission, I’ll keep on.
You have the right to do as you wish with your
own girl —to a certain point, and technically my
rights are nil. But, Mr Loftus, haven’t you dwelt
yet upon the magnitude of that ride she took to
Interpitna?”
Loftus saw that Reed was tense with earnest
ness.
“And the stupidity of it,” Jill’s father added
slowly, “and the wilful disobedience, and the crazy
advertising of my private affairs throughout the
country-side.”
“l think you are exaggerating,” came a cool voice
that held a certain amount of exasperation. “Croft
and his son, and the Mallabys, are all who know
of your feelings regarding Glenark. We, at Sun-


set Hill, do not count, for in a sense we are part
of the story. The latter two are most unlikely
to prattle about it. Mallaby is a gentleman appar-
ently, and his wife not a gossip. The Crofts would
hardly broadcast the tale, after what has occurred.
Do you,” queried Timothy, leaning forward to
emphasize his words, “realize that Jill s impulsive
action was inspired?” Timothy gave a small laugh
as he thought how he had innocently inspired it.
“Can’t you see the splendid courage of it?”
Loftus was silent. He, too, was needing courage
at the moment. His indifference to Jill’s fine action
was on the surface only, but the ways of a life-
time of self-training—and no tutor is so merciless
as the man inside himself —are difficult to under-
mine. The difficulty of it was rendering Loftus
unable to think clearly. The bitterness of his
spreading doubts was stealing through him like a
sharp acid.
Reed moved forward again, with a small shrug.
“This is unforgivable, but I’m choosing between
being judged as an officious bounder and leaving
Jill as she is. The latter is the greater sin. In-
discretions, oddly enough, are usually slated more
heavily than sins.” Timothy smiled oddly as he
continued, with a timbre in his voice that the other
man instinctively respected. “According to popular
traditions, Jill belongs to you, to make or mar.
Allowing for the same traditions, I have not even
the right to give . . . her a violin to play. You are
her father, while I . . .” Reed drew a long breath
that was expelled as slowly, “merely . . . love her.”
Philip Loftus stirred in his chair, his face deeply
lined about his mouth. “You . . . merely love Jill,”
he repeated. “What might I infer from that?”


“Anything,” replied Timothy with brittle terse'
ness. “Anything but the truth —that being that
I love her so much that I’ve never let her know
it.” It cost Timothy a great deal to utter that
sentence. It was like tearing open a partly-healed
wound to expose his secrets to Loftus. “She is
dearer to me than even my own happiness . . .
dearer to me than my life.” Timothy, as in all
moments of strain, found his pipe, and shakingly
tried to light it. The other man automatically
handed over another match, lighted on a box taken
from his own pocket. “Thanks,” said Reed. The
silence of the veranda was now so complete that
the men heard the whining of mosquitoes up under
the cool iron of the roof.
Timothy, because of the unbearable ache within
him, and the unfinished explanations which had
been thrust at his companion, went on unsteadily.
“Too late —I found Jill. Long ago—in another
world —I married a woman not worth the hem of
Jill’s oldest frock. My disillusion came through
smashed ideals. Ideals which, however old-
fashioned and unpractical, took me through the war
and a few other purgatories. Jill is the indistinct
figure which has always hovered through those
dreams . . . dreams of a fool. I’m not harming
her by loving her. She doesn’t even know it.”
To doubt the young man’s sincerity would be an
outrage. Loftus did not move a feature, as Tim
hesitated, changed his position, and resumed: “Mr
Loftus, I am curious on one small point which
perhaps you might explain to me.”
“Yes?”
“What means did you use to extract Jill’s pro-
mise not to play again?”


Without expression, still motionless, Loftus said
evenly: “I threatened her with your . . . depar-
ture, Reed.”
Timothy half lifted himself from his chair, then,
after ten seconds of suspension from all sound and
movement, he fell back again, his teeth set fast
on the stem of his pipe. It was a moment or two
before he could speak. “So,” remarked the young
man with scornful calm, “you are consequently very
proud of your victory, sir?”
The mosquitoes sounded clearly as Loftus hesi-
tated, while an odd alteration spread over his face
and body. He seemed to crumple, from his heavily
wrinkled forehead to his sagging shoulders, as he
slid lower into his chair and repeated: “Victory?”
Bitterness past all measure sounded in his voice, the
word being flung from him. “Victory?” he asked
louder, turning heavily to Reed. “God forgive me
for it all.”
Surprised to a degree, Reed waited, staring, as
quick pity wove itself into his regard for the man
before him, who had so suddenly revealed his sick-
ness of heart and spirit. Many things were ex-
plained to Reed in that moment of revelation.
“Jill’s won all along,” said her father unexpectedly.
The admission broke from his lips reluctantly and
sharply.
“Won?” rapped out Timothy. “Rather a broken
warrior, though.” He was still too astonished at
the sudden capitulation of Loftus to re-adjust his
thoughts properly.
Loftus spread his hands in an unconsciously
pitiful gesture. “Do you think for one moment,”
he asked slowly, “that I consider her beaten ?”
“No,” came confidently. Timothy lifted his head.


“She’s triumphant, even in her sickness. She has
beaten herself, and that in itself is no small con-
quest.” Reed smiled as he added with a finality
that the older man noted even in his distraction:
“As I know to my sorrow.”
“I retreat,” said Jill’s father with a bitter glance
and a heavy frown, “and hand her the glory she’s
earned. But . . . it’s not easy.”
“About as easy, I imagine, as Jill found it when
she fought herself —and won,” retorted the younger
man smoothly.
Loftus waited for more, but Reed did not add
to his remark. He seemed to be deliberating upon
something further. His host was finding it harder
than any task faced before to speak to this young
man, whose clean-cut features betrayed little of his
own stormy passage through a comparatively short
life. “It’s taken me a long time, Reed, to find
out all this,” Loftus said slowly at last, hesitating
as he chose between the words which instinctively
came to his tongue, and the speech he was accus-
tomed to using. “But the crumbling away of my
belief in my own opinions, began when Jill put
on her . . . mother’s frock. You know about
that incident? Yes ... of course. My greatest
mistake happened years ago, when I married
Marie. I . . . cared for her, deeply, but I can
see now how unutterably senseless it was to ex-
pect a ... a hot-house flower to bloom upon a
naked sandhill. Forgive my poetry,” he smiled
grimly. “It is contagious ... in this house.
Perhaps . . . er, speaking of ideals . . . perhaps
those ideals you spoke of reluctantly have—or
had—their prototypes in some of mine.’’ Loftus
puckered his forehead and slid lower in his chair.


‘Tve suffered. Jill’s mother suffered. How much,
I dare not try to think. It is my fault. Had
my . . . love been greater, I should have gone with
her, instead of bringing her with me . . . for ever.
It proved not to be for ever. Nor did Igo after her.
My fault again. I was proud, proud and unreason-
able. Jill has fought me. She too, is proud. From
that I take one comfort. Jill has some of the
Loftus blood in her, or she would not have pitted
her strength against mine. You see, Reed, that
her mother was out of her element, I attach
no blame to her flight. She was a rare crea-
ture, exotic, and . . . unusually attractive. But I
never felt that I had her. She was as elusive
as a shadow. Perhaps I deserved the censuring
I received from my sister over that affair . . .
but ...” Loftus was talking to himself now,
Timothy half-forgotten. ‘T didn’t understand. I
under-estimated the strength of that strange desire
to play upon an instrument, and over-estimated my
power to give such a woman all she needed.”
Remembering Reed again, the other man lifted a
grey face to ask: “You . . . follow me?”
“Quite.”
Loftus smiled strangely, lifting his voice a trifle.
“Jill, with her journey to Interpitna, has vanquished
a number of ‘enemies’ in a most remarkable
manner.”
“No longer has she any enemy,” added Reed
softly.
Loftus eyed him curiously, arrested into making
a remark which had never been given to any man
before. “Reed .. . you are a good man.” The
words that might have been banal and embarras-
sing fell with a solid simplicity. Timothy made no


response to this, but his face stained slightly. He
felt vaguely comforted in an odd manner by the
other man’s generosity.
The older man looked sharply at Timothy, his
face etched in black shadow and white light. “What
manner of fool am I, Reed?’’ Loftus asked abruptly.
In some indescribable fashion the two men had
come together, the closer weaving of two different
strengths bringing with it that queer sensation of
uplift that throws sorrows just a little farther into
the shadows.
Partly because of the depth of the moment, which
had stirred each man surely, Reed laughed slightly.
“You are no fool, sir.
“Now?” asked Loftus with sudden humour.
“Well, yes. You are no fool now,” smiled Reed
in return, with a lighting up of his eyes. “We all
are at times. Just as Croft has been, and I’ve
been no more ghastly fool than a young fool,
although, proverbially, an old one excels. Just as all
men must be fools, until they find the strength to
admit their own weaknesses. Jill, in some fateful
way, has been part of the scheme of enlightenment
for all three of us.”
“I expect she’ll continue with that . . . er . . .
virtue,” returned her father dryly, “as she moves
Reed noted the significance of the words, but said
nothing.
Loftus repeated: “Jill is inevitably a figure of at-
traction, even in her old breeches.”
Reed pondered a while, then said slowly: “I ex-
pect, when you have avoided her so, you’ve been
unable to cope with a definite discussion of
matters?”


entirely all thoughts of . . . Jill?”
Timothy’s voice was dull and lifeless as he said
quietly: “Entirely, sir. My wife . . . is . . .
alive.”
“I’ve felt myself to be such a cur that I’ve not
been able to face her,” admitted Loftus curtly.
Timothy nodded, preferring silence to the awk-
wardness of superfluities.
The men gradually edged back to a normal con-
versation, trying to skirt emotional betrayals with
the distaste common to all whom the world calls
British. They had touched upon deep matters
which were covered always but for this exception.
Reticence and reserve were broken away slightly
before the problem of Jill and those who were part
of her destiny. Both men needed breathing space
before continuing with the discussion which they
knew must be resumed.
Out of a slightly weighty silence Loftus said
abruptly, almost roughly: “Have you given up
Then Loftus paid the younger man a compliment
whose subtlety warmed him and gave him strength.
“I’m sorry, Reed.” The hands of the two men
reached out and met, without volition on their
part, it seemed, and their grip crushed the fingers
of each of them. Loftus added gruffly: “I shall be
darned sorry when you go south, you know.”
Fingers unclasped, and two self-conscious but
rather stirred men lit their pipes—neither pipe in
need of lighting. “Have you made any plans,”
asked the older man, over small clouds of smoke.
“regarding your future?”
“Even the possibility of a future is doubtful,”
came with a short laugh that held little mirth.
“Nonsense: you are better every day.”


“One lung ...” reminded Timothy softly.
“You’ll beat it, in this air,” came the sturdy
reply.
“I hope so.”
“Have you ever thought seriously of buying a
farm down lower?” asked Philip Loftus, frowning
with thought as he stared forward.
“No, only hopefully.”
“Short of cash, eh?” came the query, genuine in-
terest in Loftus’ voice.
“Not at all,” replied Timothy truthfully. “But
I’m an ignoramus, and should probably buy the
wrong-shaped paddocks, or the wrong-coloured
wheat, or something equally asinine. Even the
thought of a ducky hen makes me break out into
a cold sweat. The miracle of that fowl-yard of yours
is, why don’t the ten-pounders who sit on the eggs
smash them to smithereens? Especially when they
kick them regularly, as a kind of indoor sport.”
Loftus smiled at the whimsical camouflage, but
went on, following some idea of his own. “Why
don’t you buy a small cattle-run, if you can rake
up a few thousands? Money to be made that way.
Say a place up above the Charlotte, or near the
Ranges.”
“All I know about cattle is that they taste very
nice when fried —or portions of them —by that Lina
of yours. Hens seem easier to manage, even with
their embarrassing maternal instincts to cater for.”
“Reed,” ejected Loftus suddenly, after a long
and concentrated stare at the young man’s features,
“I’ve been formulating a scheme which occurred to
me about ten minutes ago. Croft and his son are
coming down later. Croft’s son has a fairly large
sum held for him in the city, which I am certain


way, and . . . well . . . show you that cattle are
as easy to manage as . . . hens.”
his father will not use for himself. I have a
part of Sunset Hill, up towards the Ranges, which
could be separated from this end of the property.
You and young Croft could manage it easily, if he
is agreeable. If not, then you could run it your-
self, with help from a man I could get for you.
I should be more than willing to assist you in every
Timothy found himself bereft of the power to
speak.
Loftus saw this, and hurriedly continued: “I’m
planning to take David south next year, to put
him into the hands of the best specialist in Sydney.
I’ve shut my eyes to that urgent need, but the
Major advised me to try Sir Henry Dark with the
boy, and I’ll do it. That, however, can rest for
the time. Until I return from Sydney then, next
year, you could remain at Sunset Hill, and after
that we could get your house built, up at
whatever we’ll call the new place.”
“I ... I say, how can I answer? You . . .
you’re suggesting a huge thing, Mr Loftus.”
“It won’t be too huge when you get the hang
of it.”
“Lord, I don’t mean that. By Jove, no. The
idea is so splendid for me that I feel a twinge of
compunction over grabbing it, as it were. It’s
. . . absolute generosity.”
Hiding his pleasure, the older man said without
expression: “Then you won’t object to cattle, in-
stead of hens?”
“I’ll be a regular toreador,” replied Reed gladly.
Then: “You’re troubling a great deal over a man
almost a stranger.”


the proposed . . . alliance?”
Over glasses and decanter they talked again, very
much in earnest over business affairs, until Tim-
othy’s host paused, and made a strange request.
“Reed . . . er . . . have you any objections to
Loftus smiled dryly. “Not a stranger, he re-
plied after a pause, adding hastily; “Anybody who
can manage and understand Jill is worthy of con-
sideration, Now, shall we have a drink to celebrate
giving me that fiddle of yours for a week
or so?”
As Timothy, a little later, strode towards the
House That Jack Built he whistled. The strange
sound stopped abruptly as he realized that it was
he who had made it.
A little later Loftus walked the corridor of his
own dwelling as if trespassing. Stepping stealthily
into Jill’s room, he saw that she was asleep, twisted
sideways, with one hand nestled up beneath her
chin. After twenty minutes, while her father sat
at the foot of the bed watching her face, Jill awoke.
He moved to the chair near her head, as she said:
“Why didn’t you wake me? Have you been here
long?”
“An eternity, Jill.” Something in his attitude
made her rise to one elbow, then sink back list-
lessly to the pillows as she beheld his sombre face
and unsmiling mouth.
“Is it late?” she asked politely.
“About eleven, I think; I’ve been talking to
Reed.” It was a statement which, standing alone,
meant nothing, but which, applied to Jill’s own
thoughts and her father’s late visit to her room,
might mean anything.
“Jill, do you hate me entirely?”


A silence bom of amazement kept Jill from re-
plying. The man moved. “Do you hate me so
much, Jill?”
“I did,” came bluntly at last, with a long look
that searched his features and found little as re-
ward. “But I don’t hate anybody now. It’s all
. . gone.” She moved her hands on the sheet.
“Then what is left . . . for me?” he inquired
slowly.
“Pity,” she said carelessly.
He flinched visibly. “Why is that?”
“You’ve missed so much,” she explained patiently,
as one would to a child of slow understanding. “I’ve
thought it all out here, alone. Other men, like the
Major, know their daughters, and don’t try to kill
them.” Jill stilled the sensitive trembling of her
lips as she went on. “Beryl and those other girls
down at their Beehive share, and plan, and discuss
everything, and their mother is one of them. They
are all interested in one another . . . and get joy
out of the most ordinary things. I . . . you . . .
you’ve not understood a bit what that is like. Now,
I’m not a girl any more, and it’s too late.”
“You regret that?” A query, wry and solemn.
“Yes, but that doesn’t matter. Nothing matters
.. . .much. Now that I. . —Jill stumbled and
stopped. But she was lifted out of her lethargy by
the way her father completed her sentence for her.
“Now that you . . . have not your . . . songs.
Jill?” It was a hard thing to say—but he said it.
“Yes,” she said fiercely. “But,” she added, “I
still have them inside me. Don’t forget that.”
“I shall never forget that.” Loftus smiled, while
his eyes still held a kind of hard sorrow. He
stopped, and from beneath his feet lifted a familiar


object. The smile seemed frozen on his face as
he pushed the object awkwardly into tne girls
hands. She looked from it to him, from him to
the fiddle again. “Father ...” she stammered,
“I ... I don’t understand.”
“Nor do I . . . entirely,” admitted the man. “But
the promise I cheated you of ... is non-existent.
He rose to his feet, Jill sitting up in the bed, her
eyes wide with gladness and excitement, as she
tried to falter forth a pitiful mingling of gratitude,
explanation, and relief. Her father stopped her
with an uplifted hand, saying hurriedly: “Nothing
can undo what is done. I m seeing that now.
Don’t try to thank me. You have nothing to thank
me for. The fiddle is yours until you get your
hands upon that one of your mother’s. 111 ask the
Major to-morrow if he will take you south as far
as Adelaide with him—when he goes and no doubt
Susan will readily do the rest. Play, child,
and”—Loftus struggled with something that
tightened in his throat—“don’t forget ...” But
he altered the personal pronoun to: “Reed;” —add-
ing quickly, “he’s very fond of you.”
He turned away, and was in the doorway, strid-
ing swiftly, when Jill, with a cry that pierced
him with its terror, called him back. “Father!
Daddy !” Once before had Jill called him that,
when she was an infant. He swayed, swallowed,
and turned again, looking at the girl, who was
kneeling forward on the bed, scrambling towards
its foot. Her hands moved blindly towards him.
“Daddy, I didn’t know it all . . . before . . .
The husky, inarticulate plea broke through the
last of his reserve, and the grave face twisted into
an expressive poignancy which he hid in the soft-


3 06 SUNSET HILL
ness of her hair. His hands, trembling and uncer-
tain, pressed her thin figure to him, as he found his
daughter again. Found her, perhaps, for the first
time. Presently, after a moment ineffably sweet to
both, she drew back, stroking his face with her
finger-tips, her eyes glistening. She blinked, to see
him better, then slowly crumpled her hand —the
finger-tips were wet.
“A little while away, over there,” he said thickly,
“and you will forget me . . . fame . . . talent ex-
pressed . . . praise . . . success . . . and you’ll
forget me, Jill.”
She smiled unsteadily
gulped, and shook her
head. “You are too dear now . . . for that,” She
nodded. “We’ll not fight any more, Daddy. Oh,
what fools we’ve been!”
They held on to each other for a while, the violin
forgotten, until Loftus spoke again, out of a new,
big resolve which showed the inevitable separation
less hideously. “Jill, after a year or so, would
you like me . . . and David ... to join you, in
Rome or wherever Susan is to take you?”
“Oh ...” Jill was incoherent, moving her lips
as she tried to speak.
“Join you for a year or so, then back to Reed.
Perhaps I can still have a bit of you, in that
way.” He smiled into the face that was suddenly
glowing and suffused with radiance, eyes shining
and happy. Her hands suddenly moved to the
violin. “May I . . . please ...” she begged, “just
play one little scrap . . . Daddy ? I must.
The man sat very still as the “Faltering Tune”
rang out, the long incomplete note bringing a sharp
pain to his face; then Jill moved the bow quickly,
looking over the instrument into eyes which did not


flinch, lit by something that moved her to mad
cascades of notes. “It won’t . . . falter any more
now,” she said through the music. “It can t . . •
and Marie will live on and on, and I’ll be to you
what she . . . could have been.”
Loftus, as he bent forward and silently laid his
lips on his daughter’s forehead, closed his eyes as
he gave a beseeching caress to his wife and
Jill, looking at him with a greater understanding,
smiled again, and her green eyes were Marie’s, for-
giving him.


CHAPTER XVIII
He far away beheld the sea
Guarding the sweet land patiently.
William Morris.
“Our minds are really silly things,” said Jill, as
the south-going express thundered nearer the city
a few weeks later. “I’ve thought over this until
I hadn’t a thought left, and imagined that when
I saw the actual spires of town I should almost
break into poetry. Yet all I can do is to say:
‘Oh, Beryl!’ ” Excitement shone from the big eyes
of the station girl, who had been whisked from sid-
ing to siding, from town to town, before she was
fully aware of being upon the dreamed-of journey.
The long camping trip to the rail-head had been
made more easy for Jill, not yet strong, by the use
of two buggies, with an imposing array of horses
in charge of two pleased blackboys. The rains
had hardened the sand, and the rivers had dwindled
sufficiently for wheels to cross without being
bogged. There had been wild alarms and great
commotion at various points of the journey on the
way to Oodnadatta, but no accident had marred the
trip. Apart from Jill’s comfort, buggies were im-
perative on account of the Major’s huge collection
of curios, which he had eyed with some amusement
and perturbation as his host stood beside him on
the veranda, preparatory to loading.
Jill’s father, for reasons of his own, chose not to


go to the rail-head, and Timothy, also for reasons
of his own, preferred to stay with Loftus and say
farewell there to the little party who left the station
at midday.
Timothy voiced his farewells in his customary
whimsical fashion, preventing tearfulness by a pat-
ter of nonsense that brought wintry smiles from the
young folk, and a poignant admiration from Loftus
—who understood. Jill’s hands Timothy held for
an unaccountably long time, as he looked into her
green eyes, and smiled gaily. “When you have the
world at your feet, and have penned a bevy of
Muses into that Strad., kindly forward me a few
of your compositions, and I shall make the air
hideous by trying to practise them.” Jill had
pressed her lips together, and tried not to weep, but
something stronger than her will-power sent tears
to her eyes and a little catch into her voice. “Tim,”
she said huskily, her hands in his, “I’ll always re-
member what you’ve told me. I’ll take it with
me, everywhere.” Then she swung abruptly about
and climbed into the buggy. As it moved away
she turned in the direction of the house and the
party on the veranda steps, but she saw nothing
but a strange-coloured sea, in whose depths she
seemed to be plunging. But she waved to some-
thing, and cried; “So long!”
David had stood, a slender figure in spotless flan-
nels, beside his father as the buggies drove off.
He said nothing, for he and Jill the night before had
talked, and David hid his sorrow at her going
under the glory of her new love for him. Jill would
come back . , . some day, and, perhaps, not to a
weakling. David lifted his hand in grave salute
as Jill’s clear “So long” came to the group on the
steps.


In a corner of the carriage, her face close to the
window, Jill had lived in a trance throughout the
day. The wheels sang a swift rhythm that chopped
itself into little bars which fitted all sorts of tunes.
After the queer night on the train, the country
changed from monotonous spaces, laden with bi-
zarre colouring, to the bright, crisp tints of the
Upper North. Small towns punctuated the wheels’
refrain, and big towns hopped surprisingly from
hill and dale. Houses spread themselves like
bumpy carpets over rolling downs, while spires
pierced towards the sky in unexpected places.
Farm country, barred with pine hedges, clouded
with fat white balls of cotton-wool, yellow with
ripening wheat, lay like a prosperous sea, through
which the train whisked importantly. The shrill
whistles at the crossings darkened the station girl’s
eyes with apprehension, until she found that the
sound was one of warning and not of distress. The
suburbs, to Jill, were unbelievable. Looking at the
little rows and clusters of back yards and houses
all alike, she cried to Beryl: “It’s stupid. How do
people move, let alone breathe and live. And
there are so many miles all empty, up there.”
“Up there,” to Jill, was anywhere north of where
the crowded houses ceased. She waved a hand ex-
pressively but vaguely. “I should hate to live in a
house the same shape as the next one.”
The city, pearly against the ranges, with its
spires visible from a long way off, and its tall build-
ings, made small impression upon the inland girl’s
mind. “Of course, in a city, where business must
be attended to,” she remarked reflectively, staring
hard through the window, “one would have to pile
the buildings high, to save time in transit.


But ...” she was looking at back yards again,
“people should not have to live in rabbit warrens.”
“Bob will pounce on you,” laughed the Major,
“if he hears you express those opinions. Town-
planning and fresh air are two hobbies of his.”
At the railway-station Jill found that she could
not think at all. Her brain seemed to have turned
into a cavity whose spaces were infinite. Her body
had lost all its power to move, until Beryl gently
propelled her towards a laughing, delighted group
of pleasing folk whom Jill numbly recognized as
the inmates of the Beehive. Barby first, per-
fectly dressed in a little jumper suit of dull red, a
rakish hat pulled tightly down over her short hair,
her eyes keenly critical, her mouth generous and
kind.
Brenda then, in a lacy frock which was wide at
the hem, a sunshade held under one arm, her mouth
pink and friendly, smiling all for Jill.
Mum—Jill’s mouth curved into a half shy, half
contented quiver as Mum stepped into view. Her
face was happy, her pretty figure clad in a way
that rendered her delicious to look upon. In Mum’s
eyes, as her husband took her hands, was a light
that made Jill humbly worshipful for ever. “John,”
she heard Mrs Campbell say with a break of joy.
“You are very naughty—you’ve been forgetting
your hat again.”
And the Major, whom Jill always regarded with
complete awe and admiration, looked meek and
contrite. “Dear me,” he replied, while he devoured
the sweet face before him, “shall I go away again
until I’m bleached?”
Figures moved about Jill. She heard names, felt
her hands pressed warmly, or softly, or with a
crushing grip which she gasped at, for Susan was


facing her, blinking into the green eyes. “The
image of Marie . . . Thank God!’’ the bewildered
girl heard in a relieved whisper, as the nice faces
and nice voices mingled, broke, separated all about
her. She heard a shrill call as Bubbles threw him-
self into his mother’s arms. “Oh, Mum —I can ride
horses ’n’ everything.”
Order came at last out of the bustle on the sta-
tion, as a pair of red-cap porters swooped down
w,ith their trunks, anxious expressions on their
perspiring faces, hands touching caps as the Major
started collecting the luggage. Cars and taxis
hooted outside somewhere, past the columns and
the glitter and the impressive simplicity of the rail-
way-station, overwhelming to the girl who had been
slightly disturbed by the leave-taking of strangers
and relatives even at Oodnadatta two days before.
Jill still could not think, but she noted Beryl sud-
denly standing back a little, her face pink and her
eyes confused, as a tall man strode towards her.
Beryl felt exactly ten years old, as she saw how
distinctive Pat Brent was. Her legs were behaving
curiously, and her hands curled up helplessly in
his, as he smiled into her face. She drew back from
the kiss which almost came, and bit her lips as they
both paused. “I’m . . . not a little girl any more,”
she faltered with such woe and distress that it broke
the ice between them, and they laughed. Eyes
shining, Beryl laughed, her fingers still moving
softly under the pressure that seemed to spread
to a big aching spot in her breast. “Pat . . . I’m
glad you waited till I came home.”
“Waited?” he repeated, with flattering emphasis
as he watched the wild-rose in her cheeks and the
deep blue of the eyes which still beheld the world
as it had done long ago. The young man felt his


heart miss a beat, as he took in the sweet picture
framed in a little upturned hat whose brim was car-
essed by a dozen spraying wisps of dark hair. “I’ve
waited . . . but it’s been worth while,’’ He released
the fingers, suddenly remembering where he stood.
“You’ve grown up, little pal, but not too much.”
They walked back a dozen steps to the others,
who were waiting for the Major to finish with his
instructions to the porters. A carrier stood at at-
tention with a stumpy pencil high in one hand,
blinking at the boxes and bags which meant such
a haul for his commercially-governed mind. Barby
said crisply: “You’d better let me write it, I think.
You’ve spelt the name wrongly.” With a grim-
ace she took the scrap of red pencil and swiftly
scribbled in the subdued carrier’s book of wisdom,
then handed it back with a: “You could do with a
new one.”
Jill suddenly smiled; she liked Barby, who was
now indicating various articles to be taken out to
the car.
With Mum beside her, and Brenda hovering near,
Jill felt at peace with the world —or this part of
it. She nodded towards the people now drifting
away from the almost deserted platform. “Do
people in town always behave as if they have only
ten minutes to live?” she asked.
“Not always,” replied Brenda, taking her arm.
“Jill, what delicious fun we’ll have taking you
about; it will be like peering through strange glasses
at our own city.”
“I shall soon get used to it.”
Mum smiled at the girl from Sunset Hill. “I’m
sure of that, my dear,” she announced with a
shrewd calmness which brought a gleam to Jill’s
eyes.


Susan Loftus caught up to the three who were
strolling towards the gate. “Where is Sophon-
isba?”
“Outside by the ramp,” replied Brenda, and Jill s
face fell. “Who,” she asked, “is Sophonisba? Is
there anyone called that?”
A delighted chuckle ran round the group as
Barby, overtaking them, a swift-footed vision in
dull red, cried gaily: “Oh, Jill, it’s the car.
Sorry, I named it.” Jill was relieved and amused,
and quite ready to be introduced to this kind of
Sophonisba.
“We can’t all get into the bus,” Pat cried with
assumed distress. “Now I shall have to bang sax-
pence on a taxi.” He looked straight at Beryl;
“Who’ll ride with me in it?”
“I’m driving Sophonisba,” remarked Barby has-
tily.
“I’m sitting next to Mum,” said Dad compla-
cently, “in the back where we can flirt.” Mum
blushed charmingly, like a pretty bird amid a flutter
of other birds of brighter plumage.
Barby stood still, her hands in the modish pockets
of her suit. “Look here,” she announced. “Pile
in and let those who get left over ride in that
boneshaker. Beryl, you’d better go with Pat. He’s
been making hopeless eyes at you for five minutes.”
Strangely, Beryl seemed to remember something,
as she flushed and drew back. “Please . . . Brenda
. . . you go with Pat.” Beryl climbed precipitately
into the familiar old car, “I’ll ride with Barby and
Jill”.
“That,” said Barby, stopping Sophonisba at
the curve of the tram-line along which they had
followed, “is the sea.”


She pointed with pride, as if Barby and nothing
else was responsible for the creation of the Gulf.
She watched Jill’s face with devouring anxiety,
as the station girl for the first time beheld the love-
liness of the ocean, stretching out in blue and bril-
liant green, white-capped, flecked with diamonds,
to the far flat horizon.
The others in the back seat waited also, as Jill
considered, worshipped, then made her reply. It
pleased them all, with its crisp, decided; “It’s just
like a wide plain . . . made of water. I knew I
should love it.”
“But wait” said Barby with a mysterious pro-
phecy in her swift glance sideways. She changed
gear silently as the car slid on. “But wait until
you get into it.”
A week sped by; a week of contented picking up
of dropped threads by the Major and Beryl, a week
of delight and surprise for the girl from the station,
A week of glory for Bubbles, who at school was a
hero of superlative qualities in the eyes of his com-
rades, for had he not ridden upon a camel and
camped in the open?
“Beryl,” ejaculated Jill one day, as they lay in
bathing-suits under a wide striped umbrella stabbed
into the sand. “I feel awful in my old frocks. Let’s
go into the city again and buy some clothes.”
Lure all the world over, from the Hottentot to
the woman of China! Clothes! Jill was fitting
with bewildering speed into her new life. Beryl
nodded. “You’ll want a lot,” she warned. “And
the prices will absolutely petrify you; the less
material in a frock, the more you are charged for
it.”
“I’ve got lots of money,” volunteered Jill, as if


money were the grains of sand that ran through
her fingers while she spoke. “Father said I must
make up for lost time. And ... I like the look
of town, and busy people.”
“Do you know, Jill,” said Beryl wonderingly,
striking a fragment of the truth in her own gentle
way, “I believe that under all your love of the
outback, you are more of a cosmopolitan than any
of us.”
A vision of colour, light, movement, and sound
whipped before Jill’s eyes. She regarded the spark-
ling brilliancy of the afternoon sea as she played
with this not-unpleasant thought. “Yes,” she said
at last. “Perhaps that is right. My mother be-
longed . . . over there.”
“And,” replied Beryl absently—the two were
alone on the sands —“some day, Jill, you might
have to decide which is the real you —Jill of
Sunset Hill, or Jill of some beautiful city.”
Perhaps the long fingers of destiny had touched
Beryl’s tongue with prophecy, for Jill shivered in
the hot glare and moved restlessly. “I don’t know
. . . I shan’t know, until I’ve tested both.” She
met Beryl’s glance of quiet contemplation. “And
I intend not to try to think it out . . . until I know
both.”
The invincible commonsense of this satisfied the
girl who preferred to stay in her own country. She
nodded brightly. “It should be interesting,” she
remarked sagely, “to sit inside your mind and see
what happens to i't during the next few years,”
“Don’t,” cried Jill. “Don’t talk about it. Let’s
discuss clothes. How many dresses shall I need,
Beryl?”
“Enough to see you over the sea-trip,” came con-


fidently. “But not too many, or you’ll hate yourself
when you see the lovely things over the other side.”
“Hmn! Suppose so. Anyway, let’s choose them
before Aunt Susan awakes to the fact that I look
like a dairy-maid, or she’ll help me choose. Hea-
vens! I don’t want that.”
Beryl was more kind. “Cousin Susan has a mind
above decoration,” she remarked slowly.
“That’s easily seen,” came placidly from Jill. She
w r as quite satisfied with this aunt of hers, but had
no intention of enthusing over her. Anyway, Aunt
Susan would hate gush, and was a stern lover of
the truth, however disconcerting.
“There’s a little shop which imports the very
frocks you should wear,” Beryl now said with
a comprehensive stare that took the other slim
figure in from head to bare toes. “You are not a
type, but an individual. You mustn’t wear things
that look nice by accident. You must match the
clothes by yourself, and that little shop is the place
to go to. I used to know how to choose a dress,
once.” She laughed aloud. “But now I’ve thrust
them into their proper place . . . However, this is
different.”
“Can we go alone?” asked Jill doubtfully. The
Beehive seemed to form itself into a solid body
whenever an excursion was suggested.
“We’ll ask Mum.”
The next day, dressed in their best, with Mum
a charming figure in the grace of navy and grey
turned out by Parisian fingers, her gloves perfec-
tion, her hat “elegant,” as Beryl said, they set off
in Sophonisba. Dad was very proud of his charges,
as he set them down at a street corner outside an
enticing window arrayed with lingerie and silken
hosiery. “Now,” he warned, fumbling with the


gear lever, “don’t break my bank, Mary, or we shall
all have to go out scrubbing.”
giggled—or what was almost a giggle—and
in her winning husky voice, said to Mum that
“she couldn’t have picked a nicer man to marry, if
she’d hunted all over the world.” Mum, with sat-
isfaction and aplomb, said: “Of course.”
They filed into the shop, which was a large one,
with that complete and puzzled absorption that
seems to assail all folk of feminine gender when
amid counters and show-cases. Beryl laughed as
the three found themselves on the footpath again,
nothing purchased. “I’m sure they thought I was
shop-lifting,” she murmured; “I was hopelessly
witless. Big shops are so overwhelming.”
“What about the little shop?” asked Jill, feeling
bewildered by the surging of the crowds about
her.
“It’s horribly posh,” said Beryl doubtfully.
“The posher the better,” retorted Jill, who said
to herself: “Neck or nothing.”
“Then come on —to the left. Franchette’s, Mum
dear.”
“Franchette’s. Dear me, I must get the wrinkles
out of my gloves.” Gravely Mum pretended to
do so.
Even Jill’s untrained eyes recognized that odd
quality named “posh” in the small shop, which was
furnished chiefly by a carpet that felt like thick
moss underfoot, and a few slender-legged gilt
chairs hopefully pompous under the invisible label
of Louis XIV. Then some velvet curtains parted,
and Madame, or Mademoiselle, Franchette floated
in.
Beryl expected Jill to be utterly crushed by the


black-gowned woman with the tiny forks of hair
plastered over her forehead. Certainly Sunset Hill
had never witnessed such a miracle of frocking as
was displayed by the personage whose gown must
have been put upon her whde she held her breath,
Jill twitched the skirt of her own simple dress, the
movement expressing the essence of deep dissatis-
faction. “I want something that doesn’t look like
this, please,” Jill announced calmly.
Mum and Beryl seated themselves on the gilt
chairs, enjoying the scene as much as any play.
Madame glanced for one second at Jill’s frock and
mentally tabulated all that she had on, and its ori-
ginal cost. But Jill’s green eyes had lighted upon
a glass cupboard which showed discreetly some
folds of lace, silk, and velvet.
With complete aplomb the girl from the station
turned her back upon a red garment held out hope-
fully by Madame Franchette, and moved towards
the show-case. “There’s a green thing in there,”
she said stolidly. “I want to look at it in the
light.”
“This red one is more . . . suitable, Mam’selle,”
murmured the lady persuasively. But Jill was stung
into her old self by this suspicion of contempt.
Once more she turned from the georgette frock
whose colouring would war with her skin and eyes.
“Thank you, madame, but I prefer a colour which
suits me.” Jill had remembered something Mallaby
had said to her up at Interpitna. “Dryad,” he had
murmured, “always wear green ... or gold.”
Jill was on the war-path, and the lady of the tight
frock recognized the fact. She brought out a gar-
ment which she handled reverently, an exquisite
thing which shaded from egg-shell to a deep rich


green, simple, unadorned, otherwise than by its
beautiful cut and workmanship. “I like that,” an-
nounced Jill. “It’s like a gum-trunk. I think I should
like to try it on . . and she glanced for support
towards Mum, who nodded in unison with Beryl.
Into a small alcove the proprietress vanished
with Jill.
‘‘She will take kindly to the best that the world
has to offer,” smiled Mum with a suspicion of
anxiety; ‘‘but she has a lot of wisdom behind her
strange eyes.”
‘‘She won't be crushed, anyway,” stated Beryl
with satisfaction. ‘‘And”—with an expression of
glad surprise—“she never dressed at all at the
station.”
“Dear me, how shocking.”
Beryl laughed indulgently at this Mum who was
young enough to renounce severity and welcome
stray scraps of fun. Then Beryl gasped, for there
was a sound, and Jill had emerged. Without her hat,
her hair shining and gleaming, her colouring en-
hanced magically by the garment she graced, she
stood smiling in the doorway, until, as she saw the
others’ approval, she bowed with a low, sweeping
gesture that billowed her skirts and rippled her hair.
“That,” said Beryl, with a flash of intuition, “is
how she will look before her audiences some day
■and she knows it.”
The exquisite picture that Jill made brought ad-
miration and enthusiasm from the woman who
understood clothes. “Charmanfe,” she murmured.
“It is charming, Jill,” agreed Mrs Campbell.
“You look positively grand,” allowed Beryl hon-
estly. Jill turned to Madame Franchette. “How
much is it, please?”


more, too.”
The artist in the woman now came to the fore,
as the commercial side of the transaction proved
so promising. She pulled forth an armful of gar-
ments whose colours glowed richly, and, turning to
Mrs Campbell: “This, madame . . . ees it not
Madame Franchette felt a stab of fear as she
totalled the result of an hour in her elegant salon,
but Jill did not appear to notice the size of the notes
which she counted out childishly, licking one finger
and saying aloud: “One . . . two . . . three . . •
Madame spoke softly, as if to lessen the blow,
but she stood at attention and her manner altered
visibly when Jill said, “I’ll have it. I want some
superb?” she asked. But Jill shook her head. “I'm
not superb,” she stated quietly. “It might do in
ten years’ time, but not now; I don’t feel like
that.”
Madame smiled feebly. “Mam’selle has excellent
taste,” she admitted.
In the end Jill purchased five dresses, some lin-
gerie, a pair of shoes, silk stockings, and a wide
white hat. The frocks, navy, cream, almond-green,
and lemon, with some of the lingerie, she left to be
sent to the Beehive, but the first frock of the colour-
ing of a moonlight gum, Jill wore, over silken
things that slid deliciously against her slim limbs,
above stockings which were finer than cobweb, and
ten times as beautiful.
and some odd ones. Is that right?”
Jill, in her new frock and shoes, felt and looked
a different being. The transition stage between
the girl of Sunset Hill and the girl of the future
had been marked definitely by Madame Franchette.
Beryl noticed more than one passer-by look with


mingled emotions at the beautiful creature, who
walked, a flawless interpretation of youth, between
Mum and Beryl.
The Major, at four, was patiently waiting at the
restaurant porch. He smiled as he took Jill’s hands
and turned her round. “Beautiful, my dear. Beau-
tiful ! You look like a sea-nymph fresh from a
cavern.”
Compliments—so flowery, too—at your age,
John! I am surprised. Now let us find a table
quickly. I am famished.”
Bob and Pat will be along about four-fifteen,”
stated the Major as he signalled a waitress. A
table had been ordered, and the party sat down
gratefully. As they ordered China tea, cakes, and
sandwiches, the man explained more, “I saw them
at Bob’s office. I lunched with him, and they are
devoured with curiosity to see what has happened
in the shops.”
“We’ll linger over tea, then,” sighed Mum. She
was tired.
The big restaurant, its size subdued by stan-
dard lamps and hidden lighting; flaunting Iceland
poppies and bright china among the spotless napery
of the unevenly placed tables, thrilled Jill to utter
content. This kind of thing, with new clothes on,
seemed just right. She suddenly exploded into a
small laugh that was infectious. The others glanced
at her inquiringly. “Not long ago,” she explained,
twinkling, “I was covered with grime, scowling at
Boomerang, and eating hard-boiled eggs with as
much mud as salt over them, and drinking tea out
of a billycan as black as . . . soot.”
Dad nodded. “And is the change unpleasant?”
he asked.
“It’s beautiful,” came enthusiastically. “But


these fragile cups and silver vases would be just
as ridiculous in camp as a quart-pot would be here.
I like them both, but each in its proper place.”
“Which,” completed Beryl, “is precisely as it
should be. Oh, there’s Pat.” She flushed. “And
Bob,” she added.
The two young men were winding their way
among tables, smiling towards the group across
the room. They descended with greetings, and
immediately professed an overpowering thirst.
A waitress approached, and Bob leaned back to
give his order. “Lots of tea, please, and some-
thing to eat.”
“How very masculine,” commented Mum. She
liked the look of the bevy round her, consequently
almost purring with happiness. But they were
growing up . . . Mum sighed in the midst of her
satisfaction, for growing up is so often accom-
panied by those vague hurts which sting and
wound so strangely.
Pat was watching Beryl; perhaps something in
his glances interrupted Mum’s content in her
family and their friends. An odd confusion took
charge of Beryl whenever she found herself with
Brent. The old comradeship had somehow slipped
away, and had left behind a perpetual unease
founded upon . . . nothing. Since her return,
Beryl had almost avoided him, for she found that
his presence always meant a heartache after, which
she was afraid of. Why was everything spoiled?
Why had Pat slipped so far away, when all she
wanted was to return to those salty-scented days
when he and she were comrades?
Pat was speaking directly to Jill. “In the best
society,” he proclaimed piously, “one does not


comment rudely upon one’s lady-friends’ garments;
but, Jill, you seem to have been turned out by a
superlative maid. How did you do it?”
Bob also regarded Jill with admiration. “You
look ripping, Sprite. But sorrow! Five years
more adult.”
“I can’t drift round for ever in faded relics of
a stone-age,” Jill replied rather breathlessly. The
hearty enthusiasm of these nice young men made
her strangely elated. The novelty of so much
masculine approval was heady.
“Did you choose them yourself?” asked Bob in-
quisitively, handing cake absent-mindedly to Brent.
“Yes,” answered Jill waveringly. “But Mum and
Beryl were there to see that I wasn’t robbed.”
“That would be most unlikely,” stated Mum
happily. “Now, Pat, some more tea?”
“Thank you, Mrs Campbell. I say, Beryl, we’re
coming home with you, to dinner. The Major
pressed us with such warmth that I found it diffi-
cult to refuse,”
Major Campbell chuckled. “Imps,” he scoffed
with a smile. “Bob said, T say. Dad, Pat’s coming
home for some food to-night,’ and that is the extent
of my pressing invitation.”
Brent looked hurt; they all knew how real it
was. “Of course,” he replied stiltedly, “if I am
unwanted, I shall go in disdain to my pub,”
Not waiting for response to this unlikely threat,
Pat addressed Jill. “Fine feathers make fine birds.
Don’t get all ‘het up’, as Mrs Pent says, when
you go trailing round Monte Carlo, or air yourself
along the Rue de Rivoli.”
I shan t get het up, murmured Jill, who was
gradually becoming accustomed to the Beehive’s


form of kindly teasing. “And aren’t feathers
slightly passees ?” inquired the girl loftily.
The howl of laughter that came from the corner
table made several interested folk turn in their
chairs, but the two young men, as Barby was wont
to say, always behaved as if in the middle of a
forty-acre paddock.
“And Jill will saunter through her salon in a
jade-green thingummy with ear-rings a foot long,
and a cigarette-holder jutting into mid-air,”
laughed Bob.
“He’s been to the cinema lately,” explained
Beryl sotto voce.
“A pet monkey on one arm . . . and another
kind of monkey on the other,” contributed Pat.
“Shh! People are looking,” breathed Beryl.
“Let ’em,” replied Bob. “We’re worth looking
at. I can’t bring a bathing-box with me every
time I eat in a restaurant.”
Dad interrupted by glancing at his watch,
“Enough of these pleasantries for the time, people,”
he told them. “Our Sophonisba will be arrested
if we don’t hasten. I have a dull feeling that I’ve
left her in a non-parking area. Shall we move?”
So they moved, and the car was found round the
corner conspicuously alone. Beryl chuckled as she
pointed to a sign near by, plainly warning all
vehicles away. “Hop in quickly,” advised the
Major. “I hope no official has seen it yet.” Bob
drove at a speed which brought a gasp from Mum,
in the back seat between Pat Brent and Dad. Beryl
and Jill had somehow managed to insert them-
selves beside the driver.
That night the Beehive en mastie wandered
down to the cool sand. There was a moon, which


threw wedges of creamy light in a path across the
sea.
Pat manoeuvred until he caught up with Beryl,
strolling beside Bubbles and Brenda. “Catching
fairies, Brenda?” he asked. The young writer
turned her smooth crown and replied that she did
not write fairy stories now.
“Pity,” came the answer. “Well . . . perhaps
the book will ‘take;’ it’s a jolly little story.”
“But,” replied Brenda stubbornly. “I’ve told
you a hundred times that I don’t want to write
jolly litle stories.”
“Old thing,” remarked Brent seriously, “now let
us sit down, and be lit’ry.” They dropped to the
sand, their faces turned towards the sea. Bubbles
moved away to paddle. He was not lit’ry.
“Look here,” Pat commenced, talking to Brenda,
but turning towards Beryl, who moved slightly.
She was wondering why she wanted to choke, or
weep, or run away. With a wide gesture Brent
was saying; “You can’t write novels yet, Bren.
Remember all that I’ve told you about expression.
You’re an infant yet, compared with what you’ll
be when you write a real book. This yarn you’ve
finished will take it’s proper place in a kiddies’ book,
probably, or a girl’s magazine. How can you run,
old girl, before you can walk?”
“You like my story,” argued Brenda uneasily.
“You told me so.”
“Only a cynic would dislike it—but there are
cynics to deal with as well as people like our-
selves, remember. Don’t spoil your market,
Brenda, by trying to push immature stuff on to
the world before you are fit to write human yarns.”
Beryl listened idly, but with sinking heart.


These two understood so well how to wind a con-
versation among the shoals which would wreck
any verbal course of hers. She was an outsider.
These two were in a little world apart. He was
explaining with affectionate impatience. “Moon-
mist is pretty, Bren, as I’ve informed you before
. . . but it’s life as it is that interests people.
Nobody can exist on moonmist for long. You
must live first, before you write as I know you
will write . . . but not yet. Plumb some of the
pain of life, and find out what a man or woman
does when faced by cataclysms —spiritual cata-
clysms. Who knows of life, or death, or marriage,
until they’ve experienced the currents these deep
rivers hold?”
“Marriage ... a deep river,” remarked Brenda
suddenly. “Marriage ends everything.”
“No,” replied the young man. “It commences
everything.”
Beryl was thinking dully: “They all do things
but me. They all have careers. They all talk of
subjects which reduce me to shreds. And . . .
and I can do nothing but cook omelettes and stay
at home.” Revolt stirred in her for a moment,
until she smiled in wan fashion and said beneath
her breath, “Anyway, they’re good omelettes.”
“But how about talking about something that
includes Beryl,” Brent was saying in friendly
consideration for the silent figure outlined a yard
from him. “What are you doing, Beryl? Building
dream cities?”
“No, making an omelette,” she replied slowly.
A call came from along the beach, and Brenda
rose. “Stay there and talk to Pat,” she said
swiftly. “I’ll go to Barby.”
“You avoid me, Beryl,” Brent ventured presently.


“I can’t discuss books and poems and writers and
. . . inhibitions and complexes,” Beryl told him
blankly. “I don’t even know what libido means.
“Thank the Lord for that,” he announced fer-
vently. “Is that why you avoid me, then?’
“Certainly not .. . altogether. How, silly!”
Beryl was retiring in woe behind a frivolous bar-
rage erected in desperation.
“Am I too old for your . . . company?” he asked
next.
“You are not old,” she replied serenely. Then,
cuttingly: “You are very young, at times.”
“I say! Nasty! Beryl . . .” he hesitated,
then went on rather sickly. “I waited a good many
weeks to see what you had grown into, not daring
to hope you were as beautiful as you are. Now
. . . have I altered much, Berry?”
The old name whipped her. And she whipped
herself, by repeating voicelessly; ‘He s Brendas,
he’s Brenda’s. He belongs to her.” She spoke
aloud. “No, Pat, you are the same nice old thing.”
“But you’ve shut me out. Is that it?”
The inner voice cried in pain; “No, no,’ but a
calm little reply chilled him. “How have I shut
you out, Pat?”
“There’s a difference” doggedly.
“P’raps it’s you,” said Beryl, her heart like
lead.
“Perhaps ...” —bitterly.
“But,” said Beryl hastily, unable to bear it any
more. “I . . . I’m sorry.” She bit her lips.
“Perhaps it’s my fault,” she stammered. “I’m not
so young now, Pat.”
“Perhaps that’s it,” he conceded unemotionally.
“And the idols of yesterday are the clay pots of
to-day.”


Something stung Beryl to agony. “Pat, she
burst out, “I can’t talk to you. Something is in
between. Why can’t we talk as we used to
as you and Brenda do?”
Blindly, Brent made a grave mistake. Brenda
and I have a great deal in common, Beryl.’
White-lipped, the girl twisted her hands in
misery, repeated to herself, “He and she ... in
common. It is I who am shut outside. ’
In a silence Beryl foundered, as she fought wave
after wave of anguish. Brent spoke quietly at
last, “Beryl, this is impertinent, but . . . have
you learned to love somebody while you’ve been
away?”
“No,” she whispered numbly. “No ...” Was
it, or was it not the truth? Was it honest deliber-
ately to allow a misunderstanding to remain?
Even for Brenda’s sake?
“Pat,” she cried a moment after, “don’t speak
about . . . things like that, please. They . . .
hurt.”
“Hurt,” said the man to himself. “Then there is
some one.”
Beryl moved, and jumped to her feet, the man
following. “We must go,” she said miserably.
Then with a cry that held all the pain that she
had no name for—'Beryl asked: “Pat. Why
can’t life be what we want it to, instead of
all going wrong?”
He paused, and took her hands. “What is it,
little girl? Can you tell me?”
“No,” she whispered. “Not you ... of all
people.”
He winced, smiled strangely, and moved to walk
politely beside the girl who could not see the
sand for tears.


CHAPTER XIX
. . . ’Twos a mystic thing
That waited me upon a moonlit pathway,
And crept within my heart with folded wing.
R. A. Broinowski.
Blank indeed was the day Jill sailed away on the
big liner with Susan Loftus, their arms full of
white and red roses given them by Bob and Brent,
Jill’s mouth aquiver with the w r onder of her new
adventure, her eyes misted with the pain of leaving
so much behind. Without Jill, as Barby said ex-
pressively, the Beehive was like a car without its
accelerator. The others laughed at this remark,
and passed it by, for it said what they could not.
Half an hour after a strangely silent meal with
Jill in the thoughts of all of them, the cool sands
called the young people outside, for the day had
been warm, and leave-takings had been physically
and mentally fatiguing.
Pat and Beryl moved to the end of the veranda,
where the pines and tamarisks made an indefinite,
shredded wall and roof through which the stars
glimmered mysteriously. Against their soft glow
the young man saw the delicate profile turned from
him. Reluctantly Beryl had found herself paired
off with Brent.
“Jill’s an electric little personage,” Pat was
saying. “I think I shall have to fill that gap in my


book with her.” He watched Beryl s outline re-
flectively as he spoke.
“Jill wouldn’t be your type of heroine,” retorted
Beryl swiftly. “She’s not plastic enough.
Brent whistled at the intuition displayed by the
girl who stood beside him on the cement floor. He
had almost said : “I could put you in that gap, then .
but something made him refrain from 1 the
crudity of the phrase, which somehow was un-
suited to Beryl. But were it possible to write
Beryl into that baffling space which no feminine
figure would quite fit, how easy the story would
be then. Beryl in every way was ideal . . . yet
there was something missing. A volume of
beautiful poetry . . . but unopened: that pleased
him. It was very true. “I think I’ve caught a bit of
myself,” he admitted to her presently, “in the man
in my book —quite unconsciously, and dressed
up in more pleasing form than my face and body.”
Brent laughed. “He’s a stupid enough ass, anyway,
and quite sentimental.”
“Your other book wasn’t sentimental,” Beryl
reminded him calmly. “I think it’s silly to pre-
tend he’s sentimental if he’s not. I think your book
was wonderful. It tugged you to bits with the
tiniest of happenings, and hadn’t an awkward touch
in it. You surely haven’t made a sticky hero,” she
added.
“We’re all rather sentimental at times,” he con-
fessed with a grunt. “But of course there are lots
of ways of labelling that virtue.”
“Of course.” Then, startlingly abrupt, came
Beryl’s unconsciously sharp remark: “Why don’t
you put Brenda into your novel? She’s plastic
enough . . . and beautiful.” The afterthought


came hastily, as if in apology for the human little
blow at Brent’s apparent dalliance with the other
girl.
At that moment a dull ache in Brent changed to
a wild desire to throw his hat into the air. His
hat was not there, or he might have obeyed the
impulse. Hundreds of small incidents connected
with himself, Brenda, and Beryl stood out now
with sudden sharpness. The analytical mind of the
writer all at once seized upon the personal problem
and dissected it in book fashion. As in manuscript,
it worked in reality. A rush of overwhelming ten-
derness replaced the glory of his discovery, as Pat
stepped towards Beryl and placed a hand on her
arm. She wriggled smartly away, and stood at a
little distance. He did not follow, “Blind fool,”
he called himself. “Blind . . . idiot.” Naturally
the old care-free comradeship could not last: a new
footing awaited them both, deeper and richer, even
sweeter.
Brent pondered, there on the veranda edge, his
thoughts swooping from Brenda to Beryl, and back
again, ticketing, labelling, and pigeon-holing all
manner of curiosities discovered in this mental rum-
maging. Beryl was different from Brenda, entirely.
Brenda the writer and dreamer, with her trials and
thoughts all dealing with the abstract, against
Beryl, who had no ambition, therefore lived each
moment with joy and satisfaction, extracting from
the every day a far greater pleasure than any
afflicted romancer. Brenda, the theoretical idealist
—Beryl, ideally practical, Brenda, doomed to alone-
ness until the great moment in her life should show
her that writing is not living, and Beryl dedicated
to the kingdom of home and the wonder of love,


living a story far greater than any Brenda could
write. Brent smiled at Beryl in the darkness, bless-
ing her absurdly for her regret because of “doing
nothing in the world,” and her swift readiness to
help do everything. Her ability to listen . . • and
with a slight lift of his shoulders and a whimsical
movement of his brows, he blessed her again
fervently for listening as no writer would ever listen
to his effusions.
He turned suddenly to the girl, who was not
bored in the silence that had fallen on the pair.
“Why,” he asked curiously, “haven’t you suggested
Brenda before as a possible heroine?” He sniffed.
“Nasty word that! Don’t use it.”
“I . , . don’t know anything about writing, Pat.
“You’re the sanest little critic I know of, anyway.
You’ve got no personal obsessions to trip you into
spite or scorn ... or praise,” he told her promptly.
“It’s only the outsider who can judge fairly, you
know.”
“Outsider,” she breathed to herself, an angry
resentment rising to her cheeks and flooding them
with warmth. “I am . . . always the outsider.
As she did not reply, the young man went on.
“You and Bren are like a view seen far-off and
close up. With you, you are far enough off for
me to see you entire, therefore completely beautiful;
but with Brent it’s like walking over paddocks,
I know her well. It’s like knowing myself. We
thing uncannily alike, in lots of ways. Distant
scenes are more glamorous than scenes too close at
hand. See?”
“Yes, I see. A scene must be disillusioning when
viewed from the angle of an earth-worm.”


Her sinking spirits lifted a little, as he murmured
a hurt “Oh, I say!”
“I think,” she said presently, glancing at the
window near her, “that Bob is feeling it rather
badly—Jill going away, I mean.”
Brent considered, then said with a frown of
sympathy. “Yes, I imagine he is. Poor old chap,
but ...” and the speaker paused as he tried to
introduce a phrase subtly helpful to his own cause.
“Those things hurt like the dickens —as I know
from experience.” Clumsy, he told himself, cumsy
and crude. Do better than that, man!
For one who had written so many appealing
passages about the love-lorn, and thrilled the
people of three countries with the graceful whim-
sies of his first novel, Pat stumbled heavily in his
own professions of devotion. His fluency had
gone, replaced by a woolly feeling in his mouth,
his brains refusing to work for the benefit of one
coherent sentence. His body was leaden, a profuse
perspiration breaking out upon his face and
hands. He stumbled, and started again, then for-
got what he had intended to say, while in the
merciful dark he felt that his face was stretching
and grimacing and his hands swelling like the
pulpy ends of a mangrove root. “Beryl . . .” he
blurted, moving the oddly behaving hands vaguely
and heavily. “Beryl . . . I . . . am . . , still
feeling the . . . my experience has been un-
pleasant ... I mean . . . look here, don’t you
understand?” With a rush the definite query burst
from his lips, as his hands went into his pockets—
desperately. “I say, look here, Beryl . . . Oh,
Lord, this is awful ... to try to put into words
. , . words, mind you . . . and not one that’s


sane. Beryl ... a few moments ago I was sane.
Beryl . . . look here, can you try to . . . alter it.”
(“Confoundation: didn’t mean that at all. Oh,
Lord!”)
Beryl saw nothing ridiculous in the stuttered
confession that scorched itself in shame upon the
dispenser of words for the benefit of the public,
while they sorely failed the dispenser himself.
All that Beryl saw was a man hurt abominably,
petitioning awkwardly for help in a matter which
rested its weight on his heart. The desperate
need of . . . altering his unhappy state, brought
compassion and a world of tenderness to the girl,
who pressed his arm comfortingly, choked back
her tears, and said in a whisper as she realized her
need of hasty flight: “Don’t worry, Pat.” Then
against the dark doorway, “I understand . . . I’ll
try.”
The hours were eternities that night, as Pat waited
for Beryl to reappear, she hiding in her darkened
room, shutting her ears to the calls that sounded
through the house at supper-time. “She must
come now,” thought Brent miserably, sending
Bubbles three times to search. That small gentle-
man had called enticingly that there were egg
sangwidges and coffee, had peeped beneath the
bed breathing heavily into the dark a foot from
Beryl’s swollen face, then had returned to the
dining-room to report failure and attack the sang-
widges stolidly. “She must be out,” Barby cried
heartlessly. “Beryl often goes for walks to moon
by herself. I’ll stick a sandwich in her room for
when she comes in.”


Brent departed at last, the beach almost deserted
and very silent. The figure on the sands moved
with alternate slowness and enthusiasm as he
speculated and theorized by the whispering sea.
He blushed painfully from chin to forehead at
every recollection of the inane ass he had made of
himself before Beryl. Before Beryl . . . Oh, Lord!
She as cool as a cucumber, too. Why a cucumber?
Why not a turnip? He would tear up that
chapter he wrote last week. Tripe! People did
not make spectacular and graceful protestations
when they loved. They blithered and slithered
through a verbal canyon, stunned and sick and
helpless, staggeringly conscious of the tranquillity
of the other party, who never , , . never had to pro-
pose. Weaker sex! Rot! In their supposed weak-
ness was a strength stronger than a dozen Chinese
walls. That chapter would be scotched, anyway,
torn up and tossed into the wastepaper-basket.
“To-morrow,” he vowed, as he strode through the
silent hall of his hotel, “I’ll write a new one . . .
starting off with a lot of dots and asterisks, finish-
ing with a row of bally exclamation marks. More
true to life.”
Beryl crouched beside her bed until the house
was dark and silent in the bedtime hush, with the
Beehive windows lit softly by the light of candles.
She thought of Brent, until her brain spun wildly.
She emerged at Mum’s good-night visit, to fiddle
with lace and a brooch before the mirror, as Mrs
Campbell asked: “Where have you been, Beryl?”
“Nowhere, Mum dear.”
The lamp in Mrs Campbell’s hands had shone
upon the face of the giH, who forgot that her reflec-


tion was not hidden from the other. Mum sud-
denly winced, then stepping towards her, kissed
her softly. “What is it?” Mum asked in a whisper.
“Nothing . . . shhhh.” The kiss was returned
warmly, but the girl’s cheek was averted from the
light.
“Oh ...” Mum hesitated, then smiled, point-
ing almost gaily to the dressing-table. “Bubbles
put a sandwich there for you, but no milk. Would
you like some?”
“No, thank you, Mum dear . . . not ... to-
night.”
She withdrew. She would know it all in
time. The slim, tragic figure by the dressing-table
was bravely attempting to eat as the door closed
gently, but at the click of the latch the black head
went down and the sandwich dropped to the
plate again.
Beryl sat on the edge of her bed in her thin
nightgown, waiting until Barby’s light was out
on the veranda where she slept through all
weathers. To Brenda’s room Beryl crept silently,
shading the candle in her hands, moving softly
and quickly towards Brenda, half asleep in the
narrow bed by the wall. She sat up, alarmed as
the light moved across the room. “Shhh . . .
Brenda, I want to say something quickly. I can’t
wait. I don’t dare . . . but I don’t want Barby
to hear.” Beryl gulped and closed her eyes for
one sick moment, then steeled herself to go on.
“Brenda, Pat is eating his heart out for you,
and you won’t see it at all.”
“Beryl!”
“To-night he talked . . . about you, and said
he has experienced himself what . . . Bob per-


haps is feeling about Jill. Says he feels it now.
Almost choked him to admit it ... to me. He
almost asked me to try and help alter it.”
Beryl’s rapidly spoken explanation paused as she
moved nearer the amazed girl in the bed, illumin-
ated by the candlelight which was shaded away
from Beryl’s own face. “Brenda, can’t you
see it . . and say something, to stop him going on
and on and hurting himself more and more?”
“But ...” came a feeble gasp from the genuinely
dismayed and bewildered Brenda. “But Beryl
. . . he . . . he . . . he . . Brenda stuttered and
flushed. It was hard to say, to this big-eyed, big-
souled girl who had come in her long nightgown
to give away all chances of her own possible hap-
piness. Brenda thought in a panic-stricken flash:
“He ought to tell her, not I.”
Beryl saw the flush that rose on Brenda’s pretty
face and heard the stammer which to her meant
one thing. Brenda, you and he could go away,
and plan books and books. You could . . . you
needn t wait, until . . . later. Mum will have me.”
“I don't want to get married,” said Brenda with
startling vehemence. “It would upset everything.
As for Pat ... I should . . . hate to marry him.
Oh, Beryl, you are a goose, you’re all wrong. It’s
‘‘Don’t . . . don’t dare say you’d hate to marry
him. He’s ...” The cambric folds were gathered
up as the light was puffed out sharply. Brenda
caught one glimpse of the other’s woe-begone face,
indignant in defence of the man for whose happiness
she was fighting, and she stifled a small gasp of
pity.
“Beryl.”


Then, “Beryl?"
A door along the hall clicked; Brenda was alone.
Presently another white-clad figure was tap-
ping at Beryl’s room, but there was no response.
Opening the door slowly, Brenda peered in, then
struck a match at the dressing-table. The bed was
ordered, clothes folded tidily, the window wide
open, the curtains stirring in the night breeze.
With a little sound of dismay and sympathy the
girl stood in indecision on the rug, until, fearing
to wake the others and so reveal Beryl’s distress
against her will, Brenda slipped quietly back to
her own room. “It’s Pat’s job, anyway,” she mur-
mured. “If I told her, then he couldn’t . . . and
a man should tell those things himself.” As she
fell asleep Brenda said silently and contentedly:
“It’s really much more comfortable to imagine
things, after all.”
Beryl was out on the sand, hunched up with her
knees wrapped round by her arms, locked tightly,
hands over elbows, as she stared out, dry-eyed,
over the dim sea. “If she’s not kind to him, I be-
lieve 1 could even . . . hate Brenda.” She added:
“Almost.”


CHAPTER XX
While love than lightning fleeter
Turns all he touches sweeter. .
A MARA.
Obligations, unavoidable but annoying, took Brent
into the city by an early train next day, and did
not release him until after dark that night. With-
out waiting for dinner, he changed his clothes and
set out for the house along the shore. Into his
pockets he stuffed some bulky papers which be-
longed to Brenda; before dealing with his own
pitifully tangled affairs, he must tell her some-
thing. He found the household lingering over a
late meal, at the coffee stage, with the cloth almost
bare.
“Thanks, I should like some,” he admitted with a
pang of hunger, as Mum started to pour from the
old silver pot. He ate biscuits and cheese for a
moment, avoiding Beryl’s white face and Brenda’s
vaguely worried eyes. He added sugar to his cup,
and suddenly dragged some sheets of typed manu-
script into prominence.
“Good news for you, Bren,” he announced with
cheerfulness.
Good news! She almost dropped her cup as
she leaned forward, recognizing her own work on
the papers on the table. “Pat, do you mean . . ?”
Tell me quickly.”


“Just that, Authoress. I had business with old
Wimpel to-day, and tactfully led up to your manu-
script. He hummed and haaed and tried to
escape, but I read him scraps here and there, and
brazenly kept a roomful of hopefuls waiting out-
side while I outlined the yarn. He’s going to
print it on the new Girl’s Page of the Tribune, and
I’m responsible. I’m it’s Editor, from now onwards.
So beware . .” He nibbled a biscuit, still avoiding
Beryl.
Very still Brenda sat, while the others listened
with some awe as Pat continued. “Of course, you
won’t be able to retire on the proceeds, but the
Tribune's an important little rag, and you can’t buy
space in it —outside ads. The spirit you ve put
into this tale —by the way, you must cut out a
little—will capture a lot of readers for you, and
later some benign publisher will no doubt issue
it in book form. Congratulations, fellow-scribe.”
Brenda still did not speak. Waves of colour
rose to her sensitive skin as she looked from one
to another of the faces round the table. Beryl was
the first to break the silence. “I knew you’d do
it, Brenda, and I’m so glad.”
She was; the gladness shone from her eyes and
lingered on her mouth, everything forgotten in the
success for which the other girl had worked since
she knew how to hold a pen.
Barby grunted. “So now I suppose you’ll spend
the rest of your life wearing smocks and a vague
expression, and talking of psycho-analysis. Well,
if you can be paid for it, talk away. Congratula-
tions, Brenda; you deserve it. I don’t know how
you find enough to fill up a page. I should collapse


into a rigid swoon if anybody asked me to write
a tale.”
“And have smelling salts?” eagerly asked Bub-
bles. Nobody replied. Mum was gazing at this
girl of hers, so eager and happy in the small
triumph which all were sure was but the thin edge
of a considerable wedge. “I’m proud of you,
dear,”
“Oh, Mum darling! I’ve waited to hear you
say that. You see, it wasn’t for nothing—all
my horrid neglectfulness away in my room.” Her
lips trembled as she turned to Brent. “I owe it
all to you, Pat. I wish I knew how to thank you.”
“She does,” thought Beryl agonizingly. “She does
—if she will.”
“You’ve thanked me already,” grunted the em-
barrassed young man. “The little I’ve done
matters not a jot beside your own jolly clever work.
I’ve helped place it in the right quarter, that’s all.”
“That was something I might never have done,”
replied Brenda truthfully, “And . . . you don’t
know what it means to me.”
“Keep your books happy, Brenda,” supplied the
Major with a grave smile that also held pride.
“And write about things you understand. You’ll
be famous yet.”
Bubbles interrupted with heavy emphasis. “Will
you get rich ?” he asked with awe.
“I don’t know —and don’t care,” came promptly
from the girl whose grey eyes were luminous.
Pat smiled and shrugged. “The reply of the true
artist, eh?”
“Oh, Christopher!” groaned Barby suddenly.
“We all look perfectly foolish. Let’s tramp down
to the Bend and indulge. Ices might cool off our


enthusiasm .. . it’s rather hectic. I feel rather
convivial, too, with all this fame that has come
into our midst.” But Barby smiled fondly at her
sister.
It seemed to Brent that the girls would never
emerge from their rooms, to which they had gone in
search of microscopic powder-puffs and purses.
Strolling slowly over the hard sand close to the
slumberous waves, Beryl planned and dodged until
she managed to move away alone with Bubbles,
who held her hand tightly. Its warmth comforted
her in a vague way that at the same time made
her feel more alone. But he was a safe companion,
this night of turbulent emotions and tricky re-
actions. “I made up a pome to-day,” he announced
proudly. “Perhaps I’ll have pomes in papers, like
Brenda’s story.”
“Perhaps,” remarked Beryl with not too much
confidence. “What was the pome about, Bubbles?”
“About a strordinry thing,” came quickly. “You
see, pomes all nearly all strordinry, Pat says, so
I made one.”
“Tell me.”
There was once a place which I called the B-zoo,
A K-monkey lived there and a big kangaroo.
It had forty-five tails and a nose that was blue,
Which was very aggsiting for the nice B-zoo.
A deep sigh followed this masterpiece, and a
small: “Do you like it?”
“Oh, immensely.”
“I thought you would.” A wriggle of joy, then:
“Beryl, I had a surprise to-day.”
“Did you; a nice one?”
“Oh, just marv’lous. I found a frippence in the
leg of my bags that’ve got a hole in the pocket.”


Brent appeared at that moment, catching up
with long strides which swiftly overtook the girl
and the little boy. “Here, old chap,” he said to
Bubbles, handing him a shilling, “this will buy a
lot of drinks at the shop,”
“Goo’ness,” ejaculated that youth. “This is a
very surprising day. Thank you, Pat. I hope you
can spare it,” he added politely, stuffing the shill-
ing deep into his shirt pocket and buttoning the
flap carefully.
“Oh, quite. Now run on.”
Bubbles ran on, very willing.
“Beryl,” Brent asked abruptly, “why did you
slip away just now, and evade me?”
“You were with Brenda,” she replied weakly.
Gently he stopped her, turning her round so that
she had to face him in the grey light of the almost
soundless beach. She felt the tears start to her
eyes with the struggle that was gradually beating
her; if Pat would only let her go!
“Please . . .” she implored miserably.
“Oh, Beryl . . . are you still blind, little girl?”
“Blind?” she jerked, awakening with a sharp-
ness that bewildered her. There was something
in his voice that made her catch her breath.
“Blind and deaf to my pitifully crude efforts
to explain myself. Last night I tried to talk to
you . , . and I failed. I made a complete ass of
myself, but I shan’t again, not over this, anyway.
There’s too much at stake for any more stammer-
ing and misunderstanding. I can’t risk ... the
latter.”
Beryl could not move, or think clearly. She was
aware of the loud thumping of her heart against
her ribs, and absurdly afraid that he would hear


strange manner all day, and her glances which had
finally sent Beryl to her bedroom to escape them.
Oh . . . what did it all mean? What was Brent
saying?”
The ineffable
wonder of it almost hurt her,
as
she heard her
own voice saying hoarsely:
“I
thought ... it
was Brenda.” It was all that she
it. He said she had been blind . . . Pat . . . Pat
how? She waited, lips parted, unshed tears
drying on her lashes.
“Brenda told me just now, Beryl, of the fine,
splendid, courageous thing you did last night. You
thought it was Brenda I cared for, you dear,
quixotic, silly child. Brenda is the rarest little
pal either of us will ever find —but she could never
be my wife.”
Beryl gulped, and closed her eyes, while Pat’s
warm fingers released her shoulders. She swayed
where she stood. So that accounted for Brenda’s
He was talking, half chidingly, half fondly, with
an inflection in his voice that suddenly sent a wild
rush of intense joy through her as she waited, a
smile stealing into the tones he used as he stood
there, telling her the things she had not known
would be said to her. She was almost afraid to
move for fear the spell might be broken.
“. . . my wife, Beryl. Not now, for we both
have lots of time ahead, and I have a job to com-
plete. But I want to know that you love me and
will wait until you can come to me, and say: ‘Pat,
lam ready.’ Could you ever say that, dear?”
could think, clearly.
“I know you did. Dear, blessed little comrade
. . and the old companionship hasn’t been lost


after all; it’s come back, dressed up in its best, to-
night.”
“No.” She shook her head, half laughing, half
weeping. “That could never come back. It’s away,
finished. This is . . . new. Oh, Pat, I wondered
. . . how I could go on.”
“I know, dear. I’d come to wondering how I
should go on, with everything barren and chill with-
out you. Ever since Cleo married I’ve been as lonely
as . . . Thingummy’s cloud, until I felt that all I
wanted was to come back to you. I expected a
Beryl just a little older, still paddling in the water
and eating chocolates on the veranda, or making a
cake or something, to supplement my bachelor fare
at the cottage . . , eh?”
She laughed rather shakily. “Now you’re try-
ing to fit me with a halo,” she faltered. “And you
know my opinions about them. I shan’t wear it.”
“No need of one,” came gloriously from the
young man as he took her hands and pressed her
soft fingers warmly, trying to ease some of the full-
ness in that oddly behaving region in his chest.
“When I left the West I was in search of a type
for my yarn. It’s rather a particular kind of yarn,
and just a nobody wouldn’t suit it. I’d stopped,
Beryl, for I suddenly found I’d run out of types—
used them all up, until I hadn’t even an imaginary
creature in my noddle. I’ve found you now, and
I ve found myself, and into the book is going the
one girl who can make it. You’ll fit there, dear,
because the dreaming idiot in it is taken from my-
self ... the best bits, if I have any,”
I didn t know,” came a small confession,
humbly, “that I could ever be in a hook"
“Lord, Beryl, I’d have proposed there and then.


if I’d heard you say that in such adoring worship,
even without loving you you’ll be a perfect
author’s wife ... I mean,” he corrected gravely,
“an author’s perfect wife. See our pitfalls, little
lady?”
“Pat, I could sing” —blurted Beryl, not meaning
to say that at all.
“I could, but I shan’t; I have too much mercy
on the sleeping, or card-playing community behind
those windows up there,” he said placidly. “Let s
sit down; sorry, I forgot we were standing. I say,
I make rather a poor lover, don’t I?”
“Oh, no,” —Beryl sat on the warm soft sand, one
hand held between Pat’s fingers, where it curled
and nestled happily.
“Beryl, why did you try and hoist Brenda on
to me? I mean, how on earth could you have done
such a rippingly unselfish thing?”
“I don’t think it was that,” she answered doubt-
fully. “It was just that your being happy wouldn’t
make my own unhappiness worse; better, in fact;
and I couldn’t bear to see you hurt.” She realized
with a shock that it was she who had made the
unhappiness. “Oh, it was me; Pat, I’m sorry I was
blind.”
“You’re not now,” he reminded her.
“But I was silly: I remember now that she tried
and tried to tell me something, and there was a
kind of rushing sound in my eais, and I just talked
on, then flew. I was terrified for fear she’d see my
jealousy . . . that would be awful.”
“Jealousy,” scoffed Brent. “Don’t be a fathead.”
With a throb of contentment she heard the
unloverlike phrase that brought back the old days


Beryl paused, then lifted her head a trifle, and in
clear tones repeated softly: “I love you, Pat, and
will wait for you . . . and will always love you, and
will wait for ever and ever Oh, Pat•” Her
eyes filled. “I will, too.”
Gently, tenderly, he slipped an arm round the
slender figure beside him. She closed her eyes as
his lips pressed her cheek, firm, cool, and smooth,
then he slowly released her. “Some day . . . Beryl
I’ll kiss your mouth—but not now.”
Fiery, tingling with gladness, Beryl nodded.
“And some day I shall want you to,” she said. “And
nobody else will ever ... do that.”
so closely; he would not have called her that yester-
There was a small silence. Brent held the soft
hand tighter between his own as he leaned for-
ward : “Say it, Beryl.” He was almost solemn as he
waited.
“Say . , . what?” she whispered.
“ T love you, Pat, enough to wait for you.’ Say
it, dear, if you can, with truth.”
Footsteps scuffled in the sand not far away.
The girl and the man rose precipitately, guilty in
their absence from Brenda’s “conviviality,” but
laughing, they raced along the beach ahead of the
others, and reached the house first.
The rest filed into the dining-room, where two
glowing, self-conscious, and obviously happv young
people were seated in opposite corners of the room,
apparently reading. One glimpse told Mum that
everything was well with them, and a word or two
told the others.
An hour later Bubbles, disturbed from his bed
and in his pyjamas, wandered sleepily down through
the hall to where an interesting buzz of voices


sounded persistently. Something, in his estimation,
was “up.” He proceeded to investigate. Pushing
open the door, he announced to a suddenly silenced
room: “Please aggscuse my dressing-gown not
being on, cos the cat’s asleep on it, and she's not a
good sleeper sometimes. I say,” the small boy pro-
tested solemnly. “You sent me to bed and told me
to go to sleep, but how can I, with all this fuss
going on?”
“What fuss?” asked Mum twinkling.
Bubbles waved an arm expressively. “All this
J what are you two all smily about?
Blinking, he faced Beryl and Pat.
Brent struck a pose and appeared to consider,
much to the amusement of the remainder. “Let me
see,” he asked himself ponderously. “What am I
all smily about?” He racked his mind. “Ah, I
have it. I’m wearing a new tie.”
After a long inspection of Brent’s plain black
bow, Bubbles remarked stolidly: “It’s not pretty
enough to make you happy.”
Brent sighed dismally. “Perhaps its because I
haven’t enough income to pay taxes on.
Bubbles dismissed this with a haste that told of
his refusal to delve into it. “Now you’re silly. Go
on, Pat, tell me. There’s a secret in this house; I
can tell by the feel of it.”
“What can it be?” Brent pondered, evidently in
the throes of a great struggle. “Ah!” He struck
his leg. “Perhaps,” —and his eyebrows shot up as
he glanced sideways at the girl who was rosy-
cheeked and smiling, “It’s because I m going to
marry Beryl some day.”
Bubbles was a study in the blankness that can
fall upon the face of eleven years old. His gaze


travelled round the room with growing suspicion.
“You’re making fun,” he said at last. “Beryl’s not
a lady.”
“I thank you, son,” murmured the girl with
gravity.
“It’s quite true, Bubbles,” said Mum. “Beryl
and Pat are going to be married and live in another
house, which Bob will build for them, I expect . . .
when the girls come back from abroad.”
Bubbles was dumb, stricken and helpless. So
baffled was he that Brent asked curiously: “Well,
what are you thinking, Bubbles, old man?”
Silence, deep and incredulous, while round eyes
grew rounder.
Pat asked again: “What do you think of the idea,
Bubbles ?”
With a long sigh that wavered and broke long
after it began, the small boy turned to go. “What
do I think?” he asked witheringly. “I think it’s
ridic’lous.”
Halstead Printing Company Ltd.,
Allen Street, Waterloo


3 15 08 00068625 8


I
* \
/I ■
'\J $
■ —' 6- “' _ - ~ ' , >»


y —


rim i
iX - ;/%
tIMim If j
■*. f\w7-jmn$ 1
•v /■£> ; If iJ^rt : '-< ■*'*J $r : w3r®^
wm0wp iw# #v«v w%w*
!&%»w iiSjmh\n&w>irTO*«
'Ww&T
wmmm. wSi- ?Jlt wil^jl
hi ia |mM !
■ y f <- ffVv\ f 3n
&vW* frj rafroS $
.A 5 ,J\ifek &M*.; ~i? r« t&$r
||||ji ||||


m i lw
' *TI i K
V w
'wll
WM-
ivm
Vwl s
r i#
it, my »\w 4* j-
m
