

SUNSHINE H.S.T.
GROUND DRIVE and POWER-TAKE-OFF
Header Harvesters
INSTRUCTIONS
FOR
ASSEMBLING & STARTING
WITH
GENERAL INFORM ATION
FOR ADJUSTING AND
WORKING ON THE FARM.


H.V.McKAY MASSEY HARRIS Pty.Ltd.
"[lncorporated in Victoria)-
SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS,
SUNSHINE, AUSTRALIA.
MANUFACTURERS OF
FARM MACHINERY
Registered Office and Works —SUNSHINE.
'Phone —MW 9211 (5 lines).
Registered address for Cables and Telegrams : ‘
“SUNSHINE, MELBOURNE.”
For Duplicate Parts —“SUNPARTS, MELBOURNE.”
Branches—
-654-654 BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE, VICTORIA.
'Phone—Central 4354 (2 lines).
CONCORD WEST, NEW SOUTH WALES.
Telegrams—“ Sunshine, Sydney.” ‘Phone—UF 1221 (4 lines).
95-97 NORTH TERRACE, ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Telegrams—“ Sunshine, Adelaide.” 'Phone—Cent.s9ls(4 lines).
Duplicates—“Sunparts, Port Adelaide.” 'Phone —J 1135.
Cr. MURRAY & KING STS., PERTH, WEST. AUSTRALIA.
Telegrams—“ Sunshine, Perth.” 'Phone —85161 (3 lines).
Duplicates—“Sunparts, Maylands.” 'Phone—U 2151.
Distributors in Queensland —
11. V. McKay Massey Harris (Qld.) Pty. Ltd.
STANLEY STREET, SOUTH BRISBANE.
Telegrams—
“ Sunshine, Brisbane.” Duplicates—“Sunparts, Brisbane.”
'Phone—J 1501 (3 lines).
AGENCIES IN ALL AGRICULTURAL CENTRES
THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA.
Index at back of book.
X 235, 57, Gm. 946.
Sunshine Harvester Press.


The Sunshine H.S.T. Header, 8 ft. —completely assembled.


Sunshine 10 ft. Header Type H.S.T.
Fitted with Bagging Platform.


THE SUNSHINE H.S.T. HEADER
6FT., 8FT. Sc 10-FT. GROUND-WHEEL DRIVE
AND POWER-TAKE-OFF MACHINES
MR. OWNER,
In presenting this booklet for your use,
we have endeavoured to set out the various
details necessary to start your machine properly
and then to adjust it in the field, so that you
will obtain many years of trustworthy service
from it.
The first section of the book deals with
the assembly of the machine on the farm, the
second section with the adjustment of various
parts for the crop, and the third section with
details of construction and assembly which
may be of service in unusual crop conditions or
when any repairs are needed. The final section
comprises a list of special attachments and
instructions as to their fitting.
Should any further information be re'
quired, we welcome enquiries, and will do our
utmost to assist you.
LUBRICATION CHART AT BACK OF BOOK


DESCRIPTION OF SUNSHINE H.S.T. HEADER
The Sunshine H.S.T. Header Harvester has twin spirals
to convey the straw and grain to an elevator, which in turn
conveys the mass to the drum, which is of the “Grid Bar” or
“Rasp” type, with a concave of a similar type. Five walkers
are supported by hangers at the front end and are operated by
a crankshaft at the rear end, while the riddle box, for the final
cleaning of the grain, is supported by steel hangers and springs,
and move sideways—this movement being adjustable. On the
10-ft. size, a baffle reel above the walkers assists in the separa-
tion and in keeping the drum clear.
With the Ground-wheel drive machine the power for the
mechanism is derived from the crown wheel mounted on the
nearside of the main wheels, which drives two gear shafts.
The P.T.O. machines derive the power from the tractor engine
via the tractor P.T.O. spline shaft. A well concealed tail shaft
under the forecarriage of the machine takes the power to a
bevel gear box, which in turn drives the two gear spindles re-
ferred to above on the ground-drive machine. The front gear
shaft drives the thrashing drum through two short roller chains,
and the front elevator and feed roller with a belt chain. The
rear gear shaft drives the grain and headings elevators, the
straw' walkers, and the shaker shaft, w'hich in turn drives the
front or cutting bar section and provides the reciprocating
motion for the riddle box.
The Sunshine H.S.T. Header is built in three sizes—6ft.,
Bft. and 10ft. Many parts are interchangeable, but when order-
ing duplicates it is advisable to state the number of the machine
(on nearside of forecarriage) and use the code words as set out
in the Parts Catalogue.
NOTE.—In all references to the side of the machine,
Nearside is the left-hand, and Offside the right-hand, when
sitting on the seat or viewing the machine from the rear. The
Bagging Platform or Grain Box is on the nearside.


ASSEMBLING INSTRUCTIONS
FOR THE MACHINE ON THE FARM
Great care should be taken to see that the following in-
structions are correctly carried out and that the machine is
properly adjusted and lubricated before a start is made. A
good start will ensure good service over a period of years, pro-
vided that the lubrication is kept up to the bearings as indicated
by the “LUBRICATION CHART” at back of this book.
Lubricate the road wheels thoroughly before taking the
machine to the farm or field.
KEEP ALL NUTS TIGHT
ASSEMBLY OF PULLING GEAR TO
GROUND DRIVE MACH INES
On arrival at the station, the extension on nose piece of
the front carriage and the cross arms with the wide slotted plate
riveted together and the bows or links attached, will be found
folded back and wired on to the front carriage.
Remove the long bolt through front of nose piece and
swing the extension, complete with slotted plate, forward, and
replace bolt.
Bring the two links or bows attached to the outer ends of
cross arms around and secure in the brackets on the fork with


cotter pins. For pulling the implement to the farm, a shackle,
packed in the tool box, may be attached. If the implement is
to be pulled home behind a vehicle, the pole supplied should be
attached. This will be found wired to the frame behind the
seat. Remove the |" bolt on top of the wide plate riveted to
the cross arms, and bolt the pole in place.
On arrival at the farm the pole should be detached. Re-
move all the parts wired to the undercarriage. Then fit in
place the pulling gear as follows: —
STUB POLE IN
POSITION FOR PULLING
BEHIND WAGGON. Etc.
Remove the nut on the nearside of the front bolt of the
nose piece. Attach the under member of the outrigger with the
three holes on the one end outwards. Remove the nut on the
offside of the front bolt of the nose piece and slide the bolt in
until the top strap of the outrigger can be fitted.
Remove the bolt at the back of the tool box and bolt on
the round stay through the larger end. Bring this stay
forward to the top of the outrigger, securing it together with
the two members of the outrigger through the nearest hole to
the machine. Bolt on the two links for the shackle bar with a
J" holt through fhe outside hole of the outrigger if the team
is to be worked abreast.
If the team is to be worked tandem, the tw r o links should
be bolted to the inner hole.
The forward end of the links bolt to either the second or
third hole from the end of the shackle bar, according to the
yoking of the team. By this means the wheel will be kept in
the best position to maintain the machine in the crop with a
minimum of side draught.
The shackle bar should be bolted to slotted plate in the end
hole.


ASSEMBLY OF TRACTOR HITCH TO
POWER-TAKE-OFF MACHINES
The tractor hitch will be found attached to the machine in
a folded-up position. Cut the wires and bolt the two diagonal
angles of the tractor hitch to the draw-bar portion.
MAIN FRAME OF 8-FT. HEADER
Showing offside hinge extension fitted.




EXTRA ASSEMBLY INSTRUCTIONS FOR
10-FT. HEADERS ONLY
OFFSIDE WHEEL:
This has been fitted to the axle itself to facilitate trucking,
but when working, is carried on an extension of the main axle.
When fitting this extension it is necessary to jack up the offside
of the machine, so that the wheel may be removed from its
trucking position on the main axle. The extension is then slid
on to the axle and pinned to it with the dropper pointing to the
ground.
The J" Round Truss Rod is then put in position and loosely
screwed up. Fit the wheel to the extension with its sand
washers and bearings. See that there is ample lubrication on
these roller bearings. The truss rod should then be tensioned
up to give the wheel an outward lean; the top of the rim should
lean outwards from to 1" over the bottom (see illustration
opposite). Use a plumb line to check this. The upright casting
on the offside of the axle should be pinned to the axle and the
pin riveted.
NOTE.—The wheel must be fitted with the long side of the
wheel centre to the offside (outside).
UNDERFRAME DIAGONAL TRUSS ANGLES:
These have also been partially dissembled to save trucking
space. Undo the rear end of the channel member and truss on
offside of axle and slide the offside diagonal angle iron truss
over the channel member, keeping the truss rod underneath.
The cast iron distance piece at centre of diagonal truss goes
underneath the channel member with shallow end to the front.
Bolt the nearside end of the diagonal trass to the threaded
adjusting stud on the axle at nearside of drum case (see
Page 8).
Replace truss rod under channel member and tighten firmly.


TO ASSEMBLE FRONT ON MACHINE
To facilitate the assembling of the Sunshine H.S.T. Header,
draw the machine to a clear and level piece of ground and
place the comb or cutting bar section in front of the machine,
so that it will be convenient when running the machine forward
for coupling up.
END VIEW OF FRONT
Roller over Comb in position for average crop. Keep chains
driving Spirals reasonably tight (see page 40).
Put the offside hinge extension on forward side of angle
truss, with slot over web. Then attach round stay from
bracket with vertical extension on offside end of axle to the


hinge extension previously bolted on. The levelling pipe, with
the castings each end, is then pinned to the top of the vertical
portion of the axle bracket and put back out of the way until
the front is ready for coupling.
CHECKING SETTING OF DRUM:
The setting of the drum in relation to the concave should
be checked before fitting front—for details of this see page 46.
HINGE FLAP FOR FRONT ELEVATOR:
Take out long bolt which holds flap (and later, the out-
side sliding portion) of front elevator in position between drum
cheeks, not moving flaps unless it is not fitting closely on each
end, in which case it will be necessary to remove for dressing.
In placing back, be sure the spring grip (underneath) is holding
the flap firmly on top of concave plate.
FRONT ELEVATOR CASING:
The covering case for the front elevator or floats (embossed
“Sunshine”) is now bolted to the top of the throat at the near-
side end of the spiral case with twelve coach bolts. The stay
from the rear spiral rail to the covering case is riveted to the
casing with the two rivets supplied (in extras case).
FRONT ELEVATOR SPINDLES:
The %" spindles, with sprockets attached, should be put in
the bearings on covering case of front elevator (from the offside)
by removing the two sprockets, but leaving the cotter pin and
washer. The long spindle is for the bottom and the short one
for the top. When the spindle is threaded through offside
bottom bearing, thread the sprocket with set screw on spindle
first, with set screw on the inner side, then thread the second
sprocket, leaving -h" clearance between sprocket and end of
bearing. The same applies to the top spindle. At no time
should both sprockets on the same spindle be secured to it—
except in the case of the driving spindle, where the sprockets
are held by Woodruff keys and set screws.
ATTACHING THE FRONT:
The front may now be placed on boxes or supports about
18 inches high, or may be stood up on the comb, which is pro-
tected by a timber guard, and propped under the forward side
of elevator casing by the stub pole or a piece of timber about
three feet long, which gives about the right height to take the
balance. It is advisable to dig holes so that the points of the
dividers on each side are not bent. Then remove the wooden
protector pieces behind and under the spiral case.
Then attach nearside and offside castings for coupling front
to underframe; these are each attached by two bolts, which
must not be finally tightened until front elevator casing is in
its position on the machine. Now lower the underframe, by the


raising and lowering lever, sufficiently to run under the pre-
viously mentioned castings. (Danger: Stand well to side when
releasing latch in quadrant, as the lever may spring up suddenly
when not balanced by weight of front). The machine is then
run forward, and the underframe adjusted until the nearside
is in position, so that the cup-head pin can be put in. When
secured on the nearside, the oifside can be placed in position by
moving the front as required, and putting in the cup-head pin
and the cotter pins.
Now that the front is attached to the underframe, it can
be pushed back, and the underframe lowered by the raising and
lowering lever until within about 12 inches of the ground, then
tilt the comb downwards until the points of the dividers or wood
protecting the comb rest on the ground; this will give sufficient
room to slide outside portion of front elevator over inside
portion. Slide it down until low enough to be in line with holes
in drum cheeks—oil the slides and make sure the slide moves
freely.
Now release levelling guide (which will run between the
rollers on the drum cheeks) on nearside of front elevator casing
by loosening the bolts at its ends. It is secured to the bearing
bracket at the top.
The front roller on the nearside drum cheek can now be
taken off—but just slacken the back roller bolt enough to take
off the outside connecting strap. Replace the nut without the
connecting strap and tighten on the bush to prevent the head
of the bolt falling back and catching the wings on the outside
sliding portion of the elevator. (This bolt cannot be replaced
without letting the front forward, so it must be kept in position.)
This sliding portion of the elevator should be moved up or
down till the hinges at its top end coincide with the hinge on
the flap at the mouth of the drum case and the holes in the
drum cover cheeks. Put in the long I" bolt from the offside,
picking up the small stay first, then the cheek of the drum
cover, then the hinges of the sliding portion and the flap. Care
must be taken when the bolt is nearly through to see that the
hole in the nearside cheek of the drum cover and the small stay
on the outside are picked up, too. Replace the nut on the bolt
and screw up, but not too tightly.
Push the top of the elevator back (this lifts the comb off
the ground) until the levelling guide, previously loosened off,
clears the bolt and bush for the front roller.
It is important to see that the casing for the front elevator
goes inside the sliding portion, which in turn goes on the inner
side of the drum cover cheeks. Also, the extreme foinvard corner
of these cheeks, which have a slight bend in them, must be
sprung in behind the reinforcing pieces of sheet iron spot-welded
to the sides of the casing for the front elevator —both sides.


The levelling guide will now rest against the rear roller, so
replace the front roller on its pipe centre and connect by the
strap between the two bolts. Tighten these securely, also those
in the levelling guide.
UNIVERSAL JOINT ON DRIVING ROD:
The universal joint with release coupling attached should be
screwed on to the right-hand threaded spindle on the combina-
tion driving bracket on the nearside end of the front, and then
the square sleeve slid over the driving shaft as the front is
let back.
Another method is to place the coupling on the square driv-
ing rod and then screw it on to the spindle on the front. When
caught by two or three threads, it can be screwed up by using
a spanner on the square rod. Notice should be taken when
screwing up that the bevel wheel on back gear shaft does not
screw off. If it is inclined to screw off, put rear pinion into
gear and tighten firmly by turning square driving rod from the
machine (anti-clockwise) before commencing to screw up the
universal joint.
LEVELLING THE COMB:
The offside levelling connection, which has already been
attached to upright from axle on the offside, can now be brought
forward and coupled to the spiral case rail.
Notice should be taken to see that this latter rail is at least
parallel on the top side with the axle. A twist may be apparent
in the comb or spiral casing (detected by looking along it from
either end), and this would be taken out by adjusting the length
of the offside levelling connection. This can be altered by
loosening the lock-nut, withdrawing the pin and screwing the
adjusting casting on or off.
TO RAISE OR LOWER THE OFFSIDE END OF THE
COMB, a further adjustment will be found on nearside end of
the angle truss members, which are attached on a heavy stud
pivoted to the main axle underneath. To raise the offside end of
the underframe (and the comb), slacken the lower nut on this
stud, and screw down the upper nut. Continue this operation
until the comb is at least level or preferably the offside is one
inch higher than nearside.
ALIGNING FRONT ELEVATOR WITH DRUM CASE:
The front can now be lifted up and down a few times to
see that everything is in place and that it is running in line
with the sliding elevator. If not, it should be moved to the
offside or nearside slightly. The slots in castings bolted to the
main pipe member under comb allow for this adjustment, and
if satisfied that it is in line and square, the bolts in these cast-
ings can be finally tightened up.


FITTING “FLOATS” OR FRONT ELEVATOR:
To put in the floats or front elevator it is necessary to have
the front of the machine about three-quarters of the way up.
Release the long pipes from studs on bottom bearings on each
ASSEMBLY OF “FLOATS” OR FRONT ELEVATOR
side of front elevator, then take off short pipes on both sides.
Then the floats can be put in by running them over top
sprockets, with the flange, which is riveted to the chain, facing


down, then under and around bottom sprocket and up and
around driving sprockets, and before coupling, give the floats a
pull to raise the bottom bearings, to give as much slack chain
as possible for coupling.
It is important that the floats should be put in to draw
from the underside, and to prove that they are correct, the
flange riveted to the link should face up, looking at it from
the back.
NOTE.—If float chain is to be coupled or uncoupled, it is
always necessary to release the pressure pipes off the studs on
both top and bottom bearings each side.
When chains have been coupled, push down the bottom
bearing, and see that all links are straight, and no slack chain
under bottom sprockets. Replace the long pipe on the stud on
bottom bearing-. Before bringing the top pressure spring into
action, it is necessary to see that there is one washer under it
and one washer on top of it. This done, press the spring and
short pipe down with one hand or a hammer handle and pul!
up the top bearing with the other (or lift it with a screwdriver)
and place the nipe on stud under top bearing.
Remove short driving chain on nearside (lift tension
sprocket). and pull the floats around a few times to see that
everything is in place and that the floats are running square,
and, if so, replace driving chain. The elevator chains are of
No. 52 steel, but the outside driving chain is No. 55 chain.
For adjustment of elevator see page 42.
Put COVER FOR REAR OF FRONT ELEVATOR (packed
in riddle box) on long bolt at the bottom, between the drum
case cheeks, and replace the other long bolt behind the top of it.
The feed roller cover is not intended to be held by the lower
bolt, but the lugs should rest on it at each side.
COVER FOR REAR OF WALKER CASE:
This fastens to the rear of walker case with the three bolts
and two screws on each side, the rear bolts taking also the
adjustable Tail Sheet at the rear of the walkers (see page4s).
THE CHUTE FOR HEADINGS ELEVATOR;
This slides over the chute on the elevator and clips to the
hopper on drum case cover. It is packed in the riddle box. (See
page 90 for special chute to walker casmg.)
BELT FOR STRAW WALKER DRIVE:
This should be put on crossed to give the correct direction
of rotation to the straw walkers. It is advisable to oil the belt
well with Neatsfoot or Castor Oil to make it pliable, and so that
it is not necessary to over-tighten it to make it drive properly.
The belt should be removed at the end of each day’s work and
kept out of the rain at all times.


CHAINS:
See that all packing wires are removed from these before
starting. Each chain should be oiled liberally at the start to
prevent any cutting or scoring.
GRIPS FOR MAIN WHEEL:
In bolting grips on main wheel from the back, place
the bolting flange up, and the right-hand side down. Screw nuts
up firmly when finished. These grips must always be put on.
REAR VIEW OF MAIN WHEEL.
Showing attachment of Grips, also Roller Bearings and Crown Wheel.
DRIVING PINIONS:
The driving pinions for the front and back gear shafts are
packed in the tool box. To fit these, remove the driving pin,
which is held in place by the set screw in the end of the shaft.
Undo the nuts holding the clutch fork in place, then placing
fork in groove of pinion, slide pinion on shaft and replace nuts


ASSEMBLY OF NEARSIDE BEARINGS & PINIONS
Driving Pinion and
Clutch Fork
Assembled on
Front Gear Shaft.


securing clutch fork. Turn lever to the left (anti-clockwise),
so that driving pin can be replaced. See that the set screw
locates in the countersink in the pin.
IMPORTANT.—The two lock nuts in the eye bolt which
operates the fork must be located on the inside of the link
and should be tightened so that they touch and exert slight
pressure on the fork, when the pinion is engaged. If the eye
bolt is unduly slack when the pinion is in gear, there is lost
motion in the operation of putting the machine out of gear, and
it may drop into gear when travelling along a road, etc.
For aligning and meshing of pinions, see page 49.
TO ATTACH GRAIN BOX
A pair of angle iron supports, with sheet metal plates
riveted to the top of them, are to carry the weight of the box
and to bolt to the angle iron frame around same. These sup-
ports, one at each end of the grain box, bolt on to the nearside
of the nearside side strap, with the flange of the sheet metal at
the top, on the front one facing to the front, and on the rear
one to the rear.
Two diagonal stays, I|-" x tie the supports together,
and are held at the lower end by the centre bolt in the frame
bracket on axle in the offside of the nearside strap, the upper
end being bolted to the inside angle support, front and rear.
(Do not tighten these bolts up until the box is in position.)
From the offside end of the metal plate riveted to the front
support, bolt on the plain x stay, and secure the other
end by the bolt in the front diagonal immediately in front of
the front gear shaft.
The rear 1|" x |" stay, which is bent in several places, has
a plate riveted to it for securing the lower end of extension for
seconds box. Bolt this stay to the offside end of sheet metal
plate riveted to the rear angle iron support by two bolts, one
bolt passing through plate alone and other through plate and
support. Secure the other end by the first bolts in the comer
bracket for the rear end of the offside gear rail. The box can
be then picked up bodily and slid into position, being careful
not to damage the screen. Secure the box by two I" bolts at
each end and screw up securely.
A cover for the screen is provided, and bolts will„be found
in the top of the grain box and in the extras case for securing it.
The chain and sprocket with handle attached for spread-
ing the grain in the grain box will be found in the tool box.
When attaching the sprocket and handle to the box, the chain
must be in position. Any slack chain can be taken up by the
slot when tightening up the stud that holds the sprocket and
handle. (This applies to the 17-bushel grain box as normally
supplied on Bft. Headers.)


10-FT. POWER-TAKE-OFF HEADER WITH 23-BUS. GRAIN BOX.


The seconds box extension is bolted to the grain box and
the plate on the diagonal support for the box. The bolts will
be found in the extras case.
The oil-can stand, if not already fitted, will be found in
the extras case, together with bolts. Attach it on the offside
member of the front grain box support.
TO ATTACH BAGGING PLATFORM
(See illustration, page 2.)
If grain box fitted—remove it and the mountings.
The Supporting Frame for Platform, which is riveted to-
gether, is attached to the machine in the following manner:—
The rear upright angle support is attached by long bolt
supplied, using it in place of the bolt at rear end of nearside
side strap. This bolt also secures the end of strap on back of
gear rails.
The front upright angle support is secured by a clamp
(supplied), which fits over the nearside side strap.
The front diagonal stay is secured by the bolt through top
angle rail and upright front angle support, on the supporting
frame for platform, and at its other end by the bolt through
front diagonal strap and strap from nearside side strap on the
main frame of the machine.
The rear diagonal stay is secured by the bolt through-top
angle rail and upright rear support, on the supporting frame
for platform,, and at its other end by the bolt through bracket
for headings elevator and strap on back of gear rails. This
stay may be distinguished by a bracket bolted to it for support
of rear end of extension for seconds box.
The front diagonal stay is bolted at one end to the bottom
of upright front angle support, using the countersunk bolt
supplied. At its other end it is secured by the bolt through
front diagonal strap and connecting strap from nearside side
strap.
The rear diagonal stay, with sheet metal plate riveted on,
is bolted at one end to the bottom of upright rear angle support
(using countersunk bolt supplied), and at its other end is
secured by the bolt through strap on back of gear rails and
angle stay on nearside of walker case.


The Floor of the Platform is hinged by a bolt at each end
through the upright angle supports. The front |" bolt also
secures bracket for hingeing empty bag rack with the eye
facing downwards.
The Front and Rear Posts are bolted on to form the corner
plates on the bottom angle rail, the special rivet for slip rail
to face outwards.
Front and Rear Top Rails are hinged to the front and rear
posts by bolts and lock nuts, the offside ends resting in the
guide brackets.
The Empty Bag Rack is arranged in front of the platform,
and is supported by a hinge rod. This rod engages with the
bracket secured by |" bolt at the offside, while at the nearside
there is a corresponding bracket secured by a |" bolt to the
post. The eye of this latter bracket must face upwards, in
order to make the hinge rod level. Attach the spring bow to
front of empty bag rack with brackets supplied. The brackets
must be bolted on with the upright portion outside, in order to
prevent the bow from moving from one side to the other, as
would occur if the brackets were put on the other way round.
The spring and guide attached to the bow are for the purpose
of retaining the bow in position. The guide works in the slot
of the angle iron projecting beyond the front of the rack, with
the spring between bow and angle iron.
The Chain, for maintaining the platform in position when
folded up against the machine for transport is bolted near the
top of the upright rear angle support, and engages with hole
bored in rear body member of platform.
The Screen, complete with the ring and sprocket, is screwed
to the “hat board” on the side of the elevator with the screws
provided in the Extras Case. The screen should be kept back to
the rear, so that the chain will mesh properly with the sprocket.
The Screen Case and Seconds Box are secured on the offside
by brackets riveted to them. These brackets fit on to the long
bolt through grain and headings elevators. Remove the nut
and place the brackets on the bolt on nearside of arm for
tension of elevator chain. Screw nut up tightly when fitted.




The Bagging Hopper bolts on to the top angle rail of the
supporting frame. The nearside end of this hopper is sup-
ported by a stay, as shown in the illustration.
The Extension for Seconds Box is attached in a similar
manner to that used in the case of the standard grain box.
The Bag Bows are supported by brackets secured to the
top angle rail of the supporting frame. The front bag bow
chain is attached to the hole in the plate on the front of the
hopper. After attaching the chain, bend the plate back so that
the link cannot come out. Tire rear bag bow chain is attached
to a hook as illustrated.
LUBRICATION
It is essential that every bearing be lubricated regularly
according to the Lubrication Chart at back of book, and also
attached to the machine under the tool box or grain box lid.
The chart is set out for average shade temperatures of
from 85° to 100° F., but should conditions be excessively hot or
dusty, we advise extra lubrication.
Failure to carry out this lubrication as described may result
in a seizure of the bearing, or undue wear.
The oils specified have been fully tested, and will ensure
the minimum of wear over a long period of years.
All bearings in Sunshine Headers are lubricated by the
pressure gun nipple system, and we recommend the use of
“Sungoil” gun oil in the grease gun for this. It is the most
suitable lubricant obtainable, and it will not choke or air lock as
grease will, and will penetrate through a bearing like a light oil.
Exhaustive tests have shown that a small quantity of lubri-
cation on all the joints of the steel and malleable belt chains,
especially when starting, prolongs the life to a great extent.
(For Roller Chains see later.) If the new chain once begins to
cut or scrub, due to dryness between the links, it will not last
long. Old heavy oil is admirable for these chains. Under
some sandy conditions, particularly those of a silicious nature,


it is very difficult to keep any oil on the chains. However, ltic
initial oiling will always help to make the chain wear with a
good bright surface and prevent “scrubbing.”
Oil from the sump of a tractor using kerosene is not recom-
mended, as it is usually diluted badly with kerosene.
BALL BEARINGS OR RACES:
The machine is fitted with the highest quality ball races,
which, although not requiring extra attention, should be care-
fully looked after.
The manufacturers of these bearings give much attention
to the finishing of the surfaces of the balls and races, but these
are susceptible to corrosion, so the first essential in lubricating
them is that the lubricant must be free from acid or alkali.
Therefore, lubricants known as “animal” or “vegetable” are
unsuitable, as they are liable to become rancid or develop acid.
Lubricants containing graphite or French chalk, etc., should not
be used.
A pure mineral lubricant of a consistency such as vaseline
or lighter is recommended. (“Sungoil,” for example.) Gear
oil (S.A.E. 160) in temperatures under 85° F. is satisfactory.
The ball bearings on a harvesting machine have to work
under extremely dusty conditions, so we recommend greasing
once every day the ball races on the ends of the drum shaft and
on the front and rear gear spindles. These are in housings
with felt washers to check dust working along the spindles. It
is not recommended that large quantities of lubricant be forced
past the felt washers, as the dust seal is then spoilt. In fact,
the ball races will run better with the housings about half full,
if that can be gauged. Often excessive filling—especially if
hard grease is used —will cause heating.
If any of the ball races are removed, they should be care-
fully washed in petrol or gasoline and filled according to the
above instructions, making sure no foreign matter, such as sand
or water, is introduced. Should the bearings be removed from
their housings at any time, it is advisable to check and renew
(if necessary) the felt washers to ensure a good dust seal.
ROLLER CHAINS:
Special consideration should be given to the two roller
chains. They should be oiled liberally and kept moist at all
times. Old engine oil is suitable.


It is also recommended that the roller chains be removed
at the end of each season and washed thoroughly in petrol and
soaked in clean oil for some days before replacement.
For adjustment of chains, see page 54.
CROWN WHEEL FOR MAIN DRIVE:
Keep this lubricated with oil or grease, so that a good
surface is maintained. Do not over-lubricate, to cause a collec-
tion of dirt and grease in the root of the teeth. This will cause
the driving pinions to be gradually pushed out of mesh, as well
as putting undue strain on the driving mechanism, and causing
heavy draught.
It is never advisable to allow the segment teeth to have a
“scrubbed” appearance, through lack of some lubricant.
For adjustment of pinions, see page 49.
For replacement of segment, see page 71.
END OF SEASON
Keep your machine under coyer as much as possible; put
it in a shed as soon as it has been cleaned down. Scrape off
all dust, grain and grease, and empty grain box, grain and
headings elevators, and see that the grain and headings chutes
and spiral casings are clean.
Remove all chains, particularly roller chains, and wash in
petrol and soak in oil.
Take off belts and clean and rub thoroughly with good
castor or neatsfoot oil.
Check over all the parts which may need adjusting or
replacing before next season. Do this while the harvest is still
fresh in your mind.
Collect all extra parts belonging to your header—the spare
comb fingers, walker pulley, roller over comb, tools, lever for
adjusting helper spring, stub pole, etc., so that you can find
them next season.
Grease all bearings thoroughly.


SETTING THE MACHINE FOR THE
CROP
RIDDLE BOX, RIDDLES AND BLAST
STRENGTH OF THE BLAST:
The blast on this machine is obtained without the addition
of an extra drive. There are two fans, one on each side,
attached to the ends of the thrashing drum itself. These are
made of such a design as to throw the blast towards the centre
of the outlet, from where, by means of vanes or deflectors, it is
distributed over the width of the riddle box.
TO ADJUST:
To adjust the amount of blast for ordinary wheat, oat or
barley crops, shutters are provided covering the intakes on
each side, being operated by a lever at the driver’s right hand.
Pulling the lever right forward admits more air, pushing it
back reduces it. It is essential each shutter opens the same
amount, otherwise uneven distribution is obtained. Her the
arms evenly on the rod carrying each shutter.
THE ADJUSTABLE SHEET-IRON “CUT-OFFS”:
These should be set about To" from the ends of the rotating
fan blades. However, the nearer they are brought to the blades
the greater the blast, as there is then less tendency for the air
to be carried around by the fans. The “cut-offs” are fastened
to the top sheet of the throat from the fan by two bolts,
situated in the opening between that throat and the throat
leading upward from the drum.
After setting, always revolve drum to see that the blades clear.
THE VOLUME OF BLAST is also controlled by the speed
of the drum. This speed is variable by utilising the change
sprockets on the drum shaft (see page 57), but on account of
particular conditions of thrashing, it is not always feasible or
desirable to speed up the drum. For instance, certain types of
wheat and barley are cracked by excessive drum speed, but, on
the other hand, there are wheats that require the highest speed.
However, it is not recommended that high drum speeds be used
purely for the sake of more blast, unless it is absolutely essential
on account of heavy green stuffs, etc.
NOTE.—If ever the drum is re-set or shifted in its
brackets, it is essential to check the setting of the fan “cut-offs,”
also drum “cut-off” (see page 48).


NORMAL SETTINGS FOR WHEAT, OATS OR BARLEY


Showing the normal settings for Wheat, Oats, Barley, Rice, Peas, etc.,
using the 2" Lip Ridged Top Riddle.


DIRECTION OF BLAST:
Just as important as the volume of the blast is the direction
in which it is deflected through the riddles. The direction is
controlled in three ways. There is an adjustable bottom in the
throat of the blast chamber to which are riveted two vertical
wind deflectors. By raising this adjustable bottom, the blast
can be thrown up on to the front of the riddles or vice versa.
The usual working position is about J inch —| inch from the
bottom of the drum case, the adjustment being made by the set
screws and locking wing nuts under the drum case. Be sure
to tighten the wing nuts after altering. If the sheet is set too
high, the wind will not be effective on the rear of the bottom
riddle, causing a dirty sample.
The VERTICAL DEFLECTORS also play a big part in
the distribution of the wind. The setting of these is permanent,
so that once they are set correctly they should not be altered.
However, should any uneven distributiion of wind be apparent,
they should be re-set as follows: : —
For normal working they should be vertical with a slight
tendency for the front top end to be bent towards the drum
case side, so as to catch the blast. Setting them close to the
drum case sides at the front end will give a stronger current
up the centre of the riddles.
To have a stronger current up the sides, bend the rear end
slightly to the drum case sides.
Do not over bend these deflectors, and always endeavour
to keep the lower part of them square to the adjustable sheet on
the bottom.
THE HORIZONTAL DEFLECTORS:
The third adjustment (the normal one when working) is
the two horizontal deflectors operated by the two levers in the
racks on the offside of the machine, at the outlet from the
fan case. These are to throw the blast upwards or down-
wards, or concentrate it in one direction. The usual setting
is the fourth notch from the rear end of the rack for the top
one, and the third notch from the rear end of the rack for the
bottom one. The position of these, however, will vary accord-
ing to the setting of the riddles and the other deflectors. Further
reference will be made later to the various settings of these.
SHAKE:
Never use any more shake on riddle box than absolutely
necessary.
Always make best use of all the wind and the direction of
it before increasiing the shake. Extra wind does not cost any-
thing (provided the drum speed is not increased to obtain it),
whereas extra shake causes more general wear.


It should be each operator’s aim to exhaust every avenue of
riddle setting and wind adjustment before increasing the shake,
which should then only be increased one tooth at a time until
the sample is satisfactory.
The shake can be adjusted by the bolt with castellated nut
and cotter pin in crank on rear end of shaker shaft. Withdraw
the cotter pin and loosen the nut (right-hand thread) and slide
the roller up or down in crank, according to shake required;
tighten up securely when finished, and do not omit to use the
cotter pin, as the nut may work loose.
Heavy oat and barley crops usually require more shake
than a similar yielding wheat crop.
Conditions that generally require more shake are where
heavy green rubbish is prevalent, or where the crops are heavy
yielding, say, up to 35 bushels.
If the machine moves from this heavy crop to a light one
or a clean one, the shake should be reduced. Too much shake
is indicated by a clean riddle, on which the grain can be seen
bouncing when working; short straws in the sample; excessive
repeat and loss of grain over the tail board.
For very heavy oat or barley crops, it may be advisable
to use one riddle only. In this case it is recommended to set
whichever riddle is used low in the box, using the rake on the
rear end as before. It will be used smooth side up or vice versa,
according to amount of green rubbish, etc., as before.
RIDDLES:
TO FIT. —Loosen the long -J" bolt through the centre of the
box by unscrewing the nut on the outside.
Loosen the thumbscrews of the bolts at the front and back
of the box, and slide the tail board at the back of the riddle to
its lowest position.
The selected riddle is then slid into the box, picking up the
rack in the front end on the right side first—this rack is further
back than the other. Without exception, this lower riddle is
put in with the lips down and facing towards the blast —you
should be able to see through the riddle as you put it in. The
rear of the riddle is then secured to the box with the bolts and
wing nuts, using the range of holes. Do not tighten the rear
bolts up till the top riddle is in place.
The top riddle has a rake secured by three bolts to the rear
of it. _ The riddle may be used with the lips up or down, but the
rake is always used at the rear to carry the straw and other
coarse particles over the tail board, with the bent ends of the
prongs up and well separated, so that the straw will not catch


between them. The slope on the rake will vary according to
conditions, but it is preferable to have the ends of the prongs
about 1 inch to inches above the level of the riddle.
The tail board position will also vary, but generally it will
be about 1 inch to 1-J inches above the end of the rake prongs.
Tighten all thumbscrews (six) and the i" bolt through the
riddle box.
SELECTION AND POSITION OF RIDDLES (For special
riddles see page 91).
For an average clean crop of, say, 20-25 bushels of wheat,
oats or barley, the f" riddle is put in the bottom first, and
always with the lips facing down towards the blast. Use the
lowest notch of the rack at the front and the second hole from
the bottom at the back. The TJ-" riddle is then put in above it,
with its front in the third notch from the top and the bolt in
the fourth or fifth hole from the top at the rear. The lips will
be up and facing towards the rear. This means that each
riddle is put in with the lips in such a way that the operator
can look through them as he stands behind the box.
Hence, if the top riddle is turned over to have the smooth
side up and lips down, it must be turned end for end as well as
over, the rake being unbolted and shifted to the rear end in
every case.
It is always preferable to keep the riddles as low as pos-
sible at the front (nearest blast) end of the riddle box. This
secures a better sample, as there is a greater distance for the
chaff to fall from the trays and hence the blast has a better
chance of treating it; secondly, in some cases the chaff is partly
separated from the grain before it reaches the riddles; thirdly,
straws have more room to turn back and so have not the
tendency to block the riddle; fourthly, the riddles being nearer
the bottom of the blast throat have more blast on them; fifthly,
there is not the same risk of blowing grain out as the tail
board may be kept well up. There may be conditions (such as
green trash, etc.) which will not allow the riddles to be placed
as advised, but in many cases better cleaning with less shake
and less blast is obtainable with this setting.
If straws are inclined to penetrate front end of riddles,
partly close about seven or eight rows where the straws are
troublesome. If the crop is a light one, the sheet for covering the
rake on the sliding tray at front end of riddle box can be fitted.
On 8-ft. cut machines, the f'' riddle is used as a bottom
riddle instead of the |" when the wheat is small or pinched.


ADJUSTMENTS IN THE CROP:
The blast should be regulated so that a clean sample is
obtained without blowing grain over the tail board, which
should be raised or lowered to suit the conditions.
If reducing the blast, to stop loss or repeat into the head-
ings chute, causes a dirty sample, raise the rear end of the
riddle and tail board, and keep approximately the same blast
setting.
It is always preferable to have a few odd straws on the
rear of the riddle to check clean grain being blown into the
headings chute.
If too much clean grain is returning to the drum—often
indicated by cracked grain in the sample —set the horizontal de-
flectors steeper; this throws the blast up through the riddles.
If this does not help, then reduce the blast and raise the rear
end or lower the front end of the riddle —the lower one usually.
Setting the horizontal deflectors flatter will help to remove
“white heads” as the wind carries them along into the headings
chute. However, under certain circumstances it is necessary
to lower the rear end of the lower riddle to cure this trouble.
If the wind is directed along the riddle too much it may
cause excessive repeat. Make the horizontal deflectors a little
steeper.
Examine the lower riddle occasionally to see that it is
clean, and not blocked by thistle heads or earth, etc., especially
when working in a down crop, peas, etc.
WIDTH OF RIDDLE BOX:
The width of the riddle box should be so adjusted by means
of the threaded distance bolts at front end and in centre of box,
that the riddles are held firmly but not too tightly. Should the
box be too wide the riddles will be cracked through looseness,
and should they be buckled because the box is too tight, they
will eventually crack (see page 43).
THE 2 LIP RIDGED TOP RIDDLE :
This is a special top riddle for Wheat, Oats, Barley, Peas or
Rice, and is of special value in the harvesting of heavy crops, its de-
sign being such that the maximum yield of grain is successfully
riddled without wastage.
The riddle can be worked in variable crop conditions without
adjustment in the riddle box, the only adjustment necessary is the
blast control according to the crop being handled. THIS IS AN OUT-
STANDING FEATURE OF THIS RIDDLE.


It has ample capacity to handle the heaviest of crops and is
capable of handling a big body of straw and trash. Its ability to do
this is given by the ridges which keep the body of straw, etc., light
on the riddle. The side shake of the riddle box, in conjunction with
these ridges, will not allow any dead spots or mass to congest it.
If the setting, as illustrated below, is adopted, it will serve for
most grain crops, from heavy to light.
The 2" Lip Ridged Top Riddle has proved to be ideal in Peas,
particularly if the crop is at all infested with green weeds.
THE 2" LIP RIDGED TOP RIDDLE.
The rake is attached to the rear end of the riddle
in the usual way.
For Rice it has become very popular. In harvesting this heavy
yielding crop, an abnormal quantity of grain is passed through the
machine and the 2" lip has proved capable of giving an excellent
sample. An idea of the weight of grain which has to be dealt with,
can be appreciated when we realise that yields of paddy rice some-
times reach 3J tons to the acre.
ROLLER OVER COMB:
A roller over comb is provided to reduce the length of
straw taken in when working in high crops. It is also very
useful in short or very thin crops to avoid heads jumping away
when cut by the knife. Each end is fastened to the dividers at
each end of the spiral casing.


The rolletr should be set about six inches above the comb
and in front of the spiral for an average crop. In this position
the comb can be set to apparently cut about 18-24 inches of
straw, and yet the roller will hold it down until the knife (and
machine) advances and cuts it off much nearer the head. It
will be noticed that the straw is cut on an angle.
ROLLER IN POSITION FOR NORMAL CROP
(See also illustration, page 10)
A pair of brackets are supplied to give greater adjust-
ment if necessary—say, for an abnormal crop of tall thistles.
After adjusting, see that the roller revolves freely.


DRIVING HINTS
GROUND-DRIVE MACHINES
A new machine should be given a short test before it enters
the crop.
1. See that all tools are collected, that all bolts are
tightened, and cotter pins opened out.
2. Check drum to see that it revolves freely.
3. Then engage the front gear pinion by turning the lever
, clockwise (to the right). See that the clutch teeth in
the pinion are fully engaged with the driving pin. It
may be necessary to pull the roller chain forward to
check this. (The front gear shaft only operates the
drum, feed roller, and front elevator.)
4. Then start the tractor or horses steadily, and if all is
correct, stop and engage the rear gear shaft, which will
put the rest of the machine in gear.
5. Drive the machine a few chains in gear and check all
the moving parts.
IMPORTANT: Never put the front or back gear shaft into
gear with the machine moving.
At all times avoid jerking the machine when in gear, as
this imposes a severe strain on the driving mechanism.
Avoid driving the machine at full speed when leaving the
crop to empty, etc., as this cracks grain and causes loss over
the riddle box. Throw the mechanism out of gear if the heaps
are distant. This particularly applies in easily cracked grains,
such as barley, peas, etc.
Do not overspeed the machine. The machine should be
drawn at such a speed that the main and offside wheels are
revolving at 17—18 turns per minute = 2) —2|- miles per hour.
If the speed is less than this the drum will not thrash properly
and the blast will not be correct on the riddles. On the other
hand, excessive speed will wear and shake the machine unduly.
With a new machine, or if the machine has been standing
in the rain, see that grain comes into the grain bin and the
“headings” flow freely into the drum. Blockages may be due
to damp grain or straw, or sprocket slipping.
POWER-TAKE-OFF MACHINES
1. On no account engage the tractor clutch to drive the
double universal joint without it being coupled to the machine,
otherwise much damage to the universals will be done as well
as possible bodily injury to the operator.


CHART FOR CALCULATING TRAVELLING SPEED
(Watch the grease nipple in the offside wheel of
your Header and count the number of revolutions
to the minute.)
R.P.M of
Speed in
R.P.M. of
Speed in
O/S. Wheel
Miles P.tl.
O/S. Wheel
Miles P.H.
12
1 !•;
22
Si
13
24
23
3 il
14
2i
24 i
Si
15
24
25
4
16
2 tli
26
4A
17
24
27
44
18
01
8
28
44
19
Sin
29
44
20
34
30
44
21
34
31
5
2. The overload clutch at front end of forecarriage should
be evenly adjusted on the four pressure springs just sufficiently
to function machine. If this clutch is over-tight, a blockage
in machine would meet with the full power of tractor engine,
thus likely to cause major breakages. The best method of
adjusting this clutch is to let it slip for a start, then gradually
take up springs until they drive machine in heaviest part
of crop. It is advisable to give periodical attention to this clutch
to make sure it is free to work. This is best done by slacken-
ing off the four springs to make sure it can slip, then gradually
re-tighten.
3. Always engage the tractor clutch gently to avoid undue
strains on the machine.
4. Speeds: The correct working speed for the forward
shaft in the bevel gear case is 545 R.P.M. 10 or 15 R.P.M.
variation from this figure would not affect the good working of
the machine.
Use a revolution counter to ascertain the speed, preferably
while the machine is working in the crop. If the tractor throttle
cannot be arranged to give the above speed, then variable size
sprockets are available for the front end of the gear box to suit
the variable tractor power-take-off speeds.
The correct travelling speed is determined by the crop to
be handled. The heavier or more difficult crops can only be
efficiently dealt with in the lower gears. If the crop is light,
then the higher gears can be used.
HEIGHT OF COMB OR CUTTING BAR:
Sunshine Headers are designed to gather the maximum
grain with the least possible straw, and therefore far less straw
is handled than with many makes of machines.


The front of the machine is raised and lowered by means
of the lever at the driver’s right hand, and the latch operated
by the right foot. The cutting bar should be set so that the
ends of the comb teeth are a little above the first joint from
the top of the standing crop—or, say, about eight to twelve
inches below the top of the heads. This position must, of
course, vary to suit the many kinds and conditions of crop. A
crop that has grown unevenly may need to be cut eighteen
inches or two feet down.
The operator should endeavour to always handle as little
straw and flag as possible, as then there is less need for shake
on the riddle box, and the machine in general is not loaded
unnecessarily.
SPEED OF DRUM AND SETTING OF CONCAVE:
There are two means of varying the thrashing on the
Sunshine H.S.T.: Firstly, by means of the lever on the offside
of the drum case (near the opening to the fan)—when this
lever is down the concave is raised and brought closer to the
drum, and the thrashing is harder; secondly, by using the range
of speeds provided by the change sprockets on the drum shaft.
(See page 57 to change.)
The concave adjustment should always be used in preference
to increasing the drum speed—that is, generally speaking, do
not increase the drum speed when there is still concave adjust-
ment left. Likewise, the drum speed should not be altered to
compensate for a poorly set or damaged drum. (See page 46).
MINOR ADJUSTMENTS TO CHECK AT END OF
FIRST DAY’S RUN.
1. Meshing of Pinions and Crown Wheel.—The correct engage-
ment of these pinions is important, and if not set properly
they will show undue wear. (See page 48 for adjustment.)
2. Tension and Alignment of Roller -Chains. —The tension of
the two roller chains driving the drum should be checked,
and also the alignment of the sprockets. (See page 54 for
adjustment.)
3 Setting of Bevel Wheels driving Shaker Shaft.—These gears
are mounted in a self-aligning bracket, which eliminates
adjustment to a great degree, but the depth of engagement
of the teeth should be checked. (See page 60.)
4. Lining up and Tightening Steel Belt Chains driving ele-
vators, front and rear spirals, etc. Any chains which have
not automatic tighteners should be checked for stretch
which sometimes occurs in the first few hours.
Watch for loose Bolts and Set Screws.—Every owner should
he on the lookout for loose nuts, etc., for the first few days, and
check those in such reciprocating parts as the straw walker
hearings, riddle box, knife drive, etc.


THE CUTTING AND GATHERING SECTION
TO ADJUST COMB SPACING:
The comb is adjustable—that is to say, the space between
comb fingers can be made wider or narrower to suit the
class of crop in which the machine is working. In the standard
setting (as the machine leaves the factory) the distance between
fingers is tV', measured at the point of the knife section.
This setting suits the average clean crop in good harvesting
condition. For weed-infested crop, also for crops that are down
and tangled or very rotten crops it is necessary to set the fingers
wider apart than as above. The exact amount of such widening
of the spaces can only be determined by experience, according
to the varying nature of crops. The method of making the
adjustment is as follows: —
Never shift the offside nor the nearside fingers. When
desiring to widen the spacing, first loosen the bolts which attach
comb finger to comb bar, then tap the second finger away from
the outside finger until desired width of opening is obtained,
then tighten up bolt. Proceed in same manner with third tooth,
and so on, until it becomes necessary to take out one finger to
get room for the spacing. Repeat in the same way right across
the comlb, taking care, when approaching the nearside end, so
that, if necessary, the spacings can be varied slightly to get the
last few fingers in without moving the nearside finger.
The standard spacing between the teeth of both 8-ft. and
10-ft. machine is ts".
The following tables give approximately the openings
obtained for the number of teeth removed.
8-FT. MACHINE:
Removing 1 tooth the spacing becomes J inch.
„ 2 teeth „ „ „ H inch.
„ 3 „ „ „ „ U inch.
„ 4 „ „ „ „ U inch.
„ 5 „ „ „ H inch.
10-FT. MACHINE:
Removing 1 tooth the spacing becomes rh inch.
„ 2 teeth „ „ „ H inch.
„ 3 „ „ „ „ ii inch.
4 „ „ „ „ inch.
„ 5 ~ ~ „ ~ | inch,
and so on if more fingers are removed.
In very bad conditions of down crop, the spaces between
the comb teeth may be opened to one inch or slightly more, but
care must be taken when increasing the width of space to that
extent, that the knife blades do not ran under the ledger plate.


The Comb can be set to suit all conditions. The group on the left is
the standard setting of 3/16 opening. A Croplifter bracket is shown
in position on the right.
KNIFE BAR:
The knife should have the blades hidden under the comb
teeth while the knife is fully extended by the crank, thus letting
the openings at the root of the comb teeth fill while the crank
is changing the stroke of the knife. Upon the return stroke
it is necessary that the knife blades completely cross two open-
ings in between the teeth, and be hidden under a comb tooth,
two away from where it was when fully extended.
Of course, this only applies to the standard A" openings in
comb. The knife should be oiled at the end of each season to
prevent its rusting.
LEDGER PLATES:
The ledger plate is of such a length that it provides ample
wearing surface to the incoming straw. Should it be necessary
at any time to renew the ledger plate, the efficiency of the
finger will be practically as new when the plate is fitted.
It is essential to see that the proper clearance for the knife
is maintained at all times. It should be | inch between the
ledger plate and the underside of the finger itself.
Showing Long Ledger Plate between Finger
and Finger-Back.


Poor cutting will be caused by too much clearance, or by
a worn knife or ledger plates, or a worn or poorly set spiral
(see later).
FRONT SPIRAL ADJUSTMENT:
It will be noticed that the front spiral is notched over its
entire length. This helps greatly in gathering the crop, especi-
ally when the crop is down and tangled, and very few heads
will be missed, even in light conditions.
The front spiral can be raised or lowered by means of the
adjusting bolts, and moved forwards or rearwards by means of
the adjusting plates supporting the bearings.
For ordinary working conditions the serrated edge of the
spiral should follow the contour of the concave made by the
comb fingers and the plate immediately behind them. It should
have a clearance of £ inch—j- inch for a clean crop. (This clear-
ance should always be maintained—therefore, should the spiral
wear, set it down.)
When the crop is heavily strawed or down and tangled or
infested with weeds, the front spiral should be raised to give
the mass more clearance underneath. In unusual cases f inch
to \ inch clearance may be used. Should the straw be inclined
to break up, the front spiral may be moved back slightly to-
wards the rear one, or if there are thistles, etc., prevalent, the
spiral could be set forward. This helps it to gather better.
When conditions become normal again—reset the spiral
to standard—this helps reduce comb and knife wear.
REAR SPIRAL ADJUSTMENT:
The rear spiral is adjusted by the three set screws in the
bearing brackets at each end. It should be set well down on
the strip in the bottom of the casing, especially if there is a
tendency for any straws or heads to be brought over from the
back. It should be about -| inch from the back of the casing.
The end thrust of the spiral is taken on a set screw at the
offside end. It is most important that the lock nut on this set
screw is kept tight. If not, the rotation of the shaft may tend
to work the screw in.
ATTACHMENT OF SPINDLE TO SPIRAL SECTION.


SPIRAL SPINDLES:
Should these spindles come loose in the ends of the spirals,
it will be necessary to remove the offside end of the casing for
the offside end spindle, and tighten the nut with the special
spanner supplied. If it is the nearside end spindle, remove the
driving sprockets and then take out the spiral for tightening.
ATTACHMENT OF SPINDLE TO SPIRAL CENTRE:
Should a spindle be bent by accident, the spiral should be
removed and set up in its bearings on two boxes or anything
that will permit it being turned freely. Hold something close
to the spindle, so that the throw in the bend can be seen dis-
tinctly while the sniral is revolved. Mark the side that throws,
and drive in slightly with a punch, the casting in the spiral
tube on the opposite side of the mark. Test again to see what
impression has been made; if required, repeat till perfectly true.
ROLLER RACE FOR KNIFE DRIVE:
The roller should be a good fit between the two plates, as
otherwise the drive will be noisy and cause excessive wear on
other moving parts.
If the hard steel plates on either side of the roller race
wear, the light sheet iron filling plate or shim in the top can
be removed and a lighter one put in. The distance pipe between
them at the bottom can be filed to the required length, thus
maintaining smooth running without renewal for many years.
Keep the roller well oiled.
SPIRAL DRIVE:
This is from the front end of the square driving rod and
through the safety coupling or release clutch. ' The spiral is
driven from the combination bevel wheel and sprocket by chains,
which should be kept reasonably tight at all times, by adjusting
the tension.
The chains should be put on with the roll of each link to-
wards the rear of rotation, so that they will not catch each
other. Should the bevel wheels ever be replaced, they should
be kept in mesh by a suitable thickness washer behind the
pinion or wheel.
The spindle through the combination bevel wheel and
sprocket is removable by undoing the bolt at the nearside end
and set screw at the other.
DRIVING CHAIN FOR FLOATS AM) FEED ROLLER:
The floats on front elevator are driven by a No. 55 steel
chain off a sprocket on the offside of front gear spindle.
If this chain is to be removed for any purpose, depress the
arm of the tension wheel, which is spring loaded, thus allowing
sufficient slack for the chain to be removed.


The chain may be tightened or loosened by taking up the
spring on the arm. Loosen the nut on the centre first and
rotate it with a spanner, using this on the lug of the adjusting
washer.
Precaution: This chain should always work without slack,
to avoid jumping feed roller sprocket.
The tension sprocket should not be allowed to come too near
to the driving sprocket as it may catch. Take a link from the
chain in this case.
FRONT ELEVATOR OR FLOATS (To fit see page 14):
The front elevator conveys from the underside, and is
driven by two sprockets fastened to a spindle, running through
drum cheeks, in front of opening to drum. The two sprockets
must be set the exact distance apart-, so that the floats will work
square in casing, and the set screws must be tight to avoid the
sprockets moving. Woodruff keys maintain the correct teeth
alignment of the sprockets.
The top and bottom spindles in elevator casing have two
sprockets on each spindle, only one of which is fastened to each
spindle; this allows for variation in length of chain, which is
sometimes caused by stretching more on one side than the other.
The bearings in top and bottom of this elevator work in
slides to permit different quantities being fed into drum without
undue strain. The top and bottom bearings on both sides of
the elevator case are connected by long and short pipes, which
at about the middle of the pipes have each two springs, a long
spring and a short spring. The short springs, which are below
the long springs, are there to keep the floats down while work-
ing, and the long springs are to keep an even tension on float
chains.
It is important that the top springs should always be free
in action; by that, it is meant that if the top bearing is work-
ing too near the top of its slide, the float chains will be loose
when passing gluts of stuff under the floats, and are likely to
jump a tooth on the driving sprockets, thus putting the floats
off the horizontal.
To avoid this happening, the top bearing must be watched
while the machine is in action, to see that it is not working more
than half-way up its slide.
After the machine has been worked some time, the float
chains may stretch or wear a little, and allow the top bearing
to work higher than half-way up, as explained above; and it
is then necessary to adjust as below. If possible, arrange it so
that the top bearings are working within a quarter of an inch
of the bottom of their slides, thus giving plenty of play, so that
you will not have to adjust them for some time.


ADJUSTMENT OF ELEVATOR CHAINS:
The adjustment is made by taking out a link from both
elevator chains. Raise the front of the machine until it is
about three parts of the way up, and in a convenient position
to work upon. Then take off the pipes which have the springs
attached in the following manner: —
Release pipe off stud on top bearing by pushing the bottom
bearing down with the foot (take care not to damage grease
nipple) and depressing the pipe from the stud with both hands,
or pliers. Do same both sides, then release pipe from stud on
the lower bearings by pushing them down and lifting the short
pipe firmly off the stud.
Warning: The top pipes are likely to fly up when released,
so hold them carefully with pliers.
Then give the float chains a good pull from the back to
raise the bottom bearings, to get as much slack chain as pos-
sible for taking out the links. You will notice that generally
there are three links between each angle iron float of the
elevator chain, but in one or two places there are four, and it
is at either of these latter that the links are to be taken out.
Take out links and couple up again.
Before starting to put spring pipes, etc., back again, see
that there are no links caught up, or slack chain under bottom
sprocket. After re-assembling, run floats around a few times
to make sure they are right before starting the machine.
Then put on the cover over the rear of the elevator casing
by placing it in position between the cheeks of entrance to
drum, and thread the long A" bolt through the slot in the lower
end. The top end is held in position by another long A" bolt
to allow the elevator case to slide up and down freely.
RIDDLE BOX:
The riddle box should be occasionally examined to see that
the bolts and screws have not come loose, and that it swings
freely without the chutes rubbing on the elevator hoppers, or
the tray at the front striking the supports at the front end.
It is necessary to have the bolt through the centre of the riddle
box adjusted so that the riddles fit firmly, and also have the
nuts tight at all times. The thrust of the reciprocating motion
is taken through this i" bolt, and any slackness may damage
the sides of the box or the riddles themselves.
GRAIN TRAY AND STRAW WALKERS (For Belt see
page 15):
Normally these parts run without special attention, but
care should be always taken to see that the bolts and nuts on
the reciprocating parts, such as the hangers at the front of
the walkers or the bearings and brackets at the rear, are tight.


The coupling of the grain tray to the walker bearings at
the rear is by means of a bolt, which should have a spring
washer and one of the special dished washers under both head
and nut.
A pipe bushing separating the two sides of the grain tray
bracket is clamped firmly by the bolt, but it must be free to
revolve in the lug cast on the underside of the bearing. The
method of assembling is to place the bush in the lug on the
walker bearing and then spring the bracket holding the grain
tray, over it. The bolt is then fitted with the dished washers
and spring washers as above.
TO REMOVE STRAW WALKERS:
Remove belt driving the walker crank, so that it can be
turned to any position. Without loosening the bearings on the
crankshaft, undo the bolts holding the plate at the rear of the
walkers to the bearings. Open the front door of the walker
case (or raise the baffle reel cover on 10ft. machines) and lift
the front end of either of the second outside walkers, over centre,
so that the long bolt in the hanger can be removed. Then the
walker can be taken out, through the front opening. When the
second outside walker has been removed, the bolt of the outside
hanger can be removed similarly. (If the riddles are taken out
of the riddle box, these bolts in the hangers can be reached
from the underneath also.)
Replace in same order as they were taken out.
See that the two outside walkers have clearance under the
wood blocks at the mouth of drum case.
When the walkers are being bolted to the walker crank
bearings, it is necessary to bolt all in position before finally
tightening up. This is because the spacing between the walkers
should be as even as possible to avoid their rubbing or catching
one another, particularly when the bearings are worn. There
is sufficient clearance in the bolt holes to provide for this
spacing.
Lubricate the hangers thoroughly before replacing walkers.
The spindle supporting the hangers at the front end of the
walkers is secured by a cotter pin at each end. This should be
well opened up as, if the shaft works out, damage may result.
The Walker Bearings may be removed from the crankshaft
without taking the walkers out of the machine.
An Extension for the front end of grain tray is provided
on 10 ft. machines, and should be used only when working in
very light crops to bring the chaff and straw closer to the front
end of the riddles.
An Eccentric Cam is fitted to the offside of the headings
elevator for the purpose of adjusting the position of the top
spindle. If the belt runs to the outside (offside) of the pulley,


loosen the bolts securing the bearing plate and the long bolt
through the elevators carrying the eccentric itself. Then raise
the bearing by means of a spanner on the cam, or if the
belt runs to the nearside, lower it. Tighten all bolts after
adjusting.
The Swinging Flap in walker case must work freely, so it
will fall back with its own weight after permitting a quantity
of stuff to pass under it.
The Change Pulley, 8i inches in diameter, sent in extras
case, is for the purpose of increasing the speed of walkers in
case of large quantities of straw, or difficult grain to separate.
Do not use this unless required.
The Tail Piece on walker case is used to catch stray grains
passing over walkers, but should not be used higher than neces-
sary, because it catches a lot of straw when very high, and
passes it on to the riddles, where it may cause trouble by pene-
trating them. If trouble is experienced in stopping grain going
over walkers in a very heavy crop, or in a crop where a lot of
straw is to be handled, extensions can be procured to bolt on
the boards at rear end of walkers. When these extensions are
used, the tail piece can be used right up. It is a good plan in a
very heavy crop to open up slightly five or six rows of slats on
the walkers where the bulk of grain falls, at the front.
BAFFLE FEEDER REEL ON 10-FT. MACHINE:
This machine is equipped with a baffle reel on the top of
the walkers behind the drum. The purpose of this reel is to
assist in feeding the mass back evenly on to the walkers and in
separating the grain from the straw immediately it leaves the
drum. If the straw is inclined to hang on to the teeth or the
prongs, they can be bent back slightly, contrary to the direc-
tion in which the reel revolves. The reel requires no other
adjustment. See that the set screws holding it to the spindle
are always tight.
GRAIN AND HEADINGS ELEVATORS:
Each elevator is provided with tension bolts at the bottom
to take up slack when required. When the bearings work near
the bottom of slots, loosen tension bolts, and take out a
link, then screw up tension bolts until chain is sufficiently
tight. The steel chain in the elevators is known as “51,” with
“51 Kl” attachment links, and is detachable by hand in the
same way as malleable chain.
A Sheet Iron Worm or Screw is provided in both hoppers
on bottom of grain and headings elevators, for the purpose of
Preventing straws checking the feed to the elevator cups. See
that the cotter pins in worms are well opened to prevent them
Working out. (See Hillside Attachments.)


The chain that drives grain and headings elevator is No. 55
Steel Link. It can be taken up with tension wheel (mounted on
the arm near the top of the elevator) until enough slack chain
is given to take out a link. Always make sure, when a link has
been taken out, that it leaves room for tension wheel to run
clear of the pressure wheel under screen, or they will lock and
break chain. The chain should always be worked fairly tight
and lubricated.
Keep set screws tight in the sprockets in the elevators; a
special box spanner is supplied for this purpose.
After rain, and at the end and beginning of the season,
clean out the bottom of the elevators. It is recommended that
these doors be left open when the machine is not in use.
THRASHER DRUM, CONCAVE AND FANS
The thrasher drum should always run free. The set screws
in the ball bearing brackets should be screwed firmly, but not
too tightly, on the bearings, as it might cause them to overheat.
The lock nuts on the set screws should be kept tight.
THRASHING DRUM AND CONCAVE COMPLETE


SECTION OF DRUM AND CONCAVE
Showing Position of gauge when setting.


If a rap is noticed in the drum, try and locate it before
removing any parts. It will most likely be found on the main
dram cut-off, the fan cut-offs, or on the end of the beaters or
sides of the fans. Check the cut-offs (according to page 26 and
below), or shift the drum along the shaft, enough to give clear-
ance, by loosening the set screws that secure it, taking care to
re-tighten them on the flats cut on the spindle.
SETTING OF DRUM FOR NORMAL CONDITIONS:
The importance of good and careful setting of the drum is
stressed. It is essential to be set evenly on each side. An
incorrectly set drum will give poor thrashing, cause loss of
time in cool weather and perhaps cracking of grain at other
times.
To prove that the drum is correctly set, first raise the con-
cave, by lowering the lever, to the third notch from the
bottom of the rack; then try a piece of 10-gauge sheet iron
between boaters and concave, and the sheet iron should be
distinctly felt while moving the drum backwards and forwards
slightly; if not set correctly, adjust by set screws on drum
bearings on each side. In tough thrashing localities, set the
drum on a piece of 16 gauge iron or with the concave lever a
few more notches from the bottom.
It will be necessary to check the alignment and tension of
the secondary chain if the drum has been moved.
“CUT-OFF” FOR BEATER BARS OF DRUM:
The “Cut-off” over the beaters is generally set about tV
from beaters, but if the drum “repeats” slacken the bolt and
slide the “cuUoff” within i" or less of beaters.
The “Cut-offs” for blast should be adjusted as per page 26.
Both sets of “cut-offs” must be checked after the drum is
adjusted.
SPEED OF DRUM (see page 57).
REMOVAL OF DRUM BEATER BARS, &c. (see page 64).
MAIN DRIVE.
CROWN WHEEL, GEAR SHAFTS, ROLLER CHAINS,
BALL BEARINGS.
CROWN WHEEL AND PINIONS (to renew, see page 71):
The crown wheel, which drives the mechanism from the
main wheel, is secured to the tyre by nine lugs. The lugs are
riveted to the tyre and the segment is bolted to the lugs.


The two driving pinions mesh on the inside of the crown
wheel and should be worked as deeply in mesh as possible
without running in the bottom of the teeth.
TO ADJUST PINIONS:
The adjustment is by means of the threaded “J” bolts
which are used to position the plummer blocks or ball bearing
housings. Slightly loosen the bolts holding the housings to the
gear rail, and then loosen the two nuts locking the “J” bolt to
the casting secured to the gear rail.
Care should be taken to see that each side is moved evenly,
so that the pinion will be square to the teeth of the crown wheel.


THE MAIN DRIVE, SHOWING
ADJUSTMENT OF GEAR SHAFTS.


It will be noticed that there is under the nearside housing
on the front gear shaft, a packing plate, which is to compensate
for any deflection of the gear rail which may take place when
the machine is at work.
The correct method of adjustment is important, and this
should be as follows. (See illustration on page 50): —
When adjusting the nearside bearing of the front gear
shaft, always tighten the inside nut (marked 1) first, so that
the “J” bolt is forcing against the housing. Then firmly tighten
the lock nut in the outside (marked 2).
The offside bearing is adjusted in the reverse manner—
that is, tighten the outside nut (3) first, so that the housing or
plummer block is pulled forwards, then tighten the lock nut (4)
in the inside.
Tightening the nuts in this way prevents the pull of the
primary chain affecting the settings, the alteration of which
may cause the pinion to work further into gear.
On the back gear shaft, tighten the outside nut first
(marked 5) and the inner nut last.
The gear rails are slotted to allow the ball bearing hous-
ings to move. When the adjustments are completed, firmly
tighten the bolts securing the housings or plummer blocks to
the gear rails. The bolts should be tightened evenly, so that
the housings are not twisted on the gear rails—although a
housing or plummer block, if out of line or twisted, can be
trued by screwing the bolts on one side tighter than the other.
ALIGNMENT OF REAR PINION WITH CROWN WHEEL:
Provision is also made to adjust the depth or alignment
sideways of the rear pinion in the crown wheel. This is by
means of a distance bolt which can be adjusted for length
between the rear of the gear rails. Slots are provided in the
corner brackets securing the offside gear rail to the rear frame
member so that it can be moved sideways. It is necessary to
loosen the two bolts at this point under the headings elevator,
and adjust the distance bolt in the direction desired to line the
pinion with the crown wheel.
ALIGNMENT OF FRONT PINION AND CROWN WHEEL:
Should the alignment of the front pinion and crown wheel
not be correct, it is necessary to alter the spacing of wearing
washers between the main wheel centre and sand washer on
the offside of it, and so shift the whole wheel into the right
position. This operation should only be necessary when wear
of these washers has taken place, or if the crown wheel has
been fitted incorrectly. (See page 71 for Fitting of Crown
Wheel.)


FRONT AND REAR GEAR SHAFTS—THEIR ASSEMBLY:
The two main driving shafts with the pinions on the near-
side end run on ball bearings, mounted in housings and pro-
vided with felt washers to prevent dust, chaff, etc., entering.
The housings on the nearside have the engaging clutch
forks built into them and are mounted directly on the gear
rails. A special type of floating ball bearing is used. These
have a long sleeve which is a sliding fit on the shaft. The
sleeve is prevented from turning by a Woodruff key, which
should be a sliding fit in the ball race sleeve also. In this way
any frame movement does not affect the bearing, as it will
align itself inside the housing.
The nearside ball bearing on the drum shaft is also of the
floating type, and is interchangeable with that on the back gear
shaft.
The gear shafts are maintained in their correct position by
radial ball bearings in self-aligning housings mounted in plum-
mer blocks secured to the offside gear rail. The drum shaft
ball bearing on the offside is similar, but mounted in a self-
aligning housing secured by three set screws.
TO DISMANTLE FRONT GEAR SHAFT:
Remove primary chain and unbolt the cap over the top of
the offside ball race housing. Leave the plummer block in
place. Take out the bolts securing the nearside housing to the
gear rail, and the shaft may be lifted out.
To remove any of the radial bearings on the offside of
the front or back gear shaft or the drum shaft, remove the
securing part, whether it be a cap, sprocket or bevel wheel,
and lightly tap the housing, but should the bearing be found
too tight, then it will be advisable to unscrew the housing disc,
push the housing back, and remove the bearing by tapping it
on its inner race with the aid of a short piece of soft iron or
brass and hammer.
On the drum shaft, and the front and back gear shafts, the
offside ends are tapped or screwed left hand. Then take out
driving pin, remove clutch fork and pinion, and undo the four
bolts securing the cap on the ball race housing. The cap (which
holds the felt washer), bearing, and housing can now be taken
off the spindle separately. It should be noted that the Woodruff
key prevents the housing being removed with the bearing, so
this key must be lifted out first. When replacing the ball
bearing see that the key is fitted so that the bearing is a firm
sliding fit on it. The spring on the clutch fork plunger will
resist the re-assembly of the cap on the housing. This spring
must be strong to operate the fork properly.
The two nuts must be locked on the eyebolt so that they
just touch, but do not exert pressure on the fork when the
pinion is in gear. This is to avoid lost movement in the clutch
operating lever.


ASSEMBLY OF FRONT GEAR SHAFT


The Driving Sprocket on the front gear shaft is held in
place by a gib head key, which must be a good fit in the sproc-
ket. Should a new key, shaft, or sprocket be used in the
assembly, care must be taken to fit this key correctly, as to
drive a badly fitted key may break the sprocket.
The alignment of the primary roller chain is by means of
this sprocket, as the intermediate cluster sprocket cannot be
moved sideways. Therefore, if the chain is out of line sideways,
loosen the key and move the sprocket in the desired position.
The alignment should always be checked if the gear shaft
has been moved on the gear rails. The driving sprocket should
not be altered to compensate for a gear shaft that is not
square to the crown wheel. See that the shaft is square at all
times.
MOUNTING OF DRUM SHAFT:
Across the top of the bracket carrying the ball race on the
nearside of the drum shaft, is a strap which prevents its open-
ing. It is thus easy to apply great pressure to the ball race
by over-tightening the set screws, and it is essential that only
a short spanner grip be taken when adjusting these. The ball
race does not require any more tension than is just necessary
to hold it firmly in position.
REMOVAL OP BALL BEARING ON NEARSIDE OF
DRUM SHAFT;
This is done by sliding back the triple cluster sprocket and
over-running clutch and removing the cap on the outside of the
casing. If the three set screws holding the complete bearing
housing are slackened off, the bearing and housing may be slid
off the shaft, after the Woodruff key has been removed. The
bearing may then be driven out of the housing. Care must be
taken to drive the bearing out squarely, and special tools are
procurable for each size bearing.
The drum must be reset carefully after refitting.
ROLLER CHAIN DRIVE:
For the main drive to the thrashing drum, two roller chains
are used—a primary chain (1" pitch special) from the front
gear shaft to the intermediate cluster sprocket, and a secondary
chain (|" pitch special) from the second sprocket of the cluster
to one of the three sprockets on the drum shaft.
The chains must always be kept in line. The intermediate
cluster sprocket cannot be moved to assist this, so for the
primary chain, loosen the gib head key in the large sprocket
and align this. For the secondary chain—move the triple cluster
sprocket along the drum shaft between the over-running clutch
and collar —holding them together as a unit so that the three
driving rollers will not drop out.


VIEW OF MAIN DRIVE FROM OFFSIDE


The tension of the chains is important. If the chains are
not correctly tightened, undue wear will occur on both chain
and sprockets. The tension should be checked if any adjust-
ments have been made to the front gear or drum shafts.
In each instance, the chains must be tensioned so that they
can only be deflected | to I". This means, for example, that
the primary chain should move not more than up and down
midway between the sprockets. The same applies to the second-
ary chain.
The adjustment for each chain is by means of the inter-
mediate cluster sprocket. There are no separate tension
sprockets.
To tighten the front or primary chain, loosen the two
clamps holding the support for the intermediate sprockets to
the gear rail and adjust by the “J” bolt behind the bracket,
tightening the outer nut first. See that the clamps are always
secured tightly and evenly after adjusting.
To tighten the secondary or drum chain, slightly loosen
the big nut on the spindle (on offside of the bracket) and by
adjusting the set screw on top, move it in the required direction.
After adjusting, tighten large nut and lock nut on set screw.
On no account should the adjustments for the drum shaft
or front gear shaft be used to tension the roller chains.
REMOVING ROLLER CHAIN:
At one point in the chains will be found either a “hairpin”
spring fastener or two cotter pins which hold one of the side
plates in position. It is unnecessary to unrivet a link to re-
move the chain. (Sometimes the coupling link is covered with
grease, making detection difficult.
When the “hairpin” has been removed by lifting one of
the open ends out of the groove in the pin of the chain) the
side plate can be taken off and the outer link (with two pins)
taken out, leaving the chain free.
Should the adjustment provided not be sufficient to tighten
the chain properly, a link should be removed from the chain.
The chain can be shortened by removing a connecting link and
double roller section. To do this, remove the chain and wrap
the end of it around a sprocket—use one of the steel ones on
the drum shaft—and with a small punch drive out the connect-
ing link between the last two roller sections by punching each
pin alternately from the one side. This does not lopsen the
riveting of the other side. Do not file off the burr, as it will
be needed to securely re-rivet the connecting link should it be
needed again. If the chain heats, its tension and the alignment
of the sprockets must be checked. The chain must be kept
moist with oil at all times.


SPEED OF DRUM:
Three interchangeable speeds are provided on the drum
shaft. It may be found beneficial to run the drum a little faster
in the early mornings or late at night to counteract the tougher
thrashing; or to slow the drum down at mid-day to avoid severe
thrashing. The three speeds are as follows: —
With roller chain on 16-teeth sprocket (nearside) —drum
revolves at 897 r.p.m.
With roller chain on 17-teeth sprocket (centre) —drum
revolves at 844 r.p.m.
With roller chain on 18-teeth sprocket (offside) —drum
revolves at 798 r.p.m.
These speeds are with main wheel revolving at 17 turns
per minute.
To change speeds for the dram —loosen the secondary chain
by slackening the large nut (do not undo the chain itself), and
then after undoing the set screws in the over-running clutch
and the collar, slide the unit along to the required position.
See that the set screws are tightened on the two flats on the
drum shaft, and also that there is a slight clearance for the
over-running or free-wheeling portion between the fixed portion
(set screwed to the shaft) and the collar.
REMOVING SPROCKETS FROM DRUM SHAFT
CLUSTER UNIT:
The three sprockets are made and obtainable separately,
thus reducing replacement costs. The outer sprocket (16 teeth)
is screwed (left-hand thread) on to the internal portion of the
free-wheel or over-running clutch, and serves to lock the other
two sprockets in position. These sprockets (the 17 and 18
teeth) are prevented from turning by a parallel key locating m
their bore. Thus, to remove either the 17 or 18-teeth sprocket,
unscrew the outer (16 teeth) sprocket. When replacing, see
that the key is a good fit and the outer (16 teeth) sprocket
screwed up tightly.
Assembly of Ball Bearing, Free-Wheel Clutch, and Triple Cluster
Sprocket on Drum Shaft. The Outer Sprocket is screwed left-hand.


OVERRUNNING OR FREE WHEEL CLUTCH ON
DRUM SHAFT:
This is to allow the drum to rotate after the rest of the
machine has stopped. The drive is by means of three rollers
which engage only when rotated forward. To remove the unit,
loosen the roller chain and undo the set screws holding the
fixed portion, and also the collar on the end of the shaft. Slide
the unit off all at once to prevent the rollers falling out. Before
replacing try the grease gun on the end of the shaft to see
that lubricant comes through to the free-wheeling portion.
To re-assemble first grease the three rollers and locate
one in each recess or comer of the free-wheel portion, and then
replace the whole unit on the shaft together. This prevents
the rollers falling out of position. See that there is sufficient
clearance for the free-wheeling portion to operate freely.
INTERMEDIATE CLUSTER SPROCKET:
This is mounted on a bracket which is secured to the offside
gear rail by two clamps, so that a parallel movement is ensured
at all times. Provision is made to tighten the roller chains by
moving the bracket itself, or the spindle up or down the slot
provided. (See page 57 for adjustment.)
The assembly of the whole unit is shown in the illustration.
The spindle is secured to the bracket by the large nut and
washer on the offside. It is drilled through the centre from the
nearside to provide lubrication for the ball and bronze bearings.
A cotter pin in the end of the spindle prevents the sprockets
working off.


ASSEMBLY OF INTERMEDIATE CLUSTER SPROCKET
To dismantle the unit proceed as follows:
Unscrew the large cap covering the end of the spindle—
the cap has a left-hand thread. The cotter pin and washer may
then be removed. Undo the four bolts securing the retaining
cap for the ball bearing, and the spindle may be bumped out.
Use a block of wood to avoid burring the end of the shaft. If
the ball race remains in the intermediate sprocket it may be
driven out with a soft punch.
The large cap acts also as a retaining unit for the small
intermediate sprocket (16 teeth), which is prevented from turn-
ing by a Woodruff key. The sprockets may thus be replaced
separately.
When replacing, see that the ball race cap is placed on the
spindle first, and that the ball race is seated correctly on the
spindle. The ball race should be thoroughly cleaned in petrol
before re-assembling. The phosphor bronze bush is pressed
into the intermediate sprocket, and should not be removed
except for renewal purposes.
The cotter pin in the end of the shaft must be bent well
back so that the large cap is cleared. The cap must be well
tightened at all times to prevent any movement in the 16-teeth
sprocket. Lubricate the spindle thoroughly before starting the
machine.


SHAKER SHAFT DRIVE
SHAKER SHAFT FOR RIDDLE BOX:
The shaker shaft for the riddle box is driven from the bevel
wheel on the back gear shaft through a bevel pinion which is
secured to it by two set screws, one of which should locate in
the groove provided.
The shaft runs in two bearings, the front one of which is
self-aligning, and these bearings should be lubricated at least
every two hours, more especially when full shake is used.
At the front end of the shaft is riveted a universal coupling.
To this coupling is also riveted the square universal driving
rod, which in turn slides into the sleeve of the safety coupling
or release clutch which is screwed to the spindle driving the
front.
SAFETY COUPLING OR RELEASE CLUTCH:
The safety coupling has been put on the machine to avoid
breakages, and if properly adjusted in the crop, and given atten-
tion, it will prove to be a great asset in saving irritating stop-
pages. It is designed so that it will release if the knife or
spirals are fouled by any hard substance, such as an excessive
glut of hard thistle stems, or old fencing wire, which is some-
times picked up. The safety coupling can be adjusted by means
of a threaded eye bolt that carries the spring which supplies
the pressure to roller. The nuts should not be screwed down
any tighter than is required to drive the knife and spiral under
normal conditions, and should be locked one on the other when
adjustments have to be made. The usual setting is with the
outside nut flush with the end of the eye bolt.
All moving parts of this coupling should be oiled now and
again to keep them free, but the cam faces should be kept dry.
The universal joints also need oiling to keep them smooth,
especially when the front is working close to the ground, be-
cause they are then working at a greater angle, thus causing
more wear.
ADJUSTMENT OF BEVEL WHEELS ON SHAKER SHAFT:
The offside plummer block on the rear gear shaft is de-
signed to allow a self-aligning action of the bearing at this
point, and yet always maintain the bevel gear and pinion cen-
trally. Adjustment is provided to allow the bevel pinion to be
engaged at the correct depth with the bevel wheel, the setting
being made by loosening the two bolts serving as a hinge at
the bottom of the fork carrying the bearing, and adjusting the
nuts on the bolt holding the top of the fork in position. These
nuts must always be kept tight, but the gears should not be
too deeply in mesh. The pinion on the shaker shaft should be
positioned so that its back face is even with the outer edge of
the teeth of the bevel wheel on the rear gear shaft. Tighten
the two lower bolts after adjustment has been made.
Refer to pages 55 and 62 for illustrations.


MAIN DRIVE OF H.S.T. HEADER
Showing Front and Rear Gear Shafts, Driving Pinions, and Roller Chain Drive to Drum Shaft.


BACK GEAR SHAFT.
SHOWING ASSEMBLY OF SHAKER SHAFT DRIVE,


TO REMOVE SHAKER SHAFT:
Unscrew the safety coupling from the shaft of the com-
bination gear bracket on the front (right-hand thread), locking
the bevel wheels with a punch to prevent their turning while
this is being done, or if the front is let forward, the sleeve may
be slid off the square shaft.
Remove the adjustable crank from the rear end of the
shaker shaft by taking out the bolt. The bolt locates on the
locking groove at the end of the shaft.
Loosen the set screws in the bevel pinion and the collar
and pull the shaft forward. This will allow the front bearing
to be removed if necessary, but the rear bearing may be re-
moved without withdrawing the shaft itself. Remove only the
adjustable crank from the rear end.
When replacing, it is necessary to see that the bores of
each bearing are in line with each other. The rear bearing is
designed to roll on its support and the front bearing, mounted
on the adjustable fork by means of a special “U” bolt and
self-aligning cap, will, when the “U” bolt is slackened, also find
its own line, but it is essential to see that bores are in line
vertically—that is, push the shaft through one of the bearings
and see that it will enter the other without any pressure. When
finally in position the shaft should rotate readily. The bearings
should be moved to different positions until the freest rotating
position is found.
See that all bolts and lock nuts on this shaft are securely
tightened.
TO REMOVE FRONT FROM MACHINE
(1) Have the machine put in a convenient place for de-
taching the front, so that the front can remain under cover
until it is required for further use.
(2) The cover on the back of covering case for front
elevator will now be removed.
(3) Disconnect the floats from the front elevator (see
page 43).
When the links are disconnected, do not remove the floats
from the covering case, but disengage them from the sprockets
on the driving spindle, and allow them to hang on the top
spindle without removing them from the bottom spindle. Tie
the two ends together with a piece of wire, rope, etc.
When the front is required in position again, the floats are
in their place ready to be passed around the driving spindle,
and connected in the ordinary way.


(4) Now lower the front of the machine to about 12 inches
from the ground. Remove the long f" bolt through the cheek
plates of drum case, sliding elevator and flap, pull the sliding
elevator forward at the top, which will disconnect from the
flap. Leave the flap in position, and put the bolt back
through the cheek plates and flap.
Wire the outside portion of the sliding elevator to the
covering case, so that the hinge will not be strained.
(5) Release the levelling guide on the nearside of front
elevator by loosening the bolt at the lower end and slackening
the stove screws through the top of same and the bearing.
Take out roller holding levelling guide on nearside of drum
case, by slackening the bolt in rear roller and taking the nut off
bolt in front roller and removing the strap on front end only.
(6) Dig holes for the dividers on each end of comb to
prevent their being bent. (Crop lifters must be removed also.)
(7) If the guard for the comb is available, put it on the
points of fingers. Now release the levelling connection on the
offside of the machine, and pull the front forward on to the
points of the comb fingers.
(8) Screw up the nuts on bolts in top and bottom of
levelling guide, so that they will not be lost when required for
re-assembling. The front roller, strap and bolt for same,
should also be put back in position.
(9) Now raise the front up, at the same time bringing
the front elevator case slightly forward. Place two supports
under each end of comb bar, to take the weight, so that the
cup head pins through the comb lugs on the rear and offside
can be easily removed, leaving the front free. Replace the
cup head pins and cotter pins, all ready for re-assembling.
(10) The body of the machine may now be pushed back
away frem the front. The front should be made secure on
the two pieces of timber to keep it off the ground and from
falling over.
TO REMOVE DRUM COVER, DRUM
AND CONCAVE
Let the front forward up to the stage as detailed to para-
graph 8 in Instructions for Removing Front (see above).
Remove chain driving floats and feed roller. Take off
headings chute from elevator to drum cover.
Now remove the four countersunk A" bolts, one at each
corner of the cover in the small straps. Note the assembly—
the front ones are longer than the rear —and pick up the strap
to the long bolt through the slide hinge also.


The cover will lift off complete with the shutters for fans
and the two spindles in front.
The setting of the drum and concave can always be more
easily checked when the cover is off.
TO REMOVE DRUM:
First remove the drum cover and then slacken the two top
set screws (and lock nuts) in each ball bearing bracket.
Remove secondary or drum chain and undo cap of nearside
ball bearing housing, so that ball bearing and key can be taken
out. (See page 57.)
Loosen set screws on end supports of drum itself so that
shaft can be moved a little (about 2 inches) to the offside, when
that bearing will clear the bracket and the drum complete can
be lifted out.
IN REPLACING, be sure the set screws are tightened on
the flats on the shaft, and that the bearing housings are
positioned with their countersinks on the lower set screws.
Check the clearances between ends of the beater bars and the
sides of the concave. The clearance should be divided so that
there is the same space on both sides. Similarly, the fans
should have even clearance each side, but this setting is not
as important as the beater bars. In some cases the fans are
slightly bent by the removing and handling of the drum. It is
therefore important to see that the blades are not bent so as
to catch the cases when revolving. Re-assemble in reverse
order and tension chains as detailed on page 56. It is
recommended that the felt washers in the ball race housings
be inspected and replaced when an opportunity, such as the
above, presents itself. A good felt washer will keep dust, etc.,
from the ball bearing.
RENEWING BEATER BARS ON DRUM
BALANCE OF DRUM:
When these are bought in sets as duplicates, they are
selected in respect of their weight, so that when fitted they
will approximately balance. However, for smooth running and
to avoid heavy draught, it is always advisable to balance the
drum when replacing bars. If one or two new bars only are
fitted, it is then more necessary to carefully balance the drum,
either on its own bearings in the machine or preferably on two
spindles levelled up carefully on trestles or boxes. Washers
should be added to the bolts on the light side until the drum
is balanced as evenly as possible. If any bolts are removed,
see that the balance weights attached thereto are replaced in
the same position. If any bars are removed, they should be
replaced in the same position with the same ribbed head bolts,
weights, washers, etc. Hence it is recommended to only remove
one bar at a t ; me, unless they are marked.


FITTING AND SETTING OF DRUM BARS:
Drum Bars should be set as concentric as possible. To
test this, set the cut-off plate down so that it just touches a
bar and so acts as a gauge. Then rotate the drum to see if
each bar is the same distance from the cut-off plate. If a bar
is too high, a smart tap over the lug on the drum centre will
help. If the bar is low, pack it up with thin sheet iron.
Set every bar so that it is as even as possible to the cut-off.
Then check the whole drum in relation to the concave (page 48),
and see that the cut-off has the correct clearance (page 48).
TO REMOVE CONCAVE:
Remove drum as above. The concave is supported by two
long special g" bolts at the rear and by two bearings at the
front. Remove these two bearings from the adjusting crank.
Take out crank, and then the concave can be lifted out. See
that the concave is square between the drum case sides when
replacing. If the concave is not square, slot the holes holding
the rear of concave, but be sure to close the unused part of
the slot, so that there is no chance of the bolt working into
the wrong position and so allowing the concave to move off-
square.
ANGLE CHECK BARS IN CONCAVE:
The importance of the angle check bars in a concave is
not realised in many cases. These bars are for the purpose of
retarding the speed of the mass through the concave, and in
this way they assist the thrashing. If tbs thrashing is too
severe (say, in barley) and drum speeds cannot be reduced, the
removal of one of these check bars will assist greatly. Special
plates to cover the gap left are available!. The rear check bar
should be removed first. If the forward edge of the check bar
is worn round or down, it will cause cracking of grain also,
and whenever new concave grid bars are fitted, these angle
check bars should be renewed also.
POINTS TO CHECK FOR ESPECIALLY
HARD THRASHING
(1) The drum speed must be correct. Check speed of main
wheel and use range of speeds provided (see page 57).
(2) Check concave to see that it is square to drum casing, also
to see that grid bars and angle check bars are in good
order. (See above.)
(3) Check drum to see that each bar is concentric, not dam-
aged (see above) and in good order generally.
See that the ribs of all bolts are in line with the ribs
on the bars.
See that the drum is central between each side of
concave.


(4) Check drum and concave setting as per page 45, making
sure that the drum is even on each bar in the concave.
Use 16 gauge iron for gauge or keep concave lever five
notches from bottom with 10 gauge iron.
(5) See cut-offs according to page 48.
CLEANING OF SEED WHEAT, OATS OR BARLEY:
The Sunshine H.S.T. Header will clean normal grain
(wheat, oats, barley, peas, etc.) so that it is entirely suitable
for seed. It will be necessary to obtain a special driving pinion
for the front gear shaft with a reversed clutch in it, so that
the back gear shaft can be driven through the main wheel. (The
main wheel should be raised off the ground.) A pulley should
also be purchased for the offside of the drum shaft and the
machine driven from here. A special locking block for the
free-wheel clutch should also be used, which permits the chains
to drive the mechanism from the drum shaft. With Power-take-off
machines, it is only necessary to function machine from the tractor.
Peed the grain in at the front of the walkers.
REVERSE PINION
AND
NORMAL PINION
AND LOCK
RIDDLES:
Set the riddles low in the box, using af" or lip punched
riddle in the bottom as described on page 31, and the I 5" lip
riddle in the top. Keep the rear of the riddles higher than for
normal working in the field—that is, at least one hole higher
than the illustration on page 27, to avoid repeat as much as
possible.


SPEED:
With ground-drive machine, the jacked-up main wheel should re-
volve at 15-16 turns per minute. With P.T.O. machine the forward
shaft in bevel-gear case should rotate at 545 r.p.m. or slightly slower
if considered necessary.
See page 75 for pulley dimensions.
BLAST AND SHAKE:
Use the minimum of shake and as much air as possible.
SCREEN:
See that the screen is kept clean from cracked grain, so
that the sample is not spoilt with small grains.
The machine should be kept level, so that the riddles will
work properly.
For cleaning of small seeds, such as rye, canary seed,
clovers, etc., see suecial booklet “Various Crops and how to harvest
them with your Sunshine Header,”
ADJUSTMENTS FOR HARVESTING BARLEY
It is recognised that barley should be thrashed, leaving
about one-eighth of an inch of the awn or tail attached to the
kernel. It is also important that the germ at the other end
should not be damaged.
ADJUSTING THE DRUM AND CONCAVE:
The drum on the machine should be set to give an even
clearance of about one-eighth of an inch between the concave
and drum. The clearance should be uniform between all the
bars of the concave and drum when the lever of the concave is
at its lowest notch in the rack. The drum bars should be con-
centric (see page 65).
The adjustment on the concave provides for an opening
between concave and drum of approximately one-quarter of an
inch, which gives variation for hard or light thrashing under
ordinary crop conditions, providing that the speed of the drum
has also been taken into account.
SPEED OF DRUM:
A slightly slower drum speed than for'wheat is usually
necessary for barley, and it may be found necessary to use a
slower speed at mid-day.
THE REAR ANGLE CHECK BAR OF DRUM:
_ Should very hot weather be encountered through the harvest
period, and the machine inclined to damage the grain after all
the previous adjustments have been made, it is even further
possible to avoid this damage by removing the rear angle check
bar in the concave and replacing it by a filling plate. In order
to make this change, the riddles must be removed from the


riddle box to allow sufficient room for a person to unscrew the
nuts on the bolts securing the check bar. When the nuts are
unscrewed, the bolts can he pushed up inside the drum and
removed by working from the opening at the front end of the
straw walker case.
The check bar is removed by working it out at the back of
the drum.
These filling plates are not supplied with the machines, but
can be procured at low cost.
ADJUSTING THE RIDDLES:
In some cases the top wheat riddle (IJ-inch or 2" lip) alone
gives better results than when using two riddles, as it allows
a passage of greater quantities. It is understood, when using
one riddle only, that it must lie much lower in the riddle box,
about the fifth notch from the bottom in front, and secured by
the bolt in the fourth or fifth hole from the bottom at the rear.
It is also important that a machine should not be in gear
while turning at the ends, as the repeat will be treated by the
drum without any straw to protect the grain against damage
by the bare beaters and concave bars.
A sample in the box is very often spoilt through this occur-
rence, and many farmers do not realise that the damage has
been done through this cause.
EXCESSIVE REPEATING:
To overcome excessive repeating in a heavy crop, it is
necessary to open slightly the lips of the top and bottom riddle,
and work it with a downward slope to the front. This slope
may be varied from one or two notches from the level position.
As mentioned previously, the top wheat riddle may be used
alone to allow a passage to greater quantities, and if a good
sample can be obtained in a lighter crop with the use of one
riddle, it will eliminate any excessive repeating.
POORLY DEVELOPED GRAIN:
If the grain is not properly developed, due to climatic
conditions, or, in some particular species of barley, it may be
necessary to repeat more than when working in an ordinary
crop, in order to remove the awn or tail without damage to the
kernel. This may give better results than when having the
concave set too close to the drum.


SPEED OF STRAW WALKERS:
When harvesting a very heavy crop of barley, it is some-
times necessary to increase the speed of the straw walkers in
order to prevent grain being carried to the rear of the walkers
before being separated from the straw. The slats should be
opened at the front end to allow the grain to get away quickly.
FRAME ADJUSTMENTS
OFFSIDE BODY STRAP:
If it is found that the frame should sag at the rear offside
corner, it can be brought up by making use of the adjustments
at the bearings on the main axle between the drum case and
the offside wheel. The adjustment is effected by first jacking
up the rear end of the offside member, then loosening the rear
bolt of the bearings and tightening the front bolt of each. The
effect of this is to turn the bearings on the axle, and this throws
the offside body strap up at the rear. The rear end of the
strap should be about fli inch higher than the nearside one.
Tighten the said bolts until the necessary level is reached. Then
re-tighten the back bolts.
ADJUSTING THE RAISING AND
LOWERING GEAR
A powerful coil spring counterbalances the weight of the
front of the machine, making it an easy matter to raise or lower
the comb in accordance with the height of the crop.
Usually there is no need to make any adjustment of the
spring pressure, as the factory setting is correct for the average
crop, but if the front is to be worked at its extreme highest
or lowest point by using all the adjustment provided in the
links coupling the front to the fulcrum or arm, it may be neces-
sary to apply more pressure or less pressure, whichever the
case may be, to give more ease for operating ’re raising and
lowering lever. The two links coupling the front to the fulcrum
for raising and lowering are adjustable by screwing the
coupling. If the comb is required to work very close to the
ground or to work at the other extreme, 1-| inches can be gained
in either direction with the adjustment provided.
When it is desired to tighten up the coil spring to get
more assistance from it in the ordinary way, a pipe lever is
supplied for the purpose of engaging the lug provided on the
nearside of casting forming the bearing for spmdle carrying
the spring. The front must ha at its highest position before
making adjustments to the spring. Two men are needed, and
care should be taken to see that they stand clear of the line of


the pipe lever. When the lever pressure is exerted, the bolt
may be moved to another hole in the bearing plate to tighten
up or loosen off the spring as may be desired. It may be neces-
sary to withdraw the rod carrying the bag rack (on bagging
platform) to obtain clearance for the adjusting lever. Place
the point of a chisel between casting and plate (in hole), so
that the casting will not rise when being moved to take up hole
or holes. Put a little oil on spring bearings now and then, to
prevent gripping or grinding.
HAND AND FOOT STEERING GEAR
Adjustment is provided at the anchor of the hand and foot
steering gear for the purpose of altering the position of the
hand and foot levers to suit the driver.
Such adjustment is made by unscrewing the |" bolt in the
head of anchor, and moving the head on the notches.
On the 10ft. machines, steering is by steering wheel. The
lower end of the spindle has a pinion which engages in a rack
connected to the rod from the fork of the wheel.
This method of steering can be used to advantage, as the
machine can be steered, if so desired, out of line from that in
which it is being pulled. To keep a full cut and avoid missing
crop when steering by the horses alone is difficult.
However, with the steering and pulling combination it is
an easy matter to drive the machine full and yet without
missing any heads. Moreover, the team will be much fresher
at the end of the day, because the horses have not been pulled
about in the driver’s endeavour to steer the machine and keep
a full comb.
FRONT WHEEL AND AXLE
The axle for the front wheel is fitted with a locking plate
which prevents the axle turning.
The nearside arm of the fork is screwed and the axle
is threaded into it. A lock nut is provided on the outside. A
sand-washer and wearing washer are provided on each side of
the wheel centre, and there should always be running clearance
for these; that is, do not screw up the axle so that the sand-
washers and wheel centre are tight. On the other hand, should
wear occur on the side of the wheel centre or on the sand-
washers, the axle may be screwed up to take out the surplus
slack. Always see that the lock nut on the axle is tight and the
locking plate fitted on the head of the axle.
FITTING CROWN WHEEL
It is essential that the crown wheel be fitted concentrically
to the wheel centre, or it will be liable to wear owing to the
meshing of the pinion being irregular.


First remove wheel from machine. (Remove grain box or
bagging platform and main body strap on nearside.) Lay it
on trestles so that the nuts on the underside of the hub can be
reached, and with the crown wheel up.
The nine crown wheel lugs are drilled concentrically
(the same distance from the bore of the centre) and the crown
wheel has been drilled so that when the bolts are in place, it
should also be concentric.
It may be found, however, that the wheel is not true, due
to spokes having been changed, etc., or that the crown wheel
is not a true circle (even though drilled correctly in the first
place). It will be first necessary to true up the holes in the
bolting lugs with the hub x>f the wheel. To do this it will be
necessary to construct a trammel, preferably from wood. Make
a shouldered centre piece to fit neatly in the bore of the hub
and attach an arm to the top of it, of such length that it will
reach out to the rim of the wheel. To the end of this arm
cramp a piece of sheet iron to act as a pointer, which will guide
you in testing the rim for trueness.
The trueing of the lugs is done by adjusting the nuts on the
spokes around the hub, and when this is done the top edge of
the tyre (nearest the crown wheel) should be running reason-
ably true at a depth of about 1" below the face of the wheel
centre on the 13J" flanged wheel tyre, (Refer illustration on
the next page.) For the 12" flat tyre this distance is 1-|" and
f" for the 14" flat tyre.
To test this, lay a long straight-edge across the hub face
and measure the distance from the edge of the tyre to the
straight-edge. If it does not conform with this dimension, the
tyre can be set up or down by adjusting the spokes until it does
measure correctly.
Now put the crown wheel in position, and using leather
packing between the crown wheel and lug, set it so that its
upper face is running true at a depth of 2" below the face of
the wheel centre (for both flanged and flat tyres).
It may be found that some of the holes in the crown wheel
do not quite coincide, but provided the holes in the lugs of the
wheel have been made concentric first, forcing the crown wheel
into position with punches or wedges should give the desired
result. If a crown wheel appears oval, use wedges between it
and the tyre at the two wide sides, and use tapered punches to
make the holes coincide. Turning the crown wheel around to
various positions sometimes assists.
OFFSIDE OR CROP WHEEL
This wheel should always be fitted wdth the long side of the
wheel centre hub to the outside or offside.
If any adjustments are made to the centre or spokes, the
tyre should be central between the bolting flanges for the


SETTINGS FOR CROWN WHEEL AND TYRE OF MAIN WHEEL.


spokes. This means that the distance from the long side of the
wheel centre to the edge of the tyre should be—
FLAT TYRES.
2-|-" for a 5" Tyre. 2" for a 6" Tyre. 1" for an 8" Tyre.
FLANGED TYRES.
2J" for a si" Tyre. If" for a 6-J" Tyre. 1-|" for a 72" Tyre.
5" for a 92" Tyre.
OFFSIDE AND FRONT WHEELS.
HOW TO FIT NEW SPOKES:
It will be realised here, that if spokes break, others pos-
sibly become loose, and therefore, when replacing a spoke or
spokes, attention must be given to all spokes by 7 testing them
with a spanner, and tightening all to even tension.
The new spoke or spokes are placed in position and lock
nuts on rim end are tightened first. Nuts on inside of hub
flange are then tightened.
When all spokes adjusted to even tension, tighten all lock
nuts on outside of hub.
If, after an inspection of the wheel, it should appear to be
out of truth, the only way to test it is to remove wheel and use
the trammel, and make adjustments as hereinbefore explained.


PEA FRONT INSTRUCTIONS.
The Pea Harvesting Front can be fitted to 6 ft., 8 ft. or
10 ft. Sunshine Headers, H.S.T. models only. In the case of the
10 ft. machine, the under-frame carrying the front has to be
modified and the offside wheel moved in to suit the Pea Front
which is 6 ft. Thus, when the attachment is supplied for a 10ft.
machine, these extra parts to convert it to the normal 6 ft. or
8 ft. size are included in the equipment.
ASSEMBLING INSTRUCTIONS:
First remove the existing grain front from the machine and
change the wheat concave under the thrashing drum for the Pea
concave. (See pages 10 onward and 65-66.)
Remove all parts wired to the Pea Front, then attach the
bare front to the machine.
Leaving the wooden knife guard on the mower front as-
sembly, lean the body sheet up against the front and roughly
estimate the position where the hinges for the mower front will
bolt on to the comb bar. Remove the hinge rod for the mower
front and bolt on the hinges in the estimated positions. Do not
tighten tapered-head bolts, so that the hinges can be finally
hammered to the required nositions. Now put the mower front
assembly in position and thread the hinge rod through the
hinges.
Attach the angle iron supports for the mower front to the
top of the spiral case rails. Attach the nearside one first; the
rear end of the support goes on top of the stay for front ele-
vator and under the stay bolt for the gear bracket.
The dividers should now be attached to the extreme near-
side and offside guards for knife. The washers supplied on
each divider are for packing purposes to adjust the tilt of the
dividers.
Attach the sheet iron ends for the mower front. The end
with the thimble goes on the offside end and the one with the
angle clip on the nearside end.
The adjustable hangers are now attached by removing the
angle clip from the top end and threading the ends with the
seven holes in up through the slot in the supporting angles on
the spiral case rails. The angle clip is bolted on both inside
faces of these hangers and acts as a stop against the top edge
of the web of the angle supports. The lower end of the hangers
bolts on to the hinge bolt on the near and offside castings on
the finger bar. These adjustable hangers have the reel bearing
plates attached and they should be selected for the near and
offside so that the bearing plates are on the outside faces of the
hanger straps. The bearing plates are usually assembled cor-


PEA HARVESTING CFRONT.


rectly on the hanger straps, but, in case they are not, the correct
position for them is to have the 3-hole edge down and the 5-hole
edge up and the 9-hole edge forward.
Attach the xA" straps to the semi-circular wind-shields
for the reel so that the joggle in the strap will go outside the
adjustable hangers. The semi-circular shields are then attached,
by bolting to the adjustable hangers, making sure that the
shields go inside the sheet-iron ends for the mower front.
The hinge bolt for the adjustable hanger and the wind
shield strap should be screwed up to allow for pivoting action.
Then securely tighten the lock nut.
Put on the Pea lifter fingers, securely tightening the lock-
nut, otherwise these bolts tend to work loose. The bolt, of
course, should not be tightened to prevent the finger hinging;
at the same time, it should not allow a great amount of side
play.
REEL ASSEMBLY:
Strip down the reel shaft assembly with the exception of
the sprocket and release clutch. Bolt bearings on to brackets
so that the grease nipple is uppermost. Thread shaft through
bearings, arranging for the two collars to be on either side of
the nearside bearing. The centres for the reel can be put on
any way without affecting the final assembly. Assemble- the
reel as indicated in the illustration, then finally tighten the set
screws on the centres, positioning the reel centrally between
the wind shields.
The pitman assembly is then attached as per the illustration.
The support for the tension roller bolts on the front face of
the pitman support. The rear end of the tension roller support
attaches to the second bolt away from the hinge rod for the
mower front. The 1J" x iV' stay with each end set, is a
diagonal stay for the pitman support.
Now attach the crankshaft bearing to the offside face of
the pitman support. This is done by sliding the universal joint
on to the square shaft. After finally screwing up the universal,
position the collar on the crank bearing.
Lubricate all working parts and then the front should be
ready for running.
CROPLIFTERS.
The prospect of storm damage is ever present when crops
are ripening, but by the use of Crop Lifters, no crop is so bad
that a Sunshine Header cannot be driven into it and a fair yield
secured.


THE SHIPA RD CROPLIF ER
Adjusted from driver’s seat.


Three types of Croplifters are available for the H.S.T.
Header.
THE SHIPARD CROPLIFTER
(Hand Lever Control)
This crop lifter has a long wooden member to lift heavy
down and tangled crops after they have been beaten down by
wind or ram. They are controlled by a lever from the driver’s
seat.
Instructions for Fitting Shipard Crop Lifter
to 8 ft. and 10 ft. H.S.T. Headers.
The lifters are attached to the front of the machine by
cast brackets which are held at intervals by three of the com!)
bolts. They are raised or lowered from the rear by cams
attached to a pipe bar. This pipe bar is hinged in brackets
bolted to the pipe members under the spiral case, and is operated
by a lever and quadrant as mentioned hitherto.
■ Eye Brackets. —The first thing to be done is to place on
the front, the eye brackets for the pipe bars and cams. In doing
this, bolt on one short eye bracket (facing upwards and rear-
wards) with the short f" bolt through the pipe at the extreme
offside end, using the small curved filling piece between the eye
bracket and the pipe.
It will be not'ced that there a i- e bolts passing right through
the rear of the spiral case and the pipe member. New bolts of
longer length arc supplied and one of these must be used for
each of the centre eye brackets fitted.
FOR 8-ft. MACHINES
(10 ft. Machine see later)
Proceed as follows:
Bolt the second eye bracket on the third bolt from the
offside, excluding those in the bracket on the extension support-
ing comb; bolt the third bracket on the fifth bolt, and the
fourth bracket on the seventh bolt, in each case facing the eye
of the bracket upwards and to the rear. Then remove strap
connecting pipe member and knife head guide at extreme near-
side, and bolt the long bracket under the comb and pipe member
on the nearside with its eye set facing up to align the eye with
those of the others.
Cast Brackets for Lifters. —The cast brackets for the crop
lifter should now be attached, and starting from the offside —
the first bracket is attached by the comb bolts to the
2nd, 3rd and 4th fingers;
the second bracket by the 7th, Bth and 9th;
the third by the 12th, 13th and 14th;
the fourth by the 18th, 19th and 20th;
the fifth by the 24th, 25th and 26th;


the sixth by the 30th, 31st and 32nd;
the seventh by the 37th, 38th and 39th;
the eights, or last, by the 44th, 45th and 46th;
which latter is the third tooth from the nearside, including the
one in the divider.
This above spacing applies only to the 8 ft. Header-
Harvesters and when the standard comb setting of 47 teeth is
used. Should any teeth be removed, a slight rearrangement of
these positions will be necessary.
It may be found on both 8 and 10 ft. machines that the
connecting straps between the pipe member and the comb teeth
foul the brackets for the crop lifters. If possible, these straps
should be put on to the nearest comb bolt, but if it is impossible
to do this, they should be removed. It would be preferable,
however, when the croplifters are taken off, that these straps
be put back to give all possible support to the comb bar.
Pipe Bar and Cams.—The pipe bar may now be threaded
through the eye bracket on the offside and two cams
threaded on the bar which passes through the second bracket.
These cams should face rearwards with the set screw upwards.
Two more cams are then fitted before it passes through the
third bracket, and two cams between the third and fourth
brackets; and finally two before the nearside bracket is reached.
Operating Lever and Quadrant. —Then pass the pipe right
through the nearside bracket and thread on to it the lever with
the hand trigger facing to the front. On the outside of this
thread the stay for the quadrant and fit cotter pin, and open it;
also fit cotter pin at offside end of pipe. Then depressing the
hand trigger, thread the quadrant for this lever through the
latch from the front, and bolt the bent end to the bolt securing
the gear bracket and knife drive support—on the rear or casting
side with the bolt supplied.
Then bolt the stay for the quadrant to the rear end of
quadrant.
The lever can now be secured to the pipe bar by driving in
securely the tapered key and fastening it with the cotter pin.
Do not tighten the cams until the crop lifters are in position.
Fitting the Crop Lifters.—The crop lifters can now be
bolted on to the cast brackets by means of bolts supplied. They
should be tightened up to the extent (and kept tightened) that
the lifter will just fall steadily by its own weight. The best
method of doing this is to bolt them up tightly in the first
instance, and work the lifters up and down by hand, and then,
if necessary, slacken, off slightly until they will just fall under
their own weight. It is necessary to tighten these crop lifters
to avoid their crossing the comb fingers and so causing chokes,
and also to stop their jumping when travelling over rough
ground.


It will be noticed that there are two slotted holes in the
supporting castings for the lifters, and these provide for comb
adjustment and also for the correct alignment of the crop lifters
slightly towards the nearside. That is, the crop lifters should
be at least in the line of draught and on no account point to
the offside.
Setting Cams. —The cams may now be set as follows: Push
the lever forward to the full extent of the quadrant, and then
set the near and offside lifters by means of the cam, giving
clearance of about f" between the top member of the lifter and
the point of the comb tooth. See that the cams are central on
the lifters and that the set screws in them are tightened
securely, and then line up the remaining fingers with these two,
and secure these cams also.
Adjusting Top Member of Lifter.—Provision is made for
adjusting the top member of each crop lifter by a bolt and nut
near the hinge, so allowing the slope or rake of the lifters, to
be decreased or increased according to the nature of the crop.
It is essential that all top members should be set at the same
rake, especially when lining up on the cams. It is. particularly
valuable in a crop that is rotten in the straw to lower the rake
on these members.
It may be found impracticable to use the roller over comb
and yet obtain full benefit from the lifters—in which case the
roller should be removed.
10-FT. MACHINES
(To be read in conjunction with the above.)
Eye Brackets. —The crop lifter for 10 ft. consists of one
extra finger similar to those on the 8 ft., and one special finger.
Proceed with assembly as follows: Bolt on one eye bracket
with filling piece to short bolt on extreme offside; then bolt
the second eye bracket on the third bolt from the offside, ex-
cluding those in the bracket on the extension supporting comb;
the third bracket on the fifth bolt; the fourth on the 7th bolt,
and the fifth on the 9th bolt—in each case facing the eye of the
bracket upwards and to the rear.
Then remove strap connecting pipe member and knife head
guide at extreme nearside end, and bolt in its place the long
bracket with its eye facing up to align with the others. *
Cast Brackets for Lifters.—The cast brackets for the crop
lifters may now be attached. It will be noticed there are nine
similar brackets and one special one. This latter is to accom-
modate the special lifter required to clear the diagonal under-
frame.


Starting from the offside, attach the comb bolts—
the first bracket (one of the nine similar) to the 2nd,
3rd and 4th fingers;
the second bracket to the 7th, Bth and 9th fingers;
the 3rd bracket to the 11th, 12th and 13th; or 12th
13th and 14th, according to spacing of comb;
the fourth bracket (the odd special one) to the 18th,
19th and 20th;
the fifth bracket (one of the nine similar) to the 24th,
25th and 26th;
the sixth bracket to the 30th, 31st and 32nd;
the seventh bracket to the 36th, 37th and 38th;
the eighth bracket to the 42nd, 43rd and 44th;
the ninth bracket to the 48th, 49th and 50th;
the tenth bracket to the 54th, 55th and 56th.
this being the third tooth from the nearside, including that in
the divider.
This spacing only applies to the 10 ft. Header-Harvester and
when the standard comb setting of 58 teeth is used. A slight
adjustment may be necessary for the different settings of the
comb.
Pipe Bar and Cams. —The pipe bar may now be fitted
through the eye bracket on offside. Thread on two cams, then
one cam between the second and third eye bracket, and two
cams between each of the other eye brackets—nine in all—the
special lifter being set by the tapered adjustable wedge at
its rear end to conform with the approximate lowest working
position of the other lifters. Fit the pipe member wedge, lever,
etc., as for the 8 ft. machine. The lifters should be fitted simi-
larly—with the exception of the special finger in the fourth
bracket from the offside, which has no cam mechanism.
.CANADIAN TYPE CROP LIFTER:
This is a general purpose but lighter lifter than the “Ship-
ard” suitable for handling down or hail-smashed crops. In
fact, it will handle any average crop that is not rotten in the
straw or exceptionally heavy.
The stay should be used to support the Comb Finger.


The webbed finger is designed to prevent broken (or hailed)
straws falling back to the ground. Each finger will rise in-
dependently over obstacles and may be worked right on the
ground Without risk of its digging in. The body of the finger
rests on the point of the comb, which in turn is supported by a
stay to the comb bolts. With the standard \s" opening of the
comb, the lifters should be spaced about every_ fifth tooth, com-
mencing from the third or fourth from the offside. See that the
stay under the comb finger is fitted in each instance, and that
the bolts on it are tight so that the maximum support is pro-
vided for the finger.
EAR LIFTERS (Light Type);
These are for lifting light leaning heads, and will save the
machine, as it is not necessary to keep the comb so low to
gather these leaning heads.
The lifters, together with the special supporting stay, are
bolted—spaced evenly—to the holes in the ends of the comb
teeth. The rear end of the stay bolts to the comb bolt of the
finger carrying the lifter.
On 8 ft. machine there are ten lifters, and on 10 ft. machine,
twelve.
ROLLER UNDER COMB:
A 5" octagonal wooden roller for use under comb is obtain-
able for very rotten crops, or crops which have been cut or
broken by hail. In such crops the roller may be found very
useful.
It is attached by chain and hook on each side, the hook
being secured by a comb bolt and is for the purpose of adjust-
ing the length of chain, according to the height of crop.
TRACTOR HITCH:
This Hitch is adaptable to any tractor, and has five adjust-
ments, ranging for height of pull from 9 inches to 241 inches.
It is of great value in reducing the draught when using a
tractor.
The front wheel is removed, and the tractor carries the
weight of the forecarriage, the fork being used as the centre
stay.
On the 8 ft. machine, the nearside strap runs from the lower
end of the fork to the side strap, to which it is bolted just in
front of the axle. The offside strap runs from the lower end
of the fork to a point behind the main axle, and is bolted to
the main frame. On the 10 ft. machine the straps connect from
the lower end of the fork to the stay under the forecarriage,
joining it immediately under the spring for raising and
lowering.


VIEW OF 8 FT. TRACTOR HITCH


The straps leading from the fork forward have bolted be-
tween them a piece of steel 3' long, 3" x the end of which
is formed into a hook to engage into the shackle that attaches
to the draw bar of the tractor.
State size of machine (8 ft. or 10 ft.) when ordering.
SUNSWEEP CHOKECUTT ER
State size of machine when ordering.


SUNSWEEP CHOKECUTTER:
This chokecutter is of great assistance in crops badly in-
fested with thistles, weeds, etc., and under such conditions will
eliminate many stops.
The illustration shows the chokecutter fitted to the front —
a size being available for each size (8 or 10ft.).
The operating crank bolts on the nearside and in front of
rear spiral rail, and the chokecutter unit itself is fastened with
bearings to the forward side of the front rail extension in the
holes provided. The arm on the crank is coupled with the links
to that on the chokecutter spindle. See that the keys are rigidly
clamped by the arms in each instance.
Two stops are provided on the inside of the dividers to pre-
vent the chokecutter blade fouling the spirals. They affix to
the lower and rear two holes provided for the roller over comb.
The nuts should be on the outside as shown.
CANVAS EXTENSION FOR REAR OF WALKER CASE:
In windy conditions this prevents straw and chaff being
blown on to the bagging platform, or the riddles being affected
when a light seed crop, such as rye, is being harvested. It is
obtained at a small additional cost.
THE SUNDUMP CHAFFSAVER
This is designed to save the chaff and straw behind the
machine, and dump it at intervals so as to be easily gathered
for feed, etc.
The Chaffsaver is constructed of galvanised sheet iron,
firmly braced, and has a capacity of 140 cubic feet.
By operation of a chain from the driving seat, the concaved
rear portion of the Saver, which is hinged, swings up and away
from the front portion, emptying its load of chaff and straw
on to the ground in a compact heap.
From the two rear top comers of the Chaffsaver, hinged
suspension rods lead to the arms of a crank mounted across the
top of the straw walker case. Attached to the nearside arm of
this crank is a quadrant, the operating cable running from the
front of machine over its grooved rim and fastening to the rear
end of it. A spiral spring connecting from the quadrant to an
adjustable eye bolt on side of the machine assists to give an
easy lift, and also eases the momentum of the rear portion of
the saver when falling back into position. The spring is so
placed that it ceases to provide resistance when the container
is closed.
HOW TO ASSEMBLE AND ATTACH THE CHAFFSAVER:
The Chaffsaver will arrive at the farm packed down, the
container being in two sections.


CHAFFSAVER IN OPEN OR DUMPING POSITION
THE CHAFFSAVER —(Closed position)


Take up the portion with angle iron frame at each end
strapped by a top member, and attach it to the machine. Fix
the two angle iron members bolted to the nearside of this
portion on to each end of the long bolt connecting rear ends of
body straps of machine.
Next attach the two sheet iron angle brackets. These con-
nect to rear of straw walker case by the two bolts in _ strap
for hood on either side, and are bolted to the fixed portion of
container, two holes being punched in top member and two on
side member, on each side, for the purpose.
Hinge the rear portion of container to the front portion by
the two i" bolts provided. These bolts are of sufficient length
to take lock nuts, which are for the purpose of allowing the
rear portion to hinge freely. The nuts should be locked tightly
one on the other. When connected in this way, the hinged
portion should be raised up in order to ascertain if free move-
ment has been obtained. If it moves stiffly, allow a little more
freedom in the hinge.
The two 2" and guides are to be attached by the two bolts
at each end of wooden bar across bottom of fixed portion. These
are for the purpose of guiding the rear portion into position,
and preventing side movement when closed.
The crank arrangement is supplied ready assembled for
attachment by brackets to the two bolts in angle iron stay over
rear of straw walker case. It may be necessary when attach-
ing the nearside bracket, to chisel off the top corner of diagonal
stay on nearside of walker case.
The two -|" rods hinge from brackets at the top rear corners
of hinged portion of container to the crank arms on each side
of straw walker casing, with the ends for cotter pins facing
walker case.
The quadrant attached to nearside arm of crank carries the
operating cable that runs through a pulley block to the front of
machine. Attach the block with clip to the bolt securing
diagonal spring hanger for riddle box.
A helper spring, provided for the purpose of assisting to
swing up the rear portion of container to dump the contents,
is attached by a pivot anchor to the side of quadrant plate.
At its other end an eye bolt for adjusting the pressure on spring
is held by an angle iron bracket, which must be fixed on to the
two top bolts in strap for hinge of door on walker case. The
bolting flange of this bracket must face the rear.
A clip is attached to the forward end of the cable or chain
for fastening to the rear bolt in nose-piece on offside. To
operate the dumping device, pull up chain with right hand
and when the contents of container have been dumped, release
the pressure steadily, allowing the rear portion of container to
fall back into place.


10-ft. Header with 23-bushel Grain Box.


TWO-WHEEL FORECARRIAGE:
This is obtainable as an extra, and replaces the single front
wheel and fork as a unit Its advantages are very apparent
where heavy soil or sand conditions are prevalent.
A new nose-piece is needed when the conversion is made,
and it should be noted that the axle is marked “top,” and should
always be fitted this way so that the oil grooves are on top.
The wheels and centres are readily removed by undoing
the securing bolts and then removing the pin at the end of this
axle.
HILLSIDE ATTACHMENT:
Comprises extended worms for grain and headings elevator
hoppers; angles for the grain tray; and sliding tray at front
of rddle box.
The worms assist in conveying the grain, etc., to the ele-
vators and the angles on the grain and sliding trays keep the
grain and chaff spread evenly over the riddles. These fittings
are available through our Duplicate Department, or may be
fitted to new machines before delivery.
WALKER EXTENSIONS:
Extensions are available for the rear end of the walkers,
which will assist in saving grain in extremely heavy or flaggy
crops.
TIPPING PLATFORM:
A tipping tray can be fitted to the bagging platform, and
with this, sewn or skewered bags may be tipped in groups of
twos and threes with the minimum of effort, (The type of plat-
form should be specified when ordering, as there is considerable
difference between the hinged or lower portions of the platform.)
CHUTE TO STRAW WALKERS:
This is a useful attachment for returning the “headings”
to the straw' walkers instead of the drum. In such crops as
rye grass, barley, etc., cracking or skinning of the seed
is avoided in this way. The chute replaces that fitted to the
machine normally. This should be removed by undoing the
screw's at the top. A marking template is provided to correctly
locate the holes in the sheet leading to the walkers. Drill the
holes as indicated. The lower portion of the chute bolts to the
sheet leading to the walkers and the upper portion screw's to
the elevator.
SPECIAL GRIP FOR MAIN WHEEL:
A grip of 2" angle iron instead of the li" standard grip is
available for sandy conditions, for 12", 14" and 13J" wheels.
When ordering state size of tyre.


TWENTY-THREE BUSHEL GRAIN BOX:
This grain box may be fitted as an extra to the Bft. machine.
It has two doors for emptying instead of one. Owing to the
extra weight and overhang of this larger box, it is not recom-
mended in rough mallee country.
SPECIAL RIDDLES. Ask for a copy of the booklet‘'Various
crops and how to harvest them with your Sunshine Header."
LUBRICATION CHART
This chart is set out as the correct method of lubricating_ the
machine when using “Sungoil” or a lubricant of similar weight
and quality, when the air temperature is between 85 deg. and
100 deg. Fah. Higher temperatures or inferior oils necessitate
extra attention to the bearings.
We recommend “SUNGOIL” as the latest development in
Pressure Gun System Lubrication. It is an excellent semi-fluid
oil, which will retain its lubricating qualities under the most
rigorous hot and cold conditions. The process of filling a gun
with “SUNGOIL” is an easy one.
THERE ARE NO AIRLOCKS —NO WASTAGE
Lubricate every two hours:—
Nipples.
2 Bearings for Straw Walker Crank, each side.
5 Straw Walker Bearings on Crank Shaft (on pipes).
1 Forward Bearing for Universal or Shaker Shaft.
1 Rear Bearing for Universal or Shaker Shaft.
1 Tension Sprocket on Chain driving Floats and Feed
Roller.
1 Bearing Ring for Screen Sprocket (on pipe).
Lubricate every three hours:—
Nipples.
2 Bracket for Combination Sprocket Wheel and Gear for
Knife and Spiral Drives.
1 Combination Bevel and Sprocket Wheel-—on side of gear.
2 Tension Sprockets on Chain driving Grain and Headings
Elevators.
2 Tension Sprockets for Chains driving Front Spirals.
1 Tension Wheel on Chain driving Floats and Feed Roller.
2 Bearings for each end of Front Spiral.
2 Bearings for each end of Rear Spiral.
2 Bearings for Feed Roller, each side.
2 Bearings for bottom of Headings Elevator, each side.
2 Bearings for bottom of Grain Elevator, each side.


LUBRICATION CHART—(Continued)
2 Bearings for top of Grain and Headings Elevator, each
side.
2 Bearings for driving Spindle for Floats or Front
Elevator, each side.
2 Bearings for Top Spindle of Front Elevator, each side.
2 Bearings for Bottom Spindle of Front Elevator, each
side.
1 Ball Socket on Knife Head.
10-FT. HEADERS ONLY.
2 Bearings for Rotary Baffle Reel, each side.
Lubricate Twice Daily:—
Nipples.
1 Nose Piece for Forecarriage.
1 Centre of Front Wheel (2 if two Wheels are fitted).
2 Centre of Main Wheel.
1 Centre of Offside Wheel.
Lubricate Once Daily:—
Nipples.
1 Intermediate Double-Sprocket Spindle and Ball Bearing.
2 Ball Bearings on Drum Shaft, near and offsides.
3 Ball Bearings on Front Driving Shaft—near 2; offside 1.
3 Ball Bearings on Back Gear Shaft —near 2; offside 1.
1 Spring Tension Arm Centre on Floats Chain.
1 Release Coupling for Knife.
1 Drum Spindle Cluster Sprocket (end of Spindle).
USE SUNSHINE HARVESTER OIL
Oil the following liberally and often:—
Main and Secondary Roller Chains.
Roller for Shake of Riddle Box (oil centre and race).
Roller for Knife Drive (oil centre and race).
Pivot Centre for Sway Bar for Kniife Drive.
Bevel Wheels on Shaker Shaft.
Bevel Wheels and Sprockets for driving Spirals.
Oil the following Once Daily:—
All steel Belt Chains.
Bearings for Grain Spreader—when Gram Box is fitted.
Rollers on Nearside Covering Case for Front Elevator.
Bearings on Raising and Lowering Gear.
Hangers for front end of Straw Walkers.
Moving joints of Universals on Shaker Shaft.
Segment for Main Drive: Lubricate with heavy oil or grease
so that a good surface is maintained. Do not over-lubricate
to cause dirt to collect in root of teeth.
“Nearside” is left hand, “Offside” is right hand,
when sitting on the seat.


INDEX
The index is divided into sections corresponding
to the respective divisions in the machine. Any items
that cannot be readily classified will be found in the
general alphabetical section at the end.
LUBRICATION
Page.
GENERAL LUBRICATION 23
LUBRICATION CHART 91
GENERAL
ADJUSTMENTS FOR NEW MACHINE .. 37
ASSEMBLY OF MACHINE ON THE FARM 5
DRIVING HINTS 35
SETTING MACHINE FOR THE CROP .. 26
EXTRA EQUIPMENT 75
1. THE FRONT OR GATHERING SECTlON—comprises
Comb, Knife, Knife Drive, Spirals, Raising and Lowering
Gear, Croplifters.
ADJUSTING—
Chains driving Spirals . . . . . . . . .. 41
Comb —Spacing of .. .. .. . . . , . . 38
Height of .. . . . . .. . . 34, 76
Height on offside of .. .. .. ..9,13
Level of .. .. .. .. .. 13
Roller over .. .. .. .. .. 34
Roller under .. .. .. . . . . 83
Raising and Lowering Gear . . .. ~ . . 70
Release Clutch for Front Drive (safety coupling) 13, 59
Spirals—front and rear . . .. . . . . .. 40
Chokecutter (Sunsweep) .. .. .. .. .. 85
Croplifters—Shipard .. .. .. .. . . 79
Canadian . . .. .. .. 82
Earlifter .. .. . . . . . . 83


Page.
Extension for Underframe carrying Front . . . . 9
Front or Cutting Bar .. .. . . .. 39
To remove .. .. . . .. .. .. 63
To attach .. .. .. .. .. 10,11
Knife—Bar 39
Drive . . .. . . . . . . .. 41
Ledger Plates . . , . . . .. . . .. 39
Raising and Lowering Gear .. . . .. 70
Roller Race for Knife Drive • • • • . • .. 41
Spirals—. .. . . . . . . .. . . . . 40
Spindles . . . . . . . . .. 40,41
Drive for . . .. .. . . .. 41
Universal Joints in Front Drive . . . . 13, 60
(See also Release Clutch, page 60)
2. FRONT ELEVATOR OR FLOATS SECTlON—comprises
Elevator, Casing, Spindles and Sprockets, Front Elevator
or Floats, Adjusting Springs, Sliding Portion of Elevator
and Feed Roller.
ADJUSTING—
Alignment with Drum Casing . . . . . . 13
Chain driving Floats and Feed Roller.. .. .. 41
Front Elevator or Floats.. .. .. .. 42,43,63
Casing for Floats . . . . . . . . . . 11
Cover for rear of Elevator . . . . . . . . 15
Fitting Floats . . . . . . .. .. 14
Hinge Flap .. . . . . . . .. , . ..11
Sliding Portion of Elevator .. .. .. .. 12
Spindles and Sprockets . . . . . . . . .11
3. THRASHING DRUM AND CONCAVE SECTlON—com-
prises Drum, complete with Fans, Drum Spindle, Bars,
Concave and Settings. (For Speed and Drive see Main
Drive Section.)
ADJUSTING—
Concave Setting . . . . .. . . . . 37, 46
Drum Setting . . . . .. .. . . . . 48
Fan Cut-Offs . . . . . . .. .. . . 26
Thrasher Bar Cut-Off . . .. . . . . .. 48


Page.
Beater or Thrasher Bars.. .. . . . . . . G 5
Concave—. . . . . .. . . . . . • 46
Check Bars .. .. .. . . . ■ 66, 68
To remove .. .. .. . ■ . • 64,66'
Drum— .. .. . . .. 46
Balance of . . .. .. . . . . 65
Setting of .. . . . . . . . . ■ • 48, 65
Shaft Ball Bearing . . . . .. . . . . 54
Sprockets .. .. .. .. .. .. 57
Setting for hard thrashing . . . . 66
Setting for Barley, etc. .. .. . . .. 6‘B
Speed of .. .. .. .. .. 37,57
To remove . . .. . . . . . . .. 64
4. STRAW WALKER SECTION —comprises Walkers, Walker
Crank, Grain Tray, Baffle Reel, Tailpiece at rear.
ADJUSTING—
Belt for Driving .. . . . . . . . . 15, 43
Alignment (Eccentric Cam) . . . . 44
Walker—Speed of . . . . . . .. .. 45, 70
Tailpiece for . . . . . . . . 45
Baffle Feeder Reel. . . . . . . . . . 45
Canvas Extension for rear of Casing . . . . 86
Cover for rear of Casing . . . . . . 15
Grain Tray—■ . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Extension for . . .. . . . . . . 44
Straw Walkers— . . . . .. . . . . 44
Extension for . . . . . . . . . . 89
Swinging Flap in Walker Casing . . . . 45
5. RIDDLE BOX SECTION—-comprises Settings, Selection of
Riddles, Blast, Riddle Box Shake and Special Riddles for
Grass Seed.
ADJUSTING—
Blast— 26
Crop Adjustments . . .. . . . . 31
Cut-Offs for Fans . . . . . , . . 26, 48
Deflectors .. . . . . . . . . . . 29
Riddles—Setting . . .. .. . . . . 30, 31
Riddle Box, Shake.. .. .. . . . . . . 29


Page,
Repeating of Grain—. .. .. .. . . 32, 69
Special Chute to prevent . . . . . . .. 89
Riddle Box . . .. . . .. .. .. 32, 42
Riddles— . . . . . . . . .. . . 26,30
Barley 68
Rake for rear of . . .. .. . . 30
Seed Wheat Cleaning .. . . .. . . 67
Shaker Shaft . . . . .. . . . . 60
Tailboard for Riddle Box. . . . . . . . . . 31
Two-inch Lip Ridged Top Riddle .. . . 32, 33
6. GRAIN AND HEADINGS ELEVATOR SECTION-.com-
prises Elevators, Screen, and Headings Chute to Drum.
ADJUSTING—
Angle of Spindle at top . . . . .. . . 45
Chain driving Elevators . . .. . . . . .. 45
Chute for Headings—To Drum .. . . . . 15
To Walker Case . . .. 89
Eccentric for adjusting Walker Belt .. . . . . 44
Elevators .. .. . . . . .. .. 43,45
Screen .. .. . . .. .. . . 21,68
Worms—.in Hoppers . . .. .. . . 45
7. MAIN DRIVE SECTION —comprises Crown Wheel, Pinions,
Roller Chains, Steel Belt Chains, Gear Shafts, Ball
Bearings, Shaker Shaft, Sprockets, Settings and Speeds.
ADJUSTING—
Ball Bearings .. . . 24, 52, 54
Chains—Roller .. . . .. . . . . 54
Adjusting and Shortening . . . . 54,56
Clutch Forks . . . . .. . . . . 16,18
Pinions with Crown Wheel . . . . . . 48,49
Safety Coupling for Front Drive . . .. . . 60
Shaker Shaft for Riddle Box . . .. . . 60, 63
Bevel Wheels . . . . .. 60,63


Page.
Speed of Drum . . . . • • • • • • 37, 57
Bail Bearings— . . . • • • • • • • . . 24
Attention to .. . . • ■ • • • • 24
Felt Washers for . . . . . . . . . . 24
Lubrication . . • ■ • • ■ • • • 24
On Drum Shaft . . . . . • ■ • 24, 52, 54
On Gear Shafts .. .. • • • ■ 24,52
Bevel Wheels for Front Drive and Shaker Shaft 41, 60, 63
■Chain Roller—. . . . . .. .. .. 54,56
Lubrication . . .. . . • • ■ • 24,25
Clutch Fork for Driving Pinions . . . . . . 16
Crown Wheel for Main Drive —Fitting . . . . 71
Lubrication .. . . 25
Pinions .. . . 48
Free Wheel Clutch on Drum Shaft . . .. . . 57
Gear Shafts—Front and Rear . . . . . . 52
To dismantle .. .. ■ • 52
Intermediate Sprocket Assembly .. . . 58
Pinions—To Fit . . .. .. . . .. 16
Adjusting. . . . . . . . . . 49
Alignment of Rear Pinion . . .. .. 51
Alignment of Front Pinion . . . . 51
Speed of Machine . . . . . . . . . . 35
Sprockets—Roller Chain . . . . . . . . 54
On Drum Shaft 57
Universal Joints . . . . .. . . . . 13, 60
8. MAIN FRAME SECTION —comprises Assembly of Under-
frame, Pulling Gear, Grain Box, Bagging Platform,
Wheels, Grips, and General Adjustment.
ADJUSTING—
Height of Offside Body Strap .. .. 70
Raising and Lowering Gear . . . . 70
Setting of Offside Wheel on 10-ft. .. . . 9
Axle—Front . . .. . • • • • • . . 71
Offside Extension . . .. .. .. . . 9
Bagging Platform—To attach . . . . . . . . 20
Bag Rack .. .. .. 21
Tipping Platform for .. . . 90
Draught or Pulling Bars . . . . . . . . . . 6
Extension for Offside Underframe .. .. .. 9
Grain 80x—23 Bushel . . . . . . . . 91
Bag Bows .. .. .. .. .. 23
Seconds Box . . .. . . .. .. 21
To attach .. .. .. .. 18


Page.
Grips tor Main Wheel . . . . .. 16,90
Raising and Lowering Gear . . . . . . .. 70
Steering Gear—Hand and Foot. . . . .. 71
Tractor Hitch . . . . .. .. . .7,83
Transport Pole . . . . .. . . .. B
Two-Wheel Forecarriage . . . . . . 90
Underframe for Front .. .. .. ..9,10
Wheels—Fitting Spokes . . . . .. .. 74
Front . . . . .. . . . . . . 71
Grips for. . . . . . .. 16
Offside 9,74
9. POWER-TAKE-OFF MACHINES—
Overload Clutch . . . . .. . . 36
Speeds .. .. .. .. .. .. 36
Chart for Calculating Speeds .. .. .. 36
GENERAL —
Adjustments to check on new Machine .. 37
Assembly of Machine on the Farm . . . . . . 5
Bagging Platform—To attach . . . . 20
Bag Rack .. .. .. 21
Barley Harvesting . . . . . . . . 68
Chaffsaver (Sundump) .. .. .. . . .. 86
Chokecutter (Sunsweep) . . . . . . 86
Cleaning of Seed Wheat .. .. . . . . 67
Croplifters . . .. .. .. . . . . 77-83
Driving Hints . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Duplicate Parts . . . . . . . . .. 4
End of Season . . .. .. 25
Extra Equipment .. . . . . .. . . 75
Grain Box—To attach . . . . . . . . 18
Hillside Attachment . . . . . . 90
Lubrication Chart . . . . . . . . 91
Main Drive . . . . . . . . . . . , . . 48
“Nearside"—“Offside”—Definition .. . . . . 4
Pea Harvesting .. .. . . .. 75
Pulling Gear Assembly .. . . .. . . . . 5
Setting Machine for (he Crop . . . . 26
Speed of Machine . . . . . . . . 35
Tipping Platform . . . . . . .. 90
Tractor Hitch . . . . . . . . 83
Two-Wheel Forecarriage.. .. .. .. ..90
Working Speed in Crop .. .. .. ..35


INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS
Page.
Machine completely assembled—view from offside .. 1
Machine completely assembled view from nearside,
fitted with Bagging Platform .. .. .. .. 2
Forecarriage and Pulling Gear assembled . . . . .. o .
Stub Pole attached to Machine' .. .. .. .. G
Main Frame of 8 ft. Header .. .. .. . . .. 7
Fitting of Oifside Wheel and Underframe on 10 ft. Headers 8
Knd view of Front —showing Drive and Elevator Casing 10
Assembly of Float's or Front Elevator .. . . . . 14
Main Wheel and Grips .. .. .. 16
Assembly of Nearside Bearings and Pinions on Gear Shaft 17
Driving Pinion and Clutch Fork (assembled) on Front
Gear Shaft .. .. .. .. .. .. 17
Grain Box assembled on Machine—lo-ft. Header .. . . 1!)
S : de and rear view of Bagging Platform .. . . . . 22
Ball Bearings .. . . . . . . .. . . . . 23
Section of Puddle Box with Standard Riddles .. . . 27
Section of R'ddle Box with Lip Ridged Riddle . . . . 28
Two-inch Lip Ridged Riddle .. . . .. .. .. 33
Front of Machine with Roller in position .. . . .. 34
Comb Setting . . .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
Attachment of Spindle to Spiral Section .. .. .. 40
Thrashing Drum and Concave .. .. .. .. 46
Section of Drum and Concave, showing use of Gauge .. 47
Crown Wheel and Pinions —setting .. .. .. .. 49
Main Drive of Header .. . . . .. .. .. .. 50
Assembly of Front Gear Shaft .. .. .. .. 53
Main Drive of Header, from offside.. .. .. ..55
Sprockets, Free Wheel Clutch, and Ball Bearings on
Drum Shaft .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 57
Intermediate Sprocket Assembly .. .. .. ..58
Intermediate Sprocket Assembly (dmmantled) . . .. 59
Main Drive on Header, from nearside . . . . .. 01
Back Gear Shaft and Shaker Shaft Assembly. . . . . G 2
Special Pinion and Lock for Stationary Thrashing . . G 7
Setting of Crown Wheel on Main Wheel .. .. .. 73
Offside and Front Wheels .. .. .. .. .. 74
Pea Front .. .. .. .. .. .. ..76
Shipard Croplifter . . .. .. .. . . .. 78
Canadian Croplifter . . . . . . . . , . 82
Tra;tor Hitch .. .. .. .. .. .. ..84
Suns weep Cholrecutter.. . . . . . . .. .. 85
Sundump Cnaa saver—open and closed . . . . 87
10-ft. Machine with 23-bushel Gram Box . . . . . . 89


