

SUNSHINE ENGINES
PETROL ENGINES
Made in Australia by
HUGH V. McKAY
Sunshine Harvester Works, SUNSHINE


Sunshine Petrol Engines
Manufactured by
H. V. McKAY
SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS
SUNSHINE
Head Office and Works:
Sunshine, near Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
Branches:
Stanley Street, South Brisbane, Queensland.
27-39 George Street West, Sydney,
New South Wales.
Corner Collins and Spencer Streets, Melbourne,
Victoria.
56 North Terrace, Adelaide, South Australia.
36 Pier Street, Perth, West Australia.
Corner York and St. John Streets, Launceston,
Tasmania
Telegraphic Addresses :
“Sunshine,” Brisbane. "Sunshine," Sydney.
"Sunshine,” Melbourne "Sunshine,” Adelaide.
"Sunshine," Perth. "Sunshine,” Launceston
Separate Catalogues are also issued describing the “Sunshine” Harvester, the
“Sun” Grain and Fertilizer Drill, and the “Sunshine” Farm Implements.
These Books are sent Post Free to any address on request.
Inspection invited at all Showrooms and Agencies.
Quotations mailed promptly on receipt of request.
The Sunshine Harvester Works are reached in twenty minutes by train from Spencer Street
Station, Melbourne, and Farmers visiting the Victorian Capital are always cordially welcomed
to inspect the largest Implement Factory in the Commonwealth.
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by D. W. Paterson Co. Pty. Ltd., 495 Collins Street, Melbourne,


SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINE-STATIONARY TYPE
Sizes 3,5,7, and 10 b.h.p.
(From a photograph of 10 h.p. size)


MADE IN AUSTRALIA
T : iHE old-time prejudice against “Colonial make”
i has been completely overcome as far as Farm
; j Implements are concerned. The Sunshine
Harvester Works achieved its success by producing
implements which were better suited to Australian
conditions, more substantially constructed, and, in
many cases, lower priced than foreign goods. The
result to-day is that the Farmers of Australia give
preference to Australian Implements all along the line.
The same process has steadily brought the Aus-
tralian Engine into the lead. Patriotic sentiment has
undoubtedly assisted, but this would not have availed
if not backed up by the merit of the Engine itself.
The Sunshine Engine complies with this condition.
It has found favour by reason of its merits. It compares
more than favourably with importations from abroad,
and it is offered at a lower price—value for value —
than any other.
It is entirely made at the Sunshine Works, and its
manufacture gives employment to a large staff of
skilled Australian artisans; who, with their dependants,
help to swell the best market for the consumption of
Australian farm products—the home market.


SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINE-
PORTABLE TYPE
Sizes 3,5, 7, and
10 b.h.p.
(From a photograph of
10 h.p. size)


T : -HE keynote of the success of the Sunshine
I Engine is its simplicity of construction. The
i 5 Two-Cycle Type (giving a power stroke to
each revolution of the crank) was adopted because it
best lends itself to simplicity and ease of management,
together with compactness and solidity. It has but
one-third of the moving parts required in a four-
cycle engine; and it has no valves exposed to the
corrosive action of hot gases.
The Vertical Type has many advantages. The
vertical movement of the piston ensures even wear in
the cylinder without any possibility of “ovalling,”
as in a horizontal engine. The force is expended in
the best direction —against the earth, avoiding all side
strains and minimising vibration.
A detailed description of the construction of the
engine is set out on the following pages, and the two-
cycle method of working is described on page 23.
Hundreds of letters have been received from satis-
fied users in praise of the Sunshine Engine. Some of
these have been printed in a small booklet, which will
be sent post free on request.


ONE OF THE MACHINING ROOMS


Detailed Description
BASE
This not only acts as the bed plate on which the engine is
mounted, but also Serves as the petrol tank. It is a heavy casting
of great strength, and each one is tested by hydraulic pressure before
use, to make sure that it is free of defects of any sort. Its upper
faces are accurately machined to a fit with the crank case which
is bolted to it. It is provided with 4 lugs to take foundation bolts
J inch in diameter. Its capacity as a petrol tank in the various sizes
of engine is as follows; 3 h.p., f gallon ; 5 h.p., 2 gallons ; 7 h.p.,
3| gallons ; 10 h.p., 4| gallons. The plug of the petrol receiver
is provided with wings, so that it may be screwed home tight by
hand to prevent leakage of petrol gas.
CRANK CASE
This is of heavy design, and made from close-grained cast iron
without flaw. It also is subjected to a hydraulic pressure test
before being passed for use. The top and bottom are accurately
machined and faced to make perfect joints with the cylinder and the
base respectively, to which it is attached by bolts and set screws.
The main bearing socket on the carburettor side is cast solid with
the crank case. On the exhaust side the main bearing is carried on
a heavy machine-faced flanged socket, secured to the crank case
with six set screws. The bottom of the crank case is semi-circular
in shape to match the throw of the crank, and to facilitate the
splash lubrication of the bearings.
All bolt holes are “jig” drilled, so that parts may be exactly
duplicated at any time.
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES
H. V.' McKAY sunshine” "voins SUNSHINE


CYLINDER
Special care is exercised in the manufacture of the cylinder,
nothing but close-grained cylinder metal being used in this casting.
It is cast in one piece with its water jacket case. Ample water
space is provided around the cylinder and sparking plug, also large
openings for the inlet (at the bottom) and outlet (at the top) of
the water in circulating to and from the tank, on the thermo-
syphon principle. Over-heating is practically impossible if the
water tank is kept filled.
The cylinder is bored with great accuracy, and the final
machining process gives a finish like glass to the cylinder walls. The
thickness of the walls is such that if in the course of years re-
boring becomes necessary, there is ample metal for the purpose.
The spigot of the cylinder projects into the crank case, and is
so designed that no portion of the piston leaves the cylinder at any
part of the stroke. Thus the full length of the piston acts as a
guide at all times, and side thrust is thereby minimised.
Inlet and outlet ports are provided, accurately proportioned,
and situated correctly in relation to each other. The wire gauze
covering to the inlet port acts as a strainer, and also prevents back
firing under any circumstances.
The cylinder flange is machine fitted to the top of the crank
case and securely bolted thereto. Each cylinder is subjected to the
hydraulic pressure test before assembling. Great compactness is
obtained by mounting the carburettor and the exhaust directly on
to the cylinder cover. On the 10-h.p. size a half-compression cock
is provided for ease in starting.
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES 0
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE


PISTON
This is made of great strength, and special machinery is used
in finishing it to accurate dimensions, so that it can be guaranteed
to the one-thousandth part of an inch in
diameter. This fineness of measurement jf
applies also to the piston rings, grooves, U-
gudgeon pin, etc. The piston is unusually p 1
long, giving a great bearing area in the
cylinder. In the 7 and 10 b.h.p. sizes it has
four grooves and rings, while the smaller *
sizes have three. The rings are bored and j;
turned before cutting, and after cutting are ™
ground to exact size, both in width and dia-
meter. They thus engage the cylinder walls
at every part, and entirely prevent any escape
of gas.
GUDGEON PIN
This is made from best mild steel ground to
exact size. It is case-hardened by a special
process lasting eight hours, which converts its
faces into best carbon steel to a depth of one-
sixteenth of an inch, giving it almost everlasting
wear. It is prevented from moving in the piston
by set screws let into the pin. It thus has no
chance to injure the cylinder walls.
PISTON and
CONNECTING ROD
3 and 5 h.p. Engine
CRANK SHAFT BEARINGS
Special attention is called to these, as they are of unique con-
struction, and are ahead of all others by reason of the simple and
easy method they provide for taking up wear. They are made of
specially selected phosphor bronze, and have exceptionally large
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS
SUNSHINE


wearing surfaces. They are not made in two halves, but in one
solid piece. They are turned parallel on the outside to fit the crank
case sockets, but are conical on the inside or bearing faces to fit
the taper of the crank shaft. They are secured to the crank case
flanges by three studs, each with
two nuts back and front of the
bearing flange. Any wear is
simply and immediately taken
up by slackening the inner nuts
and tightening the outer ones
until the two tapered surfaces
are in exact bearing position.
No expert knowledge whatever
is required for this operation,
which is strikingly simple in
comparison with other systems.
The bearings can also be turned
to three different positions to
distribute the wear.
CONNECTING ROD and BEARINGS
The connecting or driving rod is of best steel, of double fluted
section, giving lightness with the maximum of strength. The
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE


bearing on the gudgeon pin is of best phosphor bronze, and is of
ample length. The split big end bearings on the crank are lined
with best white anti-friction alloy. They are secured by turned
bolts with nuts and cotters.
PISTON and
CONNECTING ROD
7 and 10 h.p.
CRANK SHAFT
This is drop forged from solid
steel, then turned and ground to
absolute size. It is severely tested
before being passed, and no instance
of breakage is on record. The main
journals are tapered to fit the bear-
ings (described in another paragraph), and this design provides
for the at the points of greatest strain. A glance
at the illustration shows its great diameter at the shoulders of
the crank webs. It is no exaggeration to state that this construction
gives more than double the strength of an ordinary parallel crank
shaft of the same nominal diameter. Deep keyways are provided
for the fly-wheel keys.
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE


THE PETROL PUMP
The method of raising the petrol from the base tank to the jet
chamber of the carburettor is unique in its simplicity and lack of
complication. It is covered by patent rights. The action of the
piston alternately produces a light
pressure and a partial vacuum in
the crank case. A copper pipe con-
veys these impulses to a diaphragm
pump connected with the petrol
tank, and each throb of the dia-
phragm forces some petrol through
another copper pipe to the jet cham-
ber of the carburettor. More petrol
is raised than is consumed by the
engine, the surplus draining back
by a third copper pipe to the tank.
By this means the petrol is kept at
a constant level in the jet chamber.
Two simple ball
valves are used in
conjunction with the
diaphragm, as
shown in the photo-
graph. Nothing is
liable to get out of
order, and the dia-
phragm itself, if
injured, can be re-
placed for a few
pence.
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES 0
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE


THE CARBURETTOR
This is of simple design and strong construction, and is bolted
directly on to the cylinder. It consists of a jet chamber, vaporising
chamber, and induction pipe. The petrol is maintained at a constant
level in the jet chamber as already described. The governing valve
is operated by the rocking lever of the governor. When this valve
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES 0
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE


is raised air flows through the jet chamber, and in its passage sucks
petrol from the jet. The combination forms the explosive gas, for
compression and ignition in the cylinder, as described later.
There is no float in this carburettor, and flooding is not possible,
as all surplus spirit raised by the pump drains back immediately
to the tank. The richness of the mixture is regulated by the jet
needle, the position of which determines the quantity of spirit sucked
up from the jet. The tapered point of the needle engages the orifice
of the jet from above, and after being correctly set needs no further
adjustment. In the illustration “M” is the finger screw for raising or
lowering the needle, and the lock nut “N” holds it to place when set.
The jet chamber is provided with a charging plug (marked “A”)
for filling this chamber when starting. There is also a priming tap
and cup over the induction pipe.
This carburettor works faultlessly, and is an important factor
in the smooth and perfect running of these engines.
GOVERNING VALVE
This is the only valve in the engine (excluding the two simple
ball valves at the petrol pump). It is of the mushroom type, and
as it is not subjected to the corrosive influence of hot gas, the wear
upon it is very slight. The stem is case-hardened. It is raised
vertically by the rocking lever of the governor, and closed by a
spiral spring operating on the mushroom from the top of the induction
chamber. The amount of vertical lift may be regulated by raising
or lowering the finger screw (“D”) on the rocking lever, this in turn
is held in exact position by set screw lock nut and cotter pin “C.”
THE GOVERNOR
This is operated by centrifugal force, and is simple in design
and effective in action. When the fly-wheel is running at normal
speed an eccentric collar on the crank shaft strikes the rocking lever
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES


once per revolution, and in so doing lifts the governing valve to
admit a charge of gas to the inlet port. Any increase of speed above
normal causes the conical weight on the governor rod to overcome
the spring pressure upon it by centrifugal force, and the collar is
then permitted to fall into concentric position, so that it does not
strike the rocking lever, and the governing valve is not lifted, and
no gas passes. When the speed is reduced, the opposite action occurs,
and the rocking lever resumes its control of the valve. The spring
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES


pressure may be varied by moving the cotter pin on the rod to
the several holes provided, and six speeds can be obtained in this
way, varying from two-thirds to full speed. A fibre disc at the end
of the rocking lever takes all the wear, and ensures noiseless work-
ing. When worn at one point this disc may be taken off and re-
placed in a fresh position. By this means the whole of its circum-
ference may be used for wearing surface.
MAGNETO AND SPARKING PLUG
The magneto is of the high-tension type, and is positively driven
by sprocket and chain direct from the crank shaft. It is accurately
timed, and generates
the spark at the plug at
the instant of greatest
compression. It is
supplied with a lever
for retarding the spark
when starting the en-
gine, also with a simple
earthing device for stopping. Insulated wire connects to the spark-
ing plug, which is of the highest quality made. The plug case is
surrounded by the cooling water. (The above are the only parts not
made locally.)
INSPECTION DOORS
In the 5,7, and 10 h.p. sizes a door is placed at the rear of the
crank case, and an extension of same forms a convenient bracket,
to which the magneto is firmly bolted. The same sizes have, in
addition, an inspection door in the front of the crank case. These
provide the means of examining the crank brasses, etc. They are
machine fitted to faces on the crank case, and make gas-tight joints
when studded home.
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES


LUBRICATING SYSTEM
This is most complete, and if the specified quantity of good
quality oil is used the wear on the cylinder and bearings will be so
slight as to be inappreciable for a very lengthy period. Sight feed
lubricators of neat design and handsome pattern are provided, two
supplying oil direct to each of the main crank shaft bearings, while
the third supplies the crank case. The connecting rod bearings and
the cylinder walls are splash lubricated from this supply, and will
run sweetly while it is maintained. In the 7 and 10 h.p. engines a
ring oiler is mounted on one shoulder of the crank, and receives oil
direct from the sight feed lubricator. As it revolves the centrifugal
force impels the oil through a small passage provided in the crank,
and discharges same directly on to the white metal crank bearing
faces. This ensures perfect lubrication to a most important part of
the engine.
OIL
It is false economy, in running an engine, to use an inferior oil,
no matter how low in price it may be. After years of testing, the
“Sunshine Cylinder Oil” has been chosen to be recommended for
Use with this engine. It does more work per gallon than cheaper
oils, and can always be relied upon to keep the cylinder and bearings
in good trim. It can be obtained through Sunshine agents in every
town.
SILENCER
The exhaust chamber is bolted to the cylinder, and contains a
silencer of special design, which is most efficient in muffling all
noise from the explosions.
FLY-WHEELS
These, two in number, are large in diameter, and are well pro-
portioned to maintain a uniform speed without undue weight. The
starting handle is hinged, and automatically falls flush into a recess
as soon as the engine starts.
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES 0
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE


DRIVING PULLEYS
These are of light design, and have turned faces. They are lug-
ged and bolted to the fly-wheel spokes. Standard sizes are supplied,
as shown in table of dimensions. Hollow stub axles may be sup-
plied in their place to accommodate almost any diameter standard
commercial pulley.
COOLING TANK
This is oval in shape, and made from stout galvanised sheet
iron, strongly hooped. It is provided with an anti-splash lip. Strong
rubber hose is provided for the thermo-syphon circulation to and
from the water jacket.
UNDER-CARRIAGE
For portable engines the under-carriage is very strongly built,
and stoutly braced. The axles are of steel, 2 inch square section,
and have long tapered bearings for the boxes of the wheels. Heavy
cast iron wheels are used, and they are equipped with dust-proof,
oil-retaining caps. The front axle has a rocking device for safety in
traversing rough roads. The king pin is set well forward, and gives
a good lock for turning.
Hardwood shafts are included. These are stoutly made, well
braced, and provided with runners for dray harness. Straps and
chocks are also supplied for steadying the engine when at work. A
spacious tool box is provided, and is also utilised to form the driver’s
seat. A stout canvas cover is sent out with each portable engine.
In the 3 h.p. size the body of the transport is lightly constructed,
and a hand pole with cross bar is used for moving it about.
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES 0
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE


IN THE TESTING ROOM


TOOLS, Etc.
The tool equipment includes oil can, funnel, screw driver, spanners
for f, |, I, j?, , |, -T, and | inch nuts.
Spares include 1 sparking plug, 2 washers for same, and 2 dia-
phragm discs.
FINISH
All machining processes are under the closest supervision and
inspection. No part is allowed to pass to the assembling room that
is not perfect in every detail. The machining plant, installed at
great cost, is the finest procurable in the world, and automatically
turns out parts to exact measurement and to a fineness of finish
which cannot be excelled. All painted surfaces are carefully smoothed
and primed. They receive three coats of paint, and are then coated
with the best varnish obtainable.
TESTING
Exhaustive tests are made before an engine is permitted to leave
the factory, and it does not pass from the testing bench until its
starting and running is perfect in every detail. Every engine must
develop more than its rated horse-power, not for moments, but
continuously for many hours at a time, under the brake test. It
must also do this on the normal petrol consumption. The testing
bench is the safeguard of the engine’s reputation, and not one is
passed for sale until it is in condition to completely fulfil the factory
warranty.
FUEL CONSUMPTION
The brake test over a series of years shows the petrol consump-
tion not to exceed 0.8 of a pint per brake horse-power per hour.
This is a most satisfactory figure, and indicates clearly the economy
of the use of these engines for chaff-cutting, wood-sawing, pumping,
and other services.
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES 0
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE


PATENT RIGHTS
Several special features are covered by Letters Patent, including
the crank shaft and bearings, carburettor, petrol pump, and governor,
and no infringement of these rights is permitted.
DUPLICATES
The method of manufacture, in large batches of parts, ensures
perfect duplication. Stocks of parts are carried at all branch houses
and important depots, and any replacement needed can be despatched
by first train.
EXPERTING
As the engine leaves the factory it is in condition to be started to
work by a person of limited experience, and many are put to work
in this way without expert assistance. But a large number of experts
are specially trained in the factory, and are available to be sent at
short notice when their services are required. “The factory on the
spot” is the best assurance to an engine buyer that real expert
assistance will be promptly forthcoming should trouble arise.
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE
0 SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES 0


CYLINDER
SPEED
USUAL SIZE
2 FLY-WHEELS
Revolutions
per Minute
PULLEY
SIZE
Bore Stroke
Min.
Max.
Diam. Face
Diam. Face
3 B.H.P.
3k in. x 3k in.
500
700
5i in. x 5J in.
16 in. x 2J in.
5 ..
4k in. x 4i in.
450
650
8i in. x 8 in.
19f in. x 3i in.
7 „
5 in. x 5k in.
400
610
10 in. x 9 in.
22 in. x 3k in.
10
6 in. x 7 in.
400
600
12 in. x 9 in.
25 a in. x 4 in.
DIMENSIONS, SPEEDS, ETC.
Pulleys of other sizes can be supplied to order. Please state diameter and speed of
the pulley on the machine which is to be driven, so that correct size of
engine pulley may be calculated.
THE TWO-CYCLE METHOD OF
WORKING
The cycle of operations is as follows: On the upward stroke of the piston a
partial vacuum is formed in the crank case, which causes, when the governing
valve lifts, air to flow in through the air inlet. This air is directed past the
petrol jet in the jet chamber of the carburettor, sucking petrol out of the jet in
passing. The resulting gaseous mixture is then drawn into the crank case, all
petrol held in suspension being atomised by the revolutions of the crank.
On the downward stroke of the piston this vapour is forced under pressure
through a passage to the inlet port in the cylinder walls. As the piston
approaches the bottom of its stroke both exhaust and inlet ports are
uncovered, and the petrol vapour rushing into the inlet port is directed
to the top of the cylinder by means of a baffle plate “R” cast on the
top of the piston. The burnt gases of the previous charge are completely
expelled through the exhaust port by the new charge of gas, a perfect
scavenging effect thus being obtained. On the upward stroke both ports
are closed by the piston, and the charge of gas compressed and subsequently
ignited by means of a spark generated at the plug by a high-tension
magneto. The expansion of the gases drives the piston downwards, and thus
furnishes the working stroke, This cycle of operations continues as long as the
engine is working.
SUNSHINE PETROL ENGINES
H. V. McKAY SUNSHINE HARVESTER WORKS SUNSHINE


Warranty
EVERY “ SUNSHINE ” PETROL ENGINE is
warranted to develop the actual brake horse-power
at which it is rated, and to perform the work smooth-
ly and in a satisfactory manner. Each Engine is
thoroughly tested, and all parts carefully examined
before leaving the factory. It is warranted free front
imperfections in material and workmanship, and any
part breaking within one year from date of purchase,
as the result of a hidden defect, will be replaced free
of charge, provided that the freight charges are pre-
paid by the purchaser.
H. V. McKAY.
Sunshine Harvester Works
THE ABOVE WARRANTY DOES
NOT APPLY TO REPAIRS OR REPLACEMENTS
NECESSITATED BY MISUSE OR NEGLECT.


Sunshine Engine and No. 2 D.D.B. Travelling Chaffcutter.
Sunshine Engine and Centrifugal Pump.


