



SUPERIOR CONCENTRATED FERTILISERS
VINES, FRUIT TREES, CEREALS, VEGETABLES
GRASS OR FLOWERS.
AMONG their waste products, the Colonial Sugar
Refining Company have large quantities of rich,
fertilising material, which they dispose of by
manufacturing into high-class manures for use
on their own cane fields, and which they now offer also
for sale to the public.
These Fertilisers have been tested by the Department
of Agriculture of New South Wales, and are recom-
mended by the Director as containing the various
constituents essential to a Perfect Manure, in
proportions varying according to the crop for which
each is intended.
Experience in all parts of the world has proved that
no soil can be fertile that does not contain sufficient
Phosphoric Acid, Nitrogen, Potash and
Lime ; and it has been demonstrated by Gilbert and
Lawes, the well-known English agriculturists, that even
exhausted land can be made to bear heavy crops for 30
or 40 years in succession, if supplied with these
substances in the form of Artificial Manures. At
Vincennes, in France, M. Ville has arrived at a similar
conclusion, after a lifetime spent in the investigation of
the subject.


The necessary ingredients just mentioned are
contained in a concentrated form in the Company s
Fertilisers, as Superphosphate and Sulphate
of Lime, and Sulphates of Ammonia and
Potash.
The mixtures are ground to a fine powder, are
clean to handle, and are entirely free from smell. The
fertilising constituents being soluble in water, are
immediately available as plant food, and act quickly on
all crops. By thus stimulating healthy growth, they
will often prevent disease, such as Rust in Wheat, and
Blight in Fruit Trees. The drawback to most manures
readily obtainable is the want of Potash. On this
subject Ville has written : “ The lack of Potash in the
soil is coincident with Potato Disease,” and the same
may be truly said in connection with disease in other
plants. When Fertilisers rich in Potash are obtainable,
they rarely contain sufficient Nitrogen and Phosphoric
Acid, and often none at all, so that the agriculturist
is obliged to procure these substances from various
sources, and either mix them himself or apply them
one after the other to his crops. fTo obviate this
difficulty, and to ensure proper mixing in suitable
proportions, the Colonial Sugar Refining Company have
prepared their now well-known Brands.
The money spent in purchasing these manures will
be far more than returned in the incr6clS6d yiGld () f
produce, and land that has ceased to bear the abundant
crops formerly obtained from it, can v .by their use, be
made once more fertile.


Those who have been in the habit of buying
cheaper manures are recommended to try a small bag
of No. 4, and note for themselves whether they do not
obtain better results by using half a ton of this,
costing £3 155., rather than a ton of Bone Dust
or other low-priced manure for about
For composition and prices see last page.
The Kind of Manure to Use.
No. 1 is a Superphosphate, and will do best when applied to land
that is naturally rich in organic matter, or that has been treated with
decayed vegetable, animal or fish refuse.
No. 2 has been made to meet the wants of those who require a
cheap but at the same time a really good manure for general use. It
contains Ammonia, Potash, and Phosphate of Lime in a soluble
form, and will be found superior to anything ever before offered at
the price.
No. 3 contains a larger proportion of Ammonia and Potash than
No. 2, and is specially suitable for Cereals, Grass and Garden Stuffs,
but will also do for Orchards.
No. 4 contains still more Potash and Ammonia than No 3. and
is particularly well adapted for Fruit Trees, as well as Sugar Cane,
Maize and Flowers. Where the soil is poor, it will answer better
than No. 3 for Cereals, &c.
No. 5 has been made very rich in Potash, being intended as a
special Potato, Vine and Tobacco Manure. On such soils as are
known to be almost without Potash, it may be used with advantage
for any crop in preference to either No. 3 or No. 4.
No. 6 will be found a most effective manure for Peas, Beans,
Clover and Lucerne, which require liberal applications of Potash,
but are not much benefited by Ammonia.


Rules for Applying
Keep the fertiliser dry until wanted for use, or the fine
powder to which it is ground will be liable to stick together in lumps.
Do not mix lime with it, or Nitrogen will be lost.
Use about 5 cwt. per acre for ordinary land, or up to 10
cwt. for poor, but more than this may do harm.
For Grass, scatter broadcast just before sowing, and harrow in
with the seed.
For Cereals that are sown broadcast, apply as for Grass ; if
sown in rows, apply in the drills just before the seed.
For Vegetables, dig in before sowing, at such a depth as will
suit the particular kind. Roots like the Carrot go very deep, while
Cabbages only descend a few inches.
For Vines and Fruit Trees, scatter over the ground well
away from the stem (for the roots spread very wide), then dig in a few
inches with a fork. Two applications will answer best, the first when
the buds begin to appear (*.*., about July to September), and the
second when the young fruit is formed. A large Passion or Grape
vine requires about £ lb. each time, and a large orange tree 2 to 4 lbs.
For young trees or vines proportionately less must be used.
Directions for Use in Small Gardens.
For Flowers or Grass, stir up a tablespoonful (about 1 oz.)
in a gallon of water for five minutes, and water'the flower beds or
pots once or twice a week with the solution. The undissolved
sediment, which still contains a little fertilising material, can be
utilised by applying it to the roots of shrubs, or digging it into the
garden. Or the Fertiliser may be used in the dry state by mixing
two tablespoonfuls with four times as much dry earth, and scattering
this quantity over each square yard of the surface of the flower bed or
lawn. Rain, or watering with a can, will gradually dissolve the
fertilising material and carry it to the roots of the plants.
For Potatoes, mix about one teaspoonful with a little earth
in each hole when planting, then put in the seed and cover up.


For Peas and Beans, mix with earth in the drill just before
sowing, using one teaspoonful for every eighteen inches of the drill.
For Carrots, Turnips, Radishes, &c., mix with the soil to
a depth of two or three inches just before sowing, using one
teaspoonful for every eighteen inches of the drill, or two
tablespoonfuls to each square yard if the seed is not sown in drills.
For other Vegetables. —When planting out seedlings, mix
about one-half to one teaspoonful (one for a cabbage, half for a
smaller plant) with the earth in the hole just before putting in the
plant. For Vegetables already planted, make a small hole about
three inches deep with a pointed stick, a couple of inches away from
the stem of the plant on each side, put in one-quarter to one
teaspoonful of the Fertiliser, according to the size of the plant, and
then pour in a little water. The roots will soon find their way to the
fertilising material.
CAUTION. —Care should be taken not to use more than the
quantities mentioned, as the Fertilisers are very powerful.
SELECTED OPINIONS.
The Director of Agriculture of New South
Wales writes :
In my own experience I have received great satisfaction from
the mixed manures suppled by the Sugar Company. They contain
the various constituents essential to a perfect manure in proportions
varying according to the crop for which each is intended.
Superphosphate of Lime is a most valuable source of
phosphoric acid, which it contains in a soluble form, /.<?., in a form
readily available for plant food. It costs in England, / 6 ss. per ton,
but may be had in Sydney from the Sugar Company for £4 10s.
It is extremely valuable for cereals, grass, beans and root crops. For
the two former a dressing of from 4 to 6 cwt. per acre should be
applied at the time of sowing; for turnips and mangolds it is
especially necessary, and should be drilled in at time of sowing. It is
of great value on cold clay soils, and promotes the early maturity of
any of the above-mentioned crops. It is especially needed in the
soils of New South Wales, some of the poorest of which contain as
low as ‘Ol5 percent, of phosphoric acid.


Commercial superphosphate always contains about 40 per
cent, of sulphate of lime (gypsum), which is very useful on clay land
and also for such crops as clover, grapes, olives, &c.
The Director of Agriculture recommends :
No. 2 Manure for wheat, oats, barley, turnips, grass and
citrus fruits.
No. 3 for maize, rye, clover, pears, apples, passion fruit and
tomatoes.
No. 4 for all kinds of vegetables and flowers, buckwheat,
peaches, apricots, nectarines, cherries and olives.
No. 5 for vines, potatoes, peas, beans, vetches and tobacco.
Mr. E. H. Acres, of Heywood, Baulkham
Hills, writes:
All of your manures have a good effect wherever I have tried
them. I tried experiments with various manures on small plots sown
with seed oats. Your Nos. 1,2, 3,4, Fison’s, Bonedust and Stockyard
manures, same money’s worth on each plot, and your Nos. 2 and 4
showed best results, if any —the No. 2 best. These were all side by
side, and all used at the one time.
Mr. John Broderick, of Crookwell, has
been testing the value of the No. 3 Manure to see if the
strong and rapid growth it induces would have any
effect in preventing or checking Rust in Wheat, He
thus describes the result of his trials :
I selected some purple straw wheat—a very rusty kind in this
part. I sowed it in drills with the manure on sth July, rather too late
for a fair trial, and in a piece of land where the previous crop was too
rusty to be worth cutting. Notwithstanding all these disadvantages—
namely,, a very wet season, late sowing, and a wheat subject to the
rust, I am still able to say in justice to the manure, that the grain is
now out of danger, full and plump, and that the yield will be nearly
double what it would be without the manure. Two of my neighbours,
practical farmers, Messrs. Howard and Vidler, have seen the wheat
growing, and can certify that I am not exaggerating, as I think you
can, when you see the ears I am sending you, especially the pedigree
ones grown from seed in the ground since last year.
In conclusion, every one of our farmers should get a sack at
least of this No. 3 manure for the growth of vegetables, as it forces
vegetables to grow amazingly. One sack of 2 cwt. will be sufficient
to enable any farmer to grow vegetables and try experiments for his
own satisfaction.


Mr. A. W. Littlejohn, of Moorebank,
Liverpool, writes: —
I applied 9 cwt. of No. 3 Manure to a 3-acre patch, and off it
I got rather more than 9 tons of oaten hay; this was highly satisfactory,
as off the same land for two previous seasons before using the
manure I only got something like 3 tons of hay.
Mr. S. D. Johnston, of Balmoral, writes:—
I have used your No. 3 Manure, which has turned out
splendidly for vegetables, &c , although our land here is very poor
and sandy.
Result of Experiments on growing Maize
at the Hawkesbury Agricultural College.
(From the Agricultural Gazette .)
In order to better test the value of the various manures the very
poorest of the land, being, however, uniform in character, was
selected, being little else than pure sand, and so poor in plant’s food
that a plot sown without any manure produced a sickly plant which
almost disappeared before reproducing itself. The several different
sorts of manures were broadcasted separately on each acre block set
apart for the purpose. Bone dust was taken as a standard, at per
ton, and applied at the rate of 5 cwt. to the acre. An equal money
value of the remaining manures was applied. The seed was put in
with the “ Farmers’ Friend Fertiliser Corn Drill.” The seed was put
in drills 4 feet 6 inches apart; date of sowing, 3rd October, 1891 ;
germination took place in ten days; harvested on 16th May, 1892,
giving the following results :
No. of
Plot.
MANURE USED.
Yield per Acre.
Bushels.
Blood Manure
Bone-dust
2
3
4
Kainit.
Equal quantities, Kainit, Blood Manure and Bone-dust,
with Lime extra.
Sugar Company’s No. 3 Manure
>» » * ')'>
Farmyard Manure, same value
No Manure ~


Mr. Thomas Pye, of Seven Hills, writes
Having tried various artificial manures for Orchard, I can confi-
dently recommend your Special Orchard Manure as superior to all,
both as regards price and quality.
Extract from “ Agricultural Gazette,” of New South Wales.
Mr. P. F. Adams, of Casula. Liverpool,
gives the result of experiments conducted by him with
Sugar Company’s No. 5 Manure on vines and fruit
trees: —
In consequence of an almost general application of manure-water
all through the summer of 1891, I am unable to give an absolute com-
parison between trees unmanured and those dressed with the No. 5 ;
but last winter I specially exempted one whole row taken across
the rows of planting, thus obtaining comparisons of peach, nectarine
(two sorts), apple and fig ; also, in other parts of the orchard, a
number of pairs of trees, whenever I could find them exactly under
same conditions. In all cases I applied the No. 5, in proportion to
the age and size of the tree, from 4to 11 lb. The other trees forming
the pairs were treated with what I consider to be an equivalent in
manure, the composition of which will be given further on. My trees
had never had any solid manure or soil before, and not any quantity
of manure-water. The row of trees, some eight years old, but only
equal to ordinary trees of six, in consequence of neglect when young,
received 7 lb. each tree of No. 5. With the exception of a rather
stronger foliage where the No. 5 was used, no difference could be
observed, all were luxuriant, fruit abundant, and excellent in quality.
Of the others, figs appeared to derive least benefit from No. 5 ; and I
further on applied manure-water.
The most marked advantage appeared to be in the young per-
simmon trees (not in bearing).
In only two other cases could any distinct advantage be observed,
and these were both in favor of No. 5. One was an old pear tree,
and the other a slipstone peach.
I will now describe the dressing applied to all my trees except
those receiving the No. 5: —
Late in the autumn or early in spring—about the end of April—
an average dose of lime of three shovels was dug in. In July, this was
supplemented by about three barrowfuls each of strong farmyard
manure and about the same quantity of soil, and later on three water-
ings each of 10 gallons of manure-water, to which was added about 6
or 7 oz. of ammonia sulphate and about lb. kainit.
The above is as nearly as possible the average amount used, and
judged equal to 7 lb., No. 5, the value of which at id. per lb., allowing
for carriage and labor, is 7b.


I estimate that the dressing cost as follows Lime, 3d. ; new
soil, 3d. ; manure, 4d.; ammonia sulphate, id.; kainit, id.; total, is.
It will be observed that my dressing included no bone-dust. If
the trees had been older it would have been otherwise. Although
three barrow loads of manure were used the quantity did not amount
to more than 300 lb., and I allow 2s. 6d. a load for the value of
my farmyard manure.
Whether or not the Sugar Company’s manure will keep up its
fertilising property when applied again and again to the same tree
remains to be proved. If it does, it is, without doubt, (3116 of
the best manures known. I have shown that, so far, it can
compete successfully with the best compost I can make,
under favorable circumstances, too. In fact, it will enable the
orchardist who does not combin farming, to compete on equal terms
with those who do.
Extract from “Agricultural Gazette." of New South Wales.
The following letter has been received by the Director of
Agriculture from Mr. T. B. Linley, of 573 George Street, Sydney,
and St, John’s Park, Canley Vale, giving his experience with the use
of Sugar Company’s No. 5 manure:—“As a fruit grower I have to
thank you for the trouble you have taken to make known the value
or Sugar Company’s manures. I think it highly probable that you
would like to know what some of us think about them after making
experiments. I tried for three years to grow potatoes on my ground
at Canley Vale without success. I could get the proper quantity, but
they were so very small, the largest about in. in diameter. The
varieties were Early Rose and Circular Head. I have this season dug
as fine a crop of Early Rose as you would wish to see. I used the
Sugar Company’s No. 5 sparingly. I have tried Nos, 2, 3 and 4in
different parts of the ground, and for different plants, but No. 5 suits
my ground best. Amongst my fruit trees there were thirty lemon and
orange trees that were all but dead ; they were the best I could get
at planting time. They were small and shrivelled, and foi three
seasons they lingered between life and death. I applied No. 5
manure, 202. to a pail of water, and they are now full of life and
vigour. My plum trees grew in the spring very well, but made no
growth after. I experimented with No. 5, half a pail to each tree,
about three weeks ago; they are now full of nice shoots. I have tried
it on capsicum plants. Those I gave 2 quarts o( the liquid manure to
are now 3 feet high, and those I left purposely unmanured are just
1 foot high. It acts like magic on passion fruit. I planted a year-old
vine last spring It now covers bg square feet of trellis, and it is full
of blossoms ; those passion vines I left to themselves just occupying 4
superficial feet.”


COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING COMPANY’S
POWERFUL CONCENTRATED
FERTILISING MURES,
FOR VINES. FRUIT TREES. CEREALS. VEGETABLES. GRASS.
FLOWERS. AND ALL CROPS.
Rich in Lime, Phosphoric Acid, Potash and Ammonia. Will produce much
heavier crops than ordinary Bone Manures.
BONE PHOSPHATE SERIES
C
£4 16a.
£4 ss.
Phosphate.
For
Turnips.
For
Peas, Beans,
Clover.
For
Vines, Fruit,
Vegetables.
Insoluble Bone Phosphate
Soluble Bone Phosphate
Total Bone Phosphates
Ammonia
Potash
No. 2.
£5 10s
For
Turnips.
No. 3.
£6 10s.
For
Cereals,
Grass,
Veget’bl’s.
No. 4.
£7 10s.
For
Flowers,
Fruit.
No. 5.
£7 10s
For
Vines,
Potatoes.
No. 6.
£6 10s.
For
Peas,
Beans,
Clover.
SUPERPHOSPHATE SERIES
No. t.
£4 10s.
Soluble Bone Phosphate
per cent.
Ammonia .. ~
Potash .. .. ~
Super-
phosphate.
Prices for Small Lots.
2 Cwt. 1 Cwt. 56 Lbs. 28 Lbs.
A. .. 6s. 3s. 6d. 2s. 6d. Is. 6d.
B. .. Bs. 6d. ss. 3s. 2s,
G. .. 9s. 6d. ss. 3s. 2s.
D. .. 10s. ss. 6d. 3s. „ 2s.
No. 1 .. 9s. ss. 3s. ' 2s
„ 2 .. 11s. 6s. 3s. 6d. 2s
3 . • 13s. 7s. 4s. 2s. 6d.
~ 4 .. 15s. Bs. 4s. 6d. 3s,
~ 5 .. 15s. Bs. 4s. 6d. 3s.
~ 6 .. 13s. 7s. 4s. 2s. 6d.
TERMS.—Net Cash for Small Orders ; 2| per cent, discount, on 1 to 5 tons,
5 per cent, discount on 5 tons and upwards.
Delivery FREE to the Railway or Parcel Delivery in Sydney, on receipt of
money and address, or the Manure can be supplied at the Sugar Refinery,
Pyrmont. Bags are not charged for.
Payment may be made in Postal Notes for amounts up to 20s. ; and for larger
sums by P. 0.0, or Cheque, payable to the Colonial Sugar Refining Com-
pany, Limited, O’Connell Street, Sydney.
D. is a first-class Cheap Manure for any crop.
No. 4 is the best all round Manure, but slightly inferior to No. 5 for some purposes.


DIRECTIONS FOR USE.
About 3 to 5 cwt. will Manure One Acre.
For Flowers or Grass —Scatter two tablespoonfuls (about 2 oz.) over
each square yard of the surface of flower bed or lawn. Rain, or watering 1 with
a can, will gradually dissolve the fertilising material and carry it to the roots
of the plants. Or stir a tablespoonful (about 1 oz.) in a gallon of water for
five minutes, and water the flower beds or pots once or twice a week with the
solution. The undissolved sediment, which still contains a little fertilising
material, can be utilised by applying it to the roots of shrubs, or digging it
into the garden.
For Potatoes. Scatter about one teaspoonful along the furrow for each
set when planting, then put in the seed and cover up.
For Peas and Beans. Scatter along the drill just before sowing, using
one teaspoonful for every eighteen inches of the drill.
For Carrots, Turnips, Radishes, &c.-Mix with the soil to a depth
of two or three inches just before sowing, using one teaspoonful for every
eighteen inches of the drill, or two tablespoonfuls to each square yard if the
seed is not sown in drills.
For Other Vegetables. When planting out seedlings, mix about one-
h..if to one teaspoonful (one for a cabbage, half for a smaller plant) with the
earth in the hole just before putting in the plant. For Vegetables already
planted, remove some of the earth near the plant, scatter in a little of the
fertiliser, and then cover up again with earth.
For Vines and Fruit Trees. —Scatter over the ground well a way t from
the stem (for the roots spread very wide), then dig in a few inches with a "fork.
Two applications will answer best, the first when the buds begin to appear ( i.e .,
about July to September), and the second when the young fruit is formed. A
large Passion or Grape vine requires about \ lb. each time, and a large Orange
tree 2to 4 lbs. For young trees or vines proportionately less must be used.
CAUTION.—Care should be taken not to use more than the quantities mentioned,
as the Fertilisers are very powerful.
THESE FERTILISERS ARE MANUFACTURED BY
THE COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING CO., LTD.,
O’CO3ST2STEXjIj ST., SYDNET
Agents for New South Wales, Tasmania and New Zealand—
GEORGE SHIRLEY & CO., 13 Queensland Offices, Bridge Street, Sydney.
W. ifi. Smith, Bridge Street, Sydney.— 3-2-U4


In addition to those interesting particulars, the Director of
Agriculture has received from Captain R, F. Pockley, of Gordon,
highly satisfactory accounts of the wonderful effect of Sugar Company’s
No. 5 manure on his peach trees. Mr. Pockley dressed his trees with
* this manure at the rate of 3or 4 lb. per tree. A sample of the fruit
gathered from the trees and shown to the Director measured ii'£
inches round, and weighed 11J ounces, while others were of nearly
equal excellence.
A Good Yield of Potatoes.
From the “ Manning River Times.”
In August, Mr. T. H. A. Chapman, Teacher of the Public
School, Mitchell’s Island, received a small quantity of the Colonial
Sugar Refining Company’s Fertilisers for the purpose of experimenting.
The potatoes (Early Rose) were lifted on the 10th December,
80 days from planting, and yielded at the rate of tons to the acre ;
while alternate rows, unmanured, only gave a yield of about 3 tons
per acre.
A further experiment was made with the Manhattan potato —
the No. 5 manure being applied at the rate of 8 cwt. to the acre ; the
same kind of soil as in the former, but of a poorer nature, and situated
on the side of a hill. The sets were planted on the nth October, the
potatoes were lifted on January 21st, and showed a yield, on an
average, of 10 tons q cwt. 3 qrs. per acre. The potatoes were all
large, smooth, good-shaped tubers, and quite free from any trace
of disease.
The Fertilisers are undoubtedly first-class. In all cases the
manured kinds showed great vigour—from three to five times as much
growth at the same period as the unmanured in the same soil.
The Nos. 2 and 4 manures also give excellent results when
applied to flowering plants and vegetables.
Mr. J. Lilly, of Wamberal, near Gosford,
writes :
I will send you a sample of my American Red Potatoes, grown
by the use of your No. 5 manure on what is called here poor sandy
land. I used about 6 cwt. per acre, and I lifted fully 11 tons of the
tubers per acre; the sample will speak for itself. I sent some of
them to the Agricultural Department for modelling purposes, one
potato weighing 12 oz and another loz. 1 have now potatoes only
planted 28 days ; they are moulded up, and the ground nearly covered
with the tops. They are this district’s talk.


X.
•’ •
PERCENTAGE COMPOSITION OF THE MANGELS
No. i. No. 2. No. 3. No. 4. No. 5.
No. 6.
Lime (total) ~ .. .. 23
Sulphate of Lime.. ~ .. 40
Phosphoric Acid .. .. .. j~
Equal to Bone Phosphate. .. 37
Ammonia (fixed) .. .. .. ; 0
Potash .. .. o
21 i 8 15 X 6
36 32 27 28
15 13 • 11 12
33 28 24 26
2 j 4 6,4
1 ( 2 4 7
The greater part of the Phosphoric Acid, and the whole of the
Ammonia and Potash, exist in a soluble form, which greatly adds
to the value. } t
Special manures will be made at short notice to suit fhe
requirements of those who think different proportions better suited to **
their land or their crops.
REDUCED PRICES from Ist December, 1892.
No. I—Superior Superphosphate ... M 10s. per ton.
No. 2—Greneral Manure £5 10s.
No. 3—Cereal, Grass & Vegetable Manure £6 10s.
No. 4—orchard and Mower Manure ... £7 10s.
No. s—Potato, Vine and Tobacco Manure £7 10s.
No. 6—Pea and Clover Manure ... £6 10s.
REDUCED PRICES EOR SMALL LOTS.
2 Cwt. 1 Cwt. 56 lbs. 28 lbs,
No. 1 .. 9s. ss. 3s. 2s.
» 2 .. 11s. 6s. 3s. 6d. 2s. •
». 3 .. 13s. 7s. 4s. 2s. 6d.
»• 4 •• 15s. Bs. 4s. 6d. 3s.
» 5 .. 15s. Bs. 4s. 6d. 3s.
~ 6 .. 13s. 7s 4s. 2s. 6d.
TERMS—Net Cash for Small Orders, 2\ per cent, discount on Ito 5 tons 5 per '
cent, discount on 5 tons and upwards. r
Delivery FREE to the Railway or Parcel Delivery in Sydney, on receipt of
money and address, or the Manure can be supplied at the Refiner / P
Pyrmont. Bags are not charged for.
Payment may be made in Postage Stamps for amounts up to 10s. • and for
larger sums by P. 0.0. or Cheque, payable to the
COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING GO,, Limited,
O’CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY.


TO POTATO GROWERS.
A French farmer has obtained the
extraordinary yield of 40 tons of
potatoes per acre. His method was
to soak the seed for 24 hours in a
solution of 1 lb. of Sulphate of Am-
monia and 1 lb. of Nitrate of Potash
to 5 gals, of water, and then allowing
the seed to remain for another 24 hours
exposed to the air so that the germs
might have time to swell.
o
1 lb. Sugar Company’s No. 5
Manure in 1 gallon of water will
answer the same purpose, and
prove much cheaper.
This should be a hint to colonial
farmers, and is worth trying.


THE SUGAR COMPANY’S
NEW PHOSPHATE
(No. 7 Manure)
Contains 20 per cent. PURE PHOSPHORIC ACID,
or 44 per cent. PHOSPHATE.
This has the same value as what is known as Phosphate
Powder, Thomas Phosphate, Standard Phosphate, &c.,
but can be supplied at a much lower price.
It is useful for Grain Crops, Potatoes, Peas, Fruit
Trees, &c., and is best dug or ploughed into the soil at
the rate of 2 cwt. per acre.
Price—£3 10s. per ton, or 7s. for 2 cwt.
Small Lots—l cwt. for 45.; 56 lbs. for 2s. 6d;
28 lbs, for Is. 6d.
TERMS—Net Cash for small orders, 2| per cent, discount on 1 to 5 tons,
5 per cent, discount on 5 tons and upwards.
Delivery FREE to Railway, Wharf, or Parcel Delivery in Sydney, on receipt of
money and address, or the Manure can be supplied at the Sugar Refinery,
Pyrmont. Bags are not charged for. »
Payment may be made in Postage Stamps for amounts up to 10s.; and for
larger sums by P. 0.0. or Cheque, payable to the
COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING CO., Limited,
O’CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY,
W. E. Smith, Bridge Street, Sydney.—2sl/9/03.


THE SUGAR COMPANY’S
DEODORISER
Night Soil, Fowl Houses, Stables, Back Yards, &c.
PRICE—£2 10s. per ton, or 3s. for a single cwt.
This is a dry powder which readily absorbs foul gases.
Two or three ounces at a time used regularly in the dry pan
system will completely deodorise Night Soil.
A small quantity sprinkled over the floor of a Stable or Fowl
House at once removes the usual heavy unpleasant smell; and, any
decaying refuse treated with it is instantly deprived of its offensive
odour.
The Deodoriser is also a Fertiliser containing a considerable
proportion of Phosphoric Acid, which will enhance the value of
Stable Manure, Fowl Droppings, or Night Soil, when these are
applied for fertilising purposes.
PRICE —£2 10s. per ton net cash, or ss, for 2 cwt.
SMALL LOTS—I cwt. for 35., 56 lbs. for 25.,
28 lbs. for Is. 3d.
Delivery FREE to Railway, Wharf, or Parcel Delivery in Sydney, on receipt of
money and address, or the Deodoriser can be supplied at the Sugar Refinery,
Pyrmont.
Payment may be made in Postage Stamps for amounts up to 10s.; and for
larger sums by P. 0.0. or Cheque, payable to the
COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING CO,, Limited,
O’CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY.
W. E. Smith, Bridge Street, Sydney.—22/9/93.


SPECIAL BONE CHARCOAL
FOR POULTRY.
Supplies Bone and Eggshell material.
Aids Digestion.
Promotes Health.
Keeps fresh for any period.
Is crushed to a suitable grist
And is very cheap.
All authorities insist on the necessity of supplying
Fowls with Crushed Bones to enable them to
maintain sound health.
A serious objection to ordinary bones is that they
soon begin to smell and become offensive.
Burned Bones are free from this defect and
are now supplied ready crushed for use under the
name of
SPECIAL BONE CHARCOAL.
PRICE—£4 10s. per ton net cash, or 9s. for 2 cwt.
SMALL LOTS—I cwt. for 55., 56 lbs. for 35., 28lbs. for 2s.
Delivery FREE to Railway, Wharf, or Parcel Delivery in Sydney, on receipt of money
and address, or the Special Bone Charcoal can be supplied at the Sugar Refinery, Pyrmont.
Payment may be made in Postal Notes for amounts up to 205.; and for larger sums by
P. 0.0. or Cheque, payable to the
COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING GO., LIMITED,
O'CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY.
AOBBKrXS-
GEORGE SHIRLEY and CO., 52 Pitt Street, Sydney.
W. E. Smith, Sydney, Newcastle and London.—l9/3/94.


ON PHOSPHATIC MANURES.
By H. C. L. ANDERSON, M.A.
(From the Sydney Mail.)
SUPERPHOSPHATES have become very popular in Great Britain,
where over 500,000 tons are sold every year, which are, however,
generally made from mineral phosphates, not from bones, which make
a better article. In New South Wales we have an excellent Sample
of this manure in the No. 7 manure sold by the SUGAR
REFINING COMPANY, it is made from the waste bones that
have been used in refining the sugar, and, as a by-product in the
Company’s operations, is sold at the very reasonable rate of
£4 70s. a ton.
The colonial article is guaranteed to contain 16 per cent, of
soluble phosphoric acid, i.e., combined with lime in a form available
for the use of the plants by absorption in their sap. A cwt. of
superphosphate contains less weight of phosphoric acid than the
same quantity of bone dust; but as it is in a soluble form in
the former, it is worth twice as much per lb. as in the latter; each
unit or 1 per cent, of phosphoric acid in a good superphosphate
being reckoned worth 6s. 3d. This phosphatic manure is now
recognised as much better for turnips, potatoes, and all root crops
than the insoluble form of bone dust. Its solubility makes it specially
valuable for all crops that need to be grown rapidly, and for a top
dressing in spring for cereals, grass and hay. It is found to have
a special value for cabbages, cauliflowers, tomatoes and clover, owing,
probably, to the large percentage of sulphur and lime it contains in
the sulphate of lime. It should be applied as a topdressing in the
early spring, when the buds are bursting and plant growth has
commenced.
The New Zealand farmers are now using large quantities for
turnips, hay, and grain. They prefer at present a mixture of three
parts of fine bone dust with one of superphosphate. In my own
experience with fruit trees, vegetables of all sorts, potatoes, sorghum,
maize, and hay, I have found a mixture of equal parts of good
bone dust and superphosphate most satisfactory, because it supplies
the phosphoric acid in a steady, continuous flow after the first
shower of rain, the superphosphate gradually disappearing in the
sap of the plants during the first two years, and the bone dust
becoming fermented and decomposed much more slowly, and giving
up its supplies of phosphorus over a period ranging from five to
eight years.
The SUGAR COMPANY are now supplying a very
cheap form of phosphoric acid, called their NE\N PHOS-
PHATE, or No. 7 manure. It contains 20 per cent, of this
acid, of which 12 per cent, is guaranteed soluble. It is ground
up to a very fine powder, and is perfectly dry. A t the price of
70s. per ton it is the cheapest manure of its kind ever
offered to the farmers of the colony. It gives best results
when ploughed in deeply in the autumn. On most soils and for
most crops it will probably be found insufficient by itself, but will
be found very valuable for enriching ordinary stable or farmyard
manure —supplying in a very fine form the bone material which is
deficient in these natural manures, and in most of our soils. A
complete and easily digestible manure will be formed by adding
2 cwt. of this New Phosphate to the compost heap, and fermenting
it for a few months, or by making a mixture with nitrogenous
and potash manures.
