

SUPERSTITION, MAGIC, AND MEDICINE.
3 903.
QUEENSLAND.
HOME SECRETARY'S DEPARTMENT, BRISBANE.
NORTH QUEENSLAND ETHNOGRAPHY:
Bulletin No, 5,
JANUARY, 1903.
BY
WALTER E. ROTH, B.A., M.R.C.S., Etc.
(Late Demy of Magdalen College, Oxford )
THE NORTHERN PROTECTOR OF ABORIGINALS, QUEENSLAND.
PRESENTED TO BOTH HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT BY COMMAND.
BRISBANE :
BY AUTHORITY: GEORGE ARTHUR VAUGHAN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, WILLIAM STREET.
1903.
C. A. 5 -1903.




REFACE
The reasons which prompted me to request permission from the Home Secretary, the Hon. J. F. G-. Fox ton, for
the publication of this Bulletin may be summed up in the following extract from a letter sent me by an English
correspondent, whose position in the world of Folk-lore lends additional value to the authority of his opinions :
. . . . “ The Australian savages are certainly the most unsavoury I have read of. It is the same all over the
Continent. But it cannot be helped. We want to know exactly what they are, and what are their manners, customs,
and ideas ; and this knowledge is not to be obtained without wading through the filth. The fruit of the Tree of
Knowledge is bitter even yet. . . . Repulsive as these details are, it is essential that they should be published,
for they often give the key to a puzzle that we cannot otherwise unlock.”
It is to be regretted that I have not been able to gather further reliable information concerning the idea of
a Vital Principle (sects. 65-69) from the Boulia ( i.e ., North-Western) and Tully River natives, but during the
past eighteen months my time has been so fully occupied with strictly official duties that I have had no
opportunities of carrying on these investigations, which I trust to be able to resume during the course of the
present year.
In connection with certain features of ethnological interest met with in the Northern portions of the State,
I have here and there interspersed, for purposes of comparison, various notes dealing with the Southern
aboriginals, collected from Mr. Tom Petrie, whose reminiscences of the Brisbane blacks date from the forties.
I have great pleasure in thanking numerous friends and correspondents for kindly assistance, advice, and
encouragement during the progress of this work : two who have especially interested themselves are Professor
Baldwin Spencer and Mr. Sidney Hartland.
Mr. F. M. Bailey, the respected Colonial Botanist of Queensland, has again gone to a great deal of
trouble in the identification of the medicinal plants, while Mr. J. H. Maiden, the New South Wales Government
Botanist, has given me valuable notes concerning their therapeutic uses. Mr. H. W. Mobsby, of the
Queensland Agricultural Department, has very kindly made himself responsible for the illustrations.
The abbreviations indicative of the different tribes are identical with those already given in previous
Bulletins : the only new one is K AL, referring to the Kalkadun blacks occupying the wild, hilly country, including
the Selwyn Ranges and the highlands (Barkly Tableland, etc.), drained by the Leichhardt and various tributaries
( e.g ., Buckley River, Moonah Creek) of the Upper Georgina River. The tribes which I have made mention of
as the Workai-a are apparently identical with the Waagai referred to by Spencer and Gillen.
Unless otherwise stated, the Tully R. refers to the lower portions of the river only.
WALTER E. ROTH.
January, 1903.




INDEX.
SECTION. PAGIi.
1-6—Moon and. Sun —(1) How the moon comes to hare a place in the heavens. (2) Another explanation,
and a different moon each month. (3) Moon and sun, husband and wife. (4) Moon, why his face
is alone visible. (5) Danger of staring or pointing at the moon. (6) The sun, a woman ... ... 7
7-9 —Stars, &C. —(7) Represent men, women, and animals. (8) Represent firesticks, &c., connected with
sick or deceased persons. (9) Comet, a lighted fire ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
10-13 —Thunder, Lightning, and Storms —(10) Thunder, the most potent agency known, can make
lightning, men and women ; thunder and lightning manufactured by human agency ; superstitions
concerning lightning. (11) Storms, how made at Cape Bedford ; (12) at Macdonnell; (13) how
modified on the Bloomfield River ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .., ... ... 8
14-23 —Hain-making, Rain and Rainbow —(14) Rain, manufactured by special individuals : making
a mound in water : (15) squeezing bubbles under water ; dipping wommera in water : (16) hanging
up wliirlers, &c. : (17) building a hut under water ; burning a special timber: (18) fixing a Rain-
stick under water, &c.: (19) imitating falling rain and antics of aquatic animals : (20-21) singing
special songs and using special decorations. (22) Rain ; produced by burning hair. (23) Rainbow s
due to a fish or snake; connected with scars and miscarriages ... ... ... ... ... ... 9
24—The Sea —Made by Thunder as a punishment on man for having destroyed his handiwork ... ... 10
25-27 —Fire —(25) Obtained from the skies by a bird. (26) Discovered by a bat. (27) Fire will frighten
away evil-disposed spirits ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... H
28 —Plants—Bamboo; Double-fruits ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
29-61 —Animals —(29) Why no more big guardfish are caught. (30) Scarcity of fish explained. (31) How
the fish came to have its present shape. (32) Why crocodiles and iguanas travel up-stream in
flood time. (33) (34) The first crocodile. (35) Why iguanas are so plentiful; (36) and how they
learnt to burrow. (37) Why lizards are always running about. (38) The salt-water turtle.
(39) The fish-hawk and pheasant. (40) The first fish-hawks. (41) Geographical distribution of
the pelican and emu. (42) The water-hen and the emu. (43) The red-tit and the brown-tit.
(44) Tlie more-pork and the goose. (45) How the native-companion learnt to dance. (46) The
parrot and the wafer-snake. (47) Geographical distribution of ducks and porcupines.
(48) (49) How the crow got her black plumage. (50) The galali parrot and the lizard ; (51) and
the opossum. (52) The laughing-jackass and the blackfellows. (53) Why flying-foxes hang from
trees. (54) The wallaby, the water-snake, and the parrot. (55) The opossum and the wild cat.
(56) The porcupine. (57) Why the bat became blind. (58) The scrub-wallaby. (59) The rat,
the kangaroo, and the yams. (60) How the native bear lost his tail. (61) Animals and birds
were once blacks ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11
62-64 —Origin of Man —(62) The first aboriginals. (63) White - coloured people. (64) Suggested
explanation of European idea that blacks believe in “ jumping up” whitefellows after death ... 15
65-69 —The Vital Principle: Spirit, Soul, &C. —(65) On the Tully River; (66) Bloomfield River;
(67) at Cape Bedford ; (68) on the Pennefather River ; (69a) on the Proserpine River ; (69b) at
Cape Grafton; (69c) in the Boulia district ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
70—Intelligence, Consciousness, Memory, &c. —Believed to be seated in the ear 19
71-74 —Individual Names —(71) Pet names may be given by augury; boys’ names may indicate peculiarities
in the father. (72) Causes upon which changes of name depend ; names of deceased people, &c.
(73) Endearment terms. (74) Calling namesakes, &c., before going to sleep, &c. ... ... ... 19
75-80—The Human Body —(75) Teeth. (76) Want of Pigmentation. (77) Hair. (78) Dumbness.
(79) Eyes, blindness. (80) Perspiration, urine, excrement ... ... ... ... ... ... 21
81-95 —Sexual History—(Bl) Conception not necessarily due to copulation. (82) (83) Infants may be
fashioned by spirits and then inserted in the mother. (84) Love-Charms :on Pennefather River:
on Proserpine River : (85) on Bloomfield River : (86) on Tully River: (87) on the Georgina
River. (88) Copulation during sleep, &c. (89) Puberty and menstruation. (90) Ceremonials at
early menstruation. (91) Pregnancy. (92) Twins and triplets. (93) Miscarriages. (94) Right
or left handedness depends upon presentation at birth, &c. (95) Congenital deformity explained ... 22


SECTION.
PAGE.
Auguries, Dreams, Wishes, Luck-and other Charms— (96) Hawking of phlegm. (97)
Sneezing. (98) Spitting. (99) Whistling. (100) Crick in neck. (101) Breasts tingling. (102)
Birds flying close to a person. (103) Determination of cause of death by a local man or foreigner,
&c. (104) Crossing water. [Passing under a leaning tree.] (105) Welfare of a friend recognised
by condition of a tree. (106) Dreams. (107) Wishes. (108) Charm : for obtaining turkeys, &c.:
(109) for throwing a spear straight: (110) for luck in fishing and hunting : (111) for making a
dog a good hunter : (112) for getting rid of mosquitoes ... ... ... ... ... ... 26
113-149—Disease and Accident: Produced by an Enemy Dooming the Victim— (ll3)
Person inflicting the doom more culpable than the one committing the actual physical violence.
Thanatomania. (114) The condition of being doomed. (115) Doom inflicted by living people [ e.g .,
medicine-men] with or without assistance of spirits of jjersons deceased, or nature-spirits. KTature-
spirits originally derived from bodies of dead people. (116) But spirits, &c., may act independently
of medicine-men. (117) Medicine-men : their powers : (118) their graduation in the north-western
districts: (119) in the Peninsula : (120) (121) and along the eastern coast line : (122) (123) then-
status in the tribe : (124) method of carrying their credentials. (125) Women doctors. (126) Difficulty
of differentiating between truly qualified medicine-men and quacks. (127) Procedures employed
in dooming a victim : by chants and dirges: (128) by effigy : (129) by imitating the action of
throat-cutting, &c., with a charm : (130) by burning his hair, urine, or excrement in a charm or
not: (131) by touching him, or his food, &c., with a charm : (132) by inserting a charm in his
food: (133) by placing the charm in ground where he has been defecating or micturating
(134) (135) or where he is likely to sleep : (136) by pointing it at him : (137-142) by inserting
it in his body through a wound which immediately heals and leaves no visible scar : (143) by
insertion similar to preceding methods but coupled with the simultaneous extraction of the victim’s
life-blood. The Chichah (144-146) TheMangani : how employed, &c.: (147) possession of the life-
blood in the Mangani means absolute control over the individual from whom extracted, e.g., he can be
ordered to die of snake-bite : (148) the person doomed by the Mangani has the means of
discovering his assailant. (149) Comparison of the Mangani with other charms 28
150-163-Disease and Accident: Produced by the Victim’s Own Fault— (lso) Directly due to
disobedience of certain rules of conduct, breaking of “ tabu,” &c. (151) Indirectly due to actions
of his children or parents. (152) Various remedies, medicines, &c., are resorted to—such as (153)
Chants. (154) Amulets. (155) Ligatures. (156) Sucking-strings. (157) Inorganic remedies.
(158) Animal preparations. (159) Vegetable preparations. (160) Liniments, lotions. (161)
Poultices, fomentations. (162) Bleeding. (163) Dressings. (164) Treatment of Snake-bite. ... 37


SUPERSTITION, MAGIC, AND MEDICINE.
1. Moon and. Sun. Hoio the moon comes to have a place in the heavens. —Once upon a time
two brothers—sparrow-hawks they were—went out hunting for “sugar-bag” (honey). They came
across a hollow tree which looked remarkably like containing a bees’ nest, and cutting a suitable hole,
one of them pushed his arm pretty tightly in to see if he could feel anything. To his dismay, he got his
limb jambed in the aperture, and pull as hard as he could, notwithstanding his own and his brother’s
exertions to get it out, there it remained fixed. At last, his brother went to seek assistance, and finding
a camp in the close neighbourhood, asked his friends and relatives one after the other to come and help.
Finding no one willing to lend a hand, but each excusing himself on some trivial pretext, he was just about
to let them see his buttocks (to express his contempt and disgust) when he recognised his mother’s brother,
the moon, sitting on the ground some distance away: in those days, the moon used to live on the ground
just like other people. On the difficulty being explained, the moon immediately rose and accompanied his
sister’s son back to the tree where his brother was stuck. He climbed the tree, and reaching the top, bent
his head well down into the hollow, and gave a very violent sneeze, the pressure on the air from the inside
thus releasing the poor fellow’s arm below, which was now easily extricated. The sparrow-hawk was,
however, determined on revenging himself upon the crowd of people who, through their callousness,
might have allowed him to perish. So having first of all buried the moon underground to keep him out
of harm’s way, he set fire to the grass with the intention of burning the whole camp out, but some of the
occupants managed to make their escape. He thereupon started another fire, and this time put the
moon on the top-most branches of a high tree : and again some of his would-be victims got away in
safety. But the sparrow-hawk was not going to be thwarted, and having placed the moon high up in
the sky, out of all dauger, he made such a tremendous conflagration that on this occasion none of the
camp-blacks escaped. And this is how the moon regularly comes to take up his abode in the heavens
out of harm’s way of the bush-fires. (Princess Charlotte Bay.)
2. Another explanation, and a different moon each month. —A long time ago, when the black-
fellow was a turkey, he damaged his foot and ankle very badly, and inquired from his wife, the cockatoo-
parrot, as to the nearest water-hole, but all she said was : “No water here.” So he asked the green
parrot where the water was, and as the foot was becoming more swollen, requested him furthermore to cut
it open, but the parrot said he did not know where there was any, and could not open the wound.
He thereupon successively appealed to a crow, a medicine-man, an eagle-hawk, the moon, [a white-fellow
doctor],* and even to the evil one, to render him the necessary assistance, but they one and all declared
they couldn’t undertake the job. As a last chance, he begged the earth-worm to give him relief: the
latter said he would, and thereupon bit into the swollen flesh, bored his way deep into the diseased part,
sucked all the putrid matter out, and cured the patient. A large corrobboree was therefore held, and
the galahs, storm-birds, white and black cockatoos, butcher-birds, magpies, and bower-birds, together with
the opossums, porcupines, bandicoots, etc., all took part in it. And while the turkey and the earth-worm
together with the clouds and skies shifted their position—for the latter had until then always stayed on
the surface of the ground —the whole party began singing “ There goes our brother up.” And of course
both animals remained up there. But so that the people below should always remember what a good
medicine-man he had proved himself to be, the earth-worm sends a moon regularly every month to bear
him in mind, for the moon is a brother of his, and like him, bores his way out of the ground, rises up on
high, sinks once more and dies : as he has plenty of brothers he sends along a different one every month.
(Boulia District.) The Tully River natives also believe in a different moon monthly.
3. Moon and sun : husband and wife. —At Cape Bedford the moon is the husband of the sun,
and at new moon is starving, so he goes on a fishing expedition whereon he is successful, with the result
that at full moon his belly is gorged : his wife is always travelling westwards after the green ants. The
blacks can, of course, see the sun starting, but at night she always circles round by the south. There
are really two suns, two sisters : in the cold season it is the elder one who visits them, and in the hot
season it is the younger. On the Proserpine the moon is he who made the first aboriginals (sect. 62).
4. Why the moon's face is alone visible. —The moon, once upon a time, when about to bake some
shells, had no tea-tree bark at hand to cover his ground-oven with. So he divested himself of his skin,
which he used instead of the bark, and thus cooked what he wanted to. But when he took his skin off,
his children (the bats) had no light to see by, and accordingly they got angered with him, with the
result that he got beaten and was thrown into the sea. Hence, when he does put in an appearance now
at each month, he covers the whole of his body, from the neck downwards, with plenty of charcoal, so
that the bats cannot see where to spear him. It is only his face that is visible, and this he covers with
pipe-clay, the native name of which (aro-a) is identical with that applied to the moon. The two stars in
close proximity are his two wives. (Pennefather River.)
5. Danger of staring or pointing at the moon , etc. —On the Bloomfield no blacks are supposed to
stare at the moon for long, as it is apt to cause heavy rain to fall. So again, children must not point at
the moon with the fingers straight, nor point at their own shadows in the moonlight, because this will
cause the death of their parents. On the other hand, children are not forbidden to look at one another’s
shadows ( Violet Hislop). At Cape Bedford, crabs are not believed to be any good except when caught
at full moon.
# I am afraid that this was introduced by the narrator, specially for my benefit, so as to impress me with the skill to
be subsequently displayed by the earth-worm, as compared with that of a European medico.


rt su , n \ a woman — The sun is a woman manufactured by thunder, who gave her two legs
1 f 6 ° T> e * ,no f tals ’ plenty of hands : the latter can be seen (sun’s rays) when she rises and when she
% 8 ’ p bl fngry sb e einks into the earth or water every night to obtain iguanas, roots, or fish.
( enne a ler River.) The Tully River natives consider there to be a new sun daily.
, Represent men, women, and animals. —The blacks speak of Orion as Wangga-dir
P anoe -1 t ; e ; men crossing in a canoe, the Pleiades as Kabir-Kabir, i.e. a group of girls. Others
(Capif Bedford )° nS d was una^e to Identify, are spoken of as the crab, emu, rat, snake, etc.
Long ago, an individual called Rolla-mano (= Sea-possessor of) went down to the mangroves,
~ e c °° u, g the fire the fish which he had caught, saw two women there. He threw his net
i ? e “’ b ' at on ® scaped by diving into the water. Just as he was, with a fire-stick in hand, he
mpe in at ter her, and as the stick touched the water the sparks hissed and got scattered in all
formed the stars. The woman whom he captured he took home to his camp, where
stie was all alight: she it is who is now the evening star. (Pennefather River.)
• R e P rese nt .fire-sticks, etc., connected with side or deceased persons. —Palling stars, from their
U - e , °. ™vmg fire-sticks, are often ascribed to Gi-we. This is a particular bird, evidently not
f™ g f B6d in tbe fl . esh » which has a connection with fire-sticks, as follows When a man is far away
lL?tn°'u and ;r a ?. d ba PP ens to fall sick, one of his mates will throw a lighted fire-stick up in the
<• i 1” , in , ® nection of the patients native country, telling Gi-we at the same time over which
particular tracts to travel so as to get there with the least possible delay : his family hear the cry and
see the message, and consequently know that he is sick. (Bloomfield River.)
dnnm Jv* t 6 ’ ™ ben one was sick in camp, and a falling star appeared, it was a sign that he was
into : i lfc ! va n enem / s that was falling down—the enemy who had cut him up
into pieces which he had all put together again (T. Petrie).}
i „ »„;? T r Ully El . ve1 ’ consider falling stars (chiko-binna) to be the fire-sticks which the Pitcharu,
hnt win ri f ei \ emi „ es dec ea9ed (sects. 65, 99), carry about. It is a pitcharu who starts the bush-fires,
fall!mr n* PU i ° Ut ° f r< l ach \ he wea P ons > etc., of those blacks with whom he happens to be friendlv. A
m aSO me -ti S r eaadve n t of a °y enem y= a »d it is the duty of all people to shout and make as
direction bidiL P fo S / lble i d i ire ! 5 / th l y 866 ,° ne : next; mo, ' nil ‘g> the blacks will all go out in the particular
direction indicated, and look for the tracks of their would-be destroyer.
Ppnn«fTi4 l^ e i? blacbs ea ? h falliu g Btar is a sign indicative of one of their enemies killed. The
nourina watnravpJ f h* IVGS e ” arc ! su u cb a s f ar as a female cho-i (i.e., spirit of a person deceased)
to be q^rtz-crystai? 6 them gr ° W ' The Bloomfield blacks also ofteii believed falling stars
9. The Comet seen at Mapoon, in May, 1901, was due to a fire lighted by two old women.
, e 1 9,: | Thunder, Lightning, and Storms. Thunder can make lightning, men, and
n ‘ -f blinder is the most potent agency known : lightning is considered to be the fire lighted by him
Sver ) eBW Je ' a(Seot - 83)lheh ° n0Ur0f « ha «“B made »e» and women (Pm J.S
which htlmSv nnu r t’n( h Hf d "hf n pr ° dUo , e ''S ll *'!' ll * b 7 ‘ b « rapid exposure of his generative organ,
"" lW>tni n g, « De»ildli
with nfhsvf Z a ” d Li V hlnin S ■ made , fy agency. When the Tully lliver natives are annoyed
the.r’ enemTes “°* her tr [ be ' will thunder and rain so as to inconvenience
lug; The ” SrJ *H d ° ™ twisb “> actually kill those with whom they are
named alter'd,uni,.,' „l - • not ““p 6 a j’-[ I'Slltn,r,g 1 'S lltn,r, g- It is here that certain men as well as women,
u 1 ler or rain, are believed to have special powers in raising such storms (sect. 16).
tha t MhßckfLf flo ? C + f rj) T*"? Kalkadun ( Selw J n Ea «ges, etc.) are similarly firmly
both , of tb( ; ,r °, W f!. arid other tribesman make thunder and lightning. Ou the
pSarlit * cer ! ain lizard Gunberi), by breaking off portions of a
stinearee TAt BrlsbnL Jj aS “ ade tabu ’ ° r by aujr but old lnen eatin g or even killing
particular itcaraT^r.^Pe/r/f).] 01 * ■ tona ™ “ ad » by » ‘ b »‘
abnormalftv r wW?rt'net"l connectei . aitl ant of pigmentation of the hands and feet-an
splinters front a treo whirl* n bl ( ' e afflicted individual (sect. 76) having picked up some
bS eve ?hev \ritW»nd IT by ' , « h f mn « ( Tull J' E " er )- The Cape Bedford natives
Tverv dense smoke and ofti °k 1 ' ght ? 1 " g P’ tlle burnin « o£ Xanthorrhma stumps, which produce
similarly protect themselves h rT lSe - 8 'J he i! l , he, ' e r IS an - y about: on tbe B'oomfieM River the blacks
liany protect themselves by hiding m water-holes. [At Brisbane, during lightning, the natives alwavs
the whTIP, SP thf dowil o ' , tllc g round i a » d hid their tomahawks: and when they had learnt smoking from
the whites, they would take the pipes out of their mouths (T. Petrie).} zoning rrom
a^enev ll l’f nrnd!f y f tol T l Wind ’ W n h rain ’ etc> ) cau be botb Produced and dispersed by human
tEe McivorXer in JnnTlsSo T ' Bre C ‘ 3 * lected “>^‘ b er into heaps in the solitude of the bush. At
thf .. .. ,!p p J< L’ i ' . l T J ’ l came acroßS a man named Ngamu-marko (=motlier.rock oyster ie
S' S f the Boak-oyster) who was believed to have made the terrible cyclone of the previous March
He belonged to the coast-line furlher north, but could not get home again, as the Cape MelviUe and
Barrow Point natives through whose country he would have to pass, had made up tEeir minds to be
T account f IS 6 BeriOUS iri .i ur y he had done them. He assured Rev. G. Schwarz and myself
making it tetfolr llmßo^h^JT \° hi ”’ althou K h be "- as a rain-maker, but that he intended
mating it \\et tor the Rosebank aboriginals who were coming here to the Mclvor to kill one of his friends
o was giving him hospitality. To allay the wind a particular charm is used, the Gumbamu (i.e the


name or the local north wind), about 2 feet long, made of bundles of grass, tied with vine around a
central stick (big. 1) : this is fixed either on the sea-shore, and covered with stones, so that the water
can touch, but not remove it, or else placed somewhere inland, where it is hidden underground. (Cape
Bedford.)
12. At Macdonnell, to make the wind come up, two charms (made up of a bundle of pieces of
ground-vine, etc.), each between 3 and 4 feet long (Fig. 2), are hung up from the outstanding branches of
trees in a line with the direction whence the wind and storm is to come.
13. Supposing a storm to be coming up, but it is not required, a man will rub his hand into the
opposite arm-pit, hold his arm out horizontally, and swing it in the direction along which he wants
the storm to pass: the smell of the sweat is supposed to drive it away. Sometimes, a wommera will be
passed under the arm-pit, and used in similar fashion. Occasionally, to divide the storm, both arms may
be utilised ; but in this, as in other cases, the natives will not make the attempt until they are pretty
sure of the direction in which the disturbance is passing. (Bloomfield River.)
14. Bain-making, Raiu, and Rainbow. Rain is manufactured by special individuals
(Making a mound in water). —The following description of a rain-making performance, witnessed by him
at Cape Bedford, has been given me by Rev. Gr. Schwarz. Far removed from the camp, and without any
assistance, the rain-maker collected a number of white-ants’ nests, which he heaped up in a neighbouring
swamp, and after trampling a,nd pounding on them to make them firm and cohesive, he shaped them into
an oblong mound, about 3 by li feet, just projecting above the surface of the water, aud covered
it with reeds. He next made a trench all the way round in similar fashion, continually repeating the
word “do-re” {cf. doril, dore-lil=to eject) throughout the whole procedure, which he finally brought
to a close by sprinkling some water in all directions of the compass. Before taking his departure, he got
two sticks, about 18 inches long, rolled them up in reeds, and fixed them into either end of the mound
on to which, as he walked away, he threw some water behind him. No one is allowed to go near such a
spot where rain-making is practised. So much so, that when rain did not subsequently fall on this
present occasion (Mr. Schwarz having promised him, in the presence of the whole camp, a bag of flour if
rain fell within twenty-four hours) the rain-maker explained his non-success to the other natives as due
to the presence of the missionary. On other occasions, when rain does not fall, failure is explained by
some one having visited the forbidden spot.
15. ( Squeezing bubbles under water: Dipping wommera in water.) —Raiu can be made by persons,
males, possessed of the gift, diving into a creek, and stirring up and squeezing the leaves deposited at
the bottom, so as to cause bubbles to rise to the surface. It can also be produced by a man who has been
through the initiation ceremony, dipping his wommera into the water. (Bloomfield River.)
16. ( Hanging up wbirlers , etc.) —Rain is a person, and certain men and women who happen to be
named after him can make him come. The process usually adopted is to hang a “ whirler” into the water
of certain pools. This implement is about 18 inches long, made of Flindersia Ghatawaiana, Bail. (MAL
ngarku), bears no marks or ornamentation, and is called a milka. Even if the rain does not come for
several weeks later it is nevertheless considered due to it : and when produced bv this method of whirlers
is also called Milka. If the individual wants lightning aud thunder (which are considered to be one and
the same thing) to accompany the rain, he will in addition throw chips of the Sarcocephalus cordatus into
the pool. Any adult male or female individual (not necessarily a name-sake) happening to lose his or her
temper, may threaten to call for rain, which, when it comes under these circumstances, is spoken of as
Kwi-yur. The coastal blacks have the reputation of bringing up the cyclones. (Tully River.)
17. ( Building a hut under ivater : Burning a special timber.) —Both Koko-warra and Koko-
lamalama can, some of them, make rain by means of what is said to be a “ humpy” built under water.
(Princess Charlotte Bay.)
Old men, especially warriors, can bring the rain : they can also make it come to a stop by burning
a certain kind of timber known to the natives as tra-la. (Pennefather River.)
18. ( Fixing a rain-sticJc under water , etc.)-- With the exception of perhaps a few of the Yanda
tribe, there are no individuals in the Boulia district who know how to make rain. Accordingly, when
rain is wanted here in Boulia word is sent down to the Mai-orli men at Spring vale or the Diamantina
Grates to come up and make some. This special performance, carried out with a rain-stick, a song, a
scratching, and a dance, takes place somewhat as follows :—The Kurumando or rain-stick is formed of a
thin piece of “ white” wood, about 20 inches long, and on to the top of this is fixed a mass of the ordinary
(spinifex-gum) cement-substance into which the three pieces of quartz-crystal (the “ rain-stones”) are
stuck. Hair cut from the beard is next laid lengthwise on to the cement, and fixed an inch or so
below it: over this again are laid leafy branches of “ white-wood,” which is all tied round with string,
after the manner of a straw broom. Three or four of such sticks may be used in the ceremony. At
about mid-day the men proceed to a secluded water-hole, one or more of their number having been
previously deputed to dive into the water and fix a hollow log, about the length and thickness of a man’s
arm, vertically down into the mud. They now all get into the water, and surrounding the central
individual, i.e., the one who holds the KurumanHo, in more or less of a circle, commence proceedings
with a stamping movement of the feet, each performer keeping the same relative position to the others.
Considering that the water may be sometimes 4 or more feet in depth, the “ dancing” is maintained with
no little difficulty. During this part of the performance the water is splashed with their hands, from all
sides, on to the Kurumando, held vertically on high by the central figure : there is a singing accompaniment
to this, but the Pitta-Pitta men are evidently ignorant of its exact literal purport. The singing over, the
central figure dives out of sight, and attaches the rain-stick into the hollow log previously fixed there:
coming to the surface, he quickly climbs on to the bank, and spits out on dry land the water which,
while diving, he had obtained from below. Should more than one of these rain sticks have been
prepared, the performance is repeated with each in turn. As they return to camp, they now and again
with any small twig just scratch the tops of their heads and inner aspects of their shins, singing “ panjo-
pari, panjo-pari ”in the former case, and “ wongka-pari ”in the latter. [Cf. panja=Mai-orli term for


hair of head ; wangka = Kalkadun name for shin or leg.] It is believed, that if the scratching were to be
done with the fingers direct, it would spoil the whole ceremony. On the arrival of the party back at
camp, the men who have been taking part in it paint themselves with gypsum in thick bands : from the
top of the head down the middle of the face and neck as far as the umbilicus, a transverse one over the
face across the bridge of the nose, and a third and fourth drawn from the extremities of the last-
mentioned down the side of the neck, over the shoulder, along the front and outer aspects of the arm and
fore-arm to the wrist. During the rest of the day the scratching process, accompanied by the singing, is
repeated at intervals, and the performance comes to a close. No woman is allowed to set eyes on the
rain-stick, or the ceremony of its submergence: the wife of the “boss” rain-maker may, however,
join in the subsequent twig-scratching. There would appear to be no special individual among the
Mai-orli who alone can make rain : any of the tribe can learn the process, and when once in possession
of the crystals will be successful. When the rain does eventually fall, the Kurumando is removed from
out of the water. At Boulia, during the heavy floods and rains of January and February, 1895, I was
assured, on native authority, that all the rain and water had as usual been produced by the Mai-orli men:
when I begged of them to immediately stay proceedings, the reply came that as the flood had risen too
quickly to allow of the removal of the rain-stick from out of its submerged position, the rain would have
to run its course. Instead of coming up to Boulia, the Mai-orli rain-makers may visit Marion Downs :
from the former locality they may proceed for similar purposes to Warenda, Noranside, Chatsworth, etc.
19. ( Imitating falling rain , and the antics of agnatic animals.) —On the Gfeorgina River, at
Roxburgh Downs, a piece of quartz-crystal, the rain-stone obtained from somewhere out in the ranges, is
crushed and hammered to powder. Some very straight-stemmed tree is chosen—generally a “ blood wood”
with the butt for a long way up free from branches —and saplings, from 15 to 20 feet in length, are
ranged all round it in the form of a bell-tent, forming a sort of shed. Outside, in front of this erection,
a small space of ground is cleared, a portion scooped out, and some water placed in it. The men, having
been previously collected within the shed, now come out, and dancing and singing all around the artificial
water-hole, break out with the sounds and imitate the antics of various aquatic birds and animals, e.g.,
ducks, frogs. All this time the women are camped at about 20 to 25 yards distant. The men next form
themselves into a long string, indian file, one behind the other, and gradually eucircle the gins, over
whom they throw the crushed and pulverised stone: the women at the same time hold wooden troughs,
shields, and pieces of bark over their heads, and pretend that they are protecting themselves from a heavy
downpour of rain.
20. ( Singing special songs and using special decorations .) —At Headingly, Lake Nash, etc., on the
same river, the Yaro-inga have their rain-making at night, the ceremony commencing with sun-down and
euding at sun-rise. The men who alone take part in it, are decorated with red and white feathers stuck
on with blood : a basis of white over the face, neck, arms, chest, and trunk down to the waist, with two
parallel vertical bands of red passing down the centre. On the head is worn a thick roll of emu feat hers, a sort
of min-rna (sect. 151), with one turkey-bustard feather stuck on top, and to the shaft of which are attached
five or six long opossum-string streamers falling down the back. To the usual hair-belt are fixed an
eagle-kawk feather bundle at either side, and one of white cockatoo feathers in front. My informants
could render me no interpretation of the accompanying songs.
21. Some of the Kalkadun of the Selwyn, etc., ranges can also make rain. The feather-down of
the emu is stuck with blood over the whole face, neck, and chest, back and front, down to the waist,
including the upper limbs as far as the wrists. The performance, in which two or three old men, never
young women, take part, is carried out at mid-day, when the sun is high up. They were taught the
proper song from the Workai-a at Carandotta, and so are ignorant of its meaning. At Devoncourt a sort
of “ soap-stone ” rubbed with fat is believed to be brought into requisition.
[At Brisbane, spitting could both cause and stop rain: in the latter case, the natives would in
addition throw a lighted fire-stick up in the air ( T . Petrie).)
It is true, when all is said and done, that as a rule rain generally follows upon these performances,
but at the same time it should be remembered that rain-making is only practised at certain seasons of
the year when the various atmospheric conditions afford a likely indication of its advent to the more
expei’ienced and quicker-witted individuals who presume to produce it.
22. Pain produced by burnt hair. —It is a firm belief at Cape G-rafton that heavy rains are sure
to follow if hair is burnt (sect. 77).
23. Painbow: due to a fish or snake: connected with scars and miscarriages. —The rainbow at
Red Island, etc. (Cape York) is the reflection of a huge fish, supposed to live far out at sea, appearing in
the sky after the manner produced by a bush fire : hence the natives speak of it as a big fish with its
belly up. At Cape Bedford it is supposed to represent excrement in course of ejection from a species of
large shark, both the rainbow and the creature producing it being known as Yirmbal. The Pennefather
River blacks regard this phenomenon as a very bright-coloured snake which comes up to stop the rain
that has been wilfully made by their enemies : this particular reptile is recognised in the flesh, both being
known by the same name—Andrenjinyi. The Tully River natives ascribe a scar on the head, a
miscarriage, etc., to the action of the rainbow. The Proserpine River blacks had a belief in rain being
made from a quartz-crystal obtained at the spot where the arc of the rainbow touched the earth. [This is
of interest as compared with the superstition held at Brisbane, where the rainbow orTargan was believed
to be held by an individual of the same name who lived at the bottom of deep pools and who was
supposed to vomit up the crystals used by the medicine-men (sect. 121). Thus, where one extremity of
the arc ended, there Targan was. The aboriginal would travel to the river or pool where the rainbow
was located, dive down and fetch up these crystals, at the same time cutting the bow so as to make more
rain come ( T . Petrie).)
24. The sea. Made as a punishment , etc.— The origin of the salt water is thus explained by the
Pennefather River blacks. In the beginning men and women used to be made by Thunder. As the
result of their union two sons were finally born to one of these couples : the elder was a good boy, the


younger a bad one. These boys went into the bush with their spears, and brought down a big kangaroo.
This they opened with a shell, and cutting it up to roast found the bones of a man inside : during the
process these human bones got damaged and destroyed. Thunder got very angry with them for spoiling
his handiwork, told them to leave things alone, and ordered them to clear out at once. The younger
brother refused, because he wanted to eat the beast: the elder did his best to obey, but what with his
fright and confusion, instead of backing out in a straight course, lost his bearings, and kept circling round
and round, returning each time to where his brother was, and on each occasion entreating him to come
home with him. The latter again and again deliberately refused to leave his kangaroo, so the lightning,
which was sent by Thunder, struck him several times: each flash causing him to sink deeper and deeper
into the ground : at last the man disappeared altogether, and where he had sunk the salt water came into
being, and spread itself over the surrounding country. Finally, the elder boy found his way home, and
when asked where his brother was, he told his mother that he was on the road and close up behind. She
went to look for him on her own account, but the depth of sea already formed prevented her, and finally
she had to give him up as lost.
25. Fire. Obtained from the shies by a bird. —In the days of long ago, according to the Cape Grafton
blacks, there was no such thing as fire on earth, so Bin-jir Bin-jir, a small wren with a red back (JMalums sp.)
went up into the skies to get some. He was successful; but so that his friends on earth should not have
the benefit of it, he hid it away when he returned in the evening by sticking it under liis tail. Asked
how he had fared, he told his friend that his quest had been fruitless, but at the same time suggested to
him the advisability of trying different kinds of timber. The latter thereupon worked away with
various pieces of wood, made his hands very sore in trying to kindle a flame by “ twirling,” and finally
gave up the job in disgust. However, on suddenly turning round, he burst out laughing, and Bin-jir
Bin-jir quite innocently asked him the cause of his merriment. “ Why,” said his friend, “you have got
some fire stuck on to the end of your tail ” [referring to the red spot on the bird’s back.] Bin-jir
Bin-jir was therefore obliged to admit that he did get some fire, and finally showed his friend what
particular wood to make it from.
26. Discovered by a bat. —On the Pennefather Biver, old mother wallaby, who used to occupy
the country in the neighbourhood of the ant-hills, was the first to make fire, of which she had plenty.
But it went out one day with the result that the bat couldn’t see what he was doing, and accordingly he
had to try the various kinds of timber until he discovered the right one to suit.
27. Will frighten evil-disposed spirits away. — Blacks are always afraid of going out after dark
without a firestick, except when engaged upon some special purpose — e.q ., murder, elopement. The
reason invariably given is that they might be caught by some one or other of the various spirits which
prowl about after nightfall. At Miriam Yale, a firestick even when extinguished acted as a protective
at night, the cold charcoal being itself quite sufficient to scare away any evil spirits. On the Tully
River also, fire is a great safeguard. For instance, shadows, both at day and at night, are due to the
Koi, or Ku-inggan (male or female spirit) of the person making them, and travelling about at night can
render their presence evident (section 65) : thus, on the night previous to one of my visits to the Tully,
Koi had come to the local camp and thrown three sticks at the blacks. Such a Koi makes the natives
“ shiver,” but they cannot get rid of him until one, to whom he has not yet rendered himself visible,
lights a fire which alone will make him take his departure.
28. Plants . —The bamboo-cane is found in isolated patches in the hinterland of Princess
Charlotte Bay, where it is used for a special variety of spear. It is believed by the Koko-rarmul natives
to have got to the Hann River as follows: —A finch came and stole the rain from the country traversed
by the Hann, and took it away north with him to his home in the neighbourhood of Port Stewart. A small
red-bird, resident on the Hann, revenged himself by going up to the Port, stealing the roots of as many
bamboos as he could, and planting them on his return around his own camp.
Double-fruits in bananas, nuts, &c.,are believed to be made by certain invisible beings for the sake
of amusement —“ sports” in a double sense. (Bloomfield River.)
29. Animals. Why no more big guard-fish are caught. —There used to be a time atMapoon when
these fish were so big that it required many men to haul one in when caught in the net. Well, it so
happened on one occasion that an extra large-sized fish was caught, and in anticipation of a hearty feast
the blacks proposed making a big fire to roast it in. But they were all too lazy to get the necessary
firewood, each individual excusing himself by saying that he would help draw the net, cut the fish up,
&c., &c., if the other fellow made the fire. Thus, while they were proposing everything, but doing
nothing, the fish got away, and no large ones have been since met with ; they are all small-sized nowadays.
(Pennefather River.)
30. Scarcity of fish explained. —When fish are scarce at Cape Grafton and Cape Bedford, it is
because the women have broken the tabu by eating mullet or stingaree.
31. How the fish came to have its present shape. —A snake and a fish had a fight; the former
turned out victorious, and for punishment made the victim carry his skin [the scales] and bones
[dorsal-fin] on his back. (Boulia District.)
32. Why crocodiles and iguanas travel up-stream in flood time. —This fact is explained on the
hypothesis that if these creatures were to travel in the opposite direction, the force of the water is so
great that it would suddenly rush into their posterior orifices and kill them. (Middle Palmer River.)
33. The first crocodile. —Many years ago there was a certain old blackfellow living high up on the
ranges between the Embley and Archer Rivers. Finding that the exertion necessary for hunting even
for his own requirements was a little too much for him, he caught an iguana and stuck bees’ wax over it;
a big lump on either side of its belly to make it fatter, a large chunk on its head to make it bigger, and
a long piece on its tail to make it longer. Thus he fashioned out the first crocodile, and tying a rope to
one of its legs, taught it to catch turtle for him, then some dugong, and then other men and women. One


day, however, it got loose from its rope, and commenced attacking other animals and men on its oWn
account, a practice which it has continued to follow ever since. It never attacks its inventor, however,
who is an old man now, and distinguishable from other men by the possession of some peculiar scars on
his wrists, face, and back. My informant saw him some three or four seasons ago. (Pennefather River.)
34. [Another version.) —Avery long time ago, the little wag-tail used to live on Alpartara—Rocky
Island an ait in one of the lakes on Lakefield Station. In those days there was plenty of grass and
timber there, and plenty of food. However, what with the cold and wet, the wag-tail could not keep
himself warm, so he went over to the owl’s place, and begged him to let him have some fire, a request
which was refused. He thereupon waited till nightfall, and, during the absence of the proprietor, stole
the fire-sticks from off the owl’s hut. He thus got his fire lighted, flew away to Rocky Island, burnt
all the verdure off, and returned the fire-sticks to the place whence he had stolen them The owl, on his
nocturnal wanderings, finding a large portion of his hunting-grounds destroyed, soon recognised by whom
and how this conflagration had been brought about. He thereupon set out to fight the wag-tail, but the
latter (who was justified in his conduct owing to his adversary having refused him the loan of a fire-
stick) made a crocodile, and with his assistance proved victorious. Even now', the wag-tail is often to
be observed in company with a crocodile. (Prom the Koko-w T arra of Princess Charlotte Bay.)
35. Why iguanas are so plentiful. —An old ancestor of the blacks, recognising the scarcity of
these creatures in his day, thought it would only be a fair thing to make better provision in the way of a
better supply for his progeny. With considerable difficulty he managed to find a fine specimen of iguana
which he speared and cooked. Instead of eating it, however, he cut it up into innumerable pieces, which
he strew'ed about in all directions. And where each piece fell, there an iguana grew. ( Ibid .)
36. How the iguanas learnt to burrow. —Out of pure devilment, the frog wanted to kill the
iguana: this w r as all the more wicked as they had always been good friends. At any rate, having driven
his would-be victim into a water-hole, the frog started poisoning the water with the necessary bark, etc.
[as employed in catching fish], and W'atched complacently from the bank for the body to float. He was
disappoiuted, however, for the iguana had made a hole at the bottom of the pool, burrow r ed a consider-
able distance under the ground, and thus made good his escape. (From the Kokorarmul of Princess
Charlotte Bay.)
37. Why lizards are always running about. —A lizard was playing with his brothers on the
corrobboree ground at Arnau-o, the 18-mile swamp (Musgrave Native Police Station). They weye having
a wrestling match, and he got very angry at being throwm so often. Indeed, his temper got so much the
better of him that he ran up a tree and shook a spider’s nest over his companions, with the result that
their backs became covered with the little pellets of dung. This w'as more than the other lizards would
pirt up with, so they started chasing him, but notwithstanding that they have been, and still are, hunting
for him, they have not yet succeeded in catching him. When they do they will punish him. {lbid.)
38. The salt-water turtle. —In the olden times the black turtle used to live on land where he was
wont to make himself very objectionable by always stealing water from the other people. It would
seem that he gathered the water in his arm-pits, and stored it there for the dry season. All this proved
a great hardship to the kangaroo, opossum, plain turkey, hawk, and emu, as well as the brown snake,
each of whom, whenever he or she went down to the water’s edge for a drink, was hunted away. At last
all these poor thirsty souls got up a magnificent corrobboree which —what wuth the singing and dancing
- soon attracted the turtle. He came nearer and nearer, his curiosity forcing him into close proximity
to the emu who, dancing gaily away, lifted up her leg and with a little extra pressure kicked him along
the flanks and arms. All the water that was being stored there thus fell down and spread itself over
the ground, whereby the other animals managed to drink their fill. The turtle was punished for his
greed by being forced to go dowui into the sea and remain there. (Prom the Kokowarra of Princess
Charlotte Bay.)
39. The fsh-hawlc and the pheasant. —The fish-hawk had poisoned a water-hole, and went away
to have a sleep until such time as any fish should rise to the surface. In the meantime, a pheasant came
by and seeing some fish floating, let fly his spear and killed some. The hawk upon his return, seeing
what had happened, waited his opportunity and hid the spears on the topi of a high tree. This, however,
did not prevent the pheasant climbing the tree, taking possession of his spears, and getting some more
fish. The haw'k tnereupon concealed his adversary’s spears a second time, on a much higher tree. The
pheasant had a look round, and down and up, and at last discovered where his weapons were, but was
much too lazy to climb up all that distance for them. He was spiteful enough however to go and make
some rain at the head of the river : this brought the floods down and these caught the hawk at the water-
hole and drove him and his fish into the aea. The fish-hawk is now found only along the coast-lino,
while the pheasant is looking for his spears on the higher branches of the trees. (From the Kokorarmul
of Princess Charlotte Bay.)
40. The first fish-hawlcs. — Two men were hunting turtle, but one always caught males, and the
other one females. ISow' this was just what each did not want, for the one who caught bucks w r as anxious
to get eggs, and he who caught females wasn’t. Naturally, they got very angry, and began swearing,
words soon giving way to blows. They knocked each other over the faces, and broke their noses (the
present hooked beaks), while the cuts over their bodies gave rise to feathers—like w'ooden chips when a
log is cut. They are fish-haw'ks nowq and cannot hunt turtle any more, but have to content themselves:
with fish. (Pennefather River.)
41. The geographical distribution of the pelican and emu. —In the days when the pelican and emu
occupied the same tract of country, the former w'as being continually worried by the latter always
persistii gin camping alongside. You see the pelican was a good worker and used to get plenty of fire-
w T ood: the emu on the other hand was a lazy fellow, and was always burning the timber which his
companion took the trouble to collect. Prom growding they got to quarrelling, but being the smaller
bird, the pelican had to exercise all his wits to get the advantage. ISo he told the emu that if lie put his


arms (wings) in the fire they would burn much better than the wood. The foolish bird acted on the
advice, only to find that his wings had become singed, burnt, and shortened : his legs however being still
available helped to kick his adviser into the water. It thus happens that the emu does not get interfered
with in hunting for berries and nuts on the dry land, while the pelican fishes unmolested in the salt-water :
they now have nothing in common —not even fire-wood. {lbid.)
42. The water-hen and the emu. — An emu was hatching her eggs in close proximity to a small
water-hen, who w T as also engaged in the same interesting occupation. By and by both birds proceeded to
walk along the grass in search of something to eat, and in the evening returned to their respective nests.
The same thing happened next day. But on the following morning the water-hen got up somewhat
earlier than usual and went her way. The emu, happening to see her neighbour’s eggs, said, “ Hullo !
Big-fellow eggs all same belong me: me take him,” and shifting from her own nest, sat upon them.
As the afternoon drew on, the water-hen returned home, and when she saw the emu appropriating her
eggs, began swearing, but being so much smaller a bird could not use force to turn her away. So she
built a large fire, and threw the ashes over her opponent, who thus got all her feathers browned: in
retaliation, the emu threw the hen into the flames, and burnt her legs for her, which resulted in their
turning red. (Boulia District.)
43. The red tit and the brown tit.-— [The former, PPT. munatimpiella , has a red head and breast,
the latter, PPT. tinerta, is a brown bird living among the porcupine-grass : both are up to 2 or 2% inches
long.] “ Come and catch some kangaroo,” said the brown to the red tit: “Ho!” the latter replied,
“me go look out ‘ wituka’ [roots of the Boerhaavia diffusa], and then me go along camp.” On their
return, after a successful expedition in both cases, the red tit wanted to exchange some of his wituka for
kangaroo-flesh, and asked his friend to have some, but the only answer he got was, “ No ! me no eat
him : me get guts’-ache.” When the brownie had finished his meal, he hid what remained of the
kangaroo-fiesh up in a tree, and cleared the ground all round the butt, so that if the red bird were to steal
some, he would be recognised by his tracks in the smoothed sand. By and by the red tit began to think
what he had better do. Having thought the matter over, he proceeded to the sand-hills, where, seeing
some emu-tracks, he dug four or five pit-falls close up against some wild-grape vines, and then returned
home to camp. He brought some wituka back with him. It was now night time, and still keen on
getting kangaroo meat, he again offered the brown bird some of his roots in exchange, but being refused
retired to rest very much disgusted. Early the following morning, however, he went to have a look at
his traps, and finding them full of emus, cooked and skinned them : what flesh he could not eat he
brought back to camp close alongside the particular tree where the kangaroo meat had been placed. His
mate soon saw him, and said, “Hullo ! you been catch him emu? Here! give him me. Me give you
kangaroo.” But the red tit, having the advantage, said, “ No! me no want tuck-out kangaroo now.
Might get long ears ” [i.e., like a kangaroo], and proceeding a second time to the sand-hills returned
with some more emu-flesh, and again refused to barter, on the grounds that he might get a long tail as
well as long ears. And though the brown tit assured him that he had already eaten two kangaroo, and
had noticed no special growth either in his ears or in the lower part of his back, the red one w’ould not
come to terms. Of course, as might be expected, they both soon got into a temper, and began to fight,
the brown bird with a kangaroo-tail, and the red one with an emu-leg : the scrimmage lasted a long
while, the red tit getting his head and breast besmothered in blood, and the brown tit having his head and
beak battered into their present shape. (Boulia District.)
44. The more-pork (Podargus sp ) and the goose. —The more-pork came across abed of sweet lilies
and, being a greedy fellow, ate them all himself—he never said a word about it to his wife, the goose. She,
however, found it out by examining*his dung, and set about discovering the place where the lilies grew ,
She experienced no inconsiderable difficulty in her quest, but at last succeeded in locating the spot —a
small lake on the eastern side of the Normanby close to Balser’sKnob. The more-pork happened to be in
the close vicinity when his wife got there, and picking up apiece of quartz threw it at her: he missed her
the first time, but, trying again, hit her on the head and killed her. Where the goose was struck, a
bruised swelling was developed. Her mates, however, were not slow in avenging the death, and two or
three of them waited their opportunity. This was not long in coining, for shortly after they came across
the camp where the more-pork was resting, and close by were some hot ashes on which the lily roots were
being roasted. The geese got quite close, and disarmed all suspicion by offering to pick the fleas off his
beard. Delighted at this delicate attention, the more-pork sat calmly back with eyes closed, and opened his
mouth to receive each flea as it was caught. His demeanour was suddenly changed to one of astonishment
and rage when the geese put into his mouth a piping-hot lily, surreptitiously taken from the ashes. This
caused his mouth to burn and swell, and accounts for his appearance at the present day. (Erom the
Koko-warra of Princess Charlotte Bay.)
45. How the native-companion learnt to dance. —During the course of an initiation ceremony
among the Koko-warra blacks at the mouth of the Normanby in November, 1898, I happened to ask the
chief old-man how it was they came to know all the dances representative of the different animals, of
which they showed me examples? He informed me as follows:—A very long time ago, the native-
companion found a ground-chili, and not knowing then that it was hot and poisonous, ate it, the resuit
being not only that his head and beak, etc., took on a scarlet colour, but that he became “all the same
drunk.” It was during this predicament that he learnt his steps, and these he taught to all the other
animals, each one owing to some physical peculiarity developing a variation in the dance. The present
day blacks had been taught all these by their elders.
48. The parrot and the water-snake. — Two women — a parrot and a water-snake — were sitting at
the water’s edge in a very discontented state of mind : the fact is, they had got tired of their husbands,
two big eels, and wanted a change. In response to their solicitations, a large eagle-haw'k accepted all
responsibilities, and gratified their wishes. In course of time each woman bore a boy which was duly
brought to the hawk’s camp for the father to fondle and caress. But when he looked at them, and
recognised their hybrid constitution, he could not refrain exclaiming, “ Piccaninny no belong me,” though
all inquiry from amongst his friends as to whether any of them had been tampering with his tw r o women


proved fruitless. He therefore sent the ladies away on a yam-hunting expedition, and in the meantime
took the two boys with him for the ostensible purpose of catching opossum. Coming to a likely tree a
comparatively hollow one—the hawk sent the lads up and told them to climb into a certain hole, which he
pointed out to them some considerable way up. As soon as they had disappeared, he took a tomahawk
and made a hole low down in the butt, and stuffing grass therein, set it alight, and roasted the poor boys
to death. So that suspicion should fall upon the shoulders of others, he stuffed their bodies with native
onions to give them the appearance of being plump little opossums, and then putting the corpses into
dilly-bags liung them on a branch well out of sight. By this time the mothers had returned, and in reply
to their inquiries as to where their children were, the eagle-hawk told them that they were playing behind
the trees with their grass-spears. The parrot and snake naturally went to see for themselves, and to their
grief and dismay soon recognised all what was now left of their offspring. But they got their revenge
that night: they made a big nest for him, composed of sticks and leaves, and as soon as the hawk fell
asleep, set it on fire. The snake then took to the water permanently, only stretching her nose out
occasionally to get the news from the parrot, who is still poking among the holes in the trees in the hope
of getting tidings of her dead children. (Ibid.)
47. The geographical distribution of ducks and porcupines. —ln the times long before the advent
of the whites, whistler-ducks and porcupines used to share the country equally, i e., they lived peaceably
both on land and in water, the one never disputing the claims of the other. But it so happened that the
whistler-duck, who required a “ quill” for his nose-pin, attempted to take one without permission from off
the porcupine’s back : the latter, naturally resenting such treatment, showed fight. Then commenced a
battle royal, the whistler calling to his assistance black and other duck, with the result that the porcupine
was driven to seek refuge in the holes and fastnesses among the hills, where he still remains, the ducks,
in the meantime, monopolising the water-holes. (From the Tarumbal of Rockhampton.)
48. How the crow got her black plumage —Two rain-birds were engaged in a wrestling match, and
the elder one, finding himself beaten, began to lose his temper. The younger one, of course, was anxious
to prolong the struggle. In order to separate them, their mother (a crow) covered herself with
excrement, and rendering herself thus dark and offensive, soon frightened her sons into’ obedience. The
crow has kept her colour. (From the Koko-minni of the Palmer River.)
49. [Another version .] — A crow and a hawk had a fight. The hawk succeeded in knocking his
adversary over and rolling him in the ashes, whence his black plumage: he himself got punished,
however, by being made to eat putrid meat. (Boulia District.)
50. The galah parrot and the lizard. —One time there was a row between the galah and the
lizard. The latter took up an adze with which he cut the bird upon the head, the result being that his
“top-knot ” jumped up like a wood-shaving, and the blood streaked down over his neck and breast [the
red feathers]. The galah, however, revenged himself by getting a lot of prickly burr and sticking it over
the lizard’s back so as to form tie warty growths there. (Ibid.)
51. The galah parrot and the opossum. —A galah and an opossum were fighting one day, with
the result that they both got very much damaged: the parrot had his neck and breast all cut open [red
plumage], while the opossum received a black mark on his snout. (Ibid.)
•
52. The “ laughing jackass ” and the blackfellows. —Two natives were hunting up a big mob of
emus, and having got everything ready in absolute silence, were just about to drive them into the net
when a jackass burst out laughing and frightened the emus away. Of course, the blacks were very wild
at having lost their intended prey, and killed him. The bii’d now* always laughs at their failure in
catching emus. (Ibid.)
53. Why flying-foxes hang from trees. —The striped-tail lizard went to hunt up a mob of blacks,
but couldn’t find any, yet, in order that the flying-fox shouldn’t ridicule him on his fruitless errand, he
shouted out on his return to camp, “I have plenty of spears now,” so as to make-believe that he had
really met a lot of his friends who had given him these presents. Now the fox believed him, and
thinking he might possibly meet with some damage in presence of so many dangerous weapons, wouldn’t
let him come into his house, but kept him outside all night in the rain, and laughed at him. However,
by next morning they made friends again, and went out hunting, the lizard coming home in the evening
with a fine kangaroo which he had caught; the fox, having been unsuccessful, brought home nothing.
The latter of course asked for some food, but the lizard lied, and told him he hadn’t any, and
furthermore took steps to revenge himself for having been laughed at the night before. This he did, by
collecting some caterpillar-nests, which he sprinkled all over the ground in the near vicinity : he then
went and ate the kangaroo all by himself. Later on, the gin belonging to the flying-fox put in an
appearance with her baby crying, because its seat had got covered with sores due to the “prickles,” which
had come out of the caterpillar-nests. The flying-fox then carue up, sat down, and asked what ailed the
baby ; but he hadn’t long to wait for an answer, because his back also soon got sore. Thus, all the other
foxes got stung with prickles, the one from the other, and so had to shift their camp from the Palmer to the
Laura: indeed, their soreness got so bad that they couldn’t sit down, but had to hang from the trees by
the legs. And the lizard said, “ Serve you right: why did you hunt me away when I wanted to get
home?” (From the Koko-minni of the Palmer River.)
54. The ivallaby , the water-snake , and the parrot. —An eagle-hawk went a-hunting one day, and
brought back home a kangaroo, which he gave his two gins to cook, while he returned to the chase. The
kangaroo, however, was only “ gammoning”— he was no more dead than you are —and when the women
went to break his legs to prepare him for the baking-oven, he jumped up, and, tampering with their
honour, betook himself in all haste to the scrub again. As might be expected, unfortunate results
occurred, and when the eagle-hawk came home again he was greeted by the two picaninnies who, during
his absence, had appeared upon the scene. The eagle-hawk inquired whose children they were, and the
gins replied “ Yours !” “ Oh, no !” said the hawk, “ they are not like me, they are little wallabies.”
Thinking the matter over, however, he thought they might come in useful in assisting him to hunt other


birds. So the next day he took them out with him, and supplied each with a spear, but the very sight
of them in the far distance frightened all the other birds, and it was impossible for any of them to
approach near enough to strike. He got very angered over this, so, taking them over to Mount Daintree,
he pointed to a hole there, and ordered them in. Once inside, he kindled a fire at the entrance, and
half-charred them, thus giving these wallabies their distinctive colour. His would-be victims, however,
managed to survive, became very prolific, and are now very numerous in that particular district. When,
at last, the eagle-hawk got home, the gins asked him what he had done with their children, and, upon
matters being explained, the one began to cry so much that a river was formed, and she became a
water-snake, while the other began to chatter and growl, and so got transformed into a parrot. ( Ibid .)
55. The opossum and the wild cat. —The opossum and the wild cat went away in different
directions to collect seed-food. The opossum climbed a coolibar tree, got his from the pods,
and on his return home was just in thq act of preparing it on the mill when the cat came back empty-
handed. My word! said the latter, when he cast eyes upon the seed that was being ground, “ good fellow
tucker. Where you been get him that one.” How the opossum was of course not anxious to tell
whence he had obtained his supply, so he prevaricated a bit, and said, “ Oh ! I been get him from big
rough bushes along ground. The cat, believing what he heard, broke a lot of bushes down and placed
the fragments on a stone ; but of course there was no seed there, and as the opossum would not let him
have any, he had to go to sleep hungry. The same thing happened next day, the opossum returning
with proper coolibar seed, and the cat with the bush tops : again, in reply to inquiry, the opossum told
a lie, and while he managed to get a good feed, the cat was obliged to starve. On the following morn-
ing both animals started out once more to collect food, but the cat, instead of going off in an opposite
direction, watched the opportunity of his companion being out of sight, and stole the coolibar seed
which the left in his wooden trough. Having duly ground, tasted, and eaten it, he said,
This more better. When the opossum arrived back at camp he saw his trough empty, and expressed
his suspicions by asking “ Here ! you been steal tucker belong me ?” “ No,” replied the cat, “ all seed
round-about belong me.” After some preliminary growling they began to fight. The opossum got the
worst of it and his ham-strings cut, with the result that his heel became very prominent: the cat only
got his fur spotted with the seed. (Boulia District.)
56. The porcupine and her quills. —The original mother Porcupine had a very bad habit of
staying out all night and neglecting her babies. Her excuses always were that she had been hunting for
red ants, but suspicions were aroused as to her peregrinations not being of quite so innocent a nature.
At any rate, she never got back till early morning, and the children suffered accordingly. It was therefore
but little matter for wonder that her brothers speared her. Thus it has come to pass that porcupines
nowadays always carry spears on their backs to remind them of their uncles, and of all the trouble they
took in bringing their mother to a sense of duty. (From the Koko-rarmul of Princess Charlotte Bay.)
57. Why the hat became blind [c/! sect. 79: blindness a punishment for rape]. —Avery long
time ago, the bat used to be of a very amorous disposition, and, getting tired of his wife the bandicoot,
commenced pressing his attentions first of all upon an iguana, and then upon a frilled lizard. But these,
instead of satisfying, only seemed to inflame his passions. He subsequently asked an eagle-hawk for the
loan of his sister, and finally returning home, turned the bandicoot out of doors. Meeting his mother-
in-law soon after, he proved himself guilty of incest, and feeling at last a bit tired and hungry, proceeded
to look out for some honey. In peering up a hollow tree, he struck his eye against a projecting piece of
bark, and so got his eye-sight damaged. (From the Koko-minni of the Palmer River.)
58. The scrub-ivallaby. —This animal got its distinguishing marks —a white stripe on thighs and
breast—from the fact of its having been engaged one day in digging up wild “potatoes” [Dioscorea sp.]
with a yam-stick: the implement stuck in the tuber, and spilt the white pulpy matter on the parts
indicated. (From the Koko-warra of Princess Charlotte Bay.)
59. The rat , the kangaroo , and the yams. —Many years ago, at Dakefield, it was the large kangaroo
who used to make the yams. He was thus engaged one day when a little kangaroo-rat came suddenly
past him, giving him such a surprise that he dropped the vegetables into the ground. Of course the
kangaroo was determined upon chastising his interrupter, but the rat cleared away into the ground,
took the yams with him, and burrowed along as far as Breeza, a distance sufficiently great to allow of
him showing himself in safety. The rats and yams are very plentiful now at Breeza. (Ibid.)
60. How the native bear lost his tail. —The native bear and the whip-tail kangaroo were “ cousins”
some considerable time ago. They were very much alike in colour, and, in those days, each was the
proud possessor of a tail. It chanced one day, during the very hot weather, that they both got a bit
thirsty, and arriving at a neighbouring creek, discovered to their dismay that it had run dry. They
thereupon started digging in the sand, and water began to collect in the excavation made. As"the bear
dipped his head down in eagerness for a drink, the kangaroo cut his tail off, and that is why he has never
had one since. (From the Tarumbal of Rockhampton.)
61. Animals and birds were once blacks.— There is undoubtedly a belief of this description
throughout the northern districts generally, so much so that when a native wishes to speak of the
earliest conceivable eras, he usually expresses himself somewhat in the form of “ When the animals and
birds were all black-fellows.”
62. Origin of IVC&n. The first aboriginals \cf. sect. (31, 82]. —In the beginning Anjir \_cf,
Anje-a, sect. 83] was lying in the shadow of a thickly-leaved tree. He was a blackfellow with very large
buttocks, but peculiar in that there was no sign of any orifice. Yalpan happened to be passing by at (he
time, and noticing this anomaly, made a cut in the usual place by means of a piece of quartz-crystal,
with the result that the evacuations were expelled and spread over the surface of the ground. All blacks
were thus originally born from Anjir s dung. Yalpan went southwards, and has never been heard of
since. Anjir was buried underground after he had “ breeded the interpreter’s expression—all he
wanted to. (From the Koko-warra of Princess Charlotte Bay.)


It was out of the local river whence men and women originally sprung, but on their first
appearance there was no specialisation or differentiation of sex : the stiff spear-grass gave the males
their distinctive attribute while the two labia majora remind the girls of their early peregriuations along
the two river-banks. (Tully River.)
The moon (kakara) made the first man and woman, the former out of the same stone used for
manufacturing tomahawks, the latter out of box-tree. The man was completed by rubbing him all over
with white and black ashes, and placing in his inside a stick of pandanus-root, which, when required,
can be brought into prominence. The woman was rendered supple and soft by rubbing her with yams
and mud : a ripe pandanus fruit was enclosed in her belly to produce her courses : to finish her distinctive
features she was slit up with the sharp edge of a flat mangrove-root. (Proserpine River.)
63. White-coloured people. —[The following can hardly be accounted a superstition, in the sense
of its being believed and accepted by the tribe in general: it is more of a story, and introduced here only
for convenience.] Somewhere about the time that my informant’s grandfather was a very little boy, an
aboriginal was hunting out in the bush, and beginning to feel hot and thirsty came down to the edge of
a lagoon to quench his thirst. The water being so refreshing, he thought he would have a swim, and he
dived in. Now, stretching across this lagoon was a big brown snake, so big indeed that while its head
was resting on the one bank, its tail was lying on the opposite. But the black-boy never noticed the
animal, because he was so intent enjoying himself in the cooling water, with the result that the snake
seized him by the scruff of the neck and swallowed him whole. And there he remained in the serpent’s
belly. The snake crawled about from lagoon to lagoon, when, at the end of three or four days, he
emerged on to dry land to ease his bowels. His guest thus got expelled, and rushed home to camp as
fast as his legs could carry him, but when he put in an appearance there, with a white complexion, his
parents of course did not recognise him. So he had to explain matters : “ You father belong me. You
mother belong me. Me been inside snake. Lose him skin. Me white-fellow now.” fPennefather
River.)
Unfortunately it is impossible to speak with certainty as to the impression conveyed to the
aboriginals on their first contact with Europeans. Judging from such accounts as are available, given
us by the early explorers, there is reason for believing that no small amount of interest was aroused in
satisfying their curiosity as to whether the white man was sexually like themselves. James Murrells
( Narrative , etc., 1896 Edition, p. 18) says that the natives “kept up a constant yabber amongst
themselves, which led to a more minute examination of our person, this time evidently to ascertain our
sex, which seemed necessary on account of our being clothed. The captain’s wife naturally shrank from
such scrutiny, but they persisted, and when they found we were like themselves —male and female —they
seemed satisfied and did not further molest us.” Leichhardt ( Journal of an Overland Expedition , p.
246) was even asked by the Burdekin blacks whether the bullocks were not his gins. Tradition has it
among the Cape Bedford blacks that when Europeans were first seen they were called, from their
appearance, Bera-ngobadi, the name given to a light-coloured species of shark. It was only when they
were recognised as beings like themselves, that they were called Ganggal-naka-waraigo ( i.e ., baby —east
—motion through) as indicative of their coming in ships from the east, where they were presumably
born. Occasionally these same aboriginals call a European a Nima-ga (i.e., grave —obtained or received
from) probably from the fact of the latter being believed to possess the spirit, etc. (sect. 67), of one of
their deceased. [Curiously enough, the Adelaide blacks, according to Teichelmann and Schurmann
(Outlines of a Grammar , etc., 1840, p. 39), used the same word “pindi” to express a European, and a
grave—-apparently for similar reasons.] It is admitted by the Pennefather River natives that when their
people first came into contact with the whites, they believed that they had in them the ngai or spirits,
etc. (sect. 68), of theirdead relatives, and accordingly named them Kai-worda-ngai (i.e., bark-sap-spirit),
the nearest approach which they could get to an accurate description of the colour being the sap side
of the bark, which is always of a lighter hue. As time wore on they learnt, however, that their visitors
had nothing to do with the ngai, which suffix was consequently dropped, and the term Kai-worda used
by itself as at present.
64. Suggested explanation of the ‘ Made jump-up ivhite-fellow" idea. —There are undoubtedly
traces here and there of a belief that the spirits, etc., of deceased blacks may enter the bodies of
Europeans (sect. 67) in the same way that they may occupy the haunts which they frequented in life
(common idea every where), or be actually re-born from father to son, etc. (sect. 68). The idea prevalent,
however, among Europeans of a more or less universal belief held by the natives that w r hen they die they
actually “jump-up white-fellow” is as absurd as it is wide of the truth. The accounts given by
Durrumboy (Davies, the runaway convict) and others to explain the hospitality and friendship with which
they were greeted when they first joined the wild blacks, are equally explicable and more in consonance
with what we now know of native superstitions and beliefs on the supposition that the explanations offered
them by the aboriginals were misunderstood : that instead of a return of the deceased native’s actual
body after death in the form of a European, the meaning intended to be conveyed was that the vital
principle (spirit, etc.) is re-incarnated in the white man. We can hardly expect these early observers to
have recognised this fine but, from an anthropological point of view, important distinction. As bearing
upon this line of argument I would point out that in many of the North Queensland dialects which I
have personally recorded, the same word is found to do duty for a European and a deceased aboriginal’s
spirit, ghost, etc. : thus —
Bloomfield River (KYE), winggul (or wu-inggul), topo.
Atherton (CHI), Cairns, etc. (YID), Ko-i.
Cloncurrv (MIT), parago [also signifies a corpse].
Selwyn Ranges, etc, (KAL), yanyi.
Princess Charlotte Bay, (KRA) ino-olonga, (KWA) gi-urr, (Koko-olkulo) angara.
Cape Bedford, Cooktown, etc. (KYI), malul, wangar.
Tully River (MAL), Koi, Ku-inggan. [These terms signify respectively male and female
deceased spirits, and male and female Europeans.]


65. The Vital Principle : Spirit, Soul, etc. —On the Tully River, this is associated both
with the shadow (sect. 27) and with the breath. It goes away during sleep, fainting-fits, etc., and
returns when the person awakes or recovers. It is of no tangible substance (“ no bones” is the local
description), and can be heard only at nights. Thus, for upwards of some days after it has taken its
departure from the body, it can be heard tapping on the tops of their huts, creaking on neighbouring
branches, etc. Every man has his own Koi, every woman her own Ku-inggan—one for each, and good
or bad accordingly (sect. 72). After death, these can return to their old homes and friends. The Koi
etc., finally goes away into the solitudes of the scrub, where it can be met with everywhere ; but it does
not inhabit or become associated with any particular tree, clump of trees, cluster of rocks, cave, or stone,
nor does it necessarily particularly haunt the burial-ground or the locality where its late body was
cremated. It is everlasting, so far as the blacks have any conception of the term, but, owing to the
absence of tangible substance, requires no food, and hence no victuals are put aside or prepared for it.
Koi (or Ku-inggan) is good or evil, according to the disposition of the individual whence it has been
released. But if a man is alone by himself, day or night, the Koi of even one of his deceased relatives
may come and do him harm. On the other hand, if it is seen or heard by several blacks together no
harm arises, for it cannot injure the Whole lot at once. Indeed, these natives are always taught, or,
rather, have impressed upon them from childhood up, the many disadvantages to which an individual,
when alone, renders himself continually liable at the instance of these spirits (sect. 150). Good fires
are the only means these aboriginals have for keeping Koi away. Pitcharu has already been referred to
(sect. 8) as the spirit of a deceased enemy, who brings his fire-stick or falling star with him, and is
supposed to be in hiding anywhere in the denser scrubs. He has been heard cracking twigs and boughs,
and seen both night and day; but should the individual gazing at him unfortunately be alone, he or she
will get sick at the sight, may develop serious symptoms a few days later, and possibly die as the result.
Certain of the older blacks will claim to have killed some of these pitcharu.
Animals and plants are not regarded as having any Koi, etc.
66. The Bloomfield River natives have an idea of “ something” being associated with the breath or
Wau-wu : that when a, black dies, is unconscious, or delirious, etc., his wau-wu—aud in this expression
they apparently include his will, and thinking powers—leaves the body and travels about. After an
individual’s decease, apparitions of him may be seen by the survivors, and such a ghost or spiritual
representation is called Wu-inggul, Winggul or Topo, but this, curiously enough, is apparently independent
of the wau-wu (li. Hislop). Wu-inggul haunts its late home and present burial place where it can both
be seen and heard, especially at night when the branches creak or whenever any sound, which cannot be
otherwise accounted for, is rendered audible. Hogs are reckoned upon having thinkiug powers, etc., or
wau-wu, and bear a sort of relationship to their masters, who will often speak of them as their mother,
son, brother, etc., in addition to mentioning them by their proper names, these being conferred on them
according to the districts whence they have been obtained, or to the various tracts of country occupied by
their owners. When talking about any live or dead shrub or food-plant, the Bloomfield blacks employ
the same terms as are used to denote a live or dead individual, but they do not ascribe any breath, thinking-
or will- power to it.
67. At Cape Bedford. —The belief is fixed in a certain vital principle or Wau-wu, associated with
the breath, but differing from the “something” to which a similar term is applied on the Bloomfield, in
that it is part and parcel of the deceased’s ghost or spiritual representation. This wau-wu is within the
human body, both sleeping and waking, and only leaves it when death occurs: it may hover around its
burial place for a time, aud may be seen by and communicate with the living. Thus it often shows itself
to one of the deceased’s blood-relatives or intimate friends, to tell him who it was that sent him out of
this life, and to ask for revenge. Again, if a man is travelling all alone, the wau-wu perhaps of his father
or some friend bears him company to protect him from an ambuscade: he may probably see nothing, but
his spiritual guide warns him to hide, and let his enemy pass by. It may, however, come with hostile
intent, and make a person wu-tchi (sect. 116). When wau-wu finally ceases visiting its late owner’s
grave, it travels in the direction of the east, and enters a white person : these blacks will often look for
a resemblance to some deceased tribesman amongst the Europeans, and often wonder how and why it is
that we have forgotten all about our aboriginal ancestors (sect. 63). Nature-spirits (Manya) all come
under the same category as wau-wu, in that they are originally derived from people deceased, and usually
only leave their haunts in the forests and caves at night. The old men who are not afraid can both see
and even spear, but not destroy them (as in the local burial ceremony) : they can also converse with
them, and be warned by them of various dangers: but women and children are afraid, and never see them.
It is interesting to note that the lower animals also possess wau-wu : for instance, if an individual happens
to beat a dog—dogs have human names here —more unmercifully than usual, it is of common occurrence
to hear a comrade say something to the following effect: —“Look out! you are thrashing him as if he
had no wau-wu.” Plants are not recognised as having any life or consciousness.
Having had the opportunity of making a careful study of the language spoken by these Cape
Bedford natives, I am in a position to give some further particulars of the meaning of this word
Wau-wu : the second wis hardly pronounced at all. Originally, it signifies the breath, and I cannot
refrain from surmising that it is onomatopoeic, the two syllables representing inspiration and expiration
respectively. [At Cape Grafton, it is called wai-wai: at Mapoon am-wb-o.] Erom this meaning of the
breath, is derived the idea of the non-tangible “something” contained within the body, and so the notion
of the inside (space) of anything, such as a hut or a dilly-bag. The word is also used in composition, the
meanings of the terms suffixed being given in brackets, as follows :
Wauwu-dir (with) with all my “heart,” hopefully.
~ -mul (without) = lost “heart,” despair.
„ -bieni (to die) = dead beat and tired, (and so) thirsty.
„ -kulbalbal (?—) =to sigh.
„ -wointchor (to fan, start a breeze) a gust of wind.
B


68. On the Pennefather River the vital principle, etc., the Ngai and Cho-i are not connected with
the breath but with the heart and after-birth. This ngai, which the blacks can feel palpitating, talks to
them, and tells them when it is hungry or thirsty or wants to rest: it can even talk to them during sleep
and thus causes dreams. It has nothing to do with the breath or Wanji (a term also applied to a gust of
wind), which leaves the body first: it is only some time after death that the ngai takes its departure
from the corpse, and if a male, passes into his children, both boys and girls, equally. Indeed, not
until a person’s father dies, does he or she possess a ngai: if the child dies before its father,
it never has one: in the case of a female who might possess one it passes at her death from sister
to sister, and when no more of these relatives are left to receive it, it goes “ along mangrove,
finish altogether.” Again, not only does ngai separate from the body after death, but also
during fainting-fits ( e.g , those produced by collapse, loss of blood, etc.) and other forms of uncon-
sciousness : to cure a fainting-fit, etc., the friends around will start stamping with their feet to get ngai
back again, just as they do with similar purpose in the case of a corpse (sect. 70). On the other hand,
from the time when Anje-a puts him or her into the mother’s womb (sect. 83) everybody possesses a cho-i,
which occupies the same quarters and has similar subjective sensations as the ngai: it differs, however,
from the latter in that a portion of it stays in the after-birth, the remainder leaving the corpse at death
to wander about for ever in the bush. Treed thus at death from its connexion with the body it can be
sometimes seen, often heard, and certainly smelt. If interrogated as to the appearance or qualities of a
cho-i, the natives will refer to their shadows which, though called by another name, constitute the nearest
approach they can get to rendering themselves intelligible. When the medicine-men go away for a spell
in the bush, they are believed to talk to these cho-i, with whose assistance they are supposed to control
people’s lives (sect. 117) :it should be borne in mind that these wandering cho-i ( i.e ., those portions of
them which were not left in the after-births) are all mischief-makers and evil-doers in that they can
make a person sick, or even “cranky.” And though these cho-i usually wander somewhere in the bush,
there are certain hollow trees, particular clumps, and others with unusually widespreading branches, etc.,
which they are believed more or less specially to haunt: thus at night, when the leaves are rustling, or
the branches crackling, they can be heard. Furthermore, the presence of a cho-i can be recognised,
day or night, by the nose. During one of my periodic visits to Mapoon, I was afforded
a curious illustration of this. A few days after the death of a woman in one of the huts,
and after removal of the body, the llev. N. Hey happened to be dressing with carbolic (iu the
same apartment) the wounds of a little boy who had suffered some trivial injuries, and in the
course of his friendly offices spilt some of the acid on the floor: that same night the occupants
were terrorised by the deceased’s cho-i which they knew was present by the smell. But to return. It
has been stated that portion of the cho-i which Auje-a originally puts into the baby remains in its after-birth
(NGGr. lepre-e). Now, when the child is born into the world, the grandmother takes the after-birth away, and
buries it in the sand, marking the situation by a number of twigs stuck in the ground in more or less of a
circle, and tied together at their tops forming a structure resembling in shape a cone. Anje-a comes along,
recognises the spot, and taking the cho-i out carries it to one of his haunts where he places it, and where
it may remain for years, in a hole in the rocks, in a tree, or in a lagoon. Three or four such haunts are
known in the neighbourhood of Mapoon—one at Tullanaringa (Cullen Point) along the calcareous
sandstone rocks (Figs. 3, 4)* on that portion of the beach known as Baru, another among the rocks at
Trokanguno (the junction of the Batavia and Ducie Kivers), a third among the timber along the
mangrove-swamps at Lalla (towards the south-east of the mission station), and a fourth in one of the
fresh-water lagoons at the back. Now, when Anje-a actually makes the mud-baby (sect. 83), which he
inserts in the mother, he puts in it a bit of the cho-i of its father if a boy, but that of its father’s sister
if a girl : when he makes the next little brother or sister, he puts another bit in, and so on. And
although the parents know whose cho-i their offspring possesses —whether its father’s or its father’s
sisters’—they are as yet ignorant of the particular spot where it has all these years been imprisoned,
and whence it was finally released and put in the child’s body by Anje-a. This information is obtained
as follows: —When the navel-string is cut by the grandmother (with a kangaroo-tooth, etc.) the different
haunts of Anje-a are called out, and the name mentioned at the moment of breaking tells them whence
the cho-i was brought. [The ravel-string curiously enough has two names here : ailinyi for the portion
left on the child, and anombite for that remaining on the after-birth.] The child’s own country, its
“ home,” where it will in the future have the right to hunt and roam, is thus determined, not by the
place of actual birth, but by the locality where its cho-i had been held captive —situations which may
sometimes be many miles apart. Hence a baby is sometimes spoken of as a Ko (tree)-, Akworra
(rock, stone, etc.)-, or Ngo-i (fresh water)- manu (obtained or received from)- agamo (young infant).
When an individual is finally dead, i.e., has no cho-i or ngai, the corpse as a piece of putrefying matter,
“ all finish,” is known as Pau-uto, Koju.ro, or Ji-o. Animals and plants have neither ngai nor cho-i.
69a. An almost identical belief is met with on the eastern coast among the Proserpine River blacks,
with their Mogari and Kuya, both in location and destination corresponding respectively to the ngai and
cho-i of the Pennefather. On the death of a father, the mogari passes into the children direct: on the
death of a woman, it passes into her husbaud if she has one, or else into her sisters, and then “ finish.”
When the nature-spirit Kunya (sect. 83) makes the baby out of the pandanus root, he puts in it a piece
of the kuya obtained from the after-birth of its reputed human father : on the Pennefather a distinction
is made between the boy and the girl, the cho-i being taken from that of the father in the former case,
but from that of the father’s sister in the latter. When the after-birth is buried, the kuya may either
remain there, or be carried to certain places in the rocks until such time as Kunya fetches it for insertion
in the pandanus baby. Both mogari and kuya leave the body during fainting-fits and sleep, and if they
belong to elderly people may do evil: they can also be bofh seen sometimes, but only by very old men.
Breath (Ngato) leaves the body at death, and is “no more.”
69b. At Cape Grafton I could not obtain much information from the very few old hands that are
left: the Wai-wai or breath (which is already in the child when brought by the pigeon to the human mother
—sect. 81) as well as the Mulkal which subsequently becomes inserted iu the heart (? liver) appear to be
both closely associated with the vital principle. A person develops a Mulkal only by eating a piece of
any human flesh (friend or foe) within two days after death.
* Professor Spencer tells me that these figures are strongly suggestive of the spots haunted by spirit children in the
Central Australian tribes.


69c. In the Boulia district the spirit, ghost, etc., of the deceased haunts the place of burial, and
is known as Moma. The survivors generally go in parties to the grave for the purpose of leaving food,
etc., being afraid to go singly on the chance of seeing it. This Moma can also initiate an individual into
the mysteries of the craft of medicine-men.
70. Intelligence, Consciousness, Memory, etc.—Throughout North Queensland, the
ear is believed to be the seat of intelligence, etc., through or by means of which the impressions from the
outer world are conveyed to the inner. Compare “He that hath ears to hear, let him hear,” etc., used
prefatory to any important statement in the Scriptures.
In the Koko-yimidir language of Cape Bedford, Cooktown, etc. (Both : Bulletin No. 2, p. 7)
1 inquired into this idea from a philological point of view. The word for ear is rnilka, from which by
means of suffixes (meanings expressed in brackets), the following compounds are derived:—
milka-mul (without) = stupid.
„ -dir (with) = intelligent, obedient.
„ -ngamba (closed) = won’t hear, obstinate.
~ -ngandal (to refuse) =to forget.
„ -namalma (to see) =to remember, hear, think.
„ -ninggal (to sit) =to listen.
„ -bakal (to dig) =to persuade.. Compare our expression “To drum into one's ears.’’
„ -bantchir (hard) obstinate, mad.
~ -bandandaya (to break open) = ears closed before but opened now, i.e., to turn over a
new leaf, to amend.
~ -ngudo-ngudo (a reduplicated form of play, recreation) = mind set on playing, i.e.,
playful.
„ -n (euphonic) - yiwara (to look for, but not necessarily to find) =to forget. •
~ -dundal (to soften) = home-sick.
„ -warra (bad)- mal (to become) =to crave for home, home-sick.
In the Nggerikudi dialect of the Pennefather Biver the term Vo-a (ear)- pcru (good) signifies a
clever, intelligent person.
Amongst the Kia aboriginals of the Proserpine Biver, the word Wallu (ear)- kuta (closed) means
a foolish individual, and Wallu-imbana (open) a clever one.
The Mallanpara blacks on the Tully Biver furnish the following:—Wallu (ear)- batchun (large
in quantity as well as quality) indicates an intelligent, obedient individual; Wallu-purmo (deaf) signifies
a disobedient oue, and Wallu-purmo-purmo a very cranky, foolish person.
At Boulia, the Pitta-Pitta aboriginals have the word Narra (ear)- pungga (? —) signifying “to
forget.” Furthermore, in the gesture-language employed by the last-mentioned blacks, the sign for
forgetfulness, loss of memory, etc., is the picking at the centre or lobe of the ear with the thumb and
forefinger: the idea of bringing forth that which was originally put into it. The same sign and meaning
is met with, in addition, at Cloncurry, Winton, and Hughenden ; at Cape Bedford, on the east coast, it
has a slight variation, in that the forefinger is plugged into the ear and dragged vertically out. At Cape
Bedford, also, there is a gesture indicative of knavery, foolery, etc., represented by a tapping of the ear
with the extended forefinger: he won’t listen to reason, i.e., hearing.
Another curious example comes from the Tully Biver, in the days of early settlement there. Mr.
Brookes, senr., would often send his son a message scribbled on a piece of paper or board, and instruct
his blacks to deliver it. When the latter saw that the boy could understand what had been brought him,
they would look at the board, etc., from the front, then behind it, and finally put it up to their ears to
see if they could understand anything by that method.
[The stamping of the feet round a person fainting, or a dead body, on the Peunefather Biver
(sect. 68), or the shouting at the corpse at Macdonnell, may have a similar signification : it being in the
ears that consciousness, intelligence, etc., is believed to lie. So, again, Mr. Petrie tells me that amongst
the old Brisbane blacks, in cases of fainting-fits, in articulo mortis, whenever, in fact, the patient was
unconscious, some person would bang his ears between the opeu hands, and shout into them all the time,
with the alleged object of making the invalid hear.]
71. Individual Nantes. Bet-names may he given by auyury. Boys' names may indicate
peculiarities %n the father. —At Princess Charlotte Bay, Cape Bedford, on the Proserpine Biver, etc., the
choice of an infant’s pet-name depends upon augury. The mother’s mother, or other old female takes a
small portion of the navel-string, with after-birth attached, and keeps shaking it pretty violently while
the other old women sitting around call out proposed names one after the other : the moment the string
breaks, the name which was then called is chosen. From the fact, however, at the Cape, of the same
names occurring in the same family, there is every reason for believing that there is some collusion when
the navel-string becomes finally torn. On the Bloomfield, certain of the women will come round the
child soon after its birth, talk to it somewhat as follows : —“ Your name is the same as mine, isn’t it,
dear?” and accept the kicking of a leg, the turning of the head, a gurgling in the throat —in fact,
anything on the part of the infant as a sign or token of affirmation. The name thus given to a child is
either that of an animal, plant, locality, or that of some relative (a name already known, but the meaning of
which, in many cases, has been lost). Tully r Biver girls are never named after snakes, fish, or crocodiles.
There is no necessarily connecting dependence—though I am prepared to admit the possibility of its
having once existed —between the child and its name-sake animal, or plant, which in different districts
may or may not be destroyed and eaten by it. As a general rule, in the case of girls (and the same
holds good with the Cape Bedford boys) the child is thus known throughout life until the decease of a
name-sake takes place, but even then exceptions are to be recorded ( e.g ., on the Tully Biver—sect. 72).


With boys on the other hand, as soon as they begin to toddle, or feel their way a bit in the world, it is
usual for another name to be given them by the father or his side of the family, indicative of some
peculiarity, accident, locality, etc., connected with the boy himself (Bloomfield, etc.), or with the father.
Curious examples of the latter have been met with at Cape Grafton, where names such as Leg-shark (. ie.,
extremity bitten by a shark), Foot-heavy, Knee-Sick, Speech-Gentle, all bear reference to the male parent.
On the Pennefather River all the sons bear the same name as the father : it runs right through.
72. Causes upon which changes of name depend. Names of deceased people, etc. —As the
individual goes through life, changes in name may take place at the initiation ceremony (Cape Grafton,
etc.), upon the occurrence of some important event happening to him {e.q., Broken-Mouth in reference to
a boy at Cardwell whose lower jaw had been shot away by the police), on the discovery that he can control
or influence some particular talisman or charm, on his recovery from a sickness, with the progress of old
age, and upon the decease of a name-sake. If, for instance (on the Tully), he believes that he can control
some peculiar amulet, etc., he will call himself by that name, but does not discard his original one : his
friends will recognise both. Chulo-koi (i.e., Thigh-weak) was the old man who could cause mosquitoes
to put in an appearance (cf sect. 112) by carrying out certain practices at a spot in the neighbourhood
of the mouth of the Hull River : when absent on this errand he was always spoken of as Di-u (mosquito).
In the same district, again, when an individual is sick or recovering from illness, it would be a great insult
to call him by his ordinary personal name : he must be addressed as Marki, i <?., the thin one. Here also,
and occasionally elsewhere, when a man gets very old and bald, he is spoken of, and spoken to, as “ Baldy ”
(MAL. chalkai.) It should be borne in mind that the practice of altering the individual name on the
decease of a namesake is not universal: for instance, it is certainly not changed under the circumstances
amongst the Mallanpara (scrub blacks) of the Tully River, with this limitation, however, that when such
a name is uttered in reference to a person deceased, it is spoken of by whisper only. Of course, the
prohibition of the name of a dead person is not permanent, though it may extend over many years, and
accordingly, as in the Koko-warra etc., the names of deceased relatives may be found given to children.
[When on the Endeavour River in 1770, Lieutenant Cook describes the name of one of the natives as
Taparico: this family name still exists at Cape Bedford under the guise of Yaborego, and is derived from
a particular spot in the neighbourhood of Cape Flattery.] On the Bloomfield, when a name-sake dies,
the survivor—he or she —is called Tanyu (a w r ord of unknown meaning), or else by some name bearing
reference to the corpse, prefixed with Wau-(c/! \vau-wu, the breath etc.): thus, we have AYau-bantcha
(locality where body was buried), Wau-wotchinyu (burnt, in reference to its cremation), etc. But there
may often be in the camp several Tanyu, Wau-bantcha, Wau-wotchinyu, etc., and to distinguish
particular individuals recourse is had in the usual fashion to the mother’s, etc., name, though this woman
herself may have been long dead and gone. For instance, if in the 'course of conversation
a man’s name is mentioned but not known, reference is then made to his mother’s name,
e ■{}••> Ngamu-mulun (Mother-quandong), and if that also is not recognisable to his paternal
grandmother’s name, though both these women may be deceased. In those cases where I
have obtained a reason why the name of a dead person is not mentioned it has invariably been that the
spiritual represeatation, ghost, etc., thus called upon might return to the neighbourhood and cause
mischief. A somewhat analogous idea is observable in the superstition whereby certain individuals
named after Rain can call upon their name-sake to put in an appearance (sect. 16). When one recognises
the fact that almost all accidents and diseases which can possibly befall mankind are due either to spirits
of people deceased (sect. 116), or to nature-spirits (which are derived from spirits of people deceased—
sect. 115), or to medicine-men whose initiation and calling are so intimately connected with both, this
dread of mentioning the name of a deceased person becomes intelligible. Furthermore, the vast amount
of superstition and sorcery which surrounds the savage on every side naturally engrains in him powerful
ideas of suspicion and distrust, and the better they are developed, the greater are his chances of counter-
acting this witch-craft and travelling along life’s journey in comparative safety. It is quite true that
the influence for good or for evil of some of these spirits may depend upon the bodies whence they were
originally derived (sect. 65 et seq , 74, etc.). But would not the native, if a spirit, take the same
advantage over others in the flesh,as he while living firmly believes can be taken by spirits etc. over
him ? Would he not at heart trust even his friend still less when deceased than he would when alive ?
Safe probably in the knowledge that a woman while in the flesh possesses but little power to do him
harm, the aboriginal has no compunction in mentioning if necessary her name (when deceased), in the
usual manner above referred to, when wishing to differentiate a particular individual.
There is a local curiosity in the way of avoidance of names on the Bloomfield River, where the
male blacks never speak by name to or of their Pi-wal (the individual who bores the nasal septum).
73. Endearment terms. —On the Tully River, among the Mallanpara, the four primary group-
divisions have a peculiarity attached to them, which so far I have noted nowhere else, and the
interpretation of which I have not been able to ascertain. This consists of special terms of endearment
applied in ordinary conversation by and to the males and females of each, particularly in the case of old
men, joung children, and friends : they may be noted, as follows :
(Primary division.) (Male members.) (Female members.)
kurongon ... mularamo ... murkoi-an
chikun ... 01-meri ... ma-ngaui
karavanji ... yauwinya ... pinkunya
kurkilla ... orakaja ... manji.
74. Calling upon name-saJces, etc., before going to sleep , etc. —On the Tully River, also, whenever a
man (or woman) lies down and stretches himself for a spell, or on going to sleep, or on arising of
a morning, he mentions in more or less of an undertone, the name of the animal, etc., after which he
is called, or belonging to his group-division, prefixing it with wintcha ? wintcha ? (= where ? where ?).
If there is any particular noise, cry, or call connected with such name, he may mimic it. The objects
aimed at in carrying out this practice, which is taught by the elders to the youngsters as soon as they are


considered old enough to learn such things, are that they may be lucky and skilful in hunting, and be
given full warning as to any danger which might otherwise befall them from the animal, etc., after which
they are named. If a man, named after a fish, thus regularly calls upon it, he will be successful in
catching plenty on some future occasion should he be hungry. If an individual neglects to call the
thunder, rain, etc., provided of course they are his name-sakes, he will lose the power of making them.
Snakes, alligators, etc., will never interfere with their name-sakes, provided they are thus always called
upon, without giving a warning—a “something ” which the aboriginal feels in his belly, a tingling in his
thighs or legs, etc. It the individual neglects to do so, it is his own fault that he is bitten or caught
(sect. 150). This calling upon name-sakes is not supposed to benefit the women very much. If people
were to call upon others than their name-sakes, under the circumstances above mentioned, it would bear
no results either for good or harm.
A similar practice prevails on the Proserpine River, where the native, before going to sleep, calls
upon one or other of the names of the animals, plants, or other objects connected with his particular
primary group-division, thus :
Ivurchilla: rain-bow, opossum, ground-iguana, frilled lizard.
Kupuru : stinging-tree, emu, eel, turtle.
Banbari: honey, sting-ray, bandicoot, eagle-hawk.
Wungko: wind, rain, brown-snake, carpet-snake.
In reply to inquiries, the reason given me is that when called upon they warn the people, who have
summoned them, of the advent of other animals, etc, during sleep.
75. The Human Body . — Teeth get rotten and fall out in old age, because of a certain grub
which the natives are very fond of eating. This caterpillar grows and burrows in decayed logs, and
getting into the blacks’ teeth does the same damage there as it does in the timber. When I asked why
they did not therefore give up eating this particular food, the aboriginals expressed themselves to the
effect that they had too great a craving for it to deny themselves. The falling out of the teeth in old
age is called by the same name as that for tooth-ache. Milk-teeth, when they drop out, are buried in
the growing bud, or at the butt, of the Cordyline terminalis : were this not done, no more teeth would
come. (Tully River.)
Children’s teeth, when they fall out, are put into the growing shoot of a Pandanus tree by their
mothers : older boys will bury theirs in the ground. Were this custom neglected, they would get no
others. (Pennefather River.)
As the child’s milk-teeth fall out, each one as it comes away is given to the father or mother who
buries it under a Barringtonia racemosa, where the grandparents are supposed to look for it. Sometimes
the children themselves bury the teeth under the same species of tree. If attention were not to be paid
to this matter, the grandparents would not provide them with new ones, as they are asked and supposed
to do. (Bloomfield River.)
In order that the child may ultimately get a second set, the milk-teeth as they fall out are given
to its father or mother who throws them away in the direction where it was born : here they are picked
up by a species of large kangaroo, who preserves them by sticking them into a lump of bees’ wax, to
return them finally as required. (Proserpine River.)
76. Want of pigmentation of the hands or feet is ascribed to the person having at some time or
another eaten certain foods forbidden him (Per.nefather River) : to having picked up splinters from a
tree struck by lightning (sect. 10), etc.
77. Hair of young infants is allowed to grow to a length of 3 inches or so, but if the slightest
tendency to falling out shows itself the hair is divided up into throms like a mop-broom, each throm
being fixed up with a piece of bees’ wax at its extremity: unless thus taken care of, the child is certain to
become bald when older. Some time after the child is able to walk by itself, its hair is cut off with a
quartz-crystal and made into string; this is worn either by the mother or grandmother, or else tied round
the youngster to support its prominent abdomen. When care is bestowed on these details, the grand-
parents will provide new and luxurious hair. (Bloomfield River.)
Young men can make their whiskers grow quickly by rubbing over the surface the teeth from a
carpet- or black-snake. (Proserpine River.)
When cut, hair has to be buried in swamp-mud, i.e., where there is fresh water, and if this
precaution is neglected it will not grow again (Pennefather River). Elsewhere, if burnt, heavy rains are
sure to follow (sect. 22), the individual may become sick (sect. 130), etc. On the other hand, the
Proserpine River natives purposely burn a woman’s hair after cutting because, if accidentally or wilfully
it should ever get into a man’s dilly-bag, the owner would become ill (sect. 131).
Long, long ago, at Cape Bedford, it was the women, not the men, who sported beards: as such an
appendage, however, was not considered becoming to the gentler sex, it was taken from them and given
to the men by the Nguta-Nguta (sect. 82).
[The hair is not allowed to be cut during the progress of certain of the burial rites.]
78. Dumbness. — On the Batavia, Pennefather, and Embley Rivers, and at the Moreton, for the
two or three months that he is engaged in eating certain portions of his deceased brother-in-law, an
individual loses the power of speech, and expresses himself only by signs. Mention will be again made of
this peculiarity when dealing with burial customs.
79. Dyes, Blindness. —lf, on the Bloomfield River, a' person have sore eyes, this affliction is
considered due to his or her having cut down the upper branches of certain trees wherein a special kind
of honey is found, and which has been made “ tabu.” The complaint may also be ascribed here to urine
(sect. 80) having been burnt.


The development of blindness in the Boulia district, when not explicable by visible traumatic
causes, is in the case of men accounted for as a punishment, by human agency, for continued persistency
in raping married women when alone and unprotected out in the bush. This punishment of blindness,
PPT. mi-pakkuria [cf. mi = eye, pakka- =to cut) can be inflicted by anyone except a woman. The
individual whose wife’s honour has been sullied gets two of the incisor teeth of a young opossum and ties
them with twine, derived from the same animal, one to each of his little fingers, on their inner aspects.
So prepared, he comes into camp and squats down with the chin resting on his closed hands, taking up
such a position as to admit of his getting a good view of the delinquent without exciting any suspicion. He
watches his opportunity of getting into line with the offender’s eyes and, without being noticed of course,
stretches forward in the required direction with both his hands, one on a higher level than the other, and
with the little fingers (all the other digits remaining closed) claws into the air at one eye (Fig. 5): after a
few second’s interval he shifts the position of his hands, the one which was on a higher level before being
now r lower, and “ makes for” the other eye with a similar clawing. The opossum teeth and string are
subsequently destroyed by fire. The result is that, although the culprit is totally unconscious of what
has been done to his visual organs, his eye-sight becomes affected, he gets quite and incurably blind, and
can see no more women to assault. A similar purport of the infliction of blindness is met with in the
Palmer district (sect. 57).
When the Maitakudi want to “ blind” a man, they do it by “ singing” only (Cloncurry) : the
Pennefather and other blacks get the same results with a talisman or charm (sect. 136, etc.), while the
Proserpine natives effect their purpose by putting the ashes of a burnt human bone upon the sleeper s
eye-lids.
80. Perspiration, Tlrine, Excrement. — On the Pennefather River, sweat from under the arm-pits is
used only by a father in welcoming or farewelling his children, whose faces and chests he smears with it.
He will do it to his son both when single or married, but to his daughter in childhood’s years only. In
the days before the advent of the missionaries at Mapoon, when the bodies used to be buried nude, the
father would similarly smear his deceased progeny before being finally covered up with earth. In the
North-Western districts (sect. 160), sweat similarly derived from the arm-pits is believed to possess
powerful curative properties, especially when the patient is in extremis : while on the Bloomfield (sect. 13)
it has the effect of influencing the direction of a storm.
On the Proserpine River, an individual can be made very ill by touching his food ( e.y ., honey,
opossum) with the sweat obtained from the arm-pits, crutch, or preputium (sect. 131).
On the Tully River, if a gin has had connexion with a boy, the perspiration from under the
arm-pits of the latter can be smelt on her : and for such an alleged faux pas she often has to pay the penalty.
Axillary sweat is known here as ngamurai (same name as the axillary hair) to distinguish it from churupul,
the sweat obtained from the fork and elsewhere over the body: it is stated that the stronger-scented the
ngamurai, the more attractive is it to a woman (sect. 84).
Great care is taken never to make a fire where a person has been micturating, for if an individual’s
urine is burnt it will produce bad eyes in the owner and in other persons (Bloomfield River), or sores
on the privates (Cape Bedford, where venereal disease may thus be accounted for). During the
summer of 1898, I happened to be in the Cape Bedford mission garden, when one of the camp-women’s
children micturated upon a piece of log which was just about to be burnt: the men who were working in close
vicinity, noticed it, and immediately informed the mother, who, together with them, took care to scrape
the wood perfectly clean and dry. On the Bloomfield River, urine may be used as a lotion (sect. 160).
[Tully River men and women will micturate over themselves in cold weather to keep themselves
warm: elsewhere, they will often micturate over their hands for ordinary cleansing purposes.]
In the case of young children, up to the time of their being able to walk, their faeces
and any grass or pebble, etc., upon which they may have dropped, are put into the fork of some
convenient branch of a neighbouring tree: the idea prevalent is that if a dog were to get at the
evacuations, the child would become unhealthy, and would require a much longer time than ordinary
before it could learn to walk properly (Bloomfield River). A similar practice is in vogue on the Tully
River where the reasons for it are stated as being that on the one hand the child will grow strong by the
wind blowing on its excrement, on the other, the dogs might eat it, and so render the infant sick [cf.
similar disposition of menstrual flow in trees —sect. 89]. The Pennefather River mothers always cover
their infant’s (urine and) excrement with earth : their exposure (for reasons which were not ascertainable)
would cause the child to die.
The Proserpine natives, believing that they can be made sick by their excreta being burnt, always
take the precaution of covering them with earth to hide them from their enemies.
81. Sexual History. Conception not necessarily due to copulation [see also sects. 82-83]. —
Although sexual connection as a cause of conception is not recognised among the Tully River blacks so
far as they themselves are concerned, it is admitted as true for all animals : —indeed this idea confirms
them in their belief of superiority over the brute creation. A woman begets children because (a) she
has been sitting over the fire on which she has roasted a particular species of black bream, which must
have been given to her by the prospective father, ( b ) she has purposely gone a-hunting and caught a
certain kind of bull-frog, (c) some man may have told her to be in an interesting condition, or (rf) she
may dream of having had the child put inside her.
By whichever of the above methods the child is conceived, whenever it eventually appears, the
recognised husband accepts it as his own without demur. A similar belief holds good amongst the Kia
blacks of the Proserpine River, but here it is the medicine-man (warwinjala), originally informed by
Mogari (sect. 69a), who tells the woman’s father or the woman herself that she is about to be with child.
When twins occur, the second child is accounted for by the mother having been told to be in an interest-
ing condition by a medicine-man belonging to another country, and with whom both parents are accord-
ingly correspondingly angry.
At Cape Grafton it is a particular species of pigeon (KUG. kope) which brings the already-manu-
factured baby to the mother in the course of a dream.


R 2. Infants may be fashioned by spirits and then inserted in the mother. —Nguta-Nguta
(sect. 77), also known as Talpan, are the nature-spirits living in the dense scrub and uuder-growth who
send the babies along. The Cape Bedford blacks believe that these spirits have very long hair, with big
ears, and two sets of eyes, one in front and the other behind, i.e., they hear and see everything : they are
visible only to certain old men, but disappear into the ground whenever anyone else comes near: and are
like human beings in that they have wives, children, and spears. The same natives say that babies are
made in that portion of the west where the sun sets, and in their original condition are full grown, but
in their passage into their maternal homes take the form of a curlew (the spur-winged plover) if a girl,
but of a pretty snake if a boy. When once inside the mother, baby takes on its human shape again, and
nothing more is seen or heard of that particular bird or snake. When at night the blacks hear the curlew
crying out, they will say: “ Hallo ! there’s a baby somewhere about.” In the case of a boy, the woman will
probably be out hunting, and suddenly sing out that she sees the snake in question, and, as often as not, run
away : her mates, even she herself will perhaps, join in looking to see where the serpent has got to, and
turn over rocks, leaves, and logs in their fruitless search—it can nowhere be found, and this is a sure
sign that it has reached its destination, and the future mother knows now that she is pregnant. It is the
husband here who asks for the baby to be sent as a punishment when vexed with his wife.
83. Anje-a (cf. Anjir, sect. 62) originally made by Thunder, is the individual, according to the
Pennefather blacks, who fashions the piccaninnies out of swamp-mud, and inserts them in the bellies of
the women. He is never seen, but can be heard laughing in the depths of the bush, amongst the rocks,
down in the lagoons, and along the mangrove swamps: when he is heard, the blacks say “ Anje-a he
laugh : he got him piccaninny.” Women do not know when the infants are put inside them —they only
feel them subsequently—because they may be placed in position during the day-time, at night, and in
the course of a dream. Before actually inserting these mud-babies in the women however, Anje-a makes
the boys travel in a round-about way across the bush, their forms being already moulded into shape,
whereas he causes the girls to pass over a piece of wood stretched crosswise, at a certain height, over the
path he instructs them to travel by : as each girl stretches her legs over the cross-piece, she gets split
in the fork and is now completed. Por cutting the posterior orifice in both sexes, Anje-a uses a piece of
wood from the Acacia JRothii, Bail. (NGGr. lar). Sometimes an accident befalls these infants before
they get inside their human mothers, e.g., they may catch one of their feet in a log, and so be born with
various deformities (club-foot, etc.). When the woman has plenty of room inside, twins are sent.
Thunder, who can also make children out of swamp-mud, manufactures his all left-handed, which can
thus be distinguished from Anje-a’s, who are all right-handed. How the vital principle (cho-i) is
obtained, and put into the mud-baby, is explained elsewhere (sect. 68).
On the Proserpine River, it is Kunya who makes the babies out of pandanus roots, and puts them
into the women when bathing. He is a nature-spirit most often dwelling in the ground, but he is also
to be met with below the water-surface, as well as in rocks and caves and in the quiet of the bush.
When he inserts the infant in the mother, he puts in it the kuya or vital spirit (sect. 69a).
When it is remembered that as a rule in all these Northern tribes, a little girl may be given to
and will live with her spouse as wife long before she reaches the stage of puberty—the relationship of
which to fecundity is not recognised —the idea of conception not being necessarily due to sexual
connection becomes partly intelligible.
84. Love-charms. —On the Pennefather River, when a girl fancies a boy, she sends him through
his mother a piece of over-cast and raddled fibre-twine (made of Careya australis or Malaisia sp.) known
as a tangka-a (Pig. 7) : this he wears as a necklace if her feelings are reciprocated. Furthermore, if the
girl’s mother subsequently approves she will fix into the hair at the top of the boy’s head a circular ring
(of raddled Malaisia twine) known as a pauri (Pig. 6) : if it should be lost, she can renew it. The specimen
of pauri in my possession is made (accidentally or designedly) of a 3-ply. It is difficult to learn whether
the wearing of these strings is only a sign of the betrothal, or whether the articles themselves are to be
considered in the light of love-charms. At any rate, when the boy receives one or the other, especially
the tangka-a, he feels very keen in the matter. Certainly in this same district, when a man fancies a
woman, and he wishes to inflame her passions, he puts a stripe of red clay all the way down his flanks and
along the outer sides of his lower limbs, while at the same time he smears over the front of his body a
preparation (kotenni) made from Ihe inner bark of the tchannan ( Denhamia obscura, Meisn.), or
tre-inni ( Pithecolobium grandiflorum , Benth.) mixed with charcoal, which gives him a peculiar scent.
He then passes close to her ; she both sees and smells him, and gets her passions excited. Similarly when
a younger brother here goes to claim his elder brother’s widow, he rubs the root and bark of the je-anjata
(Psychotria Fitzalani, Benth.) on his face, body, knees, hands, and spear : she is believed to be attracted
by the smell \_cf. effects of axillary perspiration on Tully River (sect. 80)]. Another means of gaining
the same end is for the man to give the woman he feels a passion for some small pieces of the root
of the Denhamia mixed with honey in her food : this makes her reciprocate his feelings. The bush-blacks
here also employ a speces of Owenia (NGG. boraga-aganganama) as follows: —After soaking the bark
from the stem and roots in water, they smear the mixture over their chests, bellies, and thighs in the
belief that it acts as an aphrodisiac.
The Proserpine River aboriginal buck will eat a leaf of a tree very like the iron-bark, and while
chewing it sing (sic) at the girl he wants, somewhat after this fashion : “ Maggie ! I like you. I want
you belong me.” The female here can bring her faithless swain to reason by breaking up a Santalum
leaf in water, which she gets his mother to give him to drink.
85. On the Bloomfield River, a woman will develop a fancy for a man, and confidentially tells her
friends—who will, of course, take care to let him know ! —that she is “Kura-tchi” on him. This Kura
is the grub of a Rhynchophorus beetle, one of the Curculionidse, and remarkable for the tenacity with
which it clings on to objects, as well as for the compartively large hole which it bores into the Melaleuca
and Xanthorrhcea trees. When, therefore, a woman is Kura-tchi—“ has got the Kura” —it means that
she is believed to have one of these grubs in her vagina, where it can be seen by anyone who cares to
make the examination; in other words, she is very keen on the man she thus temporarily fancies. This
condition often proves to be a source of trouble. Women will fight on the accusation of the one that the


other is Kura-tchi on her husband: a husband may accuse his wife of being Kura-tchi on someone else.
On the other hand, there are said to be certain charms by means of which a man can purposely make a
woman Kura-tchi on him.
86. Similarly, on the Tully River, a woman will get a man to fancy her by passing into her vulva
a nut of the Castanospermum australe, A. Cunn., or of the Cryptocarya Bancrofti. She may place it
in the position mentioned at any time, but apparently does not keep it there for very long.
87. Among the Taro-itiga natives of the Upper G-eorgina River, between Urandangie and
Pleadingly, etc., certain kinds of “roarers” (Roth: Bulletin 4, sect. 13) are used as love-charms. This
form of implement is obtained from the Workai-a (? and Toko Ranges) tribe, whence its use in this
connection has been learnt. It appears to have no special term applied to distinguish it from the
ordinary toy variety, than which it is larger, although it is recognisable by two types of gravings : one
(Fig. 8), the ring of concentric circles (Yurangudu), represents the smouldering fire-sticks, eoolibar-
roots, etc., being swung round and round at the camp-fires during the “ sing-songs,” etc., at night; the
other (Fig. 9) is a representation of the female genitals, each half-circle indicating a labium. The
talisman is swung at intervals during the hours of night, at a considerable distance from camp, by males
only, in the belief that the women whom they are bent on having connection with will reciprocate their
passions with increased fervour. The female referred to. of course sees nothing of the web into which
she is becoming entangled, though she may feel its effects: she experiences a feeling of becoming more
and more enamoured, and finds herself repeatedly exclaiming “I like this-fellow boy.” No woman is
ever allowed to handle or to gaze on one of these love-charms. Amongst the settlers around Camooweal,
etc., these particular charms used to be known by the cacophonous term of “ gin-busters.”
88. Copulation during sleep , etc. —On the Tully, women maintain that they can be copulated with
during sleep without their knowledge of it. At the Moreton, if a certain plant be burnt, and the smoke
made to pass over a sleeping woman, a man can have connection with her without her waking: a similar
idea appears to be prevalent at Cape York where, in addition, the same effect can be produced by mixing
the plant up in the woman’s food. (W. B. Webster .)
89. Puberty and menstruation. —ln the female the protuberant breasts, etc., are brought on by
the one right man —either one of the very old men or the one to whom she has been betrothed by her
parents—sleeping with the young girl in question, but not necessarily indulging in sexual connection, and
always keeping her at the back of him (Tully River). On the Proserpine there is an underground
nature-spirit, one Wunggomalli, who is the especial friend of boys and girls, whom he causes to mature
by blowing upon them occasionally : it is he who advises the parents as to their disposal when fully
developed.
On the Tully, menstruation is produced by the liver regularly breaking into two, and discharging.
What causes the breakage the women do not know : they maintain, however, that it has nothing to do
with pregnancy, though they admit its non-existence during that physiological period. Women here
declare that they can stop their menses by standing under a particular kind of gum-tree, and allowing
some of the sticky exudation to fall on them: this procedure is said to be resorted to in order to enable
them to walk about at all times without inconvenience. It is also believed that the menses can be
stopped by their husbands and others collecting and cutting up any grass, etc., on which their menstrual
flow r has fallen—but as this is about the last thing the men would touch, any confirmation of this belief
is not forthcoming. On the other hand, were their periods to be thus purposely stopped, the men would
be enabled to continually pay them sexual attention, a course to which the women assured me they
objected. And this is accordingly really the reason why females always place any such soiled grass,
leaves, etc., high up on the fork of a tree well out of man’s reach. [Of similar disposition of faeces,
sect. 80.]
Menstruation is produced by a certain kind of curlew [_cf. curlew in connection with the bringing
into the world of baby girls, sect. 82] inserting his beak into the woman’s vulva with a view to extracting
the “ honey ” for his father, the hurricane. (Pennefather River.)
On the Bloomfield River, menstruation on the part of the younger women is looked upon with
ridicule by the elder ones. In the old days, i.e., when they still used their tea-tree barks (on which they
used to lie, or cover themselves with), if any aged matron saw any stains from this cause, she would
unmercifully chaff the young woman who had given rise to them. It was considered the correct thing for
young women to bear children, and the connection between pregnancy and the stoppage of the menses
was recognised. (12. Hislop.)
[ln the old Brisbane days the blacks would die if they went anywhere near the spot where
anything that had passed from a woman during her periods was placed: this spot was indicated by a
pointed stick in the ground, close to which would be put a piece of tea-tree bark or some tussocks of
grass. (T. Petrie.)]
90. Ceremonials at early menstruation. —On the Pennefather River, during the first three menstrual
periods, the young girls undergo a certain ceremony, the successful execution of which is said to assure
them suppleness of the hip joints, etc., and general ease in future child-birth. As elsewhere, the girl
may be given to, and will live with, her future husband for some years before she is fit physically for
matrimony. When she first notices something w r rong with her, she asks her mother what is the matter.
The latter takes her away from the camp to some secluded spot where, in the shade of a convenient
tree, she makes a circular excavation in the sandy ground, at the bottom of which she puts a piece of
bark. The girl squats on this with open thighs and legs crossed, each knee, with adjacent portion of
thigh, being supported by a small log placed underneath it. Close to each hip, a digging-stick is stuck
firmly into the ground, and the whole of her body from the waist down is covered with sand. She is next
closely surrounded with more or less of a bush-fence broken only in front where her mother lights the
fire. Here she continues to sit wfith her arms crossed, and the palms of her hands down—resting, in fact,
on the sandy mound covering her extremities. She may only shift her arms to receive the food handed her
by her mother, or to scratch when necessary (i.e., for lice) the exposed parts of her body, face, or head : not


being, however, allowed to touch herself with her hands, she has to allay any such irritation by means of
a small wooden splinter which, when not in use, is stuck in her hair. She may speak with her mother
only—indeed, no one else would ever think of coming near where she is—and when she rises of an evening
to be taken back to camp, she drags herself up by pulling on the tops of the two digging-sticks at her side.
On arrival at camp, she is allowed to talk to her husband. The next morning her mother takes her back
to the same spot, and there she again remains till evening: after five days of this, when the excavation is
finally covered over with ashes, she is restored to her husband. Before being returned, however, on the
evening of the fifth day, her mother decorates the girl with a waist-belt, pearl-shell necklet, and forehead
band, sometimes also with a chest pearl-plate ; she also ties strings (interwoven with feathers of the
green mountain-parrot) round her arms and wrists, across from shoulders to opposite arm-pits, and from
the waist upwards, back and front, smears her in blotches of red, white, and yellow pigment. The underlying
idea is apparently to render her pleasing and acceptable to her spouse. When the young woman becomes
unwell the following month, she is again taken away by her mother, another excavation made, and the
ceremony repeated, etc., for a length of four days, and so again, on the third occasion, for six days. At
the fourth she remains in camp, but signifies her condition by wearing a basket of empty shells hanging
down her back, an adjunct which prevents her lying on her back for marital purposes, and by lighting
a fire for her own separate use apart from her husband’s. The following terms express the various
stages through which the girl passes at her early menstrual periods:—
troka-morra(mba)- tche = head-fighting stick-to strike, i.e., a female at first menstruation
the idea being that her condition is due to what we might call cerebral congestion, the
flow, it is believed, having come from her head which has been struck.
tre-ana = the spot where she has to sit in the shallow excavation already referred to : hence,
t.-pimidi (one), t.-ambuthari (two), t.-chumo-chumo (three), and t.-muridiki (plenty)
signify a young woman at her first, second, third, and fourth menstruation respectively.
mo-a(ga)- tanna = fire-to make, i.e., a young woman at full puberty when, during her periods,
she remains in camp with her husband, her physiological condition being then indicated
in the manner above described.
For reasons which will be readily understood, the photographs represented in Figs. 10 and 11 were
taken by me from a child specially decorated, etc., by the mother for the purpose according to the
orthodox fashion.
At Margaret Bay, on the opposite, eastern, coast of the Peninsula, an Otati woman informed me
that a similar ceremonial takes place, a statement which confirms a photograph (Fig. 12) given me by
an individual who was acquainted with the natives of that district.
Further down the coast-line I have not been able to trace the indications of any similar
proceeding at Cape Bedford, or at the Bloomfield River. South of Bowen, however, among the Kia
blacks of the Proserpine River, the following custom used to take place. At first menstruation, the
young girl, in company with her mother and sister, leaves camp for about a week, and continuously sits
or lies down in a shallow excavation, at the bottom of which are placed a layer of leaves covered with
an opossum rug : she is protected from the inclemency of the weather by a roughly-made bush-hut
(kaula), with but a small entrance, erected over her. She is asked by her mother and sister—she is not
allowed to speak with anyone else —when hungry, but she has to be satisfied with one particular kind of
yam only ( Phaseolus Mungo, Linn.), which after preparation at a fire some distance away is handed to
her. She can drink water, but must not touch it with her hands. She may scratch herself, if necessary,
just a little, but strictly speaking she ought only to use a mussel-shell for the purpose. When she
wishes to come outside for sanitary reasons, she is led to a distance by the mother and sister holding her
arms, and is brought back in the same fashion. During her second and third periods the same ordeal is
gone through, but on the termination of the latter, she is brought back to her husband decorated with
eagle-hawk or cockatoo feathers in her hair, a shell hanging over the forehead, grass bugles round her
neck, strings tied on her arms and wrists, an opossum apron-belt round her waist, and her body covered
all over with a pattern made up of red, white, and yellow pigments and blood-wood charcoal.
91. Pregnancy. —With regard to pregnancy it is the child inside which makes the breasts pro-
trude, and the mother can tell whether it will be a boy or a girl by the colour of the nipples (Tully
River). The Pennefather River women believe that if the nipples are protuberant it will be a boy ; if
flat, a girl may be expected.
92. Twins , Triplets. —A woman on the Tully River gets twins or triplets as a punishment inflicted
on her by her mother-in-law for not paying her sufficient attention in the way of collecting fire-wood,
etc. : when the daughter-in-law is away from camp, the old lady will come and plant two or three pebbles
underneath where she sleeps, and the latter will bear twins or triplets accordingly. Occasionally,
however, twins will be here accounted for by the woman dreaming of having been told to be in an
interesting condition by two different people. A similar idea of being told, etc., holds good on the
Proserpine (sect. 81). At other times a woman is presented with twins because she has room for them
(sect. 83).
93. Miscarriages are brought about by the action of cloudy weather, a rainbow (sect. 23), and by
going too much in the water (Tully River). At Cape Grafton a woman is barren because she has drunk
the blood extracted from a doomed person (sect. 143).
94. Eight- and Left-handedness. —The Tully River blacks say that at actual birth, according as the
child first presents its face to the left or to the right, so will it be left- or right- handed throughout life.
On the Pennefather, this depends upon whom the infant was originally fashioned by (sect. 83).
95. Congenital deformity is due to the wrong man having told the mother to become pregnant
(Tully River). It is also ascribed to the mother having eaten certain forbidden things, e.g., wallaby,
during pregnancv : one particularly hump-backed boy explained his deformity to me as due to his mother


having eaten porcupine when carrying him (Bloomfield River). In other cases the child has only itself
to blame for catching its foot in a log (sect. 83), or for tangling itself up in its mother’s inside, the
belief held by the Proserpine blacks.
96. Auguries, Dreams, Wishes, Luck- and other Charms, etc.—“ Hawking ” of
phlegm: Snoring. —The hawking of phlegm in the throat, as well as snoring, denotes the advent of some
one from a very long distance. (Pennefather River.)
97. Sneezing. —When a Tully River man sneezes, there is some woman in love with, or talking
about, him. Similarly, on the Pennefather, the fact of a person sneezing indicates that some one is
talking about him or her, for good or for evil, in a neighbouring camp. If he considers that evil is being
spoken, he will go next day and inquire. He may tax one or two men, who will probably deny it, but he
takes the precaution, while inquiring of each, to point his hand (with fiagers enclosed over the bent
thumb) at each in turn: if the thumb-joint cracks, this is proof positive that the accused did speak evil
of him. As far as is ascertainable, this procedure may be exercised by a “ bully” over some other
individual whom he knows he is capable of overpowering, and sneezing is thus often wilfully made the
pretext for a quarrel.
98. Spitting , which is a sign of contempt pretty well everywhere, is in addition a somewhat serious
affair on the Tully River, where the person spat upon becomes sick and emaciated (sect. 127). Among
the Otati tribe of Margaret Bay, the novitiates are said to be spat upon during the course of the
initiation ceremony, but its signification is not known. When a Cape Bedford black unintentionally
mentions some word or name that is forbidden, he will avert any injury or damage accruing therefrom by
immediately spitting and saying “barkar kada! ” (== mouth foul). [Mr. T. Petrie tells me that the old-
time Brisbane blacks would believe in quelling a rough sea by spitting on the waves (c/! sect. 104) : they
also considered that spitting could both cause and stop rain (sect. 21).]
99. Whistling. —Any whistling sound on the Bloomfield is connected with the spirits of people
deceased : in fact, the latter are supposed to communicate with mortal men by whistles which the old
men are believed capable of interpreting. It is for this reason that whistling is not encouraged here,
especially after dark: the spirits might think they w r ere being mimicked. Similarly, the Tully River
blacks do not like anyone to whistle : they believe that this brings up certain spirits, e.g ., Pitcharu (sects.
8, 65), Koi and Ku-inggan (sect. 65), who may do them harm. [At Brisbane, whistling was never practised
except during the initiation ceremony, when it constituted a signal for the women to keep out of sight and
hearing. tfl. Petrie.')']
100. Crick in the neck, when turning the head sharply round, as well as sudden “ shivers,”
signifies that there is danger behind: someone is watching for an opportunity of throwing a spear at you
(Tully River). [Compare the cracking of the thumb-joint in connection with speaking evil (sect. 97).]
101. Breasts tingling. —A mother when expecting her son’s return to camp, says she can feel
her breasts tingling on his near approach to the neighbourhood (Bloomfield River) : the same supersti-
tion holds good for any child of her’s on the Tully, as well as on the Pennefather River, where both
breast or belly may experience similar sensations. [ln the latter district the parents can, in addition,
dream that their children are returning.]
102. Birds flying close to a person, etc. The fact of a dove flying close to an individual, at Cape
Bedford, indicates a very good augury for him in everything. On the Pennefather River, when any bird
flies in close proximity to a man, it means that he is about to meet a friend. On the Tully River, the
twitter of a certain scrub-bird warns the traveller that some enemy is close at hand (sect. 104).
[ln the Brisbane district there was a species of large thrush, known as mirran, which, if it were
heard singing anywhere near the camp, would be addressed rationally, and asked if there were any
strangers in the neighbourhood : supposing it did not sing in reply, this would be accepted as a sign
that no foreigners were present. If anything, however, should have afterwards happened, the natives
would blame themselves for not having asked it some particular question relative to the event under
review. ( T . Petrie.)]
103. Determination of cause of death, etc. —In addition to the augury depending upon a
nature-spirit spitting (sect. 147: snake-bite), charcoal-pellets remaining suspended in mid-air (sect. 130),
etc., mention must be made of the procedure adopted at Cloncurry to discover whether a person’s death
is caused by a countryman or a foreigner. The near relatives of the deceased will fix upright on the
grave a small forked stick, and place in the fork a manda-kuya (sect. 154) : this is done at night, and if
on the following morning the latter implement is found on the ground, it is proof positive that the late
lamented met his death at the hands of an enemy from some district a long way off.
104. Crossing water. —When about to cross a stream or creek, the twitter of a certain bird will
warn the Tully River wayfarer to desist, and that danger in the form of a crocodile, etc., will beset him
if he persists in the attempt. A native of the same district will feel his thighs or legs tingling upon
first wading into a stream if there is a crocodile anywhere about, and will thereupon postpone swimming
across until another occasion. If however he does not experience these subjective sensations, he will lap
up a handful or two of water, which he puts into his mouth and spits out again into the stream: this
will ensure him a safe passage even if a crocodile, unknown to him, should be lurking there.
Whenever, in the Boulia district, a big flood comes up, it brings Karnmari, the nature-spirit in
the form of a huge water-snake, so that supposing our traveller wants to effect a crossing, he will
only venture in up to his waist: if the water be warm he will get across either there or at some
other spot: but if too cold, and he persists in the attempt, he is sure to be caught by the snake, i.e.,
drowned, when nothing can cure him or bring back animation. If about to swim any big stream or river
which he suspects or fears, the native will speak to Karnmari, expressing himself somewhat as follows :
“Do not touch me. I belong to this country.” But were he to cross even his own country’s river with
a stranger to the district, it is possible that harm might befall him.


When about to cross a creek, etc., and the Pennefather River native is in doubt whether it is safe
to do so or not, he puts a mangrove leaf on the surface of the stream, and watches it carefully. If the
leaf—and only a mangrove can be used for the purpose —moves backwards and forwards, or circles
round, there is a shark or crocodile about: if, on the other band, it remains perfectly still, there is
nothing therefor him to be afraid of, and he may cross in safety.
Por a similar purpose, the fluffy down from a laughing-jackass can be used on the Proserpine
River: but in this case, if the feather remains still, there is some danger to be feared beneath if it
moves, there is nothing to be afraid of.
under a leaning tree. —The Brisbane blacks would never pass under a leaning tree tbat
had been tilted by the wind, etc., so as to bend over the beaten track, but always went round : if they
passed underneath it they would be sure to die. In the same way, in the early days, a black could never
be got to pass under a fence. Similarly, if when out walking, hunting, etc., a dog passed between a
man’s legs, he would immediately stand still, call the dog back, and make it pass the same way back
again: were not this done, both dog and man would die. So again, no one was allowed to step over
another’s body or any of his belongings : if a woman did such a thing, she would be instantly killed.
(T. Petrie.)]
105. Welfare of friend recognised by condition of tree.— On the Pennefather River, when a visitor
has made him (or her) self particularly agreeable, and takes his departure home again, an effigy of him,
about 3 or 4 feet long, is cut on some soft tree, e.g., Ganarium australasicum , F. v. M., but on that side of it
which faces the direction he is travelling home by (Fig. 13). From the condition of this tree if the leaves
fall, or it gets blown over, etc —the natives can tell the condition of health, safety, etc., of their friend
{cf. effigies in sect;. 128).
106. Dreams cannot be accounted for, though great importance is attached to them on the
Bloomfield, where the natives will tell one another what they have dreamt, and either interpret it
themselves, or discuss it with others. It is here that a native may set his mind on dreaming that his
enemy will die —and with satisfactory results. The Tully River blacks also regard dreams: When
friends are expected, a dream will tell them whether they are close at hand or not: they can go to sleep
and make up their minds to dream that a certain enemy is dead —and he will die : if they have
night-mare, it is the spirit of a deceased person (Koi, etc.) that is resting on them and preventing them
getting up: if their women dream of having children put inside them they may beget them: if some
crime is committed, the culprit, as in many other districts (sect 148), can be discovered in a dream. At
Cape Gfrafton it is in a dream that the pigeon brings the mother her baby (sect. 81). In the Boulia
district it is during the course of a dream that a medicine-man may learn the mysteries of the craft. On
the Pennefather River, parents can dream that their children, after a long absence, are returning: any
dream here is due to their own ngai (sect. 68) talking to them during sleep.
107. Wishes. —A black will earnestly yearn for some particular fruit, etc., to come into season,
and will send one of the larger species of spider to bring it —and it will come. The coastal aboriginals
especially and firmly believe in this method of satisfying any particular craving. (Tully River.)
108. Luck-charms : (for catching turkeys , dugong). —On the Starcke River a charm for obtaining
more turkeys consists in laying a dead one on a grid, and covering it over with bark and sticks. A
somewhat similar belief prevails here and along the neighbouring Princess Charlotte Bay coast-line to the
effect that if the bones or skulls of the dugong be not put away in a heap or otherwise preserved, no more
will be caught. Some of these bone-heaps are of comparatively large size: on the other hand, I have
seen dugong skulls hidden singly under bushes on Flinders Island.
109. ( for throwing spears straight ). —In the case of spear-throwing among the Ducie blacks, if a
small piece of human flesh be fixed on to the wommera, between the two shells composing the handle, the
spear will never err in its flight. In the same way the Olkulo blacks, on the northern extremity of
Princess Charlotte Bay, will fix a piece of human bone on the spear-thrower for luck when after
kangaroo and emu. At Cape York the flight of a spear will be absolutely true if the thrower swallows
some ground-up quartz-crystal.
110. ( for success in hunting , fishing). —At Cape Bedford a piece of quartz-crystal coiled up in
hair or grass, so that no one can see it is carried about by anyone who wants to have luck in hunting
and fishing. The crystal is supposed to be a bone, or part thereof, of a man, is usually found on old
burying grounds, and is to be looked for during the night time : the bamboo or wooden handle to which
the quartz is often attached is hollow, and supposed to be filled with human blood taken at night out of
a living person (Fig. 14). Among these same natives anyone who carries about with him a piece of
human ham-string (wrapped up usually in bark) is sure to have luck in hunting. On the Proserpine
River the hunter would, while warming various of his knick-knacks in his hand over the fire, talk to them,
and tell them to get him fish or game, etc.: these curios, carried in a little dilly-bag under the left
arm-pit, consisted of knuckle-bones, knee-caps, bits of kidney-fat, etc., believed to have been removed, at
night, from the bodies of his enemies. The blood extracted from a doomed person at Cape Grafton
brings luck to the fishermen when smeared on the canoe or wommera (sect. 143).
HI.- ( for making dogs good hunters). —On the Bloomfield, if the owner wants his dog to become
an expert tip-top hunter, he will rub him over each morning with a piece of quartz-crystal (Fig. 15).
112. Charm for driving mosquitoes away. —A charm for getting rid of mosquitoes on the
Batavia River is made in the shape of a man 3 or 4 feet long, tied to a thin withe, on identical lines with
the arrangement whereby a human body is suspended to a transverse pole, during the drying stage,
preparatory to cremation. This figure, known as Nguru, is made of grass, and is represented with a huge
nasal organ, through which a nose-pin is passed ; the eyes are indicated by pieces of pipe-clay on which
large charcoal pupils are painted; while the head is decorated with a few cockatoo feathers (Fig. 16).
At night, when the mosquitoes are worse than usual, this figure is carried by two people, after the same
fashion as a corpse, in front of the entire camp, in procession, to some considerable distance in the bush,


at a spot where a fire has been alrea ly lighted. The men, women, and children constituting the procession
keep up a terrible din and noise, waving and gesticulating with their arms at the same time. As soon
as the fire is reached, Nguru is thrown into the flames, and the entire crowd of people makes a rush back
for the camp. The Rev. N. Hey tells me that on the last occasion this method was tried it proved
successful.
On the Tully River, certain individuals can make the mosquitoes put in an appearance (sect. 72).
113. Disease and Accident: Produced by an enemy dooming the victim.—
The person inflicting the doom is considered more culpable than the one committing the actual
physical violence or visible ill. —The very large majority of accidents, ills, and diseases to which man is
subject are wilfully produced by enemies of his, living or dead. An individual can thus be “doomed”
to be bitten by a snake, struck by lightning, killed by a falling tree, injured by running a thorn into his
foot, inflicted with some vile disease, or pierced with a spear. The snake, lightning, spear, etc., are not
so much to blame for the visible consequences : they only put the finishing touches, so to speak, on the act
of doom. Occasionally a whole tribe is held responsible, as in the case of coughs and colds in winter-time
on the Tully River: the red streaks in the sky at sunset indicate the direction where the tribe which sends
these complaints resides. It is this same superstition which makes the spread of venereal disease amongst
the natives so difficult a matter to check. The aboriginal of the unsettled districts does not know that
syphilis is due to sexual connection or other sources of contagion, the long incubative stage of the disease
going far to render such ignorance quite intelligible to us Europeans. Husband and wife thus continue
to cohabit, even during the worst stages of the disease, and quite satisfied, when one or other is at last
infected, that they have been “doomed” for the coinplaiut at the hands of an enemy by means of
witchcraft (sect. 133).
Thanatomania. — Should the invalid be restored to health too speedily, he has no means of discovering
the enemy who has done him mischief; neither does he then trouble himself about finding out, but rather
comes to believe that he must have got sick through his own fault, and has therefore only himself to
blame (sect. 150). He may even have tried some of the remedies approved of and utilised in the latter
class of cases, and it is only when he has found them of no avail, his complaint to be getting worse, and
himself becoming weaker, that after a certain length of time—varying more or less with the idiosyncracy
of the individual-—he satisfies himself that he is doomed. He accordingly takes various steps to withstand
the doom, and discover his assailant, etc. (sect. 148), but usually and finally seeks the assistance of a
medicine-man to help him withstand the effects of the charm, talisman, etc., whatever it may be (sects.
127-143), that is causing the mischief; and should no improvement manifest itself, he may give up hope,
and deliberately lie down to die (sects. 147 c, 148). In the course of my professional experience out in the
western districts, five or six of such cases of Thanatomania have come under my personal notice,
a strange one being that of a fairly educated half-caste in the Government postal service. Similar
instances are recorded, on the one hand, by Spencer and Gillen from Central Australia, and on the other,
by Mr. T. Petrie, in the early Brisbane days. The most curious of which the latter informed me was the
following : —Jimmy, an old servant of his, whom he had been treating off and on for a long time past for
a sore throat, came back from his “ walk-about ” to say that he was going to die, and would be dead
in three days, at the same time giving directions as to the disposal of his skin and body. Petrie, of
course, laughed at him, gave him medicine, thought nothing more of the matter, and as usual, had him
sleeping on the premises. On the third night, he asked to be allowed to go down to the camp, and Petrie
acquiesced, but was terribly surprised when he learned next morning that poor old Jimmy was lying dead
there.
114. The condition of being doomed —KYl. Wondor, KI7G. Kanji-i, etc. —is recognisable by
certain strange traits in the victim’s character or demeanour. Tnus at Cape Bedford, in 1899, a man
was explaining to Rev. Schwarz how that a fortnight before his step-son’s death by spearing he knew
there was something radically wrong, that his step-son in fact was “ wondor” because, when out fishing,
the deceased continued paddling his canoe longer than was necessary and, when in camp, he replied to
questions with unsuitable answers. What is supposed to actually happen to the victim when doomed,
varies in different localities. Eor instance, at Boulia, he is deprived of his blood which is replaced by a
bone, or pebble, etc. (sect. 144): on the Pennefather River, his blood is made bad (sect. 136) : on the
Upper Georgina River his belly is ripped open or his throat cut (sect. 129) : on the Tully River, a rope
is inserted just below the Adam’s apple somewhere into his chest (sect. 141): at Cape Grafton he is
choked when asleep, tongue and blood removed, and a bone splinter pierced above each nostril into his
head (sect. 143) : at Cape Bedford, he is hit with a stick, his head cut off and put on again, his neck
twisted, or his ham-strings cut: at other places, a piece of spear, splinter, bone, or quartz-crystal, etc., is
put in his “ inside ” through an invisible wound. All these superstitions have an important bearing in
explaining the various courses pursued in combating the evil thus maliciously inflicted, or in discovering
its source of origin when fatal consequences ensue. We must not, therefore, be surprised to find cases
recorded where in serious spear-, boomerang-, or waddy-wounds, the medicine-man will make-believe to
extract a crystal, or when dealing with burial-customs to learn that haruspication and similar practices
are in vogue.
I am informed (by Mr. M. Haskett) that in the neighbourhood of Macdonnell a person may be
doomed against his will to commit crime on another : he will perhaps spear his victim and, when
challenged by the tribe, will plead that he was in the condition of puri-puri, i.e., that he was involuntarily
forced to do it {cf. the condition of wu-tchi, sect. 116).
115. The doom may be inflicted by living people , with or without the assistance of spirits of people
deceased. The enemies capable of dooming others to suffer the various accidents and ills that are met
with throughout life’s journey are either living men, spirits of persons deceased, or nature-spirits. It is
an interesting fact that many of these nature-spirits —in the few instances that I have had the oppor-
tunity of discussing the subject with natives who were able to render themselves sufficiently intelligible—
are originally derived from the bodies of dead people, i.e., from spirits that have taken to the solitudes of
the mountain or forest. The living men professing to indulge in these practices either assume or are
taught the mysteries of their craft, and may for the present be spoken of as medicine-men or doctors


(sect. 117-126). They may act with or without the agency of these spirits, who are apparently in such
cases subservient to them, or influence certain animals (sect. 115) —even various physical forces
( e.g ., rain, thunder, etc.) —to carry out their wishes. On the Mclvor River, medicine-men are actually
named after a nature-spirit (sect. 120).
116. The doom may he inflicted by spirits independently. —On the other hand, not a few cases are
known to me where the spirits can practice their occult powers independently of the medicine-men.
Along the Tully River, a swollen hand or foot (with no physical cause assignable) is due to the Koi or
Ku-inggan, i.e., male or female spirit, of some long-dead enemy having returned and scratched those
particular parts at night time: in this district also, Koi, etc., will punish the blacks for going
about alone (sect. 65). Among the Pennefather River blacks, if an accident should befall one near a
certain tree, that tree would never be cut down : the cho-i or ngai (spirit of person deceased) who
purposely caused the mishap might be in hiding there, and he would be sure to have his revenge. At
Cape Bedford the Avau-wu (spirit) of a dead person will come back and take another person out of the
same tribe, sometimes a relative, and rush away with him, holding him by the wrist and pulling him on
as fast as he can go, until he falls down from sheer exhaustion. Though his friends know that he is
being rushed along by the Avau-wu,they cannot see the latter. Sometimes the individual so “possessed”
—now known as wu-tchi —is pulled up a sloping treo or up some steep incline, but wherever he falls,
there he remains until his friends, following close upon his heels, bring him back. Rev. Schwarz has
himself seen such a case, the individual possessed having a strange, wild look about him, and labouring
apparently under great mental excitement {of. condition of puri-p iri, sect. lid). On the Bloomfield,
certain diseases and other impending physical disasters are ascribed to spirits, Marunji, friendly Avith
certain individuals {e.g., medicine-men and some of their followers), but at enmity with others: those
who reckon these spirits as friends will ward off the impending danger by the exposure of anything red :
those who consider them enemies Avill hide any such colours out of sight. There is also a nature-spirit
here, Y irru, living in the ground. The older men to whom the country originally belonged will give out
that certain tracts of it are “ yirru,” with the result that if any females or males (other than themselves)
eat or camp there, or disturb the soil in any Avav whatever, this spirit will punish them with grievous
sores, etc. Indeed, near Baird’s selection (Connemara) in one of the waterfalls is said to be a large
rock which travels up and down the foaming cataract: this particular stone is believed to be Yirru in a
visible form Avho can inflict diseases of all kinds. There are one or tAvo similar rocks in the Endeavour
River at the 8-Mile (Cooktown) Native Police Camp. In the Cloncurry district any sudden disappearance
(which Europeans would probably speak of as murder and concealment of the body) is credited to
Mokipiango, a nature-spirit living underground in the seclusion of the mountain fastnesses. This bogie is
something like a blackfellow in appearance, but has some very long teeth Avith which he can easily bite
through a man’s neck: he drags his victim into the pit and eats him. The natives of the same district
believe that mental disease is due to a spirit known as Daipanganya. Karnmari, the nature-spirit in the
form of a huge Avater-snake, is the one who drowns people (sect. 101) in the Boulia district. On the
Palmer River, all diseases which do not admit of cure by any method, are ascribed to the machinations
of a spirit in the shape of an eagle-hawk, the son of some medicine-man, who has taught him all about
these things. This scamp of a son even in daylight —when he is as invisible as he is at night—will get
up into a high tree, and slinging his spear, stupefy his victim, and while in this condition will pick out
his throat-strings, remove the fat from his body, the flesh from his arms and calves, and yet leave no
outward visible wound: the victim dies rotten (probably of syphilis or phthisis). Spencer and Gillen,
(“ Native Tribes of Central Australia,” p. 533), speak of tribes where the medicine-men can and often
do assume the form of eagle-hawks.
117. Medicine-men : {their poivers). —No “ doctors ” attend specially on the sick, the charge of all
such being left to individual caprice, e.g., a Avoman looks after her husbaul, a mother after her child.
Nor do they specially prescribe, the knowledge—where known at all—of the therapeutical value of any
plant, of massage, etc., being common to the tribe. All that the medicine-men can professionally do is to pro-
duce {i.e., wilfully cause) or cure accident and disease: sometimes by means of chants and dirges (sect. 127),
or effigies (sect. 128),but most commonly by inserting or removing the magic pebble, bone, spear-tip,crystal,
(Pigs. 17-18), or other charm Avith which their graduation or reputation is so intimately associated. As
already mentioned, they can also control the forces of nature (storm, wind, rain, etc.), and may
derive assistance from the blood of their victims (sect. 113), from the spirits of persons
deceased (sect. 68), and from nature-spirits.
118. {their graduation) . —The graduation, initiation, or assumption of occult powers by the medicine-
men varies in the different districts. In the country around Boulia the individual will leave camp for three
or four days, and subsist only on bushes, etc. —that is, he practically starves himself: he gets more or less
“ cranky” and when in that condition sees a nature-spirit called Malkari, who is pleased to make him a
medicine-man by inserting certain small pebbles, bones, quartz-crystals, etc., in his insi 'e. This is the
most ordinary method. Other doctors obtain their powers through the instrumentality of Karnmari, a
nature-spirit in the form of a water-snake (sect. 101) : —Supposing that a man be fishing at the water side,
Karnmari may point at him a mangani or death-charm (sect. Ill), of course at such distance and under
circumstances that he neither sees nor recognises what is taking place. By and by, as the night-shades
begin to fall, he sees the dreaded monster undulating along upon the surface of the water, and runs as
fast as his legs will carry him to camp, where he recounts what has taken place. That night he goes to
rest as usual, but in the morning he feels sick. The sickness continues and he becomes worse and worse.
In from four to five days after the attack lie is attended by a medicine-man who removes from the patient’s
inside, by a process to be subsequently described, the identical pebble, bone, crystal, etc., that Karnmari
put there, Avith the result that the individual recovers and becomes a doctor himself. This same pebble,
etc., so extracted may be further utilised by a medicine-man inserting it in another novice, and making a
fellow-practitioner of him : this procedure may be effected on the individual when he is, perhaps, but a
child, and as the years roll on he will suddenly blossom forth Avith all the poAvers peculiar to his
profession. The ghost, shade, or spirit of some one departed Avho haunts the graves of the dead, and
known as Moma to the Boulia blacks, can also initiate an individual into the mysteries of the craft. The
natives here call a medicine-man mangani-maro or kumbo-maro, i.e., possessor of the bone or pebble.


In the Cloncurry district it is Tengalagulau, a nature-spirit who, when people are in camp at night, can
be heard scratching on the timber and snapping off the branches, that teaches medicine-men their
profession. If this spirit is not convenient, or will not make himself patent, the individual who wishes
to graduate has to take a long, long journey all the way down to the Diamantina River to a certain
encampment of the Goa tribe, where he learns the art as follows : —Having made some suitable present
to his teacher, he is first of all put to death, next thrown into a water-hole for four days, and then taken
out on the fifth, when a number of fires are lighted all round him, and his body thus smoked quite dry,
with the object of getting all the water out, and so making him all right and alive again. He is then
shown how to use the mangani, and taught the (in this tribe) necessary song to sing with it, his success
in his profession being now assured. The Maitakudi here similarly speak of the medicine-man as a
mangani-buna or bone-possessor: the Kalkadun blacks of the Selwyn Ranges, etc., call him a tu-aran.
119. On the Pennefather River where the medicine-men (NGG. au-uto) as a special class are now
all defunct, they are said to have originally learnt their business at the grave-side from the spirits of
persons deceased. The Palmer blacks (KMI) call the medicoes alwai-ya.
120. Around Princess Charlotte Bay, the medicine-men are known as naiyunka (KWA.)
nganpo-yi (KRA), etc., but owing to ignorance of language, and absence of reliable interpreters, I was
unable to gather any more definite information than that these gentry were taught by a nature-spirit
called Aru-a (KWA) or Aro-unta (KRA), who is said to be identical with the Darnbun of the Koko-
yimidir blacks of the Mclvor River. Amongst the Cape Bedford blacks there are none of these individuals
graduating as a particular class, though we find certain old men assuming the powers of medicine-men,
and described by the special name of darnbun, the nature-spirit just mentioned. On the Bloomfield River
they are called ronya-ji (KYE), at Cape Grafton chichal-barra (KUG. —where chichal signifies a bone)
and on the Proserpine River warwinjala. Amongst the Tully River natives the doctors have the special
name of Ko-bi applied to them : they are apparently not specially trained for their work unless, perhaps,
by their parents on the quiet, because the power is hereditary here [as used to be the case at Brisbane,
sect. 121].
121. The idea of a medicine-man with supernatural powers manifested through a bone, pebble,
quartz-crystal, etc. (sect. 117), does not appear to have been originally confined to the Northern natives,
and the following notes, collected by me from Mr. Thomas Petrie, will give a very fair account of a
similar superstition (traces of which can still be gathered from other parts of Southern and Central
Queensland) entertained by the Brisbane blacks, now defunct, during the first years of European
colonisation. Nearly all aches, pains, and diseases were ascribed to the quartz-crystal in the possession
of some medicine-man (turrwan). This crystal gave its owner supernatural powers. The spirit (nguru)
of the turrwan used to put the crystal (kundri) into the victim, who could only be cured by getting a
medicine-man to suck it out again : thus, a medicine-man could make an individual sick even when he
was miles away, and “ doom” him, so to speak. This “dooming” meant being cut up into small pieces
and put together again: the spear, or other visible cause, was not to blame —it only completed the
deed. The crystal was allowed to be seen by the women, though it was always carried in the grass
dilly-bag (under the owner’s—a man’s —left arm-pit) and generally had a short length of opossum string
attached to it by means of bees’ wax. The medicine-men could swallow and vomit it up again. So great
was the native belief in this crystal that when Petrie once chaffed them about one of their medicine-men
being locked up in the convict cells, and taunted them about his not being able to get out, be was
informed that the prisoner only refrained from escaping through the key-hole, etc., because he did not
like to disappoint and insult his European captors : the blacks were quite satisfied that the individual in
question couid easily have secured his own liberty if he had wanted to. The crystal also gave the owner
power to dive into the ground and come out where he liked : this was how a certain black, when his
companions were shot by the native police on a particular occasion, at the head of the Pine River, was said
to have made his escape. Though quartz-crystal was obtainable in those days at the top of the present
Spring Hill (Brisbane) and various other places in the district, the special pieces which these turrwan
possessed were obtained from deep pools, creeks, etc., where they were dived for. Targan, the individual
who was responsible for the rainbow, vomited them out of his belly, and deposited them in such places :
the medicine-men knew where to dive for them, wherever the rainbow ended. In latter years, and
the crystals got scarcer, they came to be manufactured from the bottoms of broken tumblers. The
power of the turrwan, together with his quartz-crystal, was apparently handed down from father to son.
122. ( their status in the tribe). —In the North-Western districts, no matter the different
methods by which “doctors ” come to be what they are, all of these folk are co-potent: they can all not
only cure, but also produce, sickness according to procedures which will be subsequently detailed.
Beyond their occult powers in this connection the doctors, except for certain articles which they keep
about them, have nothing to distinguish them from other individuals in the camp : they engage in
similar pursuits, enjoy no extra rights, they marry, they may themselves get sick or die through similar
agencies. The certain articles which they keep about them are small pieces of bone (knuckle- or
artificially pointed), bits of pebble, quartz-crystal, pointed pieces of wood —anything indeed at all striking
or out of the common —the stock-in-trade of one medicine-man being as a rule distinguishable from that
of another. Their owner will show these gew-gaws as opportunities occur to other individuals and friends
(not women) who can see in them a sort of guarantee as to his genuineness and respectability, and when
the occasion arises can recognise to whom they belong. The doctors of the tribe may be on friendly terms
with one another, and consult among themselves when necessary as to whose blood has been, or is to be,
taken : i.e., the person who has been or is to be “ doomed.” At heart, nevertheless, they do not trust one
another: they are really a bad lot, and it is only a common fear which binds them together. Without them
the effects of the charm would be harmless, sickness and death would consequently gradually disappear,
and there would be a likelihood of the aboriginals living for ever. As a matter of fact, lay individuals are
usually afraid to tackle them : I only know of one instance where an outsider, my own black servant at
Boulia, dared point the mangani at a native doctor, the latter dying about a fortnight later.
123. On the Tully River, the medicine-men are respected, and the other blacks would not play any
tricks or larks on them, as they often do with any others in the camp.


124. ( their method of carryinq their credentials'). —The doctor’s stock-in-trade, charms, talismans,
etc. (sect. 117), i.e., his credentials, is in most cases carried in a specially-constructed dilly-bag, slung over
the left shoulder, and more or less concealed in the arm-pit.
125- W omen-Doctors. —In the North-Western districts, though a woman dare not handle or look
upon one of these charms, she sometimes knows and practises the “ trick ” of removing by mouth or hand
(sect. 148) the particular gew-gaw which is alleged and believed to have been inserted, and to be
prolonging the sickness, in the patient’s body. She may herself be a doctor’s wife, but on no account is
she ostensibly allowed to join in the secret deliberations of the other medical practitioners. If she
herself wishes to get possession of another woman’s blood she may prevail, if married, upon her husband,
or, if single, upon her brother to put her wishes into practical execution. Along both sides of Cape
York Peninsula, and all down the Eastern coast-line, even as far as Brisbane in the early days, it is the
woman who can suck out the bad blood from the patient by means of a rope or sucking-string
(sect. 156).
126. Difficulty of differentiating between truly-qualified medicine-men and quacks. Though it is
mostly the publicly-recognised medicine-men who pursue the following practices, there are other males
equally as sharp-witted who arrogate to themselves similar powers: to differentiate between the truly
qualified practitioners and the quacks is thus often no easy matter —and the difficulty is only increased
when one bears in mind that the effects produced by either class of individual are, for all practical
purposes, identical ! The mischief which these men may work —-work which is almost invariably carried
on at night time —can be described as follows :
127. Procedures employed in dooming a person : ( by chants and dirges). —Chants and dirges are
utilised not only for exorcising ailments (sect. 152), inducing sleep, etc., but also for producing various
sickness and diseases, blindness (sect. 79), etc. In some districts the actual wording of the anathema may
be quite simple, e.g ., “Kaka (w)una nundu,” of Cape Bedford (sect. 139) : in others, e.g., at Boulia,
the chants have been so handed down from one to another, both individually and tribally, that though
some of the lay as well as the professional members of the community know several of them by rote,
none of them understood their actual meaning. On the Tully River, one man will spit at auother, and
at the same time tell him what to do —to only emaciate and waste away, or to actually die: under the
latter contingency there is no help for the victim, no cure possible. Spitting indeed is a very serious
matter here, for when in quarrelling and losing their tempers, a man or woman expectorates on another,
the person spat upon invariably becomes sick and thin.
128. (by effigy). —On the Bloomfield River, a person can be doomed by making a rough wooden
effigy of him, and burying it in the ground, or by painting him on a “ roarer.” Portions of a person will
rot away if his effigy is depicted at Cape Bedford : the illustration (Pig. 19) shows a photograph of a
tree at the mission station on the northern side of the Cape, on which had been cut, some four years
previously, the shape of a woman, turned upside down : this represents the life-size effigy of his wife,
carved out by her husband in 1886, when she eloped with another man. [Both at Cape Bedford and
on the Bloomfield, an effigy means, in addition, the public ridicule of the person in question, and in the
main this was the reason of these aboriginals objecting to my taking sketches or photographs of them.
It is noteworthy that’on the Pennefather River an effigy serves a different purpose (sect. 105).]
129. (by imitating the action of throat-cutting, etc., with a charm). —The Pearl-Plate forms
another means of dooming a person by imitating the aet of cutting his throat and ripping up his belly.
It consists of a flat more-or-less triangular piece of pearl-shell with rounded angles, measuring from I|-
to 2 inches in its greatest length, from middle of base to the subtended angle to which some cement-
substance, with a piece of hair-twine is attached (Pig. 20). Brought by the Workai-a tribe of Northern
Territory into North-West Queensland—to Lake Nash and neighbourhood, it reaches on the one hand
the Kalkadun country (Selwyn Ranges, etc.), and on the other the Upper Georgina district.. The
Kalkadun who call this charm Chikaleri (the name apparently for pearl-shell) used to employ it far
more frequently perhaps than the mangani (sect. 144), and introduced it among the Cloncurry
natives who (in 1897) practised it with the same evil intent. Through the Yaro-inga, the blacks of the
Toko Ranges (west of Glenormiston country) also came to learn its uses. The procedure is for the
assailant to come, ordinarily at night time, as close as possible to his intended and unconscious victim, to
hold the charm by the cemented corner at arm’s length, and through the air, in the direction indicated,
make two horizontal and two vertical passes: the former is considered symbolical of the cutting
of the throat, the latter the ripping up of the belly-wall. The Toko Ranges aboriginals who
apparently attach great importance to this particular mode of injury take extra precautions lest any
innocent or harmless person be hurt by the too great extent of the horizontal sweep, and will therefore
hold up the other fore-arm to limit it: or again, with a similar precautionary view, the performer will
open his legs, tuck his head well down, and then put the charm into execution, the lower limbs limiting
the movement either to the right or to the left (Eig. 21).
130. (by burning his hair, urine, or excrement—in a charm or not). —The Koko-minni blacks of the
Palmer River employ an instrument known as Ti or Eti for injuring one another at a distance. It is
formed of a piece of human shin-bone (its lower portion usually) or if not procurable, a slip of bamboo,
the free end covered with cement, the whole wound round with twine, and enclosed in a Melaleuca bark
covering (Eigs. 22-23). Having placed some hair, urine, or excrement of the individual he wishes to
injure into this piece of bone or bamboo, he burns it and so makes his victim sick. (Both the specimens
which I took the opportunity of unwrapping were charred.) A medicine-man can effect a cure by taking
the patient’s spear and dilly-bag to the water-side where he leaves them to be devoured by a, super-
natural water-snake, Opo-ira, visible to himself only. He can also find to a certainty the direction
whence the ti came, by going out into the bush where he will throw certain charcoal-looking pellets into
the air in the direction of the four cardinal points: these will remain suspended in mid-air unless
thrown in the proper quarter where only will they fall to the ground. I was informed that these
pellets had been sucked by the medicine-man out of some other patient on a previous occasion. The
Proserpine River natives can make a man sick by burning his excreta (sect. 80).


131. (by touching him or his food, etc., with a charm'). —On the river below Palmerville in 1899 I
came across some examples of theMarra (Pig. 24), an elongate charm formed of lengths of opossum-string,
coloured red, and enveloped in tea-tree. It is not manufactured here, but brought from Union Camp (the
Hodgkinson), via, Limestone, and is evidently very much dreaded, because if it only touches the lower
posterior portion of the victim, or if only stirred in any water or food partaken of by him, it will cause him
to go incurably mad. At the Proserpine, the individual can be doomed by touching his food with the
sweat derived from the arm-pits, crutch, etc. (sect. 80) : or by placing woman’s hair in his dilly-bag
(sect. 77).
132. (by inserting a charm in his food). —There are a few charms which are believed to be
actually inserted in the food. An attempt at “food-poisoning” is thus made amongst the Pennefather
liiver natives, where the bark, fruit, or leaves of the Exocarpus latifolia, R.Br. (NGG. waranunuma) are
crushed up into fine particles and mixed with the victim’s food, which by and by kills him. These same
blacks are also said to use the crushed up berries of the lEgiceras magus, Gsertn. (NGG. ni-e) for a
similar purpose.
133. (by placing a charm in the ground —inhere he has been defalcating or micturating). —The
Proserpine River blacks can make an enemy sick by sticking into the ground, where he has been micturating,
a pointed splinter made from a human shin-bone, and burying it afterwards deep under where the victim
sleeps (sect. 134). The bone-pin or Chiruko of the Boulia natives is brought into requisition for producing
venereal and other cognate disorders, fatal or not, which otherwise are inexplicable : there is many an
aboriginal who has not yet learnt that these particular diseases are capable of transmission by sexual
connection (sect. 113). Besides being used in the Boulia district, the chiruko was (in 1894) employed by
the laro-inga along the upper Georgina River, and by the Kalkadun of the upper Leichhardt River and
the belwyn Ranges, though I only had Pitta-Pitta corroborative evidence for the latter statement : a slight
variation of it was certainly in vogue among the Maitakudi of the Cloncurry under the name of Ji-go. In
its ordinary form, the chiruko consists of a short emu-bone from 2to inches, filed to a point, or
perhaps the beak of the long-necked diver-bird, with a little spinifex-gum attached to its base. If placed
underground with the point up, but not visible, in the situation where the victim has been expelling one
or other of the products of the emunctories, he or she develops some form of venereal disease.
134. ( — or where he is likely to sleep). —lf the chiruko is similarly placed in the hut or wherever
else he or she be sleeping, it may cause such a disturbance of the general health as to result even
in death. The Maitakudi make their ji-go from a human arm-bone: it is of about the same size as the
chiruko, but with beef-wood (Grcvillea) gum at the blunt extremity, and when in use is hidden anywhere
underneath where the victim may be sleeping. Both chiruko and ji-go can be used’by the medical as well
as lay fraternity, but never by women. In all cases, the assailant may be discovered either by consulting
a medicine-man, or by revelation in a dream, subsequent retaliation being effected by similar means. As
soon as the implement is removed from out of the ground, the sick individual makes a speedy recovery.
The burying of the bone-splinter under the sleeping ground among the Proserpine River aboriginals
has already been mentioned (sect. 133).
At Pine Mountain, in the Broadsound district, the death-charm was a small bone-splinter placed
point upwards in the ground where the victim would be likely to sleep (W. 11. Flowers).
135. In the districts north of the Boulia, i.e., the upper Georgina River, upper Leichhardt
River, and Selwyn Ranges, and at Cloncurry, a white powder, somewhat the appearance of very fine
ashes, is placed anywhere in close proximity to where the victim sleeps with the object of killing him.
Ihe Workai-a people of Territory it seems are responsible for its introduction here, and
throughout the whole of the Boulia district, Noranside was the only place where I noted it. The
Maitakudi speak of this powder as Mau-ar*, and so that the performer should not injure himself by
contact, he sprinkles it where required from out of a mussel-shell. The same tribe also use a reddish
powder, Manggiili, with similar methods and design, but the exact composition of either material, which
unfortunately I was never allowed to see, is unknown to me. In the neighbourhood of Normanton, on
the other hand, a specimen of the white powder was found to be ground glass. There is suspicion that
this particular charm had its origin in the fact that in the stores of many of the western stations the
large quantity of strychnine—the poisonous properties of which many of the blacks had good reason to
appreciate was generally coloured with raddle to minimise the chances of accident.
138. (by pointing ' it at him). —On the Pennefather River the death-charm or om-bo consists of a
long thin bone-needle fixed into a wooden shaft—a spear in miniature. The bone from the emu’s or
human leg is considered more efficacious than any other. So long as the tip of the bone is not too finely
sharpened it can do no harm, but otherwise it has to be kept in a tree and well covered with leaves. It
is used at night, the operator (any man) pointing it at the victim, thrusting it slowly forwards with a
long forced expiration, and slowly retracting it with a corresponding inspiration: it is next buried under
a fire-place, whereupon the victim begins to pine away in a few days, his blood being made bad thereby.
If taken in time, he may sometimes be cured by the Erythrophlamm bark decoction (sect. 159). Another
pattern consists of three or four small bone-needles (Pig. 25) stuck into a longer handle: it works more
effectively, the victim even waking from out his sleep when being pointed at. It can also be used for
blinding a person at a distance (sect. 79).
137. (by inserting it in his body through a tvound, which immediately heals and leaves no visible
scar). On the (middle) Palmer River, at the Coen, and in other portions of the Peninsula, sickness is
due to some other boy having put a bone or wooden splinter into the patient. This may be done in broad
daylight, the implement being thrown in the direction of the victim, who neither sees nor feels its
entrance into his system. The bone-charm is a long, thin, pointed pencil, cut from a young man’s
shin-bone, the most potent material (Pig. 27 xbcd), or from a kangaroo (Pig. 27 e), or native-companion
(Pig. 2v fgh) bone: it is from 3to 6 inches long, the blunt end being covered with gum-cement. The
* Professor Spencer writes : “ This is evidently the equivalent of Mau-ia, a term used for various forms of evil
magic (amongst others a powder by means of which evil magic is carried) in some of the Central Australian tribes.”


generic term for any such bone-charm is mo-had (KMI) : each being further specialised, as mar-(a
young man’s), ngan-da-(a kangaroo’s), and ka-va-(a native companion’s) mo-kad. The patient may be
cured as follows:—The medicine-man will take some water into his mouth, suck the place which is
especially the seat of pain, etc., spit it out, take some more w 7 ater, suck away, and finally get the charm
into his mouth, sucking it so forcibly that he has to severely tap the back of his head before the implement
w 7 hich has done all the mischief is ejected through one of his nostrils. The bone thus removed is shown to
all the other boys, but neither they nor the doctor can recognise its proper owner: it is only the patient
who can do this, and by and by he retaliates on his w r ould-be assailant in similar manner. The wooden
splinters (Tig. 2G) at the Coen are believed to be spear-tips (of. sects. 139-140).
138. At Princess Charlotte Bay, all complaints of a serious nature, from malaria to syphilis, are
ascribed to the action of a particular charm (KWA, ngai-anga) formed of a pointed piece of human
fibula stuck with wax on to a reed spear. It is believed that when the spear is thrown in the direction
of the intended victim, the shaft remains in the hands of the thrower, while the bone splinter travels
across the intervening space, becomes lodged in the victim’s body —the wound immediately closing
without leaving a scar —and so causes sickness or disease. Any male can throw such a magic spear and
render it effective up to a distance of 25 or 30 yards. To get cured, recourse is had to the medicine-man,
who extracts the bone by one or other of two methods. After examining the patient, he sprinkles him with
w-ater out of the hollowed hand, massages him all over, especially on any extra painful spots, and is soon
able to recognise, both by day or night, where the charm actually is. This he sucks out, generally from
the back of the shoulders, or anywhere else that the patient cannot keep his eyes on, and the sleight of
hand brought into requisition is said to be very neat. Having once set eyes on this extracted bone-
splinter, the doctor can recognise its ownership, and consequently the individual w'ho threw it. It can be
easily understood that such a method will not always work successfully and satisfactorily, especially if
there is plenty of light about, and the by-standers are too close. Under these circumstances, the
medicine-man places the patient in position such that his feet point in the direction of a spear which he
has himself hidden at some considerable distance away. Dipping a leaf of the Ficus fasciculata into
some water which he, on this occasion, never touches with his hands, he sprinkles the water with it over
the patient, and thus drives the bone-splinter out of the sufferer’s body into the spear. He then goes to
where the latter has been placed, and extracts the bone from it at his leisure: i.e., when there are no
on-lookers.
139 At Cape Bedford, in case of sickness and speedy recovery, nothing more is thought about
it. But supposing there is a relapse, etc., and the patient gets pretty bad, it is believed that some one —
an enemy of his—has during the dead of night doomed him by hitting him on the head with a stick (so as
to account for the loss of consciousness), at the same time inserting a splinter or chip from a spear (sects.
137-140) or tomahawk in his body and then closing up the wound, so as to prevent the injury being
rendered visible, saying at the same time “Kaka (w)una nundu” (i.e., “sick be you”). Tortunately for the
patient, however, most of the old men understand how to extract this magic splinter. The sick person
for instance will leave camp, retire to a secluded spot, and catch some grass-hoppers : while engaged in
eating them, one of these medicine-men will follow him up, catch hold of him, see at once in'which
portion of his body the spear-tip lies, and pull it out with his hand. The doctor is able to recognise to
whom the spear-tip, so removed, belongs, will bury it in a swamp or throw it away in water, and the
patient of course recovers.
140. A similar belief of a spear-tip (sects. 137-139) prevails on the Bloomfield River. The medicine-
man will press the patient all over, and after what may be described as a kind of massage will swear that
he can feel a piece of spear-tip somewhere inside : this, by some legerdemain, he will either draw out by
suction, or else extract with a wommera. In the latter case he will locate the remnant of spear some-
where in the back of the patient’s shoulder, etc., and then getting a confederate to place the barbed end of
a wommera on the spot indicated where he keeps his hands, he tells him to give a pull —he does so, and
out shoots a piece of spear-tip. The onlookers all make a rush for this, and a consultation is then held
as to the ownership of this portion of weapon which they firmly believe to have been removed from
inside the sufferer. Of course some poor wretch, who has comparatively few friends, or who has been
making himself objectionable to the camp generally in one way or another, is pounced upon and made to
answer for it.
141. On the Tully River any long wasting disease, e.g., malaria, consumption, is due to Koi (the
spirit of a male deceased) having put a rope into the sick person at night. This rope or twine, MAL.
morakuru, is said to be made of bark-twine, either in one long piece or two tied together, and inserted
through the front of the neck, just below the Adam’s apple, somewhere into the chest. This rope is
invisible to all except the medicine-man (c/. Spencer and Gillen, op. cit., p. 531), who can remove it by
suction, generally on the same portion of the body, viz., on the left side of the upper belly, though
occasionally it may be got out of the shoulder (Tig. 28), knee, or ear. The procedure requires a shorter or
longer time. The doctor feels all over the surface first with his hands, and practises a kind of massage
whereby he is supposed to make all the rope collect at the one spot, over which he puts his hands, edges up,
and sucks in between them. He thus gets the rope out of the body into his mouth, and betaking himself
to a distance, spits it out, and either burns it, buries it, or puts it out of anyone’s reach. As might be
expected under the circumstances, neither the patient, his friends, or any on-lookers ever see this rope
so removed. On occasion, instead of employing suction, the medicine-man will remove the cause of evil
by a mere manipulation of the hands, apparently pulling, twisting, and tugging at the twine which nobody
but he can see. On the Proserpine River, the magic rope (tandilla) is also invisible to all except the
medicine-man, who uses it at night. At one end of the string is a pointed stick, used for prodding into
the victim s body to see that he is actually asleep: at the other is a loop which is thrown round the neck
and tightened. Of course, this alleged strangulation leaves no visible mark next morning.
142. [ln the old Brisbane days (sect. 121) it w r as the spirit (nguru) of the medicine-man who
took the quartz-crystal across space and placed it in the victim’s body. In any long illness, or with any
bad pains, the crystal would be sucked out by a doctor, and the patient declare he felt much better.
0


There was no massage, and the quartz would not be produced unless the medical-man was sharp enough
to see that the illness would have no fatal consequences. Near Rockhampton the medicine-man
would remove the piece of glass (bone, etc.) from the sick person by touching him with his spear, through
which it passed into his (doctor’s) hair, whence he produced it ( G . Lumholtz) .]
143. (by insertion similar to preceding methods, hut coupled with the simultaneous extraction of the
victim's life-blood: i. the Chichal). —At Cape Grrafton among the Kungganji, in the old days, the medicine-
men or chichal-barra used to doom their victims by choking them during sleep, piercing the head with a
bone-splinter (Chichal) plunged just above each nostril, taking out the tongue, and removing the life-blood
(kuna-oko). The victim was said to be in a state of Kanji-i, and would die three or four days later—
under no circumstances could he be cured. The life-blood, which was kept hidden amongst the roots of
certain trees, possessed definite properties in that: (L) if rubbed along the inside of a canoe, the
fishermen which it was carrying would have better luck, or if smeared on a wommera stuck up in the
sand close to the water’s edge, more fish would come out of the sea: (2) if drunk by the medicine-man
he would become more clever, and be enabled to fly over immense stretches of country: (3) if partaken
of by a woman, she would be permanently barren. It might be noted that the life-blood here cannot
control the condition of the victim from whom it has been removed, as in the case of the mangani to be
subsequently described (sect. 147).
144. (it. the Mangani: a. its manufacture and uses.) —Throughout the whole of North-West
Queensland including the adjoining upper and middle Diamantina districts, people are doomed to sickness,
accident or death by a charm known as Mangani (a bone of any sort at King’s Creek) or Kambo (a flint-
flake pebble, etc.) to the Boulia and Cloncurry natives, Watoko or Malta to the Kalkadun blacks, and
Kalka (a spear in the more Eastern districts) to the Wunamara (=Macgillivray’s Oonoomurra tribe in
“ Curr’s Australian Race”). The implement can be manufactured by the medicine-man, or any other male
individual, though were such a one to chance upon a specimen not his own property, he would wash and
destroy it in case of its ever being employed to his own detriment: in the case of a woman she would
immediately fall sick were she to touch or even look at it. For descriptive purposes, the charm
(Figs. 29-30) may be said to consist of a pointer (b) connected by twine (c) with an elongate cylindrical
receptacle (a). The pointer (PPT. teri, MIT. katebrina, or KAL. kungga i.e., any pointed withe, a
message stick), from 3 to 5 inches long, is made usually from one of the human fore-arm bones, or an emu
bone, ground down from the blunt extremity to a gradually tapering point: among the Kalkadun, the
sharpened end of this pointer is sometimes fashioned into the shape of a fish-hook (like the ullinha
described by Spencer and Grillen, op. cit., p. 536). The twine (PPT. winnimunnari, MI T. and KAL.
walkur) is made of human hair or opossum-fur, or both plaited together, and varies from 3 or 4 to as
much as 12 or 15 feet long: by means of cement-substance (beef-wood or spinifex) it connects the blunt
extremity of the pointer with the internal surface of the base of the receptacle. The receptacle (PPT.
tau-ali, MIT. and KAL. wobil) is generally formed of a piece of human arm- or shin-bone (Fig. 29) cut
to a length of 3or 4 inches and hollowed or scraped out so as to form a kind of cylinder. A human bone
however, though most appreciated for the purpose, is not always at the moment obtainable, and under such
circumstances may be substituted by a portion of kangaroo or emu leg-bone, a bit of bamboo-cane,
(Fig. 30) a piece of old gun-barrel, or a small sheet of tin-ware rolled on itself. One extremity, the base,
of this receptacle is closed in with the usual cement-substance, to which, passing down on the inside, the
connecting-string is attached. Though a layman can manufacture this death-charm, it is only the
medicine-man who has the power of using or “ pointing ” it successfully, a procedure which always takes
place at night. It is most important to bear in mind that when the apparatus is thus pointed, (a) one of
the doctor’s getv-gaws, a quartz-crystal, bone, pebble, etc., passes from the pointer through space into the
victim, while at the same time (b) the blood of the victim passes across space into the pointer and so along
the connecting-string into the receptacle. It is owing to the insertion of the crystal, etc., that the victim
contracts his sickness : it is owiug to the removal of his life’s-blood into the possession of the enemy that
the latter has absolute control not only over the victim’s present complaint, for better or for worse, but
also over his actions, welfare, etc., in the immediate future (sect. 147).
145. In the Boulia district the mangani charm is put into execution thus :If single-handed, and
he knows that he can get to within a short distance of his victim, the medicine-man fixes the cup or
receptacle of the bone-apparatus upright into the ground, while the pointer, resting along the cleft of the
big toe and second digit, is directed at the person selected, the connecting-string being held in the hand, and
never by any chance allowed to touch the earth (Fig. 31). Again, if single-handed, but the victim, owing
to the position of his hut, or the presence of others, cannot be approached at short distance, a longer string
is used : the receptacle is fixed to the stump of a tree, while the pointer, which is held in the position of rest
upon a forked stick firmly planted into the ground, is directed as required (Fig. 32). Of course it is always
advisable for the practitioner to work the mangani by himself, but sometimes if in doubt or unsuccessful
he may call in the assistance of other medicos : in the former case he can keep the transaction secret, or
between himself and his employer, in case he should not happen to be working on his own account,
whereas in the latter the evil business might leak out, the danger of such a contingency being, however,
counterbalanced by the fact that the full responsibility is now shared with others. Should
two of them be working the instrument, one holds the pointer, and the other the receptacle.
When three, four, or even perhaps five medicine-men are pointing the charm, one holds the
pointer, another the receptacle, while the remainder support the connecting-string, which under
these circumstances would be very much longer than the ordinary. Amongst those holding
the string there may be some intimate friend of the proposed victim, and he, by means
of a secreted flint, etc., will possibly secretly cut the twine while the performance is proceeding:
if, on re-tying the string, it again breaks (i.e., practically speaking, is purposely cut), the intended
victim is spared. Though the others may have a shrewd suspicion as to which of their mates
severed the cord, they find it wiser not to express any opinion publicly: they only recognise the fact that
whoever did it was afraid of expressing his convictions at the secret consultation held when it was
originally decided wdio the victim was to be. Under such circumstances the individual is spared for the
present, and someone else made the scape-goat. In the Cloncurry district the manner in which the
mangani is pointed by the Maitakudi doctor is similar. The receptacle is clutched between the two


knees, and the string held in the hand, while the pointer, directed in the proper quarter, is made to rest
upon a branch or stick lying on the ground (Fig. 33): in low tones, so as not to notify his presence, he
“ sings ” while pointing, but of the song he does not know the meaning. In the upper G-eorgina district, in
addition to working the charm by one or other of the above methods, the Yaro-inga medicine-man
“ shoots ” the pointer with a sharp push from the open palm of one hand, along the prongs of a forked
stick held in the other, into the direction required : his assistant, who has charge of the connecting-string,
pulls the pointer back again before it can fall to the ground.
At Bedourie, on the southern confines of the Boulia district, among the Ulupulu tribe, is met a
modification in the procedure of the mangani, known as waluka, which is believed to be similar in mode
and action, but can be employed between very great distances. Thus, one of the Bedourie men may
have a grudge against a Boulia black, and will tell a white or a blue crane, or even a pelican, to travel
the intervening space, and by “ pointing ” get his blood for him. Some days later, during the dusk of
evening, the victim sees one of these birds and throws a stick to drive it away, but the creature being
engaged on its own special business, will not budge for some little time —this very circumstance will
make the observer suspicious that evil is befalling him —indeed, it will not shift or fly back again until it
has collected a sufficient quantity of blood in the bone-receptacle. To make sure now that he really has
possession of his victim’s blood, the would-be assailant at Bedourie will send four or five other birds
again to Boulia in order to glean the necessary information as to whether the individual upon whom he
has sinister designs is sick or not: he is afraid to send the same bird by itself on the second journey in case
it should “gammon” him. This method of obtaining an individual’s blood, with the help of birds, is
considered far more potent than by a mangani with the assistance of human beings. [On the lower
Mulligan, etc., there is said to be an amulet which can withstand the effect of the mangani (sect. 154).]
146. Having by some one or other of the preceding methods obtained the required blood in the
receptacle of the mangani charm, the medicine-man puts into it the pointer, tip downwards, around the
exposed butt-end of which and the otherwise open mouth of the cylinder he fixes a quantity of cement-
substance, so as to completely seal it: outside the whole concern he wraps the connecting-string round
and round. Though he may swear to the presence and genuineness of the contained blood, it is difficult
to learn whether the doctor has inserted some of his own, or that of some animal, or, indeed, any at all:
he naturally takes every precaution, in maintaining the deception, to prevent anyone actually seeing what
he does enclose in it. On the other hand, the employer —the would-be assailant wants to satisfy
himself that he really has possession of his intended victim’s blood, and not that of some neutral who
may have been pointed at in mistake. In company, therefore, with the medicine-man who procured it
of course, waiting a few days for suitable opportunity, so as to avert suspicion he will leave the camp
after dark, and in some sequestered spot kindle a fire, over which they warm the death-charm with its
contents. Leaving the doctor to keep watch, he returns to camp, divulges his mission to no one, but
enters into conversation with his proposed victim on any ordinary everyday topic, watches most carefully
to see if he is at all sick or not, and may casually get him to admit that he is feeling a little
tired or is a bit out of sorts. This admission, simple as it is, constitutes ample proof that his
blood has actually been obtained and is now under control, but the visitor says nothing, though
he thinks a lot, continues the conversation on ordinary everyday topics, parts on apparently friendly
terms, and sneaks back to the medicine-man, whom he informs exactly as to what has taken place.
Supposing that the wrong individual’s blood has been caught, i.e., the wrong person pointed at,—and
this is judged to be the case when not the slightest sign of sickness is discoverable the medico breaks
open the top of the receptacle, which he rinses out, and washes well in water, so as to admit of its being
used again in another attempt.
14:7. (b. — Possession of the life-blood in the Mangani means absolute control over the individual fiom
whom extracted). —But if everything is satisfactory, and the blood of the individual required has been
really (as is believed) obtained, the one in possession has only to warm the death-charm again over t e
fire to make his victim more sick : to destroy it in the flames to make him actually die : or to rinse 1 m
water and rub fat of any description over it to put him all to rights again (cf. sect. 143). But more
than this, he can talk to the captive blood, and tell its late owner to become sick m a particular way, o
meet with a certain accident, e.g ., the fall of a tree, to be struck by lightning, to be killed by a snake, or
anything else ad libitum.
(c. — The victim of the Mangani can even be ordered to die from snahe-bite). Indeed, when a fatal
issue follows snake-bite, which apparently only rarely happens, and in such cases the purely natura
cause and effect are not reconciled, the death-charm throughout the whole Boulia district is blameable as
a matter of course. It is believed that when the patient’s blood is originally caught iu the charm, the
medicine-man seals up with it a small snake which is told what to do : and that the apparatus is
finally smeared with fat. The predestined victim may depart as usual on some hunting expedition, and
become fully occupied in the excitement of the chase, when he suddenly feels something at Ins leg or
foot, and sees a snake just in the act of biting him. Strange to say, this particular kind of snake wi
now immediately disappear: it does not crawl into the ground, or hide away under a tussock or s one
like any other common or ordinary snake would do, but actually vanishes into space. By this very
process of invisibility the person bitten recognises that some enemy has been pointing the mangani at
him, and that through this form of it he is sure to die: nothing can possibly save him. He ma es no
effort in fact to apply a remedy (sect. 164), loses heart, gives way, and lies down to die (sect. 113).
Supposing his wife to be present at the time of the occurrence, she will run back to camp as last as
possible and tell one of the doctors. The latter, from a careful cross-examination as to the nature of the
bite, the variety of the snake, and the condition of the patient, will soon gather all the information e
requires, and then glance up at the skies to see if Malkari is spitting or not: if he fails to recognise this
nature-spirit expectorating from above, he tells the poor woman that some mortal must have go er
husband’s blood, using this particular form of the mangani to effect his purpose, and that it is ltnpossib e
to save the patient’s life. Furthermore, the medicine-man referred to will, at some future time, tell er
who actually did the mischief, i.e., doomed her husband: when she knows this, she will tell her bro ers
and other kindred, who may then take the necessary steps to avenge the death.


148. (d . — The person doomed by the Manqani has the means of discovering his assailant). —The
patient at whom a mangani has been pointed, i.e ., the person doomed, is not without the means, in these
North-Western districts, of discovering his would-be assailant. He either consults a friend or relative,
who may possibly mention the name of some poor wretch upon whom he —the friend—may have a
“down,” or else sees the culprit in a dream, or, best and most satisfactory method of all, he takes the
advice of a medicine-man. After making some sort of a present, the latter is asked to discover the
assailant, and possibly the name may be divulged straight away. More often, however, the doctor is not
quite such a fool as to commit himself so readily, but exercises his power of removing from within the
patient’s body the actual pebble, crystal, bone, etc., which the w'ould-be murderer had got another
medicine-man to invisibly insert there. Having inquired where the bodily pains are most marked, etc.,
he sets about rubbing or massaging the affected parts, perhaps rinsing his hands in water at intervals.
He may also blow upon the patient’s chest, take some water into his own mouth, and spit it out again, and
may even apply his lips in the act of suction to that portion of the patient’s anatomy most complained of
{of. sect. 141). At any rate, in a short time he certainly contrives, by a kind of sleight of haud, to get
some pebble, quartz, etc., into his hand, or more usually into his mouth, which the patient, as well as
anyone else who may be present, implicitly believes he has managed to draw out from the part of the
body affected. The exact manner in which this bit of pebble, etc.,'which, as these natives firmly believe,
has been causing the mischief, is suddenly made to put in an appearance, is certainly very puzzling, even
to Europeans: at any rate there it is, and the sick individual, provided he has sufficient faith, may
accordingly feel better. If no improvement in his condition follows, he is quite resigned in the
knowledge that his case is hopeless, and he accordingly calmly waits for Death to release him (sect. 113).
Even if he should feel better, after the medicine-man’s treatment, he realises that his life nevertheless
remains in danger, owing to his blood having been caught and in the possession of his enemy. But how
is the enemy to be discovered ? Well, the particular crystal, stone, etc., thus apparently removed from his
inside must have been placed in the part complained of by some other and rival doctor. The present
consultant, therefore, examines it most carefully, and tells him to which member of the profession it
belongs—that is, who did the actual mischief : he says he will now try and discover the really guilty party
—the one who instigated the deed, the original employer, the one who caused him to be doomed. The
medicine-man is only regarded as the agent of the employer, and not as being in any way culpable : it is the
doctor’s livelihood to carry on these practices ; indeed, that is what he is here for —so why blame him?
In the meantime, the medicine-man has a private talk with his fellow-practitioners, and will suggest some
personally obnoxious individual, but the latter may have some friends at court, and the idea is scouted :
at all events, amongst themselves they secretly decide upon some individual who has perhaps been causing
trouble of one sort or another in the camp, and all agree in making him the scape-goat. When the doctor
returns to his patient, it is the name of this individual which he divulges as-that of the enemy who
originally made him sick. How the enemy is dealt with, it is sufficient for present purposes to state that
his blood is similarly caught; and now that each is equally in the power of the other, they either keep
out of each other’s way in mutual distrust, and finally either make friends, or else fight to a finish.
149. (e. — Comparison of the Mangani with other charms). —When first making inquiry into the
procedures connected with the mangani in north-west Queensland, I was very much struck with the
complexity of ideas which its orthodox manipulation entailed: indeed, it was not until after I had completed
many an investigation on similar matters in other districts that I recognised in this highly-developed
form of charm several remarkable resemblances to superstitions commonly accepted elsewhere. Taking
each constituent of the mangani separately, I would accordingly draw the reader’s attention to the more
important of these analogies:—
(«) The bone-pointer—
A charm complete by itself : as a wooden spear-tip at Cape Bedford (sect. 139), Bloomfield
(sect. 140): as a bone-pin on the Proserpine (sect. 133), at Pine Mountain (sect. 134),
Palmer and Coen (sect. 137), Boulia (sect. 133) : a miniature spear on the Pennefather
Biver (sect. 130). Erom the fact of the pointer thus originally indicating a spear, the
projection-forwards movement (sect. 136, 144, etc.) is rendered intelligible in the same way
that where the instrument of death represents a knife, as in the Pearl-Plate (sect. 129), the
movement is vertical or horizontal.
(b) The (human-hair or opossum-fur) connecting-string—
A charm complete by itself in the marra of the Hodgkinson (sect. 131), the “ invisible” rope of
the Tully and Proserpine (sect. 141) : the sucking-strings (sect. 156) and ligatures (sect.
155) for alleviating sickness : the medicine-man’s hair (sect. 142) into which the pebble,
etc., from the sick person passes per medium of a spear.
(c) The bone (or bamboo) receptacle —
A charm complete by itself in the Ti or Eti of the Palmer (sect. 130) : the luck-charm of Cape
Bedford (sect. 110), Princess Charlotte Bay (sect. 109), etc.
(d) The extracted life’s blood —
Has no control over victim from whom extracted, but has special properties (sect. 143). The
treatment of this in the mangani by fire, etc,, is similar to that, with similar purpose,
applied to hair, urine, excrement (sect. 130) : in this connection, note also the insertion of
the bone-pin in the place of defsecation (sect. 133).
( e ) The inserted quartz-crystal, etc. —
A charm complete by itself at Cape Bedford (sect. 110), Bloomfield (sect. Ill), Brisbane (sect.
142), Cape York (sect. 109), and elsewhere: believed to be a bone at Cape Bedford (sect.
110) : obtained from the inside of a medicine-inan at Boulia (sect. 118), Brisbane (sect.
121), etc., or nature-spirit connected wuth water at Boulia (sect. 118) : connected with rain
at Roxburgh Downs (sect. 19), or a rainbow at Brisbane (sect. 121).
(f) The method of suction for removing the latter —
Similar to that on Tully River (sect. 141) : cf sucking-string (sect. 156), etc.


150. Disease and Accident: Produced by the Victim’s Own Fault. — Directly
due to disobedience of certain rules of conduct, breaking of" tabu,” etc. —All sickness and accidents which
are not ascribable to wilful damage at the hands of an enemy, are referred to the individual’s own fault,
either directly or indirectly. Disobedience to certain accepted rules of conduct, the breaking of “ tabu,”
the neglect of certain recognised precautions, etc., are all productive of ills for which the sufferer has
only himself to blame. Thus, if a Boulia black wdll rape unprotected females in the bush, he must take
the consequences, and put up with his blindness (sect. 79) : if a Tully Diver native persists in walking
about the scrubs by himself alone, as he is continually being warned not to do, he cannot be surprised
that Koi (sect. G 5) has punished him, when he begins to feel sick a day or two later : if a Pennefather
Diver black cut down a tree where Cho-i is believed to be in hiding, the latter will be sure to have his
revenge (sect. 116) : if a Bloomfield aboriginal will camp in the neighbourhood of a Yirru (sect. 116) he
must put up w'ith the consequences—some grievous sores. So, again, in the breaking of “tabu,” if the
individual wilfully speaks of the name referring to someone deceased, he will have to abide by the result
and submit to any mischief which the spirit of such person thus called upon may inflict: if he
purposely eats certain forbidden dietaries—well, let him put up with the consequences. By neglecting to
take proper precautions for preventing urine being burnt (sect. 80), is it matter for wonder that he
becomes troubled with sore eyes, or with ulcers elsewhere ? If he neglects the warning (sect. 74), who
but himself alone is to blame if he is caught by a snake or a crocodile ? An old Tully Diver man
candidly admitted to me that the sickness from which he was suffering was due to his neglect in not
looking properly after a corpse which had been placed in his charge.
151. Indirectly due to the actions of bis children or parents. —Certain ailments indirectly referable
to the individual himself are explicable through the actions of his children or his parents. He may
suffer grievous sickness by his child pointing at its own shadow, etc., in the moonlight (sect. 5).
Any congenital deformity is due to his mother having been told to get pregnant by the wrong person, or
to her having eaten some forbidden dietary during pregnancy (sect. 95). It was his own fault that
before getting into his mother’s womb he fell over a log (sect. 83). To account for “growing pains,”
any continued weakness, etc., his poor mother is blamed for not having looked after him properly when
a child, e.g , neglecting to put his excrement out of harm’s way (sect. 80), burying the navel-string too
soon, i.e., before he could walk (Pennefather Diver), omitting to rub him properly over with charcoal
after birth (Cape G-rafton), etc. [ Of '. Naming of children after deformities, etc., in their parents:
sect. 71.]
152. Various remedies , medicines, etc., are resorted to. —Now it is to combat all such diseases and
infirmities as are not wilfully produced by witchcraft, doom, etc., at the hands of an enemy, that certain
remedies —chants, amulets, ligatures, sucking-strings, medicines, lotions, etc. —are had recourse to. It is,
nevertheless, true that all complaints with which mankind is afflicted may be treated on one or other of
the following lines, and it is only when the treatment ultimately fails that the true cause of the disease
is discovered, the action of the particular charm recognised, and the aid of the medicine-man, etc.,
called in (sect. 148, etc.).
153. a. Chants. —The use of chants and dirges for curing ailments has already been drawn attention
to (sect. 127).
154. B. Amulets, in a true sense, have so far only been met with in the western districts. A rather
rare one, the Manda-kuya (cf. manda = to kill with a mangani, kuya = stone or stone-knife) is of a
flattened spindle-form, about 5 or 6 inches long, made of emu feathers which, after being placed
lengthways and bundlewise, are wound round and round w r ith opossum-string, and then coated all over
with red-ochre grease : a slender piece of bone of some sort is occasionally enclosed in its centre.
Originally, in the olden days throughout the Boulia district, this was used as a sign of good faith to be
forwarded to some other friendly tribe wdiose assistance was required in fighting a common enemy : in
those times there was but one of them in each camp, and the privileged individual used to wear it on his
chest, over which it wouid hang by means of a string passing round the neck. Subsequently this Manda-
kuya came to have remedial properties attributed to it, and, worn in similar position, has been gradually
imitated and supplanted by the more common woraka.
This Woraka (Digs. 34-35) is more rounded than the preceding, and accordingly can be described as
cigar-shaped: it may similarly be painted entirely red, or else in transverse bands of red and yellow
alternately. Worn over the chest it is used to relieve obscure pains, a troublesome cough, etc., and, as
a survival, may still be utilised for collecting aid in case of warfare. The woraka, its Boulia district
name, is known as Yuleri by the Kalkadun, who also manufacture it; indeed, it is believed to have been
introduced originally to the latter by their Northern neighbours, the Workai-a.
The Minma, Mintara, or Maltara, consists of a bundle of emu-feathers, either tied up loosely with
opossum-string or enclosed in a curved spindle-shaped net (Dig. 36) tied on anywhere where pain may
be : for instance, over the fore-head for head-ache, round the belly for stomach-ache, etc. It is met with
among the Boulia blacks, as well as north of them in the Kalkadun country.
[Along Eyre’s Creek and the lower Mulligan, the effects of the mangani charm are stated
(C. P. Rich) to be counteracted by a particular form of circlet (Dig. 37).]
The exposure of colours wflth the object of averting certain impending dangers (sect. IL6) might
again be noted here.
155. c. Ligatures of human-hair, opossum-fur, or occasionally fibre-twine, are very commonly
employed in any forms of pain or sickness. In the early Brisbane days (T 7 . Petrie) whenever a person,
male or female, was out of sorts, an opossum-string was tied round the wrists and ankles. In the Boulia
district, and on the Palmer, human-hair twine is similarly tied on anywhere, arms or legs. Among the
Keppel Islands, in the Dockhampton district, and at Princess Charlotte Bay, the human-hair string is
tied tightly on the particular spot wherever the injury or pain is supposed to be: e.g., round the fore-
head for headache, round the belly for stomach-ache. (The hair-cord used on Keppel Island is quite
three-eighths of an inch in thickness.) On the Palmer Diver, in place of hair, the Koko-minni may employ
twines made from the Acacia leptocarpa, Acacia lysiphloea, and Sterculia diversifolia for similar purposes :


fo again, the natives of the Tully Eiver use strips of lawyer-cane {Calamus), pieces of bladey-grass
(Imperata), etc., for tying round any painful portions of the limbs, while the Cape Bedford blacks use
the Xerotes longifolia specially for tying up sores and abscesses on the arms and legs. E. Palmer says that
the inside bark of tbe Eucalyptus pruinosa, Schau, is “ stripped, wound round the chest and body very
tightly, and damped with water for pains, rheumatism, etc., the sufferer sitting down in water at the
same time.”
156. D. Sucking-strings. —On both coasts of the Peninsula, and along the entire eastern sea-board as
low down as Rockhampton (even Brisbane in the old days), the custom prevails of sucking out the alleged
bad blood by means of a human hair, opossum-fur, or fibre-twine. The practice is generally confined to
the women, and varies but slightly in different localities: —On the Pennefather River where it is specially
employed for relieving pain, and tied round the part affected, the free extremity of the cord is rubbed
(Fig. 40) across the woman’s lower lips (behind the teeth) from side to side until they begin to swell and
bleed: this bad blood which is believed to actually come from the invalid is then spat out. With such energy
and determination is the performance gone through that the poor gin’s mouth will often be in a terrible
state for weeks after. The hair-rope is manufactured by women only, and has sometimes woven into it the
gaily-coloured feathers of the blue mountain-parrot the NGG. name of which is Mandenuto, and hence
the string (Fig. 39) is often called by the same perm. The sucking here is always done by females:
if a man is sick, by his sister, or in her absence by his mother: if a child is ailing, the mother does it.
The bad blood alleged to have been removed is, in the case of males, spat into a shell, and thrown into a
creek, swamp, or other water: in the case of females it is buried in an ant-hill. At Cape Bedford, the
sucking-string is made of kangaroo- or wallaby- hair, and has the special name of Dorlkun applied to it.
On the Bloomfield River some of the old women, or some of the “ doctors,” will take a piece of bark
twine attached to the one extremity of a spindle-shaped piece of beeswax, the other part being stuck or
held on by the patient to that portion of his body which he considers most affected : the operator then
takes the free extremity of the string in his mouth and with both his hands rubs it briskly from side to
side over the lower lip, behind the teeth, until the blood comes, and then spits it out. He takes some
water into his mouth, and after a time expectorates more bloody froth. Sometimes both ends of the string
(Fig. 38) are attached each to apiece of bees’wax : in such a case, both ends are held or placed alongside
the painful spot by the patient himself, the old woman or the medicine-man “ drawing ” the blood with the
centre of the string. At the Proserpine, the string (Kupara) was made from bark, and sucked by women
only. Throughout the whole Rockhampton district, from Marlborough on the north to Miriam Yale,
below Gladstone, on the south, as well as on the outlying Keppels, sickness of various kinds and degrees
is relieved by tying the twine (made of Acacia, etc.) round and round the patient’s breast and chest, a
woman sucking at its free end as before, and spitting it out. At Brisbane (T. Petrie) it was an opossum
string that was wound around the patient’s (male or female) body, and a bark' trough, etc., with water,
into which the old woman spat: she continued the treatment until the liquid became quite bloody.
157. e. Inorganic, remedies. —Swamp-mud, NGG.mbru-i, is eaten for stomach-ache by the
Pennefather River natives. In the Boulia district, huge clay or mud pills, one or two at a time, are
prescribed for diarrhoea : these pellets are at least twice the size of pills seen at any pharmaceutists. Salt
water is drunk by the coastal blacks around the mouth of the Tully as a cure for coughs and colds.
158. e. Animal preparations. —Green ants and their larvae constitute a very common remedy
everywhere when anyone feels out of sorts with anything from diarrhoea up to coughs and colds : these
insects may be eaten raw or after preparation (Roth : Bulletin No. 2, sect. 10). Drinking the oily mess
derived from boiling a young sting-ray’s liver with water, in a melo shell, is considered a cure for
constipation on the Pennefather. Human blood throughout North-Western Queensland may be drunk
in various obscure affections : it can also be employed externally (sect. 160). Certainly in the Boulia
district, after the multi-copulation of the young female, during the first initiation ceremony, the seminal
fluid obtained from her is collected into a wooden trough, mixed with water and drunk as medicine:
should there be no sick fellows in camp it may be preserved in the vessel until required. On the Palmer,
the Koko-minni employ seminal fluid externally (sect. 160).
159. g. Vegetable preparations. —The following is a list of plants believed to have remedial
properties: as it has been found convenient, for reference purposes, to include in it certain plants used
externally, the latter are distinguished by an initial asterisk :
* JEgiceras majus, Gsertn.—Leaves squeezed or boiled, and the juice or fluid dropped in the ear
for ear-ache (for females only). NGG, ni-e. Pennefather River.
[The bark has an extremely nauseating acrid taste, which, according to Dr. T. L. Bancroft, is due to a
saponin which is present in a large quantity.— J. H. Maiden .]
* Alphitonia excelsa , Reissek. —Leaves laid on the eyes when sore. NGG, au-na. Pennefather
River.
Alsophila australis. —The stalks of the young leaves of this tree-fern are roasted and eaten as a
tonic after any form of sickness. MAL, kalojo. Tully River.
* Andropogon bomhycinus , R. Br.—Whole plant is soaked in water which is thus made to smell,
when it is washed into sore eyes. KMI, anga-ina. Palmer River.
[Most of the Andropogons have aromatic roots, and are thought by uneducated people to have medicinal
properties.— J.H.M.']
* Barringtonia racemosa , Gaudich.—On the Bloomfield River the bark is hammered and dipped
into boiling water, and dabbed all over the sick person. Used in non-venereal stricture.
{R. Hi slop.)
[ln India an extract or juice is obtained from the leaves of the H. acutangula, G-sertn., which, when mixed
with oil, is used in native practice foreruptions of the skin. — J.11.M .]
Calamus caryotoides , Mart.— On the Bloomfield River, the young shoots, when eaten, are believed
to cure head-ache. (JR. Hislop.)


'* Calophyllum inophyllum, Linn. —Nut broken, kernel triturated with red pigment on stone, mixed
with water, and then rubbed all over patient’s body, especially where pain is. KUG,
balpuro. Cape Grafton.
[The oil is used in India as an application in rheumatism, etc. Dymock in his Materia Medica of W. India
says the natives gather the greenish resin and hence must consider it of medicinal value, although he has been
unable to ascertain its value. — J.11.M .]
Canarium australasicum , F. v. M. —Its very resinous bark is put into water where it is rubbed
and broken up so as to form a milky solution : after removal of the solids, the fluid is
drunk for diarrhoea and stomach-ache. NGG, atamba. Pennefather Piver.
*Capparis überiflora , P. v. M. —The reddish outer bark of the root is scraped off, the resulting
shavings being then soaked in water. The mixture is used for dabbing on to sores and
scratches on the legs. NGG, drortara. Pennefather Piver.
\lolanisia viscosa, DC I ., also belonging to the Capparidese, is used by the aborigines to cure head-ache (Mr. II-
W. Stone, quoted by Mr. Bailey) : it is also used in Cochin China as a counter-irritant, in the same way as
sinapisms in Europe, and also as a vesicant; and in the United States the roots are said to be used as a vermifuge.
In India the leaves boiled in ghee are applied to recent wounds, and the juice to ulcers. . . . — J.II.M .]
* Carey a australis, P. v. M. —The Kundara blacks of the lower Gulf coast boil the bark, and rub
the decoction all over the body when anyone is sick, or out of sorts.
Cassytha glabella, P. Br. —The bark is made into a sort of tea by soaking it for some time in
water, when it is drunk in cases of high temperature. The leaves are sometimes treated in
the same way as the bark. NGG, tim-reddi. Pennefather and Batavia Pi vers.
[C. jiliformis, Linn. The whole plant pulverised, and mixed with dry ginger and butter, is used in the
cleaning of inveterate ulcers in India. The juice of the plant, mixed with sugar, is occasionally applied to
inflamed eyes (Rheede). It is used in native practice as an alterative in bilious affections, and for piles
(Dymock). — J. 11. M.~\
Cymbidium albucidorum, P. v. M. —The bulb of this orchid is chewed for dysentery. MAL,
bungkiam. Tully Piver.
[The pseudo-bulbs of all Cymbidiums have been used for dysentery, either chewed or with the starch
extracted, so as to form a coarse arrow-root. — J.ll.Mi]
# ErythropMoeum Laboucherii, F. v. M. —Outer bark is put into water for some hours, and the
solution rubbed into the spear-wound, the surrounding skin of which it appears to dry up.
In cases of general malaise, etc., the solution is rubbed all over the body. NGG, naumuta.
Pennefather Piver.
[Said to contain Erythrophloein, the active principle of P. guinense. — J. Tl.Mi]
Eucalyptus corymbosa, Sm.—The gum of this “ blood-wood,” PPT, richindi, is used both as a
local and internal application for venereal sores : in the former case it is used as a powder
and dusted on, in the latter it is boiled with water. In the Boulia, Cloncurry, Upper
Geogina, and Leichhardt-Selwyn districts.
* Eucalyptus microtheca , P. v. M. —The inside bark is beaten up and used as a poultice for snake-
bites, heated. Cloncurry, etc. ( E. Palmer.)
Eucalyptus pruinosa, Schau. —The inside bark is stripped and wound round the chest and body
very tightly, damped with water, for pains, rheumatism, etc., sitting down in the water at
the same time. Cloncurry. ( E. Palmer.')
Eucalyptus resinifera , Sm. —The Kundara, of the coast-line between the Staaten and Nassau
Pi vers, boil the leaves and drink the decoction, and also rub the inner bark into the sores,
in syphilis. KUN, mitar.
Eucalyptus terminalis, P. v. M.—The gum, mixed with water, is used for constipation on the
Palmer. KMI, ga-ja.
Eucalyptus tesselaris, P. v. M. —Bark soaked in water, and drunk for dysentery on the Palmer.
KMI, r-gu-la.
Eucalyptus tetradonta, P. v. M.—The leaves of the young trees are bruised and rubbed in water
in a wooden trough with the hands till the water is green and thick, when it is drunk for
fevers and head-ache. Mitchell, Gilbert, and Norman Pi vers. ( E. Palmer.)
[The Eucalyptus leaves, barks, and gums (Kinos) as quoted above are so used, I think, because of their
availability. But I see no special merit in any of them. Eor example, I. resinifera is a very poor yielder of oil,
and it is to the oil that the leaves owe their therapeutic value. . . .— J.II.M. ]
Euphorbia. —Various species are very frequently used for relieving difficult or painful micturition.
Boulia.
[Euphorbia, Excsecaria, and Phyllanthus all belong to Euphorbiaceae, and our knowledge of the three genera
will be found summarised in Mr. J. H. Maiden's pamphlet, already referred to.]
* Exccecariaparvifolia , P. v. M. —For pains and sickness. The natives use the bark mashed up in
water in a wooden trough, and heated with stones from a fire close by. The wash is applied
externally to all parts of the body, rubbing it in. Cloncurry, Mitchell Pi vers. ( E.
Palmer.) [See Euphorbia.]
* Ficus scabra, G. Porst. —The milky juice of the young shoots is employed by the natives
medicinally, and is represented by Murrells, from personal experience, to be very efficacious
in healing wounds. After the application of the milky juice. . . the scraped root-bark
of the Grewia. . . is used as a poultice to the wound. Cleveland Bay. (A. Thozet,
quoted by E. Gregory.)
Onaphalium lufeo-album, Linn. —Used medicinally for general sickness, as a drink. Mitchell
Piver. ( E. Palmer.)


* Grevillea striata, R. Br. —The charcoal of this is employed to stop the haemorrhage in certain
spear-wounds.
Grewia polygama, Roxb. —Around Normanton, etc., is. used by (both whites and) blacks for
dysentery : the leaves are either chewed or made into a decoction.
Heliotr opium ovalifolium , Foisk. —Bruised in water it is used as a drink and wash, the head
and body being rubbed over with the dilution. {E. Palmer.')
[A poisonous alkaloid, Ileliotropine, has been found in the European 11. europeum, L., and in the closely
allied Cynoglossum vulgare. — J.11.M. ]
Hibiscus sp. —Made a decoction of, and used, for same purposes as the Mentha australis {g-v.)
MIT, yukata. Cloncurry district.
Ipomcea angusti folia , Jacq.—Whole plant chewed in mouth, or soaked in water, and then placed
on sores. NGG, rambata. Pennefather River.
[The boiled leaves of the closely-allied I. Pes-capree, Eotli, are used externally as an anodyne in cases of colic,
and in decoction in rheumatism ; the juice is given as a diuretic in dropsy, and at the same time the bruised
leaves are applied to the dropsical part. (Dymock, Materia Medica of Western India ) J.11.M .]
Loranthus Quandang, Lindl. —Tho leaves are bruised in water, and drunk for fevers. {E.
Palmer.)
Melaleuca leucadendron, Linn. —The young leaves are bruised in water, and drunk for head-
aches, colds, and general sickness. Mitchell, etc., River. {lbid.)
[The Melaleuca leaves contain Cajeput-0i1.— J.11.M.)
Mentha australis , R. Br., is drunk in the form of a decoction, like tea, with apparently very
beneficial results in coughs or colds. PPT., pokangadyi. N.W. districts.
Moschosma polystachyum, Benth. —Used as medicine for fevers, etc., by mixing in water. Mitchell,
Flinders Rivers. ( E. Palmer.)
Ocimum sanctum, Linn. —The leaves are crushed up in water, and drunk for fevers and sickness.
Cloncurry, Mitchell Rivers. {lbid.)
[This plant is much cultivated in India and Ceylon, and is frequently used in medicine in the latter country
{Treasury of Botany.) Stimulant, diaphoretic, and expectorant virtues are assigned to it by the natives.
{Pharm. of India) — J.11.M. ]
* Phyllanthus urinaria, Linn., var. After chewing in the mouth, or soaking in water, the leaves
are rubbed into and placed on the cuts made on top of the iorehqad for relieving congestion
of the head. NGG, te-mo. Pennefather River. [See Euphorbia.]
Plectranthus congestus, R. Br. —Leaves and branches crushed in water and drunk for internal
complaints. Mitchell River. {E. Palmer.)
* Polanisia viscosa, DC. —The whole plant is smashed up in the dry, and placed on boils or open
sores. NGG, a-nga. Pennefather River.
Pterocaulon glandulosus, Benth. et Hook.—By the Koko-minni, the leaves are used for stuffing
up and rubbing over spear-wounds in the legs or arms. By the Kundara, for headache,
the leaves are either just smelt as they are, or else boiled in water and drunk. (E. Palmer
states it is used as a fever medicine.) KMI, alwormangka-ina. KUN, warran.
Sarcocephalits cordatus, Miq. —The Koko-minni breakup the bark: if eaten, it produces vomiting,
and is employed for curing “ sore belly ” and certain snake-bites. KMI, po-anja.
[lt has a bitter bark, long known to bushmen, and used by them occasionally in the form of an infusion for
ague, in default of quinine, but with no good results, as far as I could ascertain. Extract of the bark, which is
very bitter, had apparently no effect on frogs. . . . (Dr. T. E. Bancroft, “ Pharm. of Some Queensland Plants,
1889, p. 2.) J.11.M.]
* Striga curvi folia, Benth.—The wffiole plant after being chewed in the mouth or soaked in
water, is rubbed into the sores in certain cases of skin-disease. Pennefather River.
* Taberncemontana orientalis, R. Br. —Fruit rubbed on sores, to heal them. KUG, pallabara.
Cape Grafton.
[Xhis small tree has an intensely bitter bark, and a decoction of it is sometimes sold as “ bitters. J.11.M .]
* Tribulus cistoides, Linn. —Kept in between the gums and cheek, along the base of a bad tooth,
to relieve pain in tooth-ache. KGG, dardatra. Pennefather River.
In the Boulia district, the belief is pretty common that any strong-scented plants are of value for
sniffing at in cases of headache, and that any sort of grass or shrub growing near the water’s edge will
relieve difficult or painful micturition.
160. h. Liniments, lotions.— Throughout North-Western Queensland human blood is used for
smearing all over the body, trunk, limbs, and face, in various obscure affections, and internal pains of
one sort or another. The blood itself is removed from any other apparently healthy individual, but
never a woman, in one or other of the two following methods : —With a string or other ligature tied
tightly round and above the main prominence of the biceps muscle, the elbow is either strongly flexed, or
while made to press upon something behind, equally strongly extended: in the former case, the incision
with the stone knife, etc., into the posterior ulnar vein, the blood-vessel usually cut, can be made by the
individual himself, in the latter by some other person. The blood is collected into a wooden.trough, and
the wound, dressed with fat, bound up with a leaf or two. By means of a bundle of emu feathers tho
blood thus obtained is dabbed all over the patient from head to heels, while his gin or some male triend,
more usually the former, rubs it in with the flat of the hands, the massage, such as it is, lasting often
well over a-quarter of an hour. In addition to the external application of the remedy, the patient may
drink some of it. (Immersion in water for hours at a time is a common remedy everywhere for all
varieties of fever.)


In these same districts, sweat removed from under the arm-pits, and smeared in a manner similar
to the blood, is also believed to have wonderful curative powers, especially when the patient is in extremis
(sect. 80).
On the Palmer, any individual, not necessarily a medicine-man, will cure fever and similar
ill-understood complaints by smearing over the patient’s head a mixture of water and human seminal
fluid. A similar belief in the Boulia district (sect. 158).
Pat, from the iguana, snake, etc., may also be employed as a liniment for rubbing over tired or
aching limbs, and in such circumstances affords apparently speedy relief.
Another common method of treatment, in fevers and other obscure cases, by the Palmer River women,
is for them to thoroughly massage the patient all over with a green “mush” formed of Melaleuca leaves
soaked in water: the bark from the under-ground roots of the same tree may be used conjointly with, or
separately from, the leaves.
Various lotions derived from plants have already been recorded (sect. 159).
On the Bloomfield, the young women suffer from an affection of the foot and toes. There is first
of all an inflammation and swelling of the toes with adjacent portions of the foot: this is then
followed by a contraction and concurrent cracking of the skin, starting from the forks of the toes, and
extending up to quite an inch on to both dorsal and plantar surfaces of the foot: the complaint
sometimes proves fatal owing perhaps to blood-poisoning. At any rate, to remedy the disease, the girl
will pour her younger brother’s urine over the sore places. (A. Hislop.)
The Kalkadun, of the upper Leichhardt River, and the Selwyn Ranges, in addition to the usual
blood-liniment, apply a method, without rubbing, wherein the whole body, head included, is covered with
red ochre. In other districts, white paint or mud may take the place of the red.
161. J. Poultices, fomentations. —At Princess Charlotte Bay, bruises, sprains, aches, and pains in
general are all treated with poultices, or rather fomentations: the Erythrophlceum, Eucalyptus or other
bark, after being boiled into more or less of a pulp, is held by the hand on to the part affected—l never
saw or heard of its being tied on. In the North -Western districts, the only application of a poultice that
has come under my observation, is the practice prevailing among the Maitakudi of Cloncurry for the cure
of a bad headache: some Eucalypt bark, subsequently to being hammered and pounded, is simply soaked
in water, and the mass so produced held by the hand on to the part affected with a piece of bark, etc.
[To lay the aching head between two heated stones covered with an opossum rug was a cure
adopted by the Brisbane blacks {T. Petrie).']
162. k. Bleeding by means of superficial incisions made with stone-knives, etc., is not infrequently
practised over an inflamed and painful knee or shoulder joint in the North-Western districts. Similarly,
gashing the top of the head, from behind forwards, is a very common form of treatment for fevers at
Cape Grafton. This is also the cure for head-ache on the Tully River, but here the wounds are in
addition covered with a piece of bark, and the bark hammered by a sympathetic friend with a stick. [ln
the old Brisbane days the same complaint was treated similarly by a waddy, but without the cuts or
intervening bark : another cure for the trouble was for the patient to go under water and force himself
to remain below the surface as long as he possibly could. {T. Petrie.) The most extraordinary treatment
of head-ache is that which the Koko-minni practice on the Palmer : —The sufferer will stand at full length
(Eig. 41) pressing with outstretched arms down upon a sapling, that portion of it below the level at which
his hands are holding on, being stripped of bark. A friend will then keep hitting the sapling some
violent blows with a heavy piece of Pandanus tree.] The Tully River natives also relieve the congestion
of head-ache through the nose by poking a sharp piece of bladey grass up one or other nostril until the
blood flows. Pains (rheumatic) in the arms may also be treated among these same blacks by bleeding:
for instance, I have seen an upper arm with numerous longitudinal incisions made between two ligatures,
the limb strongly flexed, and the blood pouring down from off the tip of the elbow.
163. l. Dressings, etc.{—for cuts). —Iguana-, snake-, or any other kind of fat or grease, mixed more
or less with mud and dirt, is used everywhere in the North-Western districts, as a dressing for cuts and
wounds of all descriptions, these never being allowed to heal by “first intention,” In other areas it is
usually mud or clay alone which is jobbed into the incised surface to stop the haemorrhage : on the Palmer
charcoal may be used. [Among the Brisbane blacks, serious spear-, boomerang-, or waddy- wounds were
sucked by the medicine-man who would spit the blood out into the patient’s face, and who, if he
considered no fatal results likely to follow, would often pretend to extract the crystal (kundri) that the
medicine-man (turrwan) doomed the victim with. These same natives treated anv ordinary wound by
simply washing with water, and scraping with a stick until the blood stopped flowing: it would then
just be covered up with wood-ashes or blood-wood charcoal, —if neither were available, with ordinary
earth. {T. Petrie.)] On the Tully River, in the case of a spear-wound, the weapon is never removed
immediately after transfixion, but left in situ for an hour or two when it is said to come out far more
readily. In other places, solutions of vegetable origin, eg., Erythrophlseum, Pterocaulon, etc. (sect.
159), may be brought into requisition for similar injuries.
In the neighbourhood of Macdonnell Electric Telegraph Office, when the youngsters’ noses are
bored, the milk from the breast of some woman is squeezed on to the wound, the alleged effect being to
take the pain away. {W. B. Webster.)
{—for fractures). —In the case of fractured limbs, two to four sticks in the rough tied on a broken
arm or leg, and left there perhaps for from one to two months, constitute the treatment as pursued in the
North-Western districts. The value of the remedy is rendered inactive, however, by the fact that these
splints are not of sufficient leugth to keep the adjacent joints at rest. On the Tully, numerous
superficial longitudinal incisions are made over the situation of the fracture, short pieces of wood or
bone are tied along and over the wounds, and the whole bandaged up with lawyer-vine {Calamus).
D


164. Treatment of snake-bite. —At Cape Bedford, snake-bite is cured by rubbing the faeces of the
reptile into the wound made by its teeth. In the case of accidents with black snakes on the Palmer Biver,
the limb is held tightly with the hand, just above the injury, aud the patient made to eat some raw bark of
the Leichhardt-tree (Sarcocepbalus cordatus) which soon makes him vomit, and so gives him relief.
With these same natives, when bitten by other poisonous snakes, the wound is sucked by a medicine-man
who is thus supposed to draw out the serpent’s teeth. In the Boulia and Cloncurry districts, with his
hair-belt, or any convenient twine, the victim ties two ligatures around the limb bitten, above and below
the knee if on the leg, or above and below the elbow if on the hand, but whether these ligatures are
intended for relieving the pain (sect. 155) or arresting the haemorrhage, it is impossible to say with
certainty ; if convenient, he applies suction to the wound, and is given a sort of vapour-bath. This
treatment is carried out as follows : —Having dug a largish hole, a fire is kindled in it and some big stones
and lumps of rock heated thereby. When these have become sufficiently hot and the flames somewhat
subsident, a number of fresh leafy boughs and branches and leaves, sprinkled with water to prevent
ignition, are placed on top. Upon this smoking mass of foliage the bitten individual now lies, and what
with the smouldering embers and hot steam arising from the leaves he soon becomes enveloped in
perspiration, falls asleep for two or three hours, wakes up refreshed, has a “ spit,” and is quite recovered.
Among the Boulia blacks, there are indications of a desire on the part of the medicine-men to claim a
share -in the cure, with a corresponding reward, especially in those cases where the snake has got away
from the bitten person down some crevice or hole. For instance, supposing the patient’s wife or other
messenger had come post-haste into camp to consult the doctor (sect. 147 c) he would, after satisfying
himself by careful cross-examination that no fatal effects were likely to be expected, look up at the sky
and declare he could see Malkari spitting and that therefore the patient would be all right if he submitted
to the prescribed treatment of a vapour-bath. More than this, the doctor himself goes to the place where
the accident happened, is shown where the snake lies hid, digs it out, and lets it glide away a few feet
before commencing to pelt it with stones. During this process the snake gradually diminishes in size,
and gradually becomes harmless, when it is carried back to camp where the medicine-man, turning its
skin half-way inside out while still alive, throws it into the water, and so makes an end of it. It is needless
to say that no layman is allowed to witness any part of this procedure.
Price 35. l
















