

NEW AND REVISED SERIES.
PREVIOUS LISTS ARE WITHDRAWN.
SUPERIOR’
'FERTILISERS
FOR VINES, FRUIT TREES, CEREALS, VEGETABLES, GRASS, SUGAR
CANE, FLOWERS AND ALL CROPS.
THE COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING GO.,
MARCUS * ANDREW, PRINTERS. SYDNEY,
MANUFACTURED BY
c ■ j-s-y y




It is universally known that bone is the foundation of all per-
fect manuring, and where other manure manufacturers are compelled to
purchase this article, we find ourselves with thousands of tons
annually actually a waste product after sugar-refining, showing an
analysis of nearly 80 per cent, pure Bone Phosphate, a test abso-
lutely impossible for bone dust. A large percentage of our bone is
available by root absorption alone, by many erroneously called soluble,
the balance being as in bonedust. Another of our by-products is
Sulphate of Ammonia, of very great value when properly blended
with other manures. Thus we have two of the chief manures vir-
tually by-products, and we can afford to supply either at a cost
impossible under ordinary business arrangements.
Potash being necessary for complete manuring, is supplied at
actual cost to us, and our large requirements enable us to land it at
lowest possible rate.
Our superphosphate or soluble series (water soluble), has made
a name and reputation unequalled by any manure in the market.
Ammonia and Potash are added in varying degree, according to re-
quirements, If more time were devoted to the study of the
plant life, many manures now used would never be applied for certain
crops, containing, as they do, an excess or lack of one or other of the
plant foods; overabundance means extravagant cost, and probable
death to plant, whilst insufficiency is throwing away money upon
an unfit manure.
Our superphosphate is not of the highly concentrated class,
we believing, with others, that a highly concentrated manure is very
Unsafe in the hands of many farmers and orchardists, —37 per cent, is
powerful enough for all purposes. Seeing some refer to concentrates as
avoiding freights, it may be well to compare actual figures : our 37 per
cent, is £4 10s., 96 per cent £l4 or thereabouts; but if we sold our
37 per cent, on the basis of 96 per cent, at £l4, our 37 per cent, would
cost the user £5 7s. lid. per ton, so we are 1?S. lid. cheaper,
surely sufficient to provide all difference in freight charges. Again, a highly
concentrated chemical manure is invariably blended with loam before
using, and much of the manure therefore becomes fixed in the loam
instead of the soil requiring its aid.


Bone Phosphate series, with or without ammonia or potash in
combination, has many very great and valuable advantages.
(1). Not chemically treated, therefore cheap.
(2). Solubility, being easily taken up by root absorption
into the growing plant.
(3). Sour lands are rendered sweet.
(4). The natural chemicals present in the soil in a form impos-
sible for plants to derive benefit, are by this manure,
rendered more assimilable.
(5). Perfect manure —By mixing one-third of our No 1 manure
with this Phosphate series a complete manure is formed,
having sufficient absolute solubility to nurture the
young plant, which at maturity is more capable of taking
care of itself.
Special attention is drawn to this series, which has been made
richer in Phosphate than formerly, at the same time being con-
siderably reduced in price. We now offer for £3 a 55 per cent.
Phosphate that is worth £5 based on the price asked for a similar
well-known imported Phosphate of lower strength.
Mineral Phosphatic manures claiming to be soluble are on the
market, the Phosphoric Acid being in same condition as in our
phosphate series; but we prefer to only call our manure reverted OF
soluble by root absorption, the word soluble implying “ solubility
in water,” a property not possessed by these mineral manures.
Two new manures are added to list in Phosphate and Soluble
series— K, and No. 7, each containing 6 per cent. Ammonia, and 10
per cent pure Potash ; these are of wonderful value. Many farmers
and others may prefer even a different mixture, and, as usual, W 6 Can
supply to special instructions.
Bone dust or blood may at times be deemed necessary, and by
arrangements with our agents, Messrs. SHIRLEY, CLAYTON & Co.,
these goods will be supplied at lowest rate, to a guaranteed
analysis.


Sulphate Ammonia and Potash may be had from the same source,
thus one freight can be secured, and multiplicity of orders avoided.
All our manures are finely ground, thus avoiding many breakages
to drills, and as they are now thoroughly dried, will not go lumpy.
While claiming for our products full value for price charged, we
desire to draw the attention of agriculturists to a matter too
often lost sight Of—viz., that the application of manure can never
obviate the need for thorough cultivation. Draining, deep
ploughing, breaking-up clods, exposing every part of the soil
to the air, and rotation of crops are essential.
A few testimonials are submitted, but it would require a very
large circular to contain all we hold.
To secure accuracy, a staff of Analytical Chemists continually
test our manures, and buyers can at all times rely upon guaranteed
contents.
SUGAR CANE • —Our vast experience not having been gained
in countries far away, but at our very doors and on our own
plantations, in all parts of these colonies, enables us to offer a
more correct opinion than any other manure firm possibly can,
and you are invited to write us before placing any orders.


THE KIND OF MANURE TO USE.
No. 1 is a Superphosphate, and will do best when applied to land that is
naturally rich in organic matter, or that has been treated with decayed vegetable,
animal or fish refuse.
No. 2 has been made to meet the wants of those who require a cheap but at
the same time a really good manure for general use. It contains Ammonia, Potash,
and Phosphate of Lime in a soluble form, aftd will be found superior to anything
ever before offered at the price.
No. 3 contains a larger proportion of Ammonia and Potash than No. 2, and is
specially suitable for Cereals, Grass and Garden Stuffs, but will also do for Orchards.
No. 4 contains still more Potash and Ammonia than No. 3, and is particularly
well adapted for Fruit Trees, as well as Sugar Cane, Maize and Flowers. Where
the soil is poor, it will answer better than No. 3 for Cereals, &c.
No. 5 has been made very rich in Potash, being intended as a special Potato,
Vine and Tobacco Manure. On such soils as are known to be almost without
Potash, it may be used with advantage for any crop in preference to either No. 3
or No. 4.
No. 6 will be found a most effective manure for Peas, Beans, Clover and
Lucerne, which require liberal applications of Potash but are not much benefited by
Ammonia. Mixed with an equal weight of Bonedust, it makes a capital manure
for other crops.
No. 7 has been made specially rich in Potash and Ammonia, and must not
be applied in too large quantity.
The A manure is the cheapest source of Phosphoric Acid in Australia, contain-
ing a higher proportion than the well-known Thomas Phosphate, or Basic Slag,
while the price is much lower. This manure ought not to be mixed with
material containing Ammonia, but is best applied as a separate dressing some
time before sowing, when nitrogenous manure can be added.
B, C, D and K contain a large proportion of partly soluble Phosphate,
combined’with definite quantities of Potash and Ammonia. They are cheaper
than wholly soluble manures, and rather slower in their effect.
RULES FOR APPLYING.
Keep the Fertiliser dry until wanted for use, or the fine powder to which
it is ground will be liable to stick together in lumps.
Do not mix lime with it, or Nitrogen will be lost.
Use 2 to 4 CWt. per acre for ordinary land, or double this quantity for
poor.
For Grass, scatter broadcast just before sowing, and harrow in with the seed.
For Cereals that are sown broadcast, apply as for Grass ; if sown in rows,
apply in the drills just before the seed.


For Vegetables, dig in before sowing, at such a depth as will suit the par-
ticular kind. Roots like the Carrot go very deep, while Cabbages only descend a
few inches.
For Potatoes, apply in the drills just before putting in the sets.
For Vines and Fruit Trees, scatter over the ground well away from the
stem (for the roots spread very wide), then dig in a few inches with a fork. Two
applications will answer best; the first, when the buds begin to appear (i.e., about
July to September), and the second when the young fruit is formed. A large
Passion or Grape Vine requires about \ lb. each time, and a large orange tree 2 to
4 lb. For young trees or vines proportionately less must be used.
DIRECTIONS FOR USE IN SMALL GARDENS.
For Flowers or Grass, stir up a tablespoonful (about 1 oz.) in a gallon of
water for a minute, and water the flower beds or pots once or twice a week with the
solution. The undissolved sediment, which still contains a little fertilising material,
can be utilised by applying it to the roots of shrubs, or digging it into the garden.
Or the Fertiliser may be used in the dry state by mixing two tablespoonfuls with
four times as much dry earth, and scattering this quantity over each square yard of
the surface of the flower bed or lawn. One teaspoonful is sufficient for a 12-inch
flower pot, half for an 8-inch pot, and quarter for a 6-inch pot. Rain, or watering
with a can, will gradually dissolve the fertilising material and carry it to the roots
of the plants.
Note. The bone phosphate series is only intended to he applied in the dry state.
For Potatoes, mix about one teaspoonful with a little earth in each hole
when planting, then put in the seed and cover up.
For Peas and Beans, mix with earth in the drill just before sowing, using
one teaspoonful for every eighteen inches of the drill.
For Carrots, Turnips, Radishes, &c., mix with the soil to a depth of
two or three inches just before sowing, using one teaspoonful for every eighteen
inches of the drill, or two tablespoonfuls to each square yard if the seed is not sown
in drills.
For Other Vegetables. —When planting out seedlings, mix about one-half
to one teaspoonful (one for a cabbage, half for a smaller plant) with the earth in
the hole just before putting in the plant. For Vegetables already planted, remove
some of the earth near the plant, scatter in a little of the Fertiliser, and then cover
up again with earth.
CAUTION—Care should be taken not to use more than the
quantities mentioned , as the Fertilisers are very powerful, and it is
always safer in the case of delicate plants that the Fertiliser should
not directly touch the seed or the roots.


Results Great Manure Trials at Hawkesbury
Agricultural College.
(See printed Report, issued by direction of the Minister for Agriculture. Our
Manures headed each of the trials referred to as under.)
HAY—At £3 per ton
25 Manures Tested, valued 30s
per acre
Order
of
Merit.
FERTILISER.
Yield per
Acre.
Profit by
Manuring.
cwt. cjr. lb.
~46 3 4
£ s. d.
Sugar Company’s No. 2 ...
Albert’s 16 percent. Phosphate
Gee’s complete Fertilizer, P. 8.8.
Thomas’ Phosphate Powder
2 14 O
42 2 0
40 1 12
2 1 3
] 15 3
38 2 8
1 10 0
Botany Bonedust.
35 0 0
30 2 24
18 2 8
0 IS 9
Albert’s Concentrated Phosphate
No Manure
0 6 0
OATEN HAY-At
£3 per ton
A test of Albert’s Manures and Sugar Go’s. Fertiliser,
mixed with other ingredients.
Yield per Acre.
iProfit by Manuring.
cwt. qr. lb.
50 2 24
£ s. d.
Sugar Company’s No. 1 ...
Albert’s Concentrated Phosphate
Albert’s 16 per cent. Phosphate
Thomas’ Phosphate
2 5 9
48 3 20
43 3 20
42 3 12
18 2 8
1 16 6
1 5 6
0 19 3
No Manure


PEAS.
FERTILISER.
Profit by
Manuring'.
Loss by
Manuring.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
Sugar Company’s 10 0
Thomas’ Phosphate.
0 4 0
0 2 6
0 4 0
Albert’s 16 per cent. Phosphate
Gee’s Bonedust and Blood
*Sulphate Ammonia
Botany Bonedust
No Manure
* Cost more than increased yield.
SPECIAL TRIAL FOR MAIZE on poorest soil— No Manure, nil
Our Manure, 36 Bushels.
Sugar Company- over 9 tons on poor soil
POTATOES
A SPECIAL TEST OF OUR MANURES gave—77 cwt. ; no Manure,
11 cwt.


SELECTED OPINIONS.
From Dr. John Hay, Coolangatta.
lhat your manure increases the yield of grass immensely I am
only too pleased to state. As a further proof of its value, I purpose
using it to a much larger extent this year than before, and have pleasure
in enclosing an order for twelve tons No. 2.
From Mr. G. McCredie, 250 Pitt Street, Sydney.
I have used the Colonial Sugar Co. ’s manure on my property at Guildford with
much success. The soil treated was about 4 acres of good black soil 12 inches deep,
with clay subsoil, it had not been treated with any other manure previous to the
application of the Sugar Co.’s, but I had grown crops on it with good returns. After
using about half a ton of the manure on the block, I grew barley and oats
thereon, and obtained a return of 25 per cent, more than formerly, and am
very well satisfied that your manure is superior to any other manure I
have used.
From Mr. J. L Thompson, Principal Hawkesbury Agricultural College.
I have very great pleasure in certifying that your manures have been used
here in the growth of nearly every kind of garden and farm produce
and always with the moat profitable results.
From Mr. Anderson, late Director of Agriculture, N.S. W.
In my own experience I have received great satisfaction from the mixed
manures supplied by the Sugar Company. They contain the various con-
stituents essential to a perfect manure in proportions varying according
to the crop for which each is intended.
Superphosphate of Lime is a most valuable source of phosphoric acid, which it
contains in a soluble form, i.e., in a form readily available for plant food. It
contains about 40 per cent, of sulphate of lime (gypsum), which is very useful on
clay land, and also for such crops as clover, grapes, olives, &c.
From Mr. Thomas Pye, Seven Hills.
Having tried various artificial manures for orchard, I can confidently recom-
mend your Special Orchard Manure as superior to all, both as regards
price and quality.
From Mr. E. W. S. Hayley, Burwood.
In all cases of vegetables the yield has been much more prolific where your
No. 3 and 4 Fertiliser has been used than with ordinary stable manure.
From Mr. S. D. Johnston, Balmoral.
I have used your No. 3 Manure, which has turned out splendidly for
vegetables, &c., although our land here is very poor and sandy.
From Mr. P. F. Adams, Liverpool.
The Sugar Company’s No. 5 Manure is, without doubt, one of the best
manures known, I have shown that, so far, it can compete successfully
with the best compost I can make, under favourable circumstances, too. In
fact, it will enable the orchardist who does not combine farming, to compete on
equal terms with those who do.


From Mr. T. />. Linley, Canley Vale.
As a fruitgrower I have to thank you for the trouble you have taken
to make known the value of Sugar Company’s Manures. I tried for three
years to grow potatoes on my ground without success. I could get the proper
quantity, but they were so very small, the largest about 1| in. in diameter. Ihe
varieties were Early Rose and Circular Head. I have this year dug as fine a
crop of Early Rose as you would wish to see. I used the Sugar Com-
pany’s No. 5 sparingly. Amongst my fruit trees there were thirty lemon
and orange trees that were all but dead. I applied No. 5 Manure, 2 o?. to a
pail of water, and they are now full of life and vigour. My plum trees grew m
the spring very well but made no growth after. I experimented with No. 5, halt
a pail to each tree, about three weeks ago ; they are now full of nice shoots. I
have tried it on capsicum plants. Those I gave 2 quarts of the liquid manure to
are now 3 feet high, and those I left purposely unmanured are just 1 foot high.
It acts like magic bn passion fruit. I planted a year-old vine last
spring. It now covers 69 square feet of trellis, and it is full of blossoms ;
those passion vines I left to themselves just occupying 4 superficial feet.
From Mr. Walter King, Ehenezer, near Windsor.
The manure I have always used has been No. 4, and it has given good results
My land is sandy, and the fruit trees were greatly benefited by giving them
a dressing of the manure.
I planted a plot of wheat with it, and it grew splendidly, being fully six
feet high. I then followed with Sorghum, and it is now fully 9 feet high
without any more manure.
From Mr. Chapman, Mitchell’s Island, Manning River,
The fertilisers are undoubtedly first-class. In all cases the manured
potatoes showed great vigour —from three to five times as much growth
at the same period as the unmanured in the same soil.
With No. 5 Manure the potatoes (Early Rose) yielded at the rate of lh
tons to the acre, while alternate rows, unmanured, only gave a yield of about
3 tons per acre.
The Nos. 2 and 4 Manures also give excellent results when applied to flower
ing plauts and vegetables.
From Mr. J. Lilly, Wamheral, near Gosford-
I will send you a sample of my American Red potatoes, grown by the US6
of your No. 5 Manure on what is called here poor sandy land- I used
about 6 cwt. per acre, and I lifted fully 11 tons pf the tubers per acre; the
sample will speak for itself. I sent some of them to the Agricultural Department
for modelling purposes, one potato weighing 12 oz. and another 111 oz- I
have now potatoes only planted 28 days ; they are moulded up, and the ground
nearly covered with the tops. They are this district s talk.
From Mr. A. W. Littlejohn, Liverpool.
I applied 9 cwt of No. 3 manure to a 3-acre patch, and off it I got rather
more than 9 tons oaten hay ; this was highly satisfactory, as off the same land
for two previous seasons before using the manure I only got something like
3 tons of hay.


From J Jr. John Broderick, Crookwell.
1 selected some purple straw wheat—a very rusty kind in this part. I
sowed it in drills with the manure on the sth July, rather too late for a
fair trial, and in a piece of land where the previous crop was too rusty to be
Worth cutting- Notwithstanding all these disadvantages—namely, a very wet
season, late sowing and a wheat subject to the rust— l am still able to Say in
jnstice to the manure, that the grain is now out of danger, full and
plump, and that the yield will be nearly double what it would be with-
out the manure. Every one of our farmers should get a sack at least of this
No. 3 Manure for the growth of vegetables, as it forces vegetables to grow
amazingly. One sack of 2 cwt. will be sufficient to enable any farmer to grow
vegetables and try experiments for his own satisfaction.
JFJr. Pockley, Gordon, communicated to the Department of Agriculture.
Highly satisfactory accounts of the wonderful effect of Sugar Com-
panys No. 5 Manure on his peach trees- Mr. Pockley dressed his trees
with this manure at the rate of 3or 4 lb. per tree. A sample of the fruit gathered
from the trees and shown to the Director measured 11 \ inches round, and
weighed Hi ounces, while others were of nearly equal excellence.
Mr, James Cocks, of Sorrento.
Believes in fertilising, and has found for citrus fruits nothing SO good as
bone dust and the Sugar Company’s No. 5 Manure in equal proportions,
ihis, and thorough cultivation have produced from trees, (which 5 years since
gave 500 cases), net less than 1700 cases of oranges this season-
From Mr. W. 11. Hunt , Milton.
I tested some of your No- 3 manure for maize, and it gave splendid
results, much better than the blood, bone, and potash of the Meat
Company.
From Mr. Charles Robinson, Somershy, Gosford.
Please send two more tons of the No. 1 Superphosphate. The last I
applied with bone manure and a small percentage of potash to eight acres of sand
—so poor that without manure it would not produce any crop worth
gathering, and the result exceeded my expectation. I obtained as good a
crop of maize as I have ever seen growing on good soils, and I attribute much of
the result to the superphosphate in feeding the crop in its early growth.
From Mr. William Mark, Kurrajong Heights.
My experience of your manure is confined to your D Fertiliser which I
applied to an orchard of lemon trees in the autumn, about 4 lbs. to the tree.
I have used most other manures, but find this fertiliser of yours the
best- It is convenient in bulk, cleanly to handle, and efficacious and sure
in its results.
From Mr John Pope, “ Karawera,” Blackheath.
I have pleasure in being able to give you a favourable report on the result of
the few Tons of Fertilisers 1 have had from you during the past year. In seme
instances I put them on Grass and Clover Paddocks, where no manure had pre-
viously been used, and the result has pleased my Overseer more than I can


express Certainly the crops are more than double that of any season for the
last four years, and the hay is first-class. Quantity tried was about 2 cwt. per
acre. In the vegetable and fruit garden, the result has been most satisfactory, and
to such shrubs and flowering plants as seemed to require it, a like good result for
its use has been experienced.
From the Universal Nursery, Wahroonga.
The Fertilisers which we have from time to time obtained from you have
given us profitable and satisfactory results, and we can with confidence
recommend them as being true to the published analyses.
We would take this opportunity of advising orchardists not to let the fertility
of their land run down to its lowest ebb, but to maintain it by annual dressings
of some approved fertiliser, among which the manures of the Colonial
Sugar Refining Co. undoubtedly take a leading place.
From Messrs. IT. G. Warby & Co., Robertson.
The report of our customers has always been favourable to the use of your
fertilisers, it being preferred to B. and B. and bonedust, for the simple
reason that it acts much quicker than those named, giving the crop a good Start.
Quite double crops being obtained over no fertiliser.
The soil consists of loose mould with ironstone, same as usually found in
mountainous brush lands.
From Mr. Albert Lansdotvne, Gon I burn, President Goulburn Fruitgrowers'
Association.
I have much pleasure in bearing witness to the wonderful value of your
manure, having used it with nearly all vegetables with good results.
It is cheaper than any other manure, easily applied and gives no trouble
by introducing weeds.
Numerous growers here are now largely using it for all grain and cereal
crops, and in the gardens for all vegetables. They use from two to three cwt.
per acre. The No. 5 has enabled many who could scarcely grow a crop of
potatoes to do SO with profit- In the case of oats, barley, sorghum, maize,
etc., the results have been surprising, wonderfully increasing yield and
quality. One grower made a trial test on three rows of maize, and expects as
much from the three, as from nine rows where the manure was not applied.
Two others said tome, “ Where we put the manure the crops are waving
with the wind, where none was given, hardly a sign of crop can be seen. ’
I can safely say, for quick, certain, paying results, the Sugar Co.’s Manures
have no equal.
From Mr. Acres, BaidklLam Hills.
All of your manures have a good effect wherever I have tried them.
I tried experiments with various manures on small plots sown with seed oats.
Your Nos. I, 2,3, 4, Fison’s Bonedust and Stockyard Manures, same
money’s worth on each plot, and your Nos. 2 and 4 showed best results—
if any, the No. 2 best. These were all side by side, and all used at the one time.
From Mr. Robert Scobie, West Maitland.
I used one ton of your manure last year on two acres of grape vines planted
two years previously, on clayey subsoil, where grapes had been grown for
about 35 years. The growth was weak previous to application, but this year
the growth has much improved-


COMPOSITION OF THE MANURES.
PHOSPHATE SERIES.—Partly Soluble.
These Manures contain Bone Phosphate in a condition available by root absorption;
but as certain Mineral Phosphates are stated to be soluble,
we also mention
that ours is in same condition as such, but we prefer to be chemically
correct, and declare ours reverted.
K class is a wonderful Potash Manure with
Ammonia in high
combination
£3 10s
For
£4 10s.
For
K
£7 10s.
Special
Potash
Manure.
Phosphate.
Turnips
or Grain,
For
Peas, Beans,
Clover.
Vines, Fruit,
Vegetables.
Phosphoric Acid (partly reverted) -25 , 23
Equal to Bone Phosphate .. ..j 55 SO
Soluble by Root Absorption .. 18 17
Ammonia fixed .. .. .. O' 2
Potash.. 0 1
SUPERPHOSPHATE OR SOLUBLE SERIES.
Special attention is directed to No. 7, being very high in Potash and Ammonia.
Insoluble Manures, such as bonedust, are not complete without one-
third of our No- 1 being added.
No. i.
No. 3.
£6 10s.
No. 4.
No. 5.
No. 6.
No. 7.
£4 10s.
Super-
phosphate
£6 10s
For
£5 10s,
For
General
Purposes,
Cereals,
Grass,
Veget’bl’s
£7 10s.
For
Flowers
or Fruit.
£7 10s
For
£9 10s.
Peas,
Beans,
Clover.
Special
Potash
Manure.
Potatoes.
Tobacco.
Phosphoric Acid ..I 17
(soluble)
Equal to Bone Phos-
phate rendered soluble 37
Ammonia (fixed) .. 0
Potash 0
7 7


REDUCED PRICES
Per Ton.
2 Cwt.
1 Cwt.
56 lb.
28 lb.
3s. 6d.
2s. 6d.
2s. 6d.
2s. 6d.
Is. 6d.
Is. 6d.
Is. 6d.
£3 10s.
4s. 6d.
ss.
£4 10s.
£7 10s.
Bs.
ss.
6s.
7s.
4s. 6d.
No. 1
£4 10s,
3s.
3s. 6d.
4s.
» 2
3
£5 10s.
£6 10s.
2s. 6d.
„ 4
£7 10s.
4s. 6d.
4s. 6d.
3s.
3s.
2s. 6d.
~ 5
£7 10s.
£6 10s.
~ 7
£9 10s.
* “A” and “
are packed
B ” being rather bulky arc
and 7s. 6d. respectively.
bags containing
If cwt., selling
at ss. 6d
TERMS—Net Cash for Small Orders ; per cent, discount on 1 ton and upwards.
Delivery FREE to Railway, Wharf, or Parcel Delivery in Sydney, on receipt of
money and address, or the Manure can be supplied at the Sugar Refinery,
Pyrmont for Cash only. Bags are not charged for.
Payments may be made in Postal Notes, P. 0.0, or Cheque, payable to
COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING- COMPANY, Limited,
O’CONNELL STREET , SYDNEY;
SHIRLEY, CLAYTON & CO., 52 & 54 Pitt Street,
AGENTS MANURE DEPOT.


„ ,RP
r r , v


THE SUGAR COMPANY’S
DEODORISER
Night Soil, Fowl Houses, Stables, Back Yards, &c.
PRICE—£2 10s. per ton, or 3s. for a single cwt.
Tms is a dry powder which readily absorbs foul gases.
Two or three ounces at a time used regularly iu the dry pan
system will completely deodorise Night Soil.
A small quantity sprinkled over tbe floor of a Stable or Fowl
House at once removes the usual heavy unpleasant smell; and, any
decaying refuse treated with it is instantly deprived of its offensive
odour.
The Deodoriser is also a Fertiliser containing a considerable
proportion of Phosphoric Acid, which will enhance the value of
Stable Manure, Fowl Droppings, or Night Soil, when these are
applied for fertilising purposes.
m
PRICE -£2 10s. per ton net cash, or ss. for 2 cwt.
SMALL LOTS—I cwt. for 35., 56 lbs. for 25.,
28 lbs. for Is. 3d
Delivery FREE to Railway, Wharf, or Parcel Delivery in Sydney, on receipt of
money and address, or the Deodoriser can be supplied at the Sugar Refinery,
Pyrmont.
Payment may bo made in Postage Stamps for amounts up to 10s.; and for
larger sums by P. 0.0. or Cheque, payable to the
COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING CO,, Limited,
O’CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY.
W. B. Smith, Bridge Street, Sydney.—22/9/93.


SPECIAL BONE CHARCOAL
FOR POULTRY.
Supplies Bone and Eggshell material.
Aids Digestion.
Promotes Health.
Keeps fresh for any period.
Is crushed to a suitable grist.
And is very cheap.
All authorities insist on the necessity of supplying
Fowls with Crushed Bones to enable them to
maintain sound health.
A serious objection to ordinary bones is that they
soon begin to smell and become offensive.
Burned Bones are free from this defect and
are now supplied ready crushed for use under the
name of
SPECIAL BONE CHARCOAL.
PRICE—£4 10s. per ton net cash, or 9s. for 2 cwt.
SMALL LOTS—I cwt. for 55., 561bs. for 35., 28 lbs. for 2s.
Delivery FREE to Railway, Wharf, or Parcel Delivery in Sydney, on receipt of money
and address; or the Special" Bone Charcoal can be supplied at the Sugar Refinery, Pyrmont,
for Cash only. Payment may be made in Postal Notes, P. 0.0. or Cheque, payable to the
COLONIAL SUGAR REFINING GO., LIMITED,
O’CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY.
W. E. Smith, Sydney, Newcastle and London. —27-9-94,
