

SUPPORT OF THE MINISTRY.
loiifUr
The admirable Address of Dr. Guthrie, delivered at the close of the last General
Assembly of the Free Church, is so seasonable, so fitted to do good, that at the request of
many friends of our colonial Church it has been printed in a separate form for distribution
amongst our people. The object of the address is to impress the members of the Church
with a sense of the great importance of the duty of providing sufficiently for the support
of the ministers of the gospel, in obedience to the scripture injunction that “ the laborer
is worthy of his hire.” Whatever need there was for so rousing an appeal in so orderly a
country as Scotland, there is at least equal need for it in this land ot our adoption; and
if as Dr. Guthrie represents, the inadequate income of the ministers taken as a whole is
fraught with dangers to the best interests of the people themselves, it is not less obvious
that to subject ministers in this wealthy colony to pecuniary hardship, is to inflict most
serious injury on the cause of our holy religion. We do not ask that ministers should be
made rich, or in any way pampered with indulgence. But it is right that they should be
kept free from the cares of poverty—should have a stated income suitable to their social
position—should have enough, in reason, to keep their minds at ease while devoted to
the studies and services of their sacred calling. We would divide our people into three
classes with reference to this subject. The first is composed of the elite of our congregations,
men of faith and prayer, men of Christian principle and generosity, who make conscience
of giving in proportion to their means, and who esteem it a privilege to be permitted to
consecrate part of their substance to the sustentation of a gospel ministry. These are the
pillars of the Church, the very pith and marrow of our communion. The second class,
quite as numerous, perhaps more so, give little, and that little with no pleasure. They do
not feel the obligation to give. They are not troubled with any consciousness of duty in
the matter. It is proper, they will allow, to give something—proper, because it is a
respectable practice. 13 ut it is not of faith that they give—it is not to the Lord; and
therefore they withhold what is meet at an expense to themselves which they will not
attempt to understand. The third class, too numerous in many of our congregations,
contribute nothing—at least their rule or habit is to avoid or refuse the duty of
bearing a share of the expense of God’s house. They have no scruple m throwing upon
others the whole responsibility of maintaining divine ordinances. They partake of the
means of grace, hear the gospel preached, will even claim and exercise the privilege of
sitting down at the Lord’s table, and yet, by some mysterious process of thought, they
act as churls in Israel, and would apparently consider as a loss or a spoliation the diverting
from their own selfish ends to the service of the sanctuary of any portion of that substance
which God has bestowed. It may be that the eloquence of Dr. Guthrie may fall like
sunbeams on these frozen hearts, and melt them into a wise and gracious sensibility.
Would that all abounded in that divine grace of liberality, which, more than any other
grace, resembles the Christian disciple to Him who, “being rich, for our sakes became
poor, that we through His poverty might be rich. _ .
Melbourne, September 12th, 1862. ADAM CAIRNS.
DR. GUTHRIE’S ADDRESS,
I am thankful that I am in circumstances now, by the kindness of my
congregation and other things, to speak out my mind, and no low-minded
man or woman can suspect me of any personal or mercenary motives in this
matter. My ministry is nearly run ; the voyage draws to its close ; I seem
to see the lights and hear the voices on the shore —the grey hairs, the long
shadows, and the fast thinning band of compatriots —(hear, hear) and many
other things, are voices in my ear, saying, “ Work while it is called to-day
—speak while it is called to-day—the night cometh when no man can work,
and the tongue shall be silent in the dust. ” Standing as Ido here, I speak
my feelings, and make no pretence ; not far in the course of nature from the
verge of another world, fathers and brethren, I feel myself above suspicion of
any mercenary, or personal, or interested motives—(applause). Therefore, I
intend to speak out fully and frankly in this matter. Now, I take leave to
say that the livings of our ministers are inadequate —(hear, hear). I take
leave to say more ; I take leave to say that the livings of ministers are quite
inadequate to their position, and to their inevitable and unavoidable outlay.
I take leave very distinctly and very expressly to say that; and what is the
residt of that ? what shall be and will be the result of it ! The greatest
calamity that can befal the Church, far worse than persecution, and far
worse than oppression. All hail to the storm that, with God’s blessing and
good management, drives the ship on, instead of driving her back. The cala-
mity which I dread, next to the withdrawal of the Divine blessing the
greatest of all, is that the rising talent, and genius, and energy of our country
may leave the Church for other professions—(hear, hear). This is what
moves me to speak, and what I have now to express on this subject. “ A
scandalous maintenance,” as Matthew Henry says, “makes a scandalous
ministry;” and, depend upon it, if I could 1 would address the public


ear, and address the eldership—and I have the confidence in the eldership of
the Free Church, that I know there is not a right-minded elder in this house
but will rejoice that I have taken up this subject. (Hear, hear.) If a scan-
dalous maintenance makes a scandalous ministry, or I’ll give you another
sentence, which, though it is my own, is pregnant with truth—is as pregnant
with truth in my opinion as Matthew Henry’s, “that the povertj r of the
manse will develop itself in the poverty of the pulpit.” I have no doubt
about it, and that is the evil lam anxious to avoid. Genteel poverty, may
you never know it ! —genteel poverty, to which some doom themselves, but
to which ministers are doomed, is the greatest evil under the sun. Give me
liberty to wear a frieze coat, and I will thank no one for black—give me
liberty to rear my sons to be labourers, and my daughters to be domestic
servants, and the manse in contentment and piety will enjoy the sun that
shines on many a pious and lowly house; but to place a man in circumstances
where he is expected to be generous and hospitable, to have a hand as open
as his heart is to the poor, to give to his family a liberal education, to breed
them up according to what they call genteel life—-to place a man in these
circumstances, and expect that from him, and deny him the means of doing
it all, is, but for the hope of heaven, to embitter existence itself. (Cheers.)
In the dread of debt, with its harassing fears—in a thousand daily mortifi-
cations—meeting, perhaps, some old acquaintance that he dare not ask to
his table for fear his more prudent wife should frown upon his extravagance,
and in the fear of what should become of his wife and family when he was in
the grave—l say, fathers and brethren, members and lovers of the Free
Church, that that is to expose men of cultivated minds and delicate sensibi-
lities to evils that are worse than the privations of the poor. (Hear, hear,
and cheers.) There is no minister of the Free Church who has been more
kindly, lovingly, and generously treated by his flock than I have been. I
stand here, and can say with Paul, “I have used none of these things, neither
do I write these things that they may be so done to mebut let me tell
you, to deepen the impression, that I have tasted of that bitter cup, and it is a
very bitter cup—that my heart bleeds for many men who never told their sor-
rows, and who are concealing beneath their cloak the fox that gnaws at their
vitals. Fathers and brethren, although this is awrong, I don’t blame the people.
I say with the poet, that more ill is done for want of thought than for want of
heart, and I believe the reason is the thing has never been told them.
As though it were my last speech, I am to tell them now. (Hear, hear.)
Fathers and brethren, the livings, I do not say of the Free Church only, but
of the ministers of all Churches, are inadequate—and I should rejoice that
my words went forth this night to do good to the United Presbyterian and
the Congregational ministers, and I do not except our friends over the way,
the Established ministers; for the fact is, I rejoice when I see one of them
getting an addition to his teinds, for I know they feel the same discomforts
that others do; and then they ai’e not sustained by the hope that I have—
—that the rising tide of liberality of our people will float us over the bar,
and into better and happier waters; they cannot expect from Parliament
what I expect with the utmost confidence from the enlarged and enlightened
liberality of our people. (Hear, hear, and loud cheers.) Now fathers and
brethren, there are certain ways to evade these points. I know some people
do not like to hear of them, and those who like least to hear of them need
most to hear of them. There are many people like an honest man belonging
to Aberdeenshire—begging the pardon of the Aberdonians here, I tell the
story as I heard it—who once was asked what he thought of the Free Church.
“Oh,” says he, “I admire her principles,but I detest her schemes.” (Loud
laughter and applause.) Now, whether the people will bear or whether they
wi 11 forbear, allow me to state two or three ways in which the claims of the
ministers are evaded. I will give you cases, because these are best remem-
bered. Many a long year and day ago there was an excellent seceder
minister of the name of Mr. Gray, and he got his son, whom I knew, a
highly esteemed Old Light, and a true light, what is more—(laughter and
applause)—a better never lived—he got his son to be appointed his assistant
and successor. The people gave the - father £IOO a-year, and they gave the
son £80; which in those days was perhaps better than the Free Church
ministers are paid at the present time. It was most creditable to the congre-
gation and to the good old Seceders. At length the father died, and the con-
gregation met to consider what stipend they should give the son, now that
he was sole pastor of the congregation; and the question was not whether


they would give him £IBO, which they ought to have done, seeing that the
giving of £IBO before proved that they were able to do it; the question was
whether they would give the son the £IOO the father had, or keep him at the
£BO. (Loud laughter and applause.) Well, the question was put, where-
upon an honest weaver stood up, and was clear for keeping the incumbent
at £BO. (Laughter.) He said that he did not see any reason for ministers
having more for weaving sermons than he had for weaving webs. (Renewed
laughter.) He was for holding them down to the lowest figure, in proof of
which, he said, the fact was that the Church never had such ministers as in
those days when they went about in sheepskins and goatskins, and lived
in caves and holes of the earth. (Loud laughter and applause.) If any
people sympathise with the weaver, I answer that I have a radical objection
to caves—they create damp—(laughter)—and, secondly, as to the habili-
ments, it will be time enough to take up that question when our people are
prepared to walk along Prince’s-street with us—(laughter)—with me, not in
this antique dress, but in the more primitive and antiquated fashion of
goatskins with the horns on. (Loud laughter and applause.) It is very easy
to dispose of this evasion. I shall pass on to the second evasion, and it was
from a case too. It was not in my own congregation—let me say that it was
not in any congregation of the Free Church. It is contained in a remark I
shall repeat. There was the same evasion in it, but it looks very pious, and
it is all the worse for that. It was contained in a remark made by a lady to
the wife of a poor minister of a wealthy congregation, who, by keeping
boarders, had to eke out a living that some of the merchant princes in his
congregation could have paid out of their own pocket, and never missed it.
The lady, rustling in silks, and in a blaze of jewels, went to visit the
minister’s wife, more a lady than herself, with the exception of the dress.
(Applause.) The lady condoled with the minister’s wife on the straitened
circumstances and means of the ministers, and she condoled thus:—“Ah!”
says she, “my dear,” looking into the pale careworn face of the excellent
woman, “My dear,” she said, “ your reward is above.” From the bloodless
lips of some poor sinner in an unfurnished garret, where the man of God has
gone to smooth the dying pillow and to minister consolation in that last
dark hour, I have been thankful to hear these words, “Your reward is
above,” but from silks and satins—disgusting! it is cant, the vilest cant, and
enough to make religion stink in the nostrils of the world. (Applause.) Would
that saying pay the minister’s stipend—pay the minister’s accounts’ Fancy
the worthy man going to his baker or his butcher, and instead of paying-
down money, turning up the white of his eyes, saying, “ Your reward is
above.” (Loud laughter and applause.) I fancy they would say, “Oh! no,
ray good sir, that will not pay the billand I say what does not pay the
bills, does not pay the ministers’ stipends as they ought to be paid. (Loud
applause.) There is another answer, another way of getting rid of this ques-
tion, that I want the Christian public to look at. I have heard it myself; it
is a very common answer, and it is this, that ministers should not be rich.
Now, I am not wanting ministers to be rich; Ido not want to be rich myself;
although it is a sweet thing to be able to pour a blessing into an empty cup.
(Applause.) I want to know why I should be deprived of that pleasure any
more than other people ? I want to know if I have not a heart as well as
other men? (Loud applause.) Have I not pity as well as other men? have
not I delight in seeing and hearing the widow’s blessing as well as other men?
(Loud applause.) I want to know more than that; I demand to know the
reason why riches are more dangerous to ministers than they are to other
people ? I want to know why men can stand up before the public and say
that ministers would make a worse use of their money than other people ?
Are those who have received a liberal education, cultivated minds, holding a
sacred office, occupying a public position, whose piety should be tired at the
altars where they minister, and whose sympathies are daily moved by the
misery and poverty they see ; are they less likely to make a better use of
money than other men ? Does any man in this house say that Agar’s prayer
was made for ministers, “ Give me neither poverty nor riches?” I will tell
that man who tells me that ministers should not be rich, that that prayer is
as good for his lips as it is for mine, and then I will answer the question by
referring him to the case of the Church of England ; and I am happy to be
able to compliment the Church of England in this respect. I say that there
is one church, and one church only, where the ministers have private for-
tunes, where men of private fortunes hold the holy livings; and is it not a


fact that in building schools, and in paying teachers, in building churches,
and in paying curates, and in other benevolent and Christian agencies, a very
large number of the ministers of the Church of England pay as much cut of
their private fortunes in their parishes as they get annually in the way of
livings—(applause) —and show me the class, bankers, merchants, physicians,
farmers, that do the same ? (Applause.) Tell me no more about ministers
not being rich, (Loud applause.) But I don’t want ministers to be rich;
that is not my object. My object, my only object, for which I stand here to
plead is, that ministers should have such maintenance as shall relieve them
of the evils that I shall call poverty. (Applause.) Don’t be ashamed of
poverty. Poverty in a good cause is a noble thing. (Applause.) Don’t
stagger at the word. There was a man came once to the person who did
the writing on Pitt’s monument, which was something to this effect—that
millions had passed through his hands, and that he died poor. It was the
noblest thing ever said of a statesman ; but the man, with a very delicate
sensibility, said, —“Oh, I don’t like that word poor. I think it ought to
have been, that millions passed through his hands, and that he died in em-
barrassed circumstances. ” (Great laughter and applause.) What I want is
this ; and I tell this house, and tell the public, that I stand here this night
to plead that my brethren should have livings adequate to this position, and
adequate to the expense in which they are necessarily involved. t (Applause.)
That is my object. I need not tell the intelligent public, or the fathers and
brethren of this house—l do not need tell you that ministers’ livings have
not risen in any church—Free Church, United Presbyterian, Congregational,
Established—that the ministers’ livings of no church, endowed or un-
endowed, have risen with the increase of labourers’ wages—(hear, hear) —
with the revenues of land, with the incomes of proprietors, with the profits
of commerce, with the salaries of schoolmasters, with the incomes of clerks ;
and that, in point of fact—and let it go abroad as with a trumpet voice—
the position of ministers is in many respects worse this day than it was half
a century ago. (Loud applause.) That is the true position of matters, and
the sooner the public know that the better. Well, what I want is this, and
I want nothing more than that our ministers should not be beset with pecu-
niary difficulties, and that they should not be harassed with circumstances
that interfere with their comfort and that mar their usefulness. (Applause.)
Fathers and brethren, whether the public know it or not, they should know
it, that it is not our creed, but our circumstances, that doom us to celibacy.
They should know how many a good man sighs, who has not listened to the
voice of cold prudence, over the happy days when it was said—“As arrows
in the hands of a mighty man, so are the children of the youth; blessed is he
that hath his quiver full of them. He shall speak with the enemy in the
gate, and shall not be ashamed.” The enemies in a man’s gate now are
those that come in at the term with their accounts—(loud laughter), and
the more sons a man has the more he is ashamed, the more unhappy
and the more straitened are his circumstances. (Loud applause.) Fathers
and brethren, there are worse evils than those I have been speaking of.
But that which I wished to address this house upon is this, that the
result of the inadequate livings of our ministers is—l don’t say it is
yet, but as sure as the tide will make at Leith to-morrow, it is the law of
Providence, it has never been otherwise, unless under some extraordinary
out-pourings of the Spirit—the result will be, and it is in the hands of the
Christian people under God to prevent it, that the rising talent, and genius,
and energy of our country will go away to other professions, and will leave
the pulpit. (Hear, hear.) Now, I would consider that an unspeakable
calamity. I don’t hold out, and I don’t wish to hold out, any lure to
avarice. lam not wishing to tempt men into the Church by riches, but my
wish is that poverty should not deter them out of the Church. (Hear, hear.)
I want to remove that barrier that at this moment stands —I don’t say
between the Church and the higher classes —I do not say between the
Church and the poorer classes—but at all events between the Church and the
middle classes of society. How many noble, how many generous, how many
large-hearted elders have we in our Church?—and I wish to know how many
gentlemen in Glasgow engaged in commerce—and I wish to know how many
gentlemen in Edinburgh engaged in the honourable pursuit of the law, are
at this moment training their sons for the ministry ? (Hear, hear.) They
give us their silver. I want their sons. (Hear, hear, hear.) I want
their sons, more precious than all their silver. (Applause.) And why do 1


want their sons ? I want their sons that the pulpits of the Free Church may
be lilled with a fair representation of the position as well as the piety of
the Free Church, (Applause.) No man will suspect me of undervaluing the
humble classes of the people. If they do, they do me a cruel wrong. (Hear,
hear.) I can say for myself—though I don’t wish to speak of myself—that
if I have lived for one thing more than another, it has been to save and raise
the very poorest of the poor. I stand by the people. I believe the lower classes
of the people are, in their political and religious views, sounder, take
them all in all, than any other class. Some of my most valued, and beloved,
and best-respected friends have sprung from that class, who have been an
ornament to the Church and to the country; and I will say that, if the Free
Church loses the lower classes of the people, she loses, under God, her best
support. (Applause.) She stands upon them more than upon any others,
just as that noble building which Mr. Maitland, in his generosity, has given
ns the church offices—stands upon the Savings’ Bank. (Applause.)
Nobody will suspect me of doing that. Nevertheless, I tell you plainly—l
am speaking my mind frankly—that I think it is a most important and
desirable thing that the ministry of the Church should present a represen-
tation of the position as well as of the piety of the Church, and that there
should be at least a considerable number of what we call well-born and well-
bred men in the Church, in order to give it a tone, so to speak. There is
nothing I would like worse, next to impiety in a Church, than what they call
genteel vulgarity; but I think it is a desirable thing to have a given number
of the upper and middle classes, a large number„of the lower classes, and
that all classes should be represented in our Church. I wish to give no
offence, but I wish to speak frankly; and let me say for the upper classes of
this country, that the humbler classes have no reason to believe that they
will betray their interests —those of them in the Free Church. (Applause.)
The men that went out in the days of the Covenant, and preached in the
face of Claverhouse’s dragoons, were, many of them, if not most of them,
what they call well-bom men—the Erskines and the Moncrieffs. The first
Seceders were well-bom men, and it deserves to be mentioned that before the
Disruption there were only three or four clergymen in -our Church that were
the sons of baronets, and they all went out to a man. (Cheers.) That de-
serves to be mentioned. Well, what I desire is, to see all classes in our pulpit
—piety, and genius, and talent, brought from every class. But at this moment
you can’t have ministers of the middle class of the community. The elders give
their silver to the Church—why don’t they give their sons to the ministry ?
They don’t do it, there is the fact, account for it as you may, and it is one I
wish to see removed. But why don’t they do so ? I have heard ministers of
the Free Church, and I have heard ministers of the Established Church—for
it is well to let out the truth, I hold pleasant communion with many minis-
ters of the Established Church, and 1 have heard ministers of both
Churches say that they have so felt the keenness of their profession, and the
difficulties of their position, that the last profession they would rear a son
to was the Church. Now, I don’t sympathise with that. (Hear.) I have
reared one son for the Church, and I hope I will rear another son for the
Church, and send him abroad to fight the battles of our Lord, however hard
it may be. (Applause.) I don’t sympathise with it. At the same time,
allow me to say, I cannot greatly blame them, because I can fancy a good
man saying, “lam at liberty to consecrate myself to Christ and poverty ;
but am I "at liberty, in the case of that boy, who gives evidence of genius,
and some promise of piety—and whom a turn of my hand, under God’s pro-
vidence, may turn him this way or that—am lat liberty to devote that boy,
at an age when he is not capable of fully judging, to a life that is full of pri-
vations, when he may serve his blessed Redeemer without having to meet
these privations ?” That is the real question, and it is a question that keeps
our intelligent and pious laymen at this moment from doing what I am
anxious that they should do—l mean, give their sons to the Church. Now,
what I want, fathers and brethren, is that this stone of offence be removed,
nor let the public forget —you take of the lucre of riches, you talk of the
temptation of wealth—l say, let the public remember this, that you don’t
get rid of the temptation to wealth by a mean and shabby stipend—nothing
of the kind. A stipend of £IOO or £l5O is as great a temptation to a peasant’s
son as a stipend four times that amount is to the son of a manufacturer, or a
merchant, or a lawyer, or a physician. (Hear, hear.) You don’t get rid of
it, therefore. The only difference is, that you draw the whole of your clergy


from the very humblest classes of the people; and I don’t think that desir-
able. I want to see all classes in the Church. And be it remembered, in
proof and illustration of what I say, that in the only case recorded in Scrip-
ture where a man sought the priest’s office for a piece of bread, it was a very
shabby stipend that took him in—just ten shekels of silver, and a suit of
clothes in the year. (Applause.) What I want is, as I have already said,
such a provision for the ministers of our Church as shall deliver them from
the trials of the circumstances in which they are placed. I hope it will be
remembered that, so far as I have spoken truth, I have spoken boldly. But
let me say, on the other hand, that I think the Church is bound to take care
that if the people give adequate stipends, to use a commercial phrase, they
should get value for their money. You understand what I mean. (Laughter
and cheers.) If you are to ask the people for large stipends, you are bound
to use every means in your power to provide them with the best ministers.
(Cheers.) I will not stand here and argue for such stipends as will get in
the genius and the talent, as well as the piety of the country—l will not
stand here to argue for such livings as will secure efficient ministers, unless
the Church takes the security of getting rid of inefficient ones. (Hear, hear,
and cheers.) I think justice to the people—justice to religion—justice to
the Redeemer’s cause—demands that on the part of the Church which men
would do in any other profession. lam not one of those who think people
never make mistakes —I am not one of those who think no minister has ever
mistaken his profession. Very strange if it should be so. There are mer-
chants that mistake their profession—there are lawyers that mistake their
profession—there are doctors that mistake their profession—(laughter)—there
are farmers that mistake their profession—and it must be by a sort of Popish
miracle if no minister mistakes his profession. (Cheers.) No man would
provide more amply for ministers than I would if they were laid aside by the
hand of Providence, but if a minister mistakes his profession, I think
that man should just betake himself to some other profession, as he
would do in other circumstances. I cannot see why, if a minister is not able
to do his duty—if there be such—l do not say there are any such, I have put
a hypothetical case—(laughter and cheers)—if a minister is not fit for his
post, if he scatters his hock instead of gathering one—if he is inefficient in
the pulpit and in the pastoral office—l cannot see why a minister who does
not succeed, any more than a doctor that does not succeed, or a merchant or
lawyer that does not succeed, should be supported at the expense of the
people. (Hear, hear, and cheers.) I tell you plainly Ido not see that. If
we ask people to provide the very cream and the finest of the wheat, we
must take care by our ecclesiastical arrangements —and, my dear brethren,
we must above all take care by giving ourselves wholly to the ministry, and
toiling, labouring, and suffering for Jesus’ cause and the good of souls, for-
getting ourselves in our office—we must take care to teach the people that we
are not lords over God’s heritage, but are servants ; and that as man was not
made for the Sabbath, but the Sabbath for man, the people were not made
for the pastor, but the pastor for the people—(hear, hear, and cheers) —and
that no personal consideration should be allowed to stand in the way. God
forbid that any personal consideration of mine should ! I would hold myself
unworthy of my office. “ Better,” says Paul, ‘‘ it were for me that I should
die, than that my glorying should be made vain by any man.” I would
hold myself unworthy of my office if for a moment any personal consideration
of mine should stand between my people and their best eternal interests.
(Hear, hear, and cheers.)
Now, fathers and brethren, allow me to suggest, before I close, some two
or three things briefly that I think may go to meet the present case. First,
then, through this Assembly I would address the wealthy members of our
Church —those men who hesitate about giving their sons to the ministry—
and so far I sympathise with them—on account of the privations they are
called on to suffer. I say to the wealthy members of our Church, “You
have the remedy in your own hands. Let me tell you plainly that you arc
without excuse.” I can well understand how a father might say, “I give
my money to the Lord, but I am not at liberty to do that with my son. I
am not free to cast him into a sea of trouble without his full consent.” But
there is no occasion that he should be in trouble. I say to that father, ” “You
can ensure your boy against the evils that you dread. ” Hundreds of worldly
men that send their sons into the army, give them such allowances as will
save them from poverty ; and why should not our pious and wealthy men give


their sons in the ministry such an allowance ? There is the remedy. 1 have
seen a will, whereby a father gave a larger share of his paternal estate to his
son, because that son being in the ministry was in a profession where he would
have difficulties to contend with. There is a way of meeting the difficulty.
If a boy gives himself to the ministry, if a son gives himself to poverty
for the cause of Christ, I say to the father, “Give him Benjamin’s
share; give him, that is, the brightest flower in your garden, a double
portion, and so you will lay the ghost of poverty, and relieve your son of
having a life-long trial of difficulty and penury in his profession. (Applause.)
Then there is another thing I would suggest to the Church, and it is this—
I would ask why it is that our wealthy congregations —now, observe, I am
not saying these things that they may come to me—l stand on my
own feet a freeman in this house, and have no personal object whatever
to serve, for I have a wealthy congregation who have dealt most nobly with
me, and therefore lam in circumstances to speak out my mind—l ask,
then, why is it that our wealthy congregations should not give their ministers
livings adequate to their position, and to the expenses in which they are
necessarily involved ? The general evils of our Church in regard to the mass
of stipends will, I know, take year’s to mend. But what I want to know is
this —where the congregations can do the thing by their own minister, why
do they not do it ? Will any man tell me why talent and genius should not
ensure the same measure of that competency in the Church which they do in
every other profession ? Will any man tell me why a man who brings the
richest gifts and tire richest graces to the highest office he can be placed in,
should be put in circumstances such as that when he dies, and his coffin is
paid, the family have nothing left, and an appeal must be made to the gene*-
rosity of the public ? I admire the generosity that answers the appeal, but
1 would admire more the justice that rendered it unnecessary. (Loud cheers.)
I sec that an elder in Glasgow has proposed that there should be some three
or four Free Church livings in Edinburgh— some three or four Free Church
livings in Glasgow, and elsewhere throughout the Church, to be up to the
mark of £IOOO. (Cheers.) I am not very much astonished at it. I can lay
my hands on men in the Church who, had they gone to the bar, would have
risen to the top of it —(loud cheers) —and not £IOOO a year, but £SOOO
they would have had ; and there (pointing to Ur. Candlish) is the man.
(Loud and prolonged cheers.) Fathers and brethren, I say that what I
desire this for is, not to make the ministers- rich, but that it should be pos-
sible for them to get what is called —for want of a better word to express
it prizes; that is to say, that there were such livings in the Church as
would remove the inevitable doom of poverty from any man that went to the
Church, and which would place a man in the position that he would be in
if he had gone to the bar. There are Judgeships, and such offices as that,
Lord Advocates, and Solicitors-Gencral, and many other comfortable positions
that may be aspired to in connection with the law ; and I want so many
livings in the Church of such a kind that we shall be able to say to a mer-
chant who gives his son to the Church —you don’t give your son to certain
poverty, for if he has the grace of God, and talent, and if he has diligence, he
may have difficulties to fight with in the first place, but at the last he will
find himself in a position where he will be above the trammels of all these
difficulties, trials, and embarrassments. (Cheers.) I say, I believe such a
man in such a position would find his only relief in either a rich wife or the
arms of the grave. (Cheers.) There is one thing in which I wont, perhaps,
meet with the approbation of all, and it is this. If it is right to learn from
our enemies, it is still more right to learn from our friends. We have friends
in the United Presbyterian body, and we have friends in the Wesleyan body.
(Cheers.) The first are very like ourselves, I wish I saw them ourselves.
(Hear, hear, and cheers.) I believe that there are some Churches separated
just as two globules of quicksilver are separated—just separated by the dust
that lies outside of them —and if you would have these two globules united,
just remove the dust, and they will run into one. (Cheers.) We are not
much different from our United Presbyterian, and not unlike our Wesleyan
friends. I know fathers and brethren differ from me in this matter, but this
will be the last opportunity I will have of addressing such an assembly, and
you will forgive me, and you will forbear with me, in speaking my mind.
(Loud cheers.) Well, lam of opinion, and I have always been of opinion,
that the more that we can throw the whole matter of our pecuniary affairs
on the elders of the Church, so much the better. (Cheers.) Where is there


a Church on earth with such elders as we have—men of such large, loving
hearts, and such large giving hands? (Cheers.) Their position in life
teaches them what we ministers need. lam speaking of those in Edinburgh
and Glasgow, into whose hands the arrangements of these matters would
chiefly fall. Their success in business proves their sagacity—the largeness
of their gifts proves their generosity ; and I am as certain of this as that I
am addressing this Assembly, that the last men in the world to keep down
the ministers’ stipends would be Edinburgh and Glasgow elders. (Cheers.)
I throw out this suggestion just now; but it is no new proposal of mine. In
St. Andrew’s Church, before the disruption took place, I proposed that the
whole secularities of the Church should be managed by a body of elders
chosen by the General Assembly. Dr. Chalmers oppbsed it, and I ceased to
say a word more on the subject. Nevertheless, I never gave up my opinion,
and I have an idea that Dr. Chalmers, a man most tenacious of the views
he once held—a man who was very slow to change his opinion, because he
was slow to form it, lived to come round to the view I have now stated, and
left his last dying testimony to this, that he believed the chief management
of all these funds should be in the hands of the laity ; and that we should
roll the burden of our maintenance upon them, and say to them—“ I preach
to you, and it is your business to provide for me; I give you my spiritual, and
you give me your carnal things.” And I have only now to say that
unless these words of mine fall on candid ears, and into wise heads and
loving hearts, running, as I see the tide running, away into the mercantile,
the legal, and the medical professions, and going abroad to Australia,
America, and India, running as the tide of youth, genius, and talent rises,
into other professions—-I protest, fathers and brethren, that I tremble for
the Ark of God in another generation, though I am thankful we have so
many young and able men in our Church now. There are three powers, the
press, the platform, and the pulpit, and if the talent and genius of our country
.go into the first two, it will be a had day for the Church and for the country,
when our pulpits are proverbial for dulness, our Sabbaths for weariness, and
when the highest of all professions has the smallest of men to fill it, when the
power of moulding public opinion is gone from the pulpit, I say then the
sceptre will have departed fron Judah. That will be a calamity to us, and
I call upon the Eree Church, and on the people of every denomination, to avert
that calamity, and never to starve the pulpit of the Christian Church.
Fathers and brethren, I hope the words I have uttered will fall into the
hearts of pious parents, and of some pious children of genius and power.
Why should our Christian parents not give their children to the Church ?
Why should our Christian youth not come forward? Admit that our stipends
are poor, admit that there is little prospect for some years to come that they
will be better, I call on the rising talent and genius of the Church to come
and occupy the place of men—and some I now see before me—who, with
their wives and children hanging on them, threw themselves into a sea of
troubles, and by their sacrifices told more upon the world than the most
eloquent of sermons. Did our youth some years ago leave titles, estates,
luxurious mansions, fathers, mothers, sisters, brothers, and brides, and
throw themselves on the shores of the Black Sea, and on frost and famine,
and pestilence and the iron shower of death, before the walls of Sebastopol ?
Did the highest and the noblest of the youth of our country do that ? and
shall piety blush before patriotism? Shall Jesus Christ call in vain on our
youth for’less costly sacrifices ? I trust, fathers and brethren, that the words
I have uttered will go and stir up pious parents to give their children to the
Church, and the children of genius and talent to give themselves to the
ministry of the word. I have served my Master now for more than thirty
years ; I am grown grey in his service ; but I can say that, when I saw how
much richer I might have been in other professions, and when I felt ,the
greatest hardships of my life—l can say I never regretted my choice. I have
been a poor servant. I have a thousand infirmities on my head, and sins,
unless washed away, on my conscience, for which I look for pardon only
through the blood of Christ ; but, fathers and brethren, poor servant as I
have been, I’ll stand up this day for my Master, and say—Christ has been a
rr o od and blessed, and gracious Master to me. To him with confidence,
fathers and brethren, I recommend you all.
MASON AND FIKTH, PBINTEES, FUNDEES LANE WEST, MELDOUKNE.
