

SUPPLEMENT
TO THE
Goberment Gazette
OF THE STATE OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY.
[REGISTERED AT THE GENERAL POST OFFICE, SYDNEY, FOR TRANSMISSION BY POST AS A NEWSPAPER.]
No. 99.]
WEDNESDAY, 2 JUNE.
[1915.
Conduct of the German Army
in France.
Extracts from Report of Commission of Inquiry
appointed hy the President of the French Republic.
The Premier has received a copy of the Official Journal
of France, containing a report as to the conduct of
the German Army which invaded the northern part
of France in August, 1914.
In September last, immediately upon the retreat of
the German armies from the Marne, a Commission was
appointed by the President, M. Poincare, to visit the
area which had been overrun by the Germans during
their advance and afterwards reconquered. This area,
it will thus be understood, had only remained in the
occupation of the invaders for a comparatively short
period—the period which elapsed between the original
advance towards Paris and their retreat to the Aisne.
The members of the Commission were MM. Georges
Payelle, Premier President de la Cour Des Comptes
(First President of the Commission of State Audits —
equal to the position of a Judge in a British com-
munity) ; Armand Mollard, Ministre Plenipotentiaire
(Plenipotentiary—high diplomatic official capable of
ambassadorial service abroad) ; Georges Maringer,
Conseiller d’Btat (Councillor of State) ; and Edmond
Faillot, Conseiller h la Cour de Cassation (Judge of
Supreme Court of France—final Court of Appeal).
The Commissioners visited all the territory which
had been regained from the enemy, and examined
many witnesses. At times they were under fire from
German shells. They conducted the inquiry on judieial
principles, and formed opinions only after hearing
corroborated evidence given on oath. “We believed it
out duty,” says the report, “ to retain only those facts,
irrefutably established, which showed in a positive
way criminal acts, clearly defined, neglecting those of
which the proof was insufficient in our opinion, or
which, however harmful and cruel they might be, could
have been the consequence of acts of war, correctly
speaking, rather than voluntary excesses imputable to
the enemy. We are firmly convinced that none of the
incidents which we have set forth could be disputed
in good faith. The proof of each one of them, more-
over, does not rest upon our personal observations; it
is based principally on photographic documents and
on the evidence of numerous witnesses received in a
judicial form and guaranteed by oath.”
Many women would not give evidence as to their
own violation or that of their children or relatives.
Where such evidence was obtained, the names of the
unfortunate victims are withheld from the report, as
is also done with the names of places when their pub-
lication would betray who were the sufferers.
The report covers forty-six columns of the Journal.
It is written with calm restraint —one might say almost
without feeling. The most horrifying facts are set
forth with a cold severity which is typical ot the
French nation at the present time. There" is n@
emotion exhibited in the wording of the report, but
one feels that beneath the words there is a passionate,
resolve of which there is no need to give expression*


The Government of New South Wales, believing
that perusal of this document will illustrate to many
the criminal nature of the .aggressions which it is now
sought to check by the armies of the Allies, have
caused extracts from it to be published in the Gazette
and given general publicity.
The soldiers who have left our shores are partici-
pating in a campaign whose success will not only put
an end to such acts of barbarism as are coldly and
officially related _ in this report, but will, it is to be
hoped, bring to justice those guilty of them and pave
the way for such international re-arrangements as may
preclude their recurrence.
While some of the incidents narrated are of a
character almost impossible of publication it is felt
that the women of our State should be acquainted
with them in order that they may fully realise the
nature of the cause in which the men of Australia are
called upon to fight.
The following extracts are translated from the
report, and are published for general information; —
“ In the districts which we have covered, and notably
in that of Lorraine, which has so frequently been the
victim of the scourge or war, we heard neither a soli-
citation nor a complaint; yet the atrocious misery
which we saw surpasses in extent and in horror any-
thing which the imagination can conceive. On all
sides the eye rests upon ruins; whole villages have
been destroyed by bombardments or fire; towns for-
merly full of life are now nothing but deserted ruins;
and when one visits the desolate places, where the
torch of the invader has done its work, one lias con-
tinually the illusion of walking amidst the remains of
ancient cities destroyed by great cataclysms of nature.
_ “ One may say in effect that never has a war between
civilised nations had the savage and ferocious chai’-
acter of this, which is now being carried on in our
country by an implacable enemy. Pillage, rape, incen-
diarism, and murder are common practices of our
enemies. The facts which have been daily revealed
to us, while constituting veritable crimes against
common law, punishable in the codes of every coun-
try by the most severe measures, also give evidence of
an astonishing retrogression in German mentality
since 1870.
“ Attempts against women and young girls have been
of unheard of frequency. We have obtained proof of
a great number which, however, represent only a very
small part of those which we might have examined;
but, owing to a quite natural objection, the victims of
these odious acts generally refuse to reveal them.
There would have been less of these crimes com-
mitted, no doubt, had the officers of the German army,
which is under a most rigorous discipline, taken the
trouble to prevent them; one must perforce consider
them as the individual and spontaneous acts of un-
chained brutes; but the case is not the same with
incendiarism, theft, and murder, the authority for
which rests on the highest commanders, who must
bear, before humanity, the crushing responsibility.
“ In the majority of places where we carried out our
inquiry, we were made fully aware that the German
army constantly professes the utmost contempt for
human life, that its soldiers and even its officers think
it no harm to butcher the wounded, that they kill
without pity inoffensive inhabitants of the districts
which they invade, and that they spare in their homi-
cidal rage neither women, old men, nor children.
“ The mind refuses to believe that all these butcheries
could have taken place without reason. Yet that is
the case. The Germans, it is true, have always given
the same pretext, pretending that civilians had begun
by firing on them. This allegation is untrue, and those
who have made it have been unable to give it an air
of truth, even by firing off rifles in the neighbourhood
of houses, as they are in the custom of doing, so as
to bo able to say that they have been attacked by
innocent people whose ruin and massacre they have
decided upon. We have on many occasions obtained
proof of this; here is one amongst many: One evening
a detonation being, heard while the Abbe Colin, cure of
Croismare, happened to be close to an officer, the latter
cried out, “ Monsieur le cure, that is enough to cause
you to be shot as well as the burgomaster, and to have
a farm burnt. Look, there is one which is burning
now.” “ Monsieur Fofficier,” replied the priest, “ yon
are too intelligent not to recognise the sharp sound of
one of your own rifles. As for me, I recognise it.” The
German did not press the point.
“ As with human life, so the liberty of people in the
eyes of the German military authorities is regarded
with absolute disdain. Nearly everywhere citizens of
■every age have been torn from their home, and led into
captivity. Many of them have died or have been killed
on the road.
“ Incendiarism even more than'murder is one of the
usual practices of' our adversaries. It is constantly
employed by them either for systematic devastation or
as _ a means of intimidation. The German army for
this purpose carries a veritable outfit, which includes
torches, grenades, fusees, petrol pumps, sticks of in-
flammable substances, and bags containing pastilles
composed of a highly inflammable compressed powder.
The rage for incendiarism has been directed principally
against, churches and those buildings which have an
historical or artistic interest.
“ As far as theft is concerned, we do not hesitate to
say that wherever the troops of the enemy have passed
they have Indulged in a methodical system of pillage
in the presence of, their officers, and often with their
officers’ participation. Cellars have been emptied of
their last bottle, safes have been blown open, consider-
able sums have been stolen or extorted; a great quan-
tity of silver and jewels, as well as pictures, furniture,
ornaments, linen, bicycles, women’s dresses, sewing
machines, and even children’s toys have been placed on
carts to be taken across the frontier.
Murder, Incendiarism, Looting.
“ At the beginning of September a German cavalry-
man came about 5 o’clock in the afternoon to the
house of M. Laforest at Mey-en-Multien, and asked him
for a drink. The latter hurried to get some wine
from his cask, but the .soldier, not satisfied that he
was being served quickly enough, discharged his rifle
at Madame Laforest, who was gravely wounded,; She
was taken to Lizy-sur-Ourcq, where she was attended
to by a German doctor, and had to have her left arm
amputated. She died recently at Meaux hospital.
“ On the 3rd of September, at Mary-sur-Marne,
M. Mathe, terrified by the arrival of German troops,
went to hide himself under the counter in a wine shop.
He was discovered and was killed, either with a knife
or bayonet thrust in the chest.
“ On September 6, after having set fire to a number of
houses in Gourtason, a troop, which it is believed be-
longed to the Imperial Guard, led away five men and
a child of 13 years through the fields, and during the
whole of an engagement exposed them to the fire of
the French. In the same Commune a conscript of the
1914 class, Edmond Rousseau, who had been arrested
for the sole reason that Ms age rendered him liable to
be called upon shortly to join the colours, was assassin-
ated in a tragic manner. The mayor, who was amongst
a number of hostages, was interrogated as to the
position of this young man and his military liabilities.
He replied that Rousseau had been-passed'as'fit for
service, but that his class had not yet been called up.
The Germans made the prisoner take off his- clothes
to examine his physical cendition, then put on his
trousers and shot him 50 yards from his compatriots.
“ At Rebais, violent outrages were committed. An
old man, August Griffaut, aged 79, was atrociously
brutalised. He was punched many times, .about the
head, and a revolver shot tore open his foreliead. His
watch and a purse containing £32 were stolen from
him.
“ In the Department of the Marne, as, in fact, every-
where, the German troops indulged in general pillage,
which was carried out always in exactly ; the., same
manner and with the connivance of the chief officers.
In this way the Communes'' of Meiltzi-le-Maufupt,
Suippes, Marfaux, Fromentieres, and Bsternay suffered
in particular. Everything that the invader took from
the houses was placed on motor-lorries or on carts. At
Suippes in particular, the invader carried away in this
manner a quantity of goods, including sewing -machines
and toys. .
“ A great number of villages, as well as important
towns, were burnt down without reason. It cannot be
doubted that these crimes were committed by order,.as
detachments showed themselves in the communes with
their torches, grenades, and other incendiary instru-
ments. . ..
“ In the important centre of Suippes, of -which the
greater part has been burnt, soldiers were seen carrying
straw and cans of petrol. While the house of the
mayor was blazing, six sentinels with fixed bayonets
were under orders to prevent anyone going near the
fire or trying to put it out.
“All these fires, which represent only a small part of
those which have taken place ill the Marne district,
were caused : without anyone being able to impute to
the inhabitants of localities, which to-day are more or
less completely destroyed; the slightest wish to rebel or
offer the least act of resistance, In several villages tie


Germans, before setting fire to the buildings, caused a
rifle to be fired by one of their soldiers, so as to be able
to say afterwards that civilians had attacked them, a
subterfuge which is the more absurd when it is remem-
bered that there remained hardly anywhere, on the
approach of the enemy, any but old people, invalids, or
persons absolutely unable to make any act of aggres-
sion.
“At Cham) iu is, a man named Jacquemin, aged 70
years, was tied to a bed by an officer, and left there
without food for three days. He died some time
afterwards.
“At Yert-la-Gravelle a farm-hand was killed. He
received blows with a bottle on the head and a thrust
with a lance in the chest.
“At Sermaize a road-maintenance man, Brocard,
was included in the hostages who were taken. At
the moment of his arrest, as well as that of his son,
his wife, and daughter-in-law, mad with terror, went
and threw themselves in the Saulx. The old man, who
was able to break away for an instant, rushed after
them, and made several attempts to save them; but
the Germans pitilessly dragged him away, leaving the
two unfortunate women to struggle in the river.
When set at liberty, after four days, Brocard and his
son found the bodies,; they saw that both had been
shot through the head.
“At Montmirail a scene of veritable savagery took
place. On September 5 a non-commissioned officer,
almost naked, threw himself upon a widow, Mme.
Naude, with whom he was billeted, and had carried
her into her room when the woman’s father, Fran-
cois Fontaine, hearing her cries, ran to her assistance.
Immediately fifteen or twenty Germans broke down
the door of the house, dragged the old man into .the
street, and shot him without mercy. At this moment
little Juliette Naude, having opened the window, was
struck in the stomach by a bullet which passed
through her body. The poor child died after going
through twenty-four hours of the most atrocious suf-
ferings
“ At Champguyon, on September 6, Mme. Louvet was
a_ witness of the martyrdom of her husband. Seeing
him in the hands of ten or fifteen soldiers, who were
thrashing him with a stick in front of his house, she
ran to embrace him through the railings; she was
however thrust back brutally and fell, while Louvet’s
brutal torturers dragged him away covered with blood,
begging for his life, and protesting that he had done
nothing to justify his being so treated, tie was
killed at the end of the village. When his wife found
him again he was horribly disfigured. His head was
crushed, one of his eyes was hanging out of the socket,
and a hand was crushed.
“ During the night of Sunday, September 6, some
soldiers who were searching amongst the houses at
Esternay on the lookout for loot came upon the
widow Bouche,' her two daughters, and Mme. Lhomme
and Mme. Mace, who had taken refuge under a stair-
case leading into a cellar. They ordered the two young
girls to take their clothes off and, as their mother
tried to intervene, one of the soldiers put his rifle to
his shoulder and fired on the group of women. The
bullet after striking Mme. Lhomme on the left elbow
smashed Mile. Marcelle Bouche’s right arm at the arm-
pit. During the following day the girl died from her
injury, which, according to the statement of witnesses,
was horrible.
“ The bombardment of an open town constitutes
incontestably a violation of common law; we there-
fore considered that we should visit Reims, which had
been bombarded for eighty days by the Germans. After
taking the mayor’s depositions, in which he informed
us that about 300 civilians had already been killed,
we observed in several quarters of the town the
destruction of numerous buildings, and we were able
to see the enormous and. irreparable damage which
has been caused to the Cathedral. Since 7th October,
the date of our visit, the bombardment has continued ;
consequently the number of victims must now be con-
siderable. Everyone knows how much the unfortu-
nate town has suffered, and how the conduct of the
municipality has been above all praise.
“After having completely pillaged the houses of
Eevigney, Meuse, and carried away their loot, the
Germans burnt down two-thirds of the town during
three consecutive days from 6th September to 91 h
September, spraying petrol on the walls with hand
pumps, and throwing bags filled with compressed
powder into the fire-places. We have been handed
specimens of tbis compressed powder, as well as- sticks
of inflammable'material, which haveffieea left behind
by the incendiaries. The Church, which is included
amongst the historical buildings, and the Town Hall,
with all its archives, have been destroyed.
“ Few localities in the Meuse have suffered so much
as the Commune of Sommeilles. It is now nothing
but a mass of ruins, having been completely burnt
out on 6th September by a regiment of German
infantry, which carried the number 51. The fire was
spread by means of instruments resembling bicycle
pumps, with which many of the soldiers were
furnished.
“This unhappy village was the scene of a frightful
tragedy. When the fire was started, Mine. X: ,
whose husband is with the French army, took refuge
in a cellar belonging to M, Adnot, who with his wife
and four children, aged respectively 11, 5,4, and
If years, had also hidden there. Several days after-
wards the bodies of all these unfortunate people were
found in a pool of .blood. Adnot has been shot, Mme.
X ■ had her breast and right arm cut off, the little
girl of 11 years had a foot cut off, the little boy of
five years had his., throat cut. Mme. X and the
little girl seemed to have been violated.
“At Triaucourt the Germans abandoned themselves
to the , worst excesses. Irritated, no doubt, by some-
thing an officer had said to a soldier, against whom
a girl of 18, Mile. H6lene Proces, had complained,
they set fire to the village and organised a system of
massacre of the inhabitants. They began by setting
fire to the house of M. Jules Gand, and shooting this
unfortunate man as he came out of his house to
escape from the flames; then they went amongst the
houses and streets firing their rifles on all sides. A
young man, 17 years old, Georges Lecourtier, who
tried to escape, was killed. M. Alfred Lallemand
suffered the same fate; he was chased into the
kitchen of his fellow r -citizen, Tantelier, and killed
there, while the latter received three bullets in the
hand.
“ Fearing, not without reason, for their lives, Mile.
Proces, her mother, her grandmother, aged 71 years,
and her grand aunt, aged 81 years. Mile. Laure Menne-
haud, tried to get over, with the help of a ladder, : a
trellis work which separated their garden from a
neighbour’s property. The young girl alone succeeded
in getting to the other side and was able to escape
death by hiding amongst some cabbages. As for the
three women, they were brought down by rifle bullets.
The cure of the village, after picking up from the
ground where they had been scattered, the brains of
Mile. Mennehand, had the body carried into the ProcSs’
house. During the night which followed, the , Germans
played the piano with the bodies lying by.
“ While the butchery was going on, the fire spread
rapidly and consumed' thirty-five houses. An old man
of 70 years, Jean, Lecourtier, and a child of 2 months
met their deaths in the flames. M. Igier, who was try-
ing to save some cattle, was chased for 300 yards by
some soldiers who fired upon him incessantly. This
man by a miracle had the luck not to be wounded;
but five bullets passed through his clothes. When
the cure Filler complained to the Duke of Wnrtem-
berg, who was lodged in the village, on the treatment
inflicted on his parish, the latter replied, “What can
srou5 r ou expect? We have bad soldiers, just as you have.”
“ In the same commune an attempt at rape failed
owing, to the stubborn and courageous resistance of
the victim. The attempt was made by three Germans
upon, Mine, D , aged 47 years. An old woman of'
75 years, Mme. Maupoix, was so savagely kicked by
heavily-booted men that she died several days after-
wards.
“ The little town of Clermont-en-Argonne, set against
a picturesque hill, in the midst of a pleasant country-
side, used to be visited every year by numerous tour-
ists. On September 4, during the night, the 121st
and 122nd Wurtemberg regiments entered this town,
smashed in the doors of the houses, and indulged in
uncurbed looting, which they continued through the
following day. Towards mid-day a soldier started a
fire in the house of a 'watchmaker by scattering about
the contents of a spirit lamp used for making coffee.
Another inhabitant ran immediately to get the muni-
cipal fire-engine, and asked an officer to let him haye
some men to work it. He was brutally refused and
threatened with a revolver. He then renewed his re-
quest with other officers but with no more success.
During this time the Germans continued to spread fire
through the town, using sticks on the end of which
torches were fixed. While the houses were burning
the soldiers invaded the church, which is in an isolated
position on a, rise awl danced there to the music of


the organ; they then set fire to it by means of gren-
ades and vessels fitted with wicks and filled with an
inflammable liquid.
“ After the fire at Clermont two bodies were found,
that of the mayor of Yauquois, M. Poinsignon, com-
pletely incinerated, and that of a young boy, 11 years
old, who had been shot down at point blank range.
“When the fire was put out, the looting began again
amongst the houses which the flames had spared.
Furniture taken from the house of M. Desforges, and
some materials stolen from the shop of M. Nordmann,
a draper, were heaped on motor-cars. A doctor-major
seized all the dressing material in the hospital, and a
superior officer, after having written on the entrance
door of M. Lebondidier’s house an order forbidding
looting, had a great part of the furniture carried away
on a cart with the intention, as he declared himself
without shame, of sending it to his own house.
“ We were overcome with horror when we saw the
lamentable ruins of Nomeny. With the exception of
several houses which are still standing near the rail-
way-station, there remains ho more of this little town
than a succession of walls, broken down and black-
ened, standing amidst a mass of rubbish, amongst
which one may see here and there animal bones partly
incinerated and the charred remains of human bodies.
“ The most tragic incident which took place in
Nomeny occurred in the house of M. Vasse, who-had
gathered in his cellar in the suburb of Nancy a cer-
tain number of persons. Towards 4 o’clock fifty sol-
diers invaded the house, burst in the doors and win-
dows, and set fire to it. The refugees tried to save
themselves, but were shot down one after the other
as they came out. M. Mentre was the first to be
killed. His sou, L6on, fell afterwards with his little
sister, 8 years old, in his arms. As he was not killed
outright, a rifle was put to his head and his brains
w r ere blown out. Then came the turn of the Kieffer
family. The mother was wounded on the arm and
shoulder; the father, the little boy of 10 years, and
the girl, aged 3 years, were shot. Their executioners
fired upon them while they were lying on the ground.
Kieffer received a bullet in the forehead; his son
had his skull blown off. Afterwards M. Strieffert and
one of the sons of M. Vasse were massacred, while
Mme. Mentre received three bullets, one in the left
arm, another in the left leg, and a third which grazed
her forehead. M. Guillaume, who was dragged into
the street, was killed there. Young Simonin, aged 17
years, came out of the cellar with her sister Jeanne,
aged 3 years. The latter had her elbow smashed by
a bullet. The other threw herself on the ground and
pretended to be dead staying there for five minutes
in frightful suspense. A soldier gave her a kick, cry-
ing “ Capout.”
“An officer arrived at the end of this butchery.
He ordered the women who were still alive to get up,
and cried to them, “ Go to France.”
“At Luneville on 25th September, about 3 o’clock,
the Germans burst into a house where Mme. Dujon,
her daughter, aged 3 years, her two sons, and M.
Gaumier, were living. The little girl narrowly escaped
death. Her face was burnt by the firing of a rifle.
At the same time Mme. Dujon, seeing her youngest
son, Lucien, aged 14 years, stretched on the ground,
tried to get him to stand up in order to fly with her.
Then she saw that he was holding his entrails in
both hands. The house was on fire. The poor child
was burnt, as was also M. Gaumier, who was not able
to escape.
“About 5 o’clock in the evening some soldiers
entered the house of Mme. Sibille, at Chanteheux,
seized her son without giving a reason, dragged him
200 yards from the house, and killed him, together
with M. Vallon. The two bodies were bound together.
A witness who saw the murderers leading the victims
away, saw them returning alone, and noticed that
their saw-bayonets were covered with blood and pieces
of flesh. After having committed numberless acts of
looting at Luneville, burning about seventy houses with
torches, petrol, and other incendiary instruments, and
after having massacred peaceful inhabitants, the
German military authority then thought fit to post up
the following proclamation, in which ridiculous accu-
sations are formulated in order to justify the extor-
tion of an enormous sum under the form of -an in-
demnity ;
“ANNOUNCEMENT TO THE POPULATION.
“On the 25th August, 1914, the inhabitants
of Luneville made an attack in ambush on the
columns and army trains of the Germans. On
the same day the inhabitants fired on some hos-
pital works which were covered by the Red
Cross. Moreover, shots were fired on wounded
Germans, and on the Military Hospital containing
a German ambulance. Because of these hostile
acts, a contribution of 650,000 francs is imposed
on the Commune of Luneville. The Mayor is
ordered to pay this sum in gold (and in silver
up to 50,000 francs), on the 6th September, at
9 o’clock in the morning, into the hands of a repre-
sentative of the German military authority. Any
objections will be disregarded. No delay will
be allowed. If the Commune does not carry out
punctually the order to pay the sum of 650,000
francs, all possible goods will be seized. In case
of non-payment, domiciliary searches will be
made, and all inhabitants will be examined.
Whoever has knowingly hidden money, or has
tried to take away goods beyond the control of
the Military Authority, or who tries to leave the
town, will be shot. The Mayor and the hostages
taken by the Military Authority will be held
responsible for the exact execution of the above-
mentioned orders. Order is given at the Town
Hall to publish immediately these commands to
the Commune.
“Henamgnil, 3rd September, 1914. j
“Commander-in-Chief,
“Von Fosbender.”
“ On October 16, at Haut-de-Vormont, some Germans
went to the house of M. Lingenheld and seized his son,
aged 36 years, who was wearing a Red Cross badge on
his arm, tied his hands behind his back and led him
into the street, where he was shot; then they returned
for the father, an old man of 70 years. Mme. Lin-
genheld then took to flight and came upon the body
of her son stretched on the ground. The unfortunate
man was still moving; the Germans sprayed him with
petrol and set fire to him in the presence of his terri-
fied mother; meanwhile Lingenheld was executed.
“ M. Yong, who was going out to put his horse in
the stable, was shot down in front of his house. The
Germans in their fury even killed the horse after kill-
ing its master, and then set fire to the house. Others
raised the trap-door leading to the cellar, in which
several persons had hidden themselves, and fired upon
them. Mine. Denis Bernard and a young boy. Barmen-
tier, were wounded.
“Towards 5 o’clock Mme. Rozier heard a supplicating
voice crying ‘ Pity, pity.’ These cries came from barns
belonging to Mme. Poinsard and Barbier. Later a per-
son who had acted as interpreter for the Germans de-
clared to a Mme. Thiebaut that the Germans boasted of
having burnt alive in one of the barns a father and
five children in spite of their supplications_ and cries
for mercy. This declaration is the more impressive
a's charred human remains were afterwards found in
Poinsard’s barn.
“ The excesses and crimes committed at Gerbeviller
were principally the work of Bavarians, The troops
which took part in these practices were under the
command of General Clauss, whose brutality has been
brought under our notice elsewhere.
“The Chateau of Beuzemont was invaded on 22nd
August. About the fifteenth day of the occupation
several motor-cars arrived, in which were a number
of wives of officers attached to the General Staff.
The cars were loaded with everything which could
be stolen from the chateau, notably silver, hats, and
silk dresses. On 21st October the Lieutenant-Colonel
commanding the th regiment of French infantry
took possession of this buliding. He found it in a
state of disorder and repugnant filth. Furniture had
been broken open and smashed, the floor in the billiard-
room was covered with fecal matter. In the bedroom
which had been occupied by the German General com-
manding the 7th Division of Reserves, there was a
stinking smell. The cupboard at the head of the bed
contained toilet linen and muslin curtains filled with
human excrement.
“ While we were at Nancy and Luneville we re-
ceived evidence regarding crimes committed by
the Germans in localities which their troops still
occupy. The cruellest of these took place in the vil-
lage of Embermenil. At the end of October, or begin-
ning of November, Mme. Masson, whose condition of
pregnancy w r as very apparent, was met by a patrol of
the enemy, who questioned her as to whether there
were any French soldiers at Embermengil. She replied
that she did not know, which was true. The Germans
then entered the village, and were fired upon by the
French. On sth November a detachment of the 4th
Bavarian regiment arrived and collected all the inha-
bitants in front of the church. Then an officer asked


who was the person who had betrayed -them. Sus-
pecting that this inquiry had something to do with
the encounter which she had had with the German
troops several days before, and realising the danger
that was being run by her compatriots, Mine. Masson
very courageously stepped forward and repeated what
she had already said, affirming that she had said it in
good faith. She was immediately seized .and forced
to sit on a bench alongside a young man, Dime, aged
24, who had been picked out haphazard to serve as a
■second victim. The whole population begged for
mercy for the unfortunate woman, but the Germans
were inflexible. ‘ A man and a woman must be shot,’
they said; ‘ that is the order of the Colonel. What
can yon expect? It is war.’ Eight soldiers, formed
two-deep, fired three times on the two martyrs, in the
presence of the whole village. The house, of Mine.
Masson’s father-ln-law c was then set on fire. '
“ On Ist, September, near Mery, the enemy opened
fire on some English artillery, and there was an
engagement between the cavalry of the two armies.
At this moment the Germans occupied a sugar re-
finery. They seized the Director, his family, and all
the .staff,, and, for the three hours during which the
engagement lasted, made them march parallel with
them to protect them from the rifle fire on their
flank. Among the twenty-five persons who were so
dangerously exposed were women and children. A
factory worker, Mine. Jeansenne, was killed, and the
overseer, Gourtois, was struck by a bullet in the left
arm. At 10 o’clock at night the enemy returned
in force to the village, but left the next day after
burning a house and conducting a general pillage.
“On 2nd September, at Senlis, the Mayor, M. Odent,
was arrested at the Town Hall on the pretext, against
which he protested, that civilians had fired upon the
German troops. While being led away, the Secretary
joined him at the Hotel Grand-Cerf, and proposed to
go. and get the two Associate Mayors, ‘ It is useless,’
he replied, ‘ one victim is enough.’ He was taken to
Chamant, and on the way was subjected to odious
brutality. His gloves were, pulled off and thrown in
his face, and his walking-stick was taken, and he was
hit violently about the head with it. Towards 11
o’clock he was brought before three officers. One of
them interrogated him, and persisted in accusing him
of having fired, or caused shots to be fired, on the
Germans, and warned him that he was about to die.
M. Odent went over to his fellow captives, gave them
his papers and money, shook hands and said good-
bye with dignity. He returned immediately to the
officers, upon whose orders two soldiers led him away
a dozen paces and fired two bullets into his head.
The murderers afterwards dug a shallow trench and
threw in the body, covering it with a layer of earth
so thin that the feet were exposed. Several hours
afterwards, 200 yards away from the same spot, six
other inhabitants of Senlis, MM. Pommier, Barbier,
Augert, Cottereau, Rigault, and Dewert were shot and
buried.
“ At Compiegne, where the enemy remained from the
31st August till the 12th of September, the chateau was
spared; the thefts which were committed were not
very important. But a great number of houses were
looted. The house of Count D’Orsetti, situated in
front of the palace, was completely sacked, especially
by non-commissioned officers. Silver, Jewellery, valu-
able ornaments were brought into the yard of the
chateau, where they were examined, registered, and
packed up. Then they were loaded on two vans on
which was placed the Red Gross.
. “ Acts ‘ committed in violation of the laws of war
relating to combatants, murder of the wounded or of
prisoners, stratagems disallowed by International con-
vention, attacks upon doctors and stretcher-bearers,
have been innumerable in all places where fighting
has taken place. It is impossible for us to verify the
greater number of them, as the ‘witnesses of them are
principally -soldiers who are obliged to be continually
moving about. These acts have been, moreover, re-
lated in the reports addressed, by the chiefs of army
corps to the military authority, who will be able to
add them to the documents of our inquiry if they
think fit A certain number, how-
ever, of such acts have been related to us.
“At Bar-le-Duc, Dr. Ferry, gave us some depositions
which he had taken. Sergeant Lemerre, of the th
regiment of infantry, declared to him that lie was
wounded on 6th September at Rembercourt in the leg
by the bursting of a shell. He had been left on the
field for eight days by the German ambulance men,
who had cl earl:/ seen him. On the fourth day, by the
order of an officer, who was passing over the field
with a revolver in his hand, Lemerre was wounded
99, 2 June, 1915,
again with a rifle shot by a soldier. He saw a number
of German stretcher-bearers fire upon the French
wounded.
“ On 22nd August a German detachment appeared
at Bonvillers (Meurthe-et-Moselle) at the farm of
Petite Rochelle, where the proprietor, M. Houillon,
was sheltering some French wounded. The officer in
command of the Germans ordered four of his men to
go and kill the nine wounded who were lying in the
barn. Each one was shot through the ear. When
Mine. Houillon asked for them to be spared, the officer
told her to keep quiet, and pointed his revolver at her
chest.”
OUTBAGES ON WOMEN.
“It is generally believed at Coulommieres that several
womou were subjected to criminal practices, but one
attempt of this nature has been definitely established.
A servant was the victim. A soldier came to her
place on 6th September about half-past 9 in the
evening, and told her husband to go and find one of
his comrades in the street; then, in spite of the pre-
sence of two little children, he tried to violate the
young woman. Hearing her cries, her husband
rushed back, but was met with blows with the butt
of a gun, and was forced into an adjoining chamber,
and the soldier committed the outrage. This took
place almost under the eyes of the husband, who,
terrorised, did, not dare to intervene, and occupied him-
self as well as he could in calming the terror of the
children.
“ A woman, X , at Sancy-les-Provins, and a
woman, Z -, at Beton-Bazoches, were also submitted
to similar violent treatment. The first was forced to
submit to a soldier, who held a revolver at her throat;
the second, in spite of her resistance, was thrown on a
bed and outraged in the presence of her little daughter
3 years old. The husbands of both these women have
been with the army since the beginning of the war.
“ At Rebal|' German soldiers maltreated a women,
X , aged 29 years, the proprietress of a wine
shop, on the pretext that she had hidden some
English soldiers. After undressing her, they kept her
in their midst for an hour and a half; then they tied
her to her counter, making her understand that they
were going to shoot her. They were then called out-
side and went away,' handing over their victim Go
an Alsatian soldier, who released her.
“ On the same day other soldiers attempted to vio-
late a woman, Z , aged 34 years, after having ran-
sacked her grocery shop. Irritated by her resistance
they tried to hang her, but she was able to cut the
rope with her knife which she found open in her
pocket. She was savagely beaten till the arrival of
an officer, whom a witness of the Incident had gone
to call.
“ At Saint-Denis-les-Rehais, on 7th September, a
Uhlan forced a woman, X -, to undress herself
while he threatened her with his gun; then he threw
her on a bed and violated her, while the mother-in-
law of the victim, powerless to interfere, strove to
prevent her grandson, aged 8 years, from seeing this
horrible sight.
“ On the . same day at the Hamlet of Marais, in the
Commune of Jouy-snr-Morin, the three daughters of
M. X aged 18, 15, and 13, were with their mother,
who was sick, when two German soldiers arrived,
seized the eldest and dragged her into an adjoining
room, where each violated her.. While one was so
engaged the other stood at the door, and, with his
rifle and bayonet, kept off the maddened mother.
The chfitean of . . . . , in the district of Fertg-
Gaucher, was the scene of terrifying events. M. X -,
an old man of independent means, lived there with a
servant, Mile, Y , aged 54 years. On sth September
several Germans, among whom was a non-commissioned
officer, occupied this property. After having had food
given them, the non-commissioned officer proposed to a
woman, Z , who had taken refuge in the chateau,
that she should go to bed with- him. She refused, and
M. X——, to protect her from the designs of which she
was the object, sent her to his farm close by. The
German ran after her, brought her back to the chateau,
and took her into an attic; then, having completely
undressed her, he tried to violate her. At this moment
M. X : , wishing: to protect her, fired off a revolver in
the staircase. He was immediately shot down.
“ The officer then forced the woman, Z , to come
out of the attic, compelling her to clamber over the
corpse of the old man, and led her into a small building
where he made two more attempts upon her but in
vain. He then abandoned her, and went to seize Mile.
Y- , giving Mine. Z— — over to two soldiers whe f


after violating,her—one once, the other twice- In the
b@sroom of the dead man, made her pass the night with
them in a barn. Meanwhile Mile. Y -was forced,
under threat of being shot, to undress herself, and was
violated by the officer, who kept her with him till the
morning. 1
“On September 3, at Suippes, Mme. X , aged 72
years, was seized by a German soldier, who, thrusting
the barrel of his revolver under her chin, brutally
threw her on a bed. The arrival of her son-in-law,
who had been attracted by the sound, fortunately
saved her from violation.
“At the same time and place a little girl, aged 11
years, was kept for three hours at the mercy of a
soldier who, having found her by the side of her sick
grandmother, carried her into an empty house, and
thrust a handkerchief into her mouth to prevent her
cries being heard.
“On September 7, at Yitry-en-Perthais, Mme. X —,
aged 45 years, and Mme. Z , aged 89 years, were
both raped. The latter died a fortnight afterwards.
“At Jussecourt-Minecburt, on September 8, about
9 o’clock at night,'Mile. X was violated by four
soldiers, who got into her room aft# smashing down
the door with a bill-hook. The four threw themselves
upon the young woman, who is 21 years oid, and each
raped her.
“In the village of Maixe, Mile. X , aged 25
years, was raped by nine Germans during the night
of 23rd August. An officer who was sleeping in a
room above that in which this ignoble scene took
place did not think it necessary to interfere, though
he must have heard the cries of the young woman
and the noise made by the soldiers.
“At Magniercs, where only one house was burnt,
a German armed with a rifle, about the end of August,
entered the house of M. Laurent and forced a girl,
aged 12 years, who had taken refuge there, to go with
him into a room. He raped her twice, despite her
prayers and cries. The poor creature was absolutely
terrorised. The soldier was so threatening that
Laurent did not dare to interfere.
“lii a commune of the Department of Meurthe-et-
Moselle, ; two nuns were the victims of a soldier’s
brutality during several hours. He forced them to
undress, and after compelling the elder to take off
his boots he attacked the younger obscenely. Pro-
mises which we have given prevent our publishing the
names of the victims of this abominable scene, as
well as the name of the village in which it took place,
but the facts'were related to us on oath by witnesses
who are worthy of the highest confidence, and we take
the responsibility of certifying' to their accuracy.”
Shooting. Party frustrated.
At Sancy-les-Provins, on the 6th September, to-
wards 9 o’clock at night, about eighty persons were
arbitrarily arrested, and shut up in a sheepfold. The
next day by the order of an thirty of them were
led 5 kilometres from the village to Pierrelez, where a
German Red Gross ambulance was stationed. A doctor-
major, after having spoken several words to the
wounded, the latter immediately loaded four rifles and
two revolvers with an Intention which no one could
doubt; moreover a French hussar, who had been
wounded in the arm and taken prisoner, asked the
priest for absolution, saying to him; “ Pam going to be
shot; then it will bevypur turn.” After having com-
plied with the request of this soldier the curd un-
buttoned his soutane and placed himself between the
mayor and another of his fellow-citizens against the
wall along which the hostages were lined up; but at
this moment two chasseurs a cheval of the French
army came along suddenly, and the doctors, together
with the wounded in the ambulance, surrendered to
the cavalrymen.
“ To show that the responsibility in this affair rested
with a high authority, it is interesting to mention that
the school teacher at Sancy, when he was about to be
taken away with the others, obtained from General
von Dutag, who was living in his house, the favour of
being left at liberty.’’
SYDNEY;
Printed and Phbliclicd by William' Applegate Gullick, Government Printer and Publisher of the State of
New South Wales, at Phillip-street. 2nd June, 1915.
[Price, 6 d.~]


[?] GERMAN ARMY IN FRANCE, CONDUCT OF
Lear Sir,
The Hsn» the Premier of Hew South w a3.es has sent. me
a communication, making the suggestion that the Supplemeuu
the Government Gazette, IT or 99, date 2nd June -191.5 ? containing
a translation of the Trench offie:a3 account of the German
atrocities in Northern Prance, snou-id be sene to the minister
in charge of each congregation so that the deplorable disclose
nres made by an impartial Tribunal may be made known far and
wide in the interest of recruiting.,
I am therefore, sending you herewith a copy of the
Gazette in question, and will leave you. to : ma,ke known the
details contained therein by the best method yon can think oi« .
I am aware that it is a hard matter .to-know how to .disclose
the dreadful contents -Of the document other than by allowing
people to read it for themselves j, still there oughJ to be some
pronouncement regarding, the report .which would lead people to
make enquiries .and read for themselves* . I feel, sure that
further copies: will be supplied by the _Government •• If appliecL-soit
Relying upon year co-operation in a matter which so
nearly affects the national well-being*
I am, Yours faithful^.
R[?] SCOTT WEST
G huroh. 0 f f ices.
By dney, 24t h J une ? 15 a
Moderator of Aasembly
