

WARRAGAMBA RIVER,
Sewerage of Sydney , Irrigation of Cumberland,
Relief of the Hawkesbury , Suburban Railway ,
and Defence of the North Shore of
Botany Bay , Jr
to
COMHX3NTBO IST OWE! SCHEME tJ
BY




SUPPLY OP WATER
FROM THE
WARRAGAMBA RIVER,
Sewerage of Sydney , Irrigation of Cumberland\
Relief of the Hawkesbury , Suburban Railway,
and Defence of the North Shore of
Botany Bay ,
COMBINED IW ONE SCHEME
THOMAS WOORE,
A Member of ihe Water Commission of 1872.
PRINTED BY F. WHITE, MACHINE PRINTER, 16G PITT STREET,
1876.




THE
WARRAGAMBA WATER SCHEME.
The tracing of this magnificent scheme, as proposed to carry it
through the country, is shown in the accompanying map. It
consists of a system of works to supply Sydney and its suburbs
with water: to irrigate the northern part of Cumberland, and
supply all the towns there with water ; and to relieve the
Hawkesbury from devastating floods. If carried out, the anxiety
that exists in reference to the first would be entirely removed for
ever; the second would convert the greater part of Cumberland
County into a productive garden, instead of being, as now, a
comparative waste, and promote health, comfort, and industry
in the towns to the highest degree; and the last relieve the
unfortunate inhabitants of that fine district from an intolerable
evil, that unless removed, will always endanger life, and be a
clog on energy and success. This country, with immense
advantages in climate, soil, productions, and situation, has the
great drawback of a want of regular moisture in the interior, and
an ample supply of water in the towns. The Almighty has been
most provident in giving us quantity, but at irregular periods,
leaving it to the reasoning powers of man to regulate such supply
to his own benefit, which it is the aim of this scheme to do. It
requires very little discrimination to see the immense advantages
that would accrue to the colony if it can be carried out, and the
object of this paper is to show its practicability, notwithstanding
what obstructionists may say. There are four heads under which
the subject may be considered: —
1. What means are there for securing the very large quantity
of water that would be required for these purposes ?
2. Is it practicable to dispose of that quantity when obtained,
as proposed in the plan ?
8. What would be the cost of doing so ?
4. What return may reasonably be expected from the capital
expended ?
In the absence of a complete survey, it is impossible to reply
to these queries with the precision necessary before determining
on such a work ; but there is sufficient authentic data in hand to
prove that the scheme is quite practicable, and that it may be
carried out at a comparatively moderate cost, for there are no very


expensive works to be undertaken, and those that are necessary-
may be accurately estimated, as they are all in view, which is
not the case in tunnelling through mountains of unknown
structure, as in the Upper Nepean scheme.
In viewing the first question—“ What means are there for
securing sufficient water?”
The catching area of the fluid that flows down the Warragamba,
as ascertained by the Water Commission, is 3247 square miles,
embracing not only a considerable portion of the southern coast
storms, but those that fall on the whole of the eastern slopes of
the main dividing range, from Lake George to Wolgan, at the
head of Cox’s Eiver, a distance of over 150 miles—a space that,
if the estimated fall of rain in inches was multiplied into, as is
usual, would produce an almost unintelligible number of gallons,
the quantity would be so great. This area is so very extensive
there cannot be a doubt that sufficient rain water falls upon it to
meet the largest demand that can be made, and if there was,
there is the whole of the area proposed by the majority of the
Water Commission, 354 square miles at the Upper Nepean, with
the addition of Bargo and the Middle Nepean, 448 square miles,
to fall back upon. These combined, making 802 square miles,
may be added to the above 3247 square miles, making a total of
4049 square miles that are available for this purpose —a space
that, coupled with the average fall of rain per annum, inches,
sets every doubt on that point at rest.
During dry seasons in this country it may be observed that the
rain-fall is very local. We have, frequently, heavy storms on
the mountain range that divides the eastern from the western
rivers, coming from ihe west, when there is no rain on the coast,
and vice versa. The coast ranges intercept storms coming from
the sea; all of which drain into the Warragamba, as may be seen
by inspecting the map of areas. Consequently this extensive
space is of material advantage in securing a regular supply iu
this variable climate, and not detrimental when there is such
simple means of getting rid of the overplus.
It is not likely this 802 miles would ever be required to
supplement the Warragamba, but it is well it should be in
reserve, as there is no foreseeing what may be required at some
remote period.
Then, as to the storage of this large quantity, rendered
absolutely necessary by the extreme variableness of the climate,
the resources are equally ample. The Warragamba, when
dammed up to the required height, will form a reservoir 14 to 15
miles iu length, with an average depth of 80 feet lying in a deep
gorge between mountains, where the least amount of evaporation
would take place, and this may be supplemented to any extent
by similar reservoh’s being made in the gorges of the Wollondilly,
Nattai, and Cox Eivers, all of which are admirably adapted to


the purpose, and all without interfering with private property.
In fact, the amount of storage that may be obtained is but a
question of cost, as there is scarcely a limit to the means of
retaining the fluid for any number of years.
As to the second query —“ Is it practicable to dispose of this
water as proposed in the map ? ”
The main difficulty in doing so is in intercepting the flow of
the immense body of water that rolls down the Warragamba
Eiver during floods,—a difficulty that all the members of the late
Water Commission, except myself, at once decided was not to be
overcome, and was one of the reasons given for refusing further
than a trial survey of the scheme: that difficulty spurred me on
to grapple with it, and I have so far succeeded tliat it now appears
a matter that may be simply and safely accomplished.
I propose to take advantage of two deep gorges that are on
the left bank of the river, one above and the other below its
junction with the Nepean (as is shown in a drawing) the heads
of which approach each other so nearly as to leave but a narrow
ridge between them. I propose to cut away this ridge to form a
new channel for the river, and direct the main body of the stream
into it by blocking up the present bed to the height required, by
a dam sufficiently high to cause whatever water is required, to
flow through a tunnel into Mulgoa, from which place there is a
natural and gradual fall in the surface of the country to Sydney.
These two new channels, that through the gorges, and that
through the tunnel should be of sufficient capacity to carry off
the greatest flood, and their levels be so arranged, as not only to
prevent the water flowing over the dam at any time, but that
the tunnel, should first draw off the quantity required for
irrigation and town use, and when the river discharged above
that measure, both channels would be open for the escape of
floods, and that in whatever proportion it was determined should
pass through each; that is to whatever extent it would be
advisable to relieve the Hawkesbury Flats by creating a discharge
into Port Jackson and Botany Bay. A simple arrangement of
the levels of the floors of these channels would effect this, and be
self-acting. In ordinary or dry seasons all the water in the
river would be retained, but immediately it rose above the
prescribed height there would be ample space for discharge into
Broken Bay, Port Jackson, and Botany Bay, and this without
any manual attention, thus dividing the stream (formidable in
floods) into three parts.
. % thus dividing the stream its force would be considerably
diminished at this point, and still more so by the surface of the
water in the reservoir, being rendered level II or 15 miles above
the dam, doing away with the present fall in the river in that
locality, which at present causes the stream to be violent; and
as these two new channels would be situated further up the


stream than the dam, the space between them and it would
assume the character of a placid lake during the heaviest floods,
thus removing all pressure from the dam but that arising from
the weight of the fluid in a quiescent state.
There can be no doubt whatever of the practicability of opening
and ultimate safety of these new channels, as they would be cut
through solid sandstone, and incapable of being destroyed by
any flood; nor of their capabilities to discharge the water in
whatever proportion is required ; but the substantial building of
a dam 170 feet high is open to much criticism, and, being of novel
construction and the key to the whole scheme, should have the
utmost consideration.
There is much difference of opinion amongst engineers all over
the world as to the form that should be given to such works to
obtain the greatest strength. Locality, the material that is
obtainable, and other circumstances, will necessarily have
considerable weight in determining such structures—what would
do for one place might not suit in another. All the engineer
can do, —and it is in this his skill should display itself, —is to
make the best use of the material he has at his disposal; for
instance, if there is abundance of earth at hand, and but little
stone, he must make an earthen structure, if the contrary, of
masonry work. It does not follow that because men of renown
erect great works to suit particular places, their example should
be followed in all cases. The true form of such works should
depend upon Nature’s laws, they should never be deviated from
if possible, but the material accommodated to them. Now, we
will consider —“ What are the laws that govern Hydrostatics P ”
and apply them to our circumstances as nearly as possible. It
is in this way that I have come to my results.
It is an established axiom that all fluids exert a pressure
perpendicular (or at right angles ) to the sides of the cavity that
contains them, and that the force is equal to the weight of the
fluid in a vertical column on the point of contact. This was
discovered, proved, and illustrated by Paschalle, 200 years ago,
and cannot be refuted, but it appears to have been lost sight of,
at all events not attended to by modern engineers in building
dams, and has been strongly contested as not true in this colony
by many that should know better. It may be simply shown in
practice by suspending a cask filled with water and boring a few
gimlet holes in it, at intervals, from the lower bilge up one of the
sides, through which the water may gush. It will be found that
the fluid will spout out at right angles, or perpendicular to that
part of the cask in which the hole is situated. To resist which
most effectually, if a plug is used it must be held in the
opposite direction ; if the hole is in the bottom, the plug would
be held perpendicular to the horizon, if at the side, horizontal to
the horizon, and if at any intermediate point, at an inclination


determined by the position of the hole, under any circumstances
perpendicular, or at right angles, to that part of the vessel in which
the hole is situated. No person desirous of stopping a dangerous
leak would hold a stick or plug askant to the hole.
This may appear frivolous and irrelevant to the subject by
some, as has been argued, but I contend it is upon this simple
law of Nature that the satisfactory formation of all dams depend,
and it should be thoroughly understood before applying any
material as a resisting power to water.
Now, in applying this law to the various forms of dams that
have been erected, of which a vertical masonry wall across a
stream the usual form adopted in masonry—and a dam, with
considerable inclination on each side—that used in earthen dams
are the two extremes. It is evident that the wall is the worst
torm that can be adopted, because the fluid acting at right angles
upon its inner surface, i.e, in a horizontal line, tends to drive the
structure out in that direction, where there is no natural resistance
opposite but the air, and with enormously increased force from
the whole column of water being close to the wall, consequently
the greatest weight, being close to its base, acting horizontally.
Those engineers who have adopted this form, either from force
of circumstances, or being content to follow the path of others
without reflection, strengthen their walls either by giving them
an arched form against the stream, with strong abutments on the
banks, thereby gaining increased resistance; or, by giving the
wall considerable batter on the opposite side, or both, in most
cases, succeed in gaining their object; but I contend the principle
is altogether wrong and that success is only obtained by increased
expenditure, which would be beyond all reasonable proportion in
works of great magnitude. In extreme cases it cannot be effected,
lo introduce such a work to intercept the Warragamba stream
would bo great folly, and it should never be adopted in less
extensive works but as a matter of absolute necessity. To
propose such a work as has been designed by Mr. Bennett, and
is represented in the Commissioners’ Report for that place at a
cost of £150,000, contrary to my strongly expressed opinion, could
ouJy be intended to bring derision upon the scheme, which it has
none, to a very great extent, among cautious non-professional
men, as the idea is looked upon as chimerical.
The true form to obtain the greatest strength is that exactly
opposite to a vertical wall dam, having its sides greatly inclined
dr^vf 18 r he as - is re P resen ted in the accompanying
i U f/i lu winch the action of the water is shown on both in
red and blue lines.) In this case the fluid, acting at right angles
m its inner inclined surface, tends to drive the structure down to
the earth where the force is met by the rocky bed of the river,
instead oj air as in the case of a vertical wall, consequently the


weight of water consolidates the structure instead of tending to
disrupture it.
Another great advantage this form possesses is that the
greatest weight of water is thrown where the greatest resistance
occurs —that is at the extremity of the inner base, and the column
decreases towards the apex or highest part where the force is
reduced to nought—contrary to the effect on a vertical wall
where the whole weight of the fluid is exerted immediately and
horizontally upon its base, tending to overturn the whole.
It will be seen that such an inclined dam obtains its strength
from the inner portion being in the form of a wedge, irrespective
of the form of the outer. The latter side may be vertical or
built with slight batter without decreasing the strength of the
whole. In the section of a plan I laid before the Water
Commission, which was published in the Appendix to their
Report, I proposed that it should be built so, but on further
consideration I see that as a matter of economy and of safety to
the work during erection, it would be better to incline that
surface also, although not to the same degree as the inner.
The strength of such a dam entirely depends upon the incli-
nation of its inner surface; any amount may be obtained by
extending the base up the stream. Suppose an exaggerate case :
that the base was carried a mile up the river with a uniform
incline from top to bottom, how insignificant the weight of the
water would be on its highest part, and how little resistance such
a gradual incline would offer to a stream passing over it.
If any doubt these assertions, I trust they will make public
their views, that the subject may be fairly discussed. There are
many gentlemen in these colonies who have taken high degrees
in European Universities and who should be well capable of investi-
gating such a mathematical point. Will they not give their
opinion to the public on this important question ? It is strange
that, after my positive assertions questioning the practice of the
first engineers in the world, all should remain silent. If that
still prevails, I think we may fairly consider them unanswerable,
unless indeed I am looked upon as unworthy of notice.
I have hitherto only spoken of the form of the structure. The
material to be used in the erection must in all cases depend upon
what can be easily obtained in the neighbourhood, as the mass is
usually so great as to preclude much carriage. As I have said,
it is in applying this material that the skill of the engineer should
principally develop itself. In the locality of the Warragamba
there is little but sandstone, and the debris therefrom, (excepting
timber) ; but, fortunately, they lie in a position where they
may easily be turned to good account. It will be seen by the
section of the river that the gorge is 767 feet G inches across
from cliff to cliff, and 323 deep from that level, but the dam would
occupy only the lower part of this space where the gorge is


about 600 feet across, and the dam requiring but 170 feet in
height. The great mass of material proposed to construct it lies
immediately over on each bank, while the debris taken from the
tunnel and bye-wash would add materially to fill the chasm. I
propose, by the aid of gunpowder, or other explosive substance,
to blast all the upper portions of these banks into the bed of the
river to form a dam, filling up the interstices between the larger
blocks of stone with the smaller, and such clay and debris as is
at hand, making as compact a mass of the whole as possible, and
finishing the inclines by pitching the rough stone that has been
thrown down, sufficiently smooth and compact as to form two
inclined planes, as is shown in the section of the dam. This
would not, of course, prevent the water from flowing through
between the stones, although a few floods would consolidate the
whole. To prevent which I propose to build a wall of rubble stones
(part of those already thrown from the high banks), grouted
with a mixture of cement and lime, across the gorge in the midst
of the mass, to act as a core to prevent the water from flowing
through, as a puddled clay wall is used in the middle of an
earthen dam to prevent leakage. This wall would be supported
on each side by the mass of rocks and debris packed closely to it
as it was built up, the whole being kept tolerably smooth that
little obstruction might be offered to any flood coming down
the river during its erection. If this was attended to, there
would be no risk whatever of any part of it being removed by
floods during erection or after ; the wall would be always
safe from being embedded in the mass of rocks, and
if the upper surface of the stones was kept level there
would be nothing for the stream to act against,
it must pass smoothly over. And, again, as the structure rose,
the water would not only have greater breadth to escape over,
but would approach the work with less force) from having come
along a level surface, which would be daily increasing, so that as
the volume increased, any risk of bursting would decrease,
consequently there would be no risk of the work giving way and
causing destruction on the lower levels by letting loose a quantity
of impounded water, as has been apprehended.
Dams constructed of earth, with inclined sides, (similar in form
to what I recommend) have been known to burst after resisting
the pressure of large bodies of water for many years, as was the
case of that at Sheffield, but the evil has invariably arisen from
an almost imperceptible leak working its way through the soil,
that after a time became a channel, which led to destruction,
probably first caused by the burrowing of some small animal.
All know how quickly the smallest stream will increase in running
through earth. Such a stream was observed at Sheffield, but not
attended to in time. This cannot take place in a dam constructed
of stones and debris with a watertight wall in the midst; and


if a leak did occur, it must remain in the minor degree—it could
not increase as in an earthen structure. I believe this evil, and
the pride of contending with difficulties, has been the cause of
engineers adopting masonry walls whenever the locality would per-
mit of their being carried out; for an earthen dam can never be
wholly depended upon; and therefore, in copying such walls, it
is not enough for us to say that engineers of renown in Europe
adopt them in particular localities, as in the case of the Ban and
Turens, affluents to the Loire, in France. We are not aware of
all the circumstances that induced their decision: there may
have been no other means of securing the object they wanted.
We should have proof of that being the most efficient form before
adopting it. Why should we be mere copyists ? What was our
reasoning powers given us for, if not to exert them to meet
unusual circumstances ? We have already suffered much from
blindly following the engineering examples of Europe in railways,
whether they suited our circumstances or not; but I hope there
is an end to that. This subject is not to be trifled with. Blunders
in other works may be endured, but the management of running
water is a more serious matter.
Here are certain data to work upon —
1. That the best form to give such a structure to obtain the
greatest strength and offer the least resistance to a stream
passing over it, is two inclined planes meeting at an apex.
2. That the best material for such a work, to withstand the
action of flowing water and prevent dangerous leaks, is stone.
But there are few situations where these advantages can be
combined. I believe there never has been a dam built the
required height (170 feet) with greatly inclined sides, entirely
of stone; in most cases the cost would be so enormous as to
preclude the attempt; but the Warragamba is an exception, and
offers such peculiar advantages for doing so, from having lofty
banks of stone in the immediate vicinity that may be thrown into
the river by blasting, and the debris easily removed by short
inclined rails, that the work can be accomplished at a moderate
cost; in fact it is nothing more than forming an ordinary railway
embankment of stones where the material lies most conveniently
plentiful, with the cheapest of walls in the middle of it.
If such a work as I describe was rendered .watertight by
introducing this concrete wall of masonry across the gorge, in
the centre of the work, and the inclined surfaces of the dam were
roughly pitched with the same material, I contend that no /load
could dislodge it, because it would offer no resistance to water or
timber passing over, either before or after completion. Have
we not examples of this in every stream in the colony ? Sand-
banks will be found in the bed of each of this form, that have
resisted the floods and timber that has come down their courses
for years, although composed of the smallest particles of rock.


And why ? Simply because their form does not offer obstruction
to the stream —only slightly changes its course. Nature shows
us how to dispose of this material, and we had better trust to her
examples than to our own vain conceits.
A concrete wall , if properly constructed, is impervious to water ;
its nature appears to be well understood by the engineers who
built those great masonry dams on the Ban and Turens, as they
have adopted rubble. I have amply proved that it is so in the
water-works attached to my mill at Pomeroy, and the substitution
of ashlar (squared blocks) for rubble in the Parramatta dam has
been the sole cause of its failure: if there is a doubt on the point
it can be easily proved.
However, it is not intended that the water should be allowed
to pass over the proposed dam when completed; the now channel
that would form the future bed of the river may be made of
sufficient capacity to ensure that, by simply quarrying, and it
should be on such a level and so constructed that none but useless
water could pass through it.
The rubble wall I propose would be thoroughly protected at
all times by the immense mass of rocks and debris piled up
against each of its faces, which would, after a few floods, become
a solid mass from the deposit of sand and mud in the interstices.
Then the action of |the water upon the dam would be to force
it down to the bed of the river, where it would meet the
resistance of solid rock. It has been contended that the films
of water that would occupy the minute spaces between the stones
before being filled by debris, would exert a lateral pressure
upon the embedded wall, equal to the weight of the column of
fluid, were there no rocks or stones there. This, in my
mind, is an absurdity that I am surprised any intelligent
man would advance, because stone does not possess the same
property of lateral expansion as water. There is no doubt each
film that touched the wall would exert that power, but even were
the rocks and stones thrown loosely about the wall, how little
water would touch it compared to the mass of rock lying against
it, and the latter may be packed so closely in its immediate
vicinity that no fluid would do so, consequently there would be
no lateral pressure on the wall from that source.
I thmk I have reasonably shown that the dam I propose to
build would be thoroughly effective in interrupting whatever
portion of the stream that would be required, allowing the
remainder to pass off, and that it would raise the water to the
required level. And also, that there is not the slightest cause
for alarm from the work giving way, either during erection or
after, as has been advanced as one of the objections to this
scheme; at all events it is perfectly clear to my mind that such
is the case, and I have no doubt any intelligent reasoner, who is
free from prejudice, will see the matter in the same light.


Now, having got command of any amount of water, at sufficient
height for the purposes proposed, it remains to he shown how
that can be disposed of. It will he remembered this is a scheme
to relieve the Hawkesbury Flats from floods —to irrigate the
northern part of Cumberland —and to supply the city of Sydney
and other towns with water. This is the ultimate result sought
to be obtained, and it should be kept in view in carrying out the
work, although it is not necessary or advisable that the whole
should be undertaken at first, or that more should be effected
at present than the resources of the colony would warrant, or
that would promise a fair return on the capital expended, for I
consider the matter as a speculation that should not only yield a
return, hut he a source of considerable revenue without touching on
its utility. The grandeur of the scheme leads to the impression
on first view that the result could not be obtained but at
enormous cost, but this is quite erroneous. Nature offers such
great facilities that there is comparatively little to be done by
man, and there is no enterprise in Europe more lucrative than
those supplying large towns with water.
When fairly understood, it will be seen that the scheme is not
only quite within the reach of the resources of the colony, but if
judiciously carried out should be the source of considerable
revenue, after paying interest on capital and annual working
expenses. And the work may justly be considered national, in
the same light as public railways, benefitting the whole com-
munity, directly or indirectly, which would do away with the
objection that has been raised to any scheme for supplying
Sydney with water alone from the interior, out of the general
revenue of the colony. I conceive the work should be national,
that is with respect to the main conduit; from which the govern-
ment would supply municipalities, companies, and even individuals
with the quantities they required, pro rata.
The dimensions of the works that would be necessary to dis-
tribute this water depends upon how much of the scheme would
be undertaken at first. The nature of the country through which
it is proposed to convey the fluid is such that very moderate
works between Mulgoa and Sydney would suffice to meet present
exigencies, which could be supplemented at some future date by
more extensive and substantial structures, to meet the require-
ments of a growing population with increased finances. But if
it is thought desirable to undertake the relief of the Hawkesbury
Flats, with partial irrigation, the works must be of greater
magnitude What portion of this great work it would bo
advisable to undertake at first is a matter that should have much
consideration. The extremes are great between the cost of
temporary accommodation and the grand result.
For instance, if it is thought desirable to relieve the Hawkes-
bury Flats from the risk of floods by preventing a large portion


of the Warragamba water from entering the Nepean, and throw-
ing it into Port Jackson and Botany Bay, the works upon that
portion of the conduit will require to be much more extensive
than what would be necessary to supply Sydney and its suburbs
alone, but they would embrace the whole scheme of relief, irriga-
tion, and towns supply; but if only the two latter are considered,
the required works would be of less magnitude than for the
whole, but still greater than for Sydney alone, and the amount of
irrigation that may be determined to provide for would be another
element in considering their magnitude, but I suppose all this
would depend upon the cost of construction, and that cannot be
got at until a detailed survey is made.
The proportion of water that would be allowed to pass through
each of the new channels would be regulated by the height of
their floors. If the whole scheme was embraced, none should
pass through the gorge channel or bye-wash, excepting in floods.
All the ordinary stream would be turned to good account, instead
of running waste into the sea as at present, but immediately the
water rose to an inconvenient height in the reservoir, the works
would be relieved by that means, and the effect would be self-
acting. There would be no depending upon servants to open or
shut flood-gates when they thought it necessary.
The tunnel and a bridge across the Nepean Eiver (shown on
the local map) would convey the water into Mulgoa, from which
there is a natural descent in the surface of the land, almost in a
straight line to Sydney, first following the slope of the country
to Prospect, then on the top of a ridge between Parramatta River
and George’s Eiver, at a height commanding the country for the
purposes of irrigation by gravitation. It is proposed to do this
by an open canal similar to a railway cutting, and open trenches
cut in the land, from which minute supplies would be delivered
through earthen pipes, the subsoil being very suitable, as it
is generally composed of clay. A dam 170 feet high will raise
the water fro n the present bed of the river to Mulgoa; the
descent from thence to Prospect, about 19 miles, averages three
feet and a half per mile on the first part, and three feet per
mile on the last five miles, just sufficient to cause a considerable
flow to get rid of flood-water. From the latter place to the
source of Parramatta Eiver to the north, and to George’s Eiver
down Prospect Creek to the south, the descent is very much
greater. It is through this portion of the conduit that
it is proposed to allow part of the flood-water that at
present inundates the Hawkesbury Flats to escape to
the ocean, consequently it would require to be of
much greater capacity than other parts of the work.
The object is to pass this flood-water on into the sea more
rapidly than the present course of the Nepean and Hawkesbury
admits of, for there is so little fall in those rivers, and the course


of the latter is so tortuous that the stream becomes quite
sluggish where it would be most rapid, consequently all the
flats on the low grounds become periodically inundated, causing
vast destruction of property and much misery, and there does not
appear to be any remedy for the evil there. The course of the
Hawkesbury might be straightened to facilitate the flow, at con-
siderable cost, but still there exists the want of fall in the land
that cannot be got over.
The present bed of the Warragamba at its junction with the
Nepean, is 88|- feet above sea level, from which the water has to
flow 94 miles before entering open water in Broken Bay,
averaging less than one foot per mile, but the principal descent
is in the Nepean ; that in the Hawkesbury does not amount to
six inches per mile —a fall quite inadequate to get rid of the vast
volume of water that accumulates there during floods.
If the W arragamba stream, at its junction with the Nepean,
is raised to the height I propose, it would be 252 feet above sea
level, and the water have only 29 miles to flow before reaching
open water in Parramatta and George’s Rivers, with an average
fall of nine feet per mile, but in this case the fall is regulated
thus :—Prom the Warragamba to Prospect about three feet per
mile, through the canal, from thence to Lansdown Bridge, down
Prospect Creek, six miles, and to Parramatta River about the
same distance; though the flood escapes the fall is considerably
more, as Prospect is 190 feet above either of those places to
which the tide ebbs and flows.
This is an advantageous disposition of the descent, as the
greatest velocity in the current would take place after the water
leaves the conduit, where it cannot do mischief. Too rapid a
flow of flood-water in the conduit would be inconvenient, as
interfering with other arragements, but the quicker it gets into
the sea from thence the better. Prospect Creek is admirably
adapted for a flood escape to any extent, without interfering with
private property, but to what amount the fall to Parramatta is
available, without interfering with private property, I am not
sufficiently acquainted with the details of that locality to give a
decided opinion upon ; no doubt such means of cleansing the town
would be appreciated.
However, it is quite evident that relief to the Hawkesbury
Plats from devastating floods may be obtained by this arrange-
ment, and that there is no other means of doing so —to what
extent is only a question of cost, for all the water in the river
might be diverted if necessary.
Prom Mulgoa to Prospect would in fact be what the Prench
call a Laide, being an extension of the Warragamba Reservoir
through Cumberland, lying from 250 to 190 feet above sea-level,
always lull, from being on a level or rather below the reservoir,
from which*supplies would be dispenced.


The supply for Sydney, and to irrigate the country between the
Parramatta and George’s Rivers would be drawn from this Laide,
that for Sydney, at Prospect, and conveyed along the top of the
ridge so as to command a fall on both sides, to a
large reservoir on the high land at Petersham for
immediate use, a plan of which I published in the Appendix to
the Report of the Water Commission. The height of Petersham
commands Crown Street Reservoir, and all parts of the city or
suburbs above that level could be supplied by utilising the force
of the water falling to the lower levels. There are many ways
in which this may be effected, but it is not necessary to go into
such detail at present.
All water required to irrigate the northern part of Cumber-
land, and to supply the towns there, would be drawn from the
Laide west of Prospect, and it will be seen by reference to the map
to what a great extent that may be done. As the Laide lies from
190 feet to 252 feet above sea level, the water may be conducted
along the tops of falling ridges, in a perfect net work all over the
northern parts of the country even to St, Leonard’s, along the
north shore of Port Jackson to the Heads, and over the low
lands around Botany Bay, but this latter part of the scheme may
well remain to some future period; at present the urgency is to
supply Sydney and its suburbs, which may be done, as before
stated, by comparatively light works, to be supplemented hereafter
as circumstances render it necessary.
The extent to which this great work should be gone into in
the first instance, and the proper mode of carrying it out,
furnishes matters for grave consideration ; blunders may be
made in carrying it out that it will be impossible to rectify here-
after. We may force a train up an unnecessary incline by an
extra expenditure of fuel and wear aud tear of machinery, but we
cannot alter the laws that govern running water, and whether
it would not be most economical to construct the canal in a
complete state at first, which would effect the two principal
objects, that of supplying Sydney and relieving the Hawkesbury
Plat, is a question that should have serious attention, but as
these points mainly depend upon the cost of the works, which
cannot reasonably be guessed at, until a minute survey is made,
no conclusion can be arrived at at present. Had the Water
Commission permitted this enquiry, at the cost of a couple of
hundred pounds, the matter would have long since been before
the public for their consideration.
The canal I propose would be simply railway cutting, keeping
a level along the slope of the land, for which the line of country
is very favourable. Besides the tunnel that has been described
as a channel leading from the Waragamba reservoir, which would
be 680 yards in length, there are but three others of 286 yards,
221 yards, and 1000 yards long—in all, 2187 yards—the first


three through sandstone, the latter a schistose formation. The
only elevated aqueduct required between Mulgoa and Prospect is
a bridge across the Nepean river where the gorge to be spanned
is 300 feet wide, ai a height of 141 feet above its bed. A plan
of a masonry structure is given, with three semicircular arches
of 80 feet span, resting upon two light piers that a tolerably
correct estimate may be made from ; there would be no sinking
for foundation, as the bed of the river is composed of solid rock,
which only requires levelling; nor for abutments, as the banks
are the same, and excellent material for ashler work is lying
convenienlly at hand—avoiding haulage. The width of this
bridge would depend upon the quantity of water that was
determined should pass over over it, and this would regulate the
cost. It is here the water of the Nepean may be intercepted by
a dam, and sent down the canal to Prospect and Sydney —a very
large supply of the purest article, collected from over 800 square
miles, but it would cause some valuable estates to be flooded ; for
instance, Winburn House would be under water. The valley of
South Creek may be crossed by an aqueduct 1000 or 1500 yards
in length; 60 feet above the bed of the creek, lessening in height
towards each extreme, but it may be better to form a dam
higher up the creek, conserving much water, with an escape for
floods ; and if this water was found not to be sufficiently pure
from having passed over Waimata shale, it could be used to
irrigate the lower country towards Penrith and Windsor. There
is only one short cutting required of 60 feet at its greatest depth,
the others are minor, and no other work of any magnitude.
It will be seen there is nothing in these works to create any
distrust as to their being effectually and economically constructed ;
nor should there be any' great delay in drawing a supply from
that source for Sydney alone. If the matter became very urgent,
sufficient w r ater could be procured for the city and suburbs to
supplement Botany, by intercepting the heads of South Creek,
Rope’s Creek, and Eastern Creek, or by pumping from the
Nepean, without waiting for the erection of the dam in the
Warragamba, or the bridge at Nepean—the two heaviest works ;
and not at any great waste of money, as those works would
always come in as a part of the great scheme, the main extra
outlay would be the pumping gear, which would be of little
service after gravitation was established from the Waragamba.
That portion of the line of aqueduct I proposed to Government
in 1866—from Prospect to Sydney—was plagiarised by the
Commission, consequently ratified by them, although laid out in a
very different manner to what I would adopt; therefore I need not
go over it, as its practicability is unquestioned, but I may mention
that I think those gentlemen should have acknowledged their
plagiarism. However, I would not follow their surveyed line,
but keep on the top of the ridge however circuitous, particularly


at Irish Town, from which high land an aqueduct would descend
on a leading ridge to Botany.
Now, I have before me undeniable testimony for every
statement I have here made, which can be produced at any time.
The extent and contour of the river gorge has been accurately
determined by trigonometrical measurement, and the elevations
of the country from Warragamba to Rope’s Creek (14 miles)
were measured by Mr. Wyndham, an intelligent Government
Surveyor, under the direction of the Surveyor-General, at the
request of the Water Commission, the correctness of which I
myself superintended. That from Rope’s Creek to Prospect
(5 miles) is part of the line I measured in 1847 for railway
purposes, the truth of which has been proved by the Water
Commission having applied the test of the levels of the Western
Railway to it—all of which were under examination in the Water
Commission. Nevertheless, the other members drew the very
opposite conclusions from myself as to the practicability and
utility of the scheme, and refused enquiry in consequence. This
will appear very strange to professional men, who know that
such surveys founded on such data cannot be controverted. It
is for me who stand in single minority to show the proof of the
conclusions I have arrived at, which are so directly opposed to
those of the other members of the Commission, and afford them
an opportunity for refutation.
The first error in the Report is that the bed of the Warragamba,
at its junction with the Nepean, is only 41 feet above sea level,
when the trial survey shows it to be feet.
2nd. That there is not sufficient fall in the country from
Mulgoa to Sydney to serve the latter with water by gravitation,
when the surveys show that Mulgoa is 116£ feet above Crown
Street Reservoir, averaging 3| feet per mile.
3rd. That a dam 170 feet high would not be sufficient to raise
the water into Mulgoa. Mr. Grundy estimates it would require
235 feet; Mr. Moriarty calculates 265 feet, when Mr. Wyndham’s
survey shows that the bed of the Waragamba is only 164 feet
below Mulgoa, to which add six feet head water=l7o feet.
4th. Mr. Moriarty states, that under any circumstances it
would require an aqueduct of 18 miles in length and 130
feet in height to convey the water from Mulgoa to Prospect, in
consequence of the conduit having to cross South Creek, Rope’s
Creek, and Eastern Creek, when the whole distance from the
Warragamba to Prospect is under 19 miles, with a gradual
descent all the way, and Mr. Wyndham’s survey shows that an
aqueduct of, at most, 1500 yards in length, and only 60 feet in
height above the bed of South Creek, lessening towards each
extreme, will answer every purpose, even should that be
necessary.


Height of Petersham
150
55
* 55
55
Rise to Prospect
40
55
55
55
Height of Prospect
190
55
55
55
Rise to Rope’s Creek
15
55
55
55
Height of Rope’s Creek
205
55
55
55
Rise to floor of tunnel at
Mulgoa
47^
55
55
55
Height of floor of tunnel at
Mulgoa
252i
55
55
55
Depth of gorge, or bed of the
Warragamba, below floor
of tunnel, at Mulgoa ...
164
55
55
55
Height of the bed of 'Warra-
gamba, at its junction
with Nepean River
881
55
55
55
sth. That the line of country I proposed would not command
Sydney by gravitation, although it was afterwards adopted by the
Commission, and is represented and recommended in their report
as capable of supplying Crown Street Reservoir.
The following is a synopsis of the elevations taken from the
above-mentioned surveys: —
Crown Street Reservoir 13G feet above the level of the sea.
Rise in the land to Petersham 14 „ „ „
This synopsis, taken from surveys that are beyond doubt,
proves that the foregoing statements, which are made in the
Water Commissioners’ report, are incorrect.
It shows that the bed of the Warragamba is 88-o- feet above sea
level, instead of 41, as represented.
That Mulgoa is 116 feet above Crown Street Reservoir;
consequently, that there is ample fall to bring the water down
from thence to Sydney by gravitation.
That there is a gradual descent in the surface of the land from
Mulgoa to Sydney, therefore it will not be necessary to convey
the water through the air 130 feet above that surface for 18 miles.
That a dam in the Warragamba of 170 feet in height will
secure a depth of six feet head of water over a reservoir 14 to 15
miles in length; consequently, it is not necessary to raise it 95
feet higher.
These mistaken assertions, coupled with an evident disinclina-
tion to entertain the subject, made me retire from the Commission
with the intention of waiting for a better opportunity to bring
the matter forward, which now appears to have arrived.


I have estimated for six feet head of water in the Warragamba
Eeservoir, but there is no reason against 20 head being impounded,
if desired, with perfect safety. Six feet in depth over such a
space would contain a vast amount of water, and this I
propose to extend 19 miles to Prospect, and, as I have stated,
supplementary dams can always be erected inj the adjoining
rivers.
As to the third query, What would the cost of such works be ?
I will not attempt to guess. The proper way to arrive at that, is
to have a complete survey made, to obtain correct data, from
which to start computations. No true reasoner will work on an
imaginary basis, for if he does, he can never be sure of his
results, and what man of sense would enter into large speculation
on an imaginary estimate ? The question has frequently been
put to me, when my reply has invariably been, What would an
architect say if you asked him for an estimate of the cost of a
house you proposed to build, without giving him the dimensions,
nor the number of floors, doors, or windows ? Such is a parallel
case to this. I want to know the dimensions of the w r ork
that would be required, the quantity of earth to be removed, the
number of bridges, culverts, &c., &c., and their size, which would
be necessary before I could satisfactorily go into any calculation
of cost. We have only got a trial survey as yet, this proves
its practicability. To ascertain the cost of the work that must
be amended, and again amended, until the best line of country is
discovered, on which the works would be planned, measured, and
estimated with certainty. There are men who do not hesitate to
flash off an estimate at sight, but lam not one of them; and I
think it will be observed that the country generally pays double
the amount of the first estimate before a work is completed.
The fourth query,. What return may reasonably be expected
from the capital expended ? This hinges on the preceding. We
have not got the principal element in the calculation, the amount
of capital that would be necessary, but can foresee that every
gallon of water that can be supplied for irrigation, town use, or
manufactures, would be of money value, and that when the work
was completed, even in part, the yearly expenditure in working
it would be very small, little more than superintendence ; a good
estimate may be made from the present and increasing consump-
tion in Sydney, but that is only one side of the question. My
impression is, if the scheme was carried out with skill and good
judgement, it would be a source of considerable revenue, as all
such schemes are in Europe, without touching upon its utility in
affording health, profit, pleasure, and comfort to the inhabitants.
Then, there are the indirect benefits, which are incalculable—
the relief to the Hawkesbury Elats, and general improvement of
Cumberland and the whole country, by introducing a complete
system of irrigation; for I believe this would be only the first


step towards that great result, as there are many other parts of
the Colony equally capable of such improvement that, were this
accomplished, would no doubt be undertaken.
I hope I have now done with this subject. I know of no part
throughout the globe, where similar advantages have been granted
to furnish a community with every necessary and luxury of life,
than is afforded to this Colony. If the present generation cannot
appreciate this gracious gift of the Almighty, they are to be
pitied. It would be more reasonable to help themselves out of
an abundance, than to be pining and praying for rain during
partial droughts, which no doubt were ordained for some wise
purpose, though we cannot see it. I have but performed a duty
in making use of what ability has been given me, by laying the
matter before them. I seek no reward here.
THOMAS WOORE.
Pomeroy, 17th August, 1872.


SEWERAGE OF SYDNEY
IN CONNECTION WITH THE
WARRAGAMBA WATER SCHEME.
In proposing this scheme for cleansing the city of Sydney and
preventing further deterioration of the harbour, in connection
with the great supply of water that may be obtained from the
Warragamba Eiver for household, manufactures, and sewerage
purposes, &c., it should be understood that I am providing for
centuries hence, not merely to satisfy present necessity, although
it need only be carried out by degrees, as funds and other
circumstances permit
From Blackwattle Swamp to the sea is five miles in a straight
line, which line cuts the heads of Darling Harbour, Eushcutter’s
Bay, Double Bay, and Eose Bay. Along this line I propose to
construct a capacious sewer, by tunnelling through the sandstone
ridges, and erecting a masonry or iron channel on the open
ground to carry off the filth of the city and its suburbs. This
sewer must necessarily be upon a level, or nearly so ; and as the
fluid will not spontaneously flow along a level, I propose to force
it by the following means :
In constructing the channel it should be made smooth, and so
formed as to widen sufficiently as it approaches the ocean, that
there may be no obstruction to the passage of the fluid from
confined area. This may be readily effected in cutting out the
tunnels (being in sandstone), by stopping all crevices and
irregularities in the strata with cement, and in the open spaces
across the head of bays, by placing iron sewers upon masonry
foundations.
In order to force the sewerage to flow along this level, and
cause it to discharge freely into the ocean, I would take advantage
of the high ground at Ashfield, and on each side, in its vicinity,
to construct main drains emptying into it, having considerable
fall, that would discharge with force, and, by their action on the
sewerage in the level, drive it on towards the sea ; and where that
power was insufficient, as would probably be the case between
Double Bay and the ocean, I would assist the flow by placing


twin propeller screws within the iron sewer, worked by small
steam engines where required.
The action of these screws would be threefold: —
Ist. By their rotation they would force the fluid on.
2nd. By creating a vacancy behind them in the fluid, forward
motion would be acquired by the action of gravitation.
3rd. By their preventing deposit of the slimy matter through
their agitating the fluid as it passed them.
The principal of these main drains would be a continuation of
the five-mile level of miles in a direct line, descending from
the high land at Ashfield, constructed in tunnel which
would make the main sewer miles long in a straight
line, discharging into the ocean from the cliff, where the
water is nine fathoms deep —the upper 3| miles being in fact a
column of fluid, eigh-ty-six feet in height, which may be made to
act with considerable pressure upon that in the level below,
forcing it to the sea. Into this sewer main drains would also
discharge from the heights of Petersham, Norwood, Stanmore,
Newtown, Balmain, and Glebe, which may also be made to act
as columns of fluid; and, again, by similar main drains discharging
from the heights of Eedfern, Paddington, "W oollahra, and
Waverley, on the south, and from Pyrmont and Sydney, proper,
(from York Street to Eushcutters’ Bay) on the north. Never-
theless, propelling screws would most likely be required to
accelerate the flow and agitate the fluid near the outlet to the
ocean, say at Eushcutters’, Double, and Rose Bays, to obtain a
sufficiently rapid discharge, and these may be multiplied to any
extent that may be found necessary, after trial. The section of this
iron sewer may be conveniently formed on this figure, s gv
for two reasons : —l. Being oval-shaped, the longest ''S. '
axis laid horizontally Twin screws worked within, would have
the greatest effect upon the fluid, and require less power to drive
them, as there would be the least depth to act upon. 2. This
form of iron sewer would be the most readily encased within the
masonry wharfage of the bays, from not rising to an inconvenient
height, and would readily permit storm water to pass over it
where designed to do so. It would also afford ready means of
placing trap hatches in the upper surface to get at the screws for
repair, or to admit of the sediment being saved and taken away
by boats or carts for manure, should that be found advantageous.
Por these reasons I conceive iron sewers in the open spaces
would be preferable to masonry They may be faced with
masonry, and metalled on the top to form wharfs.
Should there at any time be a partial scarcity of water, this
five-mile sewer may be effectually flushed by pumping sea water
into it at any of the bays. Critics may question whether such
twin screws would have the desired effect. It may be observed
that nothing of the kind is required in the new Thames Sewer at


London, although the fall can be but little. No doubt it has the
advantage of the reflux of the tide to clear it; but if a single
screw will drive the “ Whampoa ” or “ St. Osyth ” round the
globe, against the most violent winds and seas, surely several
pair will move this pailful of dirty water. Therefore, I think
there can be no doubt of a favourable result in this respect.
The work would be costly but it may be spread over many
years, and there can be no doubt as to its utility.
I propose also that a main sewer should be tunnelled from the
neighbourhood of Dawes’ Battery, round the head of the Cove
and Woolloomooloo Bay, intercepting the present mains that
lead down Pitt, Castlereagh, Phillip, and Macquarie Streets,
discharging into the five-mile level sewer at Rushcutters' Bay.
Other main drains would be required on the east and west sides
of Black Wattle Swamp, Darling Harbour, and Woolloomooloo
Bay, also Rushcutters’, Double, and Rose Bays, to complete the
scheme, but not for many years, so that no sewerage would he
allowed to enter the harbour at any point , although flood water
would escape where necessary.
It would also be desirable to effect an escape of noxious vapours
from this long line of sewer into the upper one. This would be
done by sinking shafts into it from the higher points of the
ridges it crosses, and over the mouths of them to erect chimney
columns that would conduct the poison far above human habita-
tions, somewhat similar to that in Hyde Park.
This subject has caused intense consideration in all large
cities for many years. The great difficulty to be overcome lies
in getting rid of the sludge; how to dispose of it when collected,
so as not to be injurious to health much less render it profitable,
has baffled the ingenuity of the most acute engineers. The aid
of chemistry appears to have failed, and as yet, no solution has
been found ; even in Loudon the Thames is still partially
polluted. How thankful we should be that Nature has afforded
us such ready means of throwing our refuse into the ocean, at a
spot where it cannot fail to be dissipated without injury to any
person, an advantage that no other city in the world possesses.
It is evident such an extensive system would require a large
quantity of water to flush the sewer and drains effectually, but
not more than any other efficient scheme. I believe that
quantity can only be obtained continuously from the Warragamba,
where there are over 4,000 square miles to collect from, with
almost unlimited means of storage in it, and in the deep gullies
of its tributaries —the Wollondilly, Nattai, and Cox Rivers—
enough to meet years of drought, which may be brought into
Sydney, by gravitation, at considerably less cost than by any
other scheme proposed, besides irrigating the country and
supplying other towns. A sufficient quantity for Sydney and
its suburbs alone, during many years to come, may be drawn


from the Nepean, where the proposed canal is to cross it, but it
would be at the cost of flooding many valuable estates in Mulgoa,
(for instance Winbourne House and premises would be entirely
submerged) and there would neither be sufficient water for other
towns, nor irrigation, nor relief to the Hawksbury flats, which I
propose to effect; or, water may be pumped into the conduit
without flooding the country, if that is thought to be desirable.
But I believe the Warragamba to be the only true source where
an ample and constant supply of pure water may be obtained at
all seasons. Water that is now running waste into the sea, and
occasionally doing great damage on the richest land in the
colony, may be made to cleanse Sydney and other towns, add
comfort to their inhabitants, and convert Cumberland into a
luxuriant garden.
It is admitted the water and sewerage questions should be
considered as one. I, therefore, append this to my Warragamba
Scheme, which is offered, gratuitously, to those interested, that
they may be viewed in that light.
The country about the junction of the Nepean and Warragamba
is so broken and precipitous that it astounds gentlemen who
occasionally visit that locality, who are prone to believe that such
a scheme as I propose is impracticable, and the late commission
have done their best to turn it into ridicule; but the careful
investigation of an intelligent engineer will soon unravel the
mystery, when it will be exclaimed —“ How very simple! ”as
was the case with Columbus and the egg.
It does not require engineering skill to observe the capabilities
of our rivers in affording a regular supply of water. Old
residents can form a better estimate of their enduring capabilities
from long experience than any measuring of streams during late
years. They are quite) different from European water-courses.
There the quantity is never below a known average, a portion of
which is strictly reserved to the inhabitants of the banks before
any is allowed to be abstracted. If the same law governs here,
as there is occasionally no stream, the towns would not be
allowed to take any away. Therefore, we should be on our guard
not to be deceived by masses of figures.


SUBURBAN RAILROAD
DEFENCE.
The foregoing scheme for cleansing Sydney by tunnels opens a
facility for extending the Eailway from the head of Darling
Harbour to Watson’s Bay through them, by merely widening
the opening and building off the sewerage portion. It may then
be carried along the heights of Waverley and Eandwick to the
shores of Botany Bay, and up the left bank of Shea’s Creek to
Eedfern Station, forming a first-class military road that would
skirt all the practicable landing places to the south-east of the
city, on which guns, troops, and war stores may be rapidly
conveyed to any point threatened with attack from an enemy —
an advantage of very material consequence to a community
possessing small means of defence. Tt ere is little use in fortifying
Port Jackson if the city is left entirely exposed from Botany Bay,
as at present, for no ship would attempt to enter the Heads while
there exists such safe anchorage and facilities for aggression as
that bay affords. Such a road would be in effect a continuous
battery round an exposed coast, and afford- protection to our
valuable water-works there, as heavy guns could be moved along
it and placed in position at any point with celerity, and there
masked by Toddleben’s celebrated sand batteries. Eighteen
years ago I called attention to the exposed position of the present
pumping machinery that supplies Sydney with water, which a
pinnace, with a gun in her bows, might destroy any night, as the
house containing it affords a conspicuous mark. It might at all
events have been painted black to render it less conspicuous ; but,
notwithstanding all the money that has been expended upon
fortifications, this, the weakest point, has been entirely disre-
garded. Verily, we are more indebted to the pacific tendencies
of some European statesmen, who have warded off a general war,


than to our own foresight, for exemption from this evil; hut that
may not always be the case. The tunnels would only require
widening to admit the passage of a train —the stone and debris
from which would all be available to wall off the sewerage portion
to prevent the escape of offensive odour and to form the wharves
and railway.
Besides affording this material defence to the city, this road
would be a very important work in facilitating communication
through those suburbs which are becoming thickly populated
and in giving Rushcutters’, Double, and Rose Bay, some of the
advantages of the Cove and Darling Harbour, in loading and
unloading vessels; and there is little doubt it would return a
fair interest upon the money expended in its construction from
this traffic alone, besides relieving the colony of the dead weight of
large sums being expended there upon fortifications , and their main-
tenance, which notwithstanding they may be necessary, are unremu-
nerating. We have lately been told of the vast wharfage space
the citizens of New York have provided for their trade, which,
indeed, is the case in all American seaports. We cannot do
better than follow that enterprising nation in their engineering
works.
With our very limited number of fighting men, which are not
likely to increase in proportion to the wealth they have to guard,
we should be prepared to throw them, with the least delay, upon
any point attacked, and they, to a man, should be well drilled
in handling heavy field cannon, upon which the defence of this
city will for many years depend. I have little faith in the
elevated batteries around this harbour as a defence to the city,
notwithstanding their great weight of metal, which, indeed,
renders them somewhat ineffective. I have never heard of guns
so elevated being effective. The elevated galleries at Gibraltar,
upon which the Spaniards mainly placed their dependence, were
found to be useless at the seige, while one shot from the point
blank rock guns at the Dardanelles disabled one of our line of
battle ships by knocking two ports into one, and the
combined French and English iron clad fleet dare not
attack the Point Blank casemated forts in the Baltic
during the Russian War. Plunging shot have never been
proved to be effective in the defence of a harbour, although
admirable in the destruction of a town. Therefore, the enemy
here is given an advantage. A true gunner knows the benefit
of a point blank range. I would trust more to such a road as
I have described, well served with guns, amunition, and men,
than all the forts that could be erected about Botany.
Perhaps I am wrong in saying so much upon this subject,
as the question under consideration is sewerage; but water
supply, cleansing the city, and its defence, appear to be so
combined that they cannot be judiciously separated. I have


touched upon defence only so far as it may be allied with the others
and to show what may be expected from itinerant batteries
traversing a defenceless shore ; for it is wise and economic to
consider these great engineering questions now forced upon the
community as a whole, as they intimately bear upon each other,
and the future prosperity of the country greatly depends upon
their being successfully carried out.
THOMAS WOOEE.
Pomeroy, 25 th May, 1876,






- /
