

Military Society of Ireland
SUPPLY AND TRANSPORT ON
ACTIVE SERVICE.
BY
LIEUT.-COLONEL E. W. D. WARD,
D.A.A.G., Ireland.
WEDNESDAY, 22nd MARCH, 1893
DUBLIN:
SI BL EY & CO.,
ARMY PRINTERS, BOOKSELLERS, AND STATIONERS,
51 GRAFTON STREET.




®9Bari| jlnnEli| dl{ §r«lanb.
SUPPLY AND TRANSPORT ON
ACTIVE SERVICE.
BY
LIEUT.-COLONEL E. W. D. WARD,
D.A.A.G., Ireland.
WEDNESDAY, GGud MARCH, 1893.
DUBLIN:
SIBLEY & CO.,
Army Printers, Booksellers, and Stationers,
51 Grafton Street.


Wednesday, 22nd March, 1893.
SUPPLY AND TRANSPORT ON ACTIVE
SERVICE.
By LIEUT.-COLONEL E. W. D. WARD, D.A.A.G., Ireland.
General Right Hon. Viscount Wolseley, K.P., G.C.B.
G.C.M.G., Commanding the Forces in Ireland, in the Chair.
Lord Wolseley. —Gentlemen, it is scarcely necessary for me to introduce
to you Colonel Ward, he is so well known to all of you as an officer on the
staff. I am very glad that he is going to give us a lecture upon a subject
with which he is intimately connected, and which he has studied for a great
number of years, namely, “ transport and supplies for an army in the field.”
Colonel Ward. —Lord Wolseley and Gentlemen—in the
course of a most interesting lecture on Army Organization,
recently delivered before this Society by Colonel Rothwell, of
whose sudden death we have heard within the last few days and
whose loss to the service I am sure all here will join with me in
deeply regretting, he stated that the limited time at his disposal
did not admit of his touching upon the supply and transport
service of the Army. That being so, it was suggested by certain
of the members that I should prepare a paper on the subject,
describing, as far as in me lies, our existing war organization for
these services. The knowledge that, when reading it, I should be
addressing many officers with considerably more experience than
myself, caused me to hesitate before deciding to do so.
Nevertheless, the paper I am about to submit to you is the out-
come of the suggestion, and I may mention at once that, owing
to the magnitude of the subject, I have not found it practicable
to deal with all its ramifications in detail. The following
remarks, therefore, should be regarded more as a simple outline
of the various phases of the organization, as they present
themselves to my mind, rather than as an exhaustive treatise on
the whole subject.
I think it may be safely asserted that in no portion of our


military machine have more beneficial reforms been effected
during recent years than on that which we are now about to
consider. To fully appreciate this it is only necessary to reflect
for a moment upon the condition in which the outbreak of the
Russian War found us with regard to both of these services. At
that time, there was no land transport organization in existence
worthy of the name, and the supply organization was even more
futile, supposing that to be possible. When the expedition
landed in the Crimea, the transport for the whole army consisted
of seventy-five mules only and a few carts, which, it may be
interesting to note, is but slightly in excess of the number of
animals which we now' allot to a battalion of infantry on a war
footing. The supply service was also in a similar state of
unpreparedness, and when it is considered how it must have been
crippled through the absence of sufficient transport the
deplorable results which history records as the consequences do
not cause wonder. It is, however, needless to dwell upon these
matters, and I only refer to them to show the chaos and
confusion out of which our military organizers have during
recent years evolved a transport and supply service capable under
any circumstances of rendering a good account of itself. The
experience gathered from the various wars and expeditions in
which we have been engaged since the Crimea has also been
carefully utilised in moulding and perfecting this system, and has
without doubt been invaluable in bringing it to its present high
state of efficiency. It is by force of circumstances bound to be
elastic to be of any good, as it is liable to be put into operation
in almost every quarter of the globe. The physical characteristics
of the countries in which we have had to fight, have also been
taken into consideration when formulating the present system,
and nothing has been left undone which human foresight could
anticipate to make our supply and transport service an efficient
and capable organization.
I will now endeavour to explain the working of the system in
the event of an outbreak of hostilities. The carefully com-
piled mobilization regulations and field army establishment
tables, a lecture on which has lately been delivered to this


Society, give full and complete directions as to the steps to be
taken when engaged in operations against a European foe. Our
whole experience, however, of later years has been of smaller
expeditions than those' dealt with in those tables, and therefore
they are not applicable in all cases. In order to illustrate the
system let it be supposed that the force which would be sent to
sustain our prowess in the field, would consist of the whole, or
some portion, of that now known as “ The Field Force.” This
force consists of an infantry division, a cavalry brigade, a
mounted infantry battalion, five batteries of horse and field
artillery, together with the necessary complement of the other
branches of the service, and numbers about 20,000 men and
8,700 horses. With the view of further illustrations, let it be
assumed that this “ Force” has received orders for embarkation,
and that its destination is a country where railways are non-
existent, and the provisioning of the force, a matter entirely
dependent upon, sources foreign to the hostile country.
Concurrently with the concentration and embarkation of the
force, the work of providing the necessary supplies by contract
is undertaken by the War Office authorities. These supplies
when procured are delivered into the Supply Reserve Depot,
Woolwich Dockyard, where they are examined, repacked in
cases of such size and weight as will be suitable for handling by
one individual, marked, and lastly shipped to the seat of war.
They consist of salt and preserved meat, flour, groceries, medical
comforts, forage and such like, in fact all those articles of food
which are necessary, in the absence of fresh provisions, to
provide the stipulated ration for a force on active service.
Endeavours will however at all times be made to provide and
maintain the forces with fresh provisions in preference to the
preserved commodities which will only be broken in upon when
the former fails. In connection with this portion of my subject
and with the view of reducing to a considerable extent the con-
fusion which is generally inseparable from the commencement
of a campaign, I would propose the invariable adoption of the
following expedient, viz.—That all troops embarking for active
service, should be ordered to carry with them in bulk and in


charge of the regimental authorities for subsequent issue, two
days’ preserved rations with the addition in the case of mounted
troops of two days’ forage for each animal. These rations
would be consumed during first two days on shore, and before
any demand is made on the base, which should not be called
upon to make any supply to a unit until the third day after land-
ing. The utility of this arrangement will, I think, commend
itself to all those who have experienced the difficulties connected
with the first portion of a campaign, as one which will be
beneficial both to the troops and to those concerned in their
supplies. In connection with the other preparations, arrange-
ments will, as a rule, be made at the War Office for the supply
of cattle for slaughter.
The strength of the Army Service Corps laid down for our
hypothetical field force is nine companies, which would be
selected from the existing thirty-four service companies of the
corps. An Army Service Corps company on a peace footing
consists of fifty-six of all ranks and thirty-four horses with an
adequate addition of clerks, butchers, and bakers. When,
therefore, a company is ordered on service, it is necessary that it
be augmented by numbers both of men and animals until it
reaches a war establishment varying, as regards men, from one
hundred to one hundred and thirty, and with a corresponding
increase as regards animals. This augmentation would be
effected in the ordinary course of mobilization in accordance
with the very distinct instructions which have been issued on the
subject. The men would be selected from those joining the
Army Reserve and the animals would be provided by the Remount
Establishment.
The circumstances in which we have elected to place our
hypothetical force will not most probably entail the embodiment
of all the first-class Army Reserve. This course does not at
present seem to be practicable, but, from the views expressed by
the Secretary of State for War in a recent speech, it is to be
hoped that we may soon be in such a position as will enable us
to obtain for our small wars the services of a limited number of
reservists. Should, however, it not be possible to secure the


additional men required from the Reserve, one or other of the
following plans would be adopted. The necessary complement
of officers, non-commissioned officers and men would be
obtained by transfers from the other companies—a matter of
extreme difficulty in consequence of the low establishment at
which the companies are maintained —or the company would be
embarked as a skeleton cadre, the additional drivers required
being obtained from the nearest available source to the scene of
operations.
The bakers, butchers, and clerks required would be obtained
by withdrawing men of these trades from the various home
stations where they may be employed for the time being;
replacing them by soldiers from regiments or by civil labour.
The sources abroad from which the animals could be obtained
are so numerous that it is perhaps unnecessary to particularise
them, more especially as the work connected with their supply
will be one of the duties undertaken by the remount department,
This department will also provide all the animals required for
the auxiliary transport and to replace casualties. In times past
the equipment of a company of the Army Service Corps was to a
considerable extent obtained from the Ordnance Store Depart-
ment at the base of operations. This practice gave rise to
endless confusion to say nothing of the unnecessary labour it
entailed upon that department. This is now altered, and a
company proceeding on active service takes with it all its
equipment which is retained in readiness for it, similarly to that
for the other units of the field force. Where a company is
embarked, it is in the highest degree important that the ship
conveying it to its projected destination should also carry all the
bakery' and butchery equipment, waggons or implements, etc.,
necessary to enable those composing it to commence their
various functions immediately on landing.
Before proceeding to a consideration of the various
administrative arrangements, I will briefly describe the duties of
the staff officers, who, under the officer commanding the lines of
communication, are responsible for the supply to the force of all
things necessary for its maintenance in the field. As it is


essential that these officers should be among the first arrivals at
the scene of operations, the present portion of my paper suggests
itself as the most appropriate opportunity of referring to them.
The supply duties of the whole force are placed under the charge
of a staff officer. Directly under this officer, as regards the
chain of responsibility, are two other staff officers : the one res-
ponsible for the supplies at the base, on the lines of communica-
tion and at the various depots; the other charged with the care of
all matters connected with the supplies of the force in front of
the advanced depot. Then there is the director of transport who
is responsible for the working and economical use of all the
transport of the expedition of every description, and is also
charged with the organization of all the local transport, that is,
the transport which has not been despatched from England in a
complete condition. His sphere of duties is therefore a wide
one, extending as it does over the base, the lines of communica-
tions, and the troops employed in the front. It is his duty to
ensure the judicious use of every portion of the transport under
his control as may best tend towards the general good of the
expedition. To do this effectually, he must have a thorough
knowledge of the various details connected with the transport of
the force. Should water transport be employed it will also be
worked under his directions.
Having completed as far as possible all our arrangements at
home we will now proceed to our supposed scene of operations.
It must further be assumed that we have been able to effect a
landing, and that therefore we can establish our various depots
at the base and start upon our administrative duties. On the
issue of orders to the various companies of the corps ordered on
service, a notification is also made of the special duty on which
the company will be employed, such as the supply and transport
of a brigade, work on the lines of communication, at the base, or
some other clearly defined sphere. The companies selected for
brigades, and in fact all those intended for duty with the
fighting force should be those companies which left England
completed to their war strength, leaving the remainder for
distribution between the reserve force, the line of communica


lions, and the base. The advantage of this disposition is that
it will at once afford transport sufficient for the first requirements
for all purposes of the force proposed to be engaged, and it will
give the staff of the expedition an opportunity of organizing and
equipping the auxiliary or local transport of which the skeleton
companies will form the ground-work.
This work, that is the organization of the Auxiliary Transport,
will be carried out in the transport receiving depot which
should be one of the earliest establishments formed at the base.
At this depot will be received all the animals and auxiliaries
arriving to complete the skeleton companies, and among the
subordinates on its staff there should be an adequate number of
saddlers and other tradesmen. On the arrival of the officer
commanding a company, destined to form an auxiliary company,
he would receive from this depot the drivers and animals required
to complete his strength, and also any equipment which he
might require in excess of that brought out with him.
The next establishment deserving of our attention is that
designated the “base depot” for supplies and its requirements.
The landing stage for stores, if on the sea coast, or a river
bank should be easily accessible to boats and lighters, and in
selecting a site for the “base depot,” the great object to be
kept in view is that it shall be as contiguous to this landing
stage as the nature of the surroundings will admit. It must be
large enough to stack for a force of the strength under con-
sideration, if necessary, upwards of two thousand tons of supplies
and allow sufficient space for the loading of the transport
conveying the supplies to the front. In it there should also be
a space provided for the cattle and sheep received for slaughter.
Should any distance separate it from the landing stage, a light
portable railway with small trucks would be of immense advan-
tage. In Austria a railway of this description is much used.
I refer to Dolberg’s patent railway, which I dare say many
among you have seen. A working section of it was on exhibi-
tion in Dublin at the Military Tournament of two years ago.
Its advantages lie in the fact that it can be used by inexperienced
men with ease and rapidity. The rails can be laid over any


ground and shifted without the slightest difficulty, the trucks
when loaded being easily pushed by hand. Some such arrange-
ment would facilitate the work of the officers at the base in
removing the supplies as they were landed. This is of special
importance at the commencement of a campaign, when supplies
and stores arrive in large quantities, and their rapid removal
from the landing stages is a matter of urgent moment. Failing
the railway, the work would have to be carried out, as best it
may, by manual labour assisted by the available transport
at the base.
British soldiers take very unkindly to the heavy and wearisome
work connected with the moving and packing of stores and,
moreover, their employment in large bodies as fatigue or working
parties is a profligate use of a very expensive article, especially
so in the hot climates where, as a rule, our campaigns take place.
It is, therefore, desirable that a carefully organized corps of
labourers or coolies should be enrolled for this purpose. The
men could be obtained from countries or dependencies having
climates similar to that of the land in which we happen to be
hostilely engaged. This corps should be so organized as to
admit of its division into small sections each under a head man.
Careful arrangements should be made as to their pay, and also
for, what is a matter of considerable importance—their remit-
tances of pay to their families. In order that they may be
distinguished from the other civilian employees, and also from
the natives of the country, they should be provided with a
uniform or badge peculiar to their corps. Their sphere of
duties should not be confined to the base alone, but should be
made to include all the depots or stations which might be formed
in the wake of the army. This corps should be under the
command of a capable officer able to speak the language of
those under him, and experienced in the work of organization,
and who should be assisted by an adequate European staff. The
“ base depot ” is under the charge of the general or other
officer commanding the line of communications, and from it are
obtained all the provisions and provender required by the force
until such time as an advanced depot may be established. A


bakery and butchery should form part of its equipment, and it
should contain in itself all the facilities necessary to receive,
issue, and account for, the whole of the supplies, of whatever
description landed for the sustenance of the army. It may be
properly defined as the heart of the system ; into it come all the
supplies, and from it will be conveyed either directly or through
its arteries —that is, the lines of communication to the various
stations, brigades, or detached units —the necessaries of life for
man and beast. There also is carried out the selection and
arrangement of the various descriptions of rations authorised to
be issued to conform with the religious scruples of the many
nationalities which usually compose our expeditions. Here also
the necessary precautions are taken, when despatching those
supplies to the front, to ensure that all and every consignment
represents so many complete rations of either provisions,
groceries, or forage. It will thus be seen how essential it is
that this fundamental factor of our organization should be
competently managed and systematically worked. I may add
here that at the base and under the superintendence of the staff-
officer administering the supply and transport services thereof,
is a depot for the supply of the troops located there who do not
form a portion of the other organized portions of the field force.
At the base also, as a rule, will be found the office of the officer
charged with the command and interior economy of the Army
Service Corps. With this necessarily brief description of some
of the more important features of the “ base depot,” we will
pass on to a consideration of the lines of communication.
The successful working of the lines of communication is such
an important adjunct to the success of a campaign that it would
be injudicious to lay down hard and fast rules for their organi-
zation. The condition of the country, whether peaceful or
otherwise, its topography and climate, the strategical advantages
of one route over another, the distance of the base from the
advance depots, the available transport —whether land or water
—all these and more have to be taken into consideration on the
spot, before any decision can be arrived at as to the best mode
of working them. Along these lines to the front, are conveyed


all the supplies, amunition, stores, and all the paraphernalia
required for a fighting force, while down to the base come the
sick and wounded, so that the transport service, whatever its
nature, must be such a one as will admit of the regular and
constant conveyance of everything committed to its care. In a
peaceful country where there is no apprehension of an attack, the
distances between the several stations should be short, the traffic
being worked on a system similar to that of a well-organized
railway ; where the country is disturbed, and escorts are necessary,
the arrangements will be contingent upon other, and more
potent considerations which can only be dealt with as they arise.
The general principle which is applicable to both conditions is,
that the distances between the stations should never be of such
length as will unduly strain the strength of the transport animals.
The regulations suggest six miles as the length of a stage on a
good road, that is, six miles with a loaded cart, and six miles
returning with an empty one. This is, 1 consider, a sound
suggestion, and it admits of the animals being constantly worked,
and also ensures that they and their drivers shall have their
regular rest. Each station on the line should contain food
and water for the troops resting at or passing through it, and for
the transport animals of the convoys. It should have temporary
resting places for the sick and wounded, who may have occasion
to halt there, and should contain, when possible, a small reserve
of animals and vehicles, and also parts of vehicles to meet
casualties. Along the lines of communications the transport is
superintended by the officers, warrant officers, and non-com-
missioned officers of the companies of the Army Service Corps
detailed for this duty. These companies also furnish the Army
Service Corps detachments for duty at the various stations. The
magnitude of the work over the lines of communication may be
more easily comprehended, perhaps, when it is considered that
the weight of stores and supplies required daily for an army
corps will amount to three hundred tons, while for the field
force which we are now considering the daily amount will be
about two hundred tons. Even in the case of the smaller
expeditions in which we have been from time to time engaged.


it will be seen, from the foregoing fact, how extensive must have
been the daily traffic along these lines. As the strength of a
chain is exactly the strength of its weakest link, so with a line
of communications, weakness or failure at one station, or on any
portion of the line is liable to seriously affect the whole organi-
zation. Friction must be avoided, and speedy and safe transit
assured for all the stores and supplies going up, and to the sick
and wounded coming down —all transport being at the same time
utilized to the best and most economical advantage. There is
always a latent desire and one which can be easily understood
among those engaged in the work connected with the forwarding
of the stores and supplies, to press on heterogeneous consign-
ments thereof in the belief that by so doing they are providing
against the possibility of a break down. This desire, however
laudable, should be kept well within limits, as it soon degenerates
from good to evil, and may become a matter of serious concern,
should any variation in the conduct of the operations be desirable
or necessary.
We now come to the consideration of the advanced depot
which is the frontal terminus of the lines of communications.
It will be supplied and replenished as occasion arises from the
“base depot,” and from it brigades and divisions will be
supplied with all they require. Whatever reserve may be fixed
upon for retention at this depot should be scrupulously
maintained. This remark also applies to the intermediate
stations on the line. The “ advance depot ” will be constituted
on similar lines to the “ base depot.” The officer selected for
charge of it should be known as a man of resource, capable of
meeting at any time an emergency and of overcoming difficulties.
As the line lengthens so will the “ advanced depots ” become
intermediate stations retaining all the requisites provided
therefor.
Before leaving this portion of the subject, the exigencies of the
Ordnance Store Department accompanying our field force, as
regards transport, must be considered. It also has a store at
the base from which all the stores necessary for the force, other
than those accompanying the units, are maintained. In order,


however, that deficiencies may be replaced expeditiously and
without unnecessary inconvenience to the fighting line, a
secondary store for this purpose is located at the “ advanced
depot.” It is replenished in a similar manner to the depot for
supplies. If necessary, smaller stores are established at the
intermediate stations on the line of communication. If care is
observed as to the manner in which the stores are despatched
both as to description and quantity, so that any accumulation of
stores not required at the front will be impossible ; it is
not probable that the lines of communication under ordinary
circumstances will be greatly harassed in maintaining the
ordnance store requirements. The transport for the ordnance
store depots, as well as for all the other services at the
advanced depot, will be found by the transport companies
detailed for duty on the line of communications. It ‘ must,
however, be borne in mind at all times and accepted as an
invariable rule that food and forage, and in urgent cases, medical
drugs and appliances have precedence over other stores as
regards the upward, and the sick and wounded for downward
conveyance.
The “ ammunition column ” being a distinct organization
under the Royal Artillery does not come within our cognizance
in this paper. In addition to the ordinance store, there are also
at the advanced depot, a stationary hospital, a clothing store, a
depot for clothing, and a sick horse depot, for all of which
transport has to be provided by the lines of communication
companies.
We now arrive at the consideration of the manner in which the
supplies are carried from the advanced depot to the several
units. The first stage is to the brigade supply stores, and this
is accomplished by the brigade transport. This transport also
provides conveyance for one day’s rations for current use, and a
reserve ration —by name, the emergency ration —and also
supplies the transport required for the medical services of the
brigade, that is the field hospital and bearer company, and
for the conveyance of the baggage. It is, like all the transport
accompanying the force in whatever capacity under the orders


of the general officer commanding and the director of transport
for general use when not otherwise employed on its own specific
duties. The portion set apart for the conveyance of the
supplies from the advanced depot to the brigade stores, is
designated the “ first line supply column.” The quantity of
supplies to be retained in the brigade store will vary according
to the special circumstances of each case. It must never fall
below one day’s complete rations, while, on the other hand, it
may be increased according as the requirements of the situation
may seem to justify. There are many conceivable situations in
which a brigade may find itself so placed that the maintenance
of a large reserve would be incumbent upon it, so that it might
be able to support itself for a time without assistance from the
advanced depot. Moreover, it may sometimes be necessary to
form temporarily movable magazines as intermediate depots.
These movable magazines would carry as many complete rations
as the avaliable transport would allow. These columns are
known as the “ supply park,” the transport for it being obtained
from the lines of communication. Although the Army Service
Corps officer in charge of the brigade carries in his supply
column waggons, preserved meat, biscuits and compressed
vegetables, they must be looked upon primarily as a reserve.
Fresh meat, fresh bread, and fresh vegetables, whey they can
possibly be obtained, should at all times be provided and
brought in by means of the brigade transport. The cattle will,
as a rule, accompany the force, being slaughtered as required
by the Army Service Corps butchers attached to the brigades,
the bread being daily baked by the Army Service Corps
bakers.
The system in accordance with which the rations are conveyed
from the brigade supply stores to the. various units now comes
under consideration. This particular portion of the journey is
reserved for the regimental transport. To my mind, this portion
of military transport is one of the most important of the whole
transport organization as known to us, and its completeness and
efficiency should be one of the chief aims of the leaders of an
expeditionary force. When a battalion of one thousand officers


and men is placed under orders for active service, its transport
according to the scheme for mobilization is completed to a total
of sixteen vehicles, fifty-eight draught horses, three pack
animals, and thirty-two drivers. The ammunition of the
battalion, exclusive of the reserve carried by the ammunition
column, is allotted four small arm ammunition carts and two
pack mules. The entrenching tools are conveyed in a cart
specially detailed for that purpose, and to the remaining waggons
are apportioned the baggage, stores, tents, and supplies; four
animals and two drivers being spare to replace casualties ; one
pack mule is entirely devoted to the medical panniers. Before
the departure of a unit from home for active service, its transport
should be completed on such a scale as will admit of the
supplies and stores laid down for its use in the mobilization
tables accompanying it on the march, if necessary, immediately
upon landing. Notwithstanding the fact that in some of our
successful operations of recent years the units have received
their transport on arrival at the base of operations, still the
wisest course is that it should form an integral part of the
regiment or battalion on leaving England, provided, of course,
that the country to which the force is bound admits of the
employment of our army transport. I would even apply this
principle so rigidly that units broken up to meet the exigencies
of the troopships, should each take with them the proportion
of transport to which they are entitled, so that they may land
in a complete and mobile condition. The advantage, to my
way of thinking, of an organization which will enable each unit
to be practically independent from the moment it lands cannot
be over estimated, and no effort should be spared in order to
attain it where circumstances are compatible. Should it,
however, from any cause be decided upon otherwise, then no
time should be lost after landing in providing the transport, so
that the several units may be able to undertake the transport of
their own supplies and stores without delay. In the case of a
unit provided with regimental transport three and a half days’
rations are conveyed with that unit and in the following
manner:—On the soldier, the remaining portion of the previous


day’s ration and an emergency ration one and one-sixteenth lbs. of
meat biscuit; in the regimental supply waggons, or other de-
scription of transport in use. one day’s rations for current use,
and in the baggage transport a reserve ration for each man on
the strength of the unit, which, as well as the emergency ration,
is only to be used, however, when specially ordered.
An allowance of kindling wood is, when required, also
provided among the articles conveyed in the regimental
vehicles. Forage is carried in a similar manner: on the horse
the unconsumed portion of the previous day’s ration, in the
regimental supply waggon one day’s corn ration, and an
emergency ration of twenty lbs. of patent forage for each horse.
The foregoing details are based upon the supposition that hay is
obtainable in the country. Adhering, however, to our original
assumption that local supplies cannot be obtained in the land
in which we arc campaigning, we shall have to make an
additional allowance of carriages for the conveyance of com-
pressed hay, or some other description of patent forage provided
for the force, from England. It will be seen from the fore-
going that the great importance of the regimental transport,
forming a fully completed part of the organization of each unit,
is indisputable. Its usefulness, or otherwise as a transport
factor will depend greatly on the manner in which it is utilized,
that is, when it is not fully engaged in its legitimate work with its
unit, it must be made available and used for general purposes.
If this is not done it becomes a source of waste, as the cost of
its maintenance, when idle, will be such a tax upon the resources
of the expedition as will greatly detract from its utility as a
carrying medium. The personnel of the regimental transport
is also a mat er worthy of notice. Those forming it should be
carefully selected having in view the importance of the duties on
which they will be employed, and the fact that on their efficient
performance of those duties the comfort and well-being of their
comrades will often depend. The officer in charge of the
regimental transport should be a man of energy and resource,
and should be selected for his special aptitude for the duties.
It has occurred to me that much useful practical instruction


might be imparted to the officers and non-commissioned officers
of the regimental transport by attaching as many of them as
could be spared to the various Army Service Corps’ companies
taking part in the annual manoeuvres and marching columns.
There in a few days they would have opportunities of gaining
such an experience in their duties as a prolonged course of
instruction within barrack walls could never give them. The
transport instructions, especially that portion which refers to
pack saddles and pack work generally, should be imparted to as
many men as possible of each battalion ; firstly, that there may
be men always ready to replace casualties : and secondly, for the
cogent reason that a knowledge of pack work is one without
which on service a soldier is certain to be placed sometime or
other at a disadvantage. It is much to be regretted on this
account that the present small establishment of two pack mules,
and two draught and one riding horse, cannot be given to all
battalions on home service. We may be involved in a campaign
in which the battalions at home, other than those first for
mobilization, may be required to take part, trained and ex-
perienced men will be necessary for their regimental transport
and the time available for their training very limited.
The next matter of importance which demands our attention
is the transport of the sick and wounded. The transport
arrangements for the medical services of a force in the field have
to be considered from a different standpoint to those for the
transport of supplies and stores and the arrangements for the
feeding of the reinforcements. Whereas we treated of the latter
from the base to the front; the former has to be considered from
the extreme front to the base. The brigade transport company
furnishes the horses for the ten ambulances of the bearer
company of the brigade. This portion of the transport will, as
regards its work, be under the orders of the senior medical
officer of the bearer company. Its internal economy, however,
remains under the charge of the officer of the Army Service
Corps company to which the men and horses belong. This
transport conveys the wounded from the dressing stations of the
bearer company to the field hospitals. Another portion of the


Brigade Army Service Corps company is detached for duty with
the field hospital, and is treated in a similar manner to that of the
bearer company. It consists of a sufficient number of horses for
drawing the vehicles required for the field hospital equipment.
All this detached transport, however, must be at the disposition,
should occasion require, of the general officer commanding the
Brigade, so that no question can arise as to the inadequacy of
the daily work upon which it is engaged. On the other hand,
should an engagement be anticipated the general officer will
arrange*, that either by a previous accumulation of rations, or, if
absolutely necessary, by entrenching on the reserve rations, as
large a portion as possible of the transport of the brigade supply
column is set free. This additional transport will be placed at
the disposal of the senior medical officer for the purpose of
enabling him to effect the expeditious removal of the sick and
wounded from the front. The medical transport from the
brigade field hospitals to the field hospital at the advanced depot,
thence along the line of communication to the base is carried
out by the companies of the Army Service Corps detailed for
duty on the lines of communication. The rapid transit of the sick
and wounded down the line is of the utmost importance, not only
for their own sakes, but also that any accumulation of invalids
at the advanced depots may be avoided. The various stations
on the line of communications will be found invaluable as means
of obtaining this object. They afford opportunities of resting
the sick or of changing the animals, thereby admitting of the
vehicles proceeding through to the base at a tolerable speed.
In this paper I have taken as my example of the organization
an Army Service Corps company attached to an infantry brigade
of the field force, it being practically the model upon which the
organization of the other companies is based. In the case of a
cavalry brigade it is necessary, on account of the addition of the
forage to the ordinary rations of the men, to supplement its
transport by adding an extra half-company for duty in
connection with the medical services of the brigade. The
divisional transport will, as a matter of course, follow the rules
prescribed for that of a brigade, and that employed on the lines


of communication will be regulated in accordance with the
special circumstances governing the requirements. The
bakery companies of the Army Service Corps are so organized
that they can be divided into such sections as will meet the
requirements of a division, brigade, or station.
In a country such as we have selected for our operations devoid
of local resources of every description it is possible that water
the first essential to our existence—may also be absent. In that
case a special transport organization is necessary for the con-
veyance of water from the base, and for its distribution to the
troops both there and at the front. In the campaign of Suakin
in 1885, the whole of the water required for the troops was
obtained by condensing, the process being carried out in ships
in the harbour, and the water passed through pipes on to the
shore, where it was collected into tanks, and from thence into
troughs from which the water carts and camel tins were filled.
To organize and carry out a continuous and adequate water
service in the field is one of the most anxious and arduous duties
that befall the Army Service Corps. In the first place, it is
necessary that the ration should be fixed for the troops, the sick,
and the natives employed with the force. Then comes to be
considered the best ways and means of transporting it, which
apparently would be to select a skeleton company of the Army
Service Corps and augment it with civilians and animals to the
extent necessary for the efficiency of the service. The mode of
conveyance is also a matter upon which an opinion might be
hazarded. Personally, 1 consider that as long as the ordinary
service water carts —that is, the one containing one hundred and
eight gallons —can proceed with the troops, it is much to be
preferred to the water tins which are conveyed by pack transport.
These carts should be altered to suit the vicissitudes of the
climate and the animals which it is proposed to yoke in them.
In a hot climate, the barrels should be covered with felt, and
where the roads are soft or sandy the tyres of the wheels should
be widened. In the plains around Suakin we improvised a
means of doing this by screwing wood to the wheels of the water
and other carts, and found this expedient to answer very well.


The advantages of a water transport of this description over one
of pack animats, with water tins, are many; the water is kept in
good condition; the transport is economical, as in most cases
the carts can be drawn by two mules, and the escort necessary
for their protection is consequently reduced. Moreover, the carts
are much handier for rapid formations than the more slow moving
camel and the tedious work of loading the tins on pack animals
is also avoided. Taking all these things into consideration, Ido
not think there can be any doubt as to which is the better mode
of water conveyance. In circumstances, however, where the
employment of the water cart is impracticable, then tins become
the next preferable mode, and they should be of several sizes, so
as to be suitable to the carrying powers of the animals employed
on the service. The entire water service should be considered
as a separate and distinct portion of the Army Service Corps
Organization, under the Staff Officers administering the supply
and transport services; the übiquitious director of transport
devoting special care to its manipulation.
The conditions on which this lecture has been based
necessitate the whole of the supply and transport arrangements
being conceived and carried out solely by our own or friendly
resources, or in other words, we have selected the most un-
favourable circumstances possible. There are, of course,
frequently circumstances in which a force may have the good
fortune to find itself located in a fertile country, yielding possibly
sufficient produce to maintain it, entirely independent of its
strategic base; this will relieve enormously the strain otherwise
devolving upon the line of communications. In availing our-
selves of this mode of supply, as little inconvenience as possible
must be given to the inhabitants, who should be treated with
every practicable attention to their feelings and interests. When
supplies are to be obtained the inhabitants should be encouraged
by fair treatment and reasonable prices to bring them in
voluntarily. All the supplies, so purchased should as a rule be
brought on charge at the base or advanced depot, so that the
staff officer responsible for the supplies of the force may know
exactly how the provisioning of the force is affected. Payment


for these supplies will be made by the paymaster of the depot, at
which they are delivered.
Among the preliminary preparations for a campaign, one
of the most important is the selection of the most suitable
description of transport. I fear in making this selection that
there is a strong bias towards pack transport, duo to the
desire to have a system of transport capable of use under all
circumstances.
Our experience, I submit, however, shows that pack transport
should only be adopted for general purposes when wheeled
transport is impossible or impracticable. Whatever may be the
subsequent developments of a campaign, there is little doubt but
that in the earlier stages, that is to say, when not far removed
from the base, wheeled transport, as a rule, may with advantage
be used. It is easily loaded, and unloaded ; has greater rapidity
of motion, and does not occupy so much space as pack trans-
port. This latter feature is of especial—is in fact of supreme
importance, should the country through which the convoy is
passing be in a disturbed state. The advantage of pack transport
is, that it can accompany the troops over every description of
country when advancing against an enemy, and it should be
so utilized. The entrenching tools and the regimental reserve
ammunition required for the fighting line should, I think, be
always carried on pack animals, but this mode of transport should
Only be used as a last resource for the other “ impedimenta ” of
the force. The animal, which, to my mind, is most adapted for
all the transport purposes of our expedition is the mule, being
suitable for either draught or pack work. If our arrangements were
made with an eye to this combination of objects, much difficulty
would be overcome. Carts, harness, and pack saddlery suitable
for mules would have to accompany the force from England, so
that the transport might be fitted for either work. When pack-
Work became necessary the number of animals would require to
be increased considerably in excess of that required for wheeled
transport, but notwithstanding this, the system of duplication, I
consider offers many advantages. It appears to me to be a
subject of regret that, having regard to their all-round usefulness,


we do not keep up a very much larger establishment of mules
as a part of our transport in the United Kingdom.
Pack animals of whatever description should be divided into
three classes, light, medium, and heavy, and their loads adjusted
accordingly. There should also be a further sorting out of the
animals, as regards their strength and speed which should be
considered in the following order: —conveyance of sick;
ammunition ; entrenching tools ; provisions ; and finally baggage
and stores. The blending of the two descriptions of transport,
pack and wheel, should be relegated absolutely to the discretion
of the director of transport. Bullock transport, except in a
country where grazing can be obtained, has nothing but necessity
to recommend it on account of the slow rate at which it moves.
Its use should be confined, when possible, entirely to the lines
of communications. Time will not allow me to touch upon that
most valuable animal, the camel, and his uses in various ways as
a transport animal. Our difficulties with the camel principally
arise from the fact that our soldiers make his first acquaintance,
as a rule, when a campaign commences, and consequently
they both suffer from a want of mutual knowledge. The soldiers
suffer by reason of their ignorance of the mode of using the
camel pack saddlery, and the camel from the soldier’s ignorance
of his mode of life, his food, his proper watering and his
capabilities.
Opinions differ as to the merits of our present general service
waggon, and our experience, varied though it has been, has not
brought us much nearer to an unanimous opinion on the point.
In my opinion though this waggon possesses many excellent
qualities, notably those of strength and solidity, it can hardly be
described as a perfect transport carriage. Its great weight when
equipped —22 cwt. —or with the latest pattern —19 cwt. —being
frequently more than the weight of the load carried, negatives
much of the advantage gained by its strength and carrying
capacity. The perfect transport carriage, therefore, is still, I
think, in the future. It should combine simplicity of construc-
tion with lightness and strength ; should be capable of draught
by two horses or mules when carrying a fair load ; should be


fitted with a brake, and of course be suitable for long-rein
driving. The vehicle, at present, which suggests itself as the
one best adapted for our purposes under all circumstances,
supposing such to be possible, is the Maltese cart. It can easily
be drawn by one horse or two mules, is simply constructed and
occupies but small space. Of course it has its disadvantages,
but in some amplification of it will, I am convinced, be found
the perfect transport carriage of the future, as far, of course, as
such a consummation is possible.
Our sick carriage also suffers from the same cause as our
general service waggons. Its weight (18 cwt.) being out of all
proportion to its carrying capacity. A vehicle made something
after the pattern of a light American spring waggon might, I
submit, be found more suitable to our needs in this respect. I
have had an opportunity of seeing these waggons in use in
conjunction with Woolwich pattern ambulances over the roads of
Cyprus, which are in many places rough and steep, the result of
the comparison, both as regards durability and utility, being much
in favour of the American waggon. Their weight is, as well as I
can remember, about 7 cwt., and they carry six men seated as
against the twelve conveyed in our ambulances. They last
without repair over bad ground about three times as long as the
ambulances, and they only require half the draught power. I
should much like to see a trial made of their fitness on our next
campaign.
The harness for all transport animals purchased for service
should be of a plain simple pattern, and in order that the
difficulties which arise in the fitting may be obviated, each set
should be provided with breast harness.
Should the lines of communication consist wholly or in part of
a navigable river or canal, the system under which the inland
water transport thereon will be worked, will be similar to that
already described for the land transport, all the organization and
administration of this portion of the service being also under
the general commanding the lines of communication and the
director of transport. The number of officers available for Army
Service Corps duties with a force in the field has been appreciably


increased by recent organization and is therefore sufficient under
ordinary circumstances to meet any emergency likely to arise.
Should, however, the projected campaign assume extensive
proportions it may become necessary to supplement their
numbers from sources outside the corps. In this event I trust
that no officers will be selected who have not previously gone
through a course of instruction in supply and transport duties.
If this is found impracticable, steps should be taken to put them
through a course before they are posted for duty with the Army
Service Corps in the field. It goes without saying that officers
who are devoid of any practical knowledge of the duties for
which they have been selected cannot be of much assistance,
especially in the earlier stages of the campaign, to those under
whom they are serving. With the view of overcoming the dearth
of trained officers for the supply and transport service which
might arise were a campaign to be prolonged or extensive, I
would suggest that increased opportunities should be given
yearly to junior officers of other corps to undergo a short
practical course of instruction in supply and transport work such
as they would be required to undertake on service. From these
officers, a proportion of whom might be from the militia, selec-
tion could be made should additional assistance be required.
The Army Service Corps officer on active service has legions
of difficulties before him, which must be either surmounted or
circumvented in order that he may attain his object, that is,
providing for all the wants of that portion of the force for which
he is responsible. I hope that I may be permitted to draw
attention to the campaigns of recent years to show that his
endeavours in that respect have not been without success.
At the same time it is much to be regretted that difficulties,
principally financial, prevent us from training our officers and
men during times of peace under circumstances coincident with
those in which they will find themselves placed on active service.
The ordinary routine work of peace time, supplemented by the
instruction gained in summer drills and marching columns, is,
no doubt, an excellent training in itself as far as it goes, but
being, as a rule, only the supply and transport of a limited


number of troops for a short period, and with practically
unlimited resources, it falls far short of the realities that have
to be confronted in actual warfare. Forming, however, as these
manoeuvres and columns do, the only possible peace-training,
it is most desirable that the Army Service Corps work therein
should, as far as possible, be conducted on similar lines to those
on which they would be on service.
I hope I have now touched upon all the most important
features of our organization as they present themselves to my
mind; there may be more of equal, or possibly greater, impor-
tance, but I hope I have said enough t© enable those officers
who may not have previously studied this subject to form an
idea of the nature of the undertaking usually described as the
“ Supply and Transport ” arrangements of the Army.
Jn conclusion, I beg to thank you for your kindness in
listening to what, I fear, has been a dry and imperfectly told
narrative of the working in the field of a very important branch
of our army organization.
Lord Wolselky—l hope, gentlemen, that there are several present who
will give us the benefit of their views and opinions upon the various topics that
have been so well brought before us this evening by Colonel Ward.
Colonel Lascklles, D.A.G. —My Lord and Gentlemen, I think we are
all very much indebted to Colonel Ward for the very lucid manner in which
he has shown us the duties devolving on the Army Service Corps in the
supply and transport of an army in the field. The subject is a very
interesting one, and is most intimately connected with the proper organization
of the “lines of communication,” of which in our latest wars we have had
very considerable experience. Our regulations, which have been framed for
the organization of the lines of communications, have been very much based
on what we have learned from actual experience, and I think perhaps the
most instructive example we have had lately is the system on which the lines
of communication were organized on the other side of the tiieatre of the war
to which Colonel Ward has referred. He has alluded to the expedition which
had its base at Suakim in 1885. On the other side —on the Nile side—we
had an army operating in the heart of Africa, with one long single line of
communication, upwards of a thousand miles long from its base. Along this
line the whole of the supplies of every sort and kind for the force had to be
sent up, because the country practically produced nothing except forage.
Every other thing—ordnance stores, food, ammunition, clothing, &c.— every-
thing had to be sent up this long line, and the manner in which it was worked
is very instructive ; it was ’/cry well done indeed. Now, this was about the
first time on a large scale in which we have had long lines of communication
worked under an independent “general commanding the lines of communica-
tion,” and this is one of the important features of the system that the lines of
communication must be placed under the separate and independent command
of a general or other officer, having under his control the whole system from
the base to the advanced depot, and the command of all the troops employed


on nr passing along the line. He must have under him a Director of
Transports, to whom Colonel Ward has alluded, and who holds a very
important position, having charge of the whole of the transport, whether by water
or land, whether carts, camels, boats, or other means of conveyance along the
whole line. This was the system carried out in the Nile expedition ; the
river was divided into sections, and each section placed in charge of a selected
officer, assisted by as many more officers and men as he required to work his
section. He had the charge of whatever transport was placed at his disposal
by the Director of Transports. In some parts of the river steamers were
available, in others rowing boats, sailing boats, camels along the banks, See.,
with large numbers of men at certain points to load and unload the goods
which had to be transhipped many times during the [passage up the liver.
Not only was it necessary for everything for the supply of the army in the
field fiom day to day to be sent up during the whole time, but large
additional supplies had to be constantly sent forward to the advanced depot,
and accumulated there during the summer of 1885, in anticipation of the
time when the campaign would be resumed, and the force would be marched
farther into the Soudan. That was an immense work tasking to the utmost
the energies of all employed on the L. of C. When I said that
the general officer commanding the line of communications should be
entirely independent and supreme, there is one qualification to that
remark which it is very necessary to emphasize, and that is that he
must be under the Chief of the Staff of the army in the field, and for this
reason among others that the Chief of the Staff being with the fighting troops
and being in daily communication with the heads of the departments up there,
knows exactly what are the most pressing wants of the moment ; anil
sometimes he has to hold the balance between the various departments who
are naturally anxious to get up the stores in which they are specially
interested, whether medical comforts, ordnance stores, or food, and «o on.
He can then direct the G. O. C. L, of C. to give special attention to sending
along the lines of communication those things which are of the most pressing
importance. I recollect an instance happening which illustrated this point.
The Chief of the Staff; after carefully examining the lists of stores which he had
available on the spot, saw that there was about only three weeks supply of
certain things—such as sugar, salt, and a few other things—well, he knew
that it would probably take some weeks to get these supplies passed up that
exceedingly long line, so he sent orders to the general on the lines of
communication to stop all transport for the moment until he had passed up so
many thousand rations of sugar, or salt, or whatever it might be. At another
period he finds that the time is approaching when new boots and clothing
will be of prime importance to the troops, he therefore orders that these
articles should be pushed forward, and all other things held back for the
moment. It was very curious to see up the Nile how the soldiers worked
individually and independently. You would see a boat coming in, a sailing
boat navigated by an Arab or perhaps two, in charge of one British soldier.
Very likely this soldier had been on board this boat for weeks, sailing up the
river, tying up to the bank at night and perhaps sticking for a day or two on
a sandbank. Well, you would see him sailing in with his boat looking very
dirty and ragged and sunburnt, but perfectly happy all the time. He would
then hand in his way-bill, showing what he had got on board, and after
having his boat unloaded would go down the river for another supply. These
men worked in the most admirable manner, and as a general rule everything
was handed over in capital condition and order at the end of each trip. Of
course I won’t say that there was not occasionally an undue leakage in the
case ol brandy, say, being sent up among hospital stores, but in such a very
dry and thirsty land the temptation was very strong in that direction. But a
very happy plan was hit upon, which, to a great extent, counteracted this
little failing, and that was, to inscribe in large letters on the cases containing
brandy or that kind of thing, “ castor oil,” “ sulphuric acid,” or “ nitric acid,”
and the result was that these cases generally passed through safely to their


destination It made one quite proud of our soldiers to sec how thev
worked on every occasion like that ; you felt that no matter in what posi-
tion the soldier was placed he was sure to come out of it triumphantly.
Colonel Ward has told us a great deal about the part to be taken by the
Army Service Corps dealing with transport and supplies ; that, of course, is
a subject of very great importance, but we must not consider that it is only
the Army Service Corps that is concerned in this great question, but it
behoves every officer, no matter what branch of the service he belongs to, to
work out these things very carefully and to study them, because there is
nothing more important than to have experienced men placed on the lines of
communication, and in this way a great opportunity is given to officers of
doing good work and distinguishing themselves. The lecturer referred to
one point—he said he hoped there would be some arrangement made for
calling out as many of the men of the army reserve as might be required
for completing the Army Service Corps company, even in a small war. I
think that power does exist ; I believe there is power to enable us to call out
any small proportion of army reserve men whom we may , require, without
calling them all out, and 1 don’t suppose we should ever have an expedition
without calling out at all events those belonging to certain units that may be
wanting. The lecturer said it would be a great advantage, and relieve the
strain on the Army Service Corps, if the troops when they landed on these
expeditions had two or three days’ rations with them. It is a very proper
arrangement, and it is capable of being very easily managed by arranging
that the troops, who are necessarily conveyed to the seat of war on board
ships, should be provided when leaving their ship with two or three days’
rations from the ship’s stores to go on with ; and I think this plan was
adopted in Egypt.
Veterinarv Lieut.-Colonel Thomson, A.V.D.--My Lord and Gentle-
men, with reference to the remarks made by the lecturer as to the proper
animal for transport purposes. I must say lam very much inclined to agree
with him that the mule is before all others the animal best suited for the
circumstances of our little wars, speaking as a general rule. He is a very
hardy animal, very seldom gets sick, can live under almost any conditions,
and gives very little trouble. But he has certain drawbacks. He is rather
obstinate and takes a good deal of management at times ; and I think the
question arises as to whether, perhaps, small hardy ponies would not be very
useful and more suitable for some uses—for instance in conveying sick and
wounded men in cacolets. I have seen wounded men carried in this way
upon mules, and they were not at all comfortable, and I think small hardy
ponies like the Welsh or the Exmoor ponies might be used in these circum-
stances with very great advantage, and preferably to mules. Of course we
have seen a great deal of the camel. He is a very delicate beast and gives a
great deal of trouble, but, nevertheless, in certain instances wo have been
obliged to make use of him. There is one animal the lecturer did not refer
to—probably because his lecture referred to proceedings from England—the
elephant. He is a magnificent transport animal, but occasionally breaks
down ; you can transport on his back something like a ton or so, and he is a
very useful beast, but of course has his drawbacks as well ; but taking it all
round, 1 think, that what the lecturer suggested—the mule—is about the best
transport animal you could possibly have. I don’t think we can have
anything better for general transport work.
Colonel Coke, A.A.G. — My Lord, Colonel Ward has detailed and
brought before us the subject of supply to an army in the field, which has to
be provided in a more or less barren country. Being confined to time he
could not naturally trace the question of transport back to the dark ages ;
that would have made this lecture too long; still, I think, in looking at the
question of transport and supply for to-day we must also study ancient history ;
and must be able to weigh in our minds the different conditions which
influenced the various great commanders ? and which governed their operations


as regards impediments. We have various periods in which armies were
moved under quite different conditions. Beginning with the Romans. In
the Roman armies we know each soldier carried fifteen days' rations and
there were no ammunition waggons, this, of course, made it very simple as
far as general supplies were concerned. The Greeks also moved under
similar conditions, and it was owing to that —very greatly owing to that—
that their successes were due, over the effeminate Persians who carried a large
quantity of baggage, which was often the cause of their defeat. Csesar had
for a maxim that “ war was to support war,” and he made the invaded country
pay for his army by levying contributions, plundering, &c. The Crusaders,
we know, plundered for their supplies, and thus much of their suffering is
accounted for. Louis XIV. and Marlborough were most particul ir in
their arrangements for supplies, and we can learn at the present day where
their depots were ; this made war sure but slow. The French Revolution,
like everything else which is caused by revolution, changed the whole of this.
Napoleon adopted Caesar’s maxim that “war was to support war.” He
invaded Belgium, Germany, Italy, and other adjacent countries and plundered
for his supplies. He was thus enabled to move more easily, and this accounts
for his early successes. The English on the other hand, and it is this which
we have been dealing with to-day, have always been much more honest in
their mode of obtaining supplies, even in some instances, as we know, to their
loss, for we find that in the Peninsula the French got on better with the
deceitful Spaniards by rough treatment and plunder, than did the English
who paid for everything in the most honourable manner. There is another
point which 1 think I may say a word on. I refer to the regimental transport ■
the fact of a battalion of infantry requiring thirty-two drivers for its
regimental transport has been dwelt upon by the lecturer, and also the
importance of having a certain amount of officers and men in each regiment
thus trained. Well, in the regulations the number, thirty-two, has been
adopted as a minimum to have trained in every battalion, so as to have
sufficient trained men to start the full regimental transport expedition. In
Ireland and throughout England these men are trained in certain places.
Every battery of artillery trains a certain number of men, and at the Curragb,
of course there are facilities for greater training. There is a difficulty in
keeping up this number at home, I admit, because we are not allowed to
keep men back from going to India who are trained as drivers ; they are
constantly being sent away and we have trouble after the trooping season in
keeping up this quota of thirty-two. At Aldershot and the Curragh these
men, when they have the benefit of working with the A. S. Corps, certainly
are thoroughly trained. It is impossible to instruct them at out-stations so
highly, but certainly they get very efficient training for regimental transport
duties, and the officers who go to the large camps will learn a great deal of
their duties. About the Maltese cart, I think it is a very excellent thing ;
but there is a cart in this country which, it appears, has always escaped
attention—l am*talking of the Irish float, which we see in all parts of this
country. I don’t know why we have never tried it or adopted it any way.
It is a most extraordinary cart, it holds a great deal, though it is drawn by
one horse generally in this country ; it is very low on the ground with large
wheels, it is easily loaded and unloaded, it carries a large weight, and from its
great width the centre of gravity is low and, therefore, it is nearly impossible
to upset it. I think we might do something with a modification of that cart.
Lokd Wol.seley —Gentlemen, I don’t think there was any necessity for
Colonel Ward to apologize for the dryness of his subject ; it is surely one
which must commend itself to all who have ever turned their attention to
military matters. From the days of Caesar-—from those classical times to
which Colonel Coke has referred—to the present, this difficult question of
supply and transport has been the most important. It demands the careful
consideration, not only of the general who has to plan operations, but of the
government that determines upon the war, and the end it is intended to secure by


it. The subject is a very large one, so large that it is rather difficult to know
where to begin. And I think that no small part of the lecturer’s ability, dis-
played inthecourse ofthe lecture, was themanner in which he selected the various
heads he dwelt upon. The subject is an immense one. There is, I suppose,
no part of our military science that has been more written about ; there is, in
fact, a complete literature devoted to it alone and to its various ramifications.
I am glad to say that in recent years it is one that has received the attention,
not only of the .English officers who have written upon it—men like Colonel
Furze (and I would recommend his books to those who wish to study the
subject)—but also the authorities at the War Office. As Colonel Lascelles
has told you the regulations for the supply of troops in the field have been
recently elaborated. These embrace regulations for the management of the
lines of communication. All these regulations have been very carefully
thought out, and after mature consideration have been published. I only
wish they were more studied by the army generally. They are, I think, most
interesting reading, and they are certainly of a nature to commend themselves
to all who wish to rise hereafter in the army. It is absolutely impossible that
any man can ever rise to a high position in the army or can ever hope to fill
usefully any important military post on active service, unless he has a very
good conception of the duties which are laid down in these regulations at the
present moment. I therefore venture to recommend them most earnestly to
the attention of all ambitious soldiers. The army, as we are often told, is a
sort of great animal which moves upon its stomach. The first necessity is to
supply it with food, a necessity which even comes before the supply of
ammunition ; because if you cannot fill a man’s stomach with food, there is
no use in your filling his pouch with ammunition. He must be well fed and
have good food as well as a large quantity of it to enable him to perform
the very arduous duties which devolve upon the soldier during every operation
in the field, no matter how small. I think it was the Duke of Wellington
who said when talking of the various duties he had to perform during the
Peninsular War—that there were many generals whom he had known during
the course of his life, who were capable of carrying out the operations which
devolved upon them, but not many who were good adminstrators. He
prided himself, he said, above all things, not so much upon his tactical powers
or strategical knowledge as for his great success in feeding the army that
was under his command. And if you read his general orders from the
time he began his wars in the Peninsula until he crossed into France, you will
see that there were more orders published on the subject of the feeding of
troops, lines of direction, and manipulation of lines of communication than
upon any other subject. Then, if the feeding of an army is of first consequence,
the next matter of importance is that of transport; because on transport
depends your power of being able to feed an army. I may, in passing,
before I dismiss this subject of rations, remark upon the recommendation
which Colonel Ward has made, that troops landing should'have two days’
rations with them—carried about their persons before they landed ; that this
is almost universally the practice. I remember when we landed in China long
ago—over thirty years ago now—that we landed, each man carrying either
two or three days’ rations ; and it was upon that occasion a wise provision,
for under the peculiar circumstances of the case, it w’ould have been almost
impossible to have issued food to the army for the first couple of days after
the army bad landed. I might give other instances where we landed with
two days’ rations. But it is not laid down in the regulations, which is
perhaps a pity, because it is important, if the commissariat duties of an army
are to be well carried out, that troops are not, the day after landing, to rush
at the depots for provisions and so deplete them. The question of transport
comes second in degree after food. I remember there was a very able
general with whom I was associated for a long time and whom 1 admired a
great deal ; he commanded in Ireland at one time, I mean Sir John Mitchell.
He gave me a graphic account of the various campaigns he took part in. I
asked him -when I was going to South Africa about his experience of warfare


in South Africa, and he was very amusing about the question of transport.
Amongst other subjects I asked him what were the greatest difficulties he
had to contend with during the time he was there, expecting him to say it
was either supply or transport. He was a bit of a wag, and he said ; —“ The
first difficulty and greatest difficulty I had to contend with was my aitillery ;
it was always in the way, and I had great difficulty in feeding the horses, and
the guns didn’t even frighten the Kaffirs. They never killed anybody, and
yet I had to drag them hundreds of miles through kloofs, across rivers, and
over a very difficult country. They were my first difficulty,” he said, “ the
amount of transport 1 had to make use of in bringing up the artillery into the
held would have supplied my troops with rations for almost several days, and
I always wished I could gel rid of them altogether. Had my guns been
drawn, as they used to be in India, by bullocks ; I snould have killed my
gun bullocks and eaten them. The next difficulty I had to contend with
after the artillery, was my cavalry. They were all very line looking men,
most of them nearly six feet high, splendidly mounted on enormous horses,
which required a great quantity of food. Even in those days they had,”
he said, “• so many steel chains, and bits, and tin pots, and various other
curious implements hanging about them, that they made such a rattle that
the Kaffirs could hear them several miles off, and before the cavalry
could get at the Kaffirs, the Kaffirs were away.” That was his second great
difficulty. His third difficulty was the enemy. But, he said, far and away
his greatest difficulty was to feed and supply his own cavalry and his artillery,
which in that species of bush warfare, were oi no use to him. Upon the
subject of food, he also told me what the lecturer has told you to-day of the
great difficulty of feeding an army if you plunge, as he had to do, into a
barren country far away from all depots of supplies, and of the difficulty of
carrying supplies to the front in a country destitute of roads. Colonel
Lascelles has told you very graphically, in a general way, the outline of our
supply system as we advanced up the Nile in 1884-5, a very difficult operation.
But throughout that campaign we had the great advantage of having a great
river as our line of communication. The history of many campaigns will
show vou that the general commanding, and the government that sent them
into tfie field, often based the general scheme of operations upon the facility
afforded by some navigable river running through the country to be
operated in. Indeed, all men of war experience will tell you how much
military operations are helped when a navigable river or lake, or canals can
be used as the chief line of communication. A water way requires no
mending, and boats require no food, though they carry enormous quantities.
If any of you, gentlemen, have ever to plan a campaign, and if it is possible
to adopt for your communication a navigable river, I strongly recommend
you to do so. The Nile campaign is a case in point, and that of China in
1860 is another. If you wish for an illustration of how helpless is an army
in the field when the question of transport has been neglected, you should
study the pages ot Kinglake. You could not find in all history a sadder or
a more striking illustration ot the hopeless helplessness of an array sent into
the field without transport, than is furnished by our army before Sebastapol.
Encamoed on the bleak heights before Sebastapol, we were only six or seven
miles from the snug little harbour of Balaclava, then filled with shipping ;
but during all the winter of 1854-5 we suffered most dreadfully from want of
food and firewood to cook with, and there were heaps of supplies all the
time in Balaclava. The Government which sent us to the Crimea, through
criminal ignorance and folly, and a still move criminal parsimony, gave us
no means of transport, and consequently we had no means of getting the
supplies of food, See., over the six or seven miles which separated our camps
from Balaclava. That is, above all instances 1 know of, the most striking
illustration of how absolutely helpless an army must always be when this
question of transport has not been previously well thought out and provided
lor. Colonel Ward has told you that we have lately studied this subject very
deeply, and have now laid regulations which are fairly well understood iu the


army, and I firmly believe that when next we have war forced upon its we
shall find that we possess in our Array Service Corps a body of officers and
men well able to perform the duty for which that corps has been designed :
that the army in the field will be supplied in a manner that will bring credit
to themselves as a corps and in a manner that has never been excelled at any
previous period of our military history. Colonel Lascelles and also the
lecturer referred to the necessity of placing the lines ot communication under
the orders of either a general or a colonel according to the magnitude of the
operations. That I believe to be absolutely essential to success. We have
now tried it upon several occasions and where we have properly organized it
has been most satisfactory to the interests of all concerned. I believe this
officer is to be called in future the Quarter-Master-General of the army to
which he is attached ; and, as Colonel Lascelles told you, everybody on that
line of communication, no matter what may be his rank, will be for the time
being and as long as he is on that line of communication, under the direction
and direct orders of this officer in charge of the line of communication. This
is very clearly laid down in the regulations. Of course this Quarter-Master-
ffeneral will be subordinate to the Chief of the Staff who is in the alter egooi
the General Commanding ; that is an absolute necessity. The lecturer
referred to the great necessity of having at our large depots, both at the rear
and in front, a large corps of labourers, and he told you how advisable it
would be to get these corps formed of coolies. We had a great number of
Chinese coolies for this work during our Pekin campaign. They were formed
into a special corps under a military organization and discipline, and they were
the very best labourers for the purpose I have ever seen. We employed them
at our base and also at our advanced depots, and nothing could be better
than the manner in which they worked. Should we ever again have any
operations in that part of the world and be able to draw upon China for
coolies, I would strongly recommend recourse being again had to that source
for the special labour required. There was a very interesting book on
railways—on the use of railways during the Franco-German War—written, I
think, by a Baron Jaquemain, which I would strongly recommend for perusal
by all those who wish to study the subject. In this book you will see the
extraordinary difficulty that existed in France, especially during the early part
of the war, in regard to supplies and transport. There were manv instances
on some of their railways, he tells us, where there were at stations fifty or
sixty carriages filled with various stores blocking up the lines for weeks
without their contents being known. In many instances the troops in the
neighbourhood were actually in want of the very stores and provisions which
were often locked up in these trains. This is a well known fact and it points
to the necessity of having all great stations along the line of communication,
especially railway junctions, under the command of officers well schooled in
this question of supply and transport. I entirely agree with Colonel Ward
as to the necessity of officers before they undertake these duties on active
service, being well trained to them during peace. If your officers are not
well trained in this question of supply and transports, if they have neither the
experience nor the business aptitude essential to the efficient carrying out of
these duties, you will have at all your magazines and depots the same
confusion that reigned supreme at so many places in France during the war of
1870 ; your troops wall suffer, and the interests as well as the reputation of
the nation will also suffer in consequence. I hope that before] officers are
employed upon these important duties in war they may be well trained during
our manoeuvres. The question of carts and animals is a very big question ;
those who wish to study it deeply should read Colonel purse’s bopk om
transport. He has published one or two books upon the subject, and they are
all very interesting and full of information, and are to be found in
all our military libraries. There is one advantage in using bullocks
as transport animals, and that is when they are no longer able to
walk or carry anything, you can eat them. This is important in a
very wild country where food is scarce, I have had myself many


a good dinner off a bullock that could not walk any more. Whilst
shut up in Lucknow and the Alem Bagh, we ate all our bullocks, and
had it not been for them we should have been very badly off indeed. As
regards the question of carnages —tour wheels versus two wheels—for most
countries, I much prefer the four to the two wheeled car. The two wheel
cart, or even the Irish “float,” to which Colonel Coke has referred, do
remarkably well over level roads, but on a hilly and mountainious country I
don’t think they are of much use. They imply a great weight and strain upon
the animal going down hill and fearful pull upon him when going up hill.
This at least was our own small experience during our expedition to the Red
River in 1870. For the first 50 miles of the 600 we had to go, we had to
walk thiough the primeval forest. On it we worked carts and waggons all the
time, we had a good supply of horses —the horses of two batteries of artillery
which had just been sent to England. Before I had been a week at this work
I found the two wheel carts did not answer. The road was bad and hilly and
1 had to give up using them, and take exclusively to the light four-wheeled
waggon. They carried more than twice what the cart did, and they only
required two horses ; they entailed no weight on the horses back at all. One
waggon only required one driver whereas two drivers were required for two
carts. This was then to me a matter of great consequence. When you work
through a level country, your two wheeled cart answers well, because it carries
a great deal, is easily managed, and easily repaired, but if the country is hilly,
I recommend the four wheeled waggon. I fully agree with the lecturer
about breast harness, and my experience gained during that same Red River
Expedition, bears out exactly what he said. I used a very considerable amount
of breast harness. The great advantage gained was this : that as I was rushing
my work (and in most of our campaigns we have to do so) we had to work all
day long, and could not afford to keep horses lying idle. As soon as a horse
became galled from overwork with the collar, I worked him with the breast
harness, and by the time the poor brute had become galled by the breast
harness, his shoulder was well enough to go back to the collar. That may
sound cruel, but it was not so, time pressed ; there were only certain months
available for the expedition before the frosts would cover every lake with
ice, and in no other way could I have done what I wanted. Colonel
Ward has touched upon many points to-day, each of which would
form an admirable subject for a lecture. I hope they may be taken up next
year ; and that we may then learn a great deal more about it; because,
gentlemen, I can recommend you to study most carefully everything connected
with this great subject, if you wish to rise in your profession. No man can
become an efficient staff officer who does not possess a sound knowledge of
this subject. I hope, therefore, that those who intend to make the Army a
profession and who look forward to rising in it, will take this subject up and
study it most carefully. We have had a considerable amount of information
given us by Colonel Ward to-day, and I am sure, gentlemen, that you, like
myself, are most grateful to him for having given us the benefit of his views,
and experience, which are considerable, upon the subjects that he has brought
before us, and I thank him most cordially in your name as well as in my own
for the admirable lecture he has delivered.


