

Supplement to
CHECKLIST OF ROYAL COMMISSIONS, SELECT
COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT AND BOARDS
OF INQUIRY
1856 - 1980
by
D.H. Borchardt
La Trobe University
Library
Bundoora, Vic.
1990




La Trobe University
Library Publication no. 37
Supplement to
CHECKLIST OF ROYAL COMMISSIONS, SELECT
COMMITTEES OF PARLIAMENT AND BOARDS
OF INQUIRY
1856-1980
by
D.H. Borchardt
La Trobe University Library
Bundoora, Victoria
1990


National Library of Australia Cataloguing-in-Publication entry:
Borchardt, D. H. (Dietrich Hans), 1916-
Supplement to checklist of royal commissions, select
committees of parliament and boards of inquiry,
1856-1980.
Includes index.
ISBN 0 85816 735 2.
1. Governmental investigations - Australia -
Bibliography. 2. Legislative hearings - Australia -
Bibliography. 3. Executive advisory bodies - Australia
- Bibliography. I. La Trobe University. Library
(1988- ). 11. Title. (Series : Library publication
(La Trobe University); no. 37).
016.35494093
Copyright La Trobe University Library, 1990.


In the   long, complicated   and   arduous  proccess of compiling a bibliography of the literature on
Australian commissions of inquiry now published by the Borchardt
Library, La Trobe University, Julie Marshall found a number of
references to inquiries which had escaped my net when creating the
Checklist of Royal Commissions, Select Committees of Parliament and
Boards of Inquiry. I have elsewhere commented upon the quality of
bibliographic control for the reports emanating from these inquiries,
and it is not surprising that every now and again a report should
turn up that had hitherto been overlooked. In retrospect some of
the inquiries that escaped my searches may appear to have been of
only minor significance, but that was never a reason for leaving them
out of the Checklists. At the time of their currency they must have
been of some significance - indeed, if the topic of inquiry was not
significant then, why institute an inquiry at all. Julie Marshall's
discoveries of references in general and specifically professional
journals is full proof that the contemporaries of such inquiries did
consider them worthy of commentary, both supportive as well as
critical. The fact is that the reports of some inquiries were
shelved or deliberately suppressed if the findings did not suit the
government of the day.
As all such inquiries are financed from the public purse, it is
indeed surprising that any of them should have been treated with such
neglect. A fairly large number of the reports of state based
inquiries were never tabled in parliament while some may not even
have reached cabinet. Some reports were deliberately "forgotten"
and one or two did not emerge from the office of the commissioner
conducting the inquiry.
Only after Julie Marshall's identification of a hitherto unrecorded
report was it possible to try and trace it, a process that involved a
good deal of correspondence with parliamentary, archival and state
library officers. The help of colleagues in appropriate positions
was also called upon and my sincere thanks are due to Dr Russell Cope
SUPPLEMENT TO
CHECKLIST OF ROYAL COMMISSIONS, SELECT COMMITTEES
OF PARLIAMENT AND BOARDS OF INQUIRY, 1856-1980


(Parliamentary Library of New South Wales), Peter Saunders (Flinders
University Library), Spencer Routh (University of Queensland Library)
and in particular to Patricia Allen (J S Battye Library) who dealt
with many searches for missing reports from Western Australia.
As a service to owners and users of the volumes of the Checklist, the
Borchardt Library, La Trobe University, has offered to issue gratis
this collection of supplementary entries to the base volumes. Each
entry is numbered and it is suggested that the base volumes of the
Checklists and of the Bibliographies be marked at the appropriate
point with the number of this Supplement. The indexes to the base
volumes should also be amended as suggested at the end of each of
the supplementary entries.
Each sheet of the supplement also contains suggestions for additions
to one of the several indexes compiled at various times by different
persons. For reports from Western Australia there is only one index
compiled by E. Zalums; it is attached to his so-called Bibliography
of Western Australian Royal Commissions, Select Committees of
Parliament and Boards of Inquiry, 1870-1979. This index has not
been incorporated in any of the consolidated indexes mentioned below;
the thesaurus used is somewhat idiosyncratic but it is basically
workable.
The Consolidated index to the Checklists of Royal Commissions, Select
Committees of Parliament and Boards of Inquiry ... 1856-1960,
compiled by Jean Hagger and Tina Montanelli covers reports issued in
that period by the Commonwealth of Australia, Queensland, New South
Wales, South Australia, Tasmania and Victoria. That index pulls
together the several individual indexes to the six parts of the
Checklist, unifies the thesaurus and repairs gaps in the indexes to
the several parts. Users should go to this Consolidated index .. .
1856-1960 to find reports on specific subjects and the names of
commissioners in that period.
In 1985, when the next instalment of the Checklists was being
prepared, Jean Hagger compiled a new consolidated index for the


reports identified in the Commonwealth, New South Wales, Queensland
and Victoria and issued in the years 1960-1980, and for South
Australia in 1970 to 1980. (it should he noted that South Australian
reports issued between 1857 and 1970 are listed in the Consolidated
index ... 1856-1960. However I repeat that Western Australian reports
are not included either in the Hagger-Montanelli index or in the 1960-
1980 index.)
A copy of this supplement, numbered La Trobe University Library
Publication 37 is being sent to all State and University Libraries
in Australia, and a note on its existence is being published in
Australian academic and research libraries and in the Australian
library journal. Those wishing to obtain a copy should write to the
Secretary, Library Publications Committee, Borchardt Library, La Trobe
University, BUNDOORA 3083.
D.H. Borchardt


A2U2a. C [of inquiry] on the problem of the Crown-of-thorns starfish;
Report. (20.5.1970) (23.3.1971)
A.Pp. 1971 v.2: 671-751 (no. 3*o
Members: R.J.Walsh, C.L.Harris, J.M.Harvey, W.G.H.Maxwell,
J.M.Thomson, D.J.Tranter.
The inquiry was appointed jointly by the Commonwealth and
Queensland governments (Q357) "to review and report on present
knowledge of the crown—of—thorns starfish which is alleged to
attack and destroy the Barrier Reef marine life.
The C came to the conclusion that the starfish did not
constitute a threat to the Barrier Reef and that popular concern
was quite unwarranted. It recommended that the rise and fall
of the crown-of-thorns starfish population be carefully monitored
over some years and that substantial sums of money ($120,000) be
spent on research into the ecology of the Reef.
Recommended additions to index for 1960-1980:
NAMES: WALSH, R.J. A2U2a(c)
HARRIS, C.L. A2^2a
HARVEY, J.M. A2^2a
MAXWELL, W.G.H. A2U2a
THOMSON, J.M. A2^2a
TRANTER, D.J. A2U2a
Subject headings: Crown-of-thorns starfish A2U2a
Cowed Cross Reference: Q357 - reference to A2UI should read A2^2a


TF [on a] national communications satellite system; Report.
(3.11.1977) (26.9.1978)
A.Pp. 1978 no. 317 18, 228 p. , illus. maps.
Members : H.White , W.E. Beard, P.R.Brett, J.P.Coleman,
W.G.Gosewinckel, B.L.Hennessy*, L.B.Holgate*,
D.J.McMillen, I.H.Maggs, H.B.O'Keeffe, H.Taylor,
C.B.Wilson.
*Hennessy replaced Holgate in January 1978.
The terms of reference were broadly to investigate and evaluate
the social, economic, technical, policy and other issues that
would arise from the installation of a national communications
satellite system in Australia. The TF was also asked to seek
consultation with relevant bodies and organizations and to
prepare a report on the basis of two scenarios: one on a system
based on a relay type satellite system, and another based on a
direct broadcasting satellite service.
This very thorough report is partly quite technical, but the
social implications of the findings are carefully spelled out.
The findings are complex, and the TF urges the government to
allow for public discussion of the report before making any final
decision. The recommendations are summarized at the beginning
and grouped under the following headings: [The advantages of an]
introduction of a satellite communications system; defence
communications;, facilitation of trials for social services;
technical and application trials; public consideration of this
report.
Appendices contain considerations of satellite systems in other
countries, notes on INTELSAT; and financial projection for a
satellite authority.
Recommended additions to index for 1960-1980:
NAMES: WHITE, H. A3U2a(c)
BEARD, W.E. A3U2a
BRETT, P.R. A3^2a
COLEMAN, J.P. A3^2a
GOSEWIN.CKEL, -W.G. A3^2a
HENNESSY, B.L. A3^2a
HOLGATE, L.B. A3^2a
McMILLEN, D.J. A3^2a
MAGGS, I.H. A3*+2a
0 1 KEEFFE, H.B. A3*+2a
TAYLOR, H. A3U2a
WILSON, C.B'. A3*+2a
Subject headings: Satellites A3*+2a


A3UUa. Inquiry into whales and whaling; Reports. (20.3.1978) (1.12.1978)
A.Pp. 1979 n0.3 &h, 2 vols.
Member: Sir_S^Frost.
The principal term of reference was to recommend "on the best
way in which Australia might pursue its policy of preservation
and conservation of the many species of whales (also known as
cetacea)". This inquiry had a strong scientific bent and the
report, besides dealing with the history of whales and whaling,
examines at length the biological data that affect the stock of
whales and the environmental conditions essential for the surviva
of the species. Special attention is paid to Cheynes Beach, W.A.,
and the processing of whales for various purposes.
It is recommended i.a. that Australia should oppose the
continuance of whaling, refuse the issue of licences under the
Whaling Act 1960 (except in very special circumstances), prohibit
whaling by other nations in Australian waters (200 miles!),
continue to be a member of the International Whaling Commission
and seek to achieve a world-wide ban on whaling. The need for
research is emphasized.
Numerous appendices to v.l contain legal and biological statements,
including statistics. The second volume contains three commissioned
papers dealing respectively with whale harvesting strategies
(S.J.Holt), whale brains and intelligence (H.J.Jerison) and
another on the same topic by P.J.Morgane.
Recommended additions to index for 1960-1980:
NAMES: FROST, Sir S. A3UUa
Subject headings: Whales A3^Ua


A3bhlD. Australia and the Third World; Report of the Committee on
Australia's relations with the Third World. (6.H.1978)
(10.k.1979)
A.Pp. 1979 n0.269, 19j 376 p., fold. map.
Members: o. Harries, E.K.Fisk, A.T.Griffith, N.D.Mclnnes,
J.D.C.C.Moore, P.l.Nolan, A.R.Parsons, B.W.Scott,
J.T.Smith, J.A.Uhrig.
1
The C's terms of reference were to identify and describe the
salient features of what is loosely referred to as the Third World -
i.e. developing countries (119 of them) and the impact which commercial
and general relations with them may have on Australia. This is
a very compact and far reaching report compiled by economists and
political scientists who write better than most and can be listened
to as expressing authoritative views.
The report is divided into four main sections: the first three
chapters seek to analyse the characteristics of the Third World,
the economic and political systems that govern it, and the relations
between Western (Capitalist) countries and communist countries and
the Third World. Chapters IV and V consider future prospects of
the Third World, while chapters VI and VII deal with details of
Australia's relations with the Third World. Chapter VIII contains
conclusions and recommendations. There are lU appendices; these
include descriptions of grouping in the Third World, an important
chapter by o.Harries on 'The ideology of the Third World',
supporting economic data, and a list of Third World countries as
perceived by the C.
The findings, compressed into three pages, represent a model
lecture on what "makes" the Third World, its politics and economic
conditions. The recommendations are preceded by a warning that
Australia should not (l) follow blindly in steps and attitudes of
the Western World; (2) present itself as either a Third World
country or as an "honorary" Third World country; (3) assume the
general role of a "bridge" between the Third World and the West.
On the positive side, the section called 'Australia's general
posture' contains advice on what is expected of Australia and how
Australia should present itself.
The remainder of the eleven pages of recommendations can only be
indicated here by citing the headings of sections: strategic-
geopolitical; relations with the region; U.N. and multi-lateral
diplomacy; Commonwealth of Nations; Southern Africa; international
economic system and north-south dialogue; international trade and
protection policy; private international capital flows; international
debt issues; development aid; training.
A dissenting view by J.T.Smith is recorded in which he strongly
opposes the view that Australia is a Westfern country; the
"West" is centred on Europe, and Australia should recognize
its geo-political position, influence and commitments in its
geopolitical sphere.


A3UUb (continued)
Recommended additions to index for 1960-1980:
NAMES: HARRIES, 0. " A3UUb(c)
FISK, E.K. A3UU"b
GRIFFITH, A.T. A3bkb
McINNES, N.D. A3bh\>
MOORE, J.D.C.C. A3UUb
NOLAN, P.I. A3UUb
PARSONS, A.R. A3UUb
SCOTT, B.W. A3UUb
SMITH, J.T. A3bbh
UHRIG, J.A. A3hb\>
Subject headings: Foreign affairs A3bkb
Third world A3^Ub
Foreign aid A3^b


National inquiry into teacher education; Report. (13.7.1978)
(20.8.1980)
Published as a monograph "by AGPS, 1980 38, 267 p.
Members: J.J.Auchmuty, M.Bishop, C.Blakers, A.Coveos,
T.W.Hogan, H.S.Houston, N.D.McNamara, B.Manefield,
G.W.Muir, A.Payne, C.Pederson, R.Rogers, L.W.Shears,
M.Skilbeck, K.Spaulding, B.H.Watts.
The large committee was given wide terms of reference, but
special issues to be addressed were: Selection of persons; pre-
service programs; in-service education and development; teacher
education and institutions.
The summary of recommendations takes up 6 pages, and a summary
of "positions" extends over another 7 pages. Most of these are
philosophical and academic, and many belong to the "motherhood
type of consideration.
Suggested additions to index for 1960-1980:
NAMES: AUCHMUTY, J.J. A3^sa(c)
BISHOP, M. A3U5a
BLAKERS, C. A3*+sa
COVEOS, A. A3*+sa
HOGAN, T.W. A3^sa
HOUSTON, H.S. A3U5a
McNAMARA, N.D. A3^sa
MANEFIELD, B. A3^sa
MUIR, G.W. A3^sa
PAYNE, A. A3U5a
PEDERSON, C. A3 i +sa
ROGERS, R. A3U5a
SHEARS, L.W. A3*+sa
SKILBECK, M. A3^sa
SPAULDING, K. A3 1 * 5 a
WATTS, B.H. A3^sa
Subject headings: Teacher education A3^sa


A3*+7a. Cof inquiry [into] technological change in Australia; Report.
(1.12.1978) (11.9.1980)
A Pp. 198 0 n0. 2 16-219 •
Members: R.H.Myers, A.G.Coogan, W.C.Mansfield.
Appointed to examine and report on the process of technological
change in Australia and its social and economic effects, the C
produced a mammoth report based on published reports, stated
policies and programmes issued by institutions and government
bodies. Industry groups, private citizens and unions submitted
views and the recommendations incorporate these as far as they
were deemed relevant.
The issues involved are summed up in the first volume; volume
II contains a more detailed description of the technologies likely
to be relevant to Australia; volume 111 deals with government
policies and programmes that affect the introduction of new
technologies; the fourth volume contains fifteen papers commissioned
among many others by the Committee. A full list of papers received
by the C is available separately on microfiche.
Suggested additions to index for 1960-1980:
NAMES: MYERS, R.H. A3^7a(c)
COOGAN, A.G. A3^7a
MANSFIELD, W.C. A3*+7a
Subject headings: Technological change A3^7a


The ABC in review, national "broadcasting in the 1980s; Report
by the C. of review of the Australian Broadcasting Commission...
(23.11.79) (7.5-81)
A.Pp. 1981 n0.212 {3b p) and 213 p) maps)
Members : A.Dix, A.Castles, P.Love.ll, B.Sweeney.
Charged to examine broadly all the ABC's activities under its
Act {Broadcasting and Television Act 1942) the inquiry was also
asked to review in detail the ABC's effectiveness, its relation
with other government bodies, its programming and funding aspects,
the ABC's staffing and industrial relations, its arrangements for
management improvement and its planning for technological develop-
ment. The Report consists of two volumes: the first contains
summaries of the main issues and an outline of the recommendations;
the second describes the conduct of the review and references to
earlier inquiries, and begins with an explanation of the structure
of this very long report. The second report contains 27 major
chapters which include discussions on the historical background
of the ABC, the importance of the ABC's independence, the top
management of the ABC, the audience, the development of networks
for radio and for television, aims of information services, types
of programmes [!] under various headings, funding and finance,
industrial relations, structure of the organization, and future
issues. This is a well presented and jargon-free report of
considerable importance for Australian democracy.
A summary of recommendations is contained in chapter 2 of
volume 2. These are set out with references to the point at which
they are discussed in the Report. It would lead too far to enumerate
all of them here, but the following are most worth noting: The
management of the ABC should be changed into a Board of Directors
and a National Broadcasting Consultative Council, and the name of
the ABC should be changed to National Broadcasting Organisation
(NBO); a thorough review of procedures of audience contact;
development of broadcasting and television networks; improvement
of the ABC's role in informing Australia and a change to section 66
of the Act-, a view of programme policies (music, education,
Australian content).
Suggested additions to index for 1960-1980:
NAMES: DIX, A. A3UBa(c)
CASTLES, A. A3UBa
LOVELL, P. A3UBa
SWEENEY, B. A3^Ba
Subject headings: Broadcasting A3UBs
Television A3^Ba
Australian Broadcasting Commission A3^Ba


N633a. [RC] on sites for the seat of Government of the Commonwealth;
Report. (lU.ll.l899) (30.10.1900)
NPp. 1900 v.2: 21-123, folding maps (in separate folder).
Member: A.Oliver
In the long introduction to the Report, the RC sets out in detail
the difficulties inherent in the search for a suitable site for the
Commonwealth Government, the appointment of which was to take place
a few months after the report had been commissioned. The report's
main burden is Section 125 of the Commomoeaith Constitution Act 3
1900, which sets out in detail where the seat of the federal
government is to be in NSW, if that state is to be declared an
'original state' and not less than 100 miles from Sydney. Other
matters considered as impinging upon the choice of the seat of the
federal government are the size of the territory to be set aside
for that purpose, compensation to the ceding state, space available
for the extension of the federal capital, climatic, topographic and
geological conditions of the site chosen.
In its conclusion, the RC presents the pros and cons of the
several Western, South Western and Southern sites, and suggests
that the towns of Orange, Yass and Bombala-Eden would offer the
most suitable conditions for a capital.
A detailed report on the various sites examined follows the
report, together with excerpts from the evidence presented.
Recommended additions to the CONSOLIDATED 1NDEX...1856-1960:
NAMES: OLIVER, A. N633a(c)
Subject headings: Federal capital N633a


NIOITa. Cof Inquiry into retail trading hours; Report. (9-2.1977) (7-9-1977)
Report unpublished. Copy of typed version in Parliamentary
Library, Sydney.
Members: J.M.Riordan, B.T.Even, S.J.Fegan (?), R.M.Lawrence,
J.Neary, G.Smith.
The inquiry was set up to examine the claims of Sydney shop keepers
that trading on Saturday afternoons was desirable to meet the demands
of the public. The C consisted of representatives of retail shopkeepers,
unions and consumers.
On the basis of submissions received, interviews and visits by
the Committee, it is recommended that retail shopping hours should
continue to be controlled by legislation. Permissible closing times
for retail shops are listed and special opening hours during the
Christmas period are recommended; a definition of "small shop"
is suggested. Special types of retail shops, e.g. pharmacies, shops
selling cooked food, vegetables, books, garden requisites, motor cars
and accessories, boats, etc. etc. - the list is very long - are to
be exempt from the regulation.
The C recommends also that jail sentences should no longer be
imposed as an alternative to fines for breaches of trading hours
regulations. A Retail Trading Tribunal is suggested, under a judge
of the Industrial Commission.
In conclusion the chairman points out that some of the recommendations
are not supported by all members and that the report contains a
compromise solution.
Suggested additions to the CONSOLIDATED 1NDEX...1856-1960:
NAMES: RIORDAN, J.M. N1017a(c)
EVEN, B.T. Nlol7a
FEGAN, S.J. Nlol7a
LAWRENCE, R.M. Nlol7a
NEARY, J. Nlol7a
SMITH, G. Nlol7a
Subject headings: Trading hours Nlol7a


Nlo3la. C of inquiry into occupational health and safety; Report.
(28.10.19T9) (3.6.1981)
N .Pp. 1981: no. 16 vii, ll+Bp.
Member: T.G.Williams.
The terms of reference were, in the main, to examine and
report on the legislative framework for effective and socially
relevant occupational health and safety. The inquiry was to
embrace the existing provisions for all types of employees as
well as for the self employed and to simplify where possible
existing Acts and Regulations. A long set of particular .
references to be considered is set out under the headings
legislation, employee participation, and administration.
The inquiry did not get under way until mid-April 1980 and
it is noted with regret in the preamble to the Report that
Government Departments involved in the running of large work-
shops or mechanised operations failed to contribute to this
inquiry.
The C's conclusions and recommendations are summarised at
the beginning of the Report. Among the general comments is
the request for uniform and universal legislation to be expressed
in simple terms and administered by a single body wholly
dedicated to this task.
The more specific recommendations include: the Crown be bound
by this legislation; legislation to conform with international
standards; establishment of joint employer-employee committees;
recognition of employees' right to refuse to perform unsafe work;
adequate display of information about hazards and safety methods
to be used; education and training of industrial officers in
safety precautions; establishment of a single health, safety
and welfare authority for the State, to be managed by management,
labour and appropriate specialists, and responsible to the
Minister for Industrial Relations; establishment of a tribunal
to hear appeals against inspectors' notices.
The appendices contain reports and recommendations formulated
overseas: USA, UK, and international agencies.
Suggested additions to the index for 1960-1980:
NAMES: WILLIAMS, T.G. N1031a(c)
Subject headings: Occupational safety and health Nlo3la


Tl+Oa. SC [for] education office staff inquiry; Report.. .with minutes of
proceedings, evidence, and appendices. (29.6.190U)
(13.7.190U)
T.Pp. 190k n0.36 (v.51)
Members: F.B.Rattle, W.P.Brownell, J.W.Evans, A.Hean,
W.Lamerton, C.J.Mackenzie, J.D.Wood.
Appointed to examine considerable friction in the Department
of Education, the SC found that during H.E.Packer's secretaryship
there was a lot of confusion and clerks received contradictory
instructions from the Secretary and from the Department's Director
(J.Masters).
The SC found that the Director of Education did not approve
of Packer's appointment on the grounds of competence while Packer
tended to complain directly to the minister.
The Director of Education took rather unusual steps to get
rid of Packer and the SC seems to have condoned this, but added
a note of criticism.
Suggested additions to the CONSOLIDATED 1NDEX...1856-1960:
NAMES: RATTLE, F.B. TUOa(c)
BROWNELL, W.P. TUOa
EVANS, J.W. T^Oa
HEAN, A. TUOa
LAMERTON, W. T^Oa
MACKENZIE, C.J. T^Oa
WOOD, J.D. TUOa
Subject headings: Department of Education T^Oa


TUOb. RC on the general hospitals, Hobart and. Launceston, and the
hospital for the insane, New Norfolk; Report. (1.7.190U)
(31.1.1905)
T.Pp. 1905 n0.13 Ul p.
Members: C. E^ington, J.W.Hughes, F.R.Seager.
The principal concern of the government was the administration
of the institutions, the state of the buildings, the provisions
made in case of fire and any action necessary to improve faults.
The report is divided into two sections; the first deals with
the hospitals in Hobart and Launceston, the second deals with
New Norfolk.
The RC found that the financial resources of the hospitals
were inadequate, that the administrations were different in each
institution and much in need of overhaul and the staffing required
uniformity of treatment. The RC points out numerous defects and
dangers in the buildings and criticises in particular the
absence of adequate fire precautions.
The recommendations are summarised on p. 30. Important as they
were at the time, they are now of medico-historical interest only.
However, it is worth noting that the medical superintendent is to
have wider powers, while at the same time he is to be restrained
by very specific legislation. The RC also recommended better
staff training and the establishment of general and professional
libraries.
Suggested additions to the CONSOLIDATED 1NDEX...1856-1960:
NAMES: ELKINGTON, J.S.C. TUob(c)
HUGHES, J.W. TUOb
SEAGER, F.R. TUOb
Subject headings: Hospitals TUOb


Tlo9a. SC of the LC [on the] effect of the raising of the school
leaving age to l 6 years; Report. (11.3•
T.Pp 19U8 n0.16 9 P-
Members: D.G.Lonergan, G.H.Green, L.A.Procter,
wTßobinsonT"J•Soundy, A.W.Tattersail.
The SC was established in response to strong opposition
to the Education Act, especially from country districts.
After examining the evidence brought before the SC with regard
to accommodation in schools, welfare of the children, teachers
and parents, it is recommended that children over 15 should
not be obliged to stay at school and the Apprenticeship Commission
make special provisions for children of 16 years and over.
Suggested additions to the CONSOLIDATED INDEX 1856-1960:
NAMES: LONERGAN, D.G. Tlo9a(c)
GREEN, G.H. Tlo9a
PROCTER, L.A. Tlo9a
ROBINSON, W. Tlo9a
SOUNDY, J. Tlo9a
TATTERSALL, A.W. Tlo9a
Subject headings: Education Tlo9a


VUOB. Correction required to name of chairman and to the entries in
the indexes in Part 111 and in the CONSOLIDATED INDEX 1856-1960:
Delete COOK, A. and substitute COOCH, A.


Vs2Ba. Enquiry into the economics of marketing of livestock and meat
in Victoria; Report. (8.5.1972) (?.5«1973)
Published "by Dept of Agriculture, Melbourne, 1973-
vii , 2lip.
Members : LJs.Cozens .
Appointed upon a Cabinet decision after requests from the
sheep meats Marketing Board to examine the factors that relate
to the cost of marketing live animals and meat and that affect
their prices and to examine possible changes. The Report which
deals mainly with sheep and sheep meats describes the existing
situation in live stock marketing, the many problems associated
with an even flow of stock for sale, and the advantages and dis-
advantages of the existing auction system. Separate chapters
deal with wholesale and retail marketing and with margins and
profits, and another witlj carcase grading. Two chapters deal
with existing legislation for sheep meats and the Marketing of
Primary Products 1958. Several appendices show marketing
arrangements in other states, New Zealand and the USA, and there
are numerous statistical tables.
There is a summary of conclusions on pp.iv-vi, which list
five main issues: there should be a uniform grading system; the
wholesale market is highly competitive in Victoria; the auction
system is proved to be more costly and less satisfactory than
selling animals by grade of carcase; the sheep meats Marketing
Board is unlikely to increase producer prices either by reducing
marketing costs or by raising domestic prices with serious
consequences on the industry's profitability and stability; the
Marketing of Primary Products Actj 1958 should be modified to
control production and exports.
This very brief summary is then "explained" by a slightly
enlarged summary which is very useful.
Suggested additions to the index for 1960-1980:
NAMES: COZENS, L.E. Vs2Ba(c)
Subject headings: Meat industry and trade Vs2Ba


W3sBa. RC to investigate the administration and conduct of the Fremantle
Prison [Report] (1U.3.1911) (• • 1911)
Member: C.E. de Pennefather.
References to this inquiry appear in the Western Australian
Government gazette of IT-3.19H an B in the House of Assembly
Debates 29.11.1911 (p. 530). However there is no copy of the report
in the Western Australian Archives or the Parliament, though the
House of Assembly decided that "all papers dealing with the Fremantle
Gaol inquiry, held on or about 25th March last, be laid on the Table".
There is a full account of the RC findings in The West Australian
of 10 May 1911 and in absence of the RC's own report the following
synopsis is based on that newspaper's account which appears to be
exceptionally full; it extends over six newspaper columns.
The RC expressed strong criticism of the structure and layout
of the Fremantle Gaol buildings and of the accommodation provided
for the prison staff. The terms and conditions of employment of
staff are also criticized.
Regarding workshops and manufactures, the RC praised the work
being done but had strong misgivings over the accounting system
and the lack of control over tools and materials.
The RC was critical of the housing and treatment of female
prisoners and also commented adversely on the remission system
in general. There follows an extensive section of general observations
which deal with the 'modern' view of penology. The most telling
phrase is unquestionably: '...in order to carry out modern principles
of prison reform, Acts, regulations and ideals are of little use
without the means and facilities to do so'.
Suggested additions to index in E.Zalums 's BIBLIOGRAPHY OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN ROYAL COMMISSIONS [etc]:
NAMES: PENNEFATHER, C.E. de F. W3sBa(c)
Subject headings: Prisons W3sBa
Fremantle Prison W3sBa


W37la. RC to enquire into the treatment of aboriginal natives by the
Canning Explorat ion Party. (IU. 1.19 08 )
Colonial Secretary's Office - inward correspondence
1820/2 (W.A. State Archives Acc 1820)
Typescript U7p.
Members: J.M.Finnerty, C.F.Gale, G.Taylor.
The RC was appointed to enquire into ten charges which were
made by Edward J.Blake of ill—treatment of Aboriginal natives
by the Canning Exploration Party. The charges were grouped by
the Commission under four headings, namely: compulsion of natives
to service, and cruelty to those natives; unnecessarily depriving
natives of their water supply by deepening and squaring their
native wells; taking forcible possession of native weapons and
effects; immorality with native women.
The charges were in general considered to be unsubstantiated.
Suggested additions to index in E.Zalums's BIBLIOGRAPHY OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN ROYAL COMMISSIONS [etc]:
NAMES: FINNERTY, J.M. W37la(c)
GALE, C.F. W37la
TAYLOR, G. W37la
Subject headings: Canning Exploration Party W37la
Aborigines W37la


W 557 a. RC...to inquire into the coal mining industry of Western Australia.
Report. (17 + 29-9>19^7)
Not published. Typed copy of report in WA Dept of Mines.
100 p. , illus.
Member: W.J.Wallwork.
Serious unrest in the coal mining industry at Collie, W.A. in
the years prior to the end of war and immediately afterwards led
to the appointment of this inquiry. Strikes, lack of production
and low coal prices caused dissatisfaction among consumers and
producers. An interim report of the RC suggested some immediate
remedies. Neither the interim report nor the final report were
ever made public.
The terms of reference of the RC ranged widely and covered the
country's resources of coal, the management of the mining industry,
the terms and conditions of work, and matters relating specifically
to the current disputes; the RC was also asked to suggest improvements
of working conditions and of all other matters that might endanger
the state's coal supplies.
It is pointed out right at the beginning that this inquiry did
not follow the usual course of a RC in that it did not hold public
sittings or seek evidence under oath. The acute coal shortage
in the first quarter of 19H6 prompted the RC to adopt "a direct
anproach" and make inquiries as they oecame necessary. The final
report is the product of local and national developments in the
coal industry in 19U7, with special reference to the Commonwealth
Board of Inquiry, (AI6S)« The report outlines at some length
the situation in the WA coal industry in the UOs, showing statistical
data of strikes, of costs of mining and the effect of high taxes
on mining companies as well as on the miners.
The main body of the report is divided into six parts: production
and development; mining methods and management; conditions of work
and employment; amenities and social conditions; research and
marketing; industrial issues, i.e. the working of the National
Security Act, 1939 and its regulations. The general comments that
follow summarise the RC's political and economic views as follows:
the wealth of WA coal mines should be treated as a national asset;
the private companies have failed to meet the State's needs of fuel
requirements; the coal mining industry should be subject to direct
supervision by a statutory board or commission; working conditions
should be made congenial to attract workers; all unworked coal
deposits should be vested or re-vested in the State; research
should be increased into coal resources and coal use; the high
price of coal production must be off-set by greater productivity.
Detailed recommendations, related to the terms of reference, follow
on pp. 59-68, setting out specific matters concerning mine management
and operation. The supervision by a State Coal Board or Commission
plays a very large part in these recommendations, and the provision
of good social conditions - from hygienic facilities for the miners
to a full range of schools for their children - form another
important aspect of the report. An appendix contains the recommendations
of the Health Committee attached to the Commonwealth Coal Inquiry,
(Cilento Board).


W557a (continued)
Suggested additions to index in E.Zalums 's BIBLIOGRAPHY OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN ROYAL COMMISSIONS [etc]:
NAMES: WALLWORK, W.J. W557a(c)
Subject entries: Coal mines and mining W557&


Ws6oa. Survey of native affairs; Report. (21.7- (U.6.19W
WPp. 19U8 2nd Session v.2: (n0.19) 39P- maps.
Member: FAE L A .
Initiated by the Minister for Native Affairs in W.A., this
inquiry is more in the nature of a departmental survey of existing
conditions among the W.A. Aborigines than a full-blown^ inquiry.
The terms of reference were to examine native institutions, as
defined under the Native Administration Act, 1905-19^1' » to _ recommend
on the future of these institutions and on the State's native
population in respect of education, social welfare, etc.
Commissioner travelled all over the State and the report outlines
the state of affairs in the institutions visited and the social
and working conditions of the native population. There are special
chapters on the health of Aborigines and the hospital services
available to them; on the role of the police as 'protectors| of
the Aborigines; on the education available to Aboriginal children.
Some detailed recommendations on schools for Aborigines are
included here. Statistical tables follow on the distribution of
'tribal natives' and a chapter on the position of Aborigines in
towns. There are also chapters on Aboriginal crafts and vocations,
and on the prospect of employment in the fishing and pearling
industries. Recommendations on the reorganisation of Aboriginal
settlements, on the establishment of housing schemes, a review
of employment conditions and of vocational training are set out
at the end of appropriate chapters.
Regarding the administration of the Native Affairs Department,
a number of recommendations of a practical nature follow the
of departmental practices. This chapter is followed by recommendations
regarding several aspects of existing legislation.
Recommended additions to index in E.Zaiums's BIBLIOGRAPHY OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN ROYAL COMMISSIONS [etc]:
NAMES: BATEMAN, F.E.A. Ws6oa(c)
Subject entries: Aborigines Ws6oa
Native Affairs Department Ws6oa


W6lBa. Tertiary education in Western Australia; Report[s] of the C...
(? .8.66) (13.10.66 + ?.9.67 )
Perth, W.A., University of Western Australia for the
Government of Western Australia, 1967. ix, 92 p.
(Not issued as a Pp.)
Members: Sir L.W.Jackson, C.C.Adams, W.C.K.Pearse,
s7L7Prescott"T. L. Robert son, K.J. Townsing.
The report starts with a brief historical note which stresses
the lack of coordination in Australia between institutions
concerned with tertiary education; it includes an account of
the situation in W.A., followed by a couple of chapters on future
needs and in particular the role and status of "monotechs",
universities and the W.A.I.T. Other chapters and sections deal
with country regional development, agricultural education, mining
education, training for musical performance, paramedical education
and teacher education. A brief note on future sites for
institutions of tertiary education concludes the report.
An interim report submitted in October 1966 is reprinted as
an appendix.
The recommendations refer mainly to individual institutions,
but the following are of a more general nature: the establishment
of a Tertiary Education Commission as a statutory authority;
that monotechs be combined to form one single c.a.e.; that there
be student limits at the University of WA, and that a new
university be planned for 1970-72; that an advisory committee
on agricultural education be established; that veterinary science
courses be started; that the School Mines (Kalgoorlie) become
independent and be run like a c.a.e.; that paramedical education
be established as a department of the WACAE; that planning begin
on removing teacher education from the state Education Department.
Suggested additions to index in E.Zalums's BIBLIOGRAPHY OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN ROYAL COMMISSIONS [etc]:
NAMES: JACKSON, Sir L.W. W6lBa(c)
ADAMS, C.C. W6lBa
PEARSE, W.C.K. W6lBa
PRESCOTT, S.L. W6lBa
ROBERTSON, T.L. W6lBa
TOWNSING, K.J. W6lBa
Subject headings: Postsecondary education W6lBa


w62Ua. RC upon all matters affecting the well being of persons of
Aboriginal descent in Western Australia (with particular
reference to their health, education, housing, social
welfare, economic and group cultural needs) and to recommend
such legislative, administrative, or other changes as are
thought necessary: Report. (11.7.1973) (2*4.7.197*0
Unpublished. Copy of roneoed report available in State
Library of W.A. xiv, 551 p.
Member: L.C.Furnell. *
The terms of reference for this well structured mammoth report
are contained in the title; a lengthy table of contents (10 pages)
sets out clearly the ground covered and the procedures adopted.
In reviewing the history of race relations in W.A. from 1829
to 197*4, the RC found that much of the state and Commonwealth
financial support was poorly organized, wasteful, uncontrolled
and in the end harmful to the Aborigines whose self respect and
self reliance were being belittled.
In the detailed examination of the provision of health services,
education, housing and social welfare the RC is very critical
of actual services rendered and the wide gulf between the
political stances of governments and the philanthropic tenor
of the legislation on the one hand and the hard facts of race-
relations on the other; the RC also noted the Aborigines'
unwillingness to forget the past and to start afresh. The
sections on each of the four areas: health, education, housing
and welfare conclude with a summary review of the Aborigines'
conditions and a set of relevant recommendations. To improve
health services an increase in the number of staff and vehicles
for field work is suggested, as well as free medical service
for the indigent and incapable, and better administration of the
Health Benefits System.
But with regard to education and housing the RC expresses
its full appreciation of what the government and the public
service are doing but adds that better success depends on the
Aborigines themselves, their cooperation and their ability or
willingness to accept European standards, particularly with regard
to public hygiene. The need to have the Aboriginal population
participate in the planning of better facilities is stressed
several times. Much hope is expressed in the success of the
Housing Commission's efforts.
The section on social welfare examines the impacts European
colonization and particularly the operation of large stock runs
have had on Aboriginal life and social organization. The effects
of tribal alienation, of unconquerable poverty, and of alcohol
are described but the RC also notes the work done by the missions
and other private agencies. No specific recommendations are made
under this heading.
After analysing the economic needs of the Aboriginal community
and dealing in some detail with working conditions and the attitude
to work, the RC concludes that it is almost impossible for a European
to ascertain the Aborigine's approach to work. '...a European
speculates on Aboriginal motives from a European background and


w62Ua (contd)
it may well "be that all of this speculation is based, on wrong
premises'. This appears to be a most important conclusion
even though it opens up the hopelessness of any chances for
improved, race relations in Australia.
The section on 'Cultural needs' is restricted, as the RC
points out, to 'those ingredients of Aboriginal living that
have given a heritage of artistic endeavour as is evidenced
by art, music, song, painting, carving, languages and ceremonies,
etc.' The analysis of the current situation is interesting and
gives rise to doubts and to more questions than the report
answers. The only concrete recommendation is that government
funds should be made available for the compilation of durable
records and to enhance these cultural assets in all schools.
The section on the police and courts is brief and does not
go very deeply into the problem. However, there is a full
description of the work of the Aboriginal Legal Service of
Western Australia and reference is made to the differential
treatment of offenders or alleged offenders in West Australian
gaols. However, the RC could find no evidence of such discrimination
A brief chapter on alcohol and drunkenness condemns these
evils but makes no serious attempt to offer reforms of the legal
aspects or of the social habits. This is followed by a brief
discussion of the work of mission stations which find much
approval but again fails to come to grips with basic problems.
Sections 11-lU deal with several groups of Aborigines in some
detail: Donald McLeod and the nomads; the Bardi people and the
Looma project; the Warburton Ranges and Cundeelee Missions; and
the Christian Brothers or Nulungu College, Broome. These sections
of the report try to analyze the advantages and disadvantages
of the several projects, pointing to some glaring defects and
noting laudable achievements.
Under the headings 'Some misconceptions' and 'Criticisms'
the RC defends itself in Chapters 15 and l 6 against noisy and
often ill-founded criticisms of its purpose and points to
historical facts in race relations in the past while explaining
the causes of many shortcomings among the Aborigines' life style.
Aboriginal land rights are the subject of the last section of
the Report. Reference is made to the Woodward R.C. (A 268) and
to the great changes which the new Labor Government had brought
to Aboriginal Policy since its accession to power at the end of
1972. There is little new in this Section, but the absurdity of
some of the land claims is pointed out, and the problems inherent
in the clash between tribal law and European law are stressed.
The summary of recommendations follows the structure of the
report but the many details listed cannot be repeated here.
The RC's conclusions are, briefly, that Aborigines must be given
a chance to participate in the shaping of their future, and that
care should be taken to allow them to do so in their own way and
at their own pace. The RC regrets and deplores the 'uncharitable
and ungrateful outbursts' of certain sections of the community who
criticize the European community without appreciating the efforts
made by most of it.s members to improve the life and conditions of
Aborigines. The helpfulness of the W.A. government departments is
particularly acknowledged.


w62Ua (continued)
Suggested additions to index in E.Zalums r s BIBLIOGRAPHY OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN ROYAL COMMISSIONS [etc]:
NAMES: FURNELL, L.C. 62Ua(c)
Subject headings: Aborigines 62Ua
Aboriginal land rights 62Ua


w62*+b. RC on metropolitan municipal district boundaries; Report.
(7.8.73) (29.3.197*+)
Not printed. [lso] p; fold. maps. Copy of roneoed
report in State Library of W.A. , Perth.
Member: L.F.J.Johnston.
The terms of reference were to examine the number of municipalities
in the metropolitan area of Perth, W.A., to recommend changes if
thought fit after having taken note of the Local Government
Boundaries Commission's report of 1972, and of any submissions
made to the RC, to spell out the boundaries and names of new
municipalities recommended and the status they should have
under the Local Government Act 1960-197Z 3 and to propose changes
to that Act if thought necessary.
The RC acknowledged the strong criticism levelled against the
report of the Local Government Boundaries Commission of 197 2 ,
but concurred with the L.G.B.C. that the metropolitan area should
be treated as a compact region. Though not specifically stated,
the RC considered the standard of local government administration,
though ill defined, to be reasonably efficient - a view that can
only be derived from reading all the comments on the individual
municipalities under review.
The RC noted that much of the evidence presented was merely a
repetition of the submissions made to the L.G.B.C. in 1972 and
reached conclusions fairly similar to those of the Commission.
However, the RC made new recommendations with regard to the
appropriate size of the municipal councils. The RC firmly
expressed the view that a standard size for municipalities
could not be established. Besides giving a large number of
reasons that would militate against a uniform or standard size,
the RC also cites the views of the RC on Local Government in
Greater London in support of its advocacy of relatively small
municipalities.
The recommendations on matters of principle are summarized
on p.lUl, but the detailed proposals for amalgamations and
reorganization are contained in Appendix A that follows.
Suggested additions to index in E. Zalums's BIBLIOGRAPHY OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIAN ROYAL COMMISSIONS [etc]:
NAMES: JOHNSTON, L.F.J. W62l+b(c)
Subject headings: Local government W62^b






