

PfeTH pPrK'i
S o t>t
AmP /j
SUPPLY OP WATER TO THE CITY OF BRISBANE,
By A. C. GREGORY, Esqciiie, C.M.G., P.Q.P.S.
(Read before the Queensland Philosophical Society, Brisbane,
B th August, 1878 J
One of the most important questions affecting the City of
B risbane is how to provide a sufficient supply of good water.
The Enoggera Waterworks were completed in 1866, but the
distribution was at first confined to only a small proportion of
the city, and the quantity of water delivered was comparatively
small. The gradual extension of the distributing pipes resulted
in an equivalent increase in consumption, and in 1871 it accu-
mulated to 300,000 gallons per diem, or nearly the full quantity
the 8-inch main was capable of conveying from the Storage
Reservoir, and a second main of 12 inches diameter was laid,
and for nearly two years the delivery of water to the city has
been about 1,000,000 gallons per diem; but while the distribution
has only extended to districts comprising 2,500 tenements, with
an estimated population of 16,000, the consumption has greatly
exceeded the available rainfall, and therefore cannot be long
maintained under existing conditions.
During the twenty-two months which have elapsed since
the present rate of supply to the city has been in operation
there has been no overflow of the bywash of the Storage Reser-
voir, which was quite full at the beginning of the period, but
was some four feet below at the end.
Thus the expenditure of water during the twenty-two
months has been 200,000,000 gallons in excess of the natural
supply, being at the rate of 300,000 gallons per diem over
the capabilities of the Reservoir, with a rainfall or 36 inches per
annum.
The area of the catchwater or watershed of the Enoggera
Reservoir is 5,000 acres ; the rainfall of the last two years has
been 36 inches per annum, equal to 10,000,000 gallons per diem ;
while the quantity available for delivery to the city has only
been 700,000 gallons per diem, or only one-fifteenth of the
rainfall.
The distribution of the million gallons per diem supplied to
the city is about 300,000 gallons to the lower division, with
5,000 persons, and part of South Brisbane, with an estimated
population of 1,000, or a total of 6,000 persons, or 50 gallons


per head ; while 700,000 gallons are delivered in the higher
division of Wickham and part of Fortitude Valley containing
10,000 persons, being at the rate of 70 gallons per head.
It may be remarked that in the former district the 50
gallons includes street watering, while none of the streets are
watered in the division where 70 gallons per head is consumed.
The census of 1876 shows nearly 22,000 as the population
of the Municipality of Brisbane, with 9,000 in the adjoining
suburbs, making a total of 31,000, of whom only 16,000 are
within the range of the present water supply from Enoggera,
leaving 15,000 unsupplied except by tanks and waterholes, which,
as the population increases, are every day becoming more pre-
carious and unwholesome sources.
Thus while the Enoggera Reservoir is being drained at the
rate of more than 40 per cent, above its capability of continuous
supply, there are still 15,000 persons yet to be provided with
water, irrespective of the prospective increase of population,
which from the census of 1876 may be computed at 13 per cent,
per annum.
Having thus ascertained that the water supply from
Enoggera is inadequate for even the present requirements, the
question to be considered is, from what source is the deficiency to
be obtained ?
On the northern side of the city the valley of Kedron
Brook and the South Pine River present themselves ; but these
watercourses occupy such depressed localities that it would
involve the double expense of constructing storage reservoirs
and pumping to raise the water to the higher portions of the
city. The supply from Kedron Brook would be very small, and
it would require at least 15 miles of main pipe to bring water
from the South Pine River.
To the south, the Logan River would supply a large quantity
of the best water in the Moreton district; but as it would have
to be pumped from a level scarcely above high-water mark, and
conveyed a distance of 22 miles, the cost is an almost insuper-
able objection.
To the south-west of the city, the Brisbane River, above the
tidal influence, presents a considerable volume of water of fair
quality, which, though inferior to the Logan, is better than that
from Enoggera,
The valley of the Brisbane is so nearly level that the tide
carries salt water about five miles above the junction of the
Bremer River, so that the first point at which fresh water could
be obtained is 16 miles from Brisbane along the shortest prac-
ticable line on which pipes could be laid, the surface level rising
to 170 feet above the river in several places, though there would
not be much difficulty in reducing the level of the pipes to 120
feet by a few short tunnels. .


The water from the Brisbane Biver would require to be
pumped, as the rise of the valley for 60 miles above the head of
the tide is less than six feet per mile, and following the course of
the channel of the river it is only three feet per mile, the
elevation of the river bed at Colirton being less than 350 feet
above the sea, —a head of water insufficient to overcome the
friction of pipes of more than 100 miles in length.
The Brisbane Biver is theref ore unavailable as a source of
supply by gravitation, and its waters would have to be pumped a
height equal to the required point of delivery in the city, in
addition to that necessary to overcome friction.
Now, a fall of five feet per mile is necessary to cause the
delivery on one million gallons per diem through a pipe of 15
inches diameter, even when the bore is even and there are no
bends; and five feet per mile for 16 miles is 80 feet, while the
point of delivery in the city ought not to be less than 200 feet
above the river : this gives 280 feet for the water to be pumped.
To pump 1,000,000 gallons of water 280 feet high in twenty-
four hours requires an engine of 80 horse-power working
without intermission.
There is a workable seam of coal about six miles from the
spot where the engines would be erected, and fuel might be
obtained at about 15s. per ton; but the quality is inferior, and
it would require about 10 lbs, of coal per horse-power per hour,
or about 8 tons of coal per diem, costing say £6.
Sixteen miles of cast-iron pipes, 1 inch thick and 15 inches
in diameter, would weigh 6,400 tons, which at £lO per ton
delivered on the work would cost £64,000; laying the pipes
would cost at least £30,000; engines, pumps, and accessories,
not less than £16,000; making a total of £IIO,OOO. Six per
cent, on this sum would be £6,600. Coal would cost £2,200 per
annum; wages and contingencies say £2,200 ; making a total of
£II,OOO per annum, or about 7d. per 1,000 gallons, exclusive of
the cost of renewals of engines and pipes.
The high cost of obtaining water from the Brisbane Biver
indicates the importance of seeking some less expensive source
of supply, especially as regards the contingency of pumping.
The upper valleys of Moggill Creek, from ten to twelve
miles to the west of the city, appear to offer some important
advantages over any of those localities which have been under
consideration. The distance from Brisbane to Moggill Creek by
the road is seven miles, but from this point on the creek it would
be necessary to ascend the valley about five miles to obtain
sufficient elevation to supply the city by gravitation. At this
distance the valley of the northern branch of the creek has an
elevation of about 270 feet, the highest point on the route from
Moggill Creek to Brisbane being 170 feet, so that it would be prac-
ticable to deliver the water in the city at 200 feet above the river.


There is, however, only a distance of 1\ miles between a
bend of the creek and the Enoggera Eeservoir, and the ridge is
very abrupt, with a height of 190 feet above the Reservoir.
About 20 chains of tunnel and 3 miles of pipe would be sufficient
to convey water from the upper part of the north branch of
Moggill Creek into the Enoggera Reservoir.
The watershed of the north branch of Moggill Creek, which
would be available for a reservoir, is about 3,000 acres, while
there is every facility for constructing the necessary works for
storage.
In carrying out this work it is proposed to commence at
the Enoggera Reservoir, and make a cutting in the slate rock for
20 chains, when it would reach a depth of about 30 feet; then
to tunnel through the ridge separating Enoggera Creek from
Moggill Creek a distance of 20 chains, and a second cutting of
10 chains, all having a rising grade of 10 feet per mile ; and that
for this total distance of 50 chains the water would flow in an
open conduit, as the rock is sufficiently hard without lining with
masonry, and thus the expense of more than half a mile of iron
pipes would be avoided.
Erom this open conduit iron pipes would be laid down the
ravine 50 chains to the north branch of Moggill Creek, and then
up that valley about 150 chains to a point where the channel of
the creek is about 25 feet above the surface of the Enoggera
Reservoir, and there is a narrow gorge suitable for the con-
struction of a dam, which, if made 80 feet high, would back up
the water in the valley for about one mile, with a probable
storage capacity of seven hundred millions of gallons.
The valley being narrower than that of Enoggera at the
Reservoir, it would not be more costly to build a dam of 80 feet
than that of GO feet at Enoggera; and it is important both in
regard to evaporation and freedom from weeds to secure the
greatest available depth of water in storage reservoirs.
Erom the dam to the open conduit, a pipe nine inches
diameter, with a mean fall of ten feet per mile, would deliver
400,000 gallons per diem, and as the additional head of water in
the Reservoir would generally double the pressure, the pipe
would deliver 600,000 gallons per diem.
The passage through the 50 chains of open conduit would
improve the water by contact with the air, besides saving the
expense of cast-iron pipes.
The most formidable item of this scheme is the tunnel
between the Moggill and the Enoggera valleys, but as it would
be only four chains longer than the principal tunnel already
made on the line between Enoggera and Brisbane, and the rock
cannot be of a harder description, the cost may be put at about
£3,000, or £7 per yard forward.


The general character of the watershed from which the
water would be collected is similar to that of the Enoggera
Talley, and the quality would no doubt be identical.
In addition to this reservoir on the north branch of Moggill
Creek, there is a site suitable for a second reservoir on the main
branch of Moggill Creek • but the waters would have to be con-
veyed by pipes a distance of four miles to the head of the open
conduit.
The supply from each of these reservoirs may be fairly
estimated at 500,000 gallons per diem in seasons similar to the
past two years, when the Enoggera Reservoir has had a capa-
bility of 700,000 gallons per diem.
As regards the relative cost of obtaining one million gallons
of water per diem from the Moggill Valley and the Brisbane
River, it may be estimated that each of the Moggill Reservoirs
and its accompanying works could be constructed for £50,000,
while the first cost of the works for bringing the water of the
Upper Brisbane to the city would be more than £lOO,OOO. In
the former case the water would be delivered by gravitation at
the highest level in the city, and in the latter it would have to
be pumped 280 feet by steam power.
In seeking for sources of water supply, the possibility of its
being obtainable from wells of the ordinary artesian class should
always be considered ; for, though well water is usually deficient
in “ softness,” this defect is generally more than compensated by
the greater freedom from organic impurity. Ordinary wells are,
however, only available for large supply where there are exten-
sive beds of gravel or sand belonging to tertiary or recent
alluvial drifts. Artesian wells can only be formed where there
are inclined beds of porous material interspersed between per-
meable strata of clay and rock, conditions confined to formations
above the carboniferous series of rocks.
The older .Devonian slates and carboniferous shales of the
district around Brisbane are so impervious that nearly the whole
of the rainfall flows off by surface channels, there being no beds
of sand or gravel to form subterranean reservoirs, while the
rocks are so impregnated with iron pyrites that the small quantity
of water retained in the small fissure is unfit for domestic use.
As wells are impracticable, and there are no copious springs,
it is necessary to resort to storage of the surface drainage of the
country either in natural or artificial reservoirs.
The Brisbane River is a natural reservoir of this character,
not being supplied from springs, but consisting, in the dry
season, of long reaches of nearly stagnant water, with a small
flow over the intervening banks of sand and gravel resulting
from the gradual drainage of the upper part of the channel.
Whether the storage be in these reaches of water, or in
artificial reservoirs in the upper parts of tributary valleys, the


direct source is in either case the surface drainage from tracts of
forest land, and necessarily charged with a large proportion of
vegetable matter, which, by its decomposition, especially in the
hot season, is a fertile source of organic impurity;—but this
applies to all the available sources of supply for the city of
Brisbane in nearly equal degree.
The purity of water stored in artificial reservoirs is greatly
affected by the depth ; shallow water becomes so heated by the
sun, that aquatic vegetation forms a dense mass wherever the
depth is less than fourteen feet; where the depth exceeds
fourteen feet it is free from weeds, the surface temperature does
not rise so high, and evaporation is less.
It is therefore of considerable importance that, in selecting
sites for reservoirs, the greatest practicable depth should be
secured ; and it is therefore urged that if reservoirs are formed
in the valleys of Moggill Creek, the dams should be raised higher
than that at Enoggera, and that 80 feet would be quite prac-
ticable.
In connection with the question of supply, it may be con-
venient to advert to what seems to be an excessive quantity of
water consumed in Brisbane.
In 1871 the lower district of the city consumed about 48
gallons per head for all purposes, including street watering ; and
in the upper district 30 gallons per head. At the present time,
the consumption in the lower district is 50 gallons per head,
though street watering has been trebled; but in the upper
district, where no streets are watered, the consumption has risen
to 70 gallons per head.
Now, in the upper district not one-tenth of the houses have
baths, and the average number of each household is six, and the
consumption 420 gallons per diem, equal to 200 buckets of
water, a quantity obviously in excess of what can be used ; and
the only conclusion which can be arrived at is, that more than
half the water delivered is allowed to run to waste.
If, instead of an annual water rate based on the size of the
house, water were charged by meter, the consumption would
probably be reduced below what is conducive to the health of
the city; but it is probable that if a regular system of super-
vision and small fine were imposed for allowing water to run to
waste, the consumption might be reduced to 30 gallons per
head, a quantity estimated to be ample for all purposes in
English towns.
If the consumption were reduced to 30 gallons, the present
supply of one million gallons per diem would be sufficient for the
32,000 persons at present residing in the city and suburbs; but
the contingency of a rapidly increasing population demands that
additional provision should be made for the future, and that,
under any circumstances, the requisite sites for collecting


grounds and reservoirs should be reserved from alienation in the
case of Crown lands, or repurchased in the case of alienated
lands before the value is enhanced by further improvement.
At present the alienated lands which will be required are
scarcely occupied or improved even by fencing, but in a few
years the clearing of scrub, and cultivation of portions of the
land, will increase the cost of purchase to three or four times
what it could now be bought for.
Mr. D. C. McConnel : As discussion or remarks in
writing on the very important question of Brisbane Water
Supply are asked, I take the liberty of reading this. No
doubt, on such an important subject, every point of view
should be examined. Having lived for very many years,
since 1840, on the Upper Brisbane River, I recommend
that the hottest part of summer should pass over, and the water
collected from that river by the New Waterworks in Ipswich
be well examined microscopically and chemically. I know that
half way, or to its source about 60 miles from Ipswich, in
summer the water is hot, impregnated with decaying vegetable
and animal matter and infusoria—in fact, a strong decoction of
dead prawns, &c., particularly in dry weather. About half way
it is purer, but even 30 miles from the source the taste is dis-
agreeable enough, barely fit to drink unless allowed to stand for
a time, or be boiled and then cooled. The hotter and drier the
season, the more disgusting is that decoction. It is probable
that in every feeder there is some dead animal. lam pretty
sure this will be very distinctly noticeable in the water obtained
from that river in Ipswich, from December to March, unless
heavy rain come. Although I dwell on this rather strongly, still
I think there may be some remedies to which I shall soon advert,
and the large volume of better water than the present Enoggera
Reservoir supplies is a very important consideration.
I quite agree with Mr. Gregory that there is not the
slightest chance of any success in boring for artesian wells,
particularly on the north side of the Brisbane River, as the rocks
are primary, Devonian, and lower carboniferous. On the south
side, beyond Goodna, there might be a chance among the sand-
stone strata, for water, but probably not enough for a large
water supply: rocks are often interrupted by basalt. The North
Pine and Caboolture sandstone is only a small and uncertain
basin, and a long way off; so I agree with Mr. Gregory that
artesian wells are out of the question. I can easily get water
here, and have sunk three large wells down to the bed rock,
about 15 feet to 18 feet deep. The water is most abundant, and
about three or four feet from the surface, but not fit for human


beings to drink, being much impregnated with sulphuretted
hydrogen, probably from decomposition of iron pyrites in the
soil and rock. I believe any amount of irrigation might be
carried on in this neighbourhood: there is no deficiency of
water for that purpose.
I should say there is no plan mentioned by Mr. Gregory
comparable with that from the north and main heads of Moggill
Creek, costing about £50,000 each and no pumping required,
being about 280 feet high and able to gravitate down into the
Enoggera Reservoir, and the two able to supply 1,000,000
gallons per diem at least. No doubt this is the best water
obtainable from any quarter, and at far the least cost. It is
said, and probably with truth, that in a few years the 2,000,000
gallons daily from Enoggera and the two heads of Moggill Creek
will not be enough for our fast rising population. In ordinary
seasons there might be sufficient, but for unusual dry seasons,
say three months out of the year, more is required. My idea is,
that in those unusual seasons, certainly not required at present,
a steam-engine be placed on Brisbane River about Ugly or
Kholo Creek, and in those very dry seasons, or perhaps ten years
hence, water may be forced by pipes about four (4) miles into
the head of Moggill main creek. I think such a supply is
feasible, and would suffice for the present generation —in fact,
even after. The expense of such a plan, as it is in operation for
only three months out of the year, and is only for four miles,
would be less than half of what Mr. Gregory states as the cost
of the Upper Brisbane supply. It has other great advantages—
that the water from Upper Brisbane, not most excellent in
quality, could be lifted to a higher, cooler, and deeper reservoir
at Moggill, and there exposed to air, in at least three different
reservoirs, before going to Brisbane, and thus be rendered quite
fit for use. In the large London waterworks there are always
several large purifying reservoirs, which can be changed and
cleansed as often as needed. In making reservoirs at Moggill,
this should be borne in mind. The reservoirs near Loudon are,
of course, watertight, and the Thames water used is allowed to
settle in one or two before use ; and as there are several reser-
voirs, some one or two are cleaned in their turn.
With the present Enoggera improved if possible, the two
Moggills, with plenty of exchangeable reservoirs, and in dry
weather Upper Brisbane water pumped up, I don’t think w r e
shall have anything to dread either for quantity, quality, and
certainty of supply.
Of course, all the necessary area of laud for collecting and
storage of water on Moggill heads should be reserved.
By Authority: James C. Beal, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane.
