

SUPPLEMENT
TO THE
DOUAY TESTAMENT,
WITHOUT NOTE OR COMMENT.
THE CHURCH ALONE COMPETENT TO DETERMINE RELIGIOUS QUESTIONS.
INSUFFICIENCY OF PRIVATE JUDGMENT.
Evidence of Seripture.
Mat.xiii 11. Because to you it is given to know the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven: but to them it is not given.
Mat. xviii. 17. He that will not hear the church, let him be to you as
the heathen and the publican.
2 Peter, i. 20. Understanding the first, that no prophecy of scripture
is made by private interpretation.
2 Peter iii. 15, 16, 17. As also our most dear brother Paul—in all his
epistles, speaking in them of these things, in which are some things hard
to be understood, which the unlearned and unstable wrest, as also the other
scriptures, to their own perdition. You therefore, brethren, knowing those
things before, beware: lest being led away by the error of the unwise, you
fall from your own stedfastness.
Evidence of the Fathers .
II. CENTURY.
St. Irenǿeus.
“God appointed in bis church, apostles, prophets, and doctors. Where
therefore, the gifts of God are, there must the truth be learned; with them
is the succession from the apostles; and there is the society, whose commu-
cation is sound and irreprovable, unadulterated, and pure. These preserve
the faith of one God, who made all things, increase our love towards his
divine Son, and expound, without danger, the scriptures to us.” Adver-
sus. Hær, L. iv. c. xiv. p. 345 And not only from the evangelical and
apostolical writings, which they perversely interpret and wickedly expound,
do these (heretics) attempt to prove their'assertions hut, also, from the law
and the propheis. For as there are many parables and allegories, which may
be forced into various meanings, them they craftily fit to their own pur-
pose, and thus draw from the truth, those who have not a firm faith in one
God, the Father, and his Son, Jesus Christ.” Ibid. L. i. c. i. p. 19. “So
varying are their notions drawn from the scriptures,” lie observes: "When,
therefore, they shall be agreed among themselves, on what they draw from
the scriptures, it will be our time to refute them. Meanwhile, thinking
wrongfully, and not agreeing in the meaning of the same words, they con-
vict themselves; but we, having one true and only God for our master,
and making his words the rule of truth, always speak alike of the same
things.” Ibid. L. iv. c. lxix. p. 368.
Tertullian .
“ What will you gain by recurring to the scriptures, when one denies
what the other asserts.? Learn rather, wdo it is that possesseth the faith of
Christ; to whom the scriptures belong; from whom, by whom, and when
that faith was delivered, by which we are made Christians. For, where shall
be found the true faith, there will be found the genuine scriptures” De
Præscrip. c. vi. vii, p. 531. “ And why are heretics aliens and enemies to
A


the apostles ? but from the-diversity of doctrine which each one of them,
as he likes best, lias himself advanced, or received, in opposition to them.
Where therefore, this diversity of doctrine is, there will the scriptures,
and the expounding of them, be adulterated. I am much deceived it
these men even agree in their own"rules ; while each, according to his fancy,
modifies what he "has received, as he did who delivered it. What alentinus
mi<rht do, that might his followers ; that might Marcionand the Marcionites,
that is, change their belief as they liked. In one word, view narrowly all
these heresies, and you will find that, in many things they differ from
their founders.” Ibid. c.. xxxviii. p, 338, 339.
Til. CENTURY.
Origen.
n He, who reading the gospel, applies it to bis own interpretation, not un-
derstanding it as the Lord spoke it, is truly a false prophet.- Homil. n.
in Ezech Tom. hi. p. 562. “If we follow the mere letter of the scrip-
tures, and take the interpretation of the law, as the Jews commonly explain
it I should blush to confess,that the Lord had given such laws. But if
the law of God be understood as the church teachds, then truly does it
transcend all human laws, and is worthy of him that gave it. Homil. vu,
iu LeviU T. ii. p. 221,226.
St. Cyprian.
“ And let not some men deceive themselves by an idle interpretation of
the words of Christ, when be said, Where two or three of you are gathered
together in my name, there lam with them. (Mat. xvm. 20 ) oirup ing
the gospel, and interpreting falsely, they take the last words, and omit what
e-oes before ; retaining one part and craftily suppressing the other. As they
are cut off from the church, so do they cut off the words of scripture, lmr,
recommending to his disciples unanimity and peace, the Lord said to them :
If two of you shall agree upon earth, concerning any thing whatsoever
Key shall ask, it shall he done for them by my Father; for wherethere are two
or three gathered, Ac. shewing, that much is to he granted, not to the
number, but to he unanimity of the supplicants. If two of you, he says
Za7l agree Upon earth, he gives the first place to unanimity, to peaceful
concorc : on this he insists. But how shall he agree witl. another, who
has dissented from the body of the church, and from the whole fraternity ?
Can two or three be gatheied together in the name of Christ, who, it is
plain are separated from him and his gospel ? For we did not leave them,
but they us; chusingfor themselves separate conventicles, they quitted the
head and the fountain of truth.” De unit Eccles. p. 112.
IV. CENT UKi.
Eusebius of Cesarea.
He thus addresses a heretic, who rested Ids faith on his own interpretation
of scripture: Where hast thou learnt these things? Who was thine in-
former ? What bishop? What councils? What ecclesiastical writers ?
Contra Marcell nm L. ii. c. iv. p. 55,34. Then are lus garments divided and
lots cast for his coat, when each one corrupts ami tears the beauty of h.s
word; that is, the expressions of the holy scriptures, and entertains such
opinions as are usually advanced by herft.es, Dem. Evang L. x. p. 006.
St. Gregory Nazianzum.
“To one indeed is given the word of wisdom : to another the word of know-
ledge fl Cor xii. 8.) My brethren, let us respect, and guard, and maintain
this order. ° Let*some hear, others speak, and others act -We must not


all exercise the office of the tongue, which is the most prompt and ready
member; for all are not apostles, nor prophets, nor expounders To
teach is great and eminent; but to learn is void of danger. You that are a
sheep, why do you arrogate the function of the shepherd ? Being the foot,
why will you be the head ? Why do you pursue the great, but uncertain and
perilous gains of the ocean, when you may till the earth in safety ?” Orat.
xxvi. T. l.p, 450. “ Truly there should have been a law among us, where-
by—as among the Jews, young men were not allowed to read certain books
of scripture not all men, and at all times, but certain persons only, and
on certain occasions should be permitted to discuss the points of faith.”—
Ibid* p. 462 “If these heretics may freely teach and promulgate their
opinions, who does not see that the doctrine of the church will be condemn-
ed, as if truth were on their side? But two opposite doctrines,- on the same
point, cannot possibly be true.” Ibid. xlvi. p. 722.
t St. Jerome .
“These things I have lightly touched on, that you may be convinced
how necessary a guide is, when you enter on the study of the scriptures.
I say nothing rhetoricians, philosophers, and other learned
professions, the knowledge of which is so useful, and the rules of which are
laid down- Let me speak of menial arts, such as are learnt not by lectures,
but by practice. In all these however, there must be some one to shew the
way—The art of understanding the scriptures alone, is open to every
reader! Here, learned or unlearned, we can all interpret. The tatling old
woman, the doating old man, the wordy sophist, all, all presume; they
tear texts asunder, and dare become teachers before they have learned. Some
you may see surrounded with a female circle, weighing out with a solemn
brow their pompous phrases, and discussing the import of these sacred
oracles; while others, oh shame! are taking lessons from the women, that
they may be able to instruct the men. I speak not of those who, like my-
self, coming to the study of the holy scriptures, from profane authors and
the exercise of worldly eloquence, vainly fancy all they utter to be the law
of God; not deigning to learn what the prophets, and what the apostles
thought. In support of their own conceptions, they adduce incongruous
proofs; not aware that, to distort sentences, and to force the reluctant
scripture to bend to their own wishes, argues, not a superior understanding,
but is a mode of teaching the most faulty.” Ep. 105 ad Paulinum. T. 1.
р. 1008.
St. Augustin.
“ So great is the depth of the sacred writings, that 1 might daily advance
in them if, from youth to old age, I were to endeavour, in the midst of
leisure, with incessant application, and with greater talents, to learn them
only ; not that in those points that are necessary to salvation the difficulty be
so great; but when a naan has acquired that faith which is necessary to form
a good and holy life, then so much remains involved in obscurity, such
depth of wisdom in the expression, and in the thing signified, that, after
the most acute and ardent mind has given all its days to the study, it finds
the truth of the saying: When a man hath done, then shall he begin. (Eccles.
с. xviii. 6.) Ep. 137, aliasS.ad volusianum, T. ii. p. 4. “ Heresies have
not arisen, nor certain pernicious doctrines, but from the holy scriptures
being ill understood, and when rash and bold assertion has been the conse-
quence- Wherefore, my brethren, what we are little able to comprehend,
let us listen to with great caution and with humble deference, holding the
sound rule, that we use that as food, which, according to the faith that is


in us, we understand : and what we do not tliu s understand, still believe
without doubting that it is good and true ” Tract, xviii. in Joan. T. ix, p. 64.
All these silly heretics, who wish to be called Christians, varnish over their
wild fancies with the words of Christ, when he said to his disciples: (John
xvi. 12.) I have yet many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them
now; as if the imaginations of those men were the things which the dis-
ciples could not then bear. This the apostle foresaw: (2 Tim. iv. 3. 4.)
JTor there shall be a time when they will not endure sound doctrine , but ac-
cording to their own desires they will keep to themselves teachers, having itch-
ingears; and they will turn away their hearing from the truth, but will be
turned to fables." Tract, xcvii. in Joan. T. ix. p. 197. The tradition of
what had been received from the apostles being the rule by which the pri.
mitive churches distinguished the canonical books cf scripture, from the
spurious ones that then existed, and which were circulated to serve the pur-
poses of heretics : and those heretics often rejecting such books of canoni-
cal scriptures as gave evidence against them, this Father lays down some
rules whereby canonical books might be distinguished. In this enquiry he
says, the authority of the Catholic' Church must be followed, lor~wtthout
the testimony of the Church, be declares he would not believe the books of
the Gospels. He then states the catalogue of canonical scriptures which
were received by the Catholic Apostolic Church. “ The five books of
Moses, one of Joshua: one of Judges: one cf Ruth: four of Kings:
two of Chronicles : Job, Tobias, Esther, Judith, and two of the Macca-
bees : two of Esdras: one of Psalms : Canticles, Ecclesiastes, Wisdom,
and Ecelesiasticus. Next, are the twelve Prophets, and Isaiah, Jeremiah,
Ezekiel and Daniel. In the canon of the New Testament are all the
books which are now admitted.” De Doctrina Christiana, Lib. ii. c. viii.
T. iii. p. 11. Speaking of the Catholic Church as an authority which can-
not deceive, he says: “Where obscurity occurs, do thou run to the tabernacle
of God; holdfast to the Catholic Church ; do not depart from the rule of
truth, and thou shall be protected in the tabernacle from the contradiction
er tongues.” Enar. iii. in Psal. xxx. T. viii p. 74.
Vincent of Lerins.
“ But some perhaps may ask : —The canon of the holy books being
perfect, and more than sufficient for itself, why should the authority of the
church be joined to it? —I answer : Because the scripture having a sublime
sense, is differently expounded. By one person it is interpreted in
one sense, by a second in another; so that there are almost as many opi-
nions about its meaning, as there are persons. Novatian, Sabellius, Do-
natns, Arius, Eunomius, Macedonius, Apollinaris, Priscillian, Jovini-
anus, Pejagius, Celestins, and finaliy, Nestorius, admit no common
interpretation. It is therefore necessary, on account of so many subtle
evasions, to take the Catholic church for our rule.” Common, n. 11.
p. 317. “ It may be asked«: Have heretics recourse to the authority
of the scriptures ? Yes truly, and with great eagerness. You may see
them running over all the volumes of the divine law—they seldom utter
any thing from themselves, that is not carefully disguised in scripture lan-
guage.” Ibid. n. xxv. p. 356. “ Should any one enquire while they ad-
vance their errors, what proof have you ? Whence do you learn, that it
is my duty, as you say, to depart from the universal and ancient faith
of the Catholic Church ? Without hesitation they reply : So it is ivritten,
(Mat. iv. 6.) And at once they have ready a thousand testimonies, from
the law, the Psalms, the Prophets, the apostles, which interpreted according


to their own humours, may cast the unhappy soul into the abyss of heresy.
But some may say.- If the devil and his disciples—and in general all
heretics, use the scriptures for their own purposes, how are Catholics
to discern truth from falsehood In the holy writings ? —This they will do
by studiously following the method handed down to us by the holy and
learned men, who are gone before us: that is, by interpreting the scrip-
ture according to the traditions of the universal Church, and the rule of
Catholic faith : in which Catholic and Apostolic Church, they must also
be guided by universality, antiquity, apd unanimous consent.” Ibid. c.
xxv 55 9. 360.
\ Gospel of St. M A TTHEIV.
CHAP. I. Ver=el6. The Husband of Mary. The evangelist gives us rather
the pedigree of St . Joseph, than that of the Blessed Virgin, to conform to
the custom of the Hebrews, who in their genealogies took no notice of
women : but as they were near a kin, the pedigree of one sheweth that of
the other.
_ Verse 25. Till she brought forth her fir si born. From these words Helve-
dius and other heretics, most impiously inferred that the Blessed Virgin Mary
had other children besides Christ. But St. Jerome shews by divine examples,
that this expression of the evangelist, was a manner of speaking usual among
the Hebrews, to denote by the word unltl r only what is done, without any
regard to the future. Thus it is said, (Gen. vih 6. and 7.) that Noe sent
forth a raven, which went forth and did not return till the waters were dried
upon the earth. I'hat is, did not return any more Also, (Isaias xlvi. 4.)
God says, lam till you grow old. Who dare ii>fer that God should then
cease to be? God said to his divine Son, Sit on my right hand till I make
thy enemies thy footstool. Shall he sit no longer after his enemies are
subdued ? Yea, and for all eternity. St. Jerome also proves, by scripture
examples, that an only begotten son, w r as also called first born, or first
begotten ; because according to the law, the first born males were to be con-
secrated to God : Sanctity unto me saith the Lord, every first born that
openeth the womb, among the children oflsrael. &c, Exodus, xiii. 2.
CHAP. 111. Verse 2, Do Penance. Pcenitentiam agate mtxvouts Which
word, according to the use of the scriptures and the Holy Fathers, does not
only signify-repentance and amendment of life, but also punishing past sins
by tasting and such like penitential exercises.
erse 7. Pharisees and Sadducees. These were two sects among the
Jews: otvvhich the former were for the most part notorious hypocrites; the
latter a kind of free-thinkers in matters of religion.
CHA.f. IV. Verse 8. And the Devil shewed him all the kingdoms of the
worid. I hat is, pointed out to him where each kingdom lay; and set forth,
in words what was most glorious and admirable in each of them. Or also
set before his eyes, as it were in a large map, a lively representation of all
those-kingdoms.
CHAP V Verse 3. Blessed are the poor in spirit. That is, the-humble-
and they whose spirit is not set upon riches. *
Verse 17 I amjtot come to destroy but to fulfil. By accomplishing all
the figures and prophecies j- and perfecting all that was imperfect
Verse 18. Amen. That is, assuredly of a truth, This Hebrew word
Ampn, is here retained by the example and authority of the four evangelists’
who have retained it. is used by our Lord as a strong asseveration and
affirmation of the truth.


Verse 20. Unless your justice abound more than that of the Scribes and
Pharisees, you shall not enter the kingdom of heaven. The Scribes were the
doctors of the law of Moses,- Pharisees were a precise set of men,
making profession of a more exact observance of the law.
Verse 22. Put I say to you whosoever is angry with his brother, shall b’e
guilty of the judgment, i. e. Shall be liable to be brought before the lower
court amongst the Jews, which took cognizance of such crimes, whereas the
Council or Sanhedrim was a higher court, and had greater authority.
And whosoever shall say to his brother llaca, shall be gidlty of the council.
A word expressing gteat indignation or contempt.
And whosoever shall say thou fool, shall be guilty of hell fire. This was
then looked upon as a heinous injury, and therefore is here so severely
condemned.
Verse 29. And if thy right eye cause iliee to offend, ptuclc it out. That
is, if it be a stumbling block or occasion of sin to thee. By which we are
taught to fly the immediate occasions of sin, though they be as dear to us,
or as necessary as a hand or an eye.
Verse 34. Not to swear at all. It is not forbid to swear in Truth, Justice
and Judgment, to the honour of God, or ouf own and neighbour’s just de-
fence; but only to swear rashly, or profanely, in common discourse and
without necessity.
Verse 59. Not to resist evil. fyc. What is here commanded, is a Christian
patience under injuries and affronts, and to be willing to suffer still more r
rather than to indulge the desire of revenge ; but what is further added, does
not strictly oblige according to the letter, for neither did Christ nor St.
Paul turn the other cheek. St. John xviii ar.d Actsxxiii.
Verse 46. The Publicans. These were the gatherers of the public taxes ;
a set of men odious and infamous among the Jews, for their extortions and
injustices.
CHAP. VI. Verse 1, Do not your justice before men. i. e. Works of justice
viz. fasting, prayer, and alms-deeds, which ought to be performed, notout of
ostentation, or a view to please men, but solely to please God.
Verse 9. Hallowed. That is, blessed and glorified.
Verse 11, Super substantial bread. In St. Luke the same word is rendered
daily bread. It is understood of the Bread of Life, which we receive in
the Blessed Sacrament
Verse 13. Lead us not into temptation. That is, suffer us not to be over-
come by temptation.
Verse 24. Mammon. That is, riches, worldly interest.
CHAP. IX. Verse] 5. Can the children of the bridegroom. This by a
Hebraism signifies the friends or companions of the bridegroom.
CHAP. X. Verse 16. Be ye therefore wise as serpents, and simple as doves-
That is, harmless, plaiu, sincere, and without guile.
Verse 55. lam come to set a man at variance, <§c. Not that this was the
end or design of the coming of our Saviour ; but that his coming and his
doctrine, would have this effect, by, reason of the obstinate resistance that
many would make, and of their persecuting all such as should adhere to him.
CHAP. XI. Verse 6. Blessed is he that shall not be scandalized in me.
That is, who shall not take occasion of scandal or offence from my humi-
lity, and the disgraceful death of the cross which I shall endure. >
Verse 12. The kingdom oj heaven suffereth violence , and the violent bear it


away. It is not to be obtained but by main force, by using violence upon
ourselves, and by mortification and penance.
Verse 45. He is Elias, §c. Notin person, but in spirit Luke i. 17.
CHAP XII Verse 31. The blasphemy against the Sjririt. The sin here
spoken of is that blasphemy by which the Pharisees attributed the miracles of
Christ, wrought by the Spirit of God, to Beelzebub prince of devils. Now,
this kind of sin is usually accompanied with so much obstinacy, and such wilful
opposing the Spirit of God, and the known truth, that men who are guilty
of it are seldom or. never converted; and therefore are never forgiven, be-
cause they will not repent. Otherwise there is no sin which God cannot,
'norwill not forgive, to such as sincerely repent, and have recourse to the
keys of the church.
Verse 32. Nor in the world to come. Prom these words St. Austin (De
Civ. l.xxi. c. 13.) and St Gregory (Dialog, iv. c 32.) gather, that some
sins may be remitted in the world to come; and consequently, that there is
a purgatory or a middle place.
Verse 36. Every idle word. This shews there must be a place of tempo-
ral punishment hereafter, where these slighter faults shall be punished.
Verse 38. A sign. That is, a miracle from heaven. St. Luke xi. v. 16.
Verse 40. Three days, $-c. Not complete days and nights; but pan of
three days and three nights, taken according to the way that the Hebrews
counted their days and nights, viz. from evening to evening.
Verse 48. Who is my Mother ? This was not spoken by way of slighting
his mother: but to shew that we are never to suffer ourselves to be taken
off from the service of God by any inordinate affection to our earthly pa-
rents : and that what our Lord chiefly regarded in his mother, was her
doing the will of his Father in heaven. It may also further allude to the
reprobation of the Jews, his carnal kindred, and the election of the
Gentiles.
CHAP. XIII. Verse 55. His brethren. These were the children of
Mary the wife of Cleophas, sister to our Blessed Lady (St Matt, xxviii. 56.
St. John, xix. 25.) and therefore, according to the usual stile of the Scrip-
tures, they were called brethren, that is, near relations to our Saviour.
CHAP. XV. Verse 5. The gift, That is, the offering that I shall
make to God shall be instead of that which should he expended for thy pro-
fit. Ibis tradition of the Pharisees was calculated to enrich themselves : by
exempting children from giving any further assistance to their parents, if
once they offered to the temple and the priests, that which should have been
the support of their parents. But this was a violation of the law of God,
and of nature, which our Saviour here condemns.
Verse 9. Commandments of men. The doctrines and commandments
here reprehended are such as are either contrary to the law of God (as (Eat
of neglecting parents, under pretence of giving to God) or at least are fri-
volous, unprofitable, and no M ays conducing to true piety, as that of often
washing hands, &c. without regard to the purity of the heart. But as to
the rules and ordinances of the holy church, touching fasts, festivals, &c.
these are no ways repugnant, but highly agreeable to God’s holy word, and
all Christian piety; neither are they to be counted amongst the doctrines and'
commandments of men ; because they proceed not from mere human autho-
rity', but from that which Christ has established in his chnrch ; whose pastors
he has commanded us to hear and obey, even as himself. St Luke x. 16.
St. Matt, xviii. 17.


Verse 11. Not that ivhich goeth in, See. No uncleanness in meat, nor
any dirt cbntracted liy eating with unwashed hands, can defile the soul, but
sin alone : or a disobedience of the heart to the ordinance and will of God.
And thus when Adam took the forbidden fruit, it was not the apple, which
entered into the mouth, but the disobedience to the law of God which de-
filed him. The same is to be said if a Jew, in the time of the old law, had
eaten swine’s flesh : or a Christian convert, in the days of the apostles, con-
trary to their ordinance, had eaten blood; or it any of the faithful at pre-
sent should transgress the ordinance of God’s church, by breaking the fasts :
For in all these cases the soul would be defiled; not indeed by that which
goeth into the mouth, but by the disobedience of the heart, in wiifully trans-
gressing the ordinance of God. or of those who have their authority from
him.
CHAP, XVI. Verse 18. Thou art Peter, fyc. As St. Peter, by divine
revelation, here made a solemn profession of his faith of the divinity of
Christ; so, in recompence of this faith and profession, our Lord here de-
clares to him the diguity to which he is pleased to raise him, viz. That he,
to whom he had already given the name of Peter, signifying a rock, St.
John i. 42. should be a rocks indeed of invincible strength, for the support
of the building of the church; in which building he should be, next to
Christ himself, the chief foundation-stone, in quality of chief pastor, ruler,
and governor; and should have accordingly, all fulness of ecclesiastical
power, signified by the keys of the kingdom of heaven.
Ibid. Upon thisYock, fyc. The words of Christ to Peter, spoken in the
vulgar language of the Jews which our Lord majje use of, were the same as
if he had said in English, Thou art a rock, and upon this rock l will build
my church. So that by the plain course of the words, Peter is here declared
to he the rock upon which the church was to be built; Christ himself being
both the principal foundation and founder of the same. Where also note,
that Christ, by building his house, that is, his church, upon a reck, has
thereby secured it against all Storms and floods; like the wise builder. St.
Matt. vii. 24. 25.
Ibid. The gates of hel\, <£c. That is, the powers of darkness, and what-
ever satan can do, either by himself or his agents. For as the church is here
likened to a fortress, built on a rock; so the adverse powers are likened to
a contrary bouse or fortress; the gates of which, i. e. the whole strength,
and all the efforts it can make, can never be able to prevail over the city or
church of Christ By this promise we are fully assured, that neither idola-
try, heresy, nor any pernicious error whatsoever, shall at any time prevail
over the church of Christ.
Verse 10. Loose upon earth. The loosing the bands of temporal punish-
ments due to sins, is called an indulgence; the power of which is here
granted.
Verse 23. Satan. This word signifies in Hebrew an adversary ; and is
here applied to Peter, because he opposed our Saviour’s passion.
CHAP. XVII. Verse 12, As a grain of mustard seed- That is, a per-
fect faith ; which, in its properties and fruits, resembles the grain of mus-
tard-seed in the parable, ckap.xiii. 51.
CHAP. XVIII. Verse 6. Shall scandalize. That is, shall put a stumb-
ling block in their way, and cause them to fall into sin.
Verse 7. It must needs be, s;c. viz. considering the wickedness and cor.
ruption of the world.
Verse 8. Scandalize thee, That is, cause thee to offend.


Verse 20. There am lin the midst of them. This is understood of such
assemblies only, as are gathered in the name and authority of Christ; and
hi the unity of the church of Christ. St. Cyprian de Unitale Ecclesice.
CHAP. XIX. Verse 9. Except it be , <fyc- In the case of fornication, that
is, of adultery, the wife may be put away : but even then the husband can-
not marry another, as long as the wife is living.
Verse 11. All men receive not this Word. Protestants have corrupted this
text,* by rendering it, all men cannot receive this saying; to excuse the sa-
crilegious marriages of their first reformers.
CHAP. XX. Verse 15. What I will, viz. with my own, and in matters
that depend on my own bounty,
CHAPXXTII. Verse 5. Phylacteries; i. e, Parchments on which they
wrote the ten commandments, and carried them on their foreheads before
their eyes; Which the Pharisees affected to wear broader than other men, so
to seem more zealous for the law.
Verse 9. 10. Call none your father— neither be ye called masters , <fc. —
The meaning is, that our Father in heaven is incomparably more to be re-
garded than any fallier upon earth: and no master is to be followed, who
would lead us away from Christ. But this does not hinder, but that we are
l\y the law of God to have a due respect both) for our carnal and spiritual
fathers, 11 Cor. iv. 15.) and for our masters and teachers.
Verse 29. Build the sepulchres, <s'C. This is not blamed, as if it were in
itself evil to build or adorn the monuments of the prophets : but the hypo-
crisy of the Pharisees is here taxed ; who, whilst they pretended to honour
the memory of the Prophets, were persecuting even unto death the Lord of
the prophets.
Verse 35. That upon you may pome ifc. Not that they should suffer
more than l their own sins richly deserved; but that the justice" of God should
now fall upon them with such a final vengeance, once for all, as might com-
prize all the different kinds of jndgments aud punishments, that had at any
time before been inflicted for the shedding of just biood.
CHAP XXIV. Verse 28. Wheresoever » <|-c. The coming of Christ
shall he sudden, and manifest to all the world, like lightning : and whereso-
ever he shall come, thither shall all mankind be gathered to him, as ea»les
are gathered about a dead body.
Verse 30. The sign, sc. The cross of Christ.
CHAP. XXVI. Verse 11. Me you have not always, viz. In a visible
manner, as when conversant here on earth, and as we have the poor, whom
we may daily assist and relieve.
The feast of the unleavened bread. The paschal lamb.
Verse 26; This is my body. lie does not say, this is the figure of my body,
but this is my body, (2 Council of Nice, Act vi.) Neither does he say, in
this, or with this is my body; but absolutely, this is my body : which plainly
implies trail substantiation.
Verse 27. Drink ye all of this. This was spoken to the tw’elve apostles,
who were All then present: and they all drank of it, says St. Mark xiv.
25. But it no ways follows from these words spoken to the apostles, that
all the faithful are here commanded to drink of the chalice : any more than
that all the faithful are commanded to consecrate, offer and administer this
sacrament: because Christ, upon this same occasion, and, as I may say,
with the same breath, bid the apostles do so : in these words. St. Luke xxii.
19. Do this.for a commemoration of me.
Verse 38. Blood of the Neiv Testament, As the (kid Testament was de-
dicated with the blood of victims, by Moses, in these words; this is the blood


»/ the testament, sc. Hebrews, ix. 20. So here is the dedication and in-
stitution of the New Testament, in the blood of Christ here mystically shed,
in these words ; this is the blood of the New Testament, sc.
Verse 29. Fruit of the vine. These words, by the account of ot Luke
xxii. 18. were not spoken of the sacramental cup, but of the wine that was
drank with the paschal lamb. Though the sacramental cup might also be
called the fruit of the vine, because it was consecrated from wine, and re-
tains the likeness, and all the accidents or qualities of wine.
Verse 31. Scandalized in me, <|-c For as much as my being apprehended
shall make you all run away and forsake me.
CHAP. XXVIII. Verse IS, &c. All power, <£-c. See here the war-
rant and commission of the apostles and their successors, the bishops and
pastors of Christ’s church. from his Father all power in heaven,
and in earth; and in virtue of this power he sends them {even as his Father
sent him, St. John xx. 21.) to teach and disciple, not one, but all nations,
and instruct them in all truths; and that he may assist them effectually in
the execution of this commission, he promises to be with them, not for three
or four hundred years only,, but all daps even to the consummation of the
world. How then could the Catholic church ever go astray, having always
with her pastors, as is here promised, Christ himself, who is the way, the
truth, and the life ? St. John xiv. 6.
Gospel of St. MARK.
CHAP- IV. Verse 12. That seeing they may see, <s-c. In punishment
of their wilfully shutting their eyes, (St. Matt. xiii. 15.) God justly with-
drew those lights and graces, which otherwise he would have given them,
for their effectual conversion. '
CHAP. VI. Verse 5. He coidd not. Not for want of power on his side,
but for want of a due disposition on theirs. /
CHAP VII. Verse 1. Doctrines and precepts of men. See the anno-
tations, Matthew xv. 9, 11-
CHAP. X. Verse 18. None is good. Of himself, entirely and essen-
tially, but God alone; men may be good also, but only by the participation
of God’s goodness.
CHAP. XIII. Verse 52. Nor the Son. Not that the Son of God is
absolutely ignorant of the day of judgment; but that he knoweth it not so
as to teach it to us, as not being expedient
CHAP. XIV. Verse 1. The Pasch. The feast of the unleavened bread.
Verse 50. The coch-crowin g. The cocks crow at different times in the
ni«-ht, viz., about midnight for the firsttime, and then about the time com-
monly called the cock-crowing : And this was the cock-crowing our Saviour
spoke of, and therefore the other evangelists take no notice of the first cock-
crowing .
CHAP. XV. Verse 25. The third hour. The ancient account divided
the day into four parts, which were named from the hour from which they
began, the first, third, sixth, and ninth hour. Our Lord was crucified a
little before noon, before the third hour had qiute expired, but when the
Sixth how was near at hand
CHAP. XVI. Verse 2. The sun being now risen. They set out before it
was light to go to the sepulchre ; but the sun was risen when they arrived
there. Or perhaps the sun here spoken of is the Sun of Justice , Christ
Jesus our Lord, who was risen before their coming.
Goipel of St. LUKE.
CHAP. I. Verse 5. Of the course of Abia, i. e. of the rank of Abia,


which word in the Greek is commonly put for the employment of one day •
but here for the functions of a whole week. For by the appointment of
David, i. I’aral. 24, the descendants of Aaron were divided into twenty-
four families, of which the eighth was Abia, from whom descended this
Zacharias, who at this time was in the week of his Priestly functions.
CHAP. I.Verse 48. Shall call me blessed. These words are a prediction
of that hononr which the church in all ages should pay to the Blessed
Virgin.
Verse 69. Horn of salvation, i. e. A powerful salvation, as Doctor
Witham translates it. For in the scripture, by Horn is generally under-
dertood strength and power.
Verse 78. The Orient. It is one of the titles of the Messias, the true
light of the world, and the Sun of Justice.
Verse 7. Her first-born. The meaning is, not that she had afterwards
any other child, but it is a way of speech among the Hebrews, to call them
also the first born, who are the only children.
v erse 54. For the fall. Not that God sent his Son for the fall of any
man, but that many, by their own perverseness, in wilfully refusing to re-
ceive and obey him, should take occasion of falling.
CHAP. Ilf. Verse 25. Who was of Heli ? St. Joseph, who by nature,
was the son of Jacob, (St. Matt. i. 16,) in the account of the law was the
son of Heli. lor Hdi and Jacob were brothers by the same mother ; and
Heli> who was the elder, dying without issue, Jacob, as the law directed,
married his widow: in consequence of which marriage, his son Joseph was
reputed in the law, the son of Heli.
CHAP. VII. Verse 29. And all the people hearing < and the Publicans
justified God, i. e. feared and worshipped God as just, merciful, &c.
CHAP. VIII. Verse 15. Seeing they may not see. See the annotation,
Mark iv. 12.
CHAP. XI. Verse 46. Woe to you laivyers. He speaks of the doctors
of the law of Moses, commonly called the Scribes.
Verse 47. Woe to you who build, fyc- Not that the building of the mo-
numents of the prophets was in itself blame-worthy ; but only the intention
of these unhappy men, who made use of this outward shew of religion and
piwy> as a means to carry on their wicked designs against the Prince of
prophets
CHAP. XIII. Verse 24. Shall seek , <J c. Shall desire to be saved;
but for want of taking sufficient pains, and being thoroughly in earnest,
shall not attain to it.
CHAP. XIV. Verse 26. Hate not, <j-c. The law of Christ does not
allow us to hate even our enemies, much less our parents ; but the meaning
of the text is, that we must be in that disposition of soul, as to be willing
to renounce and part with every thing, how near or dear soever it may be to
us, that would keep us from Christ.
CHAP. XV. Verse 16. Before the Angels. By this it is plain that the
spirits in heaven have a concern for us below, and a joy at our repentance,
and consequently a knowledge of it.
CHAP. XVI) Verse 9. Mammon of iniquity. Mammon signifies
riches. They are here called the mammon of iniquity, because oftentimes
ill-gotten, ill-bestowed, or an occasion of evil; and at the best are but
worldly and false; and not the true riches of a Christian.
Ibid. They may receive. By this we see, that the poor servant* of God,


whom we have relieved by our alms, may hereafter, by their intercession,
bring our souls to heaven.
CHAP. XVI. Verse 22. Abraham's bosom. The place of rest where
the souls of the saints resided, till Christ had opened heaven by his death.
CHAP. XVII. Verse 10. Unprofitable servants. Because our service
is of no profit to our master; and he justly claims it as our bounden duty:
But though we are unprofitable to him, our serving him is not unprofitable to
us, for he is pleased to give by his grace a value to our good works, which,
in consequence of his promise, entitles them to an eternal reward.
CHAP. XVIII. VerseS Avenge . That is, do me justice.
CHAP. XXII. Verse 19. Do this for a commemoration of me. This
sacrifice and sacrament is to be continued in the church to the end of the
world, to shew forth the death of Christ until he cometb. But this comme-
moration, or remembrance, is by no means inconsistent with the real pre-
sence of his body and blood, under these sacramental veils, which repre-
sent his deatli ; on the contrary, the best way we can have of commemorating
and celebrating his death, is by offering in sacrifice, and receiving in sacra-
ment, that body and blood by which we were redeemed.
Verse 58. Another, $-c. Observe here, in order to reconcile the four evan-
gelists, that divers persons concurred in charging Peter with being Christ’s
disciple; till at length they brought him to deny him thrice. 1. The por-
tress that led him in, and afterwards seeing him at the fire, first put the
question to him, and then positively affirmed that he was with Christ. 2.
Another maid accused him to the standers by; and gave occasion to the man
here mentioned, to renew the charge against him, which caused the second
denial. 3. Others of the company, who took notice of his being a Ga-
lilean, and were seconded by the kinsman of Malchus, who affirmed that
he had seen him in the garden. And this drew on the third denial.
CHAP. XXIII. Verse 43. In paradise. That is, in the happy state
of rest, joy and peace everlasting. Christ was pleased, by a special privi-
lege, to reward the faith and, confession of the good thief, with a full
discharge of all his sins, both as to the guilt and punishment; and to intro-
duce him immediately after death into the happy society of the saints ; whose
Limbo was now made a Paradise, by our Lord’s going thither.
Ibid. Verse 54. Parasceve. That is, the eve, or day of prepara
for the sabbath.
CHAP. XXV. Verse 49. And I send the promise of my Father, i. e.
The Holy Ghost whom Christ had promised, that his Bather and he
would send* John xiv. 26, and xvii. 7.
Gospel of St. JOHN.
CHAP. 11. Verse 4. What is that to me and to thee? My hour is not
yet come. Our Saviour, by these words, which at first might appear harsh,
did net. intend to rebuke his mother, (at whose request he wrought
miracle) but only to give a lesson to bis disciples, that, in the functions of
their ministry, they should not be put out of their way, by any considerations
of flesh and blood.
CHAP 111. Verse 18. Is not judged. He that believeth, viz by a
faith working through charity, is not judged, that is, not condemned, but
the obstinate unbeliever is judged, that is, condemned already, byretiench-
ing himself from the society of Christ and his church.
Verse 19. The judgment. That is, the cause of his condemnation - "
Me that doth truth, i. e He that acteth according to the truth, which
here signifies the law of God, Thy law is truth . Psalm cxviii-


CHAP. IV. "Verse 20. This mountain. Garizim, where the Samari-
tans had their schismatical temple.
CHAP. V. Verse 29. Judgment. That is, condemnation.
Verse 59. Search the Scriptures. Scrutamini, lt is not a
command for all to read the scriptures; but a reproach to the Pharisees
t iat reac mg the sciiptures as they did, and thinking to find everlasting life
m t iern, they would not receive him, to whom all those scriptures gave
testimony, and through whom alone theycould have that true life.
. ‘ - VI. Verse 44. Draw him. Not by compulsion, nor by laying
le ree-will under any necessity, but by the strong and sweet motions of
ins heavenly grace.
hi V J Except you eat and drink, fj-c. To receive both the body and
f Ifii Cl ‘ rist ’ is a divine precept insinuated in this text; which the faith-
.tu hl, thou S h they receive but in one kind ; because in one kind they re*
ctivt )ot i body and blood, which cannot be separated from each other.—»
ence ite eternal is here promised to the worthy receiving, though but in
one kind, verse 52. If any man eat of this bread he shall live for even
and the bread that I will give, is ivy flesh for the life of the world. Verse
l that eateth me shall live by me. Verse 59. He that eateth this
oread shall live for ever .
. (>o. then you shall see, &c. Christy by mentioning his ascen-
sion, by this instance of his power and divinity, would confirm°the truth of
wliat he had before asserted; and, at the same time correct their gross ap-
prehension of eating his flesh and drinking his blood, in a vulgar and car-
nal manner, by letting them know lie should take his whole body living
with him to heaven; and, consequently, not suffer it to be, as they sup-
posed, divided, mangled, and consumed upon earth.
Veise 64. The flesh profiteth nothing. Dead flesh separated from the
spirit, in the gross manner they supposed they were to eat his flesh, would
profit nothing. Neither doth mans flesh, that is to say, man’s natural and
carnal apprehension, (which refuses to be subject to the spirit and words of
Christ) profit any thing. But it would be the height of blasphemy to say,
the living flesh of Christ, which we receive in the blessed sacrament, with his
spirit, that is, with Ins soul and divinity) profiteth nothing. For if Christ’s
flesh had profited us nothing, he never would have taken flash for us, nor died
in the flesh for us.
. *kid. Are spirit and life. By proposing to you a heavenly sacrament,
in which you shall receive, in a wonderful manner, spirit, grace and life
in its very fountain. J
CHAP. IX. Verse 59. lam come, &c. Not that Christ came for that
end, that any one should be made blind : but that the Jews, by the abuse
of his coming, and by their not receiving him, brought upon themselves
this judgment of blindness.
Verse 41. If you were blind, &c. If you were invincibly ignorant, and
had neither read the scriptures nor seen my miracles, you would not be
guilty of the sin ot infidelity; but now, as you boast of your knowledge of
the scriptures, you are inexcusable.
CHAP. XII. Verses. See the annotations on St. Matthew, xxvi. 11.
Verse 09. They could not believe. Because they would not, saitb St.
August. Tr. 55. in Joan. See the annotation, St. Mark iv. 12.
GIIA P. XIII. Verse 27. That which thou dost, do quickly. It is not
a licence, much less a command, to go about his treason, but a signification
2


to him that Christ would not hinder or resist what he is about, do it as soon
as he pleased ; but was both ready and desirous to suffer for our redemption.
CHAP. XIV. Verse 16- Paraclete. That is, a comforter : or ako an
advocate ; inasmnch as by inspiring prayep, he prays, as it were, in us, and
pleads for us. ,
Ibid. That he may abide with you for ever. Hence it is evident, that
this Spirit of truth was not only promised to the persons of the apostles,
but also to their successors through all generations.
Verse 26. Teach you all things. Note that the Holy Ghost is here pro-
mised to the apostles and their successors, particularly to teach them all
truth, and to preserve them from error.
Verse 28. Greater than I. Christ as man is inferior to the Father : and
even as God, has his being from him, by an eternal procession; but this
without any detriment to his being perfectly equal, in as much as he has the
self same divinity.
CHAP. XV. Verse 26. Whom I will send. This proves, against the
modern Greeks, that the Holy Ghost proceedeth from the Son, as well from
the Father : otherwise he could not be sent by the Son.
CHAP, XVI. Verse 8. He will convince the world of sin, &c. The
Holy Ghost, by his coming, brought over many thousands, Ist, to a sense
of their sin in not believing in Christ. 2dly, to a conviction of the justice
of Christ, now sitting at the right hand of his Father. And, 3dly, to a
right apprehension of the judgment prepared for them that chose to follow
Satan, who is already judged and^condetnned.
Verse 13. Will teach you all truth. See the annotation of Chap xiv. 26.
CHAP. XIX. Verse 14. The parasceve of the Pasch. That is, the day
before the paschal sabbath. The eve of every sabbath was called the parascei’c
or day of preparation. But this was the ere of a high sabbath, viz. that
which fell in the paschal week.
CHAP. XX. Verse 10. The doors were shut. The same power which
could bring Christ’s whole body, entire in all iii dimensions, through the
doors,, can, without the least question, make the same body really present
in the sacrament: though both one and the other be above our comprehen-
sion.
Verse 23. Whose sins, &c. See here the commission, stamped by the
broad seal of heaven, by virtue of which the pastors of Christ’s church
absolve repenting sinners upon their confession.
CHAP. XXI Y erses 15, 16, 17. Feed my lambs —Feed my sheep. —
Our Lord had promised the spiritual supremacy to St. Peter; St. Matt, xxvi,
19. and here he fulfils that promise, by charging him with the superintenden-
cy of all his sheep, without exception, and consequently his whole flock,
that is, of his whole church.
Acts of the APOSTLES.
CHAP. 11. Verse 23. By the determinate, &c. God delivered up
his Son; and his Son delivered up himself for the love of us, and for the
sake of our salvation : and so Christ’s being delivered up was holy, and
was God’s own determination. But they who betrayed and crucified him,
did wickedly, following therein their own malice and the instigation of the
devil; not the will and determination of God, who was by no means the
author of their wickedness, though he permitted it: because he could
and did draw out of it *>o great a good, viz. the salvation ot man.
Verse 24. Having loosed the sorrows, &c, Having overcome the grievous
pains of death, and all the power of hell.


n J?? AP : Verse 1 • Grecians. So they called the Jews that were bom
eiiici Drought up in Greece.
erse Jesus. That is, Joshue, so called in Greek,
ef , i lu . c^ not * n houses, &c. That is, so as to stand in need
• 611 | 'tellings, or to be contained, or circumscribed by them. Though
• * . immense divinity, he is in our houses, and every where
S r’rt 1? p * n * r lls humanity, dwelt in houses, and is now on our altars.
• li *, ,! P erse 17* They laid their hands upon them, &c. See
• • w ! *l JoSt 'es administered the sacrament of confirmation by thet
Holy Ghost an< * s an d prayer: and how the faithful thereby received the
CHAP. X. Vpj>cp t . , . . _
Tpw „ r* .1 . In ever y nation, &c. That is to say, not only
th f , ■ fcntl a * so ’ _°f what nation soever, are acceptable to God, if
a ” w ° r k justice. But then true faith is always to be pre-
Cnd r',™ WU [ W l icbf (saith St Paul, Heb. xi. 6.) it is impossible to please
, a(T ~ „^' Vare ’ 1 le ”’ the error ot those who would infer from this pas*
i„sl a tnen I .° re l<gions may be pleasing to God: For since none
from t! Vfj re 'f r* 1 Can be P leasin g to God, all other religions must be
rHAp f h vn therefore highly displeasing to the God of truth.
■j r.\, * erbe I u 'ill give you the holy faithful things of
David. These are the words of the prophet Isaias, Chap, lv. verse 3 ac-
to f DaSd! ' SCnSe iS ’ 1 WHI faithfull y the promises I made
„<e C nf A £ X Z‘ Ver f 29 ; From blood, and from things strangled. The
use of these things, though of their own nature indifferent, was here pro-
lnbited, to bring the Jews more easily to admit of the society of the Gen-
tiles, and to exercise the latter in obedience. But this prohibition was but
temporary, and has long since ceased to oblige; more especially in the
western churches. J
. CH AP. x VI Verse 16. Apythonical spirit. That is, a spirit pretend-
ing to divine, and tell fortunes.
CHAP. XVII. Verse 11. More nolle. The Jews of Berea are justly
commended for their eagerly embracing the truth, and searching the scrip,
tures to n tle texts alleged by the Apostle : which was a far more generous
proceeding than that of their Countrymen at Thessalooica. who persecuted
the preachers of the Gospel, without examining the grounds they alleged
for what they taught. 5
Verse _4. Dwelleth not in temples. The Deity is not contained in temples,
so as to need them for his dwelling, or any other uses, as the heathens
unagined. let by his omnipresence he is both there and every where.
CHAP. XXI. Verse 8. The Evangelist. That is, the preacher of the
gospel : the same that before converted the Samaritans, and baptized the
eunuch ,• chap, vui. being one of the seven first deacons.
1 eise 24. Keeping the law. Hie law, though now no longer obligatory,
was for a time observed by the Christian Jews, to bury, as it were, the
synagogue with honour.
CHAP. XXII. Verse 9. Heard not the voice. That is, they distin-
guished not the words, though they heard a voice. Acts ix. 7.
Epistle of St Paul the Apostle to the Homans.
CHAP.' I. Verse 4. Predestinated, &c. Christ as man was predesti-
nated to be the Son of God ; and declared to be so (as the apostle here
signifies; first by power, that is, by his working stupendous miracles • se-


comlly, by the spirit of sanctification, that is, by his sanctity or holiness;
thirdly, by his resurrection, or raising himself from the dead.
Verse 26. God delivered them up. Not by being author of their sins,
but by withdrawing his grace, and so permitting them, in punishment of
their pride, to fall into those shameful sins.
CHAP. 111. Verse 4. God only.is essentially true. All men in their own
capacity are liable to lies and errors; nevertheless God, who is the truth, will
make good his promise ofkeeping his church in all truth. See St. John xvi. 13.
Verse 10, There is not any man just, viz. by virtue of the law of nature,
or of the law of Moses; but only by faith and grace.
Verse 28. By faith, &c. The faith to which the apostle here attributes
man’s justification, is not a presumptuous assurance of our being justified;
but a firm and lively belief of all that God has revealed or promised.—
Heb. xi. A faith working through charity in Jesus Christ. Gal. v. 6. In
short, a faith which takes in hope, love, repentance, and the use of the
sacraments. And the works which he here excludes, are only the works of
the law; that is, such as are done by the law of nature, or that of Moses,
antecedent to the faith of Christ; but by no means such as follow faith
and proceed from it.
CHAP. IV, Verse 2. By works. Done by his own strength, without
the grace of God, and faith in him.
Ibid. Not before God. Whatever glory or applause such works might
procure from men, they would be of no value in the sight of God.
Verse 3. Reputed, &c. By God, who reputeth nothing otherwise than
it is. However we may gather from this word, that when we are justified,
our justification proceedeth from God’s free grace and bounty, and. not from
any efficacy which any act of ours could have of its own nature, abstracting
from God’s grace.
Verse 4. To him that worketh, viz. As of his own fund, or by his own
Strength, such a one, says the apostle, challenges his reward as a debt, due
to his own performances ; whereas he worketh not, that is, who presumeth
not upon any works done by his own strength, but seeketh justice through
faith and grace, is freely justified by God’s grace.
, Verse? -Covered, ttc. This covering, and not imputing, means, that
our sins are quite blotted out by the blood of the Lamb, who taketh away
the sins of the world: so that we are no longer to be charged with them,
because they are no more.
Verse 9. In the circumcision, &c. That is, is it only for the Jews that
are circumcised? No, says the apostle, but also for the uncircurticised
Gentiles, who by faith and grace may come to justice; as Abraham did before
he was circumcised.
Verse 14. Be heirs. That is, if they alone, who follow the ceremonies
of the law, be heirs of the blessings promised to Abraham; then that faith,
which was so much praised in him, will be found to be of little value.
And the very promise will be made void, by which he was promised to be
the father, not of the Jews only, but of all nations of believers.
Verse 15. The law worketh wrath. The law, abstracting from faith and
grace, worketh wrath occasionally, by being au occasion of so many trans-
gressions, which provoke God’s wrath.
CHAP. V. Verse 12. By one man. Adam, from whom we all con-
tracted original sin.
Verse 15, Not imputed. That is, men knew not, or made no account
of sin ; neither was it imputed to them in the manner it was afterwards,
when they transgressed the known written law of God.


Verse 20. That sin might abound. Not as if the law were given on
purpose for sin to abound : but that it so happened through man’s perver-
sity, taking occasion of sinning more, from the prohibition of sin.
CHAP. VI. Versed. Oldman—body of'sin. Our corrupt state sub.
ject to sin and concupiscence, coming to us from Adam, is calied our old
man, (as our stale reformed in and by Christ, is called the new man )
And the vices and sins, which then ruled in us, are named the body of sin.
CHAP. VII. Verse 1. It livelh, or, as long as he livetk.
Verse 8. Sin, taking occasion. Sin, or concupiscence, (which is called
sin, because it is from sin, and leads to sin) which was asleep before, was
wakened by the prohibition : the law not being the cause thereof, nor properly
giving occasion to it, but occasion being taken by our corrupt nature, to
resist the commandment laid upon us. '
Verse 13. That it may appoar sin ; or that sin may appear, viz.’ to be
the monster it is, which is even capable to take occasion from that which is
good, to work death.
Verse IS. Ido not that good which I will, &c. The apostle here des-
cribes the disorderly motions of passion and concupiscence; which often-
times in us get the start of reason : and by means of which, even good
ulen suffer in their inferior appetite what their will abhors; and are much
hindered in the accomplishment of the desires of their spirit and mind. Put
these evil motions (though they are called the law of sin, because they come
from original sin, and violently tempt and incline to sin) as long as the will
does not consent to them, are not sins, because' they are not voluntary.
CHAP. VIII. Verse 16. The spirit himself &c. By the inward motions
of divine love, and the peace of conscience, which tiie children of God
experience, they have a kind of testimony of God’s favour; by which they
are much strengthened in their hope of their justification and salvation ;
but yet not so as to pretend to an absolute assurance, which is not usually
granted in this mortal life ; during which we are taught to work out our
salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. ii. 12. And that he who thinketk
himself to stand, must take heed lest he fall. 1 Cor. x. 12. See also Rom.
xi. 20, 21, 22.
Verse 19. The expectation of the creature, &e. He speaks of the cor-
poreal creation, made lor the use and service of man ; and, by occasion of
his sin, made subject to vanity; that is, to a perpetual instability, tending
to corruption and other defects: so that by a figure of speech it is here said
to groan and be in labour, and to long for its deliverance, which is then to
come, wjien sin shall reign no more, and God shall make a new heaven and
a new earth.
Verse 26. Askethfor us. The spirit is said to ask and desire for the saints,
and to pray in us; in as much as heinspireth prayer, and teachetli us to pray.
Verse 29. He also predestinated, St c. That is, God hath pre-ordaiued
that all his elect should be conformable to the image of his Son. We must
not here offer to dive into the secrets of God's eternal election, only firmly
believe that all our good, in time, and eternity, Hows originally from God’s
free goodness; and all our evil from man’s free will.
Verse 28. lam sure. That is, lam persuaded, as k is in the Greek
lairHapoa.
CHAP, IX. Verse 3. Anathema; a curse. The apostle’s love and
ceneern for his countrymen the Jews was so great that he was willing to
suffer even an anathema, or curse for their sake; or any evil that would
come upon him, without his offending God.
ii 2


Verse 6. All are not Israelites, &c. Not all, who are the carnal seed of
Israel, are true Israelites in God’s account; who, as by his free grace he
heretofore preferred Isaac before Ismael, and Jacob before Esau, so could
and did, by the like free grace, election and mercy, raise up spiriual
children by faith to Abraham and Israel, from among the Gentiles, and
prefer them before the carnal Jews.
Verse 11. Not yet born, &c. By this example of these two twins
and the preference of the younger to the elder, the drift of the apostle is,
to shew that God in his election, mercy and grace, is not tied to any par-
ticular nation as the Jews imagined, nor to any prerogative of birth, or
any foregoing merits. For as antecedently to his grace, he sees no merits
in any, but finds all involved in sin, in the common lump of condemnation,
and all children of wrath, there is no one whom he might not justly leave
in that lump : so that whomsoever he delivers from it, he delivers in his
mercy; and whomsoever he leaves in it, he leaves in his justice. As when
of two equally criminal, the king is pleased out of pure mercy to pardon
one, whilst he suffers justice to take place in the execution of the other.
Verse 16. Not of him that willeth, &c. That is, by any power or strength
of his own, abstracting from the grace of God.
Verse 17. To this purpose, &c. Not that God made him on purpose, that
he should sin, and so be damned; but foreseeing his obstinacy in sin, and
the abuse of his own free will, he raised him up to be a mighty king, to
make a remarkable example of him ; and that his power might be better
known; and his justice in punishing him, published through the earth.
Verse 18. He hardeneth. Not by being the cause or author of Kis sin,
but his grace, and so leaving him in his sin, in punishment
of his past demerits.
Verse 21. The potter. This similitude is used only to shew that we are
not to dispute with our Maker; nor to reason with him why he does hot
give as great a grace to one as to another; for since the whole lump of
sin is vitiated by sin, it is owing to his goodness and mercy that he makes
out of it so many vessels of honour ; and it is no more than just that others
in punishment of their unrepented of sins, should be given up to be vessels
of dishonour.
Verse 27. A remnant. That is, a small number only of the children
of Israel shall be converted and saved. How perversely is this text quoted
for the salvation of men of all religions, when it speaks only of the con-
verts of the children of Israel.
CHAP. X. Verse 5. The justice of God That is. the justice which
God giveth us through Christ; as on the other hand the Jews oxvnjustiee
is. that which they pretended to by their own strength, or by the observance
of the law without faith ir. Christt
Verse 9. Thou shall be saved. To confess the Lord Jesus, and to call
upon the name of the Lord, (v. 13.) is not barely the professing a belief
in the person of Christ; but moreover implies a belief of his whole doc-
trine and an obedience to his law-; without which the calling him Lord will
save no man. St. Matt. vii. 21*
Verse 15, Unless they be sent. Note this against all new teachers, who
have all usurped to themselves the ministry without any lawful mission, de-
rived from the apostles, to whom Christ said, John xx. 21. As the Father
hath sent me, I also send you.
CHAP. XI. Verse 4. Seven Thousand, &c. This is very ill-alleged
by some against the'perpetual visibility of the church of Christ; the more
because, however the number of the faithful might be abridged by the per-
secution of Jezabel in the kingdom of the ten tribes, the church was at the


same time in a most flourishing condition (under Asa and Jossphat) in the
kingdom of Judah.
Verse 6. It is not now by works, &c. If salvation were to come by works
done by nature without faith and grace, salvation would not be a grace or
favour, but a debt; but such dead works are indeed of no value in the sight
of God towards salvation. It is not the same with regard to works done
with, and by God’s grace; for to such works as these he has promised eter-
nal salvation.
Verse 8; God hath given them, &c. Not by his working or acting in
them, but by his permission, and by withdrawing his grace in punishment
of their obstinacy. ,
Verse Jl. That they should fall. The nation of the Jews is not abso-
lutely and without remedy cast of!' for ever; but in part only (many thou-
sands of them having been at first converted) and for a time ; which fall of
theirs God has been pleased to turn to the good of the Gentiles.
A eise 20. Thou standest by faith ; be not high-minded but fear. We
see here that he wliostandeth by faith may fall from it and therefore must
live in fear, and not in the vain presumption and security of modern sectaries.
Verse 22. Otherwise thou also shalt be cut ojf The Gentiles are here
admonished not to be proud, nor to glory against the Jews ; but to take oc-
casion rather from their fall to fear, and to be humble, lest they be cast off.
Not that the whole church of Christ can ever fall from him, having been
secured by so many divine promises in holy writ; but that each one in par-
ticular may fall, and theiefore all in general are to be admonished’to beware
of that w hich may happen to any one in particular.
Verse 29. For the gifts and the calling of God are without his repenting
himself of them. The promises of God are unchangeable, nor can he re-
pent of conferring his gifts.
Verse 52. Concluded all in unbelief. He hath found all nations, both
Jews and Gentiles, in unbelief and sin; not by bis causing, but by the
abuse of their own free-will; so that their calling and election is purely
owing to his mercy.
CHAP. XIV. Verse 2. Eat all things, viz. without observing the dis-
tinction of clean and unclean meats, prescribed by the law of Moses, which
was now no longer obligatory. Some weak Christians converted from among
the Jews, as we here gather from the apostle, made a scruple of eating
such meats as were deemed unclean by the law, such as swine’s flesh, &c.
which the stronger sort of Christians did eat without scruple. Now' the
apostle, to reconcile them together, exhorts the former riot to judge or con-
demn the latter, using their Christian liberty; and the latter to take care
not to despise or scandalize their weaker brethren, either by bringing them
to eat what in their conscience they think they should not; or by giving
them such offence as to endanger the driving them thereby from the Chris-
tian religion.
Verse 5. Between day, &c. Still observing the sabbaths and festivals of
the law.
Verse 23. Discerneth. That is, distinguished between meats, and eateth
against his conscience, what he deems unclean.
Ibid. Of faith. 13y faith here is understood judgment and conscience •
to act against which is always sin.
CHAP. XV. Verse 8- Minister of the Circumcision. That is, exe-
cuted his office and ministry towards the Jews, the people of the circum-
cision.
First Epistle of St. PA UL to the Corinthians.
CHAP. I. Verse 25, The foolish, Thai is to say, what appears


foolish to the world in the ways of God, is indeed most wise; and what
appears weak, is indeed above all the strength and comprehension of man.
CHAP. 11. Verse 14, 15. The sensual man the spiritual man, The
sensual man is either he who is taken up with sensual pleasures, with carnal
and worldly affections, or he who measureth heavenly mysteries by natural
reason, sense, and human wisdom only. Now, such a one has little or no
notion of the things of God : whereas the spiritual man, who, in the high
points of religion, takes not human sense for his guide ; but divine grace,
the faith of the church, and the spirit of God, makes a rigiit judgment of
all these matters; and sees and condemns the errors of carnal men, who
have no means or right to judge or condemn him.
CHAP. 111. Verse 12 Upon this foundation. The foundation is Christand
his doctrine, or the true faith in him, working through charity. The building
upon this foundation, gold, silver and precious stones, signifies the more per-
fect preaching and practice of the gospel: the wood, hay and stubble, such
preaching as was that of the Corinthian teachers, (who affected the pomp
of words and human eloquence) and such practice as is mixed with much
imperfection, and many lesser sins : Now the day of the Lord, and his fiery
trial (in the particular judgment after death) shall make manifest of what
sort every man’s work has been ; of which during this life ’tis hard to make
a judgment. For then the fire of God’s judgment shall try every man’s
works: And they, whose works, like wood, hay and stubble, cannot abide
the fire, shall suffer loss, these works being found to be of no value ; yet
they themselves, having built upon the right foundatioc, (by living and dying
in the true faith, and in the state of grace) though with much imperfection,
shall be saved, yet so as by fire : being liable to this punishment, by reason
of the wood, hay and stubble, which was mixed with their building.
CHAP. VI. Verse 7. A fault. Law-suits can hardly ever be without a
fault, on one side or the other; and oftentimes on both sides.
Verse 12. All things are lawful, &c. That is, all indifferent things are
indeed lawful, in as much as they are not prohibited; but oftentimes they
are not expedient, as in the case of law-suits, &c. And much less would
it be expedient to be enslaved by an irregular affection to any thing, how in-
different soever.
CHAP. VII. Verse 2. Have his oum wife. That is, keep to his wife which
he hath. His meaning is not to exhort the unmarried to marry ; on the
contrary, he would have them rather continue as they are, verseS. But he
speaks here to them that are already married, who must not depart from one
another, nor refuse the marriage-debt to one another.
Verse 6. By indulgence. That is, by a condescension to your weakness.
Verse 9lf they do not contain, &c. This is spoken of such as are free,
and not such as by vow hath given their first faith to God ; to whom, if
they will use proper means to obtain it, God will never refuse the gift of
continency. The Protestants have corrupted this text, by rendering it, if
they cannot contain.
Verse 12. I speak, not the Lord, viz. By any express commandment or
ordinance.
Verse .14. Is sand fed. The meaning is, not that the faith of the hus-
Land or the wife is of itself sufficient to put the unbelieving party or their
children in the state of grace and salvation ; but that it is very often an oc-
casion of their sanctification, by bringing them to the true faith.
Verse 56. Let him do what he will: tie sinneth not, &c. The meaning
is not, as libertines would have it, that persons may do what they will, and
not sin,• provided they afterwards marry ; but that the father, with regard


to the giving his virgin in marriage, may do as he pleaseth ; and that it will
be no sin to him if she marry.
( HAP VIII. Verse 1. Knowledge puffeth up, &c Knowledge, without
charity and humility, serveth only to puff persons up
Verse S. Gods many, &c. Reputed for such among the heathens.
Verse 15. If meat scandalize. That is, if iny eating cause my brother
to sin
C MAP. IX. Verse 5. A woman a sister. Protestants have corrupted this
text by rendering it a sister a wife ; whereas it is certain St. Paid had no wife,
(Chap. vii. Verse 7. 8.) and that he only speaks of such devout women as, ac-
cording to the custom of the Jewish nation, waited upon the preachers of the
gospel, and supplied them with necessaries.
Verse 16. Jt i s no glory. That is, I have nothing to glory of-
Verse 27. I chastise, &c. What will our new sectaries say to this, with
all their presumptuous security ? Let them open their eves now at least,
and see that their faith, which excludes all fear, is not the faith of St. Paul.
See Chap. x. 12.
chap. x. Verse 2. In Moses.- Under the conduct of Moses they re-
ceived the baptism in figure, by passing under the cloud, and through the sea;
and they partook of the body and blood of Christ in figure by eating of
the manna, (called here spiritual food, because it was a figure, of the true
bread which comes down from heaven) and drinking the water, miraculously
brought out of the rock, called here a spiritual rock ; because it was also
a figure of Christ.
Verse 11. The ends of the world. That is, the last ages.
Verse 15. Or, no temptation hath taken hold of you, or come upon you
as yet, but what is human, or incident toman.
Ibid. Issue, or a way to escape.
V erse 16. Which we bless. Here the apostle puts them in mind of the
body and blood of Christ in the sacred mysteries, and becoming thereby
one mystical body with Cbrst. From whence he infers, verse 21, that they
who are made partakers with Christ by the eucharistie sacrifice, and sacra-
ment, must not be made partakers with devils, by eating of the meats sa-
crificed to them.
Verse 17. One bread; or, as it may be rendered agreeable both to the
Latin and because the bread is one all we being many, are one body,
who partake of that one bread. For it is by our communicating with Christ,
and with one another, in this blessed sacrament, that we are formed into
one mystical body, and made, as it were, one bread, compounded of many
grains of corn, closely united together.
CHAP. XI. Verse 10. A power. That is, a veil or covering, as a sign
thatAshe is under the power of her husband; and this, the apostle adds,
because of the angels, who are present in the assemblies of the faithful.
Verse 19. There must be heresies, by reason of the pride and perversity
of man’s heart, not by God’s will or appointment: who nevertheless draws
good out of this evil, manifesting by that occasion, who are the good and
firm Christians, and making their faith more remarkable.
Verse 20. The Lord’s supper. So the apostle here calls the charity-
feasts observed by the primitive Christians; and reprehends the abuses of
the Corinthians on these occasions; which were the more criminal, be-
cause these feasts were accompanied with celebrating the eucharistie sacri-
fice and sacrament.


Verse 27. Or drink. Here the Protestat testament is corrupted, by
putting and drink (contrary to the original) si tatm instead of or drink.
Verse 27. 29. Guilty of the body, &c. not discerning the body, &c.
This demonstrates the real piesence of the body and blood of Christ, even
to the unworthy communicant; who otherwise could not be guilty of the
body and blood of Christ, or justly condemned for not discerning the
Lord’s body.
Verse 28. Drink of the chalice. This is not said by way of command,
but by way of allowance, viz. where and when it is agreeable to the prac-
tice and discipline of the church. ,
CHAP. XJV. Verse 1. Prophesy. That is, declare or expound the
mysteries of faith.
Verse 2. Not to men, viz. so as to be heard, that is, so as to be under-
stood by them.
Verse 12. Of spirits. Of spiritual gifts.
Verse 14. My spirit prayeth , &c. When the tongue is not known in
which I pray, though my'spirit may then be elevated to God, yet such a
prayer is* not so instructive to myself or others, as when the words are
understood.
Verse 16. Amen. The unlearned, not knowing that you are then bless-
ing, will not be qualified to join with you by saying Amen to your blessing.
The use or abuse of strange tongues, of which the apostle here speaks, does
not regard the public liturgy of the church (in which strange tongues were
never used) but certain conferences of the faithful, Verse 26, &c. in
which, meeting together, they discovered to one another their various mi-
raculous 'gifts of the Spirit, common in those primitive times; among
which the apostle prefers that of prophesying before that of speaking strange
tongues, because it was more to the public edification. Where also note
that the Latin, used in our Liturgy, is so far from being a strange and
unknown tongue, that it is perhaps the best known tongue in the world
CHAP. XV. Verse 29. Baptized for the Dead. Some think theapos-
tle here alludes to a ceremony then in use: but others, more probably to
the pravers and penitential labours, performed by the primitive Christians,
for the souls of the faithful departed, or to the baptism of afflictions and
sufferings undergone for sinners spiritually dead.
CHAP. XVI- Verse 22. Maran Atha. It is a Hebrew or Syriac word,
and signifieth Our Lord cometh, or. Let our Lord come.
Second Epistle of St. Paul to the Corinthians.
CHAP. T. Verse 19. It is, was in him. There was no inconstancy in
the doctrine of the apostles, sometimes, like modern sectaries, saying, It is,
and at other times saying, It is not. But their doctrine was ever the same,
one uniform yea in Jesus Christ, one Amen, that is, one truth in him. *
CHAP. 11. Verse 10. / also. The apostle here granted an indulgence
or pardon, in the person, and by the authority of Christ, to the incestuous
Corinthian, whom before he had put under penance; which pardon con-
sisted in a releasing of part of the temporal punishment due to his sin.
Verse 16. The odour of death, &c. The preaching of the apostle, which
by its fragrant odour brought many to life, was to others, through their own
fault, the occasion of death, by their wilfully opposing and resisting that
divine call.
CHAP. 111. Verse 6. The letter. Not rightly understood, and taken
without the spirit.
CHAP. V. VerseS. Absent from the body, and present with the Lord.


lliis demonstrates that the beatitude of the saints is not deferred till the
general resurrection ; hut that in the mean time, and whilst they are absent
trom the body, they are present with the Lord.
. Ver , s . e J P- The proper things of the body. In the particular judgment
immediately after death, the soul is rewarded or punished according to what
she has done in the body.
Verse 16. We know no man according to the flesh. That is, we consider
not any man with regard to his nation, family, kindred, or other natural
qualities or advantages, but only with relation to Christ, and according to
' tlle ord . er of dl vine charity, in God, and for God. The apostle adds, that
even with respect to Christ himself he now no longer considers him accord-
ing to the flesh, by taking a satisfaction in his being his countryman • bis
affection being now purified from all such earthly considerations.
r TJ I US ‘ That is ’ tobe a sin-offering, a victim for sin.
rtTAD spV l „ Verse 2 * Simplicity- That is, sincere bounty and charity.
CHAP. XI. Verse \. My folly. So he calls his reciting his own praises,
which, commonly speaking, is looked upon as a piece of folly and vanity •
though the apostle was constrained to do it, for the good of the souls com-
muted to his charge.
Verse 28. My daily instance. The labours that come in, and cress un-
ou me every day. “ ”
CHAP XII. Verse 9. Power is made perfect in infirmity. The
strength and power of God, more perfectly shines forth in our weakness and
infirmity, because the more weak wo are of ourselves, the more illustrious
conflicts™*" 6 m SUpP ° rting US ’ and giving us the victory under all trials and
CHAP. XIII, Verse 7. Reprobates. That is, without proof, by having
no occasion of shewing our power in punishing you. **
hpisile of St. Paul to the Galatians.
CHAP. 11, Verse 7. The Gospel of the uncircumcision. The preaching
of the gospel to the uncircumcised, that is, to the Gentiles. St. Paul was
cailet man extraordinary manner to be the apostle of the Gentiles • St Pe-
ter, besides his general commission over the whole flock.ff John xxi.’lj &cA
j a w ? P ecu ‘ iar cba, '£ e oP tbe people of the circumcision, that is, of the
Verse n. I withstood, &c. . The fault that is here noted in the conduct
i * t# ., ef^ r ’ wa * on l v a certain imprudence, in withdrawing himself from
the table of the Gentiles, for fear of giving offence to the Jewish converts:
Put this in such circumstances, when his so doing might be of ill conse-
quence to the Gentiles, who might be induced thereby to think themselves
obliged to conform to the Jewish way of living, to the prejudice of their
Christian liberty. Neither was St. Paul’s reprehending him any argument
against his supremacy; for in such cases an inferior may, and sometimes
ought, with respect, to admonish his superior.
CHAP. 111. Verse 19. Because of transgressions. To restrain them
from sin, by fear and threats.
Ibid. Ordained by angels. The law was delivered by angels, speaking in
le name and person of God, to Moses, who was the Mediator, on this
occasion, between God and the people.
Verse 22. Hath concluded all under sin, i. e. Hath declared all to be
fr ° m . wh j ch tbe y could not be delivered, but by faith in Jesus
Christ, the promised seed#
Verse 24. Pedagogue, i. e. Schoolmaster, conductor, or instructor.


Verse 28 , Neither Jew, &c. That is, no distinction of Jew, &c.
CHAP. I V.Verse 3. In bondage under the elements, ficc. That is, under the
first rudiments of religion, in which the carnal Jews were trained up; or
under those corporeal creatures, used in their manifold rites, sacrifices, an
sacraments. „ , . ~
Verse 10. You observe days, &c. He speaks not of the observation ot
the Lord’s day, or other Christian festivals but either of the superstitious
observation of days lucky and unlucky : or else of the Jewish festivals, to t le
observance of which, certain Jewish teachers sought to induce the Galatians.
Epistle,of St. Paul do. the Ephesians.
CHAP. T. Verse 5. In heavenly places , or in heavenly things. In
Gcelestibus.
Verse 14. Acquisition, i. e. a purchased possession.
CHAP. 11. Verse 9. Not of works, as of our own growth, or from our.
selves; but as from the grace of God.
CHAP 111. Verse 15. All paternity. Or the whole family. Gou
is the great Father both of angels and men: whosoever besides is named
father, is so named with subordination to him. .
CHAP IV. Verse 11, 15. Some indeed he gave to be apostles Till we all
meet, &c. Note here, that Christ has left in his church a perpetual succession of
orthodox pastors and teachers, to preserve the faithful in unity and truth
CHAP. V. Verse 24. As the Church is subject to Christ, ihe church
then, according to St. Paul, is ever obedient to Christ; and can never fall
from him, nor change her spouse. .
CHAP- VI. Verse 12. High places, or heavenly places. 1 hat ts to say ,
in the air, the lowest of the celestial regions, which is lull of these spirits
of darkness. . . ,
Verse 24. Insincerity. Literally, in incorruption; that is, with a pure
and perfect love. .
Epiitle of St. Paul to the Phihppians.
CHAP. I. Verse 22. This is to me. His meaning is, that although
his dying immediately for Christ would be his gain, by putting him presently
in possession of heaven, yet he is doubtful what he should choose, because by
staying longer in the flesh, he should be more beneficial to the souls oi his
neighbours. . . , , .
CHAP. 11. Verse 7. Debased himself. Exinamvit, made himselt as
of no.account. . ,
Verse 12. With fear, #c. Note, that this is against the false iaith, and
presumptuous security of modern sectaries.
CHAP- IV. Verse 3- Sincere companion. Protestants render it true
yokefellow, to insinuate that St. Paul herespe.ksto his wife; whereas he
plainly tells us, 1 Cor. vii. 8. that he had no wife.
Epistle of St. Paul to the Colossians.
CHAP. I. Verse 15. The frst-born. That is, born before the whole
creation, and before ail ages, coeval w ith the Father and with the Holy Ghost.
Verse" 24. Wanting. There is no want in the sufferings of Christ m
himself as head .• but many sufferings are still wanting, or are still to come,
in his body the church, and his members the faithful. _
CHAP. 11. Verse 16. In meat, fc. He means with regard to tUe
Jewsh observations of the distinction of clean and unclean meats ; and ot
their festivals, new moons, and sabbaths; as being no longer obligatoiy.
Verse 18. Willing, &c. That is, by a self-willed, self-invented, super-
stitious worship, falsely pretending humility, but really proceeding iroiu


pride. Such was the worship, that many of the philosophers (against whom
St. Paul speaks, verse 8.) paid to angels or demons, by sacrificing to them
as carriers of intelligence betwixt God and men ; pretending humility in so
doing, as if God was too great to be addressed by men: and setting aside
the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ, who is the head both of angels and men.
Such also was the worship paid by the ancient heretics, disciples of Simon
and Menander, to the angels, whom they believed to be the makers and
lords of this lower world. This is certain tlfat they whom the apostle here
condemns, did not hold the head, (v. 19.) that is Jesus Christ, and his
mediatorship; and therefore what he writes here no ways touches the Ca-.
tholic doctrine and practice of desiring our good angels to pray to God for
us, through Jesus Christ. St. Jerome ( Epist. ad Atgas) understands by the
religion or service of angels, the Jewish religion given bv angels: and sup-
poses all that is here said to be directed against the Jewish teachers, who
sought to subject the new Christians to the observances of the Mosaic law.
Verse •21. Touch not, fyc. The meaning is, that Christians should not
subject themselves, either tc the ordinances of the old law, forbidding touch-
ing or tasting things unclean ; or to the superstitious inventions of here-
tics, imposing such restraints'under pretence of wisdom, humility or mor-
tification: but without any warrant, either of Christ in the gospel, or of
the Holy Ghost in the church.
First Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessaf onions,
CHAP. V. Verse 14. The unquiet. That is, such as are irregular and
disorderly.
Second Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessaloninns,
CHAP. 11. Verse 5 A revolt. 'Hiis revolt, or falling off, is generally
understood by the ancient fathers, of a revolt from the Roman empire,
which was first to be destroyed before the coming of Antichrist. It may,
perhaps, be undertood also of a revolt of many nations from the Catholic
church : which has, in part, happened already, by the means of Mahomet,
Luther, &!c. and, as it may be supposed, will be more general in the days
of Antichrist: though, even then, the Catholic church herself, if we be-
lieve the scriptures and the c reed, never can fall off from Christ.
Ibid. The man of sin- Here must be meant some particular man, as is
evident from the frequent repetition of the Greek, article o, the man of sin,'
the son of perdition, the adversary or opposer, b uvTiy.iiy.ivor It agrees to the
great Antichrist, who will come before the end of the world; but by no
means to any Christian Bishop, much less to a succession of Christian Bi-
shops. Some interpret it of Mahomet.
Versed. In the temple. Either that of Jerusalem, which some think he
will rebuild; or in the Christian churches, w hich he will pervert to his
own worship : as Mahomet has done by the churches of the east.
Verse 10. God shall send. That is, God shall suffer them to be deceived
by lying wondersand false miracles, id punishment of their not entertaining
the love of truth.
Verse 14. Traditions. See here that the unwritten traditions of the
apostles are no less to be received than their epistles,
CHAP. 111. Verse 1. May run. That is, may spread itself, and have
free course.
First Epistle of St. Paul to Timothy.
CHAP. I. Verse 9. The law is not, &o lie means that the just man
doth good and avoideth evil, not as compelled by the law, and merely for


fear of the punishment appointed for transgressors, but voluntarily, and out
of the love of God and virtue; and would do so, though there were no law.
QHAP. IT. Verse 5. One Mediator. Christ is the .one and only Me-
diator of redemption ; who gave himself, as the apostle writes in the follow-
ing verse, a redemption fir all. He is also the only Mediator who .stands
In need of no other to recommend his petititions to his Father. But this
hinders not but that we may seek the prayers and intercession, as well of
the faithful upon earth, as of the saints and angels in heaven, for obtaining
mercy, grace, and salvation, through Jesus Christ: As St. Paul himself
often desired the help of the prayers of the faithful, without any injury to
the Mediatorship of Jesus Christ.
CHAP. 111. Verse 2. Of one wife. The meaning is, not that every
bishop should have a wife, (for St, Paul himself had none) but that no one
should be admitted to the holy orders of bishop, priest or deacon, who had
been married more than once.
Verse 6. A Neophyte. That is, one lately baptized, a raw young convert.
, Verse 15, The pillar and ground ef truth. Therefore the church of the
living God can never uphold error, nor bring in corruptions, superstition,
and, idolatry.
CHAP. IV. Verse Forbidding to marry, to abstain from meats, See.
He speaks of the Gnosticks, the Marcionit.es, the Encratites, the Mani-
cheans, and other ancient heretics, who absolutely condemned marriage,
and the use of all kind of meat; because they pretended that all flesh was
from an evil principle. Whereas the church of God, so far from condemn-
ing marriage, looks upon it as a most holy sacrament: and forbids it to none
but such as by a vow have chosen the better part: and prohibits not the use
of any meats whatsoever in proper times and seasons: though she does not
judge all kind of diet proper for days of fasting and penance.
CHAP. V. Verse 12. Their first faith. Their vow, by which they had
engaged themselves to Christ.
, Second, Epistle of St. Paid to Timothy.
CHAP. I. Verse 10. By the illumination. That is, by the bright
coming and appearing of our Saviour.
CHAP. 111. Verse 8. Jannes and Mambres. The magicians of king
Pharaoh.
Verse 16. All scripture, &c. Every part of divine scripture is certainly
profitable for all these ends. But, if we would have the whole rule of Chris-
tian faith and practice, we must not be content with those scriptures which
Timothy knew from his infancy, that is, with the Old Testament alone :
nor yet with the New Testament, without taking along with it the traditions
of the apostles, and the interpretation of the church, to which the apos-
tles delivered both the book, and the true meaning of it.
CHAP. IV. Verse 5. An Evangelist. A diligent preacher of the gospel,
Epistle of St. Paul to Titus.
CHAP. I- Verse 6. Of one wife. See the note upon 1 Tim. iii. 2.
CHAP. 111. Verse 11. By his own judgment Other offenders are
judged and cast out of the church by the sentence of the pastors of the
same church. Heretics, more unhappy, run out of the church of their
own accord ; and, by so doing, give judgment and sentence against their
own souls.


Ppisile of St. Paul to the Hebrews.
CHAP. I Verse 3. The figure. That is, the express image, and most
perfect resemblance.
Ibid. Making purgation . That is, having purged away our sins by his
passion.
CHAP. 11. Verse 10 . Perfect by suffering- By suffering Christ was to
enter into his glory. Luke xxiv, 26. which the Apostle here calls being made
perfect.
Verse 16. No where doth he, &c. That is, he never took upon him the
nature of angels, hut that of man of the seed of Abraham.
CHAP. IV. Verse 8. Jesus. Josue, who in Greek is called Jesus.
CHAP. VI. Verse 1. The word of the beginning. The first rudiments
Of the Christian doctrine.
Verse 4. It is impossible, &c. The meaning is, that it is impossible for
such as have fallen after baptism, to be again baptized : and very hard for*
such as have apostatized from the faith, after having received many great
graces, to return again to the happy state from which they fell,
CHAP. VII. VerseS. Without Father, &c. Not that he had no fa-
ther, &c. but that neither his father, nor his pedigree, nor his birth, nor
his death, is set down in scripture.
Verse 25. Many priests. The apostle notes this difference between the
high priests of the law, and our high priest Jesus Christ: that they, being
removed by death, made way for their successors ; whereas our Lord Jesus
is a priest for ever, and hath no successor; but liveth and concurreth for
over with bis ministers, the priests of the New Testament, in all their func-
tions. 2d!y, That no one priest of the law, nor all of them together,
could offer that absolute sacrifice for everlasting redemption, which our
one high priest Jesus Christ has offered once, and for ever.
Verse 25. Make intercession. Christ, as man, continually maketh inter-
cession for us, by representing his passion to bis Father.
CHAP. VIII. Verse 2. The That is, the sanctuary.
Verse 4. If then he ivere on earth, sc. That is, if he were not of a
higher condition than the Levitical order of earthly priests, and had not
Another kind of sacrifice to offer, he should be excluded by them from the
priesthood, and its functions, which by the law were appropriated to their tribe.
Verses. Who serve unto, <|c. The priesthood of the law and its func-
tions were a kind of an example and shadow of what is done by Christ in
his church militant and triumphant, of which the tabernacle was a pattern.
Verse 11. They shall not teach, f;c. So great shall be the light and grace
of the New Testament, that it shall not be necessary to inculcate to tlio
faithful the belief and knowledge of the true God, for they shalj all know him.
Verse 15, A new, supply covenant.
CHAP. IX, Verse 10. Of Correction, viz. when Christ should correct
and settle all things.
Verse 12. Eternal redemption. By that one sacrifice of his blood once
offered on the cross, Christ our Lord paid and exhibited, once for all, the
general ransom of all mankind; which no other priest could do; and he
himself could do but once: because he could die but once.
Verse 25. Offer himself often. Christ shall never more offer himself in
sacrifice, in that violent, painful and bloody manner, nor can there be, any
occasion for it; since by that one sacrifice upon the-cross, he lias furnished
the full ransom, redemption, and remedy, for ail the sins of tiie world.—


But this hinders not but that he may offer himself daily in the sacred mys-
teries in an unbloody manner, for the daily application of that one sacrifice
of redemption to our souls.
Verse 28 To exhaust. That is, to empty or draw out to the very bottom,
by a plentiful and perfect redemption.
CHAP. X. Verse 2. They would have ceased . Tf they had been of
themselves perfect to all the intents of redemption and remission, as Christ’s
death is, there would have been no occasion of so often repeating them, as
there is no occasion for Christ’s dying any more for our sins.
Verse 18 There is no more an oblationfor sin. Where there is a full re-
mission of sins, as in baptism, there is no more occasion for a sin-offering
to be made for such sins already remitted ; and as for sins committed after-
wards, they can only be remitted in virtue of the one oblation of Christ’s
death.
Verse 26, If ive sin tvi/ful/y. He speaks of the sin of wilful apostacy
from the known truth ; after which, as we cannot be baptized again, we can-
not expect to have that abundant remission of sins which Christ purchased
by his death, applied to our souls in that ample manner as it is in baptism ;
but we have rather all manner of reason to look fora dreadful judgment:
the more because apostates from the known truth seldom or never have the
grace to return to it.
CHAP. XI. Verse 8. He that is called Abraham: or Abraham being
called. . ‘
Verse 19. For q partible. That is, as a figure of Christ, slain, and coming
to life again.
Verse 21. Worshipped the top of his rod. The apostle here follows the
ancient Greek bible of the 70 interpreters, (which translates in this manner,
Gen. xlvii. v. 51.) and alleges this fact of Jacob, in paying a relative ho-
nour and veneration to the top of the rod or sceptre of Joseph, as to a figure
of Christ’s sceptre and kingdom, as an instance and argument of his faith.
But Protestants, who are no friends to this relative honour, have corrupted
this text, by translating it, he worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff;
as if this circumstance of leaning upon the top of his stall were any argu-
ment of Jacob’s faith, or worthy the being thus particularly taken notice of
by the Holy Ghost.
CHAP. XII. Verse 17. He found, sc, That is, he found no way to
bring his father to repent or change his mind, with relation to his having
given the blessing to his younger brother Jacob,
CHAP. XIII. Verse 4. Or, let marriage be honourable in all. It is a
warning to married people not to abuse the sanctity of their state, by any
liberties or irregularities contrary thereunto.
Verse 13. His reproach. His cross.
The Catholic Epistle of St. James the Apostle.
CHAP. I. Catholic • This Epistle is called Catholic or Universal, be-
cause it is not written to any one particular church or congregation, hut to
the faithful in general.
Verse IS Some, beginning. That is, a kind of first fruit of his creatures.
CHAP. 11. Verse). With respect of persons The meaning is, that
in matters relating to faitli, the administering the sacraments, and other spi-
ritual functions in God’s church, there shall be no respect of persons, but
that the souls of the poor should he as much regarded as those ot the rich.
Verse 10. Guilty of all. That is, he becomes a transgressor of the law,
in such a manner, that the observing of all other points will not avail him


to salvation : for lie despises the law giver, and breaks through the great and
general commandment of charity, which is the fulfilling of the whole law,
CHAP. V. Verse 14. Let him bring in, sc. See here a plain warrant
of scripture for the sacrament of extreme-unction.
Verse 1 6. Confess your sins one to another. That is, to the priests of
the church, whom, verse 14, he had ordered to be called for, and brought
in to the sick.
CHAP. 111. Verse 19. Spirits in prison. See here a proof of a third
place, or middle state of souls: for these spirits in prison, to whom Christ
went to preach after his death, were not in heaven ; nor jet in the hell of
the damned: because heaven is no prison : and Christ did not go to preach
to the damned.
Verse 21. Wkereunto baptism. sc. Tlaptism is said to be of the like
form with the water by which Noe was saved: because the one was a figure
of the other.
Paid. Not the putting away, fc. As much as to say, that baptism has
not its efficacy in order to salvation, from its washing away any bodily filth
or dirt ; but from its purging the conscience from sin: when accompanied
with suitable dispositions in the party, to answer the interrogations made at
that time, with relation to faith, the renouncing of Satan with all his works,
and the obedience to God’s commandments.
CIIAP. IV. Verse IS. Scarcely. That is, not without much labour
and difficulty, and on account of the dangers that constantly surround us, viz.
tke temptations of the world, of the devil, and of our own corrupt natures.
Second Epistle of St. Peter Ike Apostle.
CHAP. 11. Verse 1. Sects of perdition. That is, heresies destructive
of salvation.
Verse 11. Bear not an execrable judgment, sc. That is, they use no
railing or cursing sentence; not even in their conflicts with the evil angels.
See St. Jude, verse 9.
Verse J 5. The delights of a day. That is, the short delights of this
world, in which they place all their happiness.
Tke First Epistle of St. John the Apostle.
CHAP. TI Verse 5. We know him, if we keep his commandments
He speaks of that practical knowledge by love and affection, which can only
be proved by our keeping bis commandments; and without which we cannot
be said to know God, as we should do.
Verse 8. A new commandment, viz. The commandment of love, which
was first given in the old law, but was renewed and extended by Christ.
See John xiii. 55.
Verse 18. It is the last hour. That is, it is the last age of the world.
Ibid. Many Antichrists. That is, many heretics, enemies of Christ and
his church, and forerunners'of the great Antichrist.
Verse 19 They were not of us. That is, they were not solid, stedfast,
genuine Christians, otherwise they would have remained in the church.
Verse 20. An unction from the holy One. That is, grace and wisdom
from the Holy Ghost.
Ibid. Know all things. The true fchildren of God’s church remaining in
unity, under the guidance of their lawful pastors, partake of the grace of
the Holy Ghost, promised to the church and her pastors; and have in the
church all necessary knowledge and instruction: so as to have no need to
seek it elsewhere, since it can be only found in that society of which they are
members,
e 2


Verse 27. You have no need, c|-c. You want not to be taught by any
of these men who, under pretence of imparting more knowledge to you,
seek to seduce you, (verse 26.) since you are sufficiently taught already,
and have all knowledge and grace in the church, with the unction of the
Holy Ghost, which these new teachers have no share in.
CHAP. Ilf. Verse 4, Iniquity. Transgression of the law.
Verse 6. Sinneth not. viz mortally. See chap. i. 8.
Verse 91 Doth not commit sin. That is, as long as he keepeth in him-
self this seed of grace, and this divine generation, by which he is born of
God. But then he may fall from this happy state by the abuse of his free
will, as appears from Romans xi. 20, 21, 22. 1 Cor. ix. 27. chap. x. 12.
Philip, ii. 12 Apoc. iii. 11.
CHAP. IV. Verse 1. Try the spirits, viz. by examining whether their
teaching he agreeable to the rule of the Catholic faith, and the doctrine of
the church Tor as he says, verse 6, lie that Icnowelh God heareih vs, (the*
pastors of his chucch; By this we know the spirit of truth and the spirit
of error.
Verse 2. Every spirit that confcsselh, sc. Not that the confession of
this faith alone is, at all times, and in all cases sufficient: but with relation
to that time, and for that part of the Christian doctrine, which was then
particularly to be confessed, taught, and maintained against the heretics of
those days, this was the most proper token by which true teachers might be
distinguished from the false.
Verse o. That dissolvetk Jesus, viz. either by denying his humanity, or
his divinity.
Ibid. lie. is now already in the world. Not in his person, but in his spirit,
and in his precursors. - ’
Verse IS. Fear is notin charity, §c. Perfect charity, or love, banisheth
human fear, that is, the fear of men; as abo, perplexing fear, which makes
men mistrust or despair of God’s mercy; and that kind of servile fear
which makes them fear the punishment of sin more than the offence of God.
But it no way excludes the wholesome fear of God’s judgments, so often
recommended in holy writ; nor that fear and trembling, with which we are
told to work out our salvation. Phil. 11. 12.
CH AP. V. Verse 1. Is born of God, That is, is justified, and become
a child of God ; which is to be understood, provided the belief of this
fundamental article of the Christian faith be accompanied witli all the other
conditions, which, by the word of God and his appointment, are also re-
quired to justification ; such as a general belief of all that God has revealed
and promised; hope, love, repentance, and a sincere disposition to keep
God’s holy law and commandments.
Verse 4 ■ Our faith. Not a bare speculative or a dead faith, but a faith
working by charily. Gal. v 6.
Verse 6. Came by water and blood. Not only to wash away our sin by the
water of baptism, but by his own blood.
VerseS. The spirit, the wateri and the blood As the Father, the Word
and the Holy Ghost all bear witness to Christ’s divinity; so the spirit which
he yielded up, crying out with a loud voice upon the cross, and the water
and blood that issued from his side, bear witness to his humanity, and are
one ; that is, all agree in one testimony.
Verse 16. A sin unto death. Some understand this of final impeni-
tence, or of dying in mortal sin, which is the only sin that can never be re-
routed ; But it is probable he may also comprise, under this name the sin


of apostacy from (lie faith, and some other such heinous sins as are seldom
and hardly" remitted ; and therefore he gives litiie encouragement to such
as pray for these sinners, to expect w hat they ask.
Verse IS. Sinneth not. See the annotation on chap. iii. 6, &c.
Third Epistle ot St. John the Apatite, 1
CHAP. I Verse 4. No greater grace. That is, nothing that gives me
greater joy and satisfaction. ;
Catholic Epistle of St. Jude the Apostle.
CHAP. I. Verse 6. Principality. That is, the slate in which they
were first created, their original dignity.
\ erse 8. Blaspheme majesty. Speak evil of them that aie in dignity
and even blaspheme against the divine majesty.
Verse 9. Contended about the body, sc. This contention, which is no
where els'e mentioned in holy writ, was originally known by revelation, and
transmitted by tradition. ’Tis thought the occasion of it was that the devil
would have had the body buried in such a place and manner, as to be/wor-
shipped by the Jews with divine honours.
Ibid. Command thee ; or rebuke thee.
Verse 11. Gone in the way, §c. Heretics follow the way of Cain, bv
murdering the souls of their brethren ; the way of Balaam, by putting a
scandal before the people of God, for their own private ends; and the way
Of Core or Korah, by their opposition to the church governors of divine
appointment.
Verse 14, Projdiesied. This prophecy was either known by tradition,
or from some book that is now lost.
Apocalypse of St. John the Apostle.
CHAP. 11. Verse 96. Power over the nations. See here how the
saints deceased live with God, and have power given them over countries
and nations.
CHAP. 111. Verse 14. The Amen. That is, the true one, the truth
itself; the Word and Son of God.
■lbid. The beginning, i. e. the principle, the source, and the efficient
cause of the whole creation.
CHAP V. Verse 8. The prayers of saints. Here we see that the saints
in heaven offer up to Christ the prayers of the faithful upon earth.
CHAP. Vl.\erse2. Whitehorse. He that sitteth on the w bite horse
is Christ, going forth to subdue the world by his gospel. The other horses
that follow, represents the judgments and punishments that were to fall on
the enemies of Christ and his church; the red horse signifies war; the
black horse famine, and the pale horse, (which has death for its ruler) plagues
or pestilence.
Verse 9. Under the altar. Christ, as man, is this altar, under which
the souls of the martyrs live in heaven, as their bodies are here deposited
under our altars
'Verse 10. Revenge our blood. They ask not this out of hatred of fheir
enemies, but out of aeal for the glory of God, and a desire that the Lord
would accelerate the general judgment and the complete beatitude of alibis
elect.
CHAP. IX. Verse 1. A star fall. Some arch heretic.
Verse 3. Locusts. It is commonly understood of heretics. They are not
able to hurt the green tree; that is, such as have a lively faith working
by charity; but only the reprobate, they are represented as prepared for battle
as being ever ready to contend j they vfear counterfeit gold on their heads,


for all is but pretence and fiction: in shape they are as men, in smoothness
of speech as women ; in fury and rage against all that oppose them as lions;
their breasts and hearts as hard as iron ; they are full of noise arid shuffling ;
the sting of their pestiferous doctrine is worse than that of a scorpion; but
their reign is generally but for a short time.
CHAP. X. Verse 7. Declared, literally evangelized, to signify the good
tidings, agreeable to the gospel, of the final victory of Christ, and of that
eternal life which should he the reward of the temporal sufferings of the
servants of God.
CHAP. XI. Verse 3. My two witnesses. It is commonly understood
of Henoch and Elias. s
CHAP. XII. Verse I. A woman. The church of God. It may also,
by allusion, be applied to our Blessed Lady. The church is cloathed with
the sun, that is with Christ: she hath the moon, that is, the changeable
things of the world under her feet; and the twelve stars with which she is
crowned, are the twelve apostles ; she is in labour and pain, whilst she
brings forth her children, and Christ in them, in the midst of''afflictions and
persecutions.
CHAP. XIII. Verse 1. A beast. This first beast, with seven heads
and ten horns, is probably the whole company of infidels, enemies and per-
secutors of the people of God, from the beginning to the end of the world.
The sever, heads are seven kings, that is, seven kingdoms or empires, which
have exercised, or shall exercise, tyrannical power over the people of God:
of these, five were then fallen; viz. the Egyptian, Assyrian; Chaldean,
Persian, and Grecian monarchies : one was present, viz. the empire of
Rome; and the seventh and the chiefest was to come, viz. the great Anti-
christ and his empire. The ten horns may be understood of ten lesser per-
secutors.
Verse 3. One of his heads, §c- Some understand this of the mortal
wound which the idolatry of the Roman Empire (signified by the sixth head)
received from Constantine; which was, as it were, healed again by Julian
the apostate.
1 Verse 6 His tabernacle, §-c. That is, his church and his saints.
Verse 8. Slain from the beginning. In the fore-knowledge of God ;
inasmuch as all mercy and grace from the beginning, was given in view ot
histleath andpassion.
Verse 11. Another beast. This second beast with two horns may be tin-
derstood of the heathenish priests and magicians; the principal promoters
both of idolatry and persecution.
Verse 18. Six hundred sixty six. The numeral letters of his name shall
make up this number.
CHAP. XIV. Verse 8. Babylon. It is probable that here by the great Ba-
bylon is meant the city of the Devil, that is, the universal society of the
wicked : as Jerusalem is taken for the city and church of God,
Verse 15. Die inthe'Lord. It is understood of the martyrs, who die for
the Lord.
CHAP. XVI. Verse 16. Armagedont i. e. The hill of robbers.
CHAP. XVII. Verse 5-A mystery. That is, a secret, because what follows
of the name and title of the great harlot is to he taken in a mystical sense.
Ibid. Babylon. Either the city of the devil in general: or if this place
be to be understood of any particular city, Fagan Rome, which then and for
300 years persecuted the church, and was the principal seat both of empire
and idolatry.


'Verse 12. The beast which thou sawest. This beast, which supports Ru-
by lon, may signify the power of the devil; which was and is not, being
much abridged by the coming of Christ, but shall again exert itself under
Antichrist. The seven heads of this beast are seven mountains or empires,
instruments of his tyranny; of which five were then fallen, as above, Chap,
xiii. v. 1, The beast itself is said to be the eighth, and of the seven : be-
cause they will act under the devil, and by his instigation, so that his power
is in them all, yet so as to make up as it were, an eighth empire distinct
from them all.
Verse ,'2, Ten kings. Ten lesser kingdoms, enemies also of the church
of Christ, which nevertheless shall be made instruments of the justice of
God for the punishments of Babylon. Some understand this of the Goths,
Vandals, Hunns, and other barbarous nations, that destroyed the empire
of Rome.
CHAP. XTX. Verse 10. 1 fell before, #c. St. Augustin (1 20 contra.
Faust, c. 21.) is of opinion that this angel appeared in so glorious a manner,
that St. John took him to he God, and therefore Would have given him divine
honour, had not the angel stopped him, by telling him he was but his fellow-
servant. St. Gregory (Horn. 8. in Evang.) rather thinks that the veneration
offered by St. John was not divine honour, or indeed any other than what might
lawfully be given : but was nevertheless refused bv the angel, in consideration
of the dignity to which our human nature had been raised, by the incarna-
tion of the Son of God. and the dignity of St. John, an apostle, prophet,
and martyr. So far, at least, is certafn, that the Saint knew his duty too
well to offer the angel any idolatrous or superstitious worship.
CHAP. XX. V erse 2. Bound him for a thousand years- The power
of Satan has been very much abridged by the passion of Christ. For a
thousand years, that is, for the whole time of the New Testament; but es-
pecially from the time of the destruction of Babylon or Pagan Rome, till
the new efforts of Gog and Magog against the church, towards the end of
the world. During which time the souls of the martyrs and saints live
and reign with Christ in heaven, in the first resurrection, which is that
of the soul to the life of glory : as the second resurrection will be that of
the body, at the day of the general judgment. ,
CHAP. XXI. Verse I. The first heaven, and the first earth was gone;
being changed.' not as to their substance, but in their qualities.
CHAP. XXl r. Verse JO. For the time is at hand. That is,when compared
to eternity, all time and all temporal things vanish, but as to the time wheti
the chief predictions should come to pass, we have no certainty, as appears
by the different opinions, both of the ancient father?, and late interpreters.
Many think that most things set down from the 4th chapter to the end, will
not Ik fulfilled till a little time before the end of the world. Others are of
opinion, that a great part of them, and particularly the fall of the wicked
Babylon happened at the destruction of Heathen-Rome, and its persecuting
Heathen-Emperors. Of these interpretations see Aleazar in his long com-
mentary, see the learned Bossuet, Bishop of Meaux, in his treatise on this
Book, and P. Alleman, in his notes on the same Apocalypse, tom. 12-
who in his Preface says, that this, in a great measure, may be now looked
upon as the opinion followed by the learned men. In fine others think that
St. John’s design was in a mystical wav, by Metaphors and Allegories, to
represent the attempts and persecutions of the wicked against the servants of
God, the punishments that should in a short time fall upon Babylon, that


is, upon all the wicked in general: the eternal happiness and reward, which
God hath reserved for the pious inhabitants of Jerusalem, that is, for his
faithful servants, after their short trials and tribulations of this mortal life.
In the mean time we meet with many profitable instructionsand admonitions,
which we may easily understand : buttre have no certainty when we apply
these predictions to particular events : for St. Jerom takes notice, the Apo-
calypse has as many mysteries as words, or rather mysteries in every word.
Apacalypsis Joanrds tot habet Sacramenta quol perba—parum din, in verbis
singulis multipikes latent inlelligentioe, Ep ad Paulin, t. 4. p. 574. Edit.
Benedict
Verse 11. Let him hurt still. It is not .an exhortation, or license to go in
sin; hut an intimation, that how far soever the wicked may proceed, their
progress shall quickly end, and they must look to meet with propor-
tionable punishments.
The Following confession of Catholic faith was promulgaled
by Pope Pius IV. in 1564, the year after the close of the
Coucil of Trent.
“ I, N. N. with a firm faith believe and profess all and every one of
those tilings, which are contained in that creed, which'the holy Roman
church roaketh use of. To wit; I believe in one God, the Father Al-
mighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, of all things visible and invisi-
ble : and in one Lord Jesus Christ, the only begotten Son of God,
and bom of the Father before ages; God of God; Light of Light; true
God of true God ; begotten not made ; consubstantial to the Father by
wbomall tilings were made. Who for us Men and for onr salvation,
came down from heaven, and was incarnate hv the Holy Ghost of the
Virgin Mary, and was made man. Was crucified also for us tinder
Pontius Pilate ;he suffered and was buried. And the third day hearose
again, according to the scriptures : He ascended into Heaven : Sits at the
right hand of the Father, and is to come qgain with glory to judge the
living and the dead ; of whose kingdom there shall be no end. And in
ttye Holy Ghost, the Lord and life-giver who proceeds from the bather
and the Son: who together with the Father and the Son, is adored and
glorified, who spoke by the Prophets. And (I believe) one, holy. Ca-
tholic, and Apostolic Church. I confess one baptism for the remission
of sins : and I look for the resurrection of the dead, and the life of
the world to come. Amen.
I most stcdfastly admit and embrace apostolical and ecclesiastical
traditions,and all other observances and constitutions of the same church.
I also admit the holy scriptures, according to that sense which our
holy Mother the Church, has held, and does hold ; to which it belongs to
jddge of the true sense and interpretation of the scriptures ; neither will
I ever take and interpret them otherwise, than according to the unani-
mous consent of the Fathers.
I also profess that there arc truly and properly seven sacraments of the
new law, instituted by Jesus Christ, our Lord; and rtecessarv for the
salvation of mankind, though not all for every one : to wit, Baptism,
Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Extreme-unction, Order, and
Matrimony: And that they confer Grace. And that of these, Baptism,
Confirmation, and Order, cannot be reiterated without sacrilege. I


iibo receive and admit the received and approved Ceremonies of the
craments. o iUrCll,lUSed 1I! ’ the sole,nn administration of the a(oresaid sa-
I embrace and receive all and every one of the things whid. i,~
been defined and declared in the holy Connril K S » 6
Original.sin, and Justification. * 1 nCli °* lrc,,t ’ Col,Germil S
,1 profess likewise, that in the Mass there is offered to find * t, „„
and propitiatory sacrifice for the livingaml the head \, l( |thY P - rop< l T »
most holy Sacrament of the Eucharist” th>res t, ffiv™i?v . ? Ule
tiallv, the Body and Blood, together with ttYl Y’ Y- dsubstan *
Lord Jesus Christ, and that thert isirnde a ™ and , D I lv,n ' t y of our
stance of the bread into the Body, ami of the whole °Y Y vvho,e Bub '
wine into the Blood; which conversion the CatfiilicChiraSs !,' *
substantiation. I aiso confess tint , • ,u ] rc “ tails iian-
-ei.ed M and «•** »
bormnred invoeated, aSd'ufaTtheySpraym'to^GldVolYYaid
•that then Relics are to be had in veneration ’ ant
I most firmly assert, that the Images of Christ, of the Mother of r „ ,
ever \ irgm,aud also ot other Saints, ought to be had and.lt*; , God ’
that due honour and veneration is to be given them. * ed ’ and
I also affirm, that the power of Indulgences was left by Christ in t>
people! ' a " d ““ " m ““ 0f » -«* toaZZ
I acknowledge the Holy, Catholic, Apostolic Roman Church for
mother and mistress of all Churches: And I promise tr.m nlw r the-
the Bishop of Rome,-Successor to St. Pete. Prmce o?thi' enC f t(>
and Vicar of Jesus Christ. ’ C the A P°s‘lcs,
I likewise undoubtedly receive and profess all other
defined, and declared by the sacred Catons and S?
particularly by the Holy Council of Trent. And I ( O Y°" nCl S ’- ai " J
and anathematize all things contrary thereto and alt nY ’ rej . e . c t>
U'oCloo-d, lias condeiiuiott, r,j«ctaf ami
i, J>. IN 1 . do at this present, freelv urofess ami ’ . . ~
true Catholic Faith, without which no one’can be laved .*° And T
promise most constantly to retain and confess the «!?,, V T A 5
nnvioiated, with God’s assistance, to the end of my life. " C ei,hre aiid
• Mark xvi. 16. He that believcth, and is bantive,? .i, o ii i
hut he that believcth not, shall be condemned. P ’ ? be save< ’


JUST PUBLISHED,
BY
JOHN MURPHY;
SOLD BY J. J. NOLAN, 3, SUFFOLK-STREET , DUBLIN,
AN EVANGELICAL LIFE
.< OF
Our Saviour Jesus Christ; ,
Forming a Harmony of the Gospels, together with the
History of the Church until the promulgation ol the Decrees
of the Council of Jerusalem.
In an Appendix is given the evidence of the early Fathers of
the Church, on what were the Doctrines received from the
Apostles; with definitive Decrees of General Councils.
APPROBATION.
In obedience to the command of my venerated Archbishop.,
the Most Reverend Doctor Troy, I have attentively read, and
carefully examined a Compilation now preparing for publication
bv Mr. John Murphy ofLondon, entitled, “an Evangelical
Life of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, (forming a har-
mony of the four Gospels) together with the History of the
Church, until the promulgation of the Decrees of the Council
of Jerusalem.”
In the above compilation, so far from being able to discover
any thing the least objectionable, on the contrary, considering
the peculiar circumstances of the times, I feel a conviction,
not only of the utility, but even of the necessity of such a
work, to promote the salutary diffusion of Christian knowledge
among the lower classes of our communion. I consider it
also a valuable acquisition to those in a higher sphere cf life,
both as a school and family book.
MORGAN D’ARCY, P. P.
St. Audeon s-Place, St. Audcon’s, Dublin.
Ith Jan. 1820.
I recommend the above-mentioned Publication as a very
proper family and school-book.
J. T. TROY, D. D.
