

SUPPLEMENT
TO THE
QUEENSLAND
(iubi'rnmimt
OF SATURDAY, 26th OCTOBER, 1861.
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY,
YOL. ll.]
THURSDAY, 31st OCTOBER, 1861.
[No. 91.
■
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Brisbane, 28 th October, 1861.
rjniTE following Addresses were presented to
-L Governor Sir George Eorgttson Bowen,
G.C.M.G., on His Excellency’s recent official
visits to the towns of Ipswich, Gayndah, and
Dalby. Subjoined are Elis Excellency’s replies.
By His Excellency’s Command,
R. G. W. HERBERT.
ADDRESS OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE
IPSWICH SCHOOL OF ARTS, AT THE
OPENING OF THE NEW HALL OF
THAT INSTITUTION.
To His Excellency Sir G. F. Bowen, Knight
Grand Cross of St, Michael and St. George,
Captain-General and Governor-in-Chief of
the Colony of Queensland and its Depen-
dencies, and Vice-Admiral of the same,
&C., &G., &C, ' ;
May it please your Excellency,
W r e, the Committee of the Ipswich Mechanics’
School of Arts, beg to express the pleasure it
gives us to meet your Excellency at this im-
portant stage of our Society’s proceedings,
- A little more than seven months ago, while
congratulating ourselves on the auspicious
occasion of laying the foundation stone of the
building in which we are now assembled, we
ventured to express a hope that it would not
be long ere your Excellency should, with us,
hail the completion, and grace with your pre-
sence the opening of the Hall of the Ipswich
Mechanics’ School of Arts. We then had the
honor to present to your Excellency a brief
outline of the previous career and progress of
our institution, with a statement of the means
at our disposal for the proposed erection; and
it is a matter of gratification to us that the first
building erected in Queensland under the
auspices of your Excellency is one, the dis-
tinguished aim of which is to afford the widest
scope for the mental and moral improvement
of the people. This Hall, Sir, will stand to.
represent' an institution which has done more
than a little to make Great Britain what she is.
The popularization of literature and science,
associated as it is with the expansion of the
public mind, is one of the happiest features of
the day in which we live. Here all classes
can meet on a neutral territory, and lay their
political and religious differences aside ; and
here, to use your Excellency’s own happy illus-
tration, the Vulcan of labor may ally itself to
the Venus of intellect.
The entire cost of this building is T 150 0;
A5OO of this have yet to be raised, but the
Committee anticipate no difficulty in doing this,
as their appeals to the public have been so
liberally responded to. Several of the artizan
members of the institution have, in addition to
their donations, given their services gratuitously
for finishing and decorating the interior of the
building.
The Committee indulge the hope that this
institution will play no unimportant part in
the future of Ipswich and the surrounding
district. Lectures will be given in this Hall
from time to time by gentlemen competent to
instruct and entertain the public. Classes will
be formed for the more general diffusion of
scientific knowledge among the young. A
liberal supply of periodical and standard
literature will be always at hand for the use of
the members, while our fellow-townsmen will,
find in this Hall a spacious edifice equal to all
the wants of the community.
Your Excellency will have observed that the
present building is but a part of the original
intention of the Committee. It was proposed
at first that large class-rooms should be erected
along with the Hall, to facilitate the objects we
have already specified, but it was found desirable
to complete the present erection before proceed-
ing to a more extensive outlay. We do, how-
ever, confidently anticipate that, within no
distant period, the whole design will he accom-
plished, and the Hall and class-rooms will be
graced by an elegant exterior.


The present building Has been to the Com-
mittee a work of considerable anxiety; numerous
and protracted meetings have drawn largely
on the time of gentlemen, some of whom could
ill afford the sacrifice. It was felt that the
work was no ordinary one for a community so
scattered as our own ; but unity and co-opera-
tion among the members have made the w r ork
comparatively easy. The Committee will
speedily close their tenure of office, thankful
that they have been able in any way to promote
the interests of so noble an institution.
In conclusion, we beg, in the name of the
Society we have the honor to represent, to
express our,hearty appreciation of the manner
in which your Excellency consented to be
present during the proceedings of this clay.
[REPLY.]
Mr. President and Gentlemen,
The' Committee of the Ipswich School of
Arts having conveyed to me a wish that I
should preside at the inauguration of the New
Hall of the Society, I felt great satisfaction in
complying with their request. In a Colony
enjoying the privileges of Parliamentary and
Responsible Government, I need scarcely say
that the Governor, like the Crown which he
represents,, is of no party, and of no class. It
is one of my highest pleasures, as well as one
of my important duties, to take part in a cere-
mony such as that of’ this day, where all
religions denominations, all social classes, and
all political parties meet on the neutral ground
,of Literature,-Science, .and Education.
I thank you for the address which has been
read. Your account of the progress of your
Society, and of the rapid advancement to. com-
pletion of this noble Hall, of which I laid the
foundation stone little more than seven months
* ago, is very interesting, and highly creditable
to all concerned.
I am particularly struck with one fact which
yon notice, namely, that “ several of the
artizaoT members of the institution have, in
addition to their donations, given their services
'gratuitously for finishing and decorating the
interior of the building.” It was by a similar
self-denying labour of the working classes that
many of our English Cathedrals, and other
monuments of the piety and munificence of our
forefathers, were in great part erected.
And here, gentlemen, let me observe that I
give Avhat has been called “ the glorious title of
the working classes,” not to those only who
earn their living by the labour of the hand,’but
’to those also who earn their living by the often,
more anxious and wearing labour of the brain.
' In one or other sense, all men in Ipswich are
workingmen, and should belong to such an insti-
tution as the School of Arts promises to become.
Here the lawyer, the medical practitioner, the
merchant, the engineer, the tradesman, will
shortly, I hope, be enabled to gain, from an
extensive and well selected library, the inesti-
mable advantages of knowledge in literature
and science ; while they will also enjoy the
pleasure of social intercourse of the most inno-
cent and beneficial character, and have their
intellectual faculties wdietted, their industry
excited, and their exertions stimulated by
friendly emulation and combined study.
And as to the working mechanic—to what
excellent practical use may he not turn the
knowledge to be acquired in this Hall ? Lord
Brougham, one of the earliest founders and
promoters of Mechanics’ Institutes in England,
once declared, in an address delivered on an
occasion like the present, that “he placed
James Watt, the inventor of the steam engine,
as a model before all working mechanics,”
Watt was one of that class of workmen, many
of whom lam now addressing. If he had
laboured on at his trade as an instrument
maker, earning thirty shillings a week, without
studying the principles of science on which
those instruments are constructed, lie never
would have achieved that splendid invention
which gave such renown to his name, such
riches to his family, and such an ,increase to
the power and happiness of mankind. And all
other working mechanics, if they have not the
genius and the good fortune, may all have the
industry of Janies, Watt, and so acquire sound
education, and become much happier men, and
much more profitable workmen, both for them-
selves and others. And what sacrifice would
they have to make for these ends 2 They need
only set apart a few pence each week for their
subscription, to secure all the benefits- and all
the enjoyments of this excellent institution.
I will conclude these few and imperfect
observations with a quotation from that speech
of Lord Brougham to which I have already
referred I am sure,” he said, “ I should
do a very useless thing if I were here to
enlarge on the benefits of education. They are
admitted by all, even by those who formerly
sneered at them. Some people tell ns that
‘education won’t fill people’s bellies/ and trash
of that sort. Why, they might just as well
complain of the baker or the butcher, because
with their bread or beef they do not fill people’s
minds. But everyone knows that man lives
not by bread alone ; that knowledge leads to
skill; that skill leads to useful and lucrative oc-
cupation, and enables man to get the staff of this
mortal life, after getting the staff of that
immortal life which proves and strengthens his
better part —bis mind. Therefore it is not true
to assert that learning does not fill people’s
bellies, as some grossly and stupidly say; for
it puts the staff of common animal life within
our reach ; so the bread, and beef got through
its means ultimately-tend to support the mind,
inasmuch as, without the support of the animal
part, the incorporeal portion of onr nature would
have but a small chance of surviving. Now,
whatever improves men’s mind, tends to give
them sober and active habits; and clear lam
that,‘with the knowledge of the community, the
virtue of the community is certain to be in-
finitely promoted.”
ADDRESS OE THE INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN OF GAYNDAH AND
DISTRICT OF BURNETT.
To His Excellency Sir George Ferguson Bowen,
Knight Grand Cross of the Most Distin-
guished Order of St. Michael and St.
George, Captain-General and Gowernor-in-
Chief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Dependencies, and Yiec-iYlmiral of the
same, &c., &0., <fee..
May it please your Excellency,
We, the inhabitants of Gayndah and the Bur-
nett district, beg to tender your Excellency onr
heartfelt gratification at your Excellency’s
presence among ns ; and to assure your Excel-
lency of our loyal attachment towards Her Most
Gracious Majesty Queen Victoria, yourself.
Lady Bowen, and family.
We presume it must be apparent to your Ex-
cellency that this district, which you have
honored by visiting, is one of the most import-
ant in the whole ’ of that colony, Queensland,
over which your Excellency, as Representative
of our Gracious Queen, has the supervision. Its
yast area,—-its flocks and its herds, —its annual


contribution to tlie revenue df our splendid ter-
ritory, are facts with which your Excellency
must be well acquainted. The statistical re-,
turns, furnished by your Excellency’s Govern-
ment, of the stock and population of the Bur-
nett district, must have proved to your Excel-
lency’s satisfaction the great political status of
this district.
We hail your Excellency’s visit more particu-
larly, because it will be the means of eonvin-
eingly displaying through youf Excellency to
the Government our importance and our wants ;
and it must be a source of pleasure to your
Excellency to know that this most wealthy dis-
trict- —the Burnett —has tenderedmuch, towards,
and desired but little from, your Excellency’s
Treasury. We also rest in tbe probability of
seeing, at no distant date, tlie capabilities of
the banks of our Eiver Burnett opened up, and
other projects for our progress promulgated by
your Excellency’s Government
Centrally situated in tbe heart of the greatest
pastoral district of the whole Colony, Gayndah
and its approaches desire your Excellency’s
most kind consideration.
Your Excellency will, convey with yon the
warmest sympathies of a loyal people.
(Here follow the Signatures .).
[REPLY.]
Gentlemen,
I thank you with my whole heart for the
very gratifying welcome with which I have
been received in the town of Gayndah, and
throughout the Burnett district. Cordially as I
have been greeted on my visits to every part of
this Colony, I have nowhere been greeted with
more genuine feeling or with more good taste
than here. '
It is with much satisfaction that I have
listened to the loyal and dutiful address which
has just been read. I prize it highly —in tbe
first place, on account of the affectionate respect
which it breathes towards the person and Go-
vernment of our Gracious Sovereign; and
secondly, on account of the good wishes which
it expresses towards Lady Bowen and myself.
I congratulate you on the position which
your district holds, among the richest and most
important of Queensland. Numerous as are
the signs of wealth and prosperity which
already exist, they are, I trust, only the germs
of what the future, under the favour of Heaven,
may have in store for this town, and for the
territory of which it is the centre.
You have rightly interpreted the main object
of my official tours. The beauty and novelty of
the scenery, and the loyalty and hospitality
with which I am everywhere greeted, combine
to afford me. sincere pleasure ; but these are not
merely tours of pleasure or visits of ceremony.
The local information which I thereby gain
enables me to lay the wants and wishes of the
inhabitants of the several districts before my
constitutional advisers in the Executive Council,
and, through, them, before tlie Parliament of
the Colony. All contribute to the public re-
venue ; all have a right to an equitable share in
its expenditure ; but, Gentlemen, you may rest
assured that it is well-nigh Impracticable to
secure that equitable expenditure, unless the
several townships ' and country districts assist
the efforts and enquiries of the central Govern-
ment and of the central Legislature, hy forming
themselves into Municipalities. Whatever
Ministers may he in office, it is physically
impossible for three or four gentlemen at the
seat of Government —wherever that seat of
Government may he fixed—to ascertain fully
the requirements of the various parts of a Co-
lony many times larger than England, or to
carry out public works so speedily or so effi-
ciently as they could be executed under tbe
immediate, supervision of Local Councils.
. Under tlie provisions of an Act passed in the
recent Session of the Queensland Parliament,
every township and rural district can secure, hy
a simple form of Incorporation, not only large
subsidies from the general revenue, hut also a
considerable share of the proceeds of every Land
Sale within its boundaries. I would strongly
advise you to take steps for establishing a Mu-
nicipality, in Gayndah; and for extending to
the whole district of Burnett a system of local
self-government, analagous to the county or-
ganizations of England and of America.
In conclusion, I beg again to thank you for
your hearty welcome, and for your loyal address.
It is very pleasing to find that distance, far from
diminishing, seems rather to increase the attach-
ment with which you look up to our beloved
Queen, and to the free institutions of the Mother
Country. I trust that time will only add fresh
vigour to affections so natural, and so desirable to
cherish, and so productive of strength and of
honour both to this colony and to the Empire at
large.
111.
ADDRESS OE THE INHABITANTS OE
THE TOWN OE DALBY.
To His Excellency Sir George Eerguson Bowen,
Eight Grand Gross of the Most Distin-
guished Order of St. Michael and St.
George, Captain General and Governor-in-
Cliief of the Colony of Queensland and its
Dependencies, and Vice-Admiral of the
same, &0., <fec., &c.
May it please your Excellency,
We, the inhabitants of the Town of Dalby
in public meeting assembled, beg to approach
your Excellency with feelings of the greatest
loyalty and respect, and though,we are few in
nnmber in comparison to other townships
over which your mild authority extends, we
beg to assure your Excellency we are in no
way behind, nor will we admit ourselves to be
surpassed, in our loyalty to our Most Gracious
Sovereign, which we hope to illustrate hy our
respect for her excellent Representative.
We consider this day an era in our history,
that we should have been deemed worthy of a
visit from tbe Representative of our Queen,
which event, but a few short years ago, could
not have entered into the thoughts of the most
sanguine amongst us. And we hail this aus-
picious day as a commencement of a new life,
wherein the barrier existing between the Throne
and the Peasant has been partially removed.
No doubt your Excellency has seen enough
of the fine country, of which this town is the
centre, to enable you to predict the future impor-
tance of this place, as a dep6t wherein the pro-
duce of the great interior will arrive, to be
forwarded again to the Capital; and we would
urge upon your Excellency the necessity of
assisting us hy your powerful support in estab-
lishing a good and permanent road whereby
alone such great results can he attained. Your
Excellency has now an opportunity of personally
inspecting the state of our present means of
access, which, so long as it exists in its present
state, must compel us, though reluctantly, to
lag behind our more fortunate neighbours.
We must not, however, forget to thank your Ex-
cellency’s Government for what has alieady
been done for us in that respect, by the passing
of tlie Tramway Bill, and tlie granting of sums
sufficient for * the erection of bridges . over
dangerous crossing-places, and which, no doubt,


will in future prevent the loss of many valu-
able lives. These are small beginnings, out of
which we hope to reap great results, and which
may eventually place this town in the proud
position of one of the finest cities of Queens-
land.
In conclusion, we earnestly beg that your
Excellency, when you depart from among us,
may be sensible, of the interest the people of
Dalby will always take in your welfare and
happiness ; and may the great Architect of the
Universe, who permits the foundation of large
and noble cities to be laid in the midst of
deserts, and who orders and disposes of the wills
of our Eulers, as it seems best to His omniscient
Majesty, so direct and guide your future ac-
tions that the Governor and the governed shall
live in unity and peace, and that the wilderness
shall rejoice and blossom as the rose.
For the Meeting,
Fbedebick William Eoche,
Chairman.
Dalby, 12th October, 1861.
[EEPLY.]
Gentlemen,
I tender you my best thanks for the terms
in which you have expressed your sentiments
of loyalty to the Queen, and 1 of regard for
myself, as Her Majesty’s Eepresentative.
Ib is with great satisfaction that I renew my
acquaintance with the Darling Downs, and that
I find as hearty a welcome at Dalby as that
with which I was 'greeted on my former visit
to the sister towns of Toowoomba, Warwick,
and, Drayton,
The practical information which I gain on
my official tours cannot fail to be of important
service to me in, the discharge of my duties.
My experience leads me to precisely the same
conclusion as that to which you have arrived#
viz., that the one urgent need of this district,
as of the Colony generally, is the improvement
of the internal communications. This, indeed,
is, in all countries, probably, the most sure sign
of material progress. In contrasting two pe-
riods of English history, Lord Macaulay brings
prominently forward, as the most striking proof
of advancement, the fact that “ swifter carriages
rolled over smoother roads.”
I entirely agree, also, with yonr anticipations
as to the benefits which must accrue to Dalby, to
the magnificent district of which it is the centre,
and to the vast territory to the westward, from
the completion of the projected Tramway. In
common with the Government and the Par-
liament, I take a keen interest in the success
of that work, and rejoice that it should have
been undertaken in the wmy that similar public-
works are best constructed, viz. by private
enterprise, aided by legislative sanction.
Everywhere throughout this, as on my pre-
vious journeys, I have been welcomed with a
warmth of hospitality, and with expressions of
personal respect and esteem, which it will be
my sincere endeavour to merit. The future,
may possibly belie your expectations as to my
ability to serve you; it cannot belie them as to
my desire so to do.
In conclusion, I cordially reciprocate your
good wishes, and. earnestly pray that the.
blessing of Heaven may shower health and
prosperity on your homes.
By Authority : From T. P. Pugh’s' Printing Office, George-street, Brisbane,
