

) SUPREME COURT.
MACFAELANE V. MU UNIN.
CORRESPONDENCE, &c„
PROM THE PUBLIC JOURNALS.
PRINTED BY HANSON AND BENNETT, “EMPIRE' 1 OFFICE,
1860.




CORRESPONDENCE FROM THE PUBLIC JOURNALS,
The following correspondence, &c., appeared during the last month
in the columns of the Empire and other Sydney journals, and is now
published for the information of Honorable Members of the House of
Assembly, on the occasion of Petitions being presented for a Reform
in the Supreme Court; —
LAW. '
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
g IR The vast "importance attached by the Press and the public
generally to steam postal and telegraphic communication, shews most
unmistakably, the immense value of despatch in all business matters ;
and that time is, in reality, money.
How much, more so must be the value of expedition in legal
matters, which are usually ruinously expensive and distressing.
This portion of the world seems to be behind all others in respect to
the administration of speedy justice. The courts are occupied with
perpetual arguments or new trial motions, appeals, &c , on suits that
have been decided over and over again; a practice injurious alike to
plaintiffs and defendants, and calculated solely to gratify the spleen of
one party to the suit for the time being. When new trials are refused
by the full court, frivolous appeals are often made to the Privy Council
of England, merely with a view of exhausting the means of less
wealthy opponents. This is certainly a most unfortunate position of
affairs, and almost a denial of justice to men of moderate means.
Surely the Courts of this colony are competent to administer ju ■•■ e
to litigants without the assistance of the Privy Council, which, at best,
is open to wealthy men only, and is generally abused by them, to the
injury of others. I write from experience : I have suffered severely
by the acts of an agent in Sydney : I sued him in the Supreme Cpurt
at great sacrifice of time and money, and obtained a verdict against him for
balance of account and damages to the amount of upwards i-3400.
The defendant being a wealthy man, he has resorted to the practices
pointed out, and has hitherto, by new trial motion, appeals to England,
&c., avoided payment of the verdict, and entailed upon me heavy
additional losses, and now on the verge of 1860 I find myself without
any immediate prospect of redress.


Now, Sir, I beg of you to publish this letter, and use your
endeavours to get stop put to such a bad state of things. Might not
tne contemplated departure of the Chief Justice for England be turned
to account in these matters, and the presence of such a high authority
in England be made useful in getting a reform ?
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
J. S. MAGFAKLANE.
Sydney, 20th December, 1859.
[The monstrous evil of which our correspondent complains—the
delay or rather denial of justice consequent on the endless arguments,
new trial motions, &c., in the Supreme Court, can scarcely be illus-
trated in a stronger manner than is shown by reading the term paper
published in the Empire of Monday, the 12th instant. It appears
from that document that almost the entire business of the present
term is to be occupied by “ New Trial Motions.” There are three or
four cases in which judgment is to be delivered, and about half-a-
dozen demurrers and special cases, while the number of “ New Trial
Motions” is sixty-six ! The blame of this state of things, rests in our
opinion, entirely with the Judges, and mainly with the Chief Justice.
We should deeply deplore the necessity for interference with
gentlemen in the position of their Honors. But unless they are able
and willing to apply a remedy, it will be absolutely necessary for the
Legislature to take some steps in the matter. The neglect, remisness,
unwillingness or incompetency of the Judges to deal with the
deplorable state of things wnich now exists, and which threatens to go
on from bad to worse, are more highly detrimental to the interests of
the community than would be the most gross corruption on their part.
We have no hesitation in putting the saddle on the right horse. No
false delicacy should prevent the press speaking out on this matter.
We again repeat that nine-tenths of the wasting delays, the endless
applications for new trials, the sickening length of pleadings, which
consume the time and money of suitors, is attributable to the conduct
of the Judges. They have the power, if they have the will, to apply
a remedy. The case of our correspondent, unfortunately, is not a
singular one. Although we have no personal knowledge whatever of
either of theparties'tothe suit, we have paid some attention to the reports
of the case, as published from time to time during its various stages,
and we unhesitatingly say, that the conclusion we have come to is, that
it would be preferable to suffer almost any amount of wrong than be
drawn into a civil action, to be tried in the Supreme Court of this
colony. The law, as at present administered in that Court, is a terror
to the honest man, and a refuge to evil doers. If under the democratic
coi st tution which we now have we cannot mend this state of things,
we had much bel'er have a despotism at once.]


NOTICE.
MACFARLANE V. MURNIN.
VERDICT FOR PLAINTIFF £3420.
In consequence of not being able to prosecute the above suit, I hereby
offer it for sale. The history and position of the cause is briefly as
follows:—Early in 1856 I commenced proceedings against Mr. M. E.
Murniu for the recovery of money I considered he unjustly withheld
from me in 1854 and beginning of 1855; and in April, 1857, I
obtained a verdict against him for £3420 —thereupon, Mr. Murnin
applied for a new trial, which, after a delay of some months, was
granted on certain conditions ; these conditions Mr. Murnin refused to
comply with, and appealed to England for a new trial on terms which
the full Court would not allow. To save the expense of an appeal to
the Privy Council, I at once offered in writing to Mr. Murnin’s
solicitors to forego the verdict I had obtained, and go again before the
Court and another jury; and agree that the verdict which might then
be given should be a final ssttlement of the cause. In place, however,
of accepting a new trial Mr. Murnin published his own statement of
accounts, &c., and solicited merchants and business people to suspend
their judgment till after the result at a new trial, which he professed
his great anxiety to get, and in the face of such professions he has
managed for nearly three years to avoid either a new trial or a paymant
of the verdict.
Finding that I am unable to undertake the expenses of journeying to
and from New Zealand, to follow the case through all its tortuous
proceedings, I am desirous of selling the debt, believing that a resident
in Sydney may be found who can cope with Mr. M. E. Murnin, and
bring the case to an end. Mr. Murnin is a Director in several Public
Institutions, and reputed wealthy, and does not plead inability to pay. .
Apply to
J. S. MACFARLANE,
Metropolitan Hotel.
23rd December, 1859.
N. 8.—1 am informed, on good authority, that the appeal to the Privy
Council, which I declined to oppose, has never been sent out of the
colony.
« s
LAW. JUSTICE.
10 THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sir —The statements of Mr. Macfarlane in an advertisement in
your columns of Saturday last are really alarming, and go far to con-
vince me that the highest tribunal of the colony is abused to such an


extent as to render it inefficient in administering justice, for surely no
man will try to gainsay that it is almost a denial of justice to a suitor
to be treated in the manner therein pointed out. The cause of Mac-
farlane v. Murnin was tried before a special jury of twelve; two
barristers and one attorney on each side ; it occupied the court six
whole days ; the verdict was unanimous—was highly approved by the
presiding judge, and, I think, by nearly every person who heard the
evidence, which was given by witnesses of unimpeachable integrity and
well known respectability. Yet the unfortunate plaintiff is still a suitor
for justice, and the verdict is a dead letter.
I calculate that the amount of the verdict against Mr. Mumin in
April, 1857, was, with costs, about £4OOO, and I calculate that that
sum in Mr. Murnin’s hands till now is possibly increased to above
£6000; hence is manifest a substantial reason for discreditable new
trial motions. The chances of death during a term of years may also
he a consideration with most men.
The expenses of new trial motions, &c., are trifling in comparison
to the large sums gained by such proceedings, which are generally the
means of enabling debtors to evade payment of just debts, and allow
them improperly to have the use of other people’s money.
In my humble opinion, if the judges would so far respect the verdict
of every jury as to order the amount- awarded to be paid into court,
or paid in accordance with the verdict, on security being given to abide
the issue of a new trial when it was thought proper, a fatal blow would
he struck at the root of existing evils.
Special jurors likewise have grave causes for complaint. Their
time is to them most valuable, being generally business men with large
establishments to superintend. They are sworn to give a true verdict,
and notwithstanding their utmost efforts to do justice as sworn to do,
they have the mortification to witness their verdicts rendered worthless,
and their time taken over and over again with impunity—a state of
things that will not be tolerated much longer.
A MERCHANT.
Sydney, 26th December, 1859.
LAW.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sir The more publicity that is given to the delays and consequent
expense of the law, the more good service you will do the public;
therefore, pray afford room in your journal for correspondence from
parties actually suffering. You can surely, in this dull time, spare
space, and occasionally by a leading article, assist in forming a public
opinion the present unjust system, with a view to a speedy
reform. The Government will not attempt an alteration, so beneficial


to the public and injurious to the profession, without public opinion
obliges them. If we expect anything from the judges and the
profession, we shall be disappointed. At home Law Reform has been
a popular subject for several years past, and a little is done every
year; but the interests of the profession are so strong, and so well
guarded, that the Government cannot make great changes. I, with
many others* am the victim of a Chancery suit. A short and simple
will —the testator dividing his property among his children —appointing
three executors who would not agree as to the realising and dividing
the property according to the will. Three years and a-half the
executors kept the property in their own hands, when an application
was made to the Court of Chancery to do what the executors had
failed in performing. This Supreme Court has taken upwards of eight
years to carry out the testator’s written instructions in distributing his
property, and have not yet done. it. Death has taken two of the
family—insolvency two of the executors, each for years possessed of
part of the property of the estate ; and others of the family driven to
seek their fortunes in other countries —law expenses swallowing up the
estate every year. When all is spent, no doubt, there will be a
judgment and closing the suit. This state of the law is a disgrace to
the Government of a civilised community. I pray you, and every one
of you, to use your talents to get an alteration in this state of the law.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant.
W. N.
December 29th, 1859.
[We shall be happy to make room in our columns at all times for
the purpose of exposing and denouncing the manner in which the
business of the Supreme Court is carried on, or rather obstructed. It.
is an enormity which is disgracing the colony, and impoverishing
hundreds of families. It is astounding, in a community in the enjoy-
ment of railways, electric telegraphs, and all the other advantages of
modern invention and civilisation, that the whole property of the
colony—its highest temporal interests—should be subject to, and
frequently sacrificed by an antiquate and absurd system of precedents
and forms, which had their origin in a country sixteen thousand miles
away, in the darkest period of the middle ages—that here in Australia,
in the latter half of the 19th century, we still see these absurd legal
technicalities (like the ridiculous costume of horse hair and bombazine)
adhered to with a pertinacity which would be laughable if the interests
at stake were not so serious. A crying evil connected with this
fearful system of delay and obstruction —from which then is no escape—
is the useless waste of the time of jurors. A man has some chance of
avoiding the clutches of the Supreme Court as a suitor, by quietly
submitting to be cheated and wronged, rather than become a party to


an action there—and this course, we have reason to know, is frequently-
followed, even where large interests were involved. But a juror has
absolutely no means of escape. He is obliged to leave his business,
and to sit day after day, patiently listening to the legal windbags
urging endless technical and trivial arguments which have not the
slightest reference to the merits of the case ; he is doomed to listen to
decisions which decide nothing, and to antiquated precedents which
don’t apply. If all this sacrifice of time and money by the juryman
was of the slightest benefit to his neighbours, the inconvenience would
in most instances be cheerfully submitted to. But this is not the case.
The twelve active and intelligent men of business, to whom time is
money, sit there with almost the positive certainty that their verdict,
when given, will not influence the ultimate decision in the slightest
degree. They know perfectly well that while the parties to the suit
have a farthing to spend in law, and the inclination so to spend it, the
case will drag its slow length along in spite of all the verdicts of all
the jurors in the country. Trial by jury in civil action is, at present,
only a solemn farce—a useless waste of time. After watching the
proceedings of the Supreme Court for nearly twenty years, we have
come to the deliberate conclusion, that if its doors were closed
altogether, the public would be benefitted rather than otherwise ; and
if some alteration is not effected, the sooner it is shut up the better.
The last term of the Supreme Court, ending on the 24th ultimo,
commenced with a list of sixty-six new trial motions; of these about
half a dozen cases were disposed of—that is, advanced a stage. At
this rate the whole of these new trial motions —supposing no others
were added to the list —would probably be got through by the end of
1864. A dishonest debtor, against whom a verdict has been obtained,
may thus calculate, with tolerable certainty, that by moving for a new
trial at the present time, he will be able to set his creditor at defiance
for the next three or four years at least, and probably a good deal
longer.]
LAW.
The Law, as at present administered in the Supreme Court, is a terror to honest men
and a reluge to evil doers.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE,
Sir —The above startling assertion appeared in your issue of the 21st
instant. On reading it 1 was rather indignant and annoyed, as I felt
that such an accusation could not be justified. Since then, however, an
advertisement and additional correspondence published in your columns,
coupled with the result of inquiries instituted by myself, oblige me, most
reluctantly, to admit that your assertion is only a melancholy truth, and
I am now convinced that the Court is worse than useless, and that
unless a remedy is applied, it had better be shut up as far as regards
the recovery of debts.


I will give the following case of my own as a sample of what the
Court is doing for suitors :
About a year back I obtained a verdit for about ,£6OO, for goods
supplied. Notice of appeal for a new trial was then given by the
defendant, and there the matter rested until the other day, when, on
inquiry caused by your remarks, I found that I owed about £4OO costs,
which I paid. My solicitors now tell me that the last year has been
lost in waiting for the Court to hear the argument for a new trial, and
they cannot lead me to expect better treatment than that of the
plaintiff in the case of Macfarlane v. Murnin.
Well, Sir, if lam to be so treated, it will be better for me to add the
£4OO costs to the verdict, abandon both, and let the dishonest debtor
escape. Why, in three or four years the £4OO I have just paid, would
in my business do more for me than the verdict and costs will amount
to ; so I am already a positive loser by the verdict; and what would be
the result if I could not afford to pay the £4OO ?
In addition to all this, it is quite likely that my debtor will, before
the end of the suit, fly to the refuge of the Court in its insolvent
jurisdiction, and thereby plunder me of large additional costs.
I have been years in business in Sydney, and often a special juror,
but never till now did I imagine that suitors for justice could be so
grossly abused, and trampled upon with impunity by dishonest
knaves.
I am, Sir,
A SUBSCEIBEE.
[lt is quite certain that “ Subscriber” would have been much better
off, if he had lost the verdict, than he is now. He would have been
still better off if he had never brought his action at all. It is to be
hoped that he has gained wisdom by experience ; and that, in future
he will know better than attempt to recover his money by an action in
the Supreme Court. We advise him to abandon both verdict and
costs.
LAW.—MACFARLANE V MURNIN
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sir —The following is the concluding paragraph of the judgment
delivered by his Honor the Chief Justice, as published in the Empire
on 2nd July, 1858, when a new trial was granted in the above
cause: —The verdict is not so supported, or on a full review of the
circumstances so satisfactory as to entitle us to refuse the defendant a
new trial, especially in an affair of character, and in a case involving
points of law of great difficulty, as well as questions of facts of such
complication. Yet in accordance with the principles so often enunciated
by us on similar occasions, and now so familiar to every practised lawyer,


the result must he considered rather that of the exercise of a discretion,
than as a concession of a strictly legal right.”
From the above extract I conclude that a new trial was given to the
defendant, not as a legal right, but as a matter of favour, to enable him
to redeem his character. In granting such a concession it appears to
me that the Court evinced a very tender regard of Mr. Murnin’s
character, while it overlooked the respect due to the oaths of the
twelve jurors, brother merchants of the defendant, who had spent six
whole days in thoroughly investigating the case, and who had
deliberately given their verdict against him.
It is quite possible that the best of motives may have induced their
Honors to grant a new trial, but I fear that they were misled by the
professions and protestations of counsel on the new trial motion
argument, and from a belief that the defendant really desired a new'
trial in accordance with the published and often repeated assertion of
himself and his counsel. However, it is now apparent to all business-
men with whom I have conversed on the subject, that the new trial
granted to the defendant (but which he has not availed himself of), has
been made the means of entailing on the plaintiff an enormous amount
of loss of time, and caused him infinite trouble and expense.
Surely it is the duty of their Honors not only to discourage such
practices, but to put an entire stop.to the unnecessary prolongation of
all suits, so that all men may be made amenable to the law ; or at all
events make recovery of debts possible within a period of as many
months as it now takes years.
The Empire of this morning convinces me that you take a great
interest in the present disgraceful state of the Supereme Court,
consequently I trouble you with this, as it may be worthy of appearing
in your columns.
I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
A SUITOR.
2nd January, 1860.
JUSTICE V. THE CHIEF JUSTICE.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE EMPIRE.
S JR —I am one of those who would grant Sir Alfred Stephen the year’s
leave of absence he solicits ; but I would have a condition attached to
it that would be a boon to the community, a benefit to the judges
themselves, and remove a stigma from the administration of justice.
It must be admitted that his Honor and Mr. Justice Thcrry have
been mainly instrumental in causing the present arrears of business in
the Supreme Court; whether by a false leniency to unsuccessful suitors,
a too nice regard for the character of persons whom the verdict of a
j ury might have damaged, or from any other cause not for me to


surmise. It is sufficient to say that the granting so many new trials
on what appears to me very slight grounds, has induced nearly all
parties to whom the verdict of a jury has been adverse, who could get
a barrister to certify (and who could not ?), to give notice of a motion
for a new trial, until the new trial list is swelled out to such a fearful
extent that justice cannot be obtained without many years delay, and
then only at a ruinous cost. In the case of Macfarlane v. Murnin, a
new trial was granted as a favour, on payment of costs. To this I
demur; the defendant was entitled to anew trial, if justice had not
been done without payment of costs, for law and justice should
have no favourites ; and unless the Court were perfectly satisfied
that great injustice had been done, the Court ought not to have set
aside the verdict of as respectable and intelligent a jury of twelve
citizens as ever sat in that Court. The condition on which I would
allow the Chief Justice leave of absence with his very handsome
full salary is, “ That the new trial list shall first be disposed of, and a
clean bill of health presented to the new Judge.” This, at first sight,
appears a formidable matter to get over, seeing there are sixty new
trial cases to be argued, and allowing two days only to each case, it
would take upwards of four mouths to dispose of them, but this formid-
able list can be made to vanish in less than ten days, if our judges will
follow the recent decisions on new trial motions in England, as the
following cases will show : —ln the Court of Exchequer, as reported
in 5 Weekly Reporter Exchequer 85, the Chief Baron said, on an
application for a new trial in the very recent case of Pristucci v.
Turner—“ It may be now and then that what is called injustice is done
by not having a second trial, but where the specific matter in issue
was actually tried by a jury, we think it is matter of great danger to
revive the very same question because greater light can be let in upon
it, and the jurymen have further evidence presented to them, unless
it is clearly made out that there was some case of fraud or perjury on,
the part of the plaintiff. New trial refused.”
The judges in Hobart Town in the case of Solomon v. Bell,, on an
application for a new trial on the second of last month, referred to the
above decision and said, “ There was no ground for imputing fraud or
perjury, and we think, therefore, that, we ought not to grant a new
trial, or to encourage the trying over again a case where the specific
matter proposed to be tried again was before the jury, but a larger
amount of evidence had been discovered in support of the defendant’s
case, New trial refused.”
Let our judges make it distinctly understood, that unless fraud or
perjury can be proved, new trials will not be granted. Then Justice
will once more be obtainable, even “ Macfarlane” may get a glimpse
of her in the long distance, and Sir Alfred may depart by next month’s
steamer without shedding a tear for the fate of those unfortunate plain-
tiffs he had left behind him.
JUSTITIA.


(From the Chiistian Pleader, January 7.)
Supreme Court. —lt is not enough that the men composing the courts
should be incorrupt and incorruptable, the courts themselves must be
so constituted as to enable the men to do their duty, unembarrassed,
and with a rectitude of issue so obvious that none shall be able to
dispute it. If the courts are ill-constituted, the most inviolable
integrity of purpose will not secure equity to suitors. Interminable
delays, or advantage taken, by wicked suitors, of uncertain or frail
decisions, will defeat justice as surely as dishonesty of purpose. These
principles are so plain that they will not be disputed. The question
then arises, how far they are exemplified in the Department of Public
Justice in New South Wales. We have watched the press to ascertain,
with as much truth as possible, the actual state of justice in this
colony. Our conclusion is, that there is something fearfully wrong in
the whole matter. Let it not be supposed that we mean to accuse the
superior judges of corruption. Nothing of the kind. We are aware of
no instance that looks like actual or virtual bribery. We believe the
men are high above it. Even of wilful prejudice or passion it would
not be very easy, in any known instances, to convict them. We have
no doubt of their honour. Infirmity there may have been in given
cases, but this is the strongest supposition. And yet honourable as
we believe our judges to be, there is, somehow or other, something so
unsatisfactory in the results of their administration, that no one can
seriously look to their courts for justice with any degree of assurance
that it will come. Among the questionable causes of this bad condition
is the practice now become habitual, of granting new trials in civil
cases. When we look at the vastly greater importance of diameter
and liberty than of property, and especially when we consider the
incalculable value of human life so often involved in criminal trials, we
are utterly at a loss to perceive why new trials should be granted in
civil, and withheld in criminal cases. The very notion is an outrage
to justice. So rigorous is the law in the one case, that a man who
has been convicted on false evidence, or by a blundering jury, and
afterwards demonstrated to be innocent, must be pardoned of a crime
he never committed—he cannot be legally pronounced guiltless. And
yet on the other hand, new trials may be granted, almost without
end, upon some petty property case that is scarcely worth the trouble
of trying it at all, so that justice shall never be reached till either the
plaintiff or defendant is ruined with costs. Some correspondence in
last Tuesday’s Empire shows this case plainly. We have seen besides
so many instances of this sort, that our very heart has been made sick
with the contemplation of New South Wales justice. Looking at all
bearings of the facility with which new trials are obtained, we cannot
help feeling that far less mischief would be done if they were withheld
altogether. No honest suitor is the better, as the case stands, for
coming to the Supreme Court with his complaint. His verdict is


rarely of any value; or at least is never reliable. The word of
“ twelve honest” men is cheaper than sea-weed. The judge directs
without confidence that his direction will not be overruled, and the
verdict quashed in consequence. And in all this nobody is the gainer
but the dishonest debtor, who gains and time uses his adversary’s money a
little longer, and the lawyers whose greatest profit arises, not from
justice, but from protracted suits. The legal profession itself is thus
made a disreputable thing. We have only room further to say at
present, that this state of things is notoriously iniquitous, dishonourable
to those who maintain it, a pure abuse of the courts, an entire derange-
ment to the well-being of commercial society, and an abomination in the
sight of God. It is one of the proofs how low moral principle is in New-
South Wales. But there are many other things to say upon the general
subject.
(From the Empire, January 9.)
Among the extraordinary instances of popular delusion which prevail
in the present day, there is not a more unfounded one than the
hallucination of the people of New South Wales when they imagine
themselves in possession of the benefit of trial by jury. Trial by jury
in civil action—startling as the assertion may seem to those who have
paid little attention to the matter —has no practical existence in this
city. It still retains its place in theory; but, except indeed as a mere
legal and almost useless ceremony, it has fallen into comparative
desuetude ; and a jury promises soon to occupy much the same position
for any practical purpose as was lately filled by the venerable names of
John Doe and Richard Roe. The functions of jurors have been
usurped by the judge. Their verdicts, instead of being enforced, are
practically ignored on all occasions. It is true that as a matter of form
the solemn farce is still gone through of swearing in a dozen good men
and true, on trials in the Supreme Court, “ to give true verdicts
according to the evidence.” It is true that, during the year which
has just closed, 1144 special jurors were summoned to attend at the
temple of justice, at the top of King-street. It is true that those who
were impannelled sat patiently day after day, listening to the arguments
and evidence in the causes before them—sifting and weighing the
matters deposed to on either side, with as much attention and anxiety
as if the issue of the case really depended on their decision—and
giving their verdicts accordingly. This, no doubt, accounts to some
extent for the delusion which we have above referred to. But it is not
true that, as a general rule, these verdicts have any effect whatever on
the ultimate decision of the case. A few instances could, no doubt, be
produced by an industriously inclined advocate of the present system,
where, after the delivery of a verdict, no further legal steps had been
taken by the losing party. But such cases are exceptional, and are,


probably, mostly the result of want of means to fee attorneys ami
counsel to carry the matter further. Where the means and the will
exist—which they seem to do in a vast majority of cases—most
assuredly there will be no obstacle thrown in the way by the Court.
Rather the reverse. Every inducement is held out to parties to a suit
to continue, so long as their means will allow, the interesting process of
ruining each other. When this very satisfactory consummation has
been achieved, on one side or both, the case of course ends. The legal
combatants are compelled to give in from sheer exhaustion. All this
must be very satisfactory to the gentleman in horse-hair wigs. They
cannot be expected to complain of the matter. They are very much
in the position of the boys in the fable—it may be death to the frogs,
but it is good fun to them. We have no wish whatever to cast blame
on them. They simply do as others would do if placed in a like
position. They cannot be expected to go out of their way to injure
their own interests. They are not answerable for the state of things
which exists ; but they cannot be blind to the fact, that that state of
things is disgraceful alike to the intelligence and the character of the
community of which they form a by no means unimportant section.
But, bad as the system is in most respects, it has one merit, and that
merit, in legal eyes, hides a multitude of sins. It is profitable to the
profession.
Who then, it will be asked, is to blame for the deplorable state of
things at which it appears we have arrived ? Who is to blame for the
positive denial of justice which it involves ? Who is to blame for the
poverty and distress it has brought, and is still bringing, on scores of
suitors and their families ? Who is to blame for the disgrace it is bringing
on this community in the eyes of the neighbouring colonies and of England ?
Who is to blame for most of the misery resulting from wasted energies
and hope deferred, which the involuntary victims of the legal
Juggernaut are suffering ? We have no hesitation in stating that, in our
opinion, the parties most to blame are the Judges ; and that of the
Judges, the Chief Justice is beyond all comparison the most culpable.
The case of Macfaelane v. Muenin is probably familiar, in name
at least, to most of our readers. It has been before the Supreme
Court for years, and has frequently been referred to of late by
correspondents whose letters have appeared in our columns For this
reason, and not because it differs in any essential particular from a
dozen others which might be named, we notice it, as illustrating the
usurpation of the proper province and functions of the jurymen by the
judge. This unwarranted setting aside of the verdicts of juries on
frivolous grounds, or no grounds at all, is at the bottom of most of the
mischief. The action of Macfaelane v. Muenin was first tried in the
Supreme Court about four years since. It was heard before a special
jury of twelve, and occupied the Court for six days. The jury was
probably as intelligent and respectable a one as was ever impannelled


in the colony. There was no question of perjury or undue bias on the
part of the witnesses. The unanimous verdict of the jury was for the
plaintiff. There was no ground whatever, that we have been able to
ascertain, for setting aside this verdict —most certainly no ground that
in any other Court would have been listened to for a moment. The
verdict was in accordance with the conclusions of every person we have
heard express an opinion on the case. But, as a matter of course, the
defendant was not satisfied. A new trial was applied for in this as in
almost every other case which is tried in the Supreme Court. The
application was of course granted. Who ever heard of a refusal in a
suit where the party applying was sufficiently wealthy to afford the
luxury of litigation ? A refusal of a new trial would be injurious to
the interests of the profession, and would probably render the Bench
very unpopular indeed with the Bar. What did it matter that twelve
gentlemen, on their solemn oaths, after a patient hearing of six days,
had given a unanimous verdict for the plaintiff ? Not a bit. It is
only in England and such benighted countries that verdicts of juries
are accounted of any value. Here they are altogether ignored; a new
trial is granted, on the most frivolous grounds, and the solemn farce is
played over again and again. The reason—divested of all its
verbiage—assigned by the Chief Justice for granting a new trial in
Macfarlane v. Murnin was, that to maintain the verdict would be
injurious to the defendant’s character! And therefore, although he
had no legal right to ask to have the verdict set aside the Court had
chosen in its discretion to do so. In other words, a new trial was
granted as a matter of favour to the defendant, because his character
was considered to be in some degree at stake ! One would have
thought that Sir Alfred Stephen had already seen enough of the
evil effects of mischievously intermeddling with cases of character,
when nothing of the kind was before him. In the case of Devine v.
Wilson a new trial was granted by the Privy Council entirely on the
ground of Sir Alfred Stephen 'having misdirected the jury in a'
similar manner. That misdirection cost the defendants probably five
or six thousand pounds at least, to say nothing of years of trouble and
anxiety. What had the Court in Macfarlane v. Murnin to do with
the defendant’s character ? The case had been fully heard before a
tribunal legally competent to deal with it, and it had been decided
against the defendant. It would be quite as reasonable—quite as
much in accordance with all principles of justice, for a judge in a
criminal court to refuse, in the case of a man being tried for robbery
or any other crime, to receive the verdict of a jury, because -the
finding of him guilty would be a stain upon his character !
What are jurors for ? What is the use of retaining the empty form
of a trial before twelve men if their deliberate decision is to be set
aside at the mere caprice of a judge ? We wish to be understood as
not casting any reflection on the character of the defendant in


Macfarlane v. Murnin. The case ’was one of disputed accounts
between two mercantile men, and perhaps each believed himself right.
They appealed to a jury. Their case was fully heard; and the
decision of the jury should have been respected. The Court, in the
exercise of its caprice, thought otherwise. Years have elapsed. The
case, like scores of others, drags its slow length along. Term after
term goes by. The new trial list increases. The termination of the
case is apparently as far off as ever. The defendant, whose residence
was in New Zealand, has had to incur an enormous outlay, in repeated
voyages, for himself and witnesses. His expenses have far exceeded
the amount of the verdict —between three and four thousand pounds.
In order to carry on the suit he has had to reside in Sydney a great
part of the time, to the neglect of his affairs at Auckland, and the ruin
of his peace of mind. In fact, he is pretty well ruined altogether. It
is Jarndyce and Jarndyce over again, with the old result.
We have taken this case as an illustration, but there are plenty of
others just as bad. In laying the blame at the door of the Chief
Justice we emphatically state that no individual in the community
entertains a higher degree of respect for his Honor’s personal character
than we do. To his unblemished private reputation we gladly bear
testimony; but this does not blind us, and ought not to blind the
public, to his peculiar idiosyncracies—the attention which he bestows
upon legal hair-spliting and unimportant trifles, arising, it may be, from
an exaggerated dread, almost amounting to a disease of doing an
injustice. Another reason, we fear, which induces him to listen to
almost endless arguments for new trials is, his extreme desire to stand
well with the profession—an undue anxiety for popularity with the
Bar. Amiable weaknesses of this nature, however pardonable or even
estimable they may render their possessor in private life, most
undoubtedly unfit a man for the high position of a judge. We firmly
believe that a mind of Sir Alfred Stephen’s calibre unfits its
possessor for the judical office. We say it with all becoming deference
and respect. Since he has occupied the position of Chief Justice things
have gone on from bad to worse. The state of the Supreme Court at
present amounts to a positive denial of justice, and the Press will
neglect its duty to society if it fails to speak out boldly in the matter.
LAW.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE.
Sir —Six months ago I obtained a verdict in the Supreme Court.
By the 95th section of the Act of Colonial Legislature usually
called, I believe, “ the Common Law Procedure Act of 1853” —it is
provided that “ a plaintiff or defendant having obtained a verdict, shall
be entitled to issue execution in 14 days, unless the Judge who tries


the cause, or some other Judge, or the Court, shall order execution to
issue at an earlier or later period, with or without terms.”
On the 23rd of February, 1856, his Honor the Chief Justice and
the Puisne Judge of the Supreme Court, made certain general rules
relating to trials and new trials.
Under these rules the practice of the Court as to new trials is now
regulated.
By the 36th, 37th, 38th, and 39th of these rules, it is in effect
ordered that the service of a notice of motion for a new trial by a party
residing within a hundred miles of Sydney—within six days after the
trial, if such notice be accompanied by a certificate, signed by one or
more counsel, that in his or their opinion the grounds specified in the
notice are sufficient to support such motion, shall operate as a stay of
execution.
A notice of motion for a new trial “Was served on me by my adversary
within six days after the trial of my action, and the new trial motion
may, I am told, be probably heard in the course of a few years.
The Act of Parliament says I am entitled to issue execution on my
verdict within fourteen days after I had obtained it.
The Judges by their rules say, that I am not so entitled because this
notice of motion has been served on me.
I should state that no order has been made in my action by the
Judge who tried the cause, or by any other Judge that execution in my
action should issue at a later period.
Not being a lawyer myself, I am unable to understand how it is that
the Judges of the Supreme Court have the power to repeal an Act of
Parliament. lamas I have said no lawyer, but if an Act of Parlia-
ment says, I am entitled to issue execution, and the Judges, notwith-
standing, say I am not entitled to do so, is not this repealiug the Act ?
can you enlighten me ?
I remain. Sir, your very obedient servant.
A “SUCCESSFUL”!!! SUITOR.
Referring to the question of the laws delays, as discussed in the
Empire, the Maitland Mercury says : —lt is within our knowledge
that the very same complaints are urged in the country districts. The
worst feature in the affair is that the prevailing impression created is
that the Supreme Court is only an ingenious machine for ruining thepoor
man, and protecting the rich man who resort to it for nominal justice.
That the Judges intend to ruin tne poor man is not supposed, nor even
that they are influenced personally by the wealth or power of tl e
rich man ; but the end is as effectually attained as if they accepted
direct bribes to commit injustice. A poor man can hardly hope to be


successful if opposed to a rich man, determined to avail himself of the
numerous opportunities open to him for deferring justice and getting
new trials, or further appeals ; and even if he is finally successful, his
victory has cost him so dear that he is very probably forced at once to
part with his little property to pay the immense costs, or the debts he
has been incurring.
A LITTLE MATTER OF LAW REFORM.
Our daily contemporaries have, for some days past, been severe in
their censure upon the so-called intolerable grievance of new trial
motions in the Supreme Court. We willingly admit that the law is
very defective, though we do not think that either of the malecontent
Journals exactly feels where the shoe pinches.
The law is, and has been for some centuries, that no verdict of a
Jury in a civil action is conclusive. Jurors are not omniscient, and are
as liable to error as other people. Besides the Judge may, upon the
spur of the moment, and in consequence of sufficient time not being
afforded him for maturely considering the law bearing upon the facts
before the court, by chance mislead the Jury in pointing out to them
the precise nature of the issue which they have to try. For con-
tingencies such as these the law has provided a remedy, that is, that
other Judges upon a review of the facts laid before the Jury, and upon
a more mature consideration than was afforded to the Judge presiding
at the trial of the case, may determine whether the verdict was in
accordance with the preponderance of the evidence, or whether the
Jury had come to a wrong conclusion in consequence of a misdirection
of the Judge. In cases such as these it is in the power of the appellate
tribunal to order the case to be submitted to a new Jury. The law
with regard to new trials is pretty clearly laid down, bein g the result
of the accumulated experience and knowledge of many generations of
lawyers, and in this Colony, as a British community, we of course
follow English law and precedent.
The only question is, as to the practice followed by the Supreme
Court in granting new trials, which practice we believe even lawyers
admit to be susceptible of improvement. The practice in England
which for many years prevailed in this colony—was, to enable a suc-
cessful suitor to get the fruits of his verdict at the expiration of the
first four days of the term next ensuing the trial of the cause, unless on
one of those four days the opposite party applied for a rule Nisi, as it
is called, that is a rule to shew cause why a new trial should not be
granted. If the Court were clearly of opinion that no ground existed
for the application, it rejected the application at once: and if, on the
contrary, it was of opinion that an argument was required to aid the
conscience of the Court, it granted the rule Nisi, which came on for


argument upon a future day. In this colony another practice has for
the last seventeen or eighteen years prevailed. Here a discontented
suitor, who can find a learned counsel to certify in writing that the
verdict is against law, or against evidence, or that the learned Judge
misdirected the Jury as to the law, or improperly received or rejected
evidence—alleging, in short, any ground for impugning the verdict,
which his ingenuity can suggest as legal and valid, the successful
suitor can be deprived of the benefit of his verdict until the bench of
Judges can hear and determine upon argument before them whether
the objections to the verdict are legally sustainable. The effect of the
proceeding, according to both English and colonial practice, is what is
technically called a “ stay of execution.”
The practical effect of the system in each case is as follows. In
Westminister Hall no counsel will have the courage to apply for a rule
Nisi for a new trial except on very good grounds; and even then the
three or four Judges to whom the application is made, may in their
wisdom deem the grounds insufficient, and summarily reject the appli-
cation. The advantage of this mode of proceeding is, that the matter
is discussed while fresh in the recollection of all parties, and the
responsibility of arresting the execution is cast upon the Court.
Under the colonial system, any verdict can be arrested upon the mere
certificate of a counsel, founded upon his individual opinion, which in
some cases may be no better than that of the jurors who tried the case.
Upon this certificate of counsel it is alleged, and, without any reflection
upon the honour of the bar, we think, with good grounds, that a
dishonest party may evade the verdict of a Jury, and obtain an undue
advantage over his opponent. It is quite possible for a person sued for
a just debt, by this means to leave his creditor in the lurch by becoming
insolvent, or, it may be, by leaving the country. We avow our pre-
ference of the English practice.
This matter has upon several recent occasions been brought before
the legislature. Attention was, we believe, first called to it by a late
member of the Legislative Council, Mr, Pennington, and upon a
motion made by that gentleman the relative merits of the two systems
were fully discussed, and the opinion of the professional members of
that House was in favour of a return to the old practice. No action
was, however, taken upon it. Mr. Bayley, when Attorney-General to
the late Government, introduced a bill into the Legislative Assembly,
for effecting an alteration of the law, but this bill proved an abortion.
There is no doubt that the Judges, who by the Supreme Court Act
have power to make rules having the force of an Act of Parliament,
for regulating the practice of the Court, can do all that a fresh Act of
Parliament can effect. The Judges do not appear disposed, however,
to incur this responsibility, and they are understood to differ in opinion
as to the advantage to suitors of a recurrence to the old system. The
opinion of the profession is understood to be different, and the aspect of


greater fairness to the suitor, and of economy of time in disposing of
the public business, would, other things being equal, infallibly make
it popular with the public. The experiment is surely worth a trial,
and we earnestly commend the matter to the attention of the present
Crown Law Officers, about whose zeal for Law Reform there can be no
question. —Southern Cross, January 21.
LAW Y. THE LIVERPOOL AND LONDON EIRE INSURANCE
COMPANY.
TO THE EDITORS OF BELL’S LIFE IN SYDNEY.
Gentlemen —In the list of new trial motions as published in the
Empire, at the commencement of last term, I observed with much
regret that Nichols v, the above company, was amongst them. I
imagined that the case had been finally disposed of; that the company
had abided by the verdict of a jury selected from amongst the
community from which they derive such a princely income; and
whilst I admit they were justified, under the circumstances, in taking
the opinion of a jury, they ought to have respected it, and carried the
case no further, as they then had protected the interests of the share-
holders by the issue of a trial. If the English companies will not be
bound by the verdict of colonial juries, but carry the cases adverse to
them to London on appeal, then every insurer is at their mercy, and
what is Nichols’s case to-day may be any other person’s to-morrow ;
for if an insurer meets with a heavy loss he is hardly in a position to go
to law with a powerful company, and in order to remedy this state of
things, and place the insured on the same footing with the insurers, I
would recommend an arbitrative clause in the conditions, and would
advise all insurers in English companies to have nothing to do with
them without it. lam insured in this company to a large amount,
and believe the directors are actuated by no improper motives; that
they really consider themselves justified in the course they are pursuing,
although many of their customers are of a different opinion, and feel
somewhat alarmed at their position.
The following case, decided at Hobart Town on the 19th of last
month, may induce the Liverpool and London office to do the same :
Lazarus v. Bell.
This was an action against an English company (the Imperial Fire
Insurance) to recover A3OOO damages for destruction of stock, &c., by
fire. The defence was, that stock to the amount had not been
destroyed, and that plaintiff had made a fraudulent claim, &c. Before
the case was called on, the defendants made a compromise with the
plaintiff, and paid him A2OOO. There is no doubt this wealthy
company could have placed the plaintiff in the same position that
Nichols is in; but they choose the nobler and wiser plan—maintained


their own integrity, gave confidence to their customers, and gained the
good opinion of the public. I am in no way connected with the
plaintiff, but believing there are other causes of repudiation by English
companies, the sooner a perfect understanding is come to between
colonial insurers and these institutions the better for all parties
concerned. Arbitration, from which there is no appeal, is the only
safeguard for the insured, and I hope to see it adopted by our colonial
insurance companies at once.
Nichols’s case was tried in October, 1858, with a verdict for the
plaintiff; the company gave a notice of motion for a new trial, and
perhaps in another year its turn may come to be argued. Is there a
director of this wealthy company will say that the plaintiff has had
justice done him ? Have they overlooked the fact that some other
office would have taken his insurance had they declined ? This, like
the case Macfarlane v. Murnin, is another proof that a poor man cannot
obtain justice in our courts of law when opposed to a wealthy one,
without ruinous litigation and many years delay. I shall be glad to
hear that the Liverpool and London have followed the example of the
Imperial at Hobart Town, and then I shall remain,
AN INSURES IN THEIR COMPANY.
January 21, 1860.
TO THE EDITOR OP THE EMPIRE.
Sir — l am glad to see, by your paper, that you are trying to open the
eyes of the public to the enormities of that soul-crushing incubus, called
the Supreme Court. It has always been a matter of wonder to me
how any people, boasting themselves civilised and intelligent, could put
up with such a vicious and clumsy machine. Oh ! for one day of real
law reform.
No doubt my friends the lawyers will have plenty to say on the
matter. I see, from Mr. Macfarlane’s letters published in your paper,
that they are still the same folks as ever.
TRUNNIONS.
Meadows, Orange, 13th January, 1860.
LAW COURTS OF ENGLAND V. COLONIAL COURTS OF LAW.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE EMPIRE. y
Sir —A writer in the Herald, under the signature of “M. L. C.,”
labours hard to show that there are more new trials granted in Eng-
land than there are in this colony, according to the number of cases
tried. In order to set this apologist of our mismanaged jurisprudence
right, I will beg your insertion of the following paragraph from the
Weekly Dispatch of October 23, 1859;


Thk End of “ The Long Vacation.”— Yesterday (Saturday) the long vacation
virtually ended, as the 24th, being Sunday, is a dice non or no day in law.
To-morrow (Monday) the several law offices will resume their wonted activity in
anticipation of the approaching term. There are but few arrears in the Common
Law Courts, and, as a remakable fact, none in chancery. There is, however, a
good deal of business in the Divorce Court which will sit before term, when a new
Act of Parliament will take effect. The Judge Ordinary will rank in future next
to the Chief Baron of the Exchequer.
Now, if “M. L. C.” is correct, and there really are a greater
number of new trial cases in England than there are here, what does it
prove ? Simply this—that the Bar are not encouraged or not allowed
to take up the time of the Court for days together; two or three
barristers on each side arguing for a new trial, which takes more time
rpan the trial itself. The Judges sit quietly in their seats listening to
all the rhodomontade of trash, precedents, and cited cases, as if they
had no power to help it. In fact, the new trial motions are the great
source of wealth to the profession, and the certain cause of ruin to all
suitors who seek justice in the Supreme Court against a wealthy
defendant. The public can hardly be aware that the verdict of a jury
is of little avail in the Supreme Court; but the following case, tried
during last term, will fully prove that fact, and may induce parties
to pause and suffer almost any wrong rather than go to law to obtain
justice. The case I allude to, was tried by a special jury of twelve,
who returned a unanimous verdict for the plaintiff, with J£6lo damages.
A very young barrister (whom three-fourths of the jury were old
enough to be his father) certified it was a case for a new trial, the
verdict being contrary to law, contrary to evidence, and excessive
damages. Who but the jury could judge of the credulity of evidence,
and the injury the plaintiff had received ? Yet the signature of this
young man, for which, I presume, he received a fee, has the effect
of nullifying the verdict of a jury, for at least some years, of inflicting
irreparable injury on the unfortunate plaintiff, of enabling the defendant
to laugh at law, and juries also, and of bringing the administration of
justice into utter contempt.
I think it cannot be too generally known, that in the Supreme
Court of New South Wales the signature of any barrister is paramount
to the verdict of a jury—it will stay execution, cause further litigation,
and bring grist to the mill of the obliging gentleman. To shew the
desire of the Judges in England to give speedy justice to suitors, I for-
ward you an extract from the Weekly Dispatch of November 6th,
1859; it has reference to the case of Swinfen v. Lord Chelmsford
(Sir F. Thesiger) on a new trial motion which was supposed to be a
lengthy one:—
The Court was entirely in the learned Counsel’s hands. He was entitled then to
go on, but he (the Lord Chief Haron) considered it would be nniveraafly admitted
that it would be more convenient for the rest of the suitors if the Court could
hear short motions first. Mr. Kennedy said he was most anxious to meet the
views of the Court, and he would, therefore, resume his arguments on Tuesday.
The further hearing of the case was accordingly adjourned till Tuesday next.


It cannot be denied that one half of the new trial cases here are
placed on the list for no other purpose than to gain time, and are never
intended for argument. Let our Judges, like the Lord Chief Baron,
hear the short motions first; it will enable numerous suitors to obtain
justice, and diminish the new trial list to a tithe of what it is now.
Some days might then be occupied in hearing the more lengthy argu-
ments, until the list is cleared. Their Honors can, if they will,
accomplish this consummation so devoutly to be wished. They can
also abolish the iniquitous and unconstitutional system now in full force
in our courts of law—“ That the signature of a barrister, however
briefless, can arrest the verdict of a jury ; can bring the case again
before the Court, on a new trial motion, and receive a handsome fee
as counsel in the case he has been the means of creating.” That bar-
risters can cause enless litigation, which must necessarily be a source
of great profit to themselves, is an -evil too monstrous to be tolerated
much longer, even at the Antipodes.
A JUEOB.
Printed by Hanson and Bennett, “ Empire” Office, Pitt-street.




APPENDIX.
(From the Empire, January 25.)
The letters and articles which have lately appeared in the Empire on
the disgraceful denial of justice in the Supreme Court—mainly
consequent on the present accumulation of New Trial Motions have
met with a response from one end of the colony to the other. No
public department has ever experienced a more severe or a more just
condemnation than has the highest legal tribunal of the country. No
attempt at denial of the charges has been made, and the only excuse
ventured on is, that the department in question is not worse than
others of the same kind at home. This assertion is attempted (by a
correspondent in the columns of our daily contemporary) to be supported
by a mere quibble, backed by a few figures which prove nothing to the
purpose. The disingenuousness and special-pleading of the letter
referred to sufficiently indicate the quarter in which it originated.
That the alleged denial of justice exists, no one attempts to deny;—
that it arises from an undue and unconstitutional encroachment on the
part of the Court on the legitimate province of the jurymen, is, we
imagine, beyond dispute. The power granted to the judges to make
rules of Court, having the authority of Acts of the Legislature, has
been shamefully abused. Every barrister has the power of delaying
for an indefinite period, if not of altogether defeating, the verdict of a
jury. The mere certificate of counsel prevents a successful (?) suitor
obtaining the fruits of his verdict, and enables a dishonest debtor to
apply for a new trial with the positive certainty that, owing to the
enormous accumulation of new trial notices, his own case cannot be
heard for two or three years at least. In the meantime the debtor
makes his arrangements accordingly —goes into the Insolvent Court,
leaves the colony, or makes away with or encumbers property in
such a manner as to set his creditor at defiance. If this is not doing
away with trial by jury in all but mere name, we are at a loss to under-
stand the meaning of words. It is even much worse than this. The
cumbrous and expensive nature of the legal machine is retained with-
out the least benefit to the public for the enormous expense and trouble
incurred. Every person who is in the slightest degree acquainted with
the state of business in the Supreme Court, since the establishment of
District Courts, knows that but for new trial motions there would be
almost next to nothing for barristers or judges to do. It cannot be too
strongly impressed on the public mind that at the commencement of
last term the number of new trial motions set down for hearing was ten
times that of all the other cases put together ! Whether the number


of new trials granted is greater or less in proportion than in England
or elsewhere is very little to the purpose. The end for which the new
trial was asked for has been gained by the consequent delay, whether
the new trial is granted or not. Probably in a large majority of cases
the party applying for it had not the most remote idea or even wish of
obtaining it.
The whole evil, in our opinion, has its origin in the contemptuous
opinion entertained by the judges for the intelligence and honesty of
jurors. On no other ground can we account for the conduct of the
judges in granting new trials ; or, what is almost worse still, allowing
the verdicts of juries to be practically set aside, by months and even
years of delay, at the mere will of an interested party. However
respectable barristers may be as a body, it cannot be denied that there
are amongst them, as in all other professions, needy and unprincipled
men whose interest it is to promote litigation, however ruinous to the
client. On no other principal is it easy to account for the large number
of new trial motions, in cases where the nature of the evidence and the
unanimous verdict of the jury plainly show that any other verdict was
out of the question—where the defeated party had not the ghost of a
chance, and could have no object in view but that of tirring out and
ruining his creditor by delay and expense.'
How differently the important and solemn duties of jurors are
estimated by an eminent English judge, Mr. Justice Coleridge, will
be seen from the following extract from a speech recently delivered by
that gentleman :
“ From long experience, and after much consideration, there is
nothing as to which I have a more confident opinion than I have in
thinking that to the trial by jury we are indebted, individually and
collectively, as members of society, as citizens of the State, in respect
of our property, our characters, our safety, our liberties, more than any
other single institution which we possess. ... Do you
suppose that if judges alone decided questions of fact you would never
have a mistake ?—An unreasonable—an absurd —or even an un-
righteous decision ? I have been a judge for an unusually long period—
and I desire freely to record my admiration of the manner in which
juries commonly discharge their solemn duties. Again and again have
I reason to marvel at their patience and industry and attention. Again
and again have I heard from a juryman some question suggested
which judge and counsel had both omitted, and the answer to which
threw a guiding light upon the whole controversy. Not seldom, when
I have at first differed from the verdict, have I found reason, on after
reflection, to think that I had been wrong, and the judgment of the jury
right. But this is not all. We must not loose sight of the indirect
advantages of the institution. . . . Let there be no
juries ; take away those functions from our gentry, our merchants, our
farmers, and our tradesmen, and I venture to say you would take
away one of the most important of those things which distinguish us


from every other nation in Europe. This is one and not the least
important part of our self-government —it is also a material part of a
citizerTfeducation. Any judge will tell you how different a machine
the jury which a day’s trial will have
given them ; proceed at first, how fully he finds it
necessary to case when he begins the assize, and
how rapidly 11 facts and apply them to legal
definitions after l have often thought that had I to
appoint the
to appointment twßlie should serve as a petty juryman
for two assizes at least. lam sure that a more practical knowledge
of the law might so be learned than could be acquired by months of
careful reading. Earnestly I hope that in our laudable and natural
desire to improve, we may never fanpy ourselves so much more wise
than our ancestors, that we can dispense with the jury ; let us try it in
principle and in its details; let usr examine it freely and searchingly—
only reverently and modestly. Let us improve it if we can where we
find it defective, onerous, redundant; let us substitute another mode of
deciding the class of cases to which it may be inapplicable, but in its
essence and substance let us cherish it as an inestimable treasure ; let
us guard it as we would our Habeas Corpus, our Bill of rights, our Magna
Charta. Sure I am it is not less essential than any of these to our
liberty and well-being—social, civil, and national. One thing is to be
always remembered, that stupid verdicts are no arguments against the
institution, if they do not arise from any fault in it, but from some-
thing which you may remedy in jurymen. No institution, however
wise in itself, can be expected to work well with inadequate instru-
ments. Improve your jurymen by enlarging and raising your national
education. Introduce into your panel all the classes of society by law
liable to serve, and when you have done that, and not till then, if it be
found to work ill, condemn the institution.”
Are the jurors of this colony less honest, less intelligent, or less
attentive, than in England ? We do not believe it. Then why allow
a probably briefless and perhaps unprincipled barrister practically to set
their verdicts aside —for that and nothing less is the effect of the
present system ; —the end to which these endless new trial motions
aim by delaying and obstructing the successful party in the attainment
of his rights ?


s its origin in’ X\
the intelligenc KM
'.ccoi c or tb Jjj
is j wo* '/
