

‘V~
yj/ /4- \ O-w" ■;■« ' t
»•* - * !■ , f.
. ' < Tk / ! t
.<■- • ■ 'c ! ,-■■*•


The dark waves glitter as the storm subside, and all is light and glory at the eventide.
The eastern seaboard of New South Wales is justly famed for its They won out, these benefactors of mankind, and forthwith began
wonderful array of silver beaches. Possibly no place on the globe is so that weekly pilgrimage to the many seaside resorts comprising the
rich in fringes of crystal sand, upon whose shimmering faces the swell-
ing waves of the blue Pacific cream shoreward in masses of driven foam.
Add to this the glorious summer sunshine, and is it a matter for w'onder
that surf-bathing is one of the most popular recreations of pleasure-
loving New South Wales?
The cult of the surf began some twenty years ago, when a few
enthusiastic pioneers defied the powers that were, and defended “test
cases” in the police courts, to maintain their right of enjoying the
raptures of a dip in the white-crested rollers that break on the shores of
Manly and Coogeo.
environs of Sydney.
At the present juncture he would be a rash man who ventured to
compute the dimensions of the yearly influx of surfing devotees to any
of the popular beaches of Sydney. Suffice it to remark that every week-
end boat, tram, or other means of conveyance, is packed to its utmost
capacity with crowds of light-hearted Australians, making their way to
a favorite beach to worship at the shrine of old King Neptune.
It has come to stay, this healthful and cleanly amusement; and who
will possess the temerity to deny that it makes for a better, more moral,
and more cleanly race, to people the wide spaces of our own sun-kissed
Australia?


Surf Carnivals at Bondi, Freshwater and Manly.
The chief item as far as surf work is concerned is the rescue and the resuscitation
competition, which carries the Association’s Championship pennant.
Surf Carnivals.—With the object of stimulating enthusiasm in the work of surf life-saving, inter-club surf carnivals are held regularly
during the summer months. At these the members compete in life-saving events, supplemented with swimming and surf boat races, and other
athletic events. There are hundreds of entries at a single carnival, and training keeps the members physically fit and thoroughly efficient.


Grand Parade of Surf Life Savers, Manly Beach.
BRONZED SURF GODS.
The March Past at a Surf Carnival is the prelude to other thrilling
events. At the head of each team is a picked standard bearer, holding
aloft the Club Pennant; behind him come the beltman, reel bearers and
squad. Other events at a carnival are surf boat races, surf swimming
races, alarm reel races, beach sprints, surf relays, beach relays and
novelty events.
Competitors must swim to buoys corresponding with their cap colours.
Voluntary life-saving clubs have been established on every beach,
whose splendid work is beyond praise. The more popular resorts arc also
patrolled by surf-boats.
The splendid physique and athletic ability of the competitors
exemplify the tonic effects of the surf and the life-saving training on
health, and it has already been stated that the surf life-saving clubs
are one of Australia’s best advertisements. There is a record of
approximately 17,000 lives saved.


THE CALL OF THE SURF, MANLY.


Gunyah Tents and Sunshades, Manly Beach.


COOGEE BEACH AND PIER.


THE CALL OF THE SURF. Surfers and Sun Bakers, Coogee Beach.
A glorious summer day, with the white sun reflecting from a beach
of silver sand, and the long green billows curling temptingly shoreward.
Bevies of laughing men and maidens, clad in clinging costumes, sporting
in the churning foam that edges the shore. Afar on the rim of the
horizon the lazy smoke from some outward-bound steamer, cleaving her
way to distant strands. Such is the call of the surf!


BONDI BEACH, SHOWING IMPROVEMENTS.


The Surf Life-Saving Association’s Grand Parade, March Past, and General Advance Championship, held at Bondi, March 22nd, 1930.
Each of the twenty-two Clubs were represented by twenty selected members. Won by Bronte.
The Suit' Championships give an idea of the wonderful growth of the voluntary Surf Life-Saving movement and of the high standard of
efficiency of the Clubs. There are over 80 Clubs, with a total mombershipof more than 5,000.
BONDI SUET BEACH.


Pearls of the Southern Si
What vrouhlst thou he?
A wavelet just rising from life's wide sea.


Surf Beach Fashions.


An Angry Southerly Buster.
The pyramid-billows with white points of brine,
In the rope of the lightning inconstantly shine.


Shooting the Breakers, with or without Surf Boards, is most thrillingl
Amid the broken waters of our ever-restless sea.


MANLY SURF CARNIVAL—GRAND PARADE.


Exciting Surf Boat Race, Swamped, and Rescue.


MAROUBRA SURF BEACH.


Sunshine and Surf makes one carefree and happy.
Clovelly Surf Beach.


A Happy Trio.
Coogee Sharkproof Area, Day and Night Scene.


Surf Boat Races in a good surf are most exciting.
Life-saving, Teams’ Surf Race,


Amongst the Sunshades, Palm Beach.
The Golden Hours of Childhood.


Nielsen Park, Sydney Harbour, showing Floats of Sharkproof Net.


Exhilarating Sport by Canoe and Rubber Floats.


Merry Surf Pirates, Balmoral Beach.
They were maidens five, as blithe and free As the eurbless wave of the open sea.


BRONTE SURF BEACH.
H. PHILLIPS, PHOTOGRAPHER. PRINTER St PUBLISHER. 99 VICTORIA AVENUE WILLOUGHBY, N.S.W.
