

1^3522
SURPRISING
MISFORTUNES
SOPHIA JOHNSON.
Written by Herself.
"lama native of the City of Chester. My
parents are respectable innkeepers in that city ; I
was born on the Ist. of Oct. 1813. About 9 years
ago a young man named John Edwards paid his
addresses to me ; he was then serving his appren-
ticeship to a cabinet maker—our love was mutual,
our attachment growing stronger every day. In the
beginning of the year 1830, he proposed our being
privately married, but I would not consent without
acquainting my parents, which I accordingly did.
My mother consented, observing that she would not
attempt to marry me contrary to my inclination,
but my father cruelly refused me to marry a man
without property. He said I was too young to


'3s/7'/
*2.
marry, when I grew older he would provide a suit-
able match for me. He watched me very close, and
forhiu me seeing my lover; we contrived to meet
every evening, when 1 told him my fathers detci-
mination. He was very sad, our grief was gieat,
and we shed tears of sorrow, at length I consented,
to a private marriage—we parted in sadness, ieaiing
my father would take some step to prevent us ac
complishing our purpose, and so it proved, toi on
the day following I was compelled to accompany
him in a post chaise on a visit to my uncle, whoie-
sidcs in Hover-street, Piccadilly, London, where we
arrived on the following evening, 'the next day
he set out for his return home, and left me in strict
charge with my uncle, who would not allow to leave
the house unless in his company. I remaned there
nearly 7 months, during which time my father sent
several letters; my lover heard of my removal from
Chester and not being able to obtain any infor-
mation of where I was, he wandered about, vvor
a short time in a place until the month of April
when he became very oppressed in spirits on my
account, and could not settle to work. e too v o
excessive drinking, associated with had company,
and in the month of June, 1830, he and two others
robbed a gentleman named Lloyd, on the road e-
tween Tarporley and Chester; the other two escaped,
but he was arrested in Liverpool a few days a tei
and conveyed to Chester; he was tried and senten-
ced to 7 years transportation at the Chester slim-
mer Assizes in that year. My parents were one


day conversing about me, my mother desired my
father to letch me hack, hut he refused until Ed-
wards bad left England. They were overheard by
Susan Morgan, the chambermaid, who was very
fond of me,' and knowing where my uncle resided,
find learning by tbeir conversation that I was in Lon-
don, she resolved to set out in search of me imme-
diately, which she accordingly did, and contrived
to deliver a letter to me, which informed me of my
lover’s fate. I read it on going to bed at night, and
mv feelings may be better imagined than described.
I sank insensible on the bed, where I remained a
considerable time ; on recovering, I past the remain-
der of the night in planning my escape, which I
effected the next day, taking with me £IOO belong-
ing to my uncle ; 1 was determined to go to the
same lover—l dressed myself in man’s apparel, and
paid my passage on board an euiigiam- bound
to New South Wales, where I learned John Ed-
wards was sent. We sailed on the 14th. of Sept.
1830, and on the 19th of the month following we
were visited with a tremendous tempest peals of
thunder rolled awfully through the concave of Heav-
en, and the vivid flashes of lightning, by their awful
brilliancy and grandeur, seemed to open the gates
of the firmament, and presented to view a dreadliu
magnificent blaze of electric fluid—mighty torrents
o rain powered down from the sky, and all aiomul
conspired to produce in the breasts of both crew and
p issengevs, a feeling to lay ourselves down and die,
t> be relieved from the ’intense sulf lings we eu-


dured, during that terrible storm —the wind proved
contrary ; the vessel leaked—both passengers and
crew worked at the pumps incessantly—me and two
others who were assisting on deck were washed
overboard ; when I providently seized hold of one
of the masts of the ship which fell over the side, for
yards and masts were swept away. But by the pre-
serving power of the Almighty, I escaped a watery
grave, by being washed on shore at day break in
the morning; I remained there the whole of that
day, and found myself on a desolate island, with
no human being to administer to my wants, or
sooth my sorrow. On night approaching I sought
for some place of shelter, but could find none; and
being under fearful apprehension of being devoured
by wild beasts that I heard roar, which struck hor-
ror to my already nearly broken heart. T climbed up
a large tree, where 1 remained until morning—it
was then 1 thought of my father’s cruelty he being
the sole cause of my disastrous situation ; but praise
l>e to Him who is always ready to assist in the hour
of danger, those who believe in His promises, and
put their trust in Him. On the third day of my
being in this desolate place, never will it be erased
from my memory, the joy I experienced at perceiv-
ing a sail at a distance—in my excessive joy I
climbed up a tree, but then I was at a loss how to
attract their attention, at length I devised a plan. I
took off my shirt and tied it to one of the top bran-
ches of the tree—it floated in the breeze, which they
soon perceived, and knowing it to be a signal of dis-


tress, they immediately sent a boat to my relief, in
which I reached the ship, which proved to he a
Dutch Merchantman ; I was conveyed to the port of
Amsterdam, in Holland, when I was taken before
(he British Consul, to whom I disclosed my sex,
and related the whole of my sufferings, before men-
tioned. He offered to procure me a passage to
England, but I proposed staying there for a time in
hopes of procuring a passage to New South Wales,
but no opportunity presented itself for the space of
two years, during which time I was in service with
an English family residing there, at the end of that
time a favourable opportunity presented itself,
which afforded me a passage. I travelled between
2 and 300 miles, making enquiries at different
places—[ at length succeeded in discovering the
place my lover was employed j I applied to his
master rvho kindly permited us to have a private
interview together, which were the happiest mo-
ments in our lives—my pen cannot describe our
feelings on this occasion, we flew to each others
arms, while tears of joy rolled down our cheeks. I
was so overcome that I fell insensible on the floor,
and when I recovered, my lover was standing over
me in breathless anxiety. After embracing each
other affectionately, I related the whole of my suf-
ferings to him, for whose sake I underwent them,
while I was relating them we shed tears of joy and
sorrow alternately, and at the conclusion he em-
braced me, saying he hoped God would prolong
our days, and that the time was not far distant


when we should he joined toother in the bands of
wedlock, never to he separated till death. Ihe master
my lover was serving on learning the particulars was
astonished, arid sympathised for our sufferings, and
said mv constancy deserved its reward ; and lie
would render us bis as istance to make us happy
for the future. He admitted me into Ins house as
servant, where I remained until my lovers time
was expired, at which time we were married by the
Rev. Mr. King, in the presence of pur master and
several friends. Alter which he offered us an op-
portunity of settling in that country, hut we de-
clined, being desirous of returning to Old England.
He then handsomely rewarded me for my past ser-
vices, which together with the money I brought
from England, and the wages I received in Holland ;
we procured a passage to England where we ailived
on the 3rd of this month. W e immediately repaired
to Chester, and were welcomed by my parents, who
were overjoyed at beholding their long lost cndd,
who they never expected to see again, lor they mid
come to the conclusion that 1 had destroyed my-
self, which caused great dissention between ( cm,
my mother lay rig all the biamcp on m v latrier in
refusing to consent to my marriage with John bid-
wards, but cordiality and comfort is again restored.
W e now reside in the City of Chester, in the great-
est harmony, amongst our relations and friends'.
SOPHIA EDW ARDS.


COPY OF VERSES.
Come all you constant lovers, of high & low degree,
I pray you give attention and listen to me,
The sufferings of a female whom Cupid piercd her
heart, [ to P art
But her father had contrived it so, her love and her
In Chester city we did dwell, from infants lovd sincere
But my father for to part us acted a part severe ;
He sent me unto London, that we might parted be,
To my uncle, close confined, which caused all my
misery.
John Edwards was my lover’s name, and when he
came to know
'That we were separated, distracted he did go .
He roam’d about in deep disunion,
find no rest, , L ~ . .
The thoughts of his dear Sophia disturbed Ins ten-
In search of his Sophia he wander’d up and down.
In lonesome groves and valley, and many Sea-port
But still no tidings could he get of her he lev d so
Which caus’d him dreary nights to pass, and many
bitter tears.
Her absence, threw him in despair, all ajJljjW*
\nd''witha gang on the highway, to rob was led
A gentleman of wealth and store they met upon
“the wav, [raging mam.
But taken tie was, and for seven years sent oer the


ran away, , t
Dress’d out in man’s apparel, to cross the raging sea.
When sailing on the ocean, a storm it did arise,
The thunder roll’d, the lightning flash’d, and dismal
was the skies, [away ;
I and two more upon the deck, o’erboard were wash d
On a desolate island I was drove, just at the light
of day.
No living person in this place was never to be found.
Wild beasts with frightful roars in numbers did mo
surround,
V ' /K. /
I I 1
8
But when I heard my lover’s fate, that night upon
my bed, [bled head:
To rob my uncle soon a thought came in my trou-
One hundred pounds from him I took, and quickly
And for to save my precious life I dim’d upon a tree,
With fix’d c} es upon the ocean a sail in sight did see
My shirt from off my back, as a signal they might view—
A boat they sent to my relief, with some of the ship’s crew ;
And unto Holland they did steer, to Amsterdam was bound,
I to the British Consul went—he for me service found.
From Amsterdam to New South Wales a ship it did set sail,
And I on board, we soon arriv’d, with a sweet pleasant gain ;
But fortune still did prove my friend—my love I soon did sue
And his master when lie heard my woe, shed tears of grief
for me.
He took me in his service, and was very fond of me,
My John and I got married in the hands of unity;
And when his t ine it was expir’d, to England we sail’d o’er ,
Our friends received us kindfy—never to part no more.
J. Williams, Printer, Chester.
