

1888.
QUEENSLAND.
SURVEY OF THE NORMAN RIVER BETWEEN BAFFLE
GROUP AND NORMANTON.
(REPORT BY MR. E. A. CULLEN, NAUTICAL SURVEYOR.)
Presented to both Houses of Parliament by Command.
On board Dredge “ Hydra,”
Norman River, 18tb July, 1888.
Sie,
I have the honour to forward herewith a tracing from a plan of a running compass survey of
the Norman River between Baffle Group and Normanton, plotted to a scale of two inches to a nautical
mile. The soundings are expressed in feet, aud were measured with a pole, and the low-water datum to
which they are reduced is the low-water level to which spring tides fall for about two-thirds of the year;
during the rest of the year they do not fall so low by. about eighteen inches.
At a low tide the waterway is but little more than a gutter in the bed of the River, and it is the
position and depth of this gutter that is shown.
Mr. Jones, the pilot here, assisted me very materially, lending me a boat and crew and his own
services, thereby expediting the work very much.
In connection with the navigability of this portion of the River, I find that not only does
considerable misapprehension exist, but that the rashest statements are made concerning it. As to the
former, it is easily understood, since the only traffic takes place at high water of spring tides; and as the
average width between the banks at that time is about 500 feet, the fact that the vessel is following the
direction of a small gutter does not present itself. Another source of conflicting statements is to be
found in the fact of the tidal rise varying at different seasons, so that whilst during the months of
January, February, and March there is an average rise at springs of from seven to eight feet, yet
during the remainder of the year springs only rise five to six feet.
It will be seen from my survey —commencing at Baffle Group and thence ascending the River —
that a sandy shoal occurs about half-a-milo above the landing, carrying two feet at low water ; another
sand shoal occurs at one and a-half miles with two and a-half feet; a rocky shoal at two and three-quarter
miles with two feet on it; a sand shoal at four and one-quarter miles with two feet on it; a rocky shoal
with two feet at five miles; a sand and rock shoal with one foot six inches at six miles ; a rock shoal
with two feet at six and three-quarter miles ; and at seven and a-half miles rocks occur with only one
foot over them. Thus in the eight miles comprising that part of the River there are seven shoals with
not more than two feet over them, and one with only one foot of water, and those are for the most part
rocky. In the published sailing directions this portion of the river is alluded to as follows, viz.:
“ The navigation at high water even is far too intricate and dangerous for any vessels but those of very light
draught of water. . . . No vessel should attempt to proceed beyond Baffle Group drawing more than six feet
of water, and then only at spring tides,”
which is a very fair description of its navigability, and one which cannot be modified. I do not think
that, after consideration, any improvements can be contemplated here.
Almost the whole trade of the port is conducted by lighters, and as they are towed up, and the
men in charge know the “ track,” their only difficulty is a periodical insufficient depth of water for their
vessels. Small sailing vessels also frequent the port, but as their draught is rarely under six feet, any
attempt to ascend the River to Normanton is usually disastrous; nevertheless they frequently attempt it
to avoid the cost of lighterage. In so doing a disadvantage they sometimes labour under is the want of
a pilot; but it is not often that there is water enough to take a vessel drawing over six feet above the
Group, and, as Pilot Jones pointed out to me, the pilots are too busy to be able to wait perhaps several
days on a vessel of this class, merely on the chance of there being enough water to take her up to town.
If considered advisable, this last difficulty could be met by the appointment of a pilot for the upper part
of the River to be stationed at Baffle Group or Normanton, so that whenever a good tide occurred any
vessel that could possibly ascend would have every chance of doing so.
Considering the facts that the available depth is that of the tidal rise, that the River bed for
two-thirds of its length consists of an ironstone conglomerate rock, and fhat to practically, improve the
channel would require eight cuttings, all of which would be of some magnitude, and to execute which
would
C. A. 83—1888.


would require a special dredger and plant, since it is absolutely impossible for the “ Hydra ” and her
plant to do any work in the part under consideration, I submit that it would be unwise to disturb the
existing state of things, or, for reasons mentioned further on, to hold out to the people of the Gulf any
hope of improvement in the immediate future.
It may not be out of place to refer here to the very groat inconvenience to shipping and cost to
the Colony which has arisen, in one or two instances, on the east coast through the head of navigation
having been declared very far up a river, and in the case of the Norman Elver this will bo felt to a
much greater extent; as, however, vested shipping interests at the town of Normanton are at present
very small, no hardship can possibly be inflicted on the community by a refusal to undertake a work of
such magnitude as improving the upper part of the river would be.
Since the discovery of the Croydon Gold Field the trade of Normanton has increased very rapidly,
and is still doing so, although it certainly labours under very great disadvanlages, entirely owing to the
difficulty and cost of receiving and shipping goods in Normanton. In my previous reports on the
Norman lliver I have dealt with the question of a shipping terminus—viz., at the Rod Bluff—with which
some eighteen miles of railroad would connect Normanton; and the construction of this road —which, I
understand, has already been surveyed—would remove all the present difficulties and delays to which
passengers, mails, and goods are subjected in the attempt to use an impracticable waterway, —since a
waterway which can only be used at high water at spring tides is an impracticable one. The people of
Normanton apparently do not see this. .
With further reference to the foregoing, I would point out that the Government have recently
sold a township —“ Karumba ” —on the east bank of the Norman lliver, about one mile inside the heads,
and that almost adjoining a private township has been sold by a local syndicate. Both of these properties
have realised, high prices, although everything there at present is in its normal state, and doubtless an
agitation will arise for railroad connection with Croydon, the disadvantages of which scheme need not be
pointed out.
From its geographical situation and from an engineering point of view the Eed Bluff appears to
mo to alone possess all the requisites for a suitable commercial depot for the rapidly expanding settle-
ment and trade of the Gulf country; whilst there are few or no vested interests elsewhere to interfere
with its adoption—although this latter advantage diminishes with delay. Consideration may also be found
in the fact that the establishment of a township at the Eed Bluff would in all probability result in
producing large sums of money from the sale of town and suburban lands.
I have, &c.,
E. A. CULLEN,
Nautical Surveyor.
The Engineer for Harbours and Eivers, Brisbane.
Price Gd.]
.By Authority: James C. Beal, Government Printer, William street, Brisbane.


