



. \ J;


SURVEYORS’ POCKET-BOOK.
ARTICLES AND TABLES
Supplementing the information contain!? in the Standard Book,
on Surveying.
SURVEYOR GENERAL’S OFFICE, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
J* ;
J|
SYDNEY:
J RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, P„ IlUP . STRKET .
1 886. ,f
MBO S 6 ' % >
: ’**'v-i V * A


s V i; ',
2


PREFACE.
I *
In this Colony the surveyor has to depend so entirely upon his
instrument and his knowledge of its use that a thorough acquaint-
ance with its principles and with some of the simpler astronomical
and geodetic problems is essential to the intelligent and accurate
performance of any large survey that may be entrusted to him.
In many such matters connected with the practice of Colonial
surveying the ordinary books of referenfce are either deficient or
altogether wanting, and the demand upon my time in explaining
them to beginners was so great, that some years since I determined
to write and print articles upon the subjects most needed, in a size
suitable for insertion in the ordinary field-book. Additional matter
having been supplied by officers of my Department, an edition is
now issued in pocket-book form. It is intended to distribute new
editions as often as additional matter presents itself.
F. ADAMS,
Surveyor General.
2i June, 1883.
V/ &




LINEAL MEASUREMENT.
Lineal measurement has hitherto been performed with Gunter’s
chain either of steel or iron of the usual pattern; the general process
of measurement is well known and needs no description, but as
there is much liability to error in measuring over undulating and
broken country it may be well to explain the best mode of ob-
viating or considerably reducing the error arising from this cause.
It may be premised that care should be taken to put an even and
regular strain upon the chain and to insert the arrows upright
The object being to obtain the horizontal length of a line, in
practice it is found the more expeditious and satisfactory mode to
divide the slope of one chain into a series of steps of more or less
number of links according to the inclination of the ground ; for this
purpose a plummet is the only available and reliable means, the
chain being suspended between the hand of one chainman at the
handle or any other point of the chain held with the plummet over
the pin or other mark and the hand of the other chainman insert-
ing a pin. Of course no greater length than thirty links should be
measured in this manner, unless the services of one or two other
persons are available to support the chain in a horizontal
There are plummets with iron points specially designed for this
purpose which may be readily obtained. The practice frequently
adopted, superseding the use of the plummet, of dropping a pin
held suspended against the handle of the chain by the forefinger
and thumb of the chainman is clumsy and very objectionable for
obvious reasons. The other mode of reducing the actual surface
measurement to the horizontal, by observing the angle of inclination,
although perfect in theory is not found to be satisfactory in practice,
and is generally abandoned after comparing results obtained by
both methods. The principal source of error in lineal measure-
ment arises from defective standard length. From continued use
the chain gradually stretches and thus measurements are in excess,
and unless frequent attention is paid to comparing the chain wdth
a standard length, accurate survey need not be expected. It has
been customary to appropriate to the purpose of a standard an iron
or steel chain adjusted to correct length, but even this from fre-
quent use stretches, and from other causes, such as an uneven
5
Lineal Measurement.


surface, extraordinary heat, an unusual strain, or the presence of
grit in the joints or rings, leads to mistakes in the hands of even
careful men, and has been productive of serious and extended error.
The most ready, portable, and, under all conditions, most satis-
factory standard for use is a steel tape, and this instrument is now
attainable by all surveyors, it is almost rigid and not susceptible
to perceptible expansion under ordinary temperatures or during
its use for inserting standard marks, which only occupies a few
minutes at each camp. In laying down a standard length for
comparison the surveyor should select a level site and insert suitable
pegs with flat tops, the centres of the tops of the pegs nearly coin-
ciding with the index marks of the tape, then, driving two iron or
copper tacks, the exact length may be marked thereon by means of
a file, or cut with a hard chisel. The general use of a steel riband
of the length of a chain, marked with graduations in a suitable
manner, and with convenient handles for use, is strongly recom-
mended for the following reasons, —being of extreme lightness, not
liable to kinks, or very susceptible to alterations of temperature as
far as practical purposes are concerned, it may be used without the
many chances of error attendant upon a Gunter’s chain. More-
over, its chief recommendation consists in the expedition ensured
by its use, for it can be held at arm’s length retaining its horizontal
position without effort, and requires no daily comparison with the
standard. After continued use during a period of twelve months it
is reported to be a most satisfactory and desirable instrument. It
may be here noted that in subdivision of land it is desirable that
the working chain should be from 5 to | of an inch longer than
standard, as some compensation for loss which must accrue through
inequalities of surface and minor obstacles; also, that the chain
pins should not be more than eight inches long, made of one-eighth
steel wire. E. T.
6
Lineal Measurement.


HYPOTENUSAL MEASUREMENT
As applied to surveys in precipitous or undulating country.
Land Surveying of all-sorts in precipitous country, on the borders
of the sandstone formations of the colony, has led to the application
of a method of measurement which has hitherto been seldom
practised, viz.:—The division of the irregular incline, or precipitous
contour of the line to be measured, into several portions, the
inclinations of which are determined by the theodolite, and their
lengths reduced separately.
To do this readily, instead of using the ordinary chain, the
lightest crinoline steel wire, wide, is made available, in
from 5 to ro lengths of i chain each, united by softening the ends
by heat, and bending them back to form a loop, the bent ends,
which should be about 2 inches long, being secured by brazing or
whipping with fine copper wire or waxed hemp. The number of
chains is marked by tablets, small tags of leather, or tape ; the
links or fractional parts thereof are measured by a steel riband, with
a ring as a handle at one end and a snap hook at the other —as
shown in drawing—to hook into the end of any one of the several
wires as required; the length of the line may thus be quickly read,
the number of chains being shown by the number of tags, the steel
riband showing the links, and the decimal part of the link estimated
and entered thus ; 698’3.
The horizontal distances are then determined by starting each
hypotenuse from the axis of the telescope of the theodolite, and
measuring any distance under 10 chains (about 5 is the most
convenient for stretching the wire) to a mark on the ground or the
top of a wad-stick, and reading the vertical angle to the point to
which the distance has been measured. The theodolite is then set
up vertically over this point, and a second portion measured in the
same way. Thus, by starting each hypotenuse from the axis of the
telescope, the correct hypotenusal distances and angles of inclination
are obtained, and are reduced to the true horizontal lengths required
for plotting by the traverse tables, or by natural cosines. To facilitate
calculation, it is desirable, where possible, to measure portions in
7
Hypoteiwsal Measurement.


even chains, or multiples of ten links, thus : 500, 600, or 540,
680, &c. The angles of elevation or depression, if less than 12 0 ,
need only be read to the nearest 15'; between 12 0 and 20°, to the
nearest s'; and over 20 0 to the nearest minute.
The steel riband used should weigh about 12 ozs., and it is
desirable to have it marked in links from 1 to 100, from each end
on the opposite sides, that there may be no chance of reading the
wrong end of the riband, and if so marked, there should be a snap-
hook at each end.
The wire, if broken, can readily be mended by taking the temper
out of the broken ends and bending each end back about 1J inches,
and hooking them together by a short portion (the temper of which
has been drawn, and the ends bent back) sufficient to compensate
for the diminution in length caused by the broken ends having
been bent over. The loose ends are then secured, and the spliced
joint is protected by another piece of steel wire, about 7 inches long,
being attached alongside, and the whole whipped with fine copper
wire or waxed hemp.
The long wire is readily rolled up and carried on a hoop formed
of a strip of calico 4 inches wide and 4 feet long, the edges of which
are sewn on two hoops of a diameter of 15 inches, made of four
coils of the steel wire, the whole forming a hoop, the wires in the
edges of which form flanges between which the wire measure and
steel riband are coiled in convenient shape for carrying across the
shoulder.
G. H. S.,
Bowral, N.S.W.,
17 August, 1878.
Note, —Practically speaking the 66 feet tape expands and contracts
in the ratio of „ inch for every two degrees of temperature
(Fahr.). P.F.A.
8
Measurement.




Steel Riband
Jp: IM Hi If)
lOO links


It is very generally supposed that the effect of temperature on
chains and tapes may be disregarded in practice ; how far it should
be taken into consideration in laying down standards is shown ir.
the following article : 2T
COMPARISON OF STANDARD CHAINS. °
- & s~// 2."
The co-efficients of expansion of the different kinds of iron and /, /
steel for a rise of temperature from 32 0 to 212° Fahr., range between s> ' c, ° * V
•001079 f° r untempered steel, by Lavoisier and Laplace, and
•001258 for iron, by Smeaton. These figures represent the decimal _ 0/0” /rx.
fraction of the lineal measurement of a body in any direction, by S
which that length is increased by the given rise of temperature. 2
Hence the lengthening of any steel or iron chain of 66 feet length
for a rise of ioo° Fahr. may be taken at *5O inch or half-an-inch * ;
without practical error. This quantity is easily remembered and
is readily applied, being one hundredth of an inch for every 2 0 A
Fahr. V*.
In this colony a difference of 40° in the temperature of successive - . *
days may frequently occur, and supposing a chain to be adjusted to ~ O'OOb
standard when the thermometer stands at 120°, it will be "20 or sth &
of an inch short at Bo°, and a square mile laid out by it will then f
contain only 639 a. 2r. 28’8p., and if laid out in the winter
at a temperature of 40° its area will be 639 a. ir. ry’bp.,
the chainage being short roW and 2~000 respectively. It
is thus evident that while under ordinary circumstances the
errors introduced into the measurement of portions by the
daily variation of the temperature of the working chain are
seldom of importance, yet, when comparisons are made and
standards are laid down, a careful record of the temperature is
essential in order to guard against the error of comparison and of
working temperature both tending the same way and thus pro-
ducing an error of serious magnitude. Suppose a surveyor, ignorant
of the effect of temperature, adjusts his tape to the Sydney standard
at 6o°, lays down his camp standard at 120°, adjusts his working
chain to this the following morning at 70°, and then works through
the day at an average of no°, the result would be that his chain
would be an inch longer than standard. Another surveyor night
9
Comparison of Standard Chains.


go through the same operations at temperatures of 120°, 50°, 80%
and 50° respectively, his chain would consequently be \ an inch
short, and the difference between the work of the two men would
be 1 link in 8 chains, irrespective of the accidental errors and pecu-
liarities of their work, which would be just as likely to increase as
to diminish this difference. Attention to the temperature at the
times of comparison in Sydney, and of laying down the camp
standards, would reduce the difference to 1 link in 24 chains, which
is the sum of the daily variations of temperature experienced. The
performance of the new steel tapes in good country is better than
this, but as the examples given are confessedly extreme cases,
correction for the variation of temperature during the day is very
seldom needed.
The steel tape has proved so superior to the Gunter’s chain in
accuracy and convenience that its use has now become almost uni-
versal, and the only matter of doubt with some surveyors is whether
it is not more affected by temperature, and that in this respect it
may compare unfavourably with the chain as a standard of length.
To understand this point aright it must be remembered that the
shape of an object has no effect whatever upon its lineal rate of
expansion in any direction, provided always that its mass is homo-
geneous ; thus, each edge of a cube of steel will expand precisely as
much as the thinnest possible bar of the same material of equal
length, but when, from the process of manufacture, by bending or
otherwise, the parts of a body are in different states of tension, its
expansion in any given direction will probably be irregular from the
change of temperature affecting the mutual relation of these tensions
and thus altering the shape of the object. A chain with its bent
links and rings is peculiarly liable to this, and though these varia-
tions will probably balance each other, the number of separate parts
being so large, yet the calculation of its length at a given tempera-
ture is always a matter of uncertainty. The idea that the heavy iron
chain is less sensitive to temperature than the tape is true only in
the sense that it is, from its mass, less speedy in responding to a
change of temperature ; that it will eventually be as much altered in
length as the tape lying beside it, is, with the possible irregularity
above mentioned, a certainty; but until its temperature is uniform
throughout its mass, its length is uncertain, and any comparison
made may be erroneous. The thin steel tape on the contrary re-
quires but a few seconds to acquire the temperature of the ground
10
Comparison of Standard Chains.


or air, and in fact shows a change of temperature much more quickly
than an ordinary thermometer. Thus, the advantage is in all points
on the side of the homogeneous, unjointed tape, because the neces-
sary time can always be given to the thermometer by laying it on
the ground before the preparations for the comparison are made,and
then unrolling the tape and placing it a few inches on one side
of the comparison pegs it will, by being slowly moved laterally up
to the pegs, acquire the ground temperature shown by the ther-
mometer.
The most favourable conditions for a comparison are secured on
a calm, and sunless day, the next on a calm, cloudless day ; hot
sunshine and a cool breeze are objectionable, and so are passing
clouds and the night time when heavy dew is being deposited. The
thermometer should be laid on the tape or alongside it in precisely
similar surroundings, and a metal mounting for it with the bulb
exposed is preferable ; the ordinary thermometer with the bulb sunk
in the wood will often give misleading indications. Two or more
thermometers are always desirable and are really necessary wherever
there is any variation in the nature of the ground c, g., part
sand and part grass. The ground should be levelled or brought to a
uniform slope and carefully smoothed, and the tape stretched to a
fixed tension by a spring balance. Comparison should be made on
at least two different occasions with the temperature as widely
different as possible, the tape being carefully examined and the com-
parisons repeated if the results are discordant. In operations of
great delicacy other more minute precautions will be taken, but to
secure the accuracy with which it is desirable that the length of a
standard should be known it is essential that the conditions here
enumerated should be obtained as nearly as time and circum-
stances will permit.
The simplest means of recording the length of a tape is to calcu-
late the temperature at which it would be standard length, and to
mark this temperature with the tension used upon it. Thus, sup-
pose a tape proved to be *4B inch long at a temperature of 118 0 ,
it would be standard length at 48 X 2 or 96° below this, and the
temperature 22 being marked upon it, its length at any other
temperature is readily found in hundredths of an inch by halving
the difference between the two temperatures. Thus, at "8° the
. 78—22 '
tape is —- = -28 inch long.
11
Comparison qf Standard Chains.


Date.
No. of
comparison.
Temperature.
Tape long
in Dec. inch.
Resulting
standard temp.
Dec. 30,
*875
1
87
•IO
67
11
11
2
93
•07
79
Jan. 5,
1876
3
85
’OS
75
11
11
4
89
•04
81
M
11
5
88
•04
80
11
11
6
98
•08
82
11
11
7
103
•08
87
Jan. 6,
1876
8
120
•22
76
99
19
9
123
* 2 S
73
99
99
10
119
•21
77
Mean, rejecting comp. 1 and 7
78
As an example, the following comparisons of a District Surveyor’s
tape with the Sydney standard are given :
Comparisons 1 and 7 are here faulty, and have been rejected from
the mean. The error in the first is partly accounted for by the
thermometer not being allowed sufficient time for a correct indica-
tion, and in the case of No. 7, a cold southerly wind, which sud-
denly came up and reached one end only of the tape, probably
masked the effect of temporary sunshine upon the remainder, the
thermometer, which was placed near the middle, being completely
protected from the wind by the adjoining building. The other
comparisons, which range over nearly 40°, agree satisfactorily since
in this instance the tension was applied by hand, a spring-balance
not being obtainable.
L. A. V.
12
Comparison of Standard Chains.


TELESCOPES.
In selecting a telescope, whether attached to a theodolite or otherwise,
care should be taken to observe that an object viewed through it
comes quickly into focus, the shorter the distance on either side of
focus that dimness of vision occurs, the better will be the quality of
the image, and it will consequently bear a higher power of eye-piece.
When on the contrary perceptible motion may be communicated
to the pinion screw moving the object-glass without immediate
effect upon the image of the object viewed, it shows that the object-
glass has not been entirely corrected for spherical aberration, and
therefore the rays refracted by it do not converge upon one common
point or focus.
A good telescope should show the details of an object viewed
sharp, clear, and without change of colour, or in other words the
object viewed should appear the same as one similarly viewed nearer
at hand by the naked eye.
A very good test for achromatism is afforded by observing the
small branches of a dead tree, and the points of the broken limbs-
thereof against a clear sky, and comparing the appearance with
similar objects nearer by the naked eye; when no difference,
especially change of colour, appears, it indicates that the materials
of the lenses forming the object-glass have been carefully selected,
and the effects of colour thereby counteracted.
It does not follow that chromatic error belongs to the object
glass alone, and before deciding >t may be advisable for the occasion
to try an eyepiece of known quality.
TESTING OF 5-INCH TRANSIT THEODOLITE.
The satisfactory working of this instrument will depend upon the
amount of accuracy attained by the makers in the axes and gradua-
tion of the circles, errors of centering belong to the former ; all other
errors in instruments of moderately good construction are adjustable
according to the skill and care of the observer.
13
Telescopes —Testing of Transit Theodolite.


Whilst testing an instrument it should be set up either on the
earth or upon a stone floor, and the level attached to the telescope
tested by observing that it is sensitive to the smallest movement of
the tangent screw of the vertical arc, appreciable on the vernier *
Being satisfied on this point, clamp the lower plate and level the
instrument by using the parallel plate screws and tangent screw of
the vertical limb alternately, and if the bubble keeps its place
throughout an entire revolution, when turned round slowly, the inner
azimuthal axis may be judged to be accurate. Next clamp the upper
horizontal plate and release the lower, and see that the bubble of the
upper level keeps its position through an entire revolution, and should
the result of this be satisfactory, the outer azimuthal axis may also
be approved of. The next test should be applied to the graduation
and centering, which may be dealt with as a whole, for error in
either can only be remedied by the maker. To do this set the zero
of one of the verniers, which may be called A, to any line of the
graduation, note the reading, and if greater than iBo° subtract that
amount, and the result should give the reading of the vernier B ; if
it does not exactly agree note whether the difference is to the right
( —) or to the left ( + ), then bring vernier B to the position
occupied by A, and note the reading of A and see that any difference
that existed before as a -f quantity now appears as —, or vice versa;
this test should be applied to several parts of the arc, and if no error
exceeding one minute is observed, the instrument may be considered
of average accuracy; if the errors are constant, and + and
alternately, it is caused by one of the verniers being slightly out of
position, a defect that can be allowed for, and using the allowance
as an index error is preferable to attempting to shift the vernier ;
the same test allowing for the graduation being in quadrants, and
not, as is the case with the lower limb, numbered all round the
circle, may next be applied to the vertical circle. If the error exceeds
one minute in any part of the arc, the instrument, if new, should
be rejected.
Note. —In the best five-inch Theodolites the displacement of the bubble
of the level is found to be about | inch for the first minute in elevation
or depression.
14
Testing of Transit Theodolite.


ADJUSTMENT OF TRANSIT THEODOLITE.
Upon the adjustment of the transit theodolite an excellent article
is given in the 3rd vol. of the 1872 edition of “ Mathematical
Instruments,” by J. F. Heather, No. 170, Weale’s Series, published
in London by Lockwood & Co., to which attention is directed.
The order of the adjustments, as given therein, should be strictly
adhered to, viz.:—
I. Adjustment for parallax.
11. Adjustment of the vertical axis or axis of the horizontal
limb.
111. Adjustment of the horizontal axis or axis of the vertical
limb and telescope.
IV. Collimation in azimuth, or adjustment of the vertical wire.
V. Collimation in altitude, or adjustment of the horizontal
wire.
The adjustment for parallax is naturally made first to avoid sub-
sequent disturbance of the instrument. The axes are next rectified—
the correct movements of the instrument depending upon them—
and finally, the intersection of the diaphragm wires, i.e., the point
of reference of the instrument, is brought to agree with the line of
collimation horizontally, and with the graduation of the vertical arc
and the telescope-level vertically.
The following article, which has been contributed, will be found
a valuable addition to that which is referred to above :
Adj. 111. Vertical revolution of the telescope, i.e., the horizontal
axis of the instrument.
It will occur to most persons that the readiest mode of discovering
and remedying any error in this respect might be by testing the
instrument against a fine plumb line, but, in practice, it is so
difficult to secure perfect stillness and steadiness of the plummet
that such a method is generally abandoned in despair; a better and
more practical method is, by means of an artificial horizon reflect-
ing an elevated point, such as a black dot on a wall or tree. In
default of an artificial horizon proceed as follows, —Select a point,
elevated about 40° on an upright tree, or on a wall, and after
carefully setting up the instrument, mark exactly on the wall, near
15
Adjustment of Transit Theodolite.


the ground, or on a piece of paper fixed to the tree, the point where*
the perpendicular, as indicated by the instrument, falls ; and this
point should be at the same distance from the telescope as thg
upper point, so that no change of focus is needed. Then reverse the
instrument in azimuth (thus having the spirit bubble underneath
the telescope), and repeat the operation. Should there be any
difference, halve it and make a mark, which will be truly per-
pendicular to the elevated point; then carefully raising or lowering
one end of the axis by the means provided, the vertical wire may be
made to intersect the upper point and the corrected lower point,,
when the telescope will move in a vertical plane.
Adj. IV. Set the instrument truly level upon suitable ground,
bring the vertical wire of the telescope to bear upon a point A, say
10 chains distant, turn over the telescope and put down another
point Bby the vertical wire, at the same distance; unclamp the#
instrument, turn it round iBo° (thus reversing the telescope), bring
the wire to bear upon the first point A, turn over the telescope, and
if the collimation be correct the vertical wire will coincide with the
second point B, if not adjust for one-fourth of the apparent error,,
and after a few trials the collimation will be perfect.
It will be obvious that by using a graduated slip of wood for the
mark B, the collimation may be perfected to the utmost nicety,
A.point may also be marked midway between the first and second
positions of B, and as this point must evidently be in a straight
line with A and the instrument, the vertical wire should, when
finally adjusted, cut both this point and A in either position of the
instrument.
The above should be considered as the best method of collima-
ting in azimuth, the method given in Heather’s treatise being open ,
to the objection of the difficulty of performing the operation
upon a small instrument without disturbing it.
Adj. V. Collimation of the horizontal wire. The collimation of
the horizontal wire may, with advantage, be adjusted by the gradua-
tion of the vertical circle, thus, —After carefully setting up the
instrument and levelling it, bring the telescope with the vernier of
the vertical arc carefully set to zero, to bear upon any convenient
surface ; bring the bubble of the telescope level to the centre of its
run and mark a point intersected by the horizontal wire, then turn
round the instrument iBo°, reverse the telescope, and bringing the
16
Adjustment of Transit Theodolite.


vernier of the vertical arc to zero, the same point should be intersected
as before; but if not, the wire should be adjusted to cut a potnt
midway between the two, and the operation repeated to ensure
accuracy.
To effect the same thing without interfering with the diaphragm,
and probably deranging the fourth adjustment, bring the wire by
means of the twin screws to intersect the middle point, and then
adjust the level on the telescope by means of its capstan-headed
screw. E. T.
A convenient modification of this adjustment is as
Level the instrument and set the vertical arc and bubble as before,
select a well defined point at any altitude, intersect it by the
horizontal wire and read off its altitude; turn round the instrument
iBo°, turn over the telescope and again read the altitude of the
object; should the readings differ, half their sum will evidently be
the true altitude of the point; again turn round the instrument,
and setting the vernier to this true altitude, bring the wire to inter-
sect the point by means of the twin screws which clip the stud
upon the standard of the instrument; depress the telescope till the
vernier reads zero, and adjust the bubble of the telescope-level to
the middle of its run, by the capstan-headed screw.
For the sake of simplicity one vernier only has been referred to
above, and when only one is used it should be plainly marked to
prevent mistake. Should there be any difference between the
verniers it will be well to adjust one of them for ordinary observa-
tions, and then using the last method of adjustment, and reading
both verniers in each position of the instrument, take half the
difference between the means of the verniers as an index error to
be applied to the mean of the verniers whenever observations of
great nicety require both verniers to be read. This adjustment may
be made with objects of different altitudes, and it then becomes a
good test of the quality of the vertical arc, since the index errors
obtained by observation of different objects will agree closely if the
graduation, verniers and centering of the vertical arc are good.
The sign of the index error is determined by comparing the
altitude as shown by the vernier with the true altitude of the object,
thus if the true altitude be the greater, the sign of the index error
will be +.
17
Adjustment of Transit Theodolite .


Angles of depression should be preceded. by a minus sign ; the
index error will then be added algebraically with its original sign.
In the reversed position of the instrument, the index error changes
its sign, but angles of elevation and depression being written with
+ and signs, respectively, and the index error added algebraically
as before, all doubt and chance of mistake will be avoided.
Should there be occasion to use the instrument for levelling
operations, the telescope-level should be adjusted to the horizontal
wire by the aid of the levelling-staff in the same manner as that of
a dumpy level; the graduation of the vertical arc may then be
tested by the method given above.
L. A. V.
MAGNETIC DEVIATION.
This subject was treated of at length by the Government Astrono-
mer, Mr. H. C. Russell, in a paper read before the Royal Society of
Sydney, on the 12th July, 1871. The paper was illustrated by
diagrams too large to be reproduced here ; the following extracts
from the paper will, however, afford valuable information to the
surveyor:—
“ From the foundation of the Colony up to 1864, observations
on the variations of the magnetic needle at Sydney had generally
shown a gradual increase of easterly variation ; it then appeared
that the maximum had been reached, and westerly motion had
begun. Subsequent investigation has shown that such is the case,
and that the westerly motion is at about the same rate as the easterly
motion had been.
“ From what is to be shown presently, it will appear that the
common practice of taking the average annual variation between
two periods, and thence calculating the variation at another period,
is by no means a safe one; and to assume that because the varia-
tion at Sydney has changed from an easterly to a westerly motion,
therefore the same change has taken place all over Australia, would
be contrary to experience in other parts of the world.
u From the observations which have been made at London and
Paris, since 1580, it appears that although the variation at the two
18
Magnetic Deviation.


o /
#
Cook
o
April zgth
Lieut. Shutlaud ...
8 6
o
July
1788
Brewster
o
March
1793
Flinders
Brewster
34
*
February and March..
1813
P. P. King
o
October ....
Oxley
o
April
l8l^
1818
Roe
n
tQaa
Brewster
w w
»
October
Io22
1822
Rumker
April ..
Sir T, Brisbane
8 45
o
1823
1823
places was decreasing, and the magnetic coincided with the true
meridian at London in 1657, the same coincidence did not take
place at Paris until 1669, or 12 years later. A similar difference is
noticeable here, for while the easterly increase ceased in Sydney in
1858-9, it did not cease at Melbourne until 1867 (8 years).
“At the present time (July, 1871) the variation at Sydney is
9 0 35' East, and the same variation would be found all along the
line joining Sydney and Cooma. Lines drawn on the map of the
Colony parallel to this, represent lines of equal variation throughout
their length ; approximately places one degree of longitude from
each other will differ 21' in variation, the variation decreasing to
the westward.
“In other words, the variation is 2i' less for every fifty-eight
miles westward of Sydney.
“ The greatest diurnal range of the magnet occurs in February, and
amounts to 13', the magnet pointing 6' West of its mean reading
at 9 a.m., and 7' East at 2 p.m.
“ As a general rule, 7 p.m. to 8 p.m. is the best time to take the
variation, or get the true magnetic medium, because at that time the
magnet is quieter and deviates less than at any other time in the day.
"List of Determinations of the Magnetic Variation in
New South Wales, —1770 to 1871.
Variation. Month. Year.
19
Magnetic Deviation,


List, &c— continued.
'Variation.
Brewster 8 55 o
Dunlop 9 3 48
Dunlop g 21 7
Sir J. C Ross 9 57
Blackwood 9 25 o
Admiral King . H 9 42 52
Admiral King g 47 56
Denham 10 o o
Denham 10 o o
“Novara” (ship) 9 59 54
Smalley g 949 4
Smalley 9 42 54
Smalley 9 40 40
Bussell 9 36 36
Russell 9 35 o
Month.
Jan. and Feb.* 1824
Aprilt 1825
September 1532
July 4 1841
February 1844
April 1851
September 1857
December 1859
The above table, which is taken from the Diagram No 1, gives
the results of all the observations that have been published since the
foundation of the Colony. In explanation thereof Mr. Russell adds: —
“ Diagram No. 1, was formed by projecting the whole of these
results, except the two first. It is at once evident that some of the
observations must have been in error, especially from 1813 to
1823, and again in 1841 and 1864. Between King and Oxley,
though only a year apart in time, the difference is 18'; and between
Roe and Sir Thomas Brisbane, there is a difference of 21', though
only a year apart; and there are two intermediate results, both of
which are probably good. In 1841 it is evident that the assumed
variation is the true one, and the same with 1864.”
The deviation or variation of the needle since the discovery of
Australia progressed from the true meridian towards the East,
it attained its maximum in Sydney in 1858-9, in Melbourne not
till 1867, and is now returning westerly towards the true North.
* Noon.
4 Noon.
X Probable misprint here 57' for 27'.
5 First published result 10° 1'38"
20
Magnetic Deviation.




Diagram
illustrating Convergence of Meridians


REFERENCE TO DIAGRAM.
u a ', aa' true meridians, the convergence of which is exaggerated.
lb', bo' parallels of latitude.
« d c true east and west line run by theodolite.
dfg h ij traverse commencing at d, the mean true departure of the
line/g being 334 chains E., and of h i 800 chains E.
k d k' magnetic meridian through d.
I I', 11' lines drawn parallel to kdk' by which the traverse is plotted.
m m' t mm' lines drawn parallel to a da! the true meridian of the
point d at distances of 68 chains corresponding to
each half minute of convergence, the eighth and
sixteenth lines only being shown. These lines are for
the purpose of estimating the convergence correction
at any part of the traverse.
nn' line of equal magnetic variation, bearing N. 35 0 E.
The surveyor’s plan of the traverse will be drawn to suit the
magnetic north line k d k', the diagram being drawn to the true
north to make the true meridians and parallels of latitude sym-
metrical.
21
Reference.to Diagram.


CONVERGENCE OF MERIDIANS.
(See Table at page 46.)
The areas and distances with which surveyors employed in the
alienation of the public lands have to deal are sufficiently small to
.enable them without error to regard the earth as a plane, and to
represent their surveys upon paper with the distances and included
angles which they find upon the ground. Their plans are, therefore,
drawn or projected upon paper in accordance with rules similar to
those adhered to by map-constructors when using the conical pro-
jection ; and this projection is at once the best and most simple
means of illustrating the influence of the convergence of true
meridians upon surveyors’ traverses, and of practically dealing with
its effects upon their work.
The most valuable properties of the conical projection are, that
for areas as large as an average county, all distances and included
angles are sensibly correct upon the paper ; a parallel of latitude, bb'
in the diagram, is represented by the arc of a circle, the radius of
which is the cotangent of the latitude multiplied by the length of
the earth’s radius on the scale of the map; and all great circles of
the sphere, i.e., straight lines as run by the theodolite upon the
ground, are represented by straight lines, as cde in the diagram.
In the southern hemisphere, therefore, meridians will appear as
straight lines, ad ad, which cross the parallels of latitude at right
angles and converge towards the bottom or south of the map, just
as straight lines run out true south upon the ground from
different points on the tame parallel of latitude approach each other
as they proceed, the distance between any pair of meridians being
sensibly equal to the equatorial distance between them multiplied
by the cosine of the parallel of latitude on which the distance is
measured, the earth being regarded as a sphere.
Suppose now a line is started with the theodolite on a true east
bearing from a point, the latitude of which is 34 0 S., and is con-
tinued straight, it will make right angles with the meridian through
22
Convergence of Meridians.


the point of commencement, but this meridian will be the only one
which it will cross at right angles ; as the line proceeds eastwards,
the meridians, encroaching upon the north-east quadrant in conse-
quence of their convergence towards the south, will meet it at a
constantly lessening angle, so that the true bearing of the line will
continually decrease ; conversely, when a true west line is run out
its bearing will increase, and the change of bearing is sensibly pro-
portionate to the distance of departure made from the initial meri-
dian. This connection between distance of departure and change
of bearing holds good with a traverse in any direction, whether in
a single line or in many, and should the traverse return to the same
true meridian but further north or south, the departure and con-
vergence will evidently both be nil.
The east and west line being a great circle of the sphere, will be
represented on the conical projection by a straight line cde in the
diagram, drawn at right angles to the meridian add through the
starting point d, and this line crosses the meridians to the eastward
at a constantly lessening angle northwards on the paper, just as is
the case with the theodolite line and the actual meridians on the
ground. This most useful property of the projection holding good
with a traverse or series of lines no matter how complicated, if
follows that the use of the convergence table will not involve any
change in the practice which has obtained hitherto in the Surveyor
General’s Department either in the conduct of the survey in the field,
in the plot, in the calculation of direct bearing and distance, or in
the subsequent compilation in the office. Surveys will be run and
plotted throughout, and all calculations made from the initial meri-
dian, whether true or magnetic; and the value of the convergence
table is here apparent, for by its aid alone is the surveyor enabled to
utilize his azimuth observations, detect and throw out instrumental
errors and thus keep the meridians of his work throughout parallel
to the meridian he adopted at the commencement.
When a number of surveys covering a large area have to be fitted
together, as in the compilation of a county map, it is necessary to
lay down the converging meridians upon the paper, to which the
starting points of the different surveys may be referred ; but in the
plan of a single survey, even if 100 miles in length east and west,
it is evident that to apply a correction for convergence to the bear-
2 3
Convergence of Meridians.


mgs, and then to plot them from meridians converging upon the
paper, is a useless complication, for the angle of convergence of
the meridian lines so laid down is precisely the same as the correc-
tion applied to the bearing of the traverse ; and fuither, it becomes
practically an impossibility to calculate the direct bearing and
distance. By adherence to the initial azimuth and the use of
parallel meridian lines for the protraction of the bearings, the office
work is performed in the simplest and most accurate manner, the
direct bearing and distance are calculated in the ordinary way, and
the corrections for convergency, should the real bearings of the lines
be required, are afterwards obtained by mere scaling on the plan
and inspection of the table, as will be shown hereafter. Two
suiveys starting on the true meridian from points differing in
longitude and meeting in a common line will differ in the bearing of
that line by an angle equal to the convergence due to the difference
of departure, or more accurately, the difference of longitude of their
starting points; and the reciprocal bearings of two distant hills will
differ in a similar manner, the table furnishing a good approxima-
tion to the solution of the problem of the “ back bearing,” which
is, from the complications introduced by the spheroidal shape of the
earth, one of the most abstruse that occur in geodetic survey.
In the field the procedure will be as follows : —At the starting
point the surveyor will find the true meridian, and consequently the
variation of the magnetic meridian adopted for his survey, and will
proceed until it is necessary to observe for meridian again ;he will
then determine the true bearing of one of his traverse lines and
having applied the convergence correction and subtracted the
magnetic variation adopted at the commencement, will compare
this result with the bearing of the line as shown by the field notes ;
should there be any difference it is instrumental error either in the
traverse or the meridian observations; and presuming the observations
to be trustworthy this error should be corrected, the work being
thus brought back to its original meridian. To obtain the correc-
tion for convergence it is necessary to find the true departure of the
traverse ; its magnetic bearings, therefore, must all be increased by
the variation and the departure thus calculated, then, selecting the
proper latitude column in the table, opposite the nearest quantity
corresponding to the departure, the convergence will be found. If
the departure is east, this will be added to the real bearing of the
24
Convergence of Meridians.


line, as determined by observation, to obtain its proper bearing by
the traverse free from instrumental error, and if west, subtracted.
{Example* I).
The original azimuth of the survey is thus adhered to throughout,
and by it the direct bearings and distances are calculated and the
work plotted, and these are the bearings that should appear upon
the plan. If the local true bearings of the lines are required they
should be given in a second column, and for this purpose it will be
both accurate and expeditious to rule lines on the plan parallel to
the true north line through the point of commencement, and at
distances corresponding to each half minute of convergence in the
table, mm' m the diagram, and thus obtain the correction by inspec-
tion ; this will he applied to the instrumental true bearings of the
lines (i.e., their magnetic bearings by the traverse plus the variation
adopted at the start) in the opposite way to that in which it was
used above, or subtracted if the departure is east, and added if west.
(Example II).
Finally, should the local magnetic bearing of each line be
required, the magnetic bearings of the lines by the field-book
must first be corrected for convergence of the true meridians as
above, and an additional correction in the ratio of 21' for every 58
miles of departure (true as in the first instance) must be applied as
explained in the article on “ Magnetic Deviation ” (Ex. III). This
quantity, however, is only a mean for the Colony generally. It
doubtless varies in different localities and may change materially in
course of time ; the problem is also one that will rarely, if ever,
occur in connection with a traverse, but as it illustrates the method
of determining the true bearing of an old boundary run originally
by the circumferentor, its consideration will not be out of place in
this article.
It will now be evident that with the exception of meridians of
longitude, and the line of the equator itself, a straight line of any
considerable length on a fixed bearing is an impossibility. If the
line is straight its bearing will constantly change ; if it keeps its
bearing it will either run in the curve known to navigators as a
rhumb-line, or be a parallel of latitude if it runs true east or west.
The line of the ecliptic as drawn upon a terrestrial globe affords a
25
Convergence of Meridians.


ready illustration of the subject. This line is a great circle, and is
therefore straight as a theodolite would trace it on the ground, the
spheroidal figure of the earth being disregarded throughout this
article as having no appreciable effect upon ordinary surveys. At
the southern solstice, where the ecliptic touches the tropic of Capri-
corn, usually placed on the globe at the meridian of longitude 180°
E. of Greenwich, its bearing is evidently true east; tracing it
thence eastwards its bearing will be seen to decrease until at longi-
tude 270° E. of Greenwich it meets the equator at an angle of
N. 66° 32' 33" E., or exactly as much to the north of east as the
latitude 23 0 27' 27" of the starting point, or of the point at which
the line was running due east. It will be noticed also, that in
accordance with what is indicated by the eight degrees of latitude
over which the convergence table extends, the bearing of the line
has been changing in a ratio steadily diminishing as it proceeds,,
until at the equator the change ceases, for here the meridians are
parallel. Crossing the equator the meridians converge on the north
pole, and the bearing of the line increases in an increasing ratio
until another quadrant of longitude is traversed, and the line
crosses the meridian of Greenwich in latitude 23 0 27' 27" N., and
once more bears due east. Thence its bearing continues to increase,
but in a diminishing ratio until in longitude 90° E. it crosses the
equator on a bearing of S, 66° 32' 33" E., and finally arrives at the
point from which it started, and bearing due east as at first, thus
completing the circle.
The approximate formula for convergence is very easily remem-
bered. It is : — convergence departure in arc X tangent of the mean
latitude. The departure in arc in seconds is obtained by dividing the
departure by 1*54 chains (or, approximately chains) that being the
length of \" of arc at the equator, and this multiplied by the tangent of
the mean latitude of the line or traverse will give the convergence in
seconds. Results thus obtained will be found to agree closely with
the table at the end of this article, which has been calculated by
the Government Astronomer from a formula of greater precision
than the above.
Example I. A traverse dfj (see diagram) 15 miles in length is run
in a south-easterly direction in latitude 34 0 S., and observations for
(3~: \"wi
26
Convergence of Meridians.


true meridian at the commencement make the magnetic variation
to be 9 0 25' E. Near the middle of the traverse a line which bv
the field-book bears 74 0 12' is by observation made to be 83° 36' 30"
true, what is the error of the traverse ?
The true departure of the traverse is now calculated by adding
9 0 25' to the bearing of each line by the field-book, and entering the
traverse table with the nearest degree and chain only, it is found to
be 334 chains east. The convergence correction is therefore additive,
and in the table under latitude 34 0 and opposite 342*15 chains, the
nearest quantity to 334 chains is 2' 30", the correction required.
Then, — “ 0 > "
True bearing of line 83 36 30
Convergence for 334 chains E -f o 2 30
Bearing of line by initial true meridian ... 83 39 o
Variation ... ... ... ... ... —'9 *25 o
Bearing of line by the initial magnetic meridian 74 14 o
By the traverse the bearing is 74 0 12', an error of 2' has there-
fore crept in ; this being corrected the survey proceeds with 74®
14' as the bearing of the reference line, and at the end similar
observations and calculations are made.
Example ll.—Required in the above survey the true bearing of
the line hi, which by the instrument bears 87° 16', the true depar-
ture of the middle of the line from the starting point, scaled upon
the plan from the true meridian add, being 800 chains east.
The correction will now be subtractive, the true bearing of the
line being required, and its value being found as before, the calcula-
tion will be— 0 > "
Magnetic bearing of line by traverse ... 87 16 o
Magnetic variation ... ... ... 4. 25 o
Bearing by initial true meridian 96 41 o
Convergence for 800 chains E o 5 45
True bearing of line 963515
Note.—ln long traverses it may sometimes be advisable to inter-
polate the quantities in the table for intermediate latitudes.
27
Convergence of Meridians.


2l' X l 6 i = — 6 O
58
— o ii 45
Local magnetic bearing ... ... 87 4 15
Example 111. Required the local magnetic bearing of the line
hi, in the last example.
The change of bearing due to convergence is —s' 45", being calcu-
lated from the true departure of the line as in the preceding
example, but the change of magnetic variation in the ratio of 21'
for every 58 miles must not be reckoned from a true meridian
through the starting point, but from a line drawn on a bearing of
S. 35 0 W. through that point; this line being approximately the
bearing between Sydney and Cooma (see “ Magnetic Deviation ”)
will, local irregularities excepted, give the line of equal variation in
the locality, and from it must the distance of the traverse line be
measured on a true east and west bearing. This line being drawn
on the plan, nn' in the diagram, the distance of the line hi from it
is found to be 1320 chains or i6£ miles due east, and the correc-
tion will be subtractive because the variation increases to the east-
ward, and the magnetic bearing of a line therefore becomes less.
The calculation will be made as follows :
O / //
Instrumental magnetic bearing by traverse 87 16
Convergence 800 chains E. ... —5 45
Change of variation miles E.,
The magnetic variation at the place in question is evidently
•q° 25' o" -f 6' o" , or 9 0 31' o" E., the true bearing of the line is
therefore 87 0 4' 15" -f 9° 31' o", or 96° 35' 15", which agrees
with the result in Example 11.
28
Convergence of Meridians.


Sufficient data have not yet been collected to afford the means of
laying down lines of equal variation in the north and interior of
this Colony ; but from the general trending of these lines, as shown
upon nautical charts, it would appear that as the distance from tlie
coast increases the lines run more nearly north and south, until on
the western boundary of the Colony a line of equal variation prob-
ably bears N. 15 0 E.
To illustrate the retrace of an old magnetic line a recent success-
ful survey will be an instructive example. The surveyor had to
re-mark a magnetic west boundary about 8 miles long, surveyed
towards the close of the year 1827 by circumferentor in the neigh-
bourhood of Dungog. He was accordingly instructed to start his
trial line at the eastern extremity of the boundary on a true bear-
ing 278° 51' 30", and was further informed that as he continued
this line its bearing would gradually change to 278° 54' at the
middle, and 278° 56' at the western end. These instructions having
been carried out, the offset to the corner peg was found to be 1-79
chains, showing an error of in the direction of the line,, which,
considering the chances of error from inaccuracy of the needle of
the circumferentor and from the daily variation of the needle itself,
was a very satisfactory result.
The instructions were based upon the following calculations :
There being another line to be run in the locality, a mean point
was selected upon the Colony map, and its distance from the pro-
duction of the line from Cooma to Sydney was 43 miles by scale
due west, hence the variation was 21' x or 16' less than at
Sydney. Next by interpolation of the variations given in the
article on “ Magnetic Deviation,” the variation at Sydney for the
end of the year 1827 was fixed at 9 0 io', and the local variation at
the time of the original survey was hence assumed to be 9 0 io' E.
less 16' or 8° 54' E. This made the true bearing of the boundary
to be 278° 54' at its middle point, and its bearing at either end was
found by help of the convergence table, the odd half minute being
thrown into the eastern end for convenience of the survey.
Otherwise, the present variation at the middle of the line might
have been found by observation, and the line run upon a magnetic
29
Convergence of Meridians.


meridian 20' to the westward, corresponding to the increase of
variation at Sydney between 1827 and 1876, the date of the re-
survey, it being, in the absence of fuller information, necessary to
assume that the yearly change of the variation in all parts of the
Colony is the same as at Sydney. In this survey the variation at
the eastern end was observed to be 9 0 17' E. This would give a
variation of about g° 13' E. at the middle of the line, differing only
i' from the variation as calculated from Sydney ; but as the needle
used was not an approved standard, this can only be regarded as a
fortunate coincidence confirming the general accuracy of the theory
upon which the calculations were based. L. A. V.
TAPE CHAIN.
The question as to who first substituted the steel riband for the
ordinary chain has often been asked, and in reply I may state that
my attention was called to it by Mr. F. B. W. Woolrych, District
Surveyor, in the year 1872, who showed me a length of crinoline
steel, to which he had fitted the handles of a Surveyor’s chain.
He stated that he had used it in the alignment of the streets of
Randwick, and the results were not only far more reliable than tne
ordinary chain, but the work progressed with greater speed.
During the year 1873 the steel tape came into general use in this
Department. P.F.A., 2 March, ’B3.
In country where there are not many slopes steeper than one in
five, or say 12 0 , and in measurements requiring great accuracy,
such as detail work of the general survey, where numerous inter-
mediate points are to be picked up along main traverse lines, the
work can be done very expeditiously and with great precision by
using a chaining level of the pattern, as shown in diagram, together
with the elongated plummets.
The level should be made of light wood not likely to crack, and
consists of a board 4 feet long, by 2 inches deep, to the sides of
which two other boards i| inch by \ inch, and also 4 feet in
30
Convergence of Meridians — Tape Chain.


length, are screwed so that the upper edges project i an inch above
the first board, thus making a groove or trough £ an inch deep.
On one side of the above, and in the centre, is fixed an 8-inch,
ordinary carpenter’s level, with sliding brass shutters to preserve
the glass from breakage. The level should be so adjusted that
when the bubble is in the centre of its run the groove is perfectly
horizontal (see diagram). The width of the board, and conse-
quently of the groove, depends upon that of the steel band used,
for the groove should be at least a quarter of an inch wider, to
allow of sufficient play. % The instrument can be neatly finished
and varnished to preserve it from the weather, or painted in links
and decimals of a link on one side, and feet and inches on the
other for short offsetting, and need not weigh more than 2 lbs.
The plummets should be 1 foot long, and of the shape shown
in diagram.
Three men are required in chaining, one at each end, and the
assistant or third man at the centre to use the level. The surveyor
in charge of the party can be best employed watching the measure-
ment generally, especially at whichever end the plummet is being
used. As soon as the front chainman is put in line, the man at
the centre slips the level under the steel band so that the 50-link
mark rests in the groove at the middle. By holding the level
lightly in the centre with one hand he can ascertain which end of
the measuring band requires to be raised or depressed, and signals
accordingly ; he then raises his own hand with the level till he
feels a slight pressure all along it, so as to get rid of the sag. A
little practice will enable him to ascertain when his hand is perfectly
level with each end, arid consequently the whole length of the band
horizontal.
The shape of the plummets enables the chainmen to plumb with
far greater accuracy than with ordinary ones, as they can readily
hold the handle of the band and the plumb line nearly as high as
they can reach, and still watch the point of the plummet with ease.
The most convenient band to use is one of Chesterman’s best steel,
a quarter of an inch wide, divided to 1,000. As its weight is but
lb, and it is always supported in the centre, only°very few
pounds pull is sufficient to get it practically straight. The level
eliminates sag, places the chain band horizontal, and keeps it from
31
Tape Chain.


vibration, or any side swing in strong wind, so that the full length
of 100 links can be safely used under circumstances that would
be unadvisable without it. Although of course any plummets can
be used with the level. I find such a very marked increase of
accuracy is obtained by the employment of the long ones recom-
mended, that I consider it indispensable that, at any rate, the hind
chainman should always be supplied with one.
D. M. M.,
15th March, 1883.
The following extract from a paper on the “ Survey of the City of
Sydney” may be found interesting and perhaps instructive.
Instructions are then issued to the detail surveyor who is supplied
with a tracing, on which is given every information with regard to
the bearings and lengths of lines adjacent to this section, reference-
bearings, and the adjusted co-ordinates of the stations. These he
accepts as accurate. The instructions require that one of the lines,,
length of which is given, be re-chained carefully, in order that the
standard of length used in the skeleton-survey may be adapted.
The detail surveyor then makes a surround of his section, traversing
also any by-ways which intersect it. The field notes are kept in
ink in the field, and should any correction therein be required, the
erroneous information is lightly crossed through, and the correction
made above it. The different surrounds having been found to close
within reasonable limits (say half a link in a surround of 80 chains),
a perfect close is made by distribution of that error as the judgment
of the surveyor may indicate.
All permanent features are then fixed with reference to the
traverse lines, preferably by actually observed bearings and distances
from suitably placed instrument stations. Offsets of more than 5
links are discountenanced (exception being made in the case of any
ill-defined features or any dilapidated or worthless building. In
addition to fixing the corners of buildings by bearings and distances
a check thereon is obtained by taping the lengths of buildings
themselves. In order to obtain accuracy arid independent values
3 2
Tape Chain.






for the bearings of such objects the following method is adopted:—
The theodolite is set to read the back bearing of the last traverse
line, and with the instrument in that position the directions of the
forward station and any other object to be fixed, are observed and
entered in the field-book. These are then approximate bearings.
Now with the instrument still clamped to the bearing of the last
object observed, the telescope is brought on to the first station, and
another round is taken and booked. The two rounds are thus
completely independent of one another, and risk of clerical or other
blunders is avoided. A third round is taken in case of differences
appearing.
BAROMETRIC MEASUREMENT OF HEIGHTS.
The sum of the readings is to their difference as 55,000 feet to the
difference in heights between the stations at which the readings
were taken.
TENSION OF STEEL RIBANDS.
The amount of strain applied to a steel riband or flattened wire is
an important factor in the length when the sectional area is small.
The following simple formula gives the increase in length for a
given tension:—
1t x I
28,000,000 s
Where t is the tension in pounds, I the length, and s the sectional
area in inches.
Example:—Let t = 10 lbs., I = 66 feet, breadth £ inch,
thickness = inch, then
10 x 66 x 12
Increase
28,000,000 x *25 x *oi
= 0'11314 inches.
H. S. H
The sectional area is most accurately found by dividing the
length of the riband expressed in inches into the cubic content of
the riband also in inches, which is obtained by a knowledge of its
weight and the specific gravity of steel.
Barometric Measurement of Heights—Tension of Steel Ribands.


CHAINING WITH LONG STEEL RIBANDS.
Description of Ribands.
The ribands now used for chaining under the hypotenusal system
of measurement are of steel, of uniform area in their transverse,
and are to be had in sizes from *045 inch wide and *Ol5 inch thick
upwards, or in weight from about *2 lb. per chain to I*s lb. per
chain. Riband weighing ’3 lb. per chain, about *075 inch wide, is
recommended where great accuracy is required.
Ribands are elastic.
These ribands are elastic, and if stretched by the application of
any moderate tension return upon its removal to their original
lengths. In practice, a tension sufficient to cause a permanent
change in length is never required; hence frequent comparisons
with a standard are unnecessary.
Law of Elasticity.
The elasticity varies slightly in different kinds of steel; but for
practical purposes it may be accepted as constant. The change of
length in any riband varies as the product of the tension and the
length of the riband. In different ribands of the same length and
material it varies inversely as the area of their transverse sections,
or what is equivalent, as their weights.
Coefficient of Elasticity.
The change in a steel riband, 1 chain of which weighs 1 lb
avoirdupois, is *00000779 c h a i n for each pound of tension applied
and for each chain in its length.
34
Chaining with long Steel Ribands.


Formula for Elasticity.
Hence if I original length of riband, unit i chain,
L stretched length,
iv =. weight i chain of riband, unit I lb.,
t = tension applied, unit I lb.,
k •= "00000779 chain,
then Z, :z: Z/ i -f —\ , ox L —I = —.
\w J w
From this formula the change for a riband of any given weight
may tye computed.
Effect of Heat upon Elasticity ignored.
The effect of heat upon the elasticity of the steel ribands may
practically be ignored.
Spring Balance.
The most convenient instrument at present existing for applying
the tension is a Salter’s Spring Balance.
Care in using.
In applying the tension it is necessary to observe that the bar
attached to the spring in the balance does not touch the sides of the
slot through which it passes.
Effect of Heat thereon.
The effect of heat upon the spring balance is inconsiderable, and
may in practice be invariably disregarded. It is approximately
proportionately to the product of the tension and the temperature,
and may be taken as -000135 lb. for each degree Fahrenheit and
each pound avoirdupois.
Tensions to be applied to Supported Riband.
The tensions to be applied to the riband should be between 20
and 45 lbs. for each pound weight in 1 chain of riband. A
tension of 33J lbs. to each pound weight in 1 chain of riband is
recommended, and a complete table has been computed with this
35
Chaining with long Steel Ribands.


as a basis. The table is subjoined. For a riband *3 ib. weight per
chain, such as was hereinbefore recommended, the tension would
be 10 lbs., viz., 33! x *3.
Standard Tension.
The tension referred to is that to be applied when the riband is
supported hroughout its entire length upon a smooth plane surface,
and is hereinafter denominated the Standard Tension.
Elimination of the Effect of Suspension.
It frequently happens in practice, more especially in rugged
country, that it becomes necessary to use the riband suspended.
In such a case, either a correction must be made for the shorten-
ing, through its curvature, of the distance between the ends of the
riband, or the effect of this shortening must be eliminated by a
sufficient increase of the tension.
For the computation of this increased tension the following
formulae are given :
Formula when Ends are Horizontal.
When the ends of the riband are in the same horizontal plane,—
Let h tension to be applied,
t =. standard tension,
w weight of 1 chain of riband,
then ft 3 tti 1
24 k
From this equation h may readily be found with the aid of a table
of squares and cubes.
Formulce when Ends are inclined to Horizon.
When the ends of the riband are not in the same horizontal
plane, —
Let £ = angle between chord of riband and zenith,
T' = tension to be applied at upper end,
T = tension to be applied at lower end.
T' + T
T = ,
2
3 6
Chaining with Long Steel Ribands.


then t 3 - h* = p * 3Sin \
24 k
rp/ 1 Cos
I=T + ,
2
rp CoS £
Approximate Formulas when Ends are inclined to Horizon.
The values for T' and T may also be found with sufficient accu-
racy from the value of h by means of the following equations :
T = t + {h -t) Sin C + l ™ Cos £,
2
T = t + (h -t) Sin C - lwCos C,
2
By means of the above formulae tables of tensions may be com-
puted for use in the field. They may, however, be more rapidly
constructed from subjoined tables I and 11.
Formulas for Correction with Constant Tension.
If it be preferred to apply a correction to the distance recorded on
riband instead of increasing the tension, it may be found by the
following formulae: —
Let r = the correction,
t the constant tension,
C = angle between chord of riband and zenith,
l 3 w*Sin*C
then r + lw Cos 2, the upper sign in the denominator
being taken when the tension is applied at the lower end of the
riband, and the lower sign when the tension is applied at the upper
end. When the ends are in the same horizontal plane, the equation
becomes r =
241 2
37
Chaining icith Long Steel Ribands.


Reduction of Correction to Horizontal Value.
This correction is in the direction of the chord of the ribands
If it be reduced to its horizontal value, the equation becomes
Pic 2 Sin 3 (
24 (t+^j^y
Expansion from Heat.
The expansion of steel due to heat may be accepted as uniform
between 32 0 and 212° Fahrenheit, and for the steel ribands used is
about ‘OOll5 of its length for that variation of temperature. From
this may be deduced the following simple and accurate formula: —
Formula for Expansion.
Let 2 d difference or temperature, unit i° Fahr.,
I = length of riband, unit 1 chain,
R correction in hundredths of links,
, „ dl
then R =. —.
8
Defect in Length Riband upon Uneven Surface.
The friction upon ordinary ground of a light steel riband under
mpderate tension may be neglected without appreciable error.
When the surface is slightly uneven, and the riband lying in a suc-
cession of little curves, a slight increase in tension will correct the
defect in length. The amount may readily be determined by a few
simple experiments, and in practice is applied according to the
judgment of the surveyor.
Five-chain Riband marked every 10 links convenient.
A five-chain riband in one piece, marked at every 10 links, will
be found exceedingly convenient in rugged country. The terminal
marks should, in order to permit their accurate adjustment to any
desired points, be 2 or 3 inches short of the ends of the riband.
38
Chaining with Long Steel Ribands.


Attachment of Balance .
The balance end should be as close as possible to the spring
balance; or the balance may be so attached to the riband that its
index point will define the end of the chain. The latter method
has the advantage of indicating together the place to mark at and
the tension.
Noting to Hundredth Links.
Steel ribands marked at hundredth links are now obtainable. By
means of these, fractions of the chain may be recorded to almost
any assigned degree of accuracy. For facility of computation, even
chains should be laid out wherever possible.
Record in Field Book.
The record in the Field Book may be made thus.—
500*00 (links) D 20 0 12' 15" F 72 = 469*357
30
22-ios >» E i° 30' oo" F 74 = 22-103
30
D signifies depression; E, elevation; F, Fahrenheit; the sub-
scribed 30, the temperature of the riband when at standard length.
Degree of Precision , Angles of Altitude.
The degree of precision required in the observation of the angles of
elevation and depression will depend upon the rapidity with which
the cosine of the angle changes and the results required.
Corrections , how applied.
The tension correction given is applied irrespective of the cor-
rection for temperature. The latter is computed subsequently and
in conjunction with the reduction to horizontal value. The chord
of the riband is observed for the angle required to effect this reduc-
tion, the tensions given being those that make the chord of the
riband equal in length under the increased tension to the riband
itself at standard tension.
39
Chaining with Long Steel Ribands.


Mending Ribands.
The long ribands, though rarely broken by surveyors experienced
in their use, suffer somewhat in the hands of novices; and after
the nice adjustment of the marks denoting the ten-link distances,
it is very desirable that the riband should be mended so as to pre-
serve exactly its original length. The necessary materials formend-
ing are bits of spare riband, very thin silver solder, fine iron binding
wire, a blowpipe, a file, and borax. The parts to be united must
be filed bright, as also a short length of the spare riband, which is
then laid upon the riband at the break, with a thin strip of the
solder and a little borax laid between, and the whole bound with
the iron wire. The riband must be very firmly fastened on to a
piece of wood on each side of the joint, so as to be immovable, and
the soldering may then be effected by means of the blowpipe.
After soldering the iron wire and fused borax may be removed by
filing, and all sharp edges should be rounded off. The original
length is thus preserved, the broken ends being made to meet
exactly. To prevent breakage, care should be taken not to allow
the riband to bend sharply round twigs, nor to run down a steep
hill of its own accord, and thus become entangled.
Subjoined are tables which enable the computation of tensions to
be made expeditiously. Examples are also given of the use of the
second table.
G. H. K.
40
Chaining icith Long Steel Ribands.


TABLE I.
Table of Tensions to be applied to a wire riband, weighing one
pound per chain, and standard length at a tension of lbs.
c
.-2-0 Angle of Chord of Riband from Horizontal Plane.
6
a
|s
MS 0 ° + io° - + 20° - + 30° - + 40° - + 50° - + 6o° -
G)
►J
lbs. lbs. lbs.
37-20 37-19 37-0;
44-26 44-21 43-87
51-49 51-43 50-9 i
58-41 58-35 57
4
5
6
64-99 64-94 64-07
71-26 71-22 70-1
77‘ 2 5 77-23 76-02
7
8
83-01 83-02 81-63
1-5688-6087-04
93'94 94-0092-27
lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs
(7-oi 36-67 36-62 36-12 36-10 35-46 35-51 34-7,
•372 43'03 42-80 41-80 41-50 40-21 39-88 38-3
10-71 49-69 49-36 47-86 47-40 45-47 44-88 42-5:
57-46 56-09 55'75 53'75 53* 2 3 50-66 49-95 46
'3"9° 62-19 61-87 59-37 58-87 55-67 54-92 51
-0-05 68-00 67-74 64-74 64-30 60-45 59-74 55-15
’5*95 73-55 73-39 69-89 69-65 65-15 64-42 59
11-63 78-89 73-8374-83 74-61 69-47 68-97 62-8,
17-11 84-04 84-0979-59 79-52 73-74 73-38 66-4!
12-43 89-01 89-20 84-20 84-29 77-86 77-68 70-02
lbs. lbs.
34-89 34-03
38-07 36-33
41-98 39'33
45-99 42-52
50-07 45-73
54-09 48-89
58-0351-97
6i-88 54-95
65-64 57-85
•32 60'66
The standard tensions, and the tensions for the different lengths
suspended for riband of any other iceight may be found by proper
tion, or by multiplying the quantities in the table by the weight of
one chain of the riband expressed as the fraction of a pound
G. H. K.
41
Chaining icith Long Steel Ribands.


TABLE 11.
ffizv C
Table of Value for r in the general equation - t 3 £t 2 - s> =o
24 k
Altitude t _ 2Q t _ 25 j t _ 30 t _ 35 t= 40 t _ 45
Chains. lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs.
i 27-22 30-68 34-50 38-59 42-91
5 5875 60-97 63-34 65-84 68-50
10 88-42 90-42 92-51 94-67 96-93
Mt 3 i *" de t = 20. t = 25. t = 30. « = 35- t = 40.
Chains. lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs. lbs.
1 26-27 29-59 33-56 37-81 42-24
5 54-18 56-46 58-90 61-51. 64-28
10 Bro 6 83-10 85-23 87-46 89-77
Note.—= 1 lb. ;k = -00000779 chain ;I = 1,5, and 10 ;C =
t = 25. t = 30. t = 35. t = 40. « = 45.
90° and 60
This table may be used for interpolating the tensions with any
standard tension from 20 to 45 lbs. for riband weighing 1 lb. per
chain. For riband of any other weight both the supported and the
suspended tensions will be proportionals, and may be found by
multiplying the quantities in the table by the weight of one chain
of riband expressed as a fraction of a pound. See examples
following.
The mode of using the table of the values of t, deduced from the
l 2 w 3 Sin 2 C
general equation r 3 - tr 2 —= 0, is illustrated by the two
following examples:—
Example 1. Required the tensions to be used for 1, 5> and 10
chains suspended lengths of riband weighing 1*3837 lbs. per chain,
42
Chaining with Long Steel Ribands.


the standard tension being 40 lbs, that is the tension at which the
riband is standard length when supported.
To find the tabular value of t. As 1*3837 is to Isois4o to the
tabular value of t. That is 1 is the tabular standard tension
I-3837
= 28*908. By interpolation in arithmetical progression, which is
sufficiently accurate, of the quantities in the table between t = 25
and t = 30, the tabular tensions, t, for 1, 5 ? and 10 chains, are
respectively 33*67, 62*82, and 92*05 lbs. That is to say, a riband
weighing 1 lb. per chain would require these tensions for the sus-
pended lengths mentioned if standard at 28*908 lbs. tension. A
riband weighing; 1*3837 lbs, would require 1*3837 times these
amounts ; multiplying therefore the four quantities enumerated,
viz., 28*908, 33*67, 62*82, and 92*05, by 1*3837 gives t = 40,
standard tension as above adopted; r = 46*59 lbs., the tension for
1 chain suspended ;t' 86*92, the tension for 5 chains suspended;
and r" 127*37, the tension for 10 chains suspended ; and these
are the tensions which should be used with the riband in example
of standard at a tension of 40 lbs.
Example 2. Required the tensions for 1,5, and 10 chains sus-
pended lengths of a riband weighing *2885 lbs. per chain, and when
supported standard length at a tension of io lbs.
To find tabular value of t. As *2885 is to 1, so is 10 to tabular
value of t. That is ——- = tabular standard tension = 34*662.
*2085
Interpolating the values for t for 1,5, and 10 chains as in previous
example, r = 38*31, r' = 65*67 and r" = 94*52. Multiplying
these four quantities by *2885, the weight per chain of riband, gives
10 lbs., the adopted standard tension, and 11*05, 18*95, and
27*27 lbs., the tensions to be applied to suspended lengths 1,5,
and 10 chains respectively.
G. H. K.
43
Chaining with Long Steel Ribands.




CONVERGENCE OF MERIDIANS.
Table referred to in article at page 24, showing the correction to
be applied to long traverses on account of the difference of
Azimuth caused by change of Longitude.


Departure of Traverse in Chains and Links.
bC
t-i
<D
c
o
o
Latitude.
29° | 30° 31° 32° 33° I 34° 35°
12486
16648
208 "10
249-73
291 35
332-97
374-59
416-21
457*83
499-45
54i-o7
582-69
624-31
665-93
707-56
749-18
790-80
832-42
ngBg
159-85
199-81
239*78
27974
31970
359*66
399 63
439-59
47955
519-Si
559*48
599*44
639-40
679*36
7i9*32
759-29
799-25
115-22
153*62
192-03
230-44
268-84
307*25
345*65
384-06
422-46
460-87
499-28
537-68
576-09
614-49
65290
691-31
72971
768-12
11078
14771
18463
221-56
258-49
29542
332-34
369-27
406 20
443-12
480-05
516-98
553-9 I
590-83
627 76
664-69
701-61
738-S4
io6 - 6o
142*13
177-66
213-20
248-73
284-26
319*79
355*33
390*86
42639
461-92
497-46
532-99
568-52
604-05
639*59
675-12
710-65
102-64
131-8+
13686
i64'80
171-07
197-76
205-29
23072
239*50
263-69
296-65
329-61
362-57
27372
307 93
342-15
376-36
410-58
395*53
428-49
46r45
44479
479"°i
494-41
513-22
54744 52777
581-65 560-33
615-87 593-29
650-08 626-25
684-30 659-21
127-08
158-85
190-62
222-40
254-I7
285-94
31771
34948
381-25
413-02
444-79
476-56
508-33
54010
57187
60365
635 42
29° j 30° | 31° 32°
33° 34° 35° 36°
k*
6 “
0J
c £
Latitude.
46
Convergence of Meridians,


TRAVERSE TABLES,
To be used in connection with that of Convergence of Meridians.








* 19 Deg.
16 Deg.
Lat. 1
Lat. Dep.
Dep. [ Lat.
Lat. Dep.
72 Deg.
51
Difference of Latitude and Departure


IO
09-3
036
09*3
037
09*2
03-9
091
04*1
09*1
04*2
IO 1
» 20
187
07*2
*6*5
07*5
18*4
07*8
i8*3
08*1
18*1
08*5
20 I
30
2&X3
io*8
27*8
11*2
27-6
xr*7
27-4
12*2
27*2
127
30
40
373
143
37*i
15-0
36-8
15*6
363
16*3
36*3
16*9
40
5o
467
17*9
46*4
x8-7.
46*0
193
457
20*3
. 453
21*1
50
60
56*0
21*5
55*6
22*5
55*2
23*4
54-8
24*4
54-4
25-4
60
70
65-4
25*1
64*9
26*2
64-4
27*4
63-9
28*5
63-4
29*6
70
80
747
287
74*2
30*0
73*6
313
731
325
72-5
338
80
90
84-0
323
83-4
337
82*8
35‘2
82*2
366
81 *6
38 0
90
100
93’4
35*8
927
37*5
92*1
39’i
91*4
407
90*6
423
IOO
200
1867
717
185-4
74‘9
164*1
78*1
182*7
81 *3
181*3
84-5
200
300
280*1
1073
278*2
112*4
276*2
117*2
274*1
122*0
271*9
126*8
300
400
373*4
1433
37o-9
149*8
368*2
1563
365-4
1627
362*5 .
169*0
400
500
466*8
179*2
463*6
1873
460*3
I95-4
4568
203*4
4532
211 3
500 '
600 !
1 560*1
215*0
5563
224*8
5523
234-4
548*1
244*0
543-8
2536
600
7°°
i 6S3-5
250*9
649-0
262*2
644-4
273-5
6393
284*7
634-4
295*8
700
800
1746-9
286*7
7417
2997
736-4
312*6
730-8
325-4
725*0
338-1
800
9°°
! 840*2
322*5
834*5
337-1
828*5
3517
822*2
366*1
8157
380-4
900
Dep.
Lat.
Dep.
Lat
Dep.
| Lat.
Dep.
Lat. I
I D ep.
1 Lat.
ts>
D.
D.
69 Deg.
68 Deg.
67 Deg.
66 Deg.
65 Deg.
25 Deg.
Lat.
Lat. ( Dep.
5 2
Difference of Latitude and Departure,


Difference of Latitude and Departure.
53
D.
26 Deg.
27 Deg.
28 Deg.
29 Deg.
30 Deg.
D.
Lat. } Dep.
Lat. ,
Dep.
Lat.
Dep.
Lat.
Dep.
Lat.
Dep.
i
00-g
00-4
00-9
00-5
00-9
00-5
00-9
00-5
00-9
00-5
1
2
018
00-9
oi-8
00-9
oi-8
00-9
017
oi-o
017
01-o
2
3
027
01-3
027
01-4
026
01-4
026
ox -5
026
ox-5
3
4
03-6
01 8
036
oi - 8
03-5
01-9
03"5
01-9
03-5
02-0
4
5
04'5
02*2
o4'5
02-3
04-4
02-3
04*4
02 4
04-3
02-5
5
6
o5‘4
026
053
02-7
05-3
02-8
05-2
02-9
05-2
03-0
6
7
063
031
06-2
03-2
o6"2
03-3
061
03-4
061
OS'S
7
8
07-2
03-5-
07-1
036
07-1
03-8
07-0
039
069
O4-O
8
9
081
039
08-0
04-1
07-9
04-2
07-9
04-4
07-8
04-5
9
IO
090
04-4
08-9
04-5
08-8
04-7
087
04-8
087
05 0
10
20
i8 - o
08-8
.7-8
09-1
177
09-4
17-5
09-7
17-3
I0‘0
20
30
270
13-2
267
13-6
26-5
141
26-2
x 4‘5
260
150
30
40
36 - o
I7-5
35'6
18*2
35-3
188
35-o
19-4
346
20‘0
40
So
44'9
21-9
44-6
227
44-1
23-5
437
24-2
43’3
250
50
6o
53-9
26-3
53‘5
27-2
S3-o
282
525
291
52-0
30*0
60
7o
62 9
30-7
62-4
3x8
6i-8
32-9
6i-2
339
6o-6
350
7o
8o
7 J "9
35i
713
36-3
70-6
37-6
700
38-8
69-3
40-0
80
9°
80-9
39"5
80*2
40-9
79-5
42-3
78-7
43-6
77'9
45-o
9°
xoo
89-9
43"8
89-1
45’4
88-3 ,
46-9
87-5
48-5
86-6
500
100
200
179-8
877
178-2
90-8
1766
93'9
I74-9
97-o
173-2
100-0
200
300
2696
1313
267-3
136-2
264-9
140-8
262-4
145 4
259-8
150-0
300
400
359'5
1753
356-4
181-6
3532
187-8
349-8
193-9
346-4
200-0
400
500
449'4
219-2
445'5
227-0
441-5
2347
437'3
243-4
433-o
250-0
500
600
5393
263-0
534-6
2724
5298
2817
524-8
2909
519-6
300-0
600
700
629-2
306-9
6237
317-8
6181
328-6
6X2-2
339-4
606-2
350 0
700
800
7190
3507
712-8
363-2
706-4
1 3756
6997
3878
692-8
400-0
800
900
808-9
394"5
801-9
408-6
794-7
422-5
787-2
436-3
779-4
450-0
900
D.
Dep.
| Lat.
Dep.
Lat.
Dep.
| Lat.
Dep. | Lat.
| Dep.
Lat.
D.
64 Deg.
63 Deg.
62 Deg.
61 Deg.
| 60 Deg.
y


Difference of Latitude and Departure .
31 Deg. 32 Deg. 33 Deg. 34 Deg. 35 Deg.
Lat. Dep. Lat. Dep. Lat. Dep. Lat Dep. Lat. Dep.
00-g oo - 5 oo'B oo‘s 00 - 8 003 oo*B 00 - 6 00 - 8 00 - 6
ox 7 oi*o 017 oi*i 017 01 "i 017 01-i ox-6 ox-x
g 2 -6 01 - 5 023 ox-6 02-5 or 6 02*5 017 02-5 017
03-4 02*1 03-4 02*1 03-4 02*2 03-3 02-2 03-3 02'3
043 02 - 6 04-2 02 - 6 04-2 [ 027 04*1 02*8 04-1 02’9
05-1 03-1 05-1 G 3 05-0 j 03-3 05-0 03-4 04-9 03-4
o6'o 03-6 05-9 037 05-9 03-8 05-8 03-9 057 04-0
06‘9 041 06 - 8 04-2 067 04-4 05 - 6 04-5 06'6 04-6
077 04-6 07-6 o4'B 07-5 04-9 07-5 05-0 07-4 05-2
08 - 6 05-2 083 053 08-4 05-4 083 05-6 oB‘2 057
17*1 103 17-0 xo-6 i 6 -8 xo‘9 x6'6 irz 16-4 113
257 is's 25-4 15’9 25-2 j 163 24-9 i6'B 24-6 17-2
343 20-6 33-9 2i-2 333 | 21-8 332 22-4 32-8 22-9
42-9 25-8 42-4 263 41 - 9 27 ‘2 413 |2B 0 41*0 287
51-4 30-9 50-9 31’8 503 327 49 7 i 33'6 49" 1 344
60-o 36-1 59-4 37‘i 587 38-i 58-0 \ 39'i 573 40-2
68-6 41-2 67 8 I 42 - 4 67-1 43-6 663 ' 447 653 j 45‘9
77-1 46-4 763 477 753 49"° 74’6 | 503 737 j si’6
857 513 84-8 53’° 83-9 j 543 82-9 | 55-9 81-9 57 4
171-4 103-0 169-6 | xo6-o 1677 1108-9 165-8 ; ixx-8 163-8 1147
257-2 1543 254-4 j 159-0 251-6 ; 163-4 2487 1167-8 2457 i?2-i
342-9 206*0 339-2; 2X2-0 3353 ; 217-9 33 1 -6 1 2237 3277 229-4
428-6 2573 424-0 i 265-0 4193 j 2723 4x43 1279-6 409 6 286-8
514-3 309-0 508-8 j 318-0 503-2 1326-8 497-4 ; 335 5 49 1 3 344" i
600-o 3603 593’6 13703 587-1 1381-2 5803 1391 -4 573-4 4013
685-7 4i2-o 678-4 j 423-9 670-9 j 435-7 663-2 447-4 6553 458-9
7713 4633 763-2 j 4763 754-8 | 490-2 746-1 J 5033 737 2 5x6-2
Dep. | Lat. Dep. | Lat. Dep. | Lat. Dep. | Lat. Dep. | Lat.
59 Deg. 58 Deg. 57 Deg. 56 Deg. 55 Deg.
54


36 Deg.
38 Deg.
39 Deg.
Lat. I Dep.
Lat. j Dep.
Dep. j
Lat. Dep.
| Lat.
] Lat.
Dep. |
Lat. Dep.
Deg. 51
50 Deg.
55
Difference of Latitude and Departure,


42 Deg.
Deg. 44
45 Deg.


TABLES
FOR CONVERTING
FEET AND INCHES INTO LINKS,
LINKS INTO FEET AND INCHES,
LINKS INTO FEET.


58
Table for Converting Feet and Inches into Links.
FEET AND INCHES
INTO LINKS.
Feet.
Links.
Feet.
Links.
Feet.
Links.
Feet.
Links.
1
I-SI52
34
5I-5I52
67
101*5152
100
151-5152
2
3-0303
35
53-0303
68
103*0303
200
303-0303
3
4-5455
36
54-5455
69
I04-5455
800
454-5455
; 4
-6*0606
37
56*0606
70
106*0606
400
606*0606
i 5
7-5758
38
57-5758
71
107-5758
500
7S7-5758
6
■ q'oqoq
39
59-0909
72
109*0909
600
909*0909
7
10*6061
40
606061
73
iio*6o6i
700
1060*6061
8
12*1212
41
62*1212
74
112*1212
800
1212*1212
9
136364
42
63*6364
75
113*6364
900
I363-6364
10
151515
43
65-1515
76
II5-I5I5
1000
I5I5-I5I5
11
16 6667
44
77
Il6*6667
12
18*1818
45
68*1818
78
Il8l8l8
13
19 6970
46
69*6970
79
II9697O
14
1 21*2121
47
71*2121
80
121*2121
15
1 227273 »
48
727273
81
1227273
Inches
Links.
16
24*2424
49
74*2424
82
124*2424
17
257576
50
757576
83
1257576
0*1263
18
27*2727
51
77*2727
84
127*2727
1
19
287879
62
787879
85
I287879
2
0*2525
20
21
30-3030
31*8182
53
54
80*3030 3
81*8182
86
87
I30*3030
131 8l82
3
0*3788
22
33-3333
55
833333
88
I333333
4
0*5051
23
34-8485
56
84^8485
89
I34-8485
5
0*6313
24
363636
57
86*3636
90
I36 3636
25
37-8788
58
87*8788
91
137*8788
6
07576
26
39-3939
59
893939
92
139 3939
7
0*8838
27
40*9091
60
90*9091
93
140*9091
g
roiox
28
42*4242
61
92*4242
94
142*4242
1*1364
29
43-9394
62
93-9394
95
I43-9394
9
30
45-4545
63
95-4545
96
i45-4'545
10
1*2626
31
46*9697
64
96*9697
97
146*9697
11
1*3869
32
48*4848
65
98*4848
98
148*4848
33
50*0000
66
100*0000
99
150*0000
12
1-5152


•
p ' Table for Converting Links into Feet and Inches.
5'
9
LINKS INTO
FEET AND INCHES.
Links.
Ft.
In.
Links.
Ft.
In.
Links.
Ft,
In.
Links.
Feet.
1
0
7-92
34
22
5-28
67
44
2-64
100
66
2
I
3-84
35
23
1-20
68
44
10-56
200
132
3
I
1176
36
23
9-12
69
45
6-48
300
198
4
2
7-68
37
24
5‘°4
70
46
2-40
400
264
5
3
360
38
25
0-96
71
46
10-32
600
330
6
3
11'52
39
25
8-88
72
47
6-24
600
396
7
4
7‘44
40
26
480
73
48
2 - i6
700
462
8
5
3-36
41
27
0-72
74
48
10-08
800
528
9
5
11-28
42
27
8-64
75
49
6-oo
900
594
10
6
7'20
43
28
456
76
5°
1-92
1000
660
H
44
20
0-48
77
g*84
12
/
7
O
11*04
45
29
8-40
78
51
576
13
8
6-96
46
30
432
79
52
i-68
14
9
2-88
47
31
0-24
80
52
9-60
15
9
io'8o
48
31
8-i6
81
S3
5-52
16
IO
6 72
49
32
4 08
82
54
1-44
17
ii
2-64
50
33
0-00
83
54
9’36
18
ii
10-56
51
33
792
84
55
5-28
Links.
Inches.
19
12
648
52
34
384
85
56
1-20
20
13
2-40
53
34
1176
86
56
9-12
21
13
10-32
54
35
768
87
57
5"°4
0‘1
0-792
22
14
6-24
55
36
360
88
58
0-96
0'2
1384
23
15
2"l6
56
36
11-52
89
58
8-88
0'3
2*976
24
15
1008
57
37
744
90
59
4-80
25
16
600
58
38
336
91
60
072
0'4
3-168
26
17
I 92
59
38
11-28
92
60
8-64
0’5
3-960
27
17
9-84
60
39
7 "20
93
61
4’SO
28
18
576
61
40
312
94
62
0-48
0*6
4752
29
19
i-68
62
40
11-04
95
62
8-40
0’7
5-544
30
19
960
63
4i
6-96
96
63
432
OO
b
6-336
31
20
5-52
64
42
2-88
97
64
024
32
21
1-44
65
42.
io-8o
98
64
8-i6
0‘9
7-128
33
21
9-36
66
43
672
99
65
4’o8
1*0
7-920


6o
Table for Converting Links into Feet .
LINKS INTO FEET.
Links.
j Feet,
Links,
Feet.
Links.
Feet.
Links.
Feet.
1
o-66
26
17-16
51
3366
76
50-16
2
i 32
27
17-82
52
34-32
77
50-82
3
1-98
28
18-48
53
34-98
78
Si-48
4
2-64
29
19-14
54
35-64
79
52-14
5
3'30
30
19 80
55
36-30
80
52-80
6
3-96
31
20-46
56
36-96
81
53-46
7
4-62
32
21-12
57
37-62
82
54-12
8
528
33
2178
58
38-28
83
5478
9
5'94
34
22-44
59
38-94
84
55-44
10
6"6o
35
23-IO
60
39-6o
85
56-10
11
7-26
36
23 76
61
40-26
86
56-76
12
7-92
37
2442
62
40-92
87
57-42
13
858
38
25-08
63
4I-53
88
58-08
14
924
39
2 5-74
64
42-24
89
5874
15
9'9°
40
26-40
65
42-90
90
59-4o
16
10-56
41
27-06
66
43-56
91
60-06
17
11*22
42
2772
67
44-22
92
6072
18
ii-88
43
2838
68
44-88
93
61-38
19
12 '54
44
29-04
69
45-54
94
62-04
20
I3'20
45
2970
70
46-20
95
6270
21
I3‘86
46
3036
71
4686
96
63-36
22
I4-5 2
47
31-02
72
47-52
97
64-02
23
15-18
48
31-68
73
48-18
98
64-68
24
15-84
49
32-34
74
48-84
99
6574
25
16-50
50
33-oo
75
49'So
100
66-oo


UNITS OF ANGLE, PERPENDICULAR AND
DISTANCE.
subtending One Minute of Arc.
Perpendiculars
Distance or Eadius.
Perpendicular.
Exact.
Approx.
Approx.
Exact.
chains
chains
4*3406
1 inch
I link
I foot
286*48
2268*91
3T377S
52*0871
I*oo
•0291 link
•0291 foot
2.3271 links
18*4307 inches
•03 link
•03 foot
£ links
Bo*oo
inches
Perpendiculars
subtending One
Second
Perpendicular.
Distance or Radius.
Exact. Approx. Approx.
miles
chains
260*44
2062*65
3125*22
1 inch
I link
1 foot
•004848 link
*058178 inch
•038785 lint
•307178 inch
•005 link
•06 inch
*O4 link
•3 inch
10*00
80*00
* This is readily remembered by the alliterative approximation, on*
foot at forty miles.
61
Units of Angle.


Units of Perpendicular and
Distance.
Angles subtended by
one inch one foot one link
/ // / // / //
lain 4. 20-4 52. 5'3 34. 227
hains o. 26*0 5. 12*5 3. 26*3
eet 2. 51*9 34. 227 22. 41*3
eet o. 17*1887 3. 26*2648 2. 16*1
hie o. 3*2554 o. 39*0653 o. 25*8
L sin V = log *0002938882 + 10 = 6*4637261
L sin 1" = log *0000048481368.... + 10 = 4*6855749
I chain
10 chains
100 feet
1,000 feet
1 mile
ADJUSTABLE CHAIN HANDLE.
Moving the nut A a quarter of a revolution, that is, the distance
between two of its holes, alters the length 1/100 of an inch, as the
screw Cis 25 threads to an inch. The pin D prevents the nut A
shifting until the clamping nut is unscrewed. A small piece of
steel working in slot cut the length of the screw obviates any lateral
movement. EE are screw eyelets for attaching a spring balance
when required.
62
Units of Angle.






Marking of Stations in loose sandy Soil—Method of mending
Wire Chains in the Field.
MARKING OF STATIONS IN LOOSE SANDY SOIL.
As circumstances may arise in which it is required to place a
permanent mark in a loose sandy soil, where the ordinary post or
peg on the surface is liable to fall out of position owing to the
unstable nature of its foundation, it may be useful to surveyors to
know the practice of the Survey Department of Victoria in such a
case. The practice there is to bore, by means of a bolt, crow-bar,
or spud, a hole to some depth in the sand below the place of the
post or peg, and to fill the hole with a thin mixture of cement and
sand, placing the post on top in the ordinary way. Thus, should
the post or peg be displaced, its position is recoverable, and it may
be re-established in its original situation.
METHOD OF MENDING WIRE CHAINS IN THE
FIELD.
Described by A.1.L., 2nd June , 1886.
Brighten about half an inch of each of the broken ends with a file,
emery paper, knife-blade, or even a stone, and do the same with a
piece of spare wire an inch long similar to that composing the
chain. Rub the wire thus cleaned with a piece of sal-ammoniac
slightly moistened. Around the short piece of spare wire wrap
about four thicknesses of tinfoil, and place this against the chain
to be mended, at the broken part, taking care that the ends are
brought together so that the original length of the chain is not
interfered with. The heat of the flame of a match or small fire-
stick is then sufficient to effect a moderately strong joint which will
with care last for months. Take note that no corner of the wire
projects in such a way as to catch in scrub. A good tinfoil to use
is that in which the “ Old Judge” tobacco is commonly wrapped.
8c 136—8(5












Section of Bar




Diagram of Bead Reflector & Clip
The above diagram represents a head reflector, for illuminating the wires
\of a Theodolite, with clip for holding same. This simple contrivance does
way with the necessity of having the axis of the telescope bored, for, with ao
> ordinary lantern m almost any position, the light can be adjusted to illuminate
'the wires so that the smaller magnitude stars can be observed easily.
A supply of these reflectors and dips has been received and will be
Supplied to any Surveyor employed by the Department on receipt of application
inclosing 4/e. for each one required
sth5 th Oct r 'B3


/u/ 1 on o/" tri<xn? r l&f
Given AC . L a-b ~~ b r
’• A .Id m c. . Q-i-Qzt&v A +c -
O-fso <*, - J> -♦- c -2. Jc e«rtf A f ivK f 5 =? " 5 ’
_ i J - c^f^q
cx.L.A sine B=
if 1 -C | there are 2 values Ar B
•• ol B mush he excite .-. one Kjue
A I - 3o
Ca-
> I A does not
Z \
cx i \ / / ‘
. i- ■ V -
/4 -~ - X _ _ -
_jL on base = ,p cx A
also c zzljcosA t. A
cl Iso e ~b ca>3 A*tva & 3***?' A
if cl < ts*Jij4 c l's mpossthle
a. e
.. c •■•*«
.. O. ZiW A (ttrfwre C-
ol s U r\ iriwr c caw
s wm^~7n
Znwiiariy «. f~ cw A- K v~* e -1/


Diagram shewing Plumb Level For preserving horizontally
of chain or other rough levelling.
Plumb Level
( Full Size )


, ' r
,
■f>! (J & vVaSV y 4eV;:
' -r ' , ' ;: i ■■■'. i.i
'
. - v,-.,, ■ v■ * iifw t WMh??wB
■ ' ;.'■■*• :V>-
- 1 :;
-; v„»s sj / i> 'ifi; ~ Mvfewiil' « wsw-iii issw
■ w < t 1 ~, n,li fv®V* ''VW
'v', ;-. '■
