

Survey of the Half-caste
Problem in South Australia
[Reprinted from Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society,
South Australian Branch, Session 1940-41'}
*By NORMAN B. TINDALE, B.Sc.


commonwealth
parliamentary
LIBRARY


SURVEY OF THE HALF-CASTE PROBLEM
IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Ethnologist, South Australian Museum
By NORMAN B. TINDALE, B.Sc.


RESULTS OF THE HARVARD-ADELAIDE UNIVERSITIES’
ANTHROPOLOGICAL EXPEDITION, 1938-1939
SURVEY OF THE HALF-CASTE PROBLEM IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA
By Norman B. Tindale, B.Sc.
Ethnologist, South Australian Museum
LIST OF HEADINGS
Summary of Contents.
The Problem.
Geographical Setting of the Problem in South Australia.
Fullbloods in Settled Districts.
Fullbloods in Pastoral Districts.
Fullbloods in the Desert.
Development of Mixed Breeds.
The Types of Mixed Bloods.
Misunderstanding of the Half-caste Problem.
Human Hybrids and the Importance of the Australian Mixed Blood.
White Social Acceptance of Various Types of Mixed Bloods.
Typical Mixed Blood Populations.
Births Among the Hybrid People.
Population Trends Amongst Mixed Bloods.
Mixed Bloods in South Australia.
Method of Half-caste Control.
Method by which Assimilation might be Accelerated.
General Conclusions regarding Ethnic Assimilation.
Policies regarding Social Adjustment of Mixed Bloods.
Importance of Nutrition in Promoting Social Adjustment.
Education Amongst Half-caste People.
Administration of Mixed Blood Communities.
Background of the Present Investigation.
Methods Employed.
Policies of half-caste administration are developing under
the control of six different States and the Commonwealth Govern-
ment. Various, often conflicting, principles are being formulated
and applied in the administrative, legal, social and educational
fields. While the fullbloods, their problems and social changes
and adjustments have been discussed there has not been a
general survey of the problem from the viewpoint of the mixed-
bloods themselves. There have been few attempts to view
the scope of the problem of racial admixture in Australia as a


whole or to note the principal trends arising from various
policies in vogue.
The following information was gathered during fourteen
months’ field work as part of the researches of the Harvard-
Adelaide Universities’ Expedition of 1938-39- The report,
derived from a preliminary examination of data gathered during
field work in six States, embodies general conclusions applicable
to the study of the half-caste problem in South Australia.
SUMMARY OF CONTENTS
The aborigines of South Australia are a dying remnant, but
the half-castes who replace them are increasing in numbers and
need attention and care. The problem of how to deal with
them is a difficult but not an insoluble one. They are faced
with the same problems as we are in nurturing their families,
securing education and finding a place in the community. They
should not be treated as if they were a highly developed species
of animal, to be viewed only as though they were inhabitants of
a zoological gardens. They should not be shut away in
segregated (almost caged) communities.
A proportion of the mixed-bloods are making their way in
the community and others would do so if given opportunities and
assistance. A vigorous educational policy and training are
wanted. Policies of isolation and segregation are palliatives;,
they do not reach the heart of the problem.
Complete mergance of the half-castes in the general com-
munity is possible without detriment to the white race. Their
aboriginal blood is remotely the same as that of the majority
of the white inhabitants of Australia, for the Australian
aboriginal is recognised as being a forerunner of the Caucasian
race. In addition, the half-castes are increasingly of our own
blood, in places the majority of them already are more than
half-white. Two successive accessions of white blood lead
to the mergence of the aboriginal in the white community. There
are no biological reasons for the rejection of people with a
dilute strain of Australian aboriginal blood. A low percentage
of Australian aboriginal blood will not introduce any aberrant
characteristics and there need be no fear of reversions to the
dark aboriginal type.


A solution of the half-caste problem lies in the dispersal of
all artificial aggregates of mixed-bloods and the real training
of the rising generation to take their place in the general com-
munity.
In several States policies and accidents of isolation are tend-
ing to breed groups of near-aborigines, possessing the physical
vigour of whites; thereby there is appearing an increasingly
large reservoir of native blood, which must eventually be
absorbed into the general populace. Closed communities are
difficult to control and the end is a defeat of their own primary
purpose. Dispersal will mean rapid dilution of these dark"
ethnic pockets.
The fullbloods in the settled districts are a diminishing
group and will soon be extinct. Isolation of the surviving desert
tribes which have not yet completely lost their old ways of living,
would be an economic advantage to the State of South Australia.
It would enable the control of faunal pests and the effective
occupation of a desert area which is a menace to the pastoral
areas. Only a small part of this desert is being used; this is
unproductively maintained in the hands of a few white settlers
whose gain in pastoral wealth cannot balance public expenditures
on their behalf. Isolation of the desert aborigines would favour
their survival; the whole of the desert steppe should be set
apart for them. The desert folk need only the intermittent
care of an itinerant medical missioner; the formation of fixed
settlements and rationing depots among them disrupts their
economy.
Missions have a large sphere of useful work to carry out
among the mixed-bloods. The latter field has not everywhere
been adequately exploited by them.
THE PROBLEM
In South Australia as in all the other States of the Common-
wealth, there exists a population of mixed-bloods bearing
ethnic strains of the Australian aborigines in admixture with that
of aliens of many other ethnic types, but chiefly with those of
" white ” origin. Ever since first contacts between alien white
and the aboriginal, crossmatings have been taking place and
there has in consequence grown up a population in which the
ethnic mixtures occur in many different proportions.


These mixed-blooded peoples are living in different environ-
ments and have met with varying degrees of success in their
attempts to establish themselves as elements in the general Aus-
tralian populace.
In a few areas they have been accepted as a definite part of
the community, in others they have been shunned. Public
opinion, and Government edicts have not always been in their
favour and often they have been pushed aside by more for-
tunately situated neighbours. Unscrupulous whites have taken
advantage of some, relying on superior knowledge to remain
just within their legal rights in preying upon unsophisticated
mixed-bloods. Many half-castes find difficulties in obtaining
a living even with governmental aid and the help of private
charity. A fortunate few have met with financial and economic
success while at the other extreme some derelict aborigines are
in the unhappy position of being relegated to the position of
veritable garbage-can feeders, seemingly without help or hope
in their misery.
In South Australia as elsewhere there are people of various
hybrid admixtures, ranging from " near whites ” to those who
have so much aboriginal blood in their veins that they are classed
as fullbloods by all but the well-informed. The " near whites ”
with a quarter or less of aboriginal blood as a rule are absorbed
in the general community. The others range in economic and
social status from virtually homeless nomads, possessing only
the clothes on their backs, to respectable owners of landed
property, whose incomes give them a decided position in the
community at large.
According to recent census figures there are 4,881 persons
of known aboriginal or part aboriginal descent in South Aus-
tralia. Of these nearly five thousand people, 2,197 are officially
classified as "half castes” (1,282 adults and 915 children).
In official records the term " half-caste ” merely indicates
that the ethnic make-up of the individual is partly aboriginal.
The term embraces many who are actually quadroons, octoroons
and some of those who have a still lesser degree of blackfellow
admixture. Others who might be called " near whites ” are,
economically and socially, so merged in the white community


that they are probably not even represented in these statistics,
and officially pass as whites.
Of the 4,881 known South Australian individuals with
aboriginal blood (of whom 2,684 are fullblood), 3,313 are adult
and 1,562 are children. Of the adults 863 (slightly more than
one-fourth) are in employment (with 554 dependants) ; the rest
are either nomadic, unemployed, on native relief, or incapacitated
by reasons of age or ill-health.
The 2,197 persons classified as half-castes constitute the
" Problem ” in South Australia. This " Problem ” is part of a
larger one concerning the 24,718 persons of mixed-blood origin
in the Commonwealth of Australia.
In the following paragraphs some aspects of the situation
are discussed. The geographical and climatic settings have
important bearings on the subject matter as it applies to South
Australia.
Fig. 1.
South Australia, showing limit's of tribes coming under control of South
Australia, positions of government and mission stations, and relation
to the three major ecological divisions in South Australia.


GEOGRAPHICAL SETTING OF THE PROBLEM IN SOUTH
AUSTRALIA
The natural geographical subdivisions of South Australia
determine that the problem of the aborigines and mixed-bloods
shall be a composite one.
There is a southern coastal fringe of fertile country possess-
ing a moderately high rainfall and a Mediterranean climate.
This area is now relatively densely settled by whites. There
is an intermediate steppe zone of lower, seasonally less reliable
rainfall, where pastoral pursuits are successfully maintained, and
a third, still larger inland mixed steppe and desert region,
where in the absence of mineral wealth, white occupation is
at present uneconomic and is being maintained only by the
ultimately unreproductive expenditure of public funds. The
general outlines of these three regions are shown in Fig. 1.
FULLBLOODS IN SETTLED DISTRICTS
In the fertile portion of the State true full-blooded aborigines
may be considered as virtually extinct. In all about forty-
five aged persons survive and there are half-a-dozen children,
all of whom are so closely related that they must marry mixed-
bloods, remain single, or find mates from the inland country.
In any case they render improbable the development of further
generations of true " Southern ” aborigines. There is a slight
tendency for inland desert folks to migrate and to settle in the
South and to take the place of Southern fullbloods; thus already
several natives of the settled districts who are looked on as
being local aborigines are really of Northern origin (from
Western Desert, Eucla, Alice Springs, Oodnadatta, Darling
River, Upper Murray, Tennant Creek, Central Queensland, etc.).
In another decade or so there will be thus no Southern full-
bloods remaining and little can be done to ease the passing of
the present ones except to ensure that they receive adequate
rations and medical assistance. The remaining able-bodied ones
like to be independent of control and tend only to live on
Missions when unemployed or in bad health.
FULLBLOODS IN PASTORAL DISTRICTS
In the pastoral steppe fullbloods are more numerous, although
a rapidly diminishing group. At present they are in a slight


minority in the total population of people with aboriginal blood.
Whereas many half-caste children are born and survive, in the
pastoral district fullblood children are few in numbers and
those that are born tend to die young. The adults are a
rapidly ageing group with few to ensure their continuance as a
race. Thus of the Miming Tribe in western South Australia,
six aged folk, all probably over 60 years of age, and one youth of
shout 25, are all who survive out of several hundred who for-
merly ranged the southern edge of the Nullarbor Plain.
The rapid decline of the fullbloods of the pastoral districts
is sometimes masked, in statistical figures, by accessions of
young adults and youths from the Desert Region. These bush
folk have been attracted by opportunities for casual work on the
stations of the pastoral fringe. They seldom return to their
nomadic existence.
Tor example several wild bush youths who were seen and
studied at the Warburton Range, well within the Western or
Great Victoria Desert, during the University of Adelaide Anthro-
pological Expedition of 1935, during the course of the present
study, were found to be working on sheep stations within the
pastoral zone. During the four years at most since they had left
the bush they had acquired a smattering of English, a know-
ledge of horsework, the elements of sheep handling, and com-
plete outfits of clothing of a type not inferior to that worn by
any well-dressed white station hand. Fig. 2(a and b). Some-
times the parents of these youths remain in the bush; sometimes
they come in and live on the fringe of settlements and about
stations. The parents of the Warburton Range lads just men-
tioned were feeding daily by combing garbage tins and begging
for morsels of food and waste tea leaves, in the town of
Laverton.
The course of events which may take place in the pastoral
fringe and desert margins, with continued penetration of the
fringing area by whites, may be demonstrated by the sequence
which has taken place over the past seventy years in the far
smaller Arunta Desert area, and in the Lake Eyre district.
Much useful data was gathered by the 1934 Anthropological
Expedition of the University of Adelaide and Museum to the


Fig. 2a.
Wild bush youths of the Ngadadjara tribe at the Warburton Ranges,
1935. The boy nearest the camera is shown also in Fig. 2b.
Fig. 2b.
Bush youth, who has become a station hand since 1935. His father,
shown on the right, has also abandoned the bush to become a town
hanger-on.


Diamentina, where natives from the fringe of the Arunta (or
Simpson) Desert were studi.ed. At Pandi-pandi, near Birds-
ville, genealogical data relating to 98 living individuals was
secured.
Tribal disruption was complete and the 98 individuals were
the relics of more than half a dozen tribes; many were aged
and sick. Within two years afterwards 26 of them had died,
their decimation being hastened as the result of an influenza
outbreak (those dead included 16 out of 40 measured by the
Expedition). Further data just received emphasize still
further the rapidity of decline of the fullblood population
(Fig- 3.)
Fullbloods
in Lake Eyre District
1874
1900
1914
1934
1936
1939
est.
Totals
1830
500
250*
98
72
30
Aged
300
—
90
42
31
6
Adult
800
—
110
46
37
17
Children
730
—
50
10
4
7
* Estimate from T. Vogelsang


In this area, owing to the building of the Overland Telegraph
Line, contact between white and aboriginal commenced earlier
(1870) than elsewhere in our pastoral zone. The reservoir
of Desert tribes was also smaller than that in the Western or
Great Victoria Desert.
The data do indicate what may take place in the pastoral
steppe zone of the western portion of the State within a few
years’ time, if present conditions continue. There will be a
rapid decline and ultimate extinction of the aboriginal population.
There is a danger that the ecological balance may be so far
upset that even pastoral holdings may have to be abandoned
as has happened in the Eyre basin. The State may thus be
deprived of its aborigines without gain in occupiable areas.
FULLBLOODS IN THE DESERT
In the desert region of the western portion of the State
two forces are at work, one tending to keep the aborigines in
their country, and the other drawing them from it. Some hordes
of the Murunitja, Pitjandjara and Ngalea tribes still remain com-
pletely nomadic and careful enquiries suggest that a few shy or
conservative families have still to make their first direct contact
with whites, this in spite of increasing numbers who, at one
time or another, have come in and visited stations and depots
around the margins of the desert area. The rest of the people
are in contact with Mission and Government depots at Ooldea,
Forrest, Warburton Range and Ernabella. The tribes that had
not yet abandoned their nomadic habits had (at least until 1933)
retained their fertility to a high degree and after three months’
nomadic sojourn with some of the Pitjandjara in their own
country, during which period 570 individuals were personally
encountered, it was possible for the present writer to report
that in the district about the Mann Ranges and in the sandhill
country to the north and south of these hills there were healthy
populations in which the proportion of children to adults was
high enough to suggest a balanced community. There were
about 80 children (of all estimated ages up to 14 years) to
every hundred adults in the camp. They were portion of a
group of about 750 occupying an area estimated to be 45,000
square miles and extending into three States; about one person


per 60 square miles. If their environment and habits were not
altered it seemed that there was a prospect of their survival
for some time to come as an unmodified and virile people.
Recent happenings which are commented upon in the follow-
ing paragraphs indicate the possibility that at least for the
Petermann and Musgrave Ranges the optimistic picture sketched
above may have been modified since 1933 and there is again a
suggestion that many deaths have occurred through inability of
the desert to support the people without white interference.
The presence of white sojourners, principally " doggers ”
and the formation of tentative pastoral stations, on the desert side
of the marginal areas has, since 1933, encouraged the formation
of medical and other missions at Ooldea, Warburton Range and
Ernabella. The last-named was definitely planned to act as a
buffer between white and aboriginal. Since the formation of
these missions further proposals have been made that owing
to droughts which are causing conditions of life to be hard,
the natives should be fed at one or more places within their
country and that only by feeding the people at ration depots will
their survival be ensured.
Certain significant factors must be considered before ration-
ing is introduced since the change may interfere with the
nomadic migrations of the people. These movements are based
on a large fund of knowledge garnered by centuries of success-
ful living in the very areas from which it is proposed to succour
them. Interference with their mode of living may have many
undesired and unexpected repercussions which if brought about
are seemingly irreversible in their reaction.
Study of the statistics of the racial contacts that have taken
place in various parts of our continent in the past suggest that
NOTE. —Dr. A. P. Elkin, on indirect evidence obtained from a white
man engaged in dog poisoning, was led to believe that t'he Pitjandjara
had lost their children during the great drought which ended in 1930, but
the dogger’s statement was clearly unreliable since children of various
ages were photographed and measured by us in the Mann Ranges in 1933.
Apparent absence of children among bush natives in a camp may be
symptomatic of (a) fear or suspicions of the white intruder; (b)
migration away from dry areas; (c) death. In this case factors (a) and
(b) are sufficient to account for the facts.


even a small degree of association with whites is more detri-
mental to them than the severest droughts. The aborigines
appear to be highly susceptible to European diseases, such as
coughs, colds, influenza, measles as well as the more publicised
venereal diseases. Their food economy keeps them naturally
near the borderline between well-being and semi-starvation;
but the diet is a greatly varied and seemingly well-balanced
one. When deprived of this balanced ration and placed on
European foods, hunger satisfying but unbalanced as diets, they
die at a remarkable rate. This is especially true when they
are placed in contact with European diseases, but the damaging
effects of badly balanced diets of flour, tea and sugar to which
only small amounts of meat are added have not been adequately
assessed. Their rate of decline has been estimated on occasion
to exceed 50% per decade of contact or close association with
whites, and there seems to be a tendency for some decline
wherever there is any form of white contact.
Enquiries have shown that one of the longest continuous
droughts recorded in any single area of Central Australia was
the one which occurred from about 1919 to 1930 in the region
south-west of Alice Springs. It followed closely on a similar
one which affected areas further south, about the Musgrave
Range, in the period 1914-1917. This did not affect the whole
country. Nevertheless it was particularly severe around Lake
Amadeus and was strongly felt at Hermannsburg Mission.
Enquiries also suggest that it was those natives who were unable
to migrate or those who travelled in the wrong direction who
were the principal sufferers. Thus some eastern hordes of
Pitjandjara were seen at Hermannsburg in 1929 and they were
in a parlous condition (see published reports of Expedition,
Medical Journal of Australia, 1929, Vol. 11, p. 867). Other
members of the same tribe retreated from the Lake Amadeus
region (by choice or accident) towards the south-west. They
did not have to leave their own country, did not suffer insuper-
able hardships, lost few children, and were thriving again in
1933. It would appear that owing to the summer monsoonal
nature of Central Australian rains, droughts are inevitable. They
are often local; their immediate effects may be severe, but from


a broad point of view in any one place they represent a period
of fallow during which the population moves elsewhere. As
the droughts come to an end, game moves in to the area again,
and as better conditions arrive the native population returns from
adjoining regions and may recover rapidly from the worst effects
of the drought. Evidence supporting this conclusion is the
continued presence throughout the desert steppe region of
tribes of aborigines.
Few instances of this type of recovery of population have
been reported where there has been white interference or ration-
ing. Thus there is validity for the suggestion that there may
be little of permanent value to be gained by weaning the
aboriginals from their stern environment. The desert aborigines,
oy many generations of rigorous education, have been prepared
to exist in these regions. Discussions with their old men, who
are repositories of tradition, indicate how much the younger
people lose unless they continually receive at first hand the
detailed information without which they cannot survive in the
dry country. Attempts to cushion them from droughts, especially
if they involve the death of the older people by introduced
diseases, such as coughs, colds, and pneumonia may be far more
harmful than beneficent and will indeed seal their doom as a
nomadic people. It may well happen that unless carefully
planned the provision even of enlarged wells or improved waters
may so upset the long-established balance between men, game
and vegetable foods that the country may not continue to carry
the limited population which its rigours have determined shall
be proper and sufficient. It would indeed seem likely that
unless the aborigines of the Great Western Desert can be
prevented from leaving their environment, and induced to retain
their present nomadic habits they are likely to suffer rapid decima-
tion and decline.
A possible coarse of future events there may be learned by
consideration of the data which can be drawn from the figures
of population decline already cited from the Diamentina. There
were formerly several tribes living in and around the Arunta
Desert (of Griffith Taylor, 1919) or Simpson Desert (Madigan,
1929) which is smaller than the Western one. The desert area


itself was formerly inhabited by three tribes of aborigines. There
were originally probably more than 300 individuals. Thus the
Wonkanguru ranged over the southern two-thirds of this desert
and its fringes. Similarly, the Eastern Aranda, of whom there
may have been over a hundred individuals, ranged in good
seasons over the northern third or more of the desert, journey-
ing down the courses of the Hay and several other parallel
creeks which run from the Mac Donnell Ranges. Mr. T. G.
Strehlow some years ago made a patrol into their country with
some aged survivors of the tribe. The eastern third was the
country of the Wongkamala tribe.
The lines of sandhills with their Hakea shrubs, provided
root water in all but drought times. During dry intervals,
and at other times (to trade pitjuri, the native narcotic which
grows on their sandhills) these natives moved out along the
Finke and Warburton Creeks, fighting their neighbours, if
necessary, for living room.
The decline of these tribes happened in the following way.
The building of the Overland Telegraph Line, opened up the
Lake Eyre country for pastoral settlements and sheep stations.
The white communities enticed native youths away from their
parents to act as shepherds, stock-boys, etc. Missions (Killala-
paninna and Kopperamanna) were established, partly to serve
as buffers and to prevent the exploitation of the natives. With
the upset of the balance of their culture and deprivation of
the assistance of able-bodied young hunters, the older people
also left their country, at first only for intervals, but soon for all
time. What was once a regularly traversed and continually
occupied region was no longer visited. Although some lists
of native wells, soaks, and waters are in existence they often
cannot now be localised. The native population is extinct even
through the contraction of over-ambitious white settlement
now leaves the Lake Eyre country virtually unoccupied.
If present trends continue in the far larger Western Desert,
history may be repeated. Ethnologists now possess lists of
many native waters, but few of the many hundreds of small
wells, soaks, native dams and rockholes are accurately mapped.
By the withdrawal of the native population and loss of know-


ledge of these waters the region will be rendered even more
inhospitable and inaccessible than it is at present. There are,
for example, upwards of forty small waters between Ooldea
and the Everard Ranges, used by natives. They probably all
fall in the category of being quite unreliable; their exact positions
are not marked on maps although their names and general
situations have been noted. Since this desert region will always
remain a breeding place for dingoes, rabbits, emus, and grass-
hoppers it will be necessary for whites to traverse it even if the
dark inhabitants vanish. Loss of the inhabitants and of their
geographical knowledge of this country may in future constitute
a disadvantageous state of affairs for the white occupants of the
pastoral steppe whose lands abutt on these regions, and the
retention of knowledge of these waters and the protection of the
inhabitants may well be of considerable ultimate advantage. Up
to the present time the natives have been freely nomadic and
there has been no dependence on European food. This con-
dition has continued for many generations past. The South
Australian portion of this area in 1933 was carrying a part
time population of about 750 (for, as mentioned before, 570
were counted during a sojourn in the Mann Range area). These
people had been maintaining a balance of nature within their
area without cost to the States in which they live, for dingoes,
wild cats, emus, and kangaroos are their principal meat foods.
In certain areas, white occupants of pastoral holdings have
ventured beyond the recognised ecological limits of the pastoral
area. Some of these leases have already been abandoned; a
few remain. The withdrawal of these outlying white settlers
may prove in places to be a decided benefit to the community
as a whole, for where the pastoral areas have been pushed out
too far, the costs of maintenance of essential services, including
mails, food, transport, and police supervision are likely to be
greater than the total returns provided by pastoral products
(wool, hides, horses, stock, etc.) derived from the area so
taken up.
It seems that there might be advantages accruing if the
present fullbloods of the Western Desert could continue to live
unmolested within their country as nomads, and that it would be


advantageous to the State if endeavours could be made to exclude
ail possible forms of white contacts of a continuous nature.
There is some evidence to show that it is in those areas where
native inhabitants have become dispersed that the principal
troubles have been engendered for the pastoralist by the increase
of dingoes and other pests.
Owing to the specialised nature of the environment, the
desert areas could not be readily reoccupied by detribalised
aborigines and attempts at repopulation with partly civilised
natives may well prove impossible; the effective isolation of the
present native inhabitants would on the evidence, lead to their
multiplication, and to the redevelopment of an optimum popula-
tion within the region. It seems indisputable that, if the area
could be held for the aborigines, and whites excluded, it would
be an economic advantage to the whole community. The 800
to 1,000 aboriginal individuals could in isolation, be maintained
without cost to the community (beyond the minimum necessary
for occasional medical and police patrol work) as permanent
game wardens.
The aboriginal population so reserved would constitute a
far more effective occupation of the country than that produced
by the residence of the relatively few whites who, at present,
make their living by acting as wild dog killers in the desert
area. These whites only maintain their present position by the
exploitation of the cheap labour provided by natives. With-
drawal of whites from the fringe and extension of native
occupied areas to embrace the whole of the desert and the
employment of the population in getting their own living may
be a more effective means of eradicating pests than the present
spasmodic and seemingly uneconomic white efforts to suppress
dingoes by poisoning, trapping, and scalp trading, etc. The
maintenance of an effective balance of nature rather than complete
destruction of, for example, the dingo is of supreme importance,
particularly in these arid regions. The dingo is a partial control
for the rabbit; in the absence of the dingo the destruction of the
covering of mulga scrub by increases of the rabbit menace may
have far-reaching effects on the soil and climate of the areas
around the present deserts.


The possible effects of the re-isolation of an only partly
detribalised group can be demonstrated by one classic example.
About 1863 a small family group composed of a male and two
young women, the so-called Nanja horde of the Maraura tribe
fled to the bush from the Murray River settlements near Went-
worth where they had lived among the first white settlers. Some
thirty years elapsed before they were discovered. During that
period they had increased in the third generation to twenty-eight
individuals and when found were in healthy condition; their
great increase in numbers had, of course, compelled them to
range further afield from their hiding places and led to their
undoing. Within three years of discovery they were rounded
up and resubmitted to the civilising process. They are now
extinct. An account of them is given by Cudmore (1893).*
Practical means for the bringing about of the desired
seclusion of the present desert inhabitants could best be initiated
(a) by the prevention of formation of permanent institutions
and stations within the reserved areas; (b) by instituting and
maintaining routine patrols in their stead and (c) by active
discouragement of all outward migration of nomad folk. All
necessary contacts could be made by patrols, whether they be
by medical missionary, research officer or police. Permission
should only be granted for patrols small enough not to unduly
interfere with food and water supplies of inhabitants. Ernabella
station appears to be well situated for controlling access to the
eastern portion of the Western Desert. In Western Australia
the Warburton Range Mission station is placed too far into the
heart of the desert area and has had a drastic and disrupting
effect on tribal life. In the interests of the aborigines it should
be removed to a site not more than one hundred miles from
Laverton and the outer region controlled by itinerant supervising
officers.
DEVELOPMENT OF MIXED BREEDS
Today a few first half-castes are being born in the desert
region, the results of contacts between white " doggers ”, pros-
pectors and other visitors; recent developments may well tend
* Cudmore, A. F., Aust. Assoc. Adv. Sci., 1893, p. 524-526.


to minimise this factor in the formation of mixed bloods. Some
of the principal crossings occur in the fringe region of the
pastoral steppe and opportunities for hybridisation become still
more frequent in some closely settled areas. Nevertheless these
two regions in general present different aspects of the problem.
In the pastoral steppe regions there are relatively large but
shrinking populations of fullbloods with increasing groups of
first and second generation half-castes. Their education is only
now beginning to be catered for in an incipient and uncertain
manner.
Fig. 4.
First appearance of Fi hybrids, marking a stage in the decline of full-
blooded aborigines.


In the settled districts there are few full-blooded aborigines
and the mixed bloods are in the second to fourth and even
the fifth generations of crossing; some have been well educated
and have taken an honourable place in the general community,
many others, through lack of adjustment, economic difficulties,
deficiencies in education and inability or unwillingness to throw
off shackles of primitive custom, have fallen into difficult
times.
In the settled districts those who have progressed in adopting
European culture say they are being retarded in their progress
towards complete participation in the life of the white com-
munity by regulations and laws framed to take care of their
less fortunate confreres. The less favoured ones resent the
increasing restrictions placed on their nomadism, on their old
communal sharing habits, on their general ways of life, and on
those moral corruptions which have come to be, in certain cases,
their own solution of the problem of how to live on the margins
of a white community.
The appearance of the first (Fi) hybrids marks a definite
stage in the decline and disappearance of a fullblood people.
The accompanying diagram (Fig. 4) based partly on some new
data will give a general idea of the successive areas where this
disintegrative force has been at work. Only in the limited
areas, marked by ruling on the map, do full-blooded people still
roam without restraint over tribal territories.
THE TYPES OF MIXED BLOODS
In Australia terms such as " half-caste ”, " mixblood ” or
" yellow fellow ” are applied generally to anyone bearing an
admixture of alien blood with that of the Australian aborigines.
In the case of crosses between aborigines and whites there is
a tendency to qualify the term with the addition of the adjectives
white (or light) and dark respectively, to indicate the pre-
dominating strain, but other adjectives such as " real ” and
" proper ” half-castes are also ignorantly employed. However,
use is by no means uniform and even Government officials
have been found to regard the first cross as a " true half-caste ”,
the second cross as " quadroon ”, and the third as " octoroon ”,
this false terminology in some measure reflecting an undoubted


tendency for further white dilution to occur even in areas where
the first half-castes have been under official surveillance. Some
such misapprehension is also responsible for the popular state-
ment that " the black blood breeds out in three generations ”.
There is often no clear idea of the degree of white admixture in
the various individuals in a half-caste population, and the dif-
ference between the first and subsequent crosses has not as a
rule been taken into account. Everywhere the terminology
applied to half-castes seems open to confusion.
Such vagueness had indeed encouraged various errors in
statistical and other records. With the virtual disappearance
of true fullbloods in certain districts of New South Wales there
has been a tendency for people to be called fullbloods who are
only of %or % aboriginal blood. Of 56 " statistical full-
bloods ” on one station only 12 proved to be wholly aboriginal
in their racial constitution. In other places this vagueness is
less apparent. Thus in Victoria where Professor Wood Jones
made enquiries among a portion of the remaining fullbloods,
assessments seem to be far more accurate, thirty-five out of
forty-five stated survivors of the race proving, on detailed
enquiry, to be of fullblood origin.
Before entering into any details it seems desirable to define
terms which may be used in this report wherever their use can
give added significance to the data. The terms are those
used in general studies in genetics. With their aid many
important characteristics of the various types of hybrids can
be indicated with a degree of clarity not possible when using
loosely applied terms.
In the following paragraphs the principal types of half-
cases may be enumerated.
First Generation of Crossing
The first cross or " first half-caste ” brought about by the
cross-mating of members of two separate ethnic groups. In the
usual Australian case the cross is between a full-blooded
aboriginal woman and an alien (mostly "white”) male. This
is termed the Fi cross. The reverse cross in which the woman
is of alien extraction and the man an aboriginal fullblood is
quite rare and none has been actually encountered in the course


of the present study, although descendants of such unions have
been examined.
Second Generation of Crossing
Three types of descendant are possible in the second genera-
tion: —
Fa the progeny of the mating of two Fi individuals.
l/ 4 the progeny of the mating of an Fi and the alien type.
y 4 the progeny of the mating of an Fi and the full-blooded
aboriginal.
Third Generation of Crossing
By the intermarriage of the three above-mentioned second
generation types and the backcross with alien aboriginal and
Ft persons there will tend to appear a considerable variety of
mixed bloods in the third generation as follows:
1/8 whose parents were I/4 and alien.
2-8 or 14 whose parents were 14 and 14.
2-8 or 14 whose parents were Fa alien
y 8 whose parents were 14 and Fi.
y 8 whose parents were and Fa.
y 8 whose parents were % and alien.
Fs whose parents were Fa and Fa.
Fx whose parents were y 4 and %.
Fx whose parents were Fi and Fa.
y 8 whose parents were Fi and
y 8 whose parents were 14 fullblood.
y 8 whose parents were Fa and %.
6-8 or whose parents were Fa and fullblood.
6-8 or whose parents were y 4 and %
% whose parents were % and fullblood.
Matings of all the above types regularly occur and indicate
the variety of admixture to be found in any old half-caste com-
munity even when the alien blood is all of one ethnic type. In
this report when the terms Fi, Fa, I/4, etc., are used without
qualification, the cross between aboriginal and white is being
discussed. In those hybrids in which the alien blood is of non-
white origin the ethnic type or nationality of the alien parent is
indicated as follows:—Fi negro, 14 Afghan, etc. Thus of the


given examples of first denotes the first cross between an
aboriginal and negro, the second a person who has one-quarter
of aboriginal blood and three-quarters of Afghan.
Fourth Generation of Crossing
In the fourth generation and beyond the crossings are some-
times so complex that the above notation can at times only be
usefully employed in the form I/4X, y 8 x, Fx, etc., to indicate the
approximate degree of admixture present. This loose nomen-
clature is useful in indicating general trends of admixture in
the population. For example, where there may be a tendency,
because of local factors of isolation, for a population to become
fixed at about the y 8 or % or any other level of admixture it is
convenient to be able to denote it by the use of the term y 8 x,
or y 4 x, etc.
In the course of specialist genealogical studies it has some-
times been necessary to record persons with such complex
trihybrid genetic combinations as ((Fa) x (Fi x Cinghalese)),
i.e. with I/4 Cinghalese, y 8 white and y 8 aborigine, and quadri-
hybrids such as ((Fi) x (Fi Melanesian x Fi Malay)) in which
there appears y 8 Melanesian, y 8 Malay, 14 white and l/ 2
aboriginal. In South Australia where white crosses predominate
and the fourth generation of crossing is only just being reached,
notational complexities of this type are not of immediate impor-
tance and can be dismissed with scant attention.
Griffith Taylor (1924)* used y B , 2-8, y B , etc., to %to express
the various degrees of admixture. In this paper an x/8 fraction
indicates the third generation. For certain statistical purposes
such as the analysis of population trends in the fourth generation,
a 16-fold division (1-16, 2-16, 3-16, etc.) is useful and is
employed in detailed work.
MISUNDERSTANDING OF THE HALF-CASTE PROBLEM
Many misapprehensions and misunderstandings of the half-
caste problem are to be found in popular literature both inside
and outside Australia. The Australian situation is often iden-
tified with the different one met with in the United States of
*Taylor, T., Griffith and Jardine, F., 1924, Journ. & Proc. of Roy. Soc.
N.S.W., Vol. 58, p. 268-294.


America, where, owing to social prejudices and marked physical
differences the African negro cross with the white is causing
many difficulties of adjustment and may well prove to be an
insoluble problem. Some observers in America have come to
the conclusion that the only solution to the negro-white problem
is in the eventual segregation of the two peoples in different
areas, a policy which in a more limited way has already been
applied in Africa to stem that tide of negroid invasion which
threatens to swamp the whole white population of South Africa.
In both these areas there are large ethnic groups of dark-skinned
negroid peoples possessing highly characteristic physical and
mental traits which are claimed not to fit into the general pattern
of modern white life and possession of which are rightly or
wrongly considered to be insuperable barriers to social equality.
American reaction against negro-white admixture may be
contrasted with their ready acceptance of Indian-white crosses,
particularly when they become diluted to about the octoroon
level.
In Australia there is a relatively small body of dark-skinned
people who are fundamentally not negroid in ethnic constitu-
tion (even if it is contended that there may be theoretical
grounds for the presence of a relict or dilute archaic negrito
strain, surviving from those ancient times when a small amount
of Tasmanoid element was absorbed by them.) These dark
aborigines have a skin colour whose intensity seems to be con-
trolled by multiple factors so that there is steady dilution of
tone with access of white blood. Many other elements of
their make-up range within the rather wide limits of the white
races (so-called). When they are present only as a minority
and further diluted by admixture they pass into the general
mass of the populace. There seems to be no evidence to
suggest that their descendants will, through segregation of
recessive genes, unwittingly reproduce what have been commonly
called " throw-backs ” such as has been considered sometimes
to occur in the case of the negro-white cross.
As'has been remarked by a popular Australian writer in
reference to half-caste aborigines, " It may be a surprise to learn
that within Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth there are


occasional white Australians who have ' coloured ’ [meaning
Australian aboriginal] blood in their veins. No one ever dreams
it, simply because it does not show ”. The same remark could
be made with regard to Adelaide.
In overseas literature, even in that which has some preten-
sions to being scientific, there are misapprehensions about the
extent and nature of the admixture of aboriginal blood among
white Australians culminating in the mistake of the research
student who, having misinterpreted that line in the Common-
wealth census figures which related to ” native-born Australians ”,
seriously identified them with " half-castes ”, and proceeded to
make the deduction that the high percentage of " aboriginal
blood ” in the Australian soldiers who fought at Anxac seemed
to have not deleteriously affected their fighting worth or
stamina!
A section of non-scientific writers are satisfied that every-
thing worthy of note has already been said regarding the half-
caste problem and that scientific research is unwarranted or even
a waste of time. A study based on the intensive observation
of half-caste peoples and their problems may, however, offer
suggestions of service in finding a practical solution of their
difficulties. Such a study should assess the trends of crossing,
and the various factors involved in the successes and failures
of adjustment which can be met with in the various local environ-*
ments to be found within the Commonwealth of Australia.
HUMAN HYBRIDS AND THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
AUSTRALIAN MIXED BLOOD
While biologists possess a great body of accurate data on the
populations resulting from the crossing of diverse types of
lower organisms and smaller mammals and of the way in which
their chromosomes and genes react, there is, by comparison, little
knowledge of the effects of racial admixture in man, and what
little is known has been rendered obscure by many factors not
under experimental control. Among other things the difficulties
of obtaining assurances of the " purity ” of the strains with
which the mixing has been initiated are difficult to overcome.
Thus in the United States where negro-white crosses have been.


examined there is difficulty in obtaining evidence of the " racial
integrity ” of the negro blood appearing in the crosses since
the two races have already been in contact for several hundred
years. Crossing of the " pure ” types happens at present only
rarely owing to the increasing social stigma attached. Observa-
tions that have been made have, therefore, been rather incon-
clusive and actually few true Fi negro-whites have been observed.
The cross between Australian aboriginal and white is a wide
one and in selected areas such clearcut genealogical data can
be obtained that the race-crossing situation presents an almost
unique opportunity for the study of statistically valid series of
mixed bloods. The information obtained may serve in the
interpretation of the results of race-crossing in many other parts
of the world.
Some American authorities have come to the conclusion that
in the United States the negro-white ethnic admixture is a bad
one, producing many cases of physical and mental disharmonies.
The reliability of these assessments is open to criticism from
many points of view. However, Davenport, who has studied
negro-white mixture both in Jamaica and the United States,
comes to conclusions that physical and psychological disharmonies
of a serious nature may be expected to occur when partners to
a cross come from stocks which are too widely diverse. He
cites examples of grave disharmony and his cases include mulat-
toes with combinations of long legs and short arms and vice
versa which, he suggests, place them at a distinct disadvantage.
There is also the suggestion that there are innate differences of
intelligence between negro and white and that the mixed-bloods
may be at a disadvantage. It is stated also that the incorpora-
tion of this " inferior ” material in the white stock may well
prove a biological calamity. Another school of thought dis-
agrees strongly with these conclusions and concludes that there
are no significant genetic differences between negro, white, and
the hybrid type.
Where the cross has been less wide in its embrace and the
characters of the parties to the cross has been claimed to be more
harmonious the results have been considered to be more
advantageous.


Shapiro (1936) * who has studied Polynesian-white crosses
resulting from the isolation of the white mutineers of the
" Bounty ” on Pitcairn Island with Tahitian women as wives,
has indicated the presence of hybrid vigour and has shown
that the mixbreeds are superior to both parental types in some
of their physical characteristics. In Hawaii, Chinese and
Hawaiians crossed reveal marked hybrid vigour and Porteus has
indicated the high intelligence quotients of certain hybrids. Not
all hybrids are claimed to be advantageous, and several writers
have stressed the inferiority of the Filipino-white cross in
Hawaii.
In Hawaii the effects of racial admixture on the social and
physical structure of the community have been the subject of
many studies, and Hawaii has come to be regarded as almost
an experimental laboratory where racial crosses can be observed
in various and significant series, within a common sociological
pattern. On close examination this seemingly ideal experimental
situation is seen to be partly invalidated by uncontrollable dif-
ferences, but important trends can be deduced and various
assessments made of the probable effects of more widespread
mixings of various races of the countries bordering the Pacific.
WHITE SOCIAL ACCEPTANCE OF VARIOUS TYPES OF MIXED
BLOODS
First comparisons of general data on the various degrees
of social tolerance of various types of hybrids in white com-
munities including—
Negro-white crosses in U.S.A.
Tahitian-wdiite crosses in Pitcairn
Chinese-white crosses in Hawaii
Hawaiian-white crosses in Hawaii
Chinese-Hawaiian crosses in Hawaii
Filipino-white crosses in Hawaii
indicate the importance attached to skin colour and hair form.,
The negro cross is held as least desirable by reason of possession
of strongly-marked physical characteristics, body proportions,
gait, sebaceous glands, skin colour and hair form, and the fear
* Shapiro, H., 1936, Heritage of the " Bounty ”, New York.


of recurrence of these factors in relatively undiluted form in
after generations of crosses plays a not inconsiderable part in
keeping the peoples apart. The Filipino also has two factors,
skin colour and Mongolian eyefold. All the others have only
one outstanding characteristic and these are seen to be the socially
less undesirable crosses.
In the case of the Australian aborigine hair- and eye-form
are within white limits; skin colour being the most obvious
factor in which he is completely outside white range. It is
natural that this should appear to weigh most in the social
assessment of the acceptance of mixed breeds.
One of the foremost arguments used by those who insist on
the isolation of the Australian half-caste is the suggestion that
the introduction of even a remote trace of native blood into
white family lines would render possible or even likely the
appearance in the future of " throw-backs ” or reversions towards
the ancestral aboriginal type, even after many generations of
continued breeding with whites; the most marked character,
that of skin colour, is usually cited as the one likely to appear.
There has hitherto been little factual evidence to support the
likelihood of such an occurrence and during the present study
a great deal of attention has been paid without much success to
discovering actual cases and histories.
From the purely scientific aspect the appearance of individuals
of later generations of crossing in which there would be found a
recurrence of comparatively large numbers of marked aboriginal
characters would be of considerable interest and importance, and
the possibility of such would also furnish support for a policy
of continued segration of the mixed breeds.
On general grounds and from a study of their mental and
social responses the present writer concludes that there are not
likely to be any markedly aberrant characteristics introduced by
the low percentage of Australian aboriginal blood that is being
added to that of the predominantly North European ethnic
strain of white Australians.
Birdsell, similarly, after measuring and observing the physical
characters of 1,200 mixed bloods, has come to the general field
conclusion that there are no strictly biological reasons for the


non-acceptance into the white community of people with a dilute
strain of Australian aboriginal blood.
In the Northern Territory, and to a lesser extent in North
Queensland, the proportion of aborigines in the total population
is so relatively high that sociologically the problem may be a
somewhat more difficult one, especially in the absence of a
European cultural background. Grenfell Price (1939)* in his
monograph on white settlement in the tropics has recently given
a valuable resume of some possibilities and problems of white
crosses in hot climates. It would seem, on present evidence,,
that the problem is one of education, with maintenance of the
living standards playing as great a part as that of ethnic
admixture.
As previously mentioned, the possibility of the occurrence
of instances of reversion or segregation of marked aboriginal
characteristics, whether mental or physical, in Australian mixed-
bloods of predominently white ancestry is a question of such
importance as to warrant some preliminary notes on the data
gathered being included here.
The family records of about 1,200 Australian mixed bloods
have been scanned for indications of such segregations. In
addition general enquiries have been instituted at each field
station where work has been carried out. The data relating
to a great many hybrid persons have been passed in review. No
instance of true or even marked segregation of aboriginal
characters has been observed on the Australian mainland.
Speaking generally it may be stated that the Fi cross is a
characteristic one and after some experience can be distinguished
from all others. In some ways the first cross with " white ”
seems to deviate slightly from the mean towards the characters
of the white parent and to present a remarkably uniform
appearance. They appear to acquire white attitudes and occupa-
tions with greater celerity and seeming greater success than some
other mixed bloods. The significance of this will be discussed
separately. Birdsell has observed some important and relatively
* Price, A. Grenfell, 1939, White Settlement in the Tropics. New
York.


uniform physical characteristics in which the Fi hybrid type stands
apart from the others.
F 2 folk may be somewhat more variable, but in skin colour
they are seldom sufficiently different to cause confusion with
any caste other than %, and even this variation seems to be
in part attributable to different degrees of exposure to sunburn
and in part to normal variations in the grand parental types. In
a few cases there was some evidence from the genealogies that
variation in related % individuals was possibly due to factors
derived from respectively " blonde ” and " brunette ” white
ancestors. The significance of these and other cases will be
discussed by Birdsell in his analysis of all the physical data
obtained. Personal observations lead to the suggestion that in
the case of F 2 individuals there is a greater range of variability
and that in some individuals there is a somewhat closer approach
to the aboriginal type of physical form and mental outlook and
reaction than there is to be found in any Fi. There is also some
evidence, not yet properly considered, which suggests that in the
third generation of crossing this variability may be still further
increased. How far the physical form may be due to hereditary
influences and how much of the mental outlook to the social
influences of life on aboriginal stations cannot yet be stated.
The facts gathered in an attempt to sound this and allied
problems has not yet been examined statistically and no con-
clusion can be stated.
Consideration of general evidence brought together by the
present investigation points to the absence of any marked segrega-
tion of characters. There is nothing to warrant the suggestion
that markedly recessive aboriginal physical characteristics would
appear in any " white ” family in which there was a remote
and dilute strain of aboriginal blood.
TYPICAL MIXED BLOOD POPULATIONS
Synopses of data on three Australian mixed blood com-
munities may be submitted to an examination at this point in
the discussion.
In addition to furnishing important information on some
general results of white contact and admixture they will assist
in the interpretation of trends in South Australia.


The Queensland community first dealt with (Fig. 5) illus-
trates the effect of a short period of white contact followed by
isolation.
A second, New South Wales group gives a general picture
of the results of an interval of close white contact followed by
a period of partial segregation.
The third, also in Queensland, gives evidence of marked
initial and continued white contact ever since the days of first
European settlement.
1. A Re-isolated Station (Queensland).
In this segregated mixed blood and fullblood community
at Yarrabah attention is actively devoted towards isolating
the residents from all white contacts except those made by
supervised white tourist parties. Government policy favours
isolation, the policy of the Superintendent and his Board of
Control has been never to permit willingly any individual to
leave the reserved area once he has become an inmate. A strong
physical barrier to white contact exists in the form of a high
and inaccessible jungle-clad mountain range, which has always
constituted a tribal boundary. This deters all but the most
agile from desiring to depart from the station. Police super-
Fig. 5.
Changes in ethnic constitution of population in successive generations,
at three native stations.


vision also ensures that there is little leakage of population from
the reserved area. There are a few cases of present day white
contacts and a slight infiltration of white blood continues.
Some vital statistics of three successive generations which
have developed in the area may be instructive. The data are
derived from 20 genealogies and embrace 195 individuals. In
the attached diagram (Fig. 5) vertical columns show the total
numbers of persons present in each of the three generations con-
sidered, embracing respectively 64, 57, and 74 individuals.
Column 0 shows the generation before European contact; 1
indicates the generation of the first crossings; and 2 the second
generation after contact was established. In this instance figures
are not yet available for the third generation after contact since
families are not yet complete.
Accession of alien (principally white) blood was at 0%,
24% and 13% but these percentages are to be ascribed not all to
contacts on the station, for individuals are still being brought
in from surrounding areas, where some free-living peoples exist.
Some raw data on fullblood child mortality is available
(Fig. 6). It will be noticed that there are increasing percentages
of deaths of children in each succeeding generation. At the
place described this mortality is seemingly aggravated, if not
induced, by poor and probably insufficiently varied diet.
Epidemic disease is rife and medical attention is spasmodic, there
being no resident doctor in the community of 500. The system
of child rearing also requires urgent attention.
In this community the adults who produced families in each
of the three generations may be tabulated as follows:
0 12
Fullbloods - - 57 35 6
Mixed bloods - 0 11 48
The figures emphasise the rapid decline of the aborigines,
in spite of the high degree of isolation when they are in com-
petition or association with mixed bloods.
The absence of deaths among the Fi mixed blood children
on this station is worthy of note. Some infant deaths have
probably been missed or unrecorded through loss or suppression


of data regarding illegitimacies, nevertheless the general high
viability of Fi and perhaps of 14 children is noteworthy.
Consideration of the data supplied by the diagram and
preliminary figures for this station suggests that if a mixblood
community is placed under strict isolation after the first genera-
tion of contact with " whites ” a community of dark mixed
bloods tending to a%x stock will be developed. Even without
adequate diet and medical attention, and with a high mortality
rate due to various, probably preventable causes, it would seem
that the original fullblood community will tend to be replaced
by an equal-sized group of %x aborigines.
In the case under consideration the isolated area occupied is
relatively small and over-populated. The soil of the place is
chiefly sandy and sterile or otherwise wet and swampy. The
people remain largely dependent on combined support from
mission and Government funds. The fullbloods are declining
in numbers at an extraordinary rate, a fact which is masked to an
extent, in census figures, by constant accessions of natives who
are being brought in from outside the reserved area.
The effects of an early policy in taking chiefly Fi girls into
the mission and leaving boys with their parents in the bush can
be discerned in the second generation. The Fi girls were chosen
as wives often in preference to full-blooded women by full-
blood males (also reared on the station), this accounting for the
% individuals who are now so predominant in the community.
2. A Second Isolated Station (Woodenbong,
New South Wales).
Our second station yields data of an older series of crossings
and carries observations into a third generation of contract;
unfortunately no data are available for the generation born before
the first hybrids appeared. Isolation has been less marked as a
factor but has produced striking results.
Some general information suggests that the original tribe
occupying the area under consideration numbered about 100
individuals but they were dispersed and have died out; the data
in the present diagram applies in a general way to the mixed
descendants who afterwards reassembled at the station site
after being spread over the surrounding mountain region for at


least a generation. Local conditions formerly favoured the
isolation of the mixed bloods. Recent governmental supervision
continues this policy so that isolation has been a continued major
factor affecting the constitution of the group; despite this in the
third generation about 25% of the descendants of the original
inhabitants are now mixing with or are spreading out among the
white population.
Inspection of the diagram suggests that isolation tends to
build up a relatively large body of dark mixed bloods but that
there is constant trend for a proportion of the lighter elements
to pass over into the predominant stock. Isolation, by breeding
up a large population of near-aborigines, may be regarded as
tending ultimately to increase the total amount of aboriginal
blood which will be absorbed in the dominant community.
Access of white blood in the generation of contact was high,
about half of the recorded births being of Fi individuals. No
fullbloods were born in the third generation of contact but births
were more than twice as numerous as those of the first generation
of crossing.
Consideration of the second generation shows the fecundity
of Fi’s, the rapid decline of fullbloods and the rather high
proportion of %, indicating the relatively high degree of isolation
induced by their mountain home. Nevertheless, casual white
contacts were responsible for many further Fi and % individuals
in this generation.
In the third generation the isolating factors continued and
selective mating whereby fullbloods tended to marry % partners,
led to the birth of numbers of % individuals who are, to the
untrained eye, similar to aborigines. There was rather high
mortality in the group, affecting principally % and, to a lesser
extent the % en d °f sef ies. Allowing for uncontrollable
sources of error in the data the population gives every evidence-
of being somewhat greater than that of the original aboriginal
group which it has replaced. Neglecting the % and higher
caste elements which are already tending to migrate to towns
and to be absorbed in the white community, a dark mixed-
blood group of from Fx to % individuals, probably equal in
numbers to the original population of the district, remains as


the " half-caste problem”. The population may tend to
stabilise at or about the level. Unlike the fullbloods, whom
they are replacing, these near fullbloods will not die out when
brought into further contact with whites, but on the contrary
may increase their numbers at a rather rapid rate.
3. Station with Continued Close White Contact (Queensland).
At this station (Cherbourg) some data are available for four
generations. That from the generation of contact and the second
one are rather complete, the third generation has been subjected
to an averaging factor to allow for the incompleteness of some
of the families. Unfortunately the data are warped by the
disappearance into the general white population of some of the
before contact first generation
of contact
Fig. 6.
Child mortality rate after contact with Europeans (fullbloods only).


lighter, ]/ 4 , progeny of the Fi’s and Fa’s of the first and second
generations of contact.
The general social status of people at this station is probably
higher than that of the previously cited Queensland one, there
is relatively more efficient medical attention and hospital aids
are available. The child mortality is probably lower than on
most other stations visited. Nevertheless the full-blooded child-
ren die rapidly (Fig. 6). Sanitation is better, drainage com-
plete, water supply adequate and educational facilities excellent
as compared with other stations. These are factors which must
be borne in mind in interpreting the data disclosed in the popula-
tion figures.
The initial decline of fullbloods was as marked as elsewhere
although the rate is less rapid in the third generation. By
admixture with the %’ s a virtually fullblood element may develop
and survive as a proportion (say 25%) of the group.
The dominant group in the third generation is y B , but there
is a strong y 8 element and smaller 14 and l / 8 elements, chiefly
composed of children who may not remain in the mixed blood
community when they attain adulthood.
One-third of the total population is composed of those mixed
blood categories which tend to be absorbed (even after some
have already disappeared from the community). With a con-
tinuance of contact with whites and further entry of white blood
the main unabsorbable element will tend to decline still further
in the next generation, but increase in factors leading to isola-
tion or greater insistence on the absence of contacts between the
community and the surrounding whites could still lead to the
ultimate development of a population of about 7-16 constitution;
that is one composed of people only slightly fairer than the
ordinary Fx half-caste.
Summary of Points brought out in Study of Three Representative
Mixed Blood Communities.
Among the outstanding features are:—
(a) Rapid decrease of fullbloods after contact, leading to
virtual extinction of the aborigines in about the third
generation.


(b) Increasing infant mortality rate of fullbloods after con-
tact with whites.
(c) Replacement of fullbloods in each instance by an equal
or larger population of mixed bloods.
(d) Hight fecundity of Fi half-castes when mated together.
This coupled with a relatively low infant mortality
rate, may yield a large second generation population.
(e) Important results accruing from re-isolation of Fi and
F 2 half-castes in association with fullbloods; among
these are the tendency for formation of a relatively
large population of fecund near-fullbloods, which
may tend to maintain its numbers despite rather poor
living conditions and rather high infant mortality.
(f) Effects of partial isolation in promoting a large relatively
unabsorbable near-aboriginal element while a small
near-white section of the population is being absorbed
into the white community.
(g) Where free white contact continues nearly one-third of
the mixed blood population is likely to be absorbable
after the second generation of contact.
(h) Importance of continued white contacts and some inter-
marriages in promoting absorbability.
BIRTHS AMONG THE HYBRID PEOPLE
Grey (1841)* in a remarkable publication gives one of the
earliest pictures of our aboriginal population based on actual
lists. The data applies to South-Western Australia, but may
be regarded as of general application.
According to his data 41 females bore 188 children, i.e., an
average of 4.6 children, of these 3 had 7 children and only
one had one child, the rest falling between these two extremes;
of 222 births 93 were female and 129 males, i.e., one female
to 1.3 males. The data applied largely to a period before white
contact in Australia and serves as a starting point in a survey
of some changes in birthrates, etc., in more recent years.
In an aboriginal community, such as was for example
formerly present on the West Coast of South Australia, the
* Grey, Sir George, 1841, Journ. of two expeditions in . . . Western
Australia, London, Vol. 2, appendix, p. 391.


number of children born was scarcely more than sufficient to
replace the population and allow for the rather scant wastage
found among a hunting people with weakly developed com-
bative instincts, few enemies, widely dispersed in a sparsely
occupied territory and subject to few endemic diseases except
yaws.
From a preliminary examination of data gathered during
this expedition it would appear that in the generation of contact
with whites there may often be a stimulus causing an actual
increase in the total number of child births of whom more than
half, however, may be Fi half-castes. In the second generation
of contact the numbers of full-blooded children born fall, their
crude birthrate seldom averages 2 and the fullblood group tends
to disappear. The Fi half-castes on the other hand produce
large families of second generation children, an average of over
six being met with in favourable areas. This tendency may
persist or may diminish in the third generation, but the resulting
families may be very large even after taking into consideration
the numerous deaths which may occur when the children are
reared on a low scale diet.
Detailed analysis of further genealogical data may throw
additional light on these trends in vital statistics. Sufficient to
indicate that the half-castes replace vanishing fullbloods in
short time and appear to be steadily increasing at a rate possibly
greater than among any other type of the general population of
Australia.
Special Instance of Fecundity in Fi Hybrids.
A striking example of the high fertility of Fi hybrids the
reality of which is inferred after consideration of the data men-
tioned in a previous section of this paper, may be cited from
Western Australia. It is by no means unique but the data
are more complete than in other case histories. An Fi woman
of over 60 years of age who is now past the age of child-
bearing, has had fifteen children by the one husband, who was
also an Fi. He is now dead. Of the fifteen F 2 children fourteen
are still living; all of them lived to be married and beget
children; some of them have apparently completed child-
bearing, but a few others may have further children. Of the


127 known grandchildren, 102 were alive at the time of the
investigation. Several of these grandchildren had reached
marriageable age and there were great-grandchildren and others
in prospect.
In addition to the old lady there are thus at least 120 living
descendants. Owing to inbreeding and cross-marriages between
families the 127 grandchildren shared 31 parents (one a full-
blood) and 28 grandparents of whom only two are known to
have been fullbloods.
While all the second generation children were F 2 they married
people of several different crossbred types, the third generation
comprising Fx, y B , 11-16 as well as some of unascertained
admixture, the whole tending towards a probable y 8 average
type.
The family line has more than quadrupled, although it is
only between 45 and 50 years since the birth of the eldest F 2
child (and no account has been taken of possible descendants in
other lines).
Such figures are an indication of the phenomenal rates of
multiplication which may occur, especially among Fi and Fa
hybrids, even when the main support of the people is occasional
menial work, Government rations and public charity. The
extended family under review has become widely scattered over
South-Western Australia and it was not possible to study the
social history in detail. From the information at our command
it seems that in the main they are law-abiding, free from
extremes of mental and physical degeneration, and only one
family group of them is known to be supported on a Govern-
ment station. It may incidentally be remarked that the most
urgent request made on their own behalf by such members of
the family as were interviewed was for the better education of
their children.
POPULATION TRENDS AMONGST MIXED BLOODS
Examinations of the various mixed blood communities in
Australia reveals several interesting and diverse trends. It seems
clear that if both whites and aborigines were prevented from
making contacts with the mixed bloods the population would
rapidly pass through stages leading to the development of a


virtually Fx community. In practice the effects of a residual
fullblood stock are noticeable for one or two generations after
hybridisation first occurs and the presence of large contiguous
white population will ensure that the population norm will
slowly and probably inevitably creep towards the whiter end
of the mixed blood scale. The local history of the cross during
the initial generations is of marked importance in accelerating
this trend.
In the Queensland strongly-isolated community discussed in
previous paragraphs a fullblood group was rapidly being trans-
formed into one with a norm at the % Physically they
are nearly as dark as aborigines but with some physical dis-
harmonies and dental anomalies which can be ascribed to their
part white and other alien ancestries. At the other extreme
the Cape Barren Islanders in Tasmania (who have not been
previously mentioned in this paper) are tending to form a com-
munity with a norm approaching the I/4 (that is between 5-16-
4-16) level, while Point McLeay in its fifth generation approaches
closely the truly intermediate position of Fx (8-16).
It seems evident that with population norms as diverse as
these the several communities mentioned will in the future
present entirely different problems. In one (Cape Barren
Island) the population is composed of dark whites who are
chiefly conspicuous in the general community because of social
disabilities due to isolation and their forced association in a
discrete community on a relatively barren and inhospitable island.
The % people of the Queensland community are virtually
aborigines with what may be a touch of the white man’s restless-
ness and type of mentality and certainly (as Birdsell has par-
ticularly noted) with a few physical disabilities (such as a
tendency to disharmonious jaws and mal-position of the teeth)
such as are common in the white community.
Population Trends at Some Stations in South Australia.
At Point McLeay the mixed blood population is of rather
longer standing than at other stations in the State. The first
aboriginal settlement was formed in 1859 but there had already
been early native contacts with whites at the whaling stations
at Encounter Bay dating from before the earliest days of official


settlement in 1836. In addition an early half-caste element
was added to the station by the transfer from Kangaroo Island
of a colony of mixed bloods whose origin antedated from the
first official settlement in South Australia. In the earliest
families some members of the fifth generation of crossing are now
approaching marriagable age while there are many persons who
are in the fourth generation.
Most of the Fi generation are dead and even some of the
oldest inhabitants are those of the second generation of crossing.
In view of this the station is of considerable interest as indicat-
ing the trends of population likely in the future at other places.
Preliminary inspection of the data suggests that the present
population is trending strongly to become stabilised at the Fx
level with the majority of persons approaching to within 1-16
of this average constitution.
Thus approximately 75 per cent, of the rising generation are
between 9-16 and 7-16. Such illegitimacy as takes place (and
the percentage of first children born out of wedlock is rather
high) seems to be taking place more and more within the
group which, on the whole, shows a marked tendency towards
endogamy. This is encouraged by legislation, by the relative
isolation of the site, the decline of the policy of sending girls
into service, and the poverty of the community, which being
without wide scope for productive work, and with consequent
inability to travel, lives more and more to itself. The relatively
few persons from the community who marry whites are almost
invariably absorbed into the white community and are probably
to be considered as permanently lost to the mixed blood group,
which shows a strong tendency therefore in the fifth generation
to become a stable inbred ethnic mixtype of Fx constitution
whose interests do not range beyond the narrow confines of
the station upon which they live.
At Point Pearce the population trends are rather different from
those at Point McLeay and owing to the relative youth of the
cross still shows only a moderate degree of stabilisation. Some
Fi people survive and the oldest members of the third generation
of crossing are only just completing child bearing. Children
of today tend to be of the third and beginnings of the fourth
generations. There is a far wider spread of the range of mixture


with a peak at %. This is far darker than for Point McLeay
and if present trends continue the population which remains
may become stabilised at a somewhat darker level than at Point
McLeay. There is a tendency for some further dark blood
to come in by migration of aborigines from the West Coast
pastoral areas and the far northern desert fringe. In addition
to the white admixture there is present a dilute strain of Chinese
which is spreading rapidly through the group (nearly 20 per
cent, of the present generation possessing it) so that non-
European elements are likely to remain dominant. This will be
especially noticeable if a recent tendency is continued for near-
white elements to withdraw from the community and become cit}/
dwellers. The schism between the near-white element and the
darker one has already tended to reduce the white end of the
series. It may well continue adversely to affect it.
At Koonibba the admixture is on the whole relatively new
and the first individuals of the fourth generation are only just
beginning to be born. The third generation still in the
main sub-adult; adults are generally of the second generation
while the oldest people tend still to be of the Fi category. Taking
into consideration those family lines in which half-castes have
appeared the general trend of the population in the second
generation is towards %, the third is reverting more to %.
This apparent reversal seems to be in part due to changes
of mission policy. Formerly there was rather strict control
and segregation exercised under the Lutheran Mission. Later
on this surveillance was partly broken down (as seems almost
always to occur when the population increases beyond a certain
size). The adults of the second generation have tended to
seek employment outside the mission and to mix more with
whites. Nevertheless, with accessions of aboriginal blood from
the deserts to the north, the admixture will tend to become
stabilised at about y 8 or darker with a widening schism between
it and members of a small near-white group, who are living
as " whites ”in a nearby district. The ultimate racial con-
sitution of the latter will be perhaps % or (or lighter)
especially if the tendency towards amalgamation with the local
white population is continued.


Of the three stations examined, Koonibba thus seems to be
the one with the darkest trend. If inbreeding and segregation
is continued with accession of blood from aborigines of desert
tribes there seems every chance that a compact, rather dark-
skinned aboriginal-white hybrid stock, darker than the % level
will become established. Since there are not more than 300
in the group a policy of segregation, if continued to the fifth
generation, may tend to develop problems of inbreeding of the
type met with at present on Cape Barren Island, Tasmania, where
the remotest possible marriages tend to be between first cousins.
Koonibba may come to have many points in common with the
settlement at Woodenbong, New South Wales, where the darker
strain is also becoming fixed at about this level, forming a
relatively stable group of near-aborigines.
MIXED BLOODS IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA
For the purpose of the present report details of a hundred
families from South Australia have been analysed and some
estimates made.
The primary crosses with which each of these families
originated, were between non-Australian fathers and full-
blooded Australian aboriginal mothers (only very few instances
of the reverse cross being known from the whole of Australia).
The majority of these hundred first crossings took place along
the fringes of European occupation or in areas of sparse occupa-
tion such as on sheep and cattle stations, in isolated or new
farming areas, along railway construction lines, and in outlying
mining camps. They were often the product of isolation. In
the case of casual associations between alien (i.e., non-Australian)
and aborigine such as might occur along railway construction
lines there is often only an obscure history of the temporary
union which gave rise to the first half-caste. To those who
supplied the data for our studies the temporary partner was
merely a " white man ”. In the sparsely but more permanently
settled station country, where white residents were usually Jess
nomadic, the temporary unions were more defined, even if clan-
destine, and indeed the associations were often of a prolonged
nature giving rise to more than a single child by the one white
father. In such cases a more detailed history has been handed


down. Also as elsewhere the higher the social position of the
father or the more characteristic or outstanding his nature, the
more readily was he remembered.
Analysis of the hundred primary crossings here discussed
give us some indications of the types of alien blood introduced
thereby. They represent a good cross section of the mixed
blood families which have arisen in South Australia between
1830 and 1940 (from the days of the " sealer ” and " whaler ”
before the official settlement of South Australia, until the present
time).
Alien Parent:
North-Western European - - 87
Southern European - 2
Asiatic ------ 8
Others 3
100
It is possible to furnish further particulars for each of these
categories since the families have been included because of the
relative completeness of the ethnic data available for them.
North-Western European:
British (including some Australian-
born, believed British) - - 76
German ------ 4
Russian Finn ----- 2
Norwegian ----- 1
Danish 1
French-Canadian (with traces of
American Indian ... 3
South European:
Italian ------ 1
Maltese ------ 1
Asia:
Indian 5
Afghan 1
Chinese 2


Others:
Maori 1
Mauritius - 1
Negro 1
100
Since many of these were fruitful unions from which a con-
siderable proportion of the mixed blood population in our
settled districts has arisen the above list furnishes an outline
of the non-aboriginal content of the mixed blood population.
Data from the specialised groups at Marree are not included in
the study since the increasingly endogamous trihybrid Afghan
population there, although diluted with Australian aboriginal
as well as white blood, is not usually regarded as constituting
a part of the general half-caste problem under consideration.
Excluding the 11 parents of the first cross who were of non-
European origin and neglecting the above-mentioned Afghan
colony the proportions of the various white nationalities rep-
resented in the crosses agree in a general way with those of the
white population of Australia as a whole. The figures for the
whites are from Phillips and Wood.*
White Population Present Study
English - - - . 53.0 '
Scotch - 130
Irish - 23.0 90.5 85.4
Welsh - 1.5
German - 5.2 4 5
Scandinavian - - - 1.9 2 2
Other European - - 2.4 7.9
For South Australia, where some of the first crosses are
upwards of a century old there are not sufficient data at com-
mand to enable the making of a good analysis of the places
of origin within the British Isles of those white parents who
were of British origin although slightly more adequate data
will be available for Australia as a whole. It may be hazarded
Phillips, P. D., and Wood, G. L., 1928, Peopling of Australia.
Melbourne.


that the proportions did not differ greatly from those for the
general population although there may have been a somewhat
high ratio of Scotch and Irish.
Data for the occupations followed by the alien males to
whom the responsibility has been attributed for the first crosses
in the above series of a hundred families, give a slight idea
of the status of some of the males whose blood went into the
original cross:—
Occupation not specified ----- 68
Stationhand (shepherd, cook, overseer, dogger) - 5
Station manager ------ 4
Station owner ------- 1
Shearer -------- 1
Farmer - - - - - - - - 3
Fencer and scrub-clearer ----- 3
Police officer - - - - - - 3
Survey worker ------- 2
Mine owner 1
Miner -------- 1
Sailor -------- 4
Ship’s officer ------- 1
Bank messenger ------ 1
Shopkeeper ------- 1
Commercial traveller ----- 1
100
Although the data are much less complete than might be
considered desirable there is a suggestion that the fruitful primary
unions from which the present mixed blood population was
derived came very largely from the normal pioneering stock of
the country.
Non-White First Crosses
Some particulars have been gleaned of the non-European
ancestors of first crosses in South Australia. They are of special
interest since these, through further crossing, may bring in
factors affecting the mixed blood stock as a whole and cause
ultimate complications out of all proportion to their numbers.


Fi Negro.
Negro blood has come in through two known original crosses.
One family line from Mauritius has not prospered, and the
strain will probably die out; the other derived from an American
" mulatto ” is more successful, and is passing into several family
lines at one Government station. A third negro-white family
migrated to one of the other States before they re-crossed with
aborigines. In northern New South Wales they are now provid-
ing marked negroid segregations in several family lines.
Fi Maori.
Aboriginal-Maori hybrids are relatively common in the coastal
parts of the eastern States, but are represented in the above
hundred crosses by a single instance only.
Fi Indian.
East Indians were occasionally represented; chiefly they were
of dark Dravidian type from Southern India and the descendants
show decided traces of their Indian origin.
Fi Chinese
Two Chinese family lines can be traced back. One of these
is of interest and some importance since the family seems to
carry a factor for insanity which has reappeared in each genera-
tion in a proportion of the descendants. Some evidence indicates
that the trait can be traced back to the Chinese individual with
whom the hybrid family originated. In later generations the
unsound Chinese lines become spread out. The resulting white-
Chinese-aboriginal trihybrids of varied composition occur prin-
cipally on one station, where by intermarriage, their influence
is spreading into about 20 per cent, of the family lines. With
any intensification of inbreeding a dilute Chinese element will
undoubtedly come to be dispersed throughout the inhabitants
remaining on this particular station.
Second and Third Crosses with Alien (non-Australian) Strain
in South Australia
Most of the observed cases of a second and third introduc-
tion of alien (non-Australian) blood were between mixed bloods
and whites. While the first crosses between aboriginal and white
were almost always clandestine and due only to temporary unions,


a proportion of the second matings and most of the third are
legitimatized through marriage of the parties. Public opinion,,
the influence of missions, and police activities, as well as the
sentiments of the increasing number of educated mixed bloods
are beginning to ensure that only in wedlock will further alien
blood enter into the mixed blood population. The white partner
is usually a male, but in a proportion of the cases it is a mixed
blood male who marries a white woman.
Thirty-three second crosses where whites appear as the male
parent and a mixed blood as the mother can be studied in the
genealogies previously used for the study of one hundred Fi
crosses in South Australia. Although the number of families
is not large preliminary inspections of similar data for the other
States suggest that the general conclusions arrived at will be
upheld when the further data are considered.
Of the 33 second crosses 14 were due to clandestine associa-
tions and 19 were in wedlock. In practically all cases of
third crossing with white the families are completely absorbed
in the general community.
Some data exist for a study of the occupations of the male
partners and these are listed as follows:
Unions of White Men with Mixed Blood Women in
South Australia
No. of Racial Constitution of
Legitimate Instances Woman
Occupation not specified - 11 %, Fi, 5 Fa, 2%,2 14
Fisherman 2 2 14
Truckdriver 1 14
Sailor .... 1 p 2
Labourer 1 14
Stationworker 1 Fi
Painter .... 1 Fa
Dairy owner 1 y 8
Illegitimate
Occupation not specified - 10 4 Fi, 4 Fa, 3/ 4 , 3/ g
Station owner - - - 1 2 Fa
Station owner - - - 2 %
Fisherman 1 Fa


Unions of Mixed Blood Men and White Women in
South Australia.
No. of
Racial Constitution
Legitimate
Instances
of Man.
Occupation not specified -
4
2 Fi, F2,
Pastoralist
1
5/g
Labourer
1
5 /s
Farmer -
1
3 /4
Shopkeeper
1
3 /4
Musician
1
f 2
The lists reveal several interesting trends in the dilution of
mixed blood stocks, which are confirmed by a general survey
of the data from other places in Australia.
When a white man takes a mixed blood girl in marriage he
tends to choose one of a racial constitution of one-half or lighter
caste whereas in more casual unions there seems to be less
preference shown. Several reasons may be put forward to
account for this. Girls by half-caste mothers who had an
illegitimate white father, are more likely to be brought up in
white surroundings either as inmates of orphanages or in the
homes of whites who may have adopted them. They receive
an upbringing which enables them to be socially acceptable to
the men they marry. Some mixed blood girls particularly of
3 /g and 14 caste are very fair, especially in adolescence, and when
living in cities are not always recognised as having aboriginal
blood in their veins; they may pass rather readily into the general
population. People of and lesser caste merge so readily into
the community that details of their family histories are often
difficult to obtain. Such data as exist suggest that adjustment
is complete, that the children may even grow up without know-
ledge of their ancestry, and that in more than one instance a
high level of culture has been attained.
In marriages between mixed blood men and white women
there is from the point of view of the white less selection on a
colour basis, and it would seem that the economic status of the
mixed blood may have determined the marriage. It must be
remembered, however, that there may be warping of the data
since mixed blood youths of y B , I/4 and less aboriginal blood,


when reared away from aboriginal contacts, are likely to disappear
in the general population and thus they and their children would
be recorded as whites.
Many mixed marriages prove to be stable and the families
seem to be well adjusted.
Case histories could be cited from various parts of Australia.
In one case where the white male, a churchgoer, had been
married about two years, he informed the observers that his
only regret was that his Fi wife had not had the advantage of
a wider education, so that she could discuss some things, which,
in the circumstances were unknown to her. In another instance
where a white woman was married to a 5/g caste she was con-
sidered a good wife to him but not the equal of her husband,
since she was from a family of poor social standing whereas
he was from a family held in some repute in the district where
he lived. Other data will be considered later. In general it
might be stated that the closer the level of education of the
two parties the better seems to be the adjustment.
There is evidence to suggest that many marriages between
mixed bloods and whites are successful although it may seem
that in proportion to their numbers there are more unsuccessful
ones than in the white community as a whole. The best
adjusted cases of mixed marriages tend to be in isolated country
districts, although each of the capital cities of the Common-
wealth present instances of such marriages which are considered
successful.
Certain qualifications must be mentioned here in regard to
the methods by which later injections of a white strain enter
the mixed blood community. When mixed blood girls who
have been brought up in the environments of controlled stations
are sent directly into domestic service under conditions isolating
them from their usual company or from congenial and suitable
substitutes they are on occasion returned to the station as of
" bad behaviour ” to bear a child whose father was a white man.
In the case of girls from certain stations this event is rendered
the more likely because opinion and ambition among half-caste
young women is such as to encourage unions with whites even
when they are only of a temporary nature. In such cases their


code of loyalty often prevents the father of the child being
known to the authorities.
In many cases half-castes with whom the points were dis-
cussed considered that the environment of the stations was at
fault and opinion often was that immorality in mixed blood
communities is so common as to constitute a grave menace and
that the absence of the girls in service, even if it meant eventual
return with a white child, was not an unmixed evil. Among
the arguments garnered from many the following are provoking
of discussion:—
(a) Service removed the girls from a too early exposure to
sex life within the community and from interference
by older men.
(b) Delayed first pregnancies from a few months to several
years beyond what would be likely on the station.
(c) Gave the girl an insight and training in the amenities
of white life.
(d) Because of her training raised her status as a potential
wife for a mixed blood man after her return from
service.
(e) The near-white child if it eventuated was not considered
to be a bar to marriage; it helped to leaven the colour
of the whole, and a marriageable girl with a light
child might be considered to have an advantage over
one who had not had one.
(f) A 14 or less caste child, especially a girl, was an advan-
tage since she might marry white, thus raising the
prestige of the family.
Half-castes who were in opposition to the removal of mixed
blood girls from the native community felt that their departure
was disadvantageous for the reasons that:
(a) They were lonely and unhappy when away from home;
the parents worried about them.
(b) They grew intolerant of their parents.
(c) Girls sometimes brought back white babies " which spoilt
their breed ”.


(d) Light half-caste girls if taken away to be educated cut
themselves off from their relations and came to despise
them. If this happened too often there would not
be " enough women to go round ”.
(e) It was wrong to break up homes and remove children
from the control of their parents.
There seems to have been a relative decline in the former
practice of sending mixed blood girls out to service, and in
consequence a decline in illegitimacies where the child is by a
white father. A first inspection of the genealogies indeed
suggests that for the settled districts there has been an appreciable
increase in inter-mixed blood illegitimacies which may have had
their origin in the increase of unemployment and laxity of
control over mixed blood youths and girls of school leaving age.
This subject is to be discussed from other aspects in later reports;
it is only mentioned here because of its significance for the
study of second white crossings.
These lists suggest that mixed bloods whose economic status
and education are satisfactory are on occasion able to find mates
among some elements of the white population. The children
of such unions do not experience outstanding difficulties in
being absorbed in the general population. It may be deduced
that, providing there is a suitable cultural background a second
crossing with white leads to the absorption of the resulting
children in the general community. Isolation, insufficiency of
education and training may postpone the absorption. However,
a policy of isolation may increase the numbers of mixed bloods
dependent upon public support without in itself preventing the
necessity of their ultimate absorption.
It may be accepted as a corollary that two successive crossings
with " white ” blood, the second accompanied by reasonable
living conditions and normal education enables the grandchild
of a full-blooded aboriginal woman to take a place in the general
community. Where a third crossing with white occurs the
children are almost invariably completely merged in the general
population.


METHODS OF HALF-CASTE CONTROL
Several policies of dealing with half-castes have been brought
under notice. Among those that have been suggested, or which
are in practice are the following:—
(a) Segregation.
(b) Assimilation.
(c) Sterilisation.
(d) An uncertain or drifting policy.
(a) Segregation. Segregation suggests the ultimate develop-
ment of one or more ethnic pockets or variously diluted and
altered aboriginal peoples. These may remain apart, some-
times as dependant or partly dependant peoples, living in isola-
tion and often relying upon governmental subsistence for the
maintenance of their cultural integrity.
(b) Assimilation. This is a policy which may lead even-
tually to the amalgamation of the aboriginal people with the
members of the predominantly white community of Australia.
(c) Sterilisation. Sterilisation, voluntary or otherwise, has
been postulated as a possible policy, and it is employed to a
limited degree for penal offences in some of the United States.
It will not be discussed further herein, since the remoteness of
the possibility of its employment as a racial measure is sufficient
to render it a matter of academic interest only.
(d) Present System. Continuance of present negative systems
characterised by uncertainty of ultimate purpose and lack of
positive plan. This type of policy seems to be assisting in the
development of increasingly large populations of partly
dependant, partly acculturated, rather illiterate people who are
without special training and are often dependant upon govern-
mental subsistence. Some of the able-bodied individuals under
this system are unable to find employment, and are often
dependant upon private charity for their support. Often they
rely for indirect support upon those members of their own
native community who, through ill-health or singular good for-
tune, receive subsistence from the Government. From such
sources they are unlikely to obtain adequate nourishment for
healthy existence since the bare ration intended for one person
may be shared by several to the ultimate undoing of all.


Any discussion upon possible methods of improving con-
ditions amongst the mixed blood population of this and other
States involves the study of one or other of two of the positive
policies mentioned above, namely, either assimilation or
segregation.
No Australian Government has specifically expressed the
desirability of either of these two ultimate policies or even
defined its attitude towards them. However, at certain places
local conditions have tended towards one or other of these two
types of control, and may therefore furnish small indications of
the possibilities inherent in each type of policy. The following
paragraphs detail the possibilities of alternative policies of
segregation and assimilation.
Segregation.
In the preliminary study of three representative mixed blood
communities mentioned in an earlier part of this report, it has
been stated that several virtually segregated communities can be
found in different parts of Australia, and observations on these
suggest that a policy of virtual segregation may have exceedingly
important effects on a mixed blood community.
By reason of differential birth rates and the selective elimina-
tion of the fully aboriginal elements and, further, by an absence
of the continued accession of new white blood, a novel type of
aborigine is being developed in such communities. If this type
becomes fixed, it may, in the future, be necessary to recognise
a Neo-Australoid stock, a fixed blend of Australoid and European.
The formation of this new type is often being accelerated owing
to the small initial size of the communities, and the marked
degree of inbreeding which may take place. In certain cases,
first-cousin marriages are almost the remotest available mating.
This new composite stock will not at first be very uniform from
area to area because the initial degree of admixture with alien
blood differs in each separate area. Thus the levels at which
these ethnic composites are being fixed varies from virtually %
through half-caste to depending on the stage in crossing
at which isolation first began to take effect. This Neo-Australoid
stock tends to have a high birth rate, and a greater resistance


to disease than the aboriginal type which it replaces. Socially
and economically, the new stock tends to present a continued
and increasing problem.
Assimilation.
From a study of our data, it is apparent that assimilation
is occurring naturally at many places in Australia. It has hap-
pened in some districts that the first mixed breed population
has been a sparse one, or has been unusually favourably situated
and the mixed blood people have been able to acquire a status
which has enabled them to associate more freely than usual with
members of the white community in which they are living.
There are, thus, many small assimilated groups to be found in
various parts of Australia. In all cases, the results obtained seem
to have been accidental and never due to any positive policy
initiated by the Government. In these assimilated and virtually-
assimilated groups, the population is probably increasing with a
somewhat lower birth rate than in the segregated communities,
but, owing to the slightly higher standards of health and
nutrition, it is probable that the net rate is about the same. On
the whole, they are far more diluted with white blood than in
the case of segregated communities. Unfortunately, statistics
are more difficult to obtain than in the case of dependant and
institutionalised peoples, and the data are correspondingly more
difficult to evaluate. In such assimilated groups, the standard
of living is usually relatively low, being seldom better than
that of the poorer basic wage groups of whites, but, nevertheless,
it is much higher than in the case of the segregated communities.
There is increasing infiltration of white stock, often through
clandestine alliances, but usually through marriage.
Furthermore, a gradual substitution of whiter elements seems
to occur through natural selective elimination of the less adapt-
able and physically unattractive types, who tend to remain
unmarried.
In some quarters it is conventional to say that assimilation
is impracticable and even to infer that it is not taking place.
Before entering on a more detailed discussion of this aspect of
the problem, it may be as well to enumerate at random a few
first hand observations that have been made during the course


of our studies. These observations have been made in several
States and their varied nature and the wide range of instances
may be noted.
These examples are:—
5/ g aboriginal of wealth, married to white woman, attending
country dance, on occasion of local golf club celebration and
prize-giving.
5/ 8 girl attending an official public ball in a capital city with
a white escort, and mixing freely with others of her party.
3/g city messenger.
Fa dance band leader supporting a white wife and 1,4 family.
Another Fa dance band performer married to white woman.
Fa man married to white woman and owning a pastoral
property.
3/g girl who has won literary prize in an all-Australian
competition.
14 woman cook in white home for twenty years; twice
married to whites; son is a sergeant in second A.I.F.
? y 8 or 14 teacher in an Australian high school.
Fi pastoralist successfully breeding brood horses.
F 2 horse trainer engaged in trading horses to another country.
Fi Syrian, second-in-command and acting manager of large
aboriginal station.
14 successful student at a leading grammar school.
This random list of observed instances of virtual cultural
assimilation of mixed blood elements may be of some slight
value in assisting with the discussion of the problem of assimila-
tion. Although the value of such data is difficult to estimate, it
would seem that in the aggregate, it yields evidence of various
possible degrees of social and even ethnic assimilation of mixed
bloods into the white community.
METHOD BY WHICH ASSIMILATION MIGHT BE
ACCELERATED
It would appear that the most ready means of bringing about
a process of physical and social assimilation of the Australian
mixed blood into the community would be by the simple device
of ensuring that a maximum dispersal or spread of the minority
group will take place. In the settled districts of Australia, the
half-caste population represents only a small percentage of the


total white population, and it would appear that wide dispersal
would, on the basis of evidence in our possession, inevitably
lead to the decline of the less assimilable elements. The mixed
bloods who are now in a dispersed condition, have shown, by
their degree of adjustment towards local white society, their
ability to earn a living, etc., that they are not entirely inadapt-
able to European life. Indeed, they are not always unacceptable
as life mates among the section of the white population with
which their economic status brings them into closest contact.
Where the population of half-castes is greater than the
white population amongst whom they are living, such assimilation
is, seemingly, entirely impracticable. In practice, therefore,
areas such as the Broome district in North-West Australia, a
large part of the Northern Territory and the northern half of
Queensland could not be subjected to this device with the same
effect as would occur in settled districts of the south-east and
southern parts of Australia.
Absorbable and Non-Absorbable Types.
Inspection of our genealogies show that there are several
different categories of absorbability, using this term in the limited
sense to denote acceptance in the white community by residence,
marriage or occupation. The importance of physical type and
specially of skin colour in promoting absorbability can be exag-
gerated and many other factors, physical and social, are directly
involved. Nevertheless, a rough-hewn scale of absorbability
may be indicated as follows:
Absorb-
ability Types Remarks
l/ 8 Types that are most readily absorbed;
A High I/4 economic stress, especially with the
% incidence of large families, causes Fi
Fi and some y ß ’s to be less adaptable,
some y 8 Types that find many difficulties except
B Medium F 2 where they are well-educated. With
Fx one further crossing with whites the
V 8 children pass readily into the general
community.


Not readily absorbed, except after
C Low % further crossing. With the disappear-
ance of true aborigines, these people
7/ g tend to take their place as aborigines in
popular estimate and in social position.
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS REGARDING ETHNIC
ASSIMILATION
The ethnic problem of the assimilation of mixed bloods in
the general population of Australia is seen to be an important
one and worthy of mature study and analysis.
A small body of people of advanced cultural status living in
a larger community of a lower cultural or different ethnic type
may sometimes tend to become absorbed, and this process may
be accelerated by lowered standards of living and by the increase
in breeding rate sometimes encountered in mixed bloods. The
reverse may also happen. Where the conditions are such that
the ethnic stock, which is of lower cultural status, is present only
as a small minority and is dispersed through the dominant com-
munity, the cultural and ultimately the physical effects may be
such as to accelerate cultural development and cause absorption.
For an example of the latter, we may cite the fate of the
rather rare negroid families to be seen in Australia. As in
England, where they are also present only as an infinitesimal
minority, they are subjected to relatively few cultural disabilities
and there is usually intermarriage with members of the dominant
community. The resulting mixed bloods cannot be numerous
and their ultimate effect on the character of the whole population
may be considered almost negligible. There thus are probably
fewer than twenty known and certainly less than forty individuals
of discernable negro ethnic strain in South Australia. There
is certainly no negro problem. In the United States of America,
on the contrary, the relatively large ratio of negro to white
(10% in many States) has induced very difficult problems and
attitudes. It has been considered that the social ostracism of
the negro is a defence mechanism necessary to prevent the rapid
absorption into the mass of the white population of indigestible
numbers of negroids. In the United States there is a body of
opinion and strong prejudice that absorption of negro blood


into a white stock is undesirable in any proportion because of
the wideness of the cross and the disharmonic results which
may appear in the descendants. Although not proven, such
opinions are often considered to carry some weight. Notwith-
standing this, a small negroid strain will ultimately and inevitably
trickle into the general population.
In view of these general observations, it is important to
note that with the increase of mixed bloods in Australia, the
attitude of whites towards the mixed blood aborigines seems
to be trending increasingly to align itself with the general
American attitude towards the negro. This attitude is usually
based on less sure grounds and is possibly one which has been
diffused here from the United States in recent years through
cultural contact and the influence of American books and films.
Half-caste aboriginal informants have on occasions indicated
their awareness of this gradually increasing prejudice, which
naturally is amplified immediately wherever local policies of
segregation are being encouraged or practised. It would seem
that the mixed bloods are being faced in many places with a
new and increasingly intolerant attitude based on an acquired
prejudice.
The national policy of a White Australia ” requires there
should be as little possible disturbance of the present biological
balance. The absorption of ethnic strains of any widely different
type is, therefore, discouraged. The negroid Melanesians once
imported to work the sugar cane fields of Queensland were, for
example, repatriated as soon as this policy made itself felt.
The disposal of the Australian half-castes cannot be so easily
arranged and segregation within Australia has been offered as a
possible solution.
Nevertheless, if it be admitted that the Australian aboriginal
mixed bloods be permanently segregated and allowed to breed
only as a separate and dependant ethnic minority element, there
are certain pertinent points to be observed.
The breeding rate of the mixed bloods is perhaps higher
than that of Australian whites and the survival rate, despite
disease and relatively much greater degree of general mal-
nutrition, is probably also higher. His numbers are tending to


increase and may well continue to increase. Any augmentation
of philanthropic support or medical attention may further increase
survivals and develop greater numbers.
Segregation does not entirely prevent crossing and may be
only a temporary expedient; it seems possible therefore that
isolation policies would merely provide an ultimately greater
reservoir of mixed bloods for future absorption by the dominant
ethnic type.
The initiation of a policy of absorption might for example
be delayed until the mixed bloods are twice or thrice as numerous
as at present. They will then be proportionately more difficult
to absorb, and the final effects on the makeup of the general
community somewhat more evident than if there is immediate
dilution of the mixed bloods by white admixture.
The trend implicit in recent practice in parts of Queens-
land, where large numbers of mixed bloods and aborigines are
being concentrated in small areas (several communities of about
one thousand are to be found) may create on a small scale
conditions like those present in some of the southern United
States where negroid and mixed negroid communities live under
primitive conditions. In Queensland the large mixed blood
communities may well prove to present difficult problems if a
policy of eventual absorption is adopted. It may happen that
redispersal will be a necessary concomitant action to be associated
with any future trend towards a policy of assimilation.
At this juncture, it may be useful to discuss the possibility as
to whether the problem of mixed bloods in Queensland may
have to be regarded as a special case, not to be solved by any
policy of assimilation.
It has been postulated that whites have some difficulties in
adjusting themselves to subtropical and moderate tropical environ-
ments. There are many northern parts of Australia to which
a white population is spreading and there may be a danger in
the absorption into this population of even a minor Neo-
Australoid substratum. It has been suggested also that in the
northermost parts of Queensland (Cape York Peninsula) there
is a Melanesian negroid ethnic element which is evident among
the Australian aborigines.


Notwithstanding the presence of this dilute Torres Straits
negroid element and the added ethnic complications introduced
thereby, it seems possible, viewed from the long range point of
view, that the introduction of a low percentage of a primitive
Australian strain may provide just that extra range of variation
necessary for the ultimate selection and development of a white
stock adjusted to the tropical parts of Australia. The oft-
repeated suggestion that only whites mixed with an Australian
mixed blood people (or some other tropical alien ethnic stock)
could successfully colonise the tropical portions of the Northern
Territory may have had its origin in casual observations on the
apparent greater fitness and ease of the mixed bloods during
the more trying seasons of the year. The Queensland prob-
lem remains one for special study and consideration.
South Australia and other southern States seem particularly
fortunate in that their mixed blood problems are relatively minor
ones, the primitive Australian ethnic stock is not mixed with
Melanesian negro and perhaps ethnically is more digestible than
the negro elements of some other countries such as South Africa
and the United States. The numbers pressing for absorption
also represent only a small percentage of the total population
of this portion of our continent, and with one further injection
of white blood they would tend to disappear while with two
successive white matings, most of the progeny would be indis-
tinguishable in the general populace.
There seems little evidence to indicate that the difficulties
of adjustment mixed breeds may have at present are particularly
the result of marked ethnic inferiority. Physically many are of
fine type, and have shown their physical superiority for example
in sports such as running, football and boxing—-their disabilities
seem to be lack of education and home-training and the dis-
couragement implicit in belonging to an outcast stock. There
may be no mixed blood geniuses, but there are also on the other
hand relatively few of markedly inferior mental calibre. The
majority are of a mediocre type, often but little inferior to the
inhabitants of small white communities which have, through
force of circumstances remained in poverty, ignorance or
isolation.


POLICIES REGARDING SOCIAL ADJUSTMENT OF MIXED
BLOODS
Our genealogical data on the Australian aborigines and
their miscegenated descendants seem sufficient to reveal in some
detail changes that are taking place in the aboriginal population.
It reveals the inability of the full-blooded people to withstand
the multiple new factors which our presence has brought to
them. It demonstrates the varying degree in which the inadapt-
able fullbloods have been replaced by a new cross-bred stock
which is capable of surviving and even of increasing under the
changed conditions of white occupation. This mixed blood
stock is relatively virile, and seems to be increasing, despite
poor economic circumstances and many attendant inhibiting
factors, malnutrition and disease, such as tuberculosis, which
are characteristic of the very poor. On the basis of present
population trends, the survival of the mixed bloods seems certain,
and their numbers may continue to increase.
Any crystallisation of governmental policy in one or other
manner is likely, therefore, to have important and far-reaching
effects on the future condition and social status of the cross-
breeds. Before discussing future policy, it may be as well, there-
fore, to present here some general notes on the present-day
practices in vogue in various States of the Commonwealth.
Some General Aspects of Existing Policies in
Several States.
In Queensland, the low-lying swampy and generally rather
geographically isolated western parts of Cape York Peninsula
are tending to become a large reserve for aborigines. To some
extent the presence of limited goldfields on the Divide and
of cattle country vitiates the possibility of the permanent isolation
of the whole region. In general, however, this is the only
area in Queensland where an isolated area for the aborigines,
could be permanently established. In other parts of this State,
the aborigines have long been mixed with the whites and many
mixed bloods occur. There seems to be a trend towards isolation
of these mixed bloods, and many, both full-blooded and half-
caste, are being brought together into supervised settlements,
mission stations, island reserves and penal establishments.


Employment in Queensland is only permitted under contract,
50% of the wages being paid by the employer to the natives
and 50% passing into a trust fund established by the Govern-
ment. All people with aboriginal blood are subject to the
Aborigines’ Act, except where they have been specifically granted
exemption. This exemption may be revoked at any time.
Any mixed blood breaking contract while in employment is
liable to be removed with his or her family to a settlement or
reserve. Once on this reserve, he may, at the will of the
Protector, be temporarily or permanently restrained from further
attempts at leaving the settlement or finding employment in the
white community.
Education is only indirectly a concern of the Education
Department in the State, and in practice, the teachers are rarely
trained men or women. Standards of teaching vary greatly,
and, during the course of the preparation of the present report,
one of the best and also what is possibly the worst school in
Australia were encountered.
Policing of the Queensland regulations appears to present
many difficulties, and compulsion, undue interference with
liberty, etc., are among charges frequently alleged against the
Department. As one mixed blood remarked, " The law makes
it easy for the whites to control us, but it makes it harder for
us to live ”. It would seem that gross misunderstandings and
abuse are possible, even in laws which are benign in their
intention, and that the difficulties mixed bloods have in proving
victimisation, their frequent inability to receive recognition of
the urgency and validity of the reasons for which they break
contracts with their employers and misunderstandings of the
contract and banking laws all tend to create an unhappy and
unstable people who, undoubtedly, feel that they are being
increasingly confined and isolated. They claim that, on small
and isolated settlements there is no intention or hope of giving
them freedom. For example, at Palm Island they indicate that
while any free man may, during a month’s annual holiday,
visit the mainland if he wishes to do so, and may make arrange-
ments to obtain permanent employment there, if he can find a
white guarantor, his chances of doing so are becoming increas-


ingly remote as the mixed bloods are eliminated from the general
population.
In New South Wales, contrary to policy in Queensland,
where infringement of native regulation compels one to reside
indefinitely on a settlement, anyone breaking regulations is
expelled from a station or, if already away from a station, is
banned from coming near one. An expulsion order prevents
an individual from approaching to within a specified number
of miles of any aboriginal station, even though he or she may
thus be separated for long periods from the rest of his or her
family. The method of rationing also determines the size and
distribution of settlements. These mixed blood native settle-
ments are tending now to increase rapidly in size as the people
are being uprooted from the aboriginal homes, and as they
become increasingly dependant on Governmental subsistence.
That the New South Wales system is less foreign to native
ways than the Queensland one may be indicated by the fact
that while refugees from the Queensland Department are to
be found at towns and stations in northern New South Wales,
relatively few New South Wales mixed bloods are to be encoun-
tered in Queensland. This is so, in spite of the definite impres-
sion that New South Wales government stations are far inferior
to those of Queensland in organisation, educational facilities
and degree of support offered. In New South Wales the educa-
tion of the children is lax, usually in the hands of educationally
untrained managers, whose other duties would be more than
sufficient to occupy their time. The Education Department, as
a rule, does not supply regular teachers. A change of policy is
indicated as likely, but had not taken effect at the time of the
preparation of this report.
In Victoria, where the aborigines were originally relatively
few in number, policy and accidental circumstances have per-
mitted a greater degree of assimilation than in some other
States. There is only one important Government station. The
regulations have many similarities with those of New South
Wales, but there are several important differences. From one
viewpoint, an advantage of Victorian policy is the freedom of
the genuine wage-earner to spend his money as he may wish,


even though for example, it be in a public house. While this
may seem a paradox it would appear that the privilege of the
wage-earner to spend his money, even on drink, if desired,
acts as a positive inducement towards independence, and, on
the whole, it is not unduly abused, except near such border
stations as Cumeroogunja, where the principal offenders seem to
be the less-privileged New South Wales mixed bloods who
journey across the State boundary to indulge in the liquor which
is forbidden them in their own State. It would appear that
discriminatory and restrictive laws are as irksome to mixed
bloods as to any other minority group, even when their intention
is well-meaning.
Education in Victoria is a function of the State, and at Lake
Tyers rather successful endeavours are being made to inculcate
a useful degree of learning. In many districts the mixed bloods,
who are generally much diluted with white blood, attend school
along with white children, and there is relatively little discrimina-
tion practised against them. At the Government station at
Lake Tyers, the school has teachers who have had some special
training to enable them to cope with the problems of native
education, and the school is regarded as being composed of
" opportunity classes ”. One regrettable tendency at Lake Tyers
Station, is the encouragement of tourists, who treat the station
much as though it were a kind of zoological garden and place of
amusement, where aborigines and near-aborigines can be seen
and discussed almost as though they were an animal species.
Since the Lake Tyers district undoubtedly obtains revenue by the
encouragement of tourists to visit the station, it is unlikely that
this practice will be lightly abandoned.
In general, the Victorian policy has enabled many mixed
bloods to become dispersed and culturally and otherwise absorbed
into the general population. There seems to be less prejudice
against the mixed bloods than elsewhere in Australia, and a
greater degree of adjustment than would appear possible at
first sight. This seems to be due in part to their small numbers
and generally scattered distribution. In Western Victoria, the
interests of the citizens of one town (Warrnambool) have been
responsible for much public-spirited co-operation with the mixed


bloods in their district. The results are reported to be remark-
ably successful, and the improvement of housing conditions
and schooling is likely to assist the ultimate absorption of these
people.
In Tasmania, the mixed bloods are of special type. With
a few exceptions, they are admixtures between the aboriginal
inhabitants of Tasmania and whites, many of them having in
addition a trace of Australian aboriginal blood and there are very
slight traces of admixture with other races. In the main, they
are a rather fair-skinned admixture between white and aborigine,
the white blood so predominating that, on the whole, they can
be regarded as " dark-whites ” rather than as aborigines.
With a few exceptions, these " dark-whites ” are confined
to Cape Barren and Flinders Islands, and the Department in
charge endeavours to prevent their dispersal to other parts of
Tasmania. Notwithstanding this, a few families have become
established in other parts of the State, and there is a growing, if
still slight, tendency for better-educated Cape Barren Islanders
to try and improve their social condition by departure from the
Island. Some have disappeared into the environs of Melbourne.
In practice, however, there is here an instance of the almost
complete segregation of an actively inbreeding population of less
than three hundred people. Probably all are related to each
other at least as first cousins, and some marriages are closer.
The scant reserves of their island are over-taxed to maintain
them and an increasing part of their subsistence now comes
from Government aid. Their dependance is further increasing
because of the decline in their own mutton-bird industry, upon
which they formerly relied for support. In addition, commer-
cial interests are now taking an increasingly large share in what
is left of the " birding ” and the mixed bloods find that they
are not now permitted to visit islands from which they formerly
gathered their birds.
Education has been lax, in the past, but seems now to be
somewhat better managed. Living conditions are poor, although
attempts are being made to provide improved housing. On the
whole, the people are docile and law-abiding, a single teacher-
policeman being able to maintain discipline over the whole


island. The dark-whites incidentally are stated to have had the
honour of having provided a greater proportion of soldiers during
the Great War than any other community in Australia.
In Western Australia, the aboriginal population is larger
than in the other States. Since the State extends from the
tropics to the cool, temperate zone, conditions are varied, and
little progress has been made in the education or advancement
of half-castes. It is probable that the greater part of the
aborigines still remain without care or attention as nomads, or
as hangers-on around various cattle and other stations.
During the preparation of this report, time permitted visits
only to the areas south of Geraldton and to the Goldfields region.
Observations recorded hereunder are, of necessity, confined to
the southern part of this State.
Recent Western Australian policy seems to be endeavouring
to follow that of Queensland, but the trend is, as yet, little
developed. However, it has already had some repercussions
on the half-caste people, and several of the mixed bloods have
referred to the difficulties and increased unemployment they
have met with, owing to the introduction of new laws govern-
ing employment. Ultimately, this may bring increased oppor-
tunity for work and improved monetary reward, but, as yet,
the laws are not understood either by potential employer or by
native employee. There seems to be increasingly an insistence
on a policy of segregation. Weekly distributions of rations are
made at many depots in Western Australia, but, as a rule, this
is the only provision made for aborigines and half-castes. Even
in closely settled districts, no general attempts are being made
at education. There are few settlements, except at Moore River,
which takes the form of a native orphanage. To this orphanage
some local aborigines are attached, also some parents of children
maintained in the home, and a few others. No endeavours
seem to be made to provide housing for half-castes or aborigines,
except in the settlement mentioned above, and half-castes, as
well as aborigines, tend to live in the bush as nomads, or to
erect scrap-iron huts of their own conniving in the vicinity of
small towns. Illiteracy is extremely high, nurture and clothing
necessarily poor, and adjustment to white life proportionately


low; even persons who might in other circumstances pass as
whites may be ill-clothed, uneducated nomads. Several impor-
tant mission stations have carried on work among the aborigines
and half-castes. Efforts to teach mixed bloods how to work
small goldmines have been made by one mission. The measure
of success achieved indicates that the mixed bloods could be
readily taught to earn a living once they have learned the
possibilities of obtaining an adequate return for their labour, and
once they are encouraged to adjust themselves to the European
type of living.
South Australia
Since South Australian policy is in a state of flux, it is
impossible to forecast trends of policy, and evaluation of past
policy may only be of historical interest. Examination of past
and present legislation suggests a widening of the scope and
powers of the Department, enabling it to control people who in
former times, might not have come under its jurisdiction.
The method by which proof of aboriginal ancestry can be
established is, seemingly, not strictly defined, and, in the ultimate
issue, it may depend on detailed genealogical data and inference
only. It seems probable that some folk who have aboriginal
blood in their veins could not be proved to be of aboriginal
descent within the meaning of the Act, while others with lesser
amounts of aboriginal blood, by reason of their accidental
preservation of a more complete genealogical history, might be
compelled to admit their liability and be forced to seek exemption
from the provisions of the Act before being able legally to
regain the status they enjoy at present as " white ” citizens.
South Australia, in developing its new policy for the mixed
bloods, should consider the main advantages and disadvantages
observable in the policies of other States.
In educational matters, the mixed bloods of some settled
areas have been better served than in most other States. The
semi-nomadic ones are still, however, illiterate, and much more
must be done before conditions can be regarded as satisfactory.
With the possible exception of Victoria, the standard of literacy
in South Australia is probably the highest, though it does not yet
bear any close comparison with the achievements of white schools.


A start has been made in the practical training of mixed blood
youths at one station, and at another, young adults receive train-
ing of a type superior to that received anywhere else in Australia.
Thus, at Point Pearce Station, the agricultural training received
by youths who work under the share-farming system is in advance
of anything to be found in the other States. The successes of
this share-farming system indicate one way to a possible solution
of the problem of enabling a mixed blood to win a living from
the land on which he works, to give a fair return in useful
labour, and, at the same time, receive a direct profit in proportion
to his own efforts. The successful experiments in training for
gold-mining at Mt. Margaret, W.A., and this agricultural
experiment together constitute perhaps the most successful
results that have been so far obtained in the development of the
potentialities of half-caste aborigines. The recently enacted
laws for the control of aborigines in South Australia (1939)
appear to assume that once a mixed blood has been granted
exemption, his children will be exempt from the provisions of
the Act. It thus tacitly admits the general irreversability of the
trends of events which govern the acceptance of half-castes into
the white economy. These trends are real ones, and, if
encouraged by positive and planned control of the mixed blood
situation, may well go far to minimise the problem, and in the
course of a generation or two, lead to its disappearance.
This brings up the important question of the form which
Government stations may be tending to take, and the effects
of these stations on the present half-caste population. There
seems to be a definite possibility of some stations becoming the
permanent home and support of whole families of able-bodied
folk, who are coming to rely on Government support and subsidy
for their living. Often, the only qualification required for
admittance to these stations is the possession of proof of
aboriginal blood. It seems likely that these stations are encourag-
ing a centripetal tendency rather than a centrifugal one among
the mixed bloods.
It may be of interest to quote here the remarks of a half-
caste at one station in South Australia. "You white people
make the station too attractive for young folk; it is like a little


city; there is life here. We cannot help coming back. If our
life was outside the station and it was only a place for old people
we would not wish to be here at all. Working outside is alright
when you are young, but you miss the company of other half-
castes. When you marry, you wish to settle down where your
wife is living. There are too many bad people about to leave
her alone on the station. We do not mix with white people
because we do not understand their talk. If we went to school
with them it would be different. Our education makes us talk
a language of our own. It is English right enough, but we
do not talk about the same things as white people do. The
boys who grow up in Adelaide are different. We can scarcely
understand them when they come back here on holiday This
is a sample of many statements which have been considered
during the preparation of this report. This particular one
indicates the effects of various trends in present-day half-caste
control, it suggests possible reasons for failure of education on
the stations, it points out difficulties inherent in the life of
half-castes on stations. It indicates the dangers of an
immorality which undoubtedly thrives on the separation of
husband and wife through systems whereby natives obtain
temporary employment outside, leaving their families to be partly
supported by the Government station. It suggests that the
retention of women-folk on Government stations has a tendency
to prevent the ready adjustment of younger men to life in white
communities, partly because of their divided loyalties and desires
to be near their own women-folk.
The assessment of the value of items of social data such as
the above offers difficulties. The objectivity of the data is less
apparent than in the case of enquiries on some other aspects
of the problem, and issues are so diverse that many different view-
points may be possible. The interpretation could be readily
coloured by the personal prejudices of the various informants,
and even by the unconscious bias of the observer. It may, there-
fore, be an advantage at this stage to discuss the types of social
information sought and utilised, as well as to describe in a few
words the types of attitude encountered.
Each native was spoken to separately for a period of about
half an hour; a wide range of subjects being traversed. The


talk was in private, and it was not necessary at any time to use
an interpreter. All relevant statements were noted, the data,
of course, being regarded as strictly confidential. Points common
to several statements were discussed in a general fashion with
officials, police officers and interested people, in order that
alternative opinions might be gathered. The people proved
willing to impart information and some, especially interested
ones, brought along documents and even written statements of
the points which appeared most important to them. Much of
the data, are, of course, only of local interest and have no
bearing on the general subject, but the information, grievances,
etc., given often afforded a useful picture of the degree to which
such persons appeared to be adjusted to their immediate
community.
During the investigation, many sources of information were
thus tapped. Naturally, some white persons were encountered
whose attitude was that of the destructive critic. It seemed
easy to dismiss the mixed bloods as merely socially and physically
poor specimens of humanity, who were better done without.
Of course, such attitudes were of little direct assistance in the
assessment of the status of half-castes, and when met with in
a few of those in authority on Government stations, indicated
their own hopeless outlook and feeling of defeat. Only a
relatively small proportion of officers were of this type, but their
influence is probably so deleterious that they cause harm in far
greater proportion than numbers. On the other hand, many
officers were met who have given much earnest personal con-
sideration to the problem of the half-castes and their years of
experience have given them a richness of outlook which has
proved of the highest benefit and assistance in the course of
our study; some of the most instructive suggestions received
originated with those who have had the care of half-castes
and who have seen possibilities of improvements in their lot.
The histories of mixed bloods who have been able to success-
fully establish themselves in the white community give an
instructive measure of information, even though they are not in
the majority amongst the half-castes. In general, it may be
said that mixed bloods who have once been able to find suitable


and congenial permanent employment and have become accus-
tomed to live on the same cultural and nutritional basis as white
citizens who are on the basic wage level, and whose children
have been able to receive State school education, scarcely ever
revert to the old type of life on half-caste stations. Observations
on these adjusted half-caste peoples indicate the importance of
the roles played by two factors, namely adequate diet, and sound
education, in promoting their successful adjustment to modern
life. Lack of suitable education and background prevents the
attainment of congenial occupation which, in turn, accentuates
problems of nutrition. The role played by nutrition seems to
be so important that it would seem that much of the apparent
lack of adjustment found in those half-castes who are assessed
as failures, may be the outcome of long-continued poor, and
unbalanced diets. This possible factor governing social
adjustment may, therefore, be considered before some other
aspects.
IMPORTANCE OF NUTRITION IN PROMOTING SOCIAL
ADJUSTMENT
The food that many half-castes obtain only enables them to
function at the lowest levels of vitality compatible with survival.
It must be remembered that in many parts of Australia dietetic
care of aborigines and half-castes is still confined to the provision
of small amounts of tea, flour, and sugar or treacle sufficient
to keep the recipient alive. One result is that such folk show
little of the joy of living, never, in fact, being properly alive.
In extreme cases, there is a tendency for them even to shirk
the minor duties and responsibilities which are thrust on them
in their lowly dependance. The contrast between unvitalised
ones and those mixed bloods who have obtained an independent
position in the community is so marked that it raises the funda-
mental question as to how far habitual malnutrition, carrying
with it, for example, some hypothetical toleration toward
deprivation of say Vitamins B and C, may be responsible for
the presence of such lethargic lackadaisical folk. It should
be remembered, however, that vitamin deficiency may be due
either to poor economic circumstances or to ignorant choice
(especially within a limited dietary). Case histories among


some half-castes appear to read much like those of the " poor-
whites ” of the southern United States and of parts of South
Africa and elsewhere. This field of research is beyond the
scope of present enquiry, but the attention of physiologists could
be drawn to much readily accessible material for the study of
the gross effects of diet on inefficiency and lack of adjustment
to life. There seems to be some evidence that the sequel to
improved and planned diets would be the ultimate transforma-
tion of many of these folk into useful, if lowly, members of
society with great improvements in their efficiency and personal
happiness.
The lethargic condition of institutionalised half-castes, insofar
as it may be due to malnutrition, is further indicated by the
low incidence of serious crime, and the consequent lack of
necessity for immediate police supervision, even in communities
of over three hundred persons. Contrary to a widespread belief,
mixed bloods are, in general, very law-abiding. This is par-
ticularly to be noted when they live in communities where they
are entirely dependant on charitable support for their subsistence.
It would appear that, on many stations, the principal offenders
are folk who have newly returned from long or short spells of
temporary work in the outside community. To account for this,
it has been suggested that an improved state of nutrition was
one of the factors which causes them to bring, for the moment,
some vigor into their reactions and rebellions against authority.
It must not be forgotten, however, that many other factors are
at work, and that modifications of outlook induced by wider
contacts in the outside community may be of considerable
influence on their behaviour. That those capable of work do
return to supervised stations even though- they know that their
subsistance there will be at a minimum level, is to be accounted
for by the attractions of family ties, social contact and habit,
which weigh heavily against any hidden menace such as a low
standard of living to which they have been accustomed since
early childhood.
Malnutrition, which has been postulated as occurring in
many half-caste communities, is possibly cumulative in its effect
over more than one generation, leading to the development of


individuals whose whole outlook is bounded by the limits of
the small community in which they live, and whose greatest
physical efforts are the procreation of still further generations
of unvital individuals.
According to statements which have been made at more
than one half-caste station as well as personal observation, it
seems likely that there is a considerable danger of the develop-
ment of an increasing body of such adjusted folk.
It can be strongly recommended, therefore, that objective
studies be made of the diet of half-castes. Perhaps methods can
be devised whereby the mixed bloods may be encouraged to
take a more active part in the general life of South Australia,
through dispersal and through hidden subsidies or bonuses,
by means of which they can obtain an adequate nourishment, and,
at the same time, be induced to perform useful work. It seems
certain that the fuller education of the people and the provision
of improved diets will play important or even decisive parts
in any planned programme for the improvement of the half-caste
situation.
Numerous statements on the subject of aboriginal diet point
out the dominance of a meat regime inherited from his wild
ancestors. Unfortunately, a meat diet under white control, is
without the variety of the " whole animal ” economy practised
formerly by his ancestors. The meat provided is almost
exclusively muscle and bone, and is often only the cheaper
and, therefore, the poorer cuts of the animal. White flour and
sugar, or treacle, are some of the other principal foods, the
whole scarcely forming a balanced or adequate ration. Green
vegetables are not widely available, and when furnished to
natives, are often wasted, owing to the seeming lack of desire
of natives and half-castes for such food. The reason for this
dislike of our vegetable foods is hard to understand; it is prob-
ably a matter of education, but the fundamental reason might
well be the subject of scientific study. Milk as an article of
diet is unusually scarce in half-caste communities, and the per
capita consumption is probably lower than in any other type of
community in Australia. Irregular supplies are often eked out
with various milk powders and tinned milks. When supplied


as a ration, tinned milk is usually not available for general con-
sumption, but is reserved for expectant mothers and for infants.
Bearing in mind the behaviour of some half-castes who are
still tied to their old communal food-sharing habits, it is not
surprising to find, on occasion, that even this source of nutriment
for the infant may be shared out among the adults instead of
finding its way into the feeding bottle. In such cases, a child
has, on occasion, been quietened by a filling diet of water-
soaked white bread. Under conditions of ignorance regarding
diet such as is illustrated above, and under conditions of food
shortage such as are common in many dependant half-caste
communities, it seems likely that the effects of malnutrition may
play an important part in adjustment or lack of adjustment of
the mixed blood to life in white communities.
An equally important factor is education, and some general
consideration may be given to this in succeeding paragraphs.
EDUCATION AMONGST HALF-CASTE PEOPLE
As compared with the education of white children, relatively
little systematic thought and attention seem to have been given
to education of mixed bloods. The claim of Australians to
be virtually 100% literate is challenged where half-castes are
concerned by the seeming lack of interest shown by educational
authorities in several States. In these States, the education of
mixed bloods is a function of the totally untrained station
managers or their dependants at remunerations ranging upwards
from 5/- per week. The Education Department in these States
seemingly undertakes no responsibility for the education of
persons on aboriginal stations, or who have sufficient aboriginal
blood to warrant their being excluded from the white schools in
the district in which the people live.
In the absence of adequate inspection and control, and
because of the great amount of other administrative work placed
on station managers’ shoulders, it seems that the provision of
education for mixed blood rhildrer on such stations is often
extremely inadequate. For instance, the number of pupils per
class in certain station schools in New South Wales ranges from
30-100 of all ages and capabilities, and these children are taught
only by a manager-teacher, whose other duties cause constant


interruptions in his efforts to teach the children. Discipline
and quality of instruction are at a minimum. Equally futile
efforts are being made in some other States, and a single
untrained teacher may be responsible for a school of up to 70
pupils. In Western Australia little provision is made at all.
Arrangements for vocational training are often poor. Some-
times this training is misdirected and, in one instance, merely
a mischievous blind to enable claims to be made that vocational
training was in progress. In this last-named instance, valuable
timber-working machinery was seen lying rusting in the open
air where it had been placed almost immediately after purchase,
and seemingly abandoned for months. In another instance,
similar machinery was stacked high in a shed where it had
remained unused over a lengthy period. On a third station,
in another part of the Commonwealth, full wood-working and
carpentery equipment had been provided, but had never been
unpacked, the building itself was being devoted to other
purposes.
Notwithstanding these just criticisms, it must be indicated
that in some other States, serious efforts are being made to give
the half-castes an adequate measure of instruction in the three
R’s, as well as real attempts to inculcate skill in handicrafts.
In three of these States, the education of half-castes is a function
of the Education Department, and trained teachers are available.
In some other States, mission efforts are endeavouring, as best
they may, to provide a substitute for Government instruction, and
in a few cases are succeeding sufficiently well as to make even
more apparent the negligence of the educational authorities
themselves.
Language of Instruction
At all the places examined in the course of our survey,
English is the language of instruction. Only at a few places,
for example, in the Torres Straits Islands, at Hermannsburg and
lately at Ernabella, is any other language taught. In some cases,
English has been taught for three generations, or more, in the
schools. In other places it has been taught for only one genera-
tion. Often the original native language is still spoken, and
there is a greater use of the native language than of English. In


a few areas, owing to the decay of the native language and an
insufficient mastery of English, there seems to be an actual
lack of an adequate language. This is serious only in limited
areas, particularly where the full-bloods died out very rapidly,
and the half-caste survivors still have some difficulty in express-
ing themselves adequately in English or in any other language.
Australia is not the only place where this difficulty has been
encountered. For instance, Sanchez, in the United States, has
reported the difficulties of some Mexicans who migrated into
the United States, have lost much of their knowledge of Indian
dialect or Mexican-Spanish, and have been unable to acquire
sufficient English, owing to lack of opportunities for contacts
with English-speaking folk. In some of the inferior half-caste
schools in parts of Australia, the same difficulty is being encoun-
tered, and lack of sufficient vocabulary seems a definite bar to
successful instruction.
The presence of two languages, side by side, creates problems
in education. Where the full-blooded progenitors are still
living, mixed blood children learn to speak the native language
and only obtain a limited vocabulary in English. The language
of instruction in school may not become of value to them in
their social contacts or domestic life, and it remains a foreign
tongue. In other areas the native language has decayed rapidly
and English is the only language known. Even under these
conditions, the choice of vocabulary may be so different from that
of normal white children, that a mixed blood may have difficulty
in adequately expressing his thoughts and desires when in con-
versation with a white person reared in a white community.
In certain other areas this difficulty has been overcome because
of the intimate contact which exists betwen the white community
and the half-castes.
The existence of this bilingualism presents many difficulties
in education. It creates a divorcement between the older genera-
tion of people and the younger, for the young ones use English
words which are not understood by the elders, while the older
people speak a native language which the young ones may not
completely understand, although they often pretend that they
do. It seems to be a rule that wherever English has been


taught for more than one school generation, the aboriginal
language dies out. The inability of the older generation to
assist the young ones with their lessons causes many difficulties,
and is an added school problem. Good teaching is doubly
important to supply the deficiency in home instruction. In some
States, attempts are being made to overcome the divorcement
between young and old by a provision of dormitory systems, and
the provision of matrons who would take the part of the parents.
Opinions are divided as to the value of such dormitories, and
this will be discussed in later paragraphs. The problems of
Bilingualism strike differently in each area.
The following table will give an idea of the conditions to
be met with in various parts of South Australia and elsewhere:-
Bilingualism in Australia
Dominant Secondary
Language, Language
Examples
Little or no basic
Native None
Western Desert
European culture
Warburton Range
acquired.
Goldfields of
Native " Pidgin English ”
W.A.
Ooldea
Intermediate with
Native English (taught)
Mt. Margaret Mis-
survival of many-
sion
aboriginal traits.
S.W. of W.A.
Hermannsburg
English Native (surviving
Pt. Augusta
in home)
Koonibba
Y arrabah
Great loss of native
English Native vocabulary
Pt. McLeay
culture, consider-
of limited char-
Woorabmda
able knowledge
acter.
of European life.
English None
Lake Tyers
Comeroogunja
Pt. Pearce
People dispersed
Complete acceptance
English None
in white com-
of European cul-
munity.
ture.


It may be useful at this point to discuss some of the educa-
tional policies to be found in Australia, in the hope that it
may furnish a basis for the systematic consideration of a desirable
form of native education. Only in recent years have there
been any plans made for the development of a form which would
enable the aboriginal to bridge the gap between his own culture
and that of the white people with whom he is now compelled
to live. The experiments and schemes of W. Lawrie at Point
McLeay, R. T. Crawford in Queensland, and Mrs. Bennett in
Western Australia are worthy of detailed consideration, because
they have come under direct notice during the course of our
survey. The Department of Education in Victoria has also con-
ducted useful experiments, but circumstances prevented these
being studied at first hand. There is still prevalent a view that
only a minimum of education is necessary to enable half-castes to
perform the menial and subordinate duties for which they are
considered to be fit, and there is a tendency for higher education
to be refused them. These matters may best be discussed in
later paragraphs.
EDUCATIONAL POLICIES OF VARIOUS STATES IN
AUSTRALIA
In most of the States there is a high degree of illiteracy
amongst half-castes, but it must be remembered that in all the
States there are some closely settled districts and other less well
occupied areas, and the illiterate people tend to be concentrated
more in the sparsely occupied areas where the provision for
education is less easy than in the more accessible ones. Never-
theless, the degree of illiteracy is very high. In New South
Wales, the Education Department apparently takes no respon-
sibility for the instruction of half-castes unless they are living
in a white community and are able to attend a public school.
In some districts such as those where there is a strong racial
prejudice, even well-dressed half-castes may be excluded from
the State schools. Teachers are provided for aboriginal schools
through the Aborigines Department, and qualified teachers are
seldom obtainable for such positions. In almost all the smaller
and most of the larger stations, the manager or his deputy is
compelled to act as teacher, even though he may have had no


training for the position, and his school work is shuttled
backwards and forwards to fit in with his many administration
ties. In areas where there are no Government stations, the
children often remain illiterate and uneducated, so that they
cannot fit into the general pattern of a white community even
if economic circumstances permit it. Considering the advanced
condition of general education in New South Wales, the position
of the half-caste is probably the least satisfactory of any of the
States. In Queensland there seems to be a slightly better link
between the Aborigines Department and the educational
authorities and, in some instances, qualified teachers have been
provided for aboriginal and half-caste schools, but these officers
do not retain their status or position in the educational system,
and, consequently, do not obtain the advantages of change of
position and privileges of seniority such as are available to other
school teachers. Good results are obtained in several closed
communities such as Palm Island, and at Barambah is one of the
most advanced schools to be seen in Queensland.
With some insignificant exceptions school-going terminates
at the critical age of fourteen in the schools examined in the
various States. There were a few exceptions; for instance, at
Palm Island in Queensland boys after the age of fourteen may
be given some months of technical training in woodworking and
elementary wire work, and in another State a mission was
conducting night classes for older boys. In a few instances,
where educational facilities have been made available to children
up to greater ages, such as amongst pupil-teachers in one or more
Queensland schools, many advantages seem to have accrued and
one teacher made the suggestion that where schooling is con-
tinued, the onset of sex maturity may be partially delayed, and
that the continued schooling is an important influence in the
moulding of the characters of the half-caste children. This is
probably also borne out by the relatively great success of one
school master (now retired) who appears to have succeeded
largely because he deliberately adapted the book ages of all
children attending his school by the removal of two years.
His method was ingenious, for under the pretence of enabling
his scholars to win greater success in athletic sports, at which


they were outstanding in any case, he encouraged the parents
quietly to acquiesce in his scheme. By this device he kept
children in school until they were actually sixteen years of age
and his students appeared always to be well up to their age!
Despite the trick, the scholastic results achieved by his plan do
point to advantages to be gained by bridging the critical period
in the life of mixed blood children between fourteen and
sixteen.
Most of the schools visited were incompletely staffed. At
one large station within a closed community the only instruction
available was that given to approximately 100 children by a
single white teacher who had had no previous teaching experience
or special training. In this instance the response was surpris-
ingly good, but scarcely consonant with modern ideas of universal
education, being notably overweighted with medieval English
history and almost entirely lacking in the essentials for half-caste
life.
It seems inevitable that in many parts of Australia the teach-
ing of mixed bloods apart from whites will continue to be a
special problem yet the general suggestion must be made that
it should be considered not as a casual vocation for untrained
teachers attached to Aboriginal Departments, but that the teach-
ing of half-castes should be regarded as an intergral part of the
general educational scheme. It should be controlled by the
Education Departments, and as in the case of Victoria, there
should be a specialised group of teachers who should have
proper training in the teaching of retarded children. In many
parts of Australia teachers of aboriginal schools have had no
previous teacher training. Amongst the former professions of
some of the school teachers met during the present study were: —
A station manager’s daughter
Third mate of a tramp steamer
Sea captain
Farmer
Military sergeant-major
Minister
Engineer
A former manufacturer of breakfast foods.


Amongst the schools visited, Barambah in Queensland and
Point McLeay in South Australia stand out as striking examples
of what can be accomplished with trained teachers who are
particularly interested in their subject. It unfortunately happens
at both these places that education ceases at fourteen years
and often the children find difficulties in subsequent adjustment
to adult life owing to the difficulties of securing employment
of the type for which they have been trained. Extension
of their education for two or more years would probably have
been most useful.
Experiments at Mount Margaret (Western Australia) in
the education of full-blooded and Fi half-caste children, some of
whom only recently were unable to speak English, show that
something can be achieved by sound methods and devoted atten-
tion to the children. With these three notable exceptions, many
of the schools observed, particularly in Queensland and New
South Wales and Western Australia, proved to be half-heartedly
dealing with the problem of native education with inadequate
equipment and often with inadequate knowledge. As sympto-
matic of the lack of plan in a great many schools it may be
pointed out that with the three exceptions noted above, practically
every school visited failed to have even a timepiece by which
the native children could learn the time, and it was not surpris-
ing to find that such children could not read a clock, although
by test it was found that half-caste adults in the same community
did possess that faculty. That this lack of knowledge of time
is merely due to bad training can be inferred from the abilities
shown even by small children at properly conducted schools such
as those which have been referred to in the above paragraphs.
It may be said that a large part of the solution of the problem
of native education lies in the finding and maintenance of
adequately equipped teachers in properly supported schools.
With the taking over of native schools by the Education
Department in each State trained teachers should be provided
and to encourage them to undertake this type of instruction
there should be reasonable opportunities for exchange of teachers.
Since it has been suggested that there are often difficulties in
finding suitable instructors it may be also recommended that some


advantage such as an accelerated rate of seniority by the calcula-
tion of service at the rate of 1 or 1-|- (for years spent in native
schools) might be given to those willing to devote time to the
special problems inherent in such schools.
With the postulated and seemingly inevitable ultimate
development of a policy for the dispersal of the mixed blood
population amongst the rest of the community, the necessity of
special schools for half-castes may vanish and all such people
will be taught in ordinary State schools, as has been successfully
done in some districts in South Australia and elsewhere for
many years. There are undoubted advantages for the mixed
bloods to be derived from co-education with whites. These
advantages are seemingly greater where the families are dispersed
in the white community and not living together as closed com-
munities. In the following paragraphs some of the principal
advantages may be listed together with some undoubted
disadvantages.
Advantages.
(a) Contact with whites gives the child a wider outlook.
(b) There is improvement in speech, social behaviour and
degree of alertness.
(c) The child develops a real understanding of normal
English conversation.
(d) Competition is keener.
(e) Earlier association with youths who may become poten-
tial future employers and work associates helps to
prevent growth of needless animosities, misunder-
standings and feelings of inferiority.
Disadvantages.
(a) Where a half-caste is unduly retarded he may be placed
among children of lower age than himself and may
be a nuisance both to himself and to others.
(b) Economic circumstances of the parents may be such as
to prevent the child dressing and bathing in a fashion
suitable for entrance to white schools.
(c) Children of dark half-caste colour are often discouraged
by a feeling of inferiority and defeat.


(d) Lack of facilities and encouragement for home work are
often a bar to good work. This is often inevitable
owing to the crowded conditions under which half-
castes tend to live because of their low economic
circumstances.
(e) Where the parents are themselves insufficiently educated
they cannot assist and may discourage the child’s
endeavours.
It would appear that there are many advantages when there
are no exceptions to the ideal of universal education. The
mixed bloods should receive equal opportunity for education
with other sections of the community. While special oppor-
tunity classes may continue to be necessary for mixed bloods
whose early upbringing is deficient (and there will be an inter-
regnum when special native schools will exist for some half-
caste children) the ultimate merging of all classes of mixed blood
children in the general school system may be well advised. This
may render easier the ultimate dispersal of the present small
congregations of inbreeding groups of mixed bloods whose
presence is, in this report, suggested to be inadvisable.
The importance of the adequate training of mixed bloods
cannot be too strongly emphasised and there should be a bias
towards education of the type which they are most likely to
meet in adult life. It may be an advantage, therefore, to list
a few of the occupations followed by half-castes. This list
has been compiled from a rather large random sample of our
data, and it may serve to indicate some occupational trends:—
Skilled
Shearer
Carpenter
Ploughman
Fisherman
Slaughterman
Small-scale gold
miner
Semi-skilled
Farm hand
Fencer
Drover
Bullock driver
Wheat stacker
Railway ganger
Piggery attendant
Factory labourer
Dairy hand
Wool presser
Garage attendant
Unskilled
Scrub cutter
Shepherd
Wheat lumper
Farm labourer
General labourer
Messenger


A glance at the above table, which could be widely extended,
will indicate the predominance of rural occupations, and it will
be noted that there are a relatively few types of skilled occupa-
tion for which the mixed blood has been able to prepare him-
self. This may not altogether be the fault of the mixed bloods
themselves, for only in a very few places in Australia have there
been any serious attempts made to educate mixed blood children
for specific occupations such as they could follow in adult life.
At Point Pearce in South Australia a few half-castes have derived
great benefit from a rather careful training in the handling of
farm machinery, and it is at this place that the mixed bloods have
shown the greatest amount of success in the practice of agricul-
ture. A similar state of affairs formerly existed in New South
Wales at Comeroogunja, where, in the last decade of the nine-
teenth century farming practice was taught in a manner produc-
tive of much skilled labour, and although the training itself was
ultimately abandoned, the good results are evident in that some
of the older men still find ready employment and good
remuneration in the adjoining districts in New South Wales
and Victoria. This is so even at times when some members of
the younger generation are unable to find work owing to their
abject lack of skill and application. It will be remembered
that there is increasing unrest and maladjustment at this place,
which in former times was one of the most successful experiments
in Australia.
The acquisition of skill in shearing has usually been due to
the initiative of some mixed bloods, who, starting as shed hands,
have gradually worked their way into the position of acquiring
the necessary knowledge to engage in the actual shearing opera-
tions. The champion shearer of the South-East of South Aus-
tralia was at one time a person of aboriginal descent. Their
services are most eagerly sought by the smaller sheds and by
people on whose farms shearing is not an extensive operation.
Owing to the keenness of competition with whites, many of
whom are taught by technical schools, it is a matter of some regret
in recent years that the total number of mixed bloods engaged in
this occupation shows some signs of diminishing. Notwith-
standing this, it would appear that in many parts of Australia,


the occupation of shearing is one of the most lucrative generally
open to the mixed blood. The seasonal nature of the work fits
in well with that part of his culture which has carried over
from his aboriginal ancestry, and the nomadic nature of the
life is also an attraction to some.
At one place in New South Wales, the mixed bloods have
received some community training in methods of fishing and
they have apparently become so well adjusted to this mode of
life that they are likely ultimately to cease being a problem owing
to their relatively great adjustment to white life. In this case,
the people concerned have been in relatively close association
with whites and in consequence have a correspondingly low
percentage of aboriginal blood in their veins.
In the Mount Margaret community in Western Australia,
the principles and practices of gold mining are being taught
under skilled management and the economic value of this
industry to the mixed bloods of that community is so great
that they have acquired a status much in advance of that of
their unfortunate kin in other parts of Western Australia.
Apart from these few instances of training, it may be said
that most of the aborigines have acquired the relatively menial
occupations which they now follow as an inheritance from their
fathers and the lists indicate that they have been, in general,
relegated to the most inferior position possible in the community.
A noticeable trend in recent years has been an increase in the
number of mixed bloods finding their way into the less skilled
ranks of industrial employment, and there is a tendency for them
to be found in the labour lines of motor building works, in
tanning-bark mills, timber yards, quarries and in some relatively
disagreeable occupations.
In one district of Queensland, a mission station ran a timber-
milling business and taught aborigines the elements of the timber-
cutting and timber-milling industry. The mission itself derived
some profit for its mission work from the employment of half-
castes and fullbloods in this occupation. However, the employ-
ment of aborigines at much less than normal union wages, was
such as to create intense dissatisfaction in other sections of the
industry and under political pressure, the experiment was aban-


doned. Small though the experiment was, it does indicate a
danger inherent in educating a small community of mixed
bloods to depend on a single source of livelihood and the
danger of encouraging the development of closed communities
whose efforts might be considered to compete unjustly with the
general labour market. Properly trained mixed bloods can be
dispersed in the community and may well find economic
acceptance such as is denied to them when they are kept together
as a privileged group in a separate community.
Adult half-castes who have been consulted have on several
occasions commented on marked differences in educational
response which are to be met with at different stations and
institutions in South Australia and elsewhere. There is, of
course, a tendency for some people to be dissatisfied with their
own environment and to imagine advantages in others. As the
Bantu proverb goes, " Distant firewood is good firewood ”. Not-
withstanding this, it seems likely that such variations do exist.
In part they are due to differences in the quality of the education
given to the children in the different schools. In other respects
they are due to deeper causes and may be due to the lack of adjust-
ment between the different generations present on the station.
In South Australia, for instance, despite the high quality of
the instruction given at Point McLeay Station where the school
curriculum is probably not bettered in any similar station
examined in Australia, there is considerable lack of adjustment
to adult life, the cause of which seems to be due to factors
inherent in the system of adult employment, and beyond the
direct control of the educational authorities themselves.
Although the children are so relatively well trained, it has been
noticed that after they leave school at fourteen years of age,
the boys are unable to make use of their learning owing to the
general absence of provision for their absorption into any form
of employment until they have reached manhood. There is a
gap of three years and, in the intervening period, seeds of good
conduct and industry which have been sown appear to be lost.
Viewed from another angle, they appear to have been too highly
and well-trained for the only types of life at present possible
to them in their closed and impoverished community. Further,


because the additional advantages they receive are not applicable
to this adult life, some of the parents are apathetic towards their
children’s progress; they feel that "it does not lead them any-
where ”.
On the contrary, at Point Pearce where the school training
seems to bear a somewhat closer similarity to the type found on
most other aboriginal stations, there is, nevertheless, a much
greater degree of adjustment towards adult life. This seems to
be due to the success of the practice of bridging the gap between
child and adult life by the insistence on the training of youths
in share-farming, petty contract work and other agricultural
employment. It points to the validity of the view that native
education cannot be regarded as a function whose operation
ceases at fourteen years. It must concern itself with the problems
to be met with by the adult mixed bloods.
The development of share-farming, petty contract work, and
the rapidly-increasing degree of contact with whites in neighbour-
ing towns caused by movements away from the station has
enabled the people of Point Pearce to develop on lines which
seem to be in advance of those met with in some other districts.
It is interesting to note that the adults here are among the
first to realise deficiencies existing in the education of their
children. Several informants with whom work was done
stressed the need for better educational facilities. Those who
had visited Point McLeay were insistent on the desirability of
trying to advance their own school to its level, which appeared
to them to be one coming nearer to their own ideal of what
a school should be. They particularly stressed their approval
of efforts made in teaching the children elements of technical
work.
It was at Point Pearce station that there was found to be
a relatively important group-sentiment favouring efforts made by
the Aborigines Department towards enabling some half-caste
youths to receive training in mechanics. There was approval
also of the teaching of girls in domestic arts. There seemed
to be a feeling also in favour of sending of orphaned and smarter
youths to Boys’ Homes where they were able to receive training


and were able to adapt their ways and social outlook more
towards that of the whites.
The people who approved of these practices felt that the
children were more likely to succeed in after-life if they were
given the opportunity to behave like Europeans. One informant
said, " This station life is our way of living and we do not
want to change, but our children should be given a chance. We
are set in our ways and will never be much better off, but our
children must be given a better chance ”.
In general, there is anxiety that there should be better train-
ing. " Give our children better education ”is one of the most
frequent types of answer to the question, ” What is the first
step towards the betterment of the conditions of your people? ”
The presence of group-sentiment favourable towards attempts at,
improvement in the education of the half-caste is significant, for
the control exercised by popular thought is important. This
can be exemplified by the circumstances found to be present at
one New South Wales Government station, where great resent-
ment had been induced and group-sentiment developed adversely
towards higher education, because some of the more brilliant girls
and boys in their school were taken, and, through what appear
to have been poorly-advised arrangements, were placed in homes
for incorrigible white children in order that they might receive
a measure of higher education. As stated by one of the leaders
of a group who resented the situation, " I have got a clever
daughter. She is so good that they want to put her with
uncontrollable and bad white girls. What do they think of
us? ” In this case, it appeared that the child had passed
primary school tests with credit and was regarded as a bright
and good child. Doubtless the authorities concerned thought
they were doing the child a good turn. Enquiry suggested that
the home circumstances of the child were, if anything, above
that of the average on the station, so that there appeared to be
little excuse for a blunder of the kind. It was at one of these
stations that there was a recent mass movement away from the
institution, seemingly as a protest against unsympathetic adminis-
tration policies, etc.


Fortunately, in South Australia, there is relatively little
opinion arraigned against improvement in the education of
mixed blood children. One young woman who, when younger,
had undergone training in domestic arts, and had had some
experience in domestic service, expressed the view that where
children passed their Qualifying Certificate examination they
should be encouraged to attend high School and be permitted
to train for pursuits other than that of domestic service. She
instanced nursing and farm work as avenues of desirable employ-
ment. It was often lack of companionship and isolation, lead-
ing to loneliness, as well as unsuitability of occupation which
turned half-caste girls back to station life. " Not all white
girls made good servants and we are no different ”. Isolation
and loneliness as a factor in the prevention of adjustment to
white life appears rather commonly in statements made about
causes for lack of adjustment, and it seemed that in many,
instances the training of the persons concerned had started
relatively late in child life when the bonds of friendship had
been strongly forged with members of the closed aboriginal com-
munity. They had not made acquaintances outside the Govern-
ment station on which they formerly lived, and, owing to theifr
general lack of knowledge of the outside world, they had been
unable to adjust themselves. Some suggested that training for
white life should start at an earlier age than ten or eleven, or,
alternately, should be continued to at least sixteen or even
eighteen years of age. When white contact commences at an
earlier age, as in the case where the children are brought up in
orphan homes or otherwise in close association with whites,
the children grow up with a minimum of a feeling of inferiority,,
while those who only begin their association with whites at a
relatively late period never lose their fear and feeling of isolation.
In some States, other than South Australia, great antipathy
towards the Departments has been caused by the compulsory
removal of children from relatively isolated settlements, and the
placing of them in Government homes where they are completely
isolated from their parents. Injudiciously controlled, this
system raises intense antipathies towards all forms of official
supervision and attempts to control the half-caste people. There


is thus both a Scylla and a Charybdis in all attempts to modify
the environment of these people. Sympathetic yet firm treat-
ment will often yield valuable results and when parents actually
realise the value of the additional facilities education gives to
their children and see trained youths making their way in
lucrative employment, they place few obstacles in the way
of the advancement of their children. There are marked
difficulties inherent in all forms of separation of parents and
children and the suggestions made in this report proposing the
dispersal of all large agglomerations of mixed blood people, if
carried out, might go far to render them generally unnecessary.
Under the restrictive schemes being adopted in New South
Wales, Queensland, and Western Australia on the other hand
compulsory separations of parent and child may tend to play
an increasing part, causing additional antagonisms towards the
Departments concerned.
ADMINISTRATION OF MIXED BLOOD COMMUNITIES
Previous sections of this report have tended to show that
from the point of view of administration, there are to be con-
sidered two main types of mixed blood communities. These
may be classed as (a) Agglomerations of mixed blood com-
munities, and (b) Dispersed family groups. When studied,
these two types present entirely different facets of the problem
of the mixed blood and the existence of both has led to the
development of different classes of problems in various parts of
the Commonwealth.
It is proposed to discuss the administration of these two
types of community groupings under the above separate
headings:
(a) Administration of Agglomerations or Closed Communities.
Before considering the general question of the administration
of such communities, it will be as well to classify the various
types in several ways in order to bring out various aspects of the
problem which is to be considered.
Agglomerations of mixed bloods can be classified as
follows:
1. Government stations or those under direct control of the
Government or its civil nominees.


2. Mission stations or those under control of the Churches.
3. Camp communities without direct supervision but often
under police control.
The classification of agglomerations can be developed in other
ways and from the geographical, historical and cultural point
of view, the following subdivisions as they tend to exist at
present, may be worthy of note: —
Type of Com-
munity
Desert Regions
Outer fringe of
pastoral zone
Fringe of agricul-
tural zone
Chief agricultural
districts
Character of Population
Chiefly fullbloods of
nomadic habits
Half-castes (fullbloods
still dominant; some-
times only received
as visitors)
Principally half-castes,
aborigines, in the
minority
Almost exclusively half-
castes
Examples
Ernabella Mission
Warburton Range
Mission
Ooldea Mission
Mount Margaret
Mission
Hermannsburg
Mission
Koonibba Mission
Brewarrina Govt.
Station
Pt. McLeay Govt.
Station
Pt. Pearce Govt.
Station
It seems from the above table that there may be several
trends in the development of agglomerations of mixed blood
communities. In isolated and desert regions the fullbloods
may at first be completely nomadic and are only occasionally
in contact with whites. Missions are usually established soon
after white contacts are made. It is usually claimed that they
tend to draw these people towards station-life. Where other
white contacts are meagre this is sometimes the case. Missions
are at first justifiable principally (perhaps solely) on religious
grounds since a nomadic people who have long been able
to maintain themselves without the help of charity from whites
undoubtedly would be better kept as nomads. After further


contact with Europeans such as is inevitable in most areas, par-
ticularly on the fringes of white settlements, the nomadic culture
begins to break down. Mission work then becomes justifiable
on additional grounds owing to the desirability of medical
care and the necessity for supervision and creation of a buffer
between the settled whites and the aborigines.
With further development of the country or in places nearer
to main centres of white settlement, racial contact leads to the
development of numbers of half-castes, especially in the marginal
areas occupied for pastoral purposes. These half-castes may be
living in country still occupied by nomadic natives and are
often dependant on missions.
A typical example can be cited in the Mount Margaret
Mission in Western Australia. Such stations are important in
protecting and educating the half-castes of the Fi generation and
assist in enabling their children to develop some knowledge of
European modes of living. This may well be the peak phase
of mission life. At this stage both the aborigines and mixed
bloods may be largely dependant on the mission for their
sustenance and often are not yet able to adequately make head-
way in the white environment without the direct care of these
religious organisations. In a still later stage of development
we seem to see the decline of missions. We find stations where
the half-castes are now in the vast majority. They have had
considerable experience of white modes of living. Nomadic
life has vanished and the aborigines are dying out. Large
families of mixed bloods have grown up in their place and with
active growth, the communities have tended to become enlarged
well beyond the ability of local industry to absorb the labour
available. The size is also often beyond the limit of the
ability of the mission organisation to maintain in a satisfactory
economic condition. Governmental subsidies enable some mis-
sions to continue actively at work. At this stage there is a
tendency for Governmental control to replace that of the religious
body. A still further stage is denoted by large native com-
munities where the half-castes so far predominate that the full-
bloods comprise only an aged relict group without further power
of adding to their numbers. Even Governmental control and


support seem to be inadequate at times to maintain the
economic status of communities which have reached this point
in their development.
When the size of such communities has been controlled
so that there are fewer than 100 people on them there has
usually been less difficulty in maintaining the position of the
mixed blood community, for the surrounding district has usually
been able to absorb the activities and labour of the mixed blood
men. This has been the case for example at Woodenbong and
at Wallaga Lake in New South Wales, but on the whole, com-
munities which have reached this stage have become difficult
to maintain even as Government stations. There are many
examples and it would appear that in South Australia, Point
McLeay and Point Pearce are approaching this condition. Palm
Island in Queensland will soon reach this point. At the last-
named place the area available on the islands is becoming taxed
to maintain the people who are being confined there and it will
not be possible to teach them to be independent of Government
aid since the area available for agriculture, dairying, etc., cannot
be extended.
One further stage in the development of the half-caste
agglomerate can be postulated where, with the dying out of all
the fullbloods, there remains only a mixed group who have
partly inbred up to the fourth and fifth generations. In such
communities we will sometimes see the breakdown of direct
Governmental control. There is usually an over-large popula-
tion concentrated in a single area which is unable to maintain
them. There is considerable and undue dependance on Govern-
ment rations and absence of local employment. The area in
which the people are confined is usually too restricted for their
numbers. Comeroogunja in New South Wales and Cape Barren
Island may be taken as examples. In such communities there
may be even a passive revolt against control and movements
away from the area in which the people are retained. In
Tasmania increasing numbers of Cape Barren Islanders are shift-
ing to the Tasmanian mainland and to Flinders Island. In New
South Wales there has been more than one mass movement away
from station areas.


In addition to the above-mentioned types of controlled
communities, there are several specialised kinds to be found
in various parts of Australia. Among these are lazarettes
and prison islands with dependant and subsequent populations.
They are not at present of particular interest for South Australia
and may be dismissed with only passing notice. Nevertheless,
the problem facing the community on Palm Island should be
borne in mind if ever there is any suggestion for the formation
here of this specialised type of segregated community.
BACKGROUND OF THE PRESENT INVESTIGATION
The present writer’s interest in the problem of the half-castes
was first aroused during general anthropological field work in
South Australia among natives on several Government stations,
and among several independent groups who during the difficult
years of 1929-1934 had resisted some of the major effects of the
period of business depression through which Australia then
passed.
In 1934 the plight of the mixed bloods in Australia was a
particular subject of debate and discussion, conflicting views
tending towards segregation and assimilation were voiced. At
this time the abilities of half-castes to obtain a living were much
reduced and opportunities for their advancement were at a par-
ticularly low ebb. Even when times began to improve the
difficulties of the half-castes continued and stood out more
clearly, for there seemed little chance for them to regain even
the small footing in the community that they had won in earlier
days.
The present author took some part in the discussions and
suggested that while certain evidence tended to support a theory
that interbreeding with whites over several generations would
enable the mixed bloods to merge with the Europeans without
causing material disturbance of the white community, some
observers had suggested that this might be an undesirable
solution and that the taking in of an ethnic strain so primitive
as that of the Australian aboriginal might be a cause of per-
manent injury to the " white ” stock. A systematic investigation
of the problem of the interbreeding of white and aboriginal
seemed worthy of attention and it was concluded with such a


study would be of considerable assistance also in the general
study of human biology and of ethnic admixture.
In 1936 the writer was invited to be a delegate to a seminar-
conference on " Native Education in Pacific Countries ”, held
at Honolulu. About the same time he was given a travelling
grant by the Carnegie Corporation of New York. This
enabled him to attend the conference and to make contacts with
some of the principal workers on problems of racial admixture.
In Hawaii some of the effects of racial admixture were
observed under especially favourable conditions during a month’s
stay as a guest of the University of Hawaii. Thereafter the
mainland of the United States and Canada was visited and over
a period of four months opportunities were taken of observ-
ing various phases of racial crossing, including American Indian-
white crosses and negro-white admixtures. Several other types
of race problem were observed at first hand.
A few of the difficulties met with among negro populations
in the United States were seen. It was possible to compare
them with parallel problems in Australia and to discuss aspects
of the subject with workers in the study of race mixture.
Research workers met included Drs. Clark Wissler, H. L. Shapiro,
C. Embree, S. Porteus, G. I. Sanchez and T. Jesse Jones. They
were interested in various branches of the study of human
racial admixture and freely gave help and guidance.
It was apparent that the problems of assimilation and the
social barriers to interbreeding between negro and white were
of a different type from those confronting the mingling of some
other ethnic groups.
Whereas in Hawaii more than half a dozen major ethnic
strains had apparently successfully amalgamated, many difficulties
were being encountered in the case of negro admixtures. In
the United States itself assimilation of American Indian blood
presented fewer problems than might be expected to arise in
view of the major ones encountered in dealing with negro crosses.
Professor E. A. Hooton, at Harvard University, who has been
engaged for many years in study of the physical characteristics
appearing in racial admixture, gave encouragement in the
enquiries and a scheme was then discussed with him for a survey


of the Australian half-caste problem under the joint auspices
of the Department of Anthropology of Harvard University and
the University of Adelaide.
During the following year the project was further discussed
and plans completed. The Carnegie Corporation of New York
supported the project with a grant from their research funds.
Mr. J. B. Birdsell was asked to represent Harvard University
and to make a physical survey of the half-castes while the writer
was asked by the University of Adelaide to report on sociological,
population and other aspects of the problem.
The South Australian Government assisted the University of
Adelaide to support its share of the responsibility and the Board
of Governors of the South Australian Museum gave the neces-
sary leave for the work to be undertaken by its officer.
Commencing in May, 1938, fourteen months were spent in
field work and 16,700 miles were traversed by cars in all the
States except the Northern Territory. In addition a visit was
made to Cape Barren Island in Bass Straits where 200 Tasmanian
mixed bloods were studied.
Experience obtained during field work in Arnhem Land,
Groote Eylandt, Cape York Peninsula, and on seven shorter
periods of study in Central Australia have augmented the
observations recorded during the present investigation.
METHODS EMPLOYED
The approach to the problem has been so far as possible
objective and factual. More than 2,500 people were studied,
their family histories and ethnic constitution being elucidated
by means of genealogies and by sets of questions designed to
bring out various aspects of their life, their adjustments, failures,
and the difficulties they had found in meeting new conditions
of life. The majority of them (2,458) were also submitted
to a physical examination by Birdsell. On the average an
hour was devoted to each individual. Much detailed confidential
information can be drawn on for study. This is augmented
by data resulting from educational tests applied to approximately
eight hundred school children, whose racial make-up was deter-
mined by these genealogical methods.


In further studies sociological and population information
will be presented by N. B. Tindale, and a study of the physical
data on racial admixture will be published by J. B. Brrdsell.
The present report deals with some general conclusions to
be drawn from the data on sociological adjustment and on
population; details and critical assessments must await further
analysis of the material in hand.
This study was furnished to the South Australian Govern-
ment for the information of the Minister controlling the
Aboriginals, Mr. M. Mclntosh (Commissioner of Public Works)
and the the Aborigines’ Protection Board. The Minister has
granted permission for its publication. The author is indebted
to many persons for information, encouragement and assistance
in the various stages of this work. He expresses his thanks
to Sir William Mitchell (Vice-Chancellor of the University
of Adelaide), to Prof. E. A. Hooton (Department of Anthro-
pology, Harvard University), Prof. J. B. Cleland (Chairman
of the Board for Anthropological Research at the University
of Adelaide), Dr. K. S. Cunningham (Director of the Australian
Council for Educational Research), and to Dr. A. N. Lewis who
organised the visit to Cape Barren Island. He desires to
acknowledge the co-operation of the Chief Protectors of
Aboriginals in each of the States, and the valued assistance of
the officers and teachers of the various Departments and
Institutions, who co-operated in his studies.
23/3/1941.
NORMAN B. TINDALE,






