

BOOKS PUBLISHED THIS DAY.
To the PROPRIETORS of the GAS-tIGttT and COKE COMPANY.
Ladles and Gentlemen,
ALLOW me to return you my grateful acknow-
lodgments for the honour you haVe conferred on me by elect-
ing me a Director of your Affairs, it shall be my earnest endeavour
to justify the confidence th*u reposed in me, by devoting myself to
the discharge of its duties.
I have the l>o„nour to be. Ladies and Gentlemen,
Your faithful and obedient Servant,
Clmncery-ifcne, 92a j une , 1830. THOMAS STEEL.
Result of the Ballot:
For Mr. Steel 507 j For Mr. Perry 14
Majority for Mr. Steel 493.
UNDER THE IMMEDIATE PATRONAGE OF THEIR ROYAL
HIGHNESSES THE DUCHESS OF CLARENCE AND THE
DUKE OF SUSSEX.
TVfADAME SALA ! !Rs the honour to announce
her MORNING CONCERT for Friday Next, the Sslh June, at
t-ye House of Mr. Penn, 10, New-slreet, Spring-gardens, who has
Kindly consented to throw open his Gardens on this occasion. Vocal
Performers—Mhde. Malibran, Made. Meric Lalaude, and Madlle.
Blasts, Signors Donzelli, Curioni, Santini, and Lablache. Solo Per-
forinersl Mrs. Anderson, Mr. Mori, and Signor Puzzr. Leader, Mr.
Conductor, Sir G. Smart. To begin at Half-past One.
Tickets, los. fid. each, to be had of Made. Sala, 25, North Audley-
Vdreet, Grosvenor-sqnare ; and all the principal Music Shop?.
|NT IM ATKIN to the NOBILITY, GENTRY,
A and COMMERCIAL GENTLEMEN, TRAVELLING to the
NORTH of SCOTLAND.—GREEN INN and HOTEL, KINROSS
THOMAS THOMSON takes the liberty of Informing the Nobility,
Gentry, and Commercial Gentlemen, that lie lately purchased, and
Las now rebuilt and opened the Green Inn, Kinross. The style of the
building, the healthful situation in which it. is placed, the elegant, and
commodious manner in which the apartments are fitted up, and the
advantages of heated air, cold, hot, and shower baths, which it affords,
render it equal 10 any Inn in Scotland, either in point of appearance,
comfort, or accommodation. There is abundant scope for fishiwg and
shooting in the neighbourhood, and it is well adapted for Gentlemen
that amusement for a few months in summer. The stables
*ire very extensive, with lock-up coach houses; and neat post chaises,
Vith careful drivers, can always be had. T. T. trusts, from the ex-
perience which he had during the eleven years he was tenant of the
Red Lion Inn here (and which is now shut up), that he will still receive
that, share of public patronage which he has hitherto been honoured
with.—Kinwoul, June, 1830.
CYeokge'lnn and hotel.^ertlE^
■®i JAMES DAVIDSON, with the most lively feeling of gratitude,
leave to return his sincere thanks tO the Nobility, Gentry, and
Public, for the liberal patronage with which he ha* been honoured
for upwards of twenty years, and to assure them that every exer-
tion will be made to merit a continuance ot their support, by pro-
D»oting the comforts of his visitors in s’ifji a manner as he trusts
*vill entitle his establishment to uphoi.a its Reputation of being 44 as
unrivalled in point of management as it is in con-
venience and elegance.” The situat ion and advantages of the George
iure too well known to the Nobilit y and G*»try both of England and
?>cotland to require farther notice; b* 4 strangers about to visit
Scotland may be apprised, that it is most centrally situated 011 the
banks of the Tay ; that it comm/uds afomplete view of the river, the
Hill of Kinnoul, and the delighif* I scenery in its neighbourhood, and
?hat it is in every other respect replete with every accommodation that
modern improvement can surges'. To commercial Gentlemen the
George holds out many inducements, a public room being devoted
entirely for their use. The stables are extensive and well aired,
with lock up coach bouses, &c. Excellent Post Horses and Chaises
can always be had at a moment’s notice, and the mail and other
coaches arrive at and depart from the house to all parts of the King-
dom. Evei y attention paid to the forwarding of game during the
season.—Perth, June, 1830.
rgAHE English Papers published at Paris have for
some time past announced the departure from that Capital, for
London, of Mens. BRUNET, de Beaulieu, the justly celebrated MA-
TRiMONIAL AGENT, of No, »9, Rue de Seine, St. Germain, at
Paris. His extensive, tespeetatble, <nd most confidential relations all
over France, and Europe at large—his unparalleled abilities in the
art of approximating persons desirous to enter into the holy state of
connubial happiness, which honourable profession he has exercised for
a long series of years with the utmost secrecy, and the happiest results
to those who honoured him with their confidence—leave us no doubt that
his eminent services Will be put in requisition by many persons in
London and the country, who may be anxious to marry advan-
tageously, and whose circle of acquaintances do not offer them an ob-
ject of their choice. It is well known that Mr. Brunet Ins at all limes
Juadies of great and substantially real property, as well as of distinc-
tion, and the highest respectability, authorising Him to treat for them,
and he has even, in several instances, successfully cemented and
brought about alliances sundry European Princes. Our coun-
trymen, therefore, w>il n/ot delay availing themselves of Mons.
Brunet s valuable services, during his stay in London, by applying to
him at Jaunay s Hot c ] s Leicester-square, from 11 o’clock to 4in the
afternoon.
BOMBAY, with liberty to land passengers
at the ISLE of FRANCE, the fine teak built ship CAROLINE,
A 1, 350 tons register, THOS. FEWSON Commander, now lying in the
West India Export Dock. This.vessel has only room for light goods,
and is under engagement to sail on or before the 10th cf July.— Appli-
cations for Freight and Passage 1© he made to Messrs. Petrie and
Chapman, 31, New Broad-street; or to John Chapman and Co. 2,
Leaden hall-street.
STEAM SHIP.—The well
R-J known splendid and powerful Steam Ship UNITED KINGDOM,
One Thousand 'lons Burthen, and Two Hundred Horse Power,
D. TURNER, Commander, will start from off Greenwich at Ten
o’clock, p.m., on the fo. ■ iwing Days :
Saturday, June 96; Wednesday. July 7; and Saturday, July 17,
Calling off Scarbro*, weather permitting.
Goods and Parcels received at the Spread Eagle Office, Regent Cir-
cus, Piccadilly; at the Cross Keys, Gracechurch*street; and at
Downes Wharf, until four o’clock on the day of sailing.
Berths may be taken, a p’an of the cabins seen, and every further
information obtained, by application to H. Underwood, sfi, Haymarket;
the Spread Eagle Office, Regent-circus, V iccadilly; W. A. Cunning-
ham, 8, St. Switbin’a-Jane; or George Bell, Agent, 157, FenchurcU-
street.
N.B. The Fore Cabin accommodation is now very superior.
AGENTLBMAN is desirous ot recommending
his Servant, a Young Man about thirty years of age, who has
been with him both at. home and in America between six and seven
years. He is sober, steady, and well conducted, has a thorough know-
ledge of horses, and has no objection to Town or Country. Address,
post paid, Z. Z., at Messrs. C. and E. Dugard’s, saddlers, No. 11,
Pavement, near Finsbury-square.
GARDENER.— A Gentleman is desirous of pro-
curing a SITUATION in a Family for a Young Man, 26 years
of age, as GARDENER. He can be very strongly recommended by
the Gentleman who inserts this advertisement, as much for thorough
knowledge of his business ns general good conduct and integrity.—
Apply to Edmund Lloyd, Bookseller, 57, Harley-street.
AW.—WANT£D7hTT SOLICITOR’S OF-
FICE of GENERAL BUSINESS, nq. Active, well-principled
PERSON, as CHIEF CLERK. He must be thoroughly competent to
the Management of a Country Office, and in every respect well re-
commended. There is a good House attached to the situation.—Also,
another CLERK, capable of Drawing and the Management ©f the
Books. Beth situations will he permanent and salaries liberal.—For
further particulars address A. 8., to the care of Messrs. Rowells,
Booksellers, Rugby, postage paid.
A LB lON HOTEL, CHESTER.—W. WIL-
-7-I LOUGHBY and SON respectfully acquaint tlre Nobility,
Gentry, and Families travelling through this part of the ktegdom,
that the ALBION MOTEL is fitted up in a superior manner, and pos-
sesses every means of a most comfortable and quiet sleeping house,
being the only hotel in Chester that is free from the noise and dis-
turbances of coaches. —Post Horses and Carriages from the Albion
Hotel are admitted to the house and grounds at Eaton Hall.
Fifty thousand pounds on mort-
GAGE IN IRELAND.-WANTED the Sum of FIFTY THOU-
THE QUARTERLY JOURNAL of
SCIENCE, LITERATURE, and ART, No. XIV. Edited at the
Royal Institution, by W. T. BRANDE, Esq. will be published with the
Magazines on the Ist of July.
Colburn and Bentley, New Buiiington-street.
In one Tfll. Svo.
The undying one,
and OTHER POEMS, by the Hon. Mrs. NORTON, Authoress
of 41 The Sorrows of Rosalie.”
Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, 8, New Burlington-street.
In three vols. post Svo.
THE DENOUNCED.
By the Author of 44 Tales by the O’Hara Family,” 44 The Now-
lans,” 44 The Croppy,” Arc.
“ Bright o’er the flood
44 Of her tears and her blood,
44 Let the Rainbow of Hope be her Wellington’s name.”
Moore.
Colburn and Bentley, 9, New Burlington-street.
Complete, in tw© vols. with a Portrait of the Author, and numerous
other Plates, price 305.,
CATLLTE’S TRAVELS to TIMBUCTOO,
4i This work must excite great public curiosity in every quarter
of the Globe.”—Literary Gazette.
44 M. Caillie is the first European who has succeeded in the attempts
to penetrate to Timbuctoo, and returned In spite of the perils inter-
posed by the climate, to communicate all the information he has col-
lected.”—Evening Paper.
Colburn and Bentley. 9, New Burlington-street.
RUSSIA. —The Second Edition, considerably improved, in two large
vols. Svo., with seventy plates, 9'. 25. bound and lettered,
DR. GRANVILLE’S TRAVELS to ST. PE-
TERSBURGH.
44 Dr. Granville’s skill we have heard and believe to be considerable.
He is a man of the world, and we have a high opinion of his sagacity.
Petersburgh is the theatre for the display of Dr. Granville’s descrip-
tive powers, and graphical illustrations, and we do not hesitate to say
that his picture of St. Petersburg!! contains the most copious and de-
tailed description of this extraordinary city, which has hitherto been
laid before the public.”—Quarterly Review, Jan. 1829.
Colburn and Bentley, S, New Burlington-street.
The Fifth Edition, in two volumes foolscap, embellished with a Por-
trait and Fac-simile, and printed uniformly with Lord Byron’s Works,
price only 4s. fid. per volume,
T ORD BYRON’S CONVERSATIONS with
CAPTAIN MEDWIN, noted during a Residence with his Lord-
ship at Pisa.
Colburn and Bentley, New Burlington-street.
Of whom may he had, in a few days, in one vol. small Svo.
CONVERSATIONS of JAMES NORTHCOTE, Esq. R.A. By
William llazlitt.
44 The precepts here of a divine old man
I could recite.” Armstrong.
Complete in four volumes Svo. with portrait, and engraved fac simile
of the Original Declaration of Independence,
IVTEMOIRS and CORRESPONDENCE of
JL THOMAS JEFFERSON,
Late President of the United Stales.
14 This publication is inestimable, and will haven material influence
upon human affairs for many generations.”—Court Journal.
44 The work must undoubtedly form a part of every historical
library.”—Spectator.
N.B. Vols. 3 and 4 may be had separately, to complete sets.
Henry Colburn and Richard Bontlev, 8, New Burlington-street.
I n 12mo« price ss. boards.
Emigration' or no emigration;
being the Narrative of the Author (an English Farmer) from
the year 182* to 1830; during which time he traversed the United
States of America, and the British Province of Canada, with a View
to Settle as an Emigrant. By JOSEPH PICKERING, late of Fenny
Stratford, Buckinghamshire.
Published by Longman, Rees, Onne, Brown, and Green.
In Svo price 14s. boards,
Travels in Russia, and a residence
at ST. PETERSBURG and ODESSA, in the years 1827-1829;
intended to give some Account of Russia as it is, and not as it is repre-
sented to be, &c. &c. By EDWARD MORTON, M. 8., Member of
Trinity College, Cambridge, &c. &c.
Printed for Longman, Rees, Onne, Brown, and Of whom
may be had,
A SPINSTER’S TOUR in FRANCE, the STATES of GENOA, &c.„
during the year 1827. In 12mo. lOs.fid. boards.
In Svo. 12s. beart>l v
A TREATISE on the NATURE and CURE
of those DISEASES, either acute or chronic, which precede
cbange of structure, with a view to the Preservation of Health, and
particularly the Prevention of Organic Diseases.—By A. P. W. PHI-
LIP, M.D., F.R.S.L. and E., &c.
Printed for Longman, Rees, Onne, Brown, and Green. —Of whom
may bo had,
PHYSIOLOGICAL LECTURES, and DISCOURSES. By John
Abernetby, F.R.S. In Svo* 10s. 6<U boards.
In 12m0., price 10s. fid., boards,
A SYNOPSIS of the BRITISH FLORA ;
arranged according to the Natural Orders; containing Vascu-
lai es, or Flowering Plants. By JOHN LINDLEY, F.R.S. LS. and
G.S. Professor of Botany in the University of London, &c.
Published by Longman, Rees,Orme, Brown, and Green.
Of whom may be bad.
The ENGLISH FLORA. By Sir J. E. Smith, F.R.S. Ac. A new
edition, in four vols. Svo. 21. Bs. boards.
TURNER’S HISTORY OF ENGLAND—In 12 vols. Svo. price 81.
THE HISTORY 3S of° a £NGLAND, from the
Earliest Period to the Death of Elizabeth.—By SHARON
TURNER, F.A.S. R.A.S.L.
Printed for Longman, Rees, Onne, Brown, and Green.
Of whom may be had, by the same Author, sepaiately.
The HISTORY of the ANGLO-SAXONS. 6th edition, 3 vols. Svo.
21. ss. boards.
The HISTORY of ENGLAND during the MIDDLE AGES; com-
prising the Reigns from William the Conqueror to the Accession of
Henry VIII. 3d edition. 6 w ls. Svo. 3/. boards.
The HISTORY of the REIGN of HENRY the EIGHTH. 3d edition,
2 vols. Svo. price 1 1. 6s. boards.
The REIGNS of EDWARD VI., MARY, and ELIZABETH. 2d
edition, 2 vols. Svo. U. 13s. boards.
In Svo. price 195., _
CONVERSATIONS on RELIGION, with
LORD BYRON ami OTHK.RS, held in ia. » 'w®
previous to his Lordship’s death. By the late JAMES KENNED*,
M.D. of his Britannic Majesty’s Medical Staff.
John Murray, Albemarle-street. ,
No. 12,038] WEDNESDAY EVENING, JUNE 23, 1830. [Price 7p
BOOKS PUBLISHED THIS DAY,
The Third and Concluding Volume of
■OOURRIENNE’S MEMOIRS of NAFO-
J 3 LEON.
“ These volumes must continue to the latest ages to be records of
invaluable interest.”—Literary Gazette-
Colburn and Bentley, 8, New Burlington-street.
In three volumes 12mo. price U. Is. a New Edition of
r* A L E B WILLI A M S:
a Novel. By W. GODWIN, Esq.
Colburn and Bentley, 8, New Burlington-street.
Of whim may be had, just published, by the same Author,
CLOU LESLEY ; a Novel. In three vols.
In small Svo. with several vignettes, price 10s. fid. bound,
TOURNAL of the HEART. Edited by the
Authoress of “ Flirtation.”
Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, 8, New Burlington-street.
It. B vo. price Bs.
nnHE BOOK of PSALMS, newly translated
5. from the Hebrew, and with Explanatory Notes. By W.
FRENCH, D.D. Master of Jesus College, Cambridge, and G. hJS IN-
NER, M.A. Fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge.
Printed at the University Pres**,for John Murray, Albemarle-streeC-
In Svo. price 3s. fid.
ON CREDIT CURRENCY, and its Superiority
to COIN; in support of a Petition for the Establishment nfw
cheap, safe, and sufficient Circulating Medium. By G. POULETI
SCROPE, Esq., F.R.S., F.G.S., &c.
John Murray, Albemarle-strcet. _
THE LIFK OF BISHOpTIKI! F.il.-lu two vols. ito , witi, a portrait
and other plates, price 31, 13s. 6d.,
THE LIFE of BISHOP HEBER; with Se-
lections from his Correspondence, and from his Unpublished
Works. By his WIDOW.
John Murray, Albemarle-street.—Of whom may be had, a New
Edition, of
BISHOP HEBER’S JOURNAL. Three vols. Bvo. U. 16s.
de MES TRAVAUX, de MES
Hi VOYAGES, ef tie MES OPINIONS: dans one Lettre A son
Ami Agathomerus. Par MELA BRITANNICUS.
44 Let school-taught Pride dissemble all it can;
These little things are great to little man.”—Goldsmith,
Limdres: Treuttel and Wunz, Soho-scjuare.— Prix I Os.
The 15th edition, price 12s. in boards,
rtpHE MEDICAL GUIDE; for the Use of the
fi~ Clergy, Heads of Families, and Seminaries, &c. &c.—By
RICHARD REECE, M.D.
44 This edition, containing a copious description of all the new re-
medies, &c. we can cordially recommend. It embraces the practical
part of medicine, without the superfluous theories with which most of
the systems of physic are loaded.”—Athenamm, April, 1828.
Printed for Longman, Rees, Onne, Brown, and Green, London.
OHO be peremptorily Sold, pursuant to an Order
v t>f the High Court of Chancery, made in a Cause ol 44 Jervis v.
Bi asier,” with the approbation of Sir Giffin Wilson, one of the Mas-
ters of the said Court, by a Person appointed by him for the purpose,
*« several Lots, at the Phoenix Inn, in Market Drayton, in the county
cf Salop, on Thursday, the Ist day of July next, between the hours of
three and four—A FREEHOLD MANSION HOUSE, with offices and
outbuildings, and several parcels of freehold land, sifualeat Ches-
stardine, in the county of Salop, late the residence of Henry Zacba-
nah Jervis, Esq. deceased, being such parts of ti e Estates of which
flhesnid Henry Zachariah Jervis was seised or possessed at the time
*.»t making his will and at his death, as have not been sold. Particu-
lars may be had (gratis) at the said Master’s Chambers, in Soutbamp-
ton Buildings, London ; of Messrs. Birkett, Taylor, and Cox, soli-
citors, Cloak-lane, London; Messrs. Alban and Benbow, solicitors,
Stone Buildirgs, Lincoln’s Inn ; Messrs. Clarke, Richards, and Med-
cnlf, and Messrs. Hemming and Baxter, solicitors, Lincoln’s fnn-
ifields ; Mr. James Crosby, solicitor, Bucklersbury, London; of Mr.
Pigot,solicitor, and Mr. Stanley,solicitor, Market Drayton ; Mr. Jo-
nathan Nickson, solicitor, at Wem ; of Messrs. Churton and Sons, in
Whitchurch; at the Lion Inn, Newport; the Lion Inn, Shrewsbury;
the Pheasant Inn, Wellington; the White Horse Inn, at Wem; the
Hawkstone Inn, at Hawkstone; the Castle Inn, at Terohill; at the
Place of Sale; and of Mr. Joseph Gibbs, of Clupnall, on application
to whoatlu- i’u.... Tnylor. aiid Cox.
Plaintiff’s Solicitors, Cloak-lane.
Capital mansion and manors.
NORFOLK.—To be LET, from 31st August next, a very excel-
lent FAMILY MANSION, containing large handsome dining and
drawing rooms, breakfast room and library en the ground floor, to-
gether with abundant and appropriate servants’ offices, and numer-
ous cheerful bed rooms of good size, the whole completely Furnished
in a handsome modern style, and fit for the reception of a large
family of the highest class. There is also ample stabling, coach-
houses, and all suitable out-door offices, forming together a most com-
plete conntry residence. The extensive and very delightful pleasure
grounds are laid out with great taste, and there is a fine conservatory
■and jreen house stocked with rare exotics; also an excellent
kitfhen garden, with pine-pits, forcing-houses, and framing. The
whole arc surrounded by a beautiful and highly productive park, and
are pleasantly and healthfully situated about eighty six miles from
London, to and from whence coaclios pass daily. The exclusive right
of sporting extends over about 6.000 acres of demesne lauds, highly
cultivated, together with extensive woods and plantations well stocked
with pheasants and oilier game. —Harriers are kept in the neighbour-
hood.—Apply for particulars and terms (by letter, post-paid) to Messrs.
W. and C. Wilkinson and Sous, auctioneers, Ludgate-hifl, London;
Mr. Aldham, solicitor, Lynn ; and Mr. Flatten, Downham Market,
Norfolk,
C COT LA N D—Desirable GROUSE SMOOT
0 ING QUARTERS, i:i Perthshire.—To be LET for the Season—
1. The LODGE of GLASCHOIRY, with the right of Shooting over the
adjoining Moors belonging to the Estate of Fincastle. These Moors
are well known to be of the very first description, being surrounded
by the preserved grounds of the Dukes of Atholl and Gordon. They
have been carefully preserved, and abound with Grouse and hill
game. The Lodge, which is suitably furnished, affords comfortable
■accommodation in every respect for a Sportsman. It is situated within
ten miles of Blair Atholl, and two miles of Dalnacardoeh Imi. The
Inverness Coach to ami from Perth passes or repas-es daily within a
mile ami a half of the Lodge. 9. The Right of Shooting and Fishing
on the low Estate of Fincastle. TUeTmut Fishing on Loch Vack and
the river Fummel is much famed.—Apply to James Morison, Account-
ant, Perth, Judicial Factor on the Estate; to Messrs. Stewart and
MHnrosb, 18, South Castle-street, Edinburgh; or Messrs. Moncreiff,
Webster, and Thomson, 1, Old Palace-yard, Westminster.
WARRANTED I. N E OLD WIN US. —
Messrs. GEDGE and Co. Importers, 132, Regent-street, Pic-
cadilly, submit to the Public the following Prices of Warranted Ge-
nuine Wines of the first quality:
Per Doz. Per Doz.
Excellent Old Port - 303. Rich Old Bucellas - 365.
Old Crusted Port three Best Lisbon and Calcavella 3fis.
years in bottle - 345. Fine Light Claret - 365.
Fine Pale Sherry -30 s. Very Choice Claret 425.
Old East India Sherry, four Finest Sparkling Champagne.
years in bottle - 345. 665. to 725.
Teneriffe and Vidonia 28s. Best Cape Madeira - 18 s.
Finest West Lidia Madeira 365.
Orders for six dozen sent, carriage paid, to any part of England.
Messrs. Gedge and Ce. have also on nale some of the finest Marsalla
or Bronti Madeira, at 265. per dozen; 1-2 1, per quarler cask of eleven
dozen; 2 SI. per hogshead, of twenty-two dozen; and 45Z. per pipe of
forty-four dozen.
Some very fine White Cognac Brandy, fifteen years old, full proof,
at 365. per gallon.
mo CLERGYMEN ami PU B LI CO RA TORS.
A —Monsieur MALLAN and SON, SURGEON-DENTISTS,
No, 32, Great Russeil-street, Blsomsbiiry, and No. 9. Half Moon-
street, Piccadilly, respectfully solicit the attention of the Nobility and
Public of the British Metropolis, to their newly-invented MINERAL
TEETH, which are incapable of Discolouration or Corrosion; which,
when fixed in the mouth’ either singly or in sets, give perfect sound
of articulation, more particularly the Dentu-lingual double Consonant
(TH.) Messrs. M. submit that these are advantages of the utmost
consequence to Clergymen, Public Lecturers, and Parliamentary
Orators. Dissenting tioin the practice of all other dentists, Messrs.
M. use neither wire nor other ligature, but fix the Teeth on a peculiar
principle, sons to support the adjoining ones, whilst pressure on the
gum is avoided. Me>-sis. M. are likewise the INVENTORS of an IN-
VALUABLE MINERAL SUBSTANCE for FILLLING DECAYED
TEETH, which, whilst it instantly relieves the agony of TOOTH-
ACHE, and prevents the necessity of extraction, arrests the progress
of decay, and identifies itself with the body of the tooth in the form of
a hard and durable enamel. They also Fasten Loose Teeth in a man-
ner singularly efficacious, even in the most apparently hope!e>s cases,
arising from age, neglect, or disease of the gums; and to the latter
they give a tone of elasticity and firmness, by the application of me-
dicaments invented and known only to themselves. Charges the same
as in Paris.
Artificial teeth, on the united Pnnci-
pics ©!’ Capillary Attraction and Atmospheric Pressure.—Mr.
GRAY, Member of the Royal College of Surgeons, in London, has
been advised by his friends, who have experienced (he eomfoi Is ol
his method of supplying artificial Teeth, and who are averse to expose
their own cases by personal recommendations, to adopt occasionally
this inoue of making it more generally known, that he continues to
supply the loss ©f teeth ©n the peculiar and ©nly successful system which
he discovered and adopted in 1813. These Artificial Teeth have been
f»«nd to answer all the purposes of the original teeth in mastication,
articulation, appearance, &c. and to remain pertectly secure in their
places b> capillary attraction and the pressure of the atmosphere,
thereby avoiding pinning to stumps, tying, twisting wires, ©r fas-
tening clasps or springs to the adjoining teeth, ©r any attachment
whatever t© the remaining teeth; and, consequently, instead of
injuring to afford them support. They may also be taken out and
replaced by the wearer with the greatest facility. These improve-
ments enable the inventor to supply whole ©r half sets without the
spiral springs which are usually attached to such pieces. The mecha-
nical friction and elastic strain on the teeth, and particularly the
Galvanic influence exerted en the mouth and teeth in contact
with Metallic Plates, producing and keeping up a morbid irritability
of the mouth, tongue, and fauces, often amounting to constriction, is
entirely avoided by Mr. Gray’s method, as the only material used by
him is the tutk of the sea-horse (either with or without human teeth),
the only innocent aud tasteless substance that feels comfortable and
congenial in the mouth.—2s, Old Burlington-street, Lenclon.
SAND PO UNDS at Four and a Half per Cent, on Mortgage of a most
eligible Freehold Estate, of ample value, in the county of Louth,
within thirty miles of Dublin. The estate is let to respectable te-
nants, and the rents are punctually paid.—For further particulars,
apply to Mr. Robinson, Solicitor, 26,Essex street, Strand, London.
LONG’S HOTEL FOR FAMILIES AND
GENTLEMEN, BOND-STREET AND CLIFFORD-STREET.
W. MARK WELL, late of Ibbetson’s Hotel, begs leave to acquaint
the Nobility, Gentry, and his Friends generally, that he has taken the
above Hotel/ The apartments, both for Families and Gentlemen, are
arranged with peculiar care, embracing both comfort and conveni-
ence; ihe rooms are spacious, airy, and well furnished, the late pro-
prietor having studied only the comforts of its visitors. W. M. begs
lo say he has purchased the entire stock of old Wines, selected by
the late Mr. Long, and, from his arrangement, will he enabled to
offer them, as well as the apartments, at very reduced prices. Fa-
milies and Gentlemen visiting London, will find this house possessing
advantages superior to any other in point of situation and comfort.
A fine Turtle of 200 lbs. weight dressed this day. Turtle seat to any
part of the kingdom.
S3ICKCLOTH S.—D EACON and ORCHARD
B-vL beg to inform the Nobility, Gentry, and Agriculturists in gene-
ral, (hey have been making a large assortment of RICK CLOTHS,
with poles, ropes, and pullies, complete; the Cloths being made
from the best canvass, they can warrant them for theit quality and du-
rability, superior to what are generally offered to the public, and on
the most advantageous terms. Also new and second hand Marquees
and Tents for pleasure parties, cricket grounds, &c. &c. Imperial
Water-proof Cloths »n a new principle, for waggons, carts, Ac. Ac.
warranted perfectly pliable, and not to crack. Netting and Bunting
for fruit trees. Marquees and Hick Cloths let on hire for the season.
Orders addressed by post to Deacon and Orchard, No. 5, West Smith-
field, London, will be punctually attended to.
Ej 'D INBURG H SHAWLS.—The innovation in
taste so elegantly introduced by the French in Shawls having
been successfully adopted in the excellent Shawls manufactured in
Scotland, HOWKS and HART beg to submit, to inspection an extensive
variety of these beautiful Specimens, with an unequalled Assortment
of the most celebrated French Designs ; thus affording an opportunity
for purchasers to compare the respective merits of each manufacture.
—Oriental Warehouse, 60, Fleet-street.—N.B. India and China Shawls
r nil... h< . SGxM or Uvrl-iu:.-
ANT L-CO EROSION LITHIC PAINT.re
commended for painting stucco fronts that are thoroughly dry,
as well as for painting rough out-door wood or iran work. It is de-
cidedly cheaper than most oil colours, is more durable, and may be
used by any common workman. Sold either in stone or lead colour.
Manufactured by FRANCIS, WHITE, and FRANCIS, Brothers, (Pa-
tentees of Hamclin’s Mastic) Nine Elms, Vauxhall.
THE TOWN AND FORTIFICATIONS OF
JS- ALGIERS. -Gra is, with THE NEWS of Sunday next, June
27, will be given a beautiful Lithographic Engraving of the TOWN
and FORTIFICATIONS of ALGIERS, with the surrounding country,
explaining the route by which the French Army is advancing to the
attack; from a Drawing transmitted by a French Officer employed in
the blockade. Orders received by all the Newsmen, and at the Office,
No. 28, Brydges-street, Covent-garden.
nnHE COURT JOIIRNALT and GAZETTE
JL of the FASHIONABLE WORLD, for Saturday, June 19, wif,
which was presented, GRATIS, an admirable PORTRAIT of HIS
MAJESTY, has been again REPRINTED, and may be had of all
Newsmen.
This new and popular Weekly Journal of Fashion presents itself as
the companion not merely of the Drawing Room and the Boudoir, but
of the Breakfast Table and the Study.
The occupations, engagements, and amusements of the Higher
Classes of society had long required a record; and they found it in
the Court Journal. The public and private habits of royal and
noble life, those habits which give the tone to manners throughout the
empire, are here depicted with a freshness and accuracy hitherto
unattempted ; hut in addition to those leading and peculiar features,
it supplies information on every topic of passing interest, thus ren-
dering it a Weekly Newspaper of au entirely new, improved, and
valuable nature.
The Court Journal, containing 48 columns, is published every Sa-
turday Morning, on a handsome 4to. stamped sheet, so that subscribers
may receive and transmit it to their friends, postage free, throughout
all par’s of the Kingdom.
Published for H. Colburn, by W. Thomas, at the Office, 19, Cathe-
rine-street. Strand; and supplied by all Booksellers and Newsvendors
throughout the Kingdom.
SALES BY AUCTION.
Paintings, removed from Clapliain-road-place; also an Importation
of speculative Pictures from the Collection of a Foreign Nobleman.
-To be SOLI) by AUCTION, Ly Mr. WILLIAMS, at the Auction
Mart, Bartholemew-lane, on Friday next, at Twelve,
A CHOICE COLLECTION of PAINTINGS,
elegantly framed, in a fine state of preservation, the property
of a Gentleman, brought from his residence in Ciapbam-ioad-place;
among which will be found several highly*finished and interesting
specimens of the ancient and modern Masters, in grand Historical
Subjects, pleasing Landscapes, Cattle and Figures, Interiors, Do-
mestic Scenes, Church and Flower Pieces, Sea Views, Portraits, &c.,
including several of a speculative class in their original state, worthy
the attention of the connoisseur. Just imported in’o this country.
To he viewed on Thursday, and Catalogues had at the Horns Ta-
vern, Kenuington; at Garraway’s; and at Mr. Williams’s Offices in
the Auction Mart.
Moss Hall, near Finchley.—To be SOLD by AUCTION, by Mr. POL-
LARD, at Garrawav’s, on Tuesday, July 6,
A Spacious FAMILY RESIDENCE, called
MOSS HALL, placed in the centre ot pleasure grounds, gardens,
and shrubberies, with a greenhouse, grapery, coaclihouses, stabling,
offices of every description, and agricultural outbuildings, delightfully
situated near Finchley, at a convenient distance from the eighth mile
stone on the North road. The House is surrounded by a lawn and
gardens, ornamented with full grown timber and thriving plantations,
and several iuclosures of fine park, waody, containing altogether 42
acres, I rood, and 32 perches, or thereabouts, which, with the excep-
tion of between <me and two acres, is of freehold tenure, with the
land tax redeemed.
Further particulars may be had on application to Messrs. Mounsey
and Gray, Solicitors, Staple Inn; at Garra way’s; and of Mr. Pollard,
Park street, Grottvenor-square; and printed particulars and plans
may be had at any of these places 21 days prior to the Sale.
South Wales.—lmportant and valuable Leasehold Estate for three
lives, near Tenby.—To he SOLD by AUCTION (by order of the
assignees of Anthony Guy, a bankrupt) on Wednesday, the 21stday
»f July, 1839. at Three o’clock in the afternoon, at the White L'on
Inn, Tenby, by Mr. WILLIAM TENDER,
nnHE very superior ESTATE and FARM called
JL TREVANE, beautifully situate on the romantic and picturesque
shores of Tenby Bay, in the out-liberties of Tenby, in the County of
Pembroke, comprising 316 a. 1 r. 15 p., more or less, of good arable,
meadow, and pasture laud, with a spacious and commodious Mansion
House, and suitable offices, capable, at a small expence, of being
adapted for the residence of a genteel family ; good vailed gardens,
farm yards, and all necessary appendages. Also a Farm House and
"Buildings, conveniently placed for occupation, with the lands most
distant from (ho mansion, ami five suitable cottages.
Trerane is surrounded by a fine sporting country, abounding with
game of all kinds in their season, and the sea and rivulets around
afford a plentiful supply of fish. The estate is in a ring fence, well
watered, and the rates and taxes unusually low. It is only two miles
from Tenby, on the road to London, and partakes of all the advan-
tage? of that celebrated and rapidly increasing watering place, the
sands of which extend to (he estate, and the town affording an excel-
lent market for its produce.
Besides the advantage of a daily post to and from London, there are
now constant communications with England by steam packet, mail,
ami stage coaches.
Trevane is distant from Haverfordwest 18 miles, from Pembroke 10
mites, and from the Royal Dock Yard 13 miles, and there are in the
vicinity several packs of hounds.
Mr. Evan Lewis, cabinet maker, Tenby, will shew the estate.
Printed particulars will be ready in a few days, and (with any further
information) may be obtained, 011 application to Mr. Lewis; to the
Auctioneer, Pembroke; Mr. William Locke, Solicitor, Tenby; Mr.
Broome Pinniger, Solicitor, Chippenham; Messrs. Jenkins and
Abbott, 8, New Inn, London; or Messrs. Clarke and Son, Solicitors,
Bristol.
Second Edition, Revised. —In two volumes,Svo. with numerous p ! '<tes,
from drawings by Mrs. WARD, price 21. *s bound,
Mexico. By h. g. ward, Esq. Compris-
ing the Personal Narrative of the Author’s Travels through
the Country, an Account of the present state of (he Mining Companies,
Political Parties, Ac.
44 The most systematic and complete work of which w r e are in posses-
sion respecting Mexico. Mr. Ward, ns British Charge d’Affaires, for
more than two years, enjoyed the best opportunities for acquiring the
first intelligence ; and he has made the best use of these advantages.
Thus his volumes are of very great value. Not only their matter,
but their maps and illustrations render them of sterling worth and
utility.”— Li teraryGa z e tt e.
t'Mhnni nod Benttcy v R. New Burl in gtoi‘street.
through Thr Crimea,
M TURKEY, and EGYPT. By the late JAMES WEBSTER,
Esq. of the Inner Temple. In 3 vols. Svo, wdh plates.
2. The FORTUNES of PERKIN WARBECK. By the Author of
44 Frankenstein,” 44 The Last Man,” Ac. In 3 vols. post Svo.
3. The Third and Fourth Volumes < f BOURRTENNE’S MEMOIRS
of NAPOLEON, which complete this important Work.
Also, nearly ready,
4. The DENOUNCED.—By the Author of 44 Tales of the O’Hara
Family,” 44 The Nowlans,” 44 The Croppy,” &c. 3 vols.
Colburn and Bentlev, New Burlington-street.
In two vols. Svo. with a line portrait, by Meyer, and map,
nnHE life of sir thomas munro,
-Sl. Bart. K.C.R., late Governor of Madras. With Extracts from
his Correspondence and Private Papers, By the Rev. G. R. GLEIG,
M.A. M.R.S.L.. Ac.
44 An admirable work which ought to take its place wherever Col-
lingwood’s Memoirs and Correspondence and Bishop Heber’s Journal
are to be found, improving and delighting the human mind.”—Lite-
rary Gazette.
Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, 8, New Burlington-street.
In I vol. neatly and closely printed in double columns, comprising
upwards of 500 pages, price only 9s. fid. bound,
mHE COOK’S DICTIONARY and HOUSE-
S- KEEPER’S DIRECTORY. A new Family Manual of Cookery
and Confectionery, on a plan of ready reference never hitherto at-
tempted. By RICHARD DOLBY, of the Thatched House Tavern, St.
James’s-street.
This volume furnishes a complete culinary code, digested into the
convenient and most available form of an alphabetical work—a form
never hitherto adopted in any book on this universally interesting
subject. Many very piquant gastronomic mmveautes are included in
this collection, as well as the whole art and mystery of confectionery.
Colburn and Bentley, New Burlington-street.
MR, HORACE SMITH’S NEW NOVEL, &c. •
WA L T E R C O L Y T O N:
A Tale of the Reign of James If. By the .Author 0f 44 Bram*
bietye House,” 44 The New Forest,” &c. In three volumes, post Svo.
2. WOMEN AS THEY ARE; or the Manners of the Day. The
second edition, in three vols. post Bvo.
3. The KING’S OWN: a Tale of the Sea, By the Author of 44 The
Naval Officer.” In three vols post Svo.
4. The COUNTRY CURATE. By the Author of 44 The Subaltern,”
44 The Chelsea Pensioners,” &c. lif two vols. post Svo.
5. TALES of the COLONIES. By John Howisou, Esq. Author of
44 Sketches of Canada.” &c. In two vols. post Svo.
Henry Colburn and Richard Bentley, 8, New Burlington street.
BURKE’S PEERAGE and BARONETAGE, for 1830,-Third Edition,
corrected to the present period (inscribed by permission to his Most
Gracious Majesty), in one large volume, with numerous illustrations,
TMJRKE’S DICTIONARY ot the PEERAGE
-Up and BARONETAGE of the BRITISH EMPIRE.
44 This popular Work justly deserves to be considered as a History
of the British Nobility. It is enriched by a variety of personal anec-
dotes, never before published, relative to many illustrious houses, in
addition to numerous authentic details connected with their lineage,
and communicated to the author by the noble inheritors of the titles.
The volume, containing 9«)0 pages of letter press, is moreover illus-
trated with upwards of 1,500 heraldic plates, is printed in double
columns with so remarkably clear and beautiful a type, as to comprise
a quantity of matter equal to no less than 12 octavo volumes!”—John
Bull.
Henry Colburn, and Richard Bentley, 8. New BurliHgf#m-street.
THE BARB ARY STATES.-The Second Edition, embellished with a
View and Map of A'giers, and a plan of the City Fortifications, price
25?, boards,
■jVTARRATIVE of a RESIDENCE in AL.
X x GIERS, comprising an Account of the Author’s Captivity, of the
Manners, Amusements, and Modes of Living among the different Peo-
ple of Barbary ; w ith Observations on the Climate, Population, Trade,
and Productions of the Country, the State of Agriculture, of the Arts,
Military and Naval Power, Christian Slavery, Financial and Piratical
System?, Anecdotes of the Dey and his Ministers, of the lale War, &c.
By M. PANANTI. With Notes by Edward Blaquierc, Esq.
This volume will be found to be an object of particular curiosity,
from the minute and lively manner in which it lays open the interior
of the Court of the Dey of Algiers. It contains the only complete and
authentic Account,{by an Eye-witness, which has hitherto appeared, of
(he manners and conduct of this Despot and his Ministers, and details
such scenes anil events as will scarcely seem credible in the eye of a
European.
Colburn and Bentley, New Burlington-street.
GREECE AND TURKEY.—Second Edition,” in 2 vols. Svo. with
Thirty-eight Engravings, price 215.,
nn RAVELS to CONSTANTINOPLE, through
-K- Vienna, Hungary, Transylvania, Wallachia, Bulgaria, and
Roumetia. and from that City to the Capital of Austria, by the Dar-
danelles, Tencc’os, the plains of Troy, Smyrna, Napoli di Romania,
Athens. Egina, Paros, Cyprus, Syria, Alexandria, Malta, Sicily,
Italy, Istria, Carniola, and Styna, in the years 1827 and 1828.—8 y
Captain CHARLES COLVILLE FRANKLAND, R-N.
44 His volumes teem with interest and instruction.”—San.
44 One of the most picturesque and attractive of modern tours.”—
Morning Journal.
Colburn and Bentley, New Burlington-street.
NEW NOVEL BY THE AUTHOR OF 44 PELHAM.”—In 3 vols.
post five.
Paul cllff o r d.
By the Author of 44 Pelham,” 44 Devereux,” and 44 The Dis-
owned.”
44 Perhaps the most original of all his works, 4 Paul Clifford’ will
at once vary and add to its writer’s reputation. For the man of the
world there is shrewdness and satire; for Hie moralist, matter of deep
thought; for the young, all the interest of narrative and all the poetry
of feeling; and we must say, it is no ordinary pleasure for a critic to
be able to assign praise so cordially and so sincerely as we can to the
author of 4 Paul Clifford,’”—Literary Gazette.
Henry Colburn aud Richard Bentley, 8, New Buriington-street.
Price 7s. fid. Vol. VIII. Part I. of
A SYSTEM of UNIVERSAL GEOGRA-
PHY. By M. MALTE BRUN, Editor of the 44 Annates des
Voyages.”
This pari contains the Geography of Spain, Portugal, and part of
France. The work is now finished in the original; but in order to
render it a more complete system of Geography for the English
reader, large additions will be made to the description wf Great Bri-
tain, which is now in progress, and will bo published in a few months.
44 We think the translators of M. Malle Brun’s Geography have done
good service to the public, by rendering so valuable a work accessible
to the English reader.”—Edinburgh Review, No. 97.
44 Infinitely superior to any thing of its class which has ever ap-
peared.”—Literary Gazette, No. 403.
'Printed far Longman, llqes, Onne, Brown, and Green, Lon Ion; and
HTiain itiHLK, Edinburgh.
HUNT’S ARCHITECT URAL WORKS.— In royal 4to. with 37 Plates,
price 21. 25., or with India Proofs, 31. Ss.,
imXEMPLAKS OF TUDOR ARCHITEC.
* TURE, adapted to Modern Habitations: with illustrative De-
tails, selected from Ancient Edifices; and Observations 011 the Furni-
ture of the Tudor Period.— By T. F- HUNT, Architect.
44 Whoever wishes to 4 talk cunniiiglie* of old houses and old furni-
ture should consult this volume.”—Literary Gazette.
By the same Author,
AR.CHI lETTURA CAMPESTRE; displayed in Lodges, Gar-
deners’ Houses, &c. Royal 4to» witli 12 Plates, 21s. bds.; or India
Proofs, 1(. 1 Is. fid. bds.
HALF A DOZEN HINTS on PICTURESQUE DOMESTIC AR-
CH ITECTURE. The Second Edition, m4to. 15s, bds.; or2ls. India
Proofs, bds.
DESIGNS for PARSONAGE HOUSES, ALMS HOUSES, Ac. In
royal 4to. 21 Plates, 2Ls. bds.; or India Proofs, \l. IU. fid. bds.
Prin fed for Longman, Rees, Onne, Brown, and Green.
EDINBURGH GAZETTEER, CORRECTED TO 1829. —ln one large
volume, Svo. (with Maps), price 18s. boards, the second edition,
brought d >wu to the present time, of
THE EDINBURGH GAZETTEER.or Com-
pendious Geographical Dictionary; being a complete body of
Geography, Physical, Political, Statistical, and Commercial, Abridged
from the larger work in six volumes.
Printed for Longman, Rees, Onne, Brown, and Green, London ;
and Adam Black, Edinburgh.—Of whom may be had.
The EDINBURGH GAZETTEER, or Geographical Dictionary,
brought down to the present time. Complete in six vols. Bvo., price
bl. ss. boards.
Also, as an Accompaniment to the above Works,
A NEW GENERAL ATLAS, constructed by A. Arrowsmith, Hy-
drwgrapher to the King, from the latest Authorities; comprehended
in Fifty-four Maps. In royal 4to. price XL, 16s. ha’.f-bound, or coloured
21. 12s. 6d. _
Price 1L Is. (dedicated by permission to the Most Noble the Marquis
of Cleveland),
The noble game of billiards;
wherein are exhibited extraordinary and surprising strokes,
which have excited the admiration of most of the Sovereigns of Eu-
rope. Translated from the French of the celebrated M. MINGAUD,
formerly Capitaine d’lnfanterie in the service of France.
44 Here is a book on Billiards that may be expected sooner or later to
produce something like a revolution in the whole sty le of play, and
consequently in the general character of the game To the owners
of private tables we would recommend this book as nn appendage al-
inostas necessary to their table as a marking board.”—Court Journal,
April 30, 1830.
44 The English player is indebted to Mr. Thurston for making him
acquainted wit l * a work so much esteemed on the Continent.”—Athe-
naeum, May 8, 1830,
Translated and Published by John Thurston, Billiard Table Manu-
facturer, 14, Catherine-street, Strand, and to be had ofall booksellers
la 3 vols. post Svo.
THE ARMENIAN S.-
A Tale of Constantinople.
By CHARLES MAC FAHLANE, Esq.
44 Mr. MacFarlane has in this w«rk condensed, in a most agreeable
manner, all the pictures, reflections, and anecdotes, of his Oriental
tou r— S ta n da r d.
44 It is not the mere novel reader alone who will ponder with delight
over these pages; it will be read as a work of instruction as well as
of amusement, the author having evidently not travelled to Constan-
tinople to exaggerate the observations of others, but t« make his
own, and to describe only what be has himself seen ami studied.”—
Morning Journal.
Printed for Saunders and Otley, Conduit-street.—Of whom may Le
had, by the same Author,
CONSTANTINOPLE in 1828-9. Second Edition.
44 Of all the tourists whom the late demand has tempted to the Press,
Mr.- Mac Farlane will, beyond comparison, most reward the reader.
The main purport of his hook is specifically adapted to the very points
011 which the curiosity of the moment is most alive. For the condition
of this part of the Eastern World, of its politics, temper, and promi-
nent interests, just at present, an authority so recent and so satisfac-
tory as Mr. Mac Farlane is a greater piece of good fortune than in
wonGl have been reasonable to expect.”—Edinburgh Review
In three vols. post Svu.
First l o v e ;
A NOVEL
44 One of the most beautifully written and delicately told tales we
remember. Never, we think, weie the heart-stirring scenes of a first
affection more ably depicted. The whole cast of the story is essentially
feminine, and cannot fail of affording great, delight, especially to the
fair sex.”— Morning Journal.
Printed for Saunders and Otley, British and Foreign Public Li-
brary, Conduit-street.
New Editions of the following Juvenile Publications are ready for
delivery at J. Harris’s, corner of St. Paul’s Church-yard,
I. rriHE JUVENILE RAMBLER, in a series
-IL of easy Reading Lessons, having the syllables divided.
Willi 12 Wood Cuts, 12mo. half bound, price 3s. fid. plain, 4s. fid. co-
loured, second edition.
2. The LITTLE LIBRARY—The MlNE—by the late Rev. Isaac
Taylor, of Ongar, Essex. With 16 Illustrations, square Ifiino. bound
in doth, price Ss. fid. second edition.
S. HOW to be HAPPY ; or, Fairy Gifts, proving the insufficiency of
Talents, Fortune, Rank, and Riches, to secure contentment. Second
edition, enlarged, with S Engravings, I2mo. half bound, ss. fid.
HE LOOKING GLASS tur ihe MIND, or
Intellectual Mirror, being an elegant Collection t-f the most
delightful little Stories and interesting Tates; chiefly translated
from that much admired work, L’Ami des Eufans, with 74 cuts by Be-
wick. The eighteenth edition, 12mo. hound, price 3s. fid.
Printed for John Harris; Rivington and Co.; Longman and Co.;
Baldwin and Co.; Harvey and Dari«u; Whittaker and Co.; Hamil-
ton and Co.; Simpkinand Marshall; T. Cadell; J. Nunn; J.bouter;
11. S.Kirby ; 11. Scholey; Poole and Edwards; aud Houlslou and Sou.


IMPERIAL PARLIAMENT. I Worced; while, in tie other, a contrary opinion prevailing. THEATRE ROYAh.HAVMARK LT.
f h Urge portion ef criminals were Allowed to escape, lie had ■* THIS EVENING will be performed
HOUSE OF LORDS—Tuesday, June j -fore him an exclusive correspondence with a great number of much ado about nothing.
Lord CLIFDEN presented a petition from the inhabitants of i uankorgand merchants, enumerating cases in which they had After which THE HAPPIEST DAY OF MY LIFE.
Ih' pariah of Burris, in the county of Carlow, for the repeal of been deterred from prosecuting persrns guilty of forgery, and Mr. Dudl e y, Mr, Willi a m s; Mrs. *Y * ■ * He ?
the Vestry Act. —Ordered to lie on the table. had left them to enjoy in impunity the produce bf their offences, To conclude with WILLIAM T ‘ wi * tb the Barber of
The Earl of SHAFTESBURY presented a petition from the from a reluctance to put the criminals on their trial capital Eveil Monster awd the Lottery Ticket,
inhahitmts of a burgh in Scotland against the East India Mono- Bet it not be said ihio state of things onlj affected tbe case or mm^
The Earl of SHAFTESBURY presen'ed a petition from the from a reluctant ;e to put the criminals on their trial capitally,
inhabitants of a burgh in Scotland against the East India Mono- Get it not be said this state of things only affected the case ot
poly.— Referred to the Committee on East India Affairs. individuals who, having abstained from prosecuting, were^ justly
Lord NAPIER moved the order of the day for receiving the deprived of redress, anil exposed to loss; for a moments eon-
report of the Parochial Registers ( Scotland) Bill. sMeration would suffice to satß; heir Lordships that Hie effect
The Ewrl of SHAFTESBURY presented the report, which of the impunity with which offences could be committed, ex-
was agreed to, an t ibe Bill ordered to be engrossed t> nded in a wide circle. He had heard of the case of a.father
The Duke of RICHMOND moved that there be laid before against whom a forgery was committed, but who had been
She House an account of the amount of Woollen Rags im- induced to abstain from prosecuting by the same motives as id-
Y»ojted in the years 1828 and 1630, and the amount of the Duty flueoced many men: this perron died, and the individual who
jpaid. Also, an account o? the quantity of Sheep and Lambs’ hul defrauded him committed the same depredation upon his son,
Wool imported in the same period, and the amount of the Duty who also refusing to prosecute, the offender was ultimately
paid; also an account of the exports of Sheep and Lambs’ hanged fof forgery on another party. The petitions which had
Wool in the same period.—Ordered, been presented to Parliament on this subject constituted a
Lord KING presented a petition from John Shehan, of strong argument in favoor of the abolition of death for forgery.
Londonderry. praying for an inquiry into the circumstances of a \mong the persons of this class who had petitioned their Lord-
loan made by Government to H -7 Corporation of that city. ships were the three greatest dealers in negotiable securities in
Th‘* Marquis of LONDONDERRY said, that it was true London; he would mention their names— Mr. Saunderson, Mr.
that Government had ad*anced a sum of 15,0002. to the Cotpo- Gurney, and Mr. Rothschild. He was glad he had an opportu-
ratiou for the repairs of a bridge, the repayment of which was nity of naming those individuals, because he thought their names
secured on the tolls, but the lolls had not yet been sufficient to must relieve their Lordships from an idea pretty generally
pav it. The Corporation was in the situation of many others entertained in some quarters, namely, that tin re existed no
who had borrowed «nd were not in a condition to pay ; but the feeling on the subject except among the members of a particular
HIS MAJESTY’S HEALTH.
“ WINDSOR CASTLE, JUNE 23, 1830.
THE COURIER. Z
WEDNESDAY EVENING, JUNE 23.
“ The King is still troubled by his cough; but it has not
interrupted his rest, and his Majesty awoke refreshed this
morning. ~ HENRY HALFORD,
“ MATTHEW JOHN TIERNEY.”
In duty to our readers we are obliged to notice this unsa-
tisfactory Bulletin. It would seem by it that his Majesty
was only troubled with a slight cold—-it could not be more
much, that it is al cost necessary to say the Irish Members con-
stitute only a part of Parliament, and that it is not their voice,
but that of the majority of all the Commons, by which the
expediency of measures is determined. He would, no doubt,
be a bold Minister who would attempt any measure affecting
Ireland alone, in opposition to all her hundred Members ; but
cases may arise, in which it would be a base desertion of
honour and trust, as she is but a part of the kingdom, not to
do so. Moreover, the Government which could be fright-
ened from its duty by menaces, is not worthy of support,
A concession to public opinion, in reason, is one of the
most important duties which a Minister can perform ; a con-
cession to factious demands would be nothing short of a high
crime. But the Irish Press, in its furor, appears to have no
conception of this, neither also of equity in government, nor of
virtue in public men—and far less that the interests of Ire-
land are part and parcel of those of England.
“ CITY, Twelve o’Clock.
Up to Ihe present hour there are no arrivals, and Consols
v.'np"Taiuja was in me summon 01 many omers i-'Himamni iu Hum- panels, ua>»x>j, ... ■ - . , ——j , . .1 . . no 3
v ' ho had borrowed *ftd were not in a condition to pay ; but the let ling on the subject except among the members of a particular vao - ue lv expressed were it so—and yet it 1 certain mat me c ntinue at JL' 4 . ... , f .
tn-ney would be paid. Some of it was repaid, and all the sect. This idea was refuted by a reference to the parties whose « J , , • a ffl: cte d to a decree that precludes “In the Foreign Market the only alteration is in Mexican
im*’rest paid P mines he had mentioned, one of whom, it was true, did disease with which he is amicieo, w - l B )ndg w bich have risen nearly I per cent., owing to the report
Aft. r a Uvv words from Lord King, which were not beard belong to the close referred to, but another of ” a . s hope, has not relented. o f the Committee being made ; Ihe price is n>w 38j.
b. lo« Use bar, the petition was withdrawn, on account of some a Dissenter, snd the third a Jew. If the House consi- , . . ■, . . d , v > s nrices but there is
wform .iity dered the character and situation of bill brokers, it would The Alleemeine Zeitung, of tbe 16th mst. which reached j “ All other Securities maintain yesterday s prices, but mere is
P elM.IDS were presented, praying that the punishment ol death perceive how worthy of attention was any petition proceed- J . . ■ nn impi-psting notice of the insurrec- no business stirring. ~ _
’might not be inflict..l for forgery, from inhabiiants of two places ing from them on this subject; and if there were three men more us this morning, contains an in . g OneoClock.
in Nurthampu by Lord King; tom a congregation of Fro interested than others in the matter, they were the individuals t j Qn j n Albania, w hich appears from this account to be ot a „ c on Sols are again 92|
iest.ni OissMitfrs in St Matr>*axe, and from Protestant Dis- he had mentioned. One of them, he understood, had between The Porte is usina every means to “ Mexican Bonds continue firm at 33 to h. The Report of the
senters of the I.i.pndeMd, nomination at Broadmead. Bristol, 20.000.000< and 30,000,000/. cf paper pas.mg through h.s hands formidable character. Ihe lone is using y tviexican n ~,v e3thu afternooll<
by Viscount CM... „ ; inhabitants of Cheltenham, and from yearly, end the three had more than 60,000,000/ Their Lord- restore tran illity . Committee, whtch we h..U - oped U have f,■»«»«»
Pr-uesianr Diss-t ts at Uxbridge, and from a congregation of ships had the authority of one of the greatest and most eminent J* THp FRONTIER OF SERVIA, June 2. will not be made public until too *st« for our Paper.
Hrotettant Dts-Gilevs of the Independent denomination at Croy- men that bad ever sat on the bench in this country—Sir M t-liam ! RUM inn - , .u, rnmmfßrcmrnt an- “Portuguese Bonds are 61J 2; Spanish, IS| #; Brazilian
con, by Viaconcs Lrtrton J from inhabitants of Bridgewater and Grant-for believing that there were circumstances arising “ The troubles in Albania, which at the commenc ra p , 374- India Bonds 81 2; F <chequer Bills, 79 80.
another piece, ihe Marqola of Cliolraondeley ; from Pro- “Utof the severity of our criminal laws in which there bad been r(l(] , 0 bc 0 f little importance, have within these few weeks •-*«!» £ ’_(; otl90 ls closed & 02H.”
lestar t Dissenters of St. ftarlholomew’s, in Exeter, and an- an actual conspiracy between prosecutors, witnesses, counsel, a very alarming appearance,and givereason to apprehend r ' ' ___
ether pI re, !■. , H Melbourne ; f,..m the Mayor, some judges, and the advisers of the Crown themselves, o prevent the assumeo a cry . T k ev which may end like PRICES OF 11RITISH STtiy- .s AY AT TWO
Of the Aider.,, Merchants, Bankers, and others, of Nor- ciecution of those law,. If such a stale o( thing, could be another serious crisis in European In key whioU may cnni. Three ™" ™ nt . Ile<l 9l j , , w
wich, amt no- Magis'rales, Clergv, Merchants, Bankers, proved to have existed in many instances, nnd with regard tothe (),;,( j n Greece. It is not a few districts that refuse obedience I Three per Cent. Consols, .shat ie “-••• •••• v 1 ® ®'
and other inborn, of S'ockport, by V.scount God, rich ; from particular law in question, the House would do well to consider , „ bt „ Alb , inia f ron , one end to Ihe other is in motion, i„„o, ditto, for Acct. .... \ ; v r/(Julv & Janlslmt
cl-rgyontw. c.. Of England, at Colchester, by Lord Cal whether it was not probable that it would exist in a still greater U e io, fan;aicism appears to have Tbreo and a BWtfgrCu. PC ' .sl.ut
thorpe; an.if,. O, members of the ks.ahlished Chi,reh residing at d.greo hereafter, if they rejected the present Bill, or at least, and a spirit ofliberty bounding on .an * ons have uerl ? enS? .“.."isbnt’ si Ss
U« bridge, by th ■M a. quia of Londonderry.-They were or- llial portion of it which went to abolish Ihe punishment of death s ,.j ze d the minds of the whole population. Insirrec . n,uo ditto! 1888 <otf dlls Old.)-.- 19 sit
dcro-.l to he on the table. for forgety. Was it not probable tha' those sciuples which now |if , en ve |lBna i n)alle rs in Turkey, and have seldom any other ' „_, orKS , • „ , „„„
toPGP.ntFS kill. a t milted the escape of offenders would be strengthened rather J cutting off a few hundred heads, because such . pil 'P E ,!.Jcents’ l Isl I Span. LP .1 per Celts is, ■
The Marquis r ? UANSDOWNE presented a petition from than diminished after all that had passed on this dsul''han the cutung o interest of some indivi. Mexican S.x percents 88j Span — e,e L j
the Bankets of BU cities and low ns of England, Scotland, and the existing system were adhered to? He was persuaded, troubles almost always ongii . ~m - but PRICES OF SHARES THIS DAY AT OWE.
Ireland. It Was signed by upwards of 700 Bankers, and, tak- that by yielding to what he believed to be a pretty general feel- duals, in which the mass of the people do not sympath e , share. ft. Price.
ing the number ot junior parg.,ers, wtio did not sign, it might be ing on the subject—a feeling which, if we meant to execute t e i bt . present insurrection in Albania proceeds from national feel- Brazilian Imperial 35 ........ ... J*
taken as the petition of 1,000 individuals, carrying on the busi- law, we must enlist along with ua-we should create that active A" . . f dependence, and is widely different from Brazilian National --- • A
Berg of bankers in the kingdom. These respectable individuals disposition in the public mind necessary to exist in order to the mgs and a spint ol umepenaence a , (■,,u, m hi.n «
all concurred in thinking that greater protection would be pursuit of delinquents vvilh diligence and Real, aad to insure a , he prctens.ons of some dtscontented and rcpacious Gluels, wnicti
afforded to them by mitigating the capital punishment for forgery, just administration of the law. The plan proposed by this Bill have been common in that country. The first impulse fmutable Gas r, ° *5
Shan could be given by the law in its present state, appeared to him, after due consideration, the best that could De .. ia gaid to have proceeded from the Albanian troops ' 1 '
The Marquis of LANSDOWNE. in moving the Order of the adopted with a view to the accomplishment of this object; still w hn had lost all respect for T „
D-iy for Ihe second reading of the bill, said, that it proposed, no he admitted that he believed the measure to be matter of eipen- returning from the la e PR- „ nrfl to i be authority Sir Henry Hardinge goes to Irek the Session,
doubt, a most extensive alteration of the law of Eng!and-of that meat, and was aware that if the expenment were to fail, a tbe p or(e , and would no longer pay obedience to me auuion y A c ab i net Council was held at r.vo u clock yesterday after-
law which had gone oa for the last 100 years in raak ing a Ire- different feeling from that at present existing would result Irom of lhe p acbas . Those were joined by Greek adventurers, noQn a( , the Tp ore i„ n Office, which was attended by the Lord
mendous addition to lire lig, of capital punishments. Their Lord- the circumstance. He was not, there ore, J? f oc h °?; who tried rv ,. r y me ans to excite a ferment to prove the weakness ch u , he Duke 0 f Wellington, Earls Bathurst, Ross-
Sr“tfipskhoffiS raK'rrM Of Ihe Porte, i the success of the Greek insiirrectiou and to “d Aberdeen, Sir Robert pLI, Sir George Murray aid
the bw want, that forgery upon the Hank of England should be same lime think they could see advantages arising from render- pro p o9e this example a» worthy of imitation. The few lurkisn r jj err i es . Lord Ellenborough and the chancellor ot the
punished with death ; but in the year 1728 that punishment was in* it a temporary low. He would be willing to propose it in the lroopg and the exhausted treasury of the Ottoman commanders Exchequer joined their colleagues about naif-past three
extended to the forgery of every species of negotiable security Commitlcn as a law to be ip force for five > years,> ?" i n Albania afforded very insufficient means to contend with the o’clock. The latter had been engaged on ’Committee of
w * c - a
par'-ient of Government, from Dowbing-street to the Custom- atthe end of five years, if the measure were found to answer, there to attac k J*kovo. They made themselves masters of that place, broke up about four o clock.
house, thought it necessary to protect itself by extending the prin- could be no objection to renew it. He should, therefore, be pre- . c rom u 9 vicinity to Bosnia and Macedonia, will be of A General Court of I ropnetois of Lasi -• 11
Ciple of e ipital punishment to forgeries connected with its depart, pared to enter the Committee with Ihe wish to meet , nrosecution of their enterprises, held this morning at tbe East India House. After a dividend
inent, and in tins way 120 penal statutes, of which 60 inflicted the the House upon that point. \I ith respect to the clause by which a great importance to P , . of 51 ner cent, had been agreed to, the Chairman brought be-
ponishmeut of death, were added to our laws. As an illustra- secondary punishment was enacted, be thought it Commissioners have been sent from Constantinople, in or- if' he cons ideration of the Registrar of Madras
tion of the spirit of legislation which prevailed on this subject, consideration, because he was of opinion that constderab try every means to restore order in Albania; but it ■ p nv ij nmpn t The Court was
he might mention that one statute declared that the forgeiy of objections existed to the punishment proposed to be substituted « rto " y e y h a)read 100 far . The Porte Bill, which is now pending m I atliament lhe Court was
those papers given at the Admiralty, and called Mediterranean for that of death, and considered it was necessary to have a more is to be feared that Ih g . .. . tbe state of in discussion on this subject when our Repomr kit.
passes, theobject of which was to pro'ect the holders of Ihe ships efficacious one- Perhaps the hulks, or banishment to the island has also sent circulars to all the Pa-tias, in wmen The Governor and Deputy Governor of tit? Hank had a
against ihe attacks of those of the Barbery Powers, wasdectared of Bermuda, as had been suggested, might prove a more effectual affjirs in Albania is described; and they are enjoined toco- con f erence w f t h the Duke of Wellington and the Chancellor
to be punishable with death. He would beg to refer those Noble punishment than the secondary penalty operate t 0 the utmost of their power in suppressing the insurrec Excheauer yesterday, at the Treasury
of foaSja,. tion. Even the Pacha of Bagdad There washday a general meeting of j.? proprietors^
other House in 1824, in which 24f01i0 pag4 were taken tor name- In his opinion, no punishment could ever succeed, or be eflica- which, considering how far he is from the b rentiers ot Albania, th e Thames Tunnel Company, but a long u .scassion ended
rate iheBiaiutusap,ai 4 ist forgery,in many of which it wasmadecapi- cions for the prevention of the offence, unless disgrace formed BeefT)S at f irgl sight very strange ; but, according to the regulations w ithout any positive result.
tal. Oa this Right Hon. Secretary for the Home Depart- one of its ingredients ; for the offence was frequently committed transaction of public affairs ia Turkey, any decree The following promotions, it is said, follow upon the death
trs&srj: • •‘^^.Hk.atwi^
and consolidating them ;so that it could be seen at one and the parties committing the crime being usually suscep neat officers in the provinces. T y’ v
view what was the penalty to be inflicted in each | articular tible of suffering from a feeling of Hegiadatron, a disgraceful ■ , .• , , Edmuikl Kerrison, tbe 14 th Dragoons, wee Sir J. O. Vande-
case stated. In this view alone the Bill was entitled to their punishment would probably tend to prevent the offence, lie In our Paper of the 15th mst. we took occasion to .ema.k, | e Eor( j iTill relinquishes the Governorship of Hull—
Lordships’ favourable consideratioD. But the Bill came to their hoped the House would assent to the second reading ot I c yj r O’Connell’s letter to the Waterford successor not named.
Loidships’ House with a very material alteration from the state Bid, and take into consideration in the Committee .oe i e b ’ , , , )t rrpr |it of It is rumoured in the vicinity of Beverley, that the head of
in which it was intro,;-.: . d into, ibe other House by the Right means of securing society from the consequences ot the cWicfe, inciting the Irish people to destroy the credit ot It.is rumomedt y ,isto be raised to the
Hon, Baronet. To him (Lorn Lansdowne) It appealed that crime, by removing the temptation to it held out by the uncer- T,„ r ,c c ,h a f we could not discern why “ the incendiary tie Maxwells, in that ne g ’
the Bill was greatly improved by the alteration tc v inch he tainty of the pnoisLmcnt, let the pumdraent to be inflicted be in Banks, that we CO 3 Pierage.—J/«U Packet. - .
alluded. He w.„,| d gta , e i 0 the House a f cw of the reasons degree what it might It would be to render the penalty com- >,. the Attorney Genera,, We have no,, to call i s d ci 3 ,,h0c offered tw® prizes of 100/ neche for
,vk:.k.r:::c:t
. „irasyussn» rffjszss.srss Jsvxsr & SEUTST«.»««**—»» *.««■«>«»■. «< fe*. p.gjg l !3
offer<’(> but miiriTcr lit- hmv-\vr was not one of those measure, not because he was a lover of novelty or fhapge, but louowuig . „ Population and territory oj Ireland commaeu wun a view
There were three views in which the highest severity of punish- on the ground of its beneficial tendency. He came to the conn- quoted from the Waterford Chronicle . Improvement.
inent should bo considered helher it was commensurate with deration of ibis most important question uninfluenced by the „ Mr o ’Connell-The Waterford Chronicle.-The sen- Q n Saturday evening last, at Paris, a Swiss named Breuher,
the nature of the crime; whether it was efficacious in suppressing slightest degree of party zeal—a feeling which he shou not € * r itcd in this city, by tne continued demand on the Member of the Legion of Honour, and was an
know n, it would be seen that one of the first tilings to which a which he had the honour to be leagued. It was true Uw u Red in their discounts, and the mercantile and trading classes by the police. Having offered some resistance the poliye
man about to commit a crime would look, would be, to see politically opposed to the Government, because he do. oji, t ~nk ~ sllt) j ec t ed to some inconvenience. For these unplea- rus h e d on him and tore his clothes to rags, the officers thix-v
how best he could escape its consequences. From a variety it qualified to benefit the country ; but m this case not knowing 0 - Connell and , b e Waterfmd Chronicle have , lim in(o acoacU and upon his attempting to put his head out
of returns which had been laid upon th. table oflhe House h. ,he if sU i visited by th. obloquy, as well of the and (h , door he was wounded with a bayonet on the
oi returns whicn naa Deen laid upon ,ne lame 01 me nousc, ■; ■ . '
found that the proportion of executions for forgery, in the last support of it merely arose from his conscientious conviction oi .ts
seven years, weie greater in London and Middlesex than utility. . , . , •. .
those In England and Wales. Now, if executions had The Duke of RICHMOND disclaimed any idea of dismissing
the power Of repressing crime, we ought to have seen that so important a subject with a feeling of party spirit. Ihe 8.11
effect ptodu. i-d in the diminution of the crime in Lon- came up recommended by a majority of the Commons. If the
don aim Middlesex as con pared with England and AVales. law as it at present stood were not altered it must place the
Hut was that the tact ? He was not now going to compaie Judges, and whoever happened to be Secretary of State, in a
London nnd Middlesex with England and Wales, but Lon most perplexing situation H upon I the « -
don nnd Middlesex with London nnd Middlesex, and Eng- experiment hut of trial..At the same_time that he
land and Wales vvilh England and Wales, al different periods, supported the Bill, he agreed with the Noble Marquis in think
In the last seven years the commitments on chaiges of foigery ing that the secondary punishment would require amendment in
in England and \Vah s amounted lo 383, and the executions to the Committee. .
24. In' London and Middlesex, within the last seven years, there The LORD CHANCELLOR did not nsc to
were 80 committals (or forgery, 40 convictions, and 15 persons second reading of the Bill, or lor the purpose ng tnto
were executed, so ihat Ihe proportion of executions to commit- a general discussion of it on that occasion but he shi old not
tala amt convictions was very different in either case. Tbe result be acting airly towards the Noble Marquis ° r »h e P“WIC if he
w as, that the commission of the crime of forgery had increased tn did not take that first opportunity of
London and Middlesex, while in England...id Wales there was it eonta.ned r anses (probably hoae . which he
London amt Middlesex, w lute in Lngiann ..no vi aies nieie n “V „ in „i, ir i,
scare, ly any increase. What was this attributable to, if not to Noble Lord had been principally induced to adopt it) to which
the greaterfrequency of capital punishments in Ihe metropolis, a he (the Lord Chancellor) could not give-bitsupport . When the
circumstance which bad ended in deterring injured parties from Bill went into Committee, he should call ®“? b
pros, ruling in many cases, amt thus affording an encouragement tion to these clauses, and stale the reasons w hich lt d linn tolhe
to crime bv chance of impunity ?In Ireland the case wasstrooger conclusion that they could not with propriety or safety be
aUtlHor in ihal'cmtiutry there’had occurred, during the last seven adop.ed. He thanked tlieNobleMarqu.sforlhefairne.Sß.nd
years no execution for forgery whatever, and yet, notwilh- candour wiib which he had acted in bringing forward tbe Kill,
Standing the existence of a paper circuia.ion, that circumstance and agreed with the Noble Duke, that q"F»oonsof this natureits-
had not led to so great amount of crime, for the whole number voiced subjects so serious and important as to require them to bt
charged with forgery in 1823 was 53, and in 1829 the number discussed without reference to party views or * eel ‘ n ß»- l l 'fJ
amounted to 41. Tius th.re had been a positive diminution were thrte to consider one of the most important questions con-
in ilu amount of forg. ry committed in Ireland under Ihe necled witbourcriminal law, andcouldonly discuss it inone spirit,
circumstance of no capital punishment having been in- and with one common object, that object being Ihe prevention of
flic ed. Th. re had been w ithm ihe range of Iheir own legislation crime in the mod effectual manner by “* 4D * h A c , .
two instances in very important branches of the law, which sistent with the dictates of humanity. He should not feel
clearly illustrated the disadvantage of a severity of punishment justified in proposing 10 continue the penalty of death with
disproportionate to off. nces, e.nd the good effects that resulted respect to any part of the crime of forgety, unless c ° n ~
from a P < o“tr«v policy . In one case to which he alluded, they vinced, after due inquiry, as he now declared himself to be, ha
had withdrawn the penalty of death with ihe most beneficial ihat punishment furnished the only mode of effectually prevenling
etf c”- in another tl.ey had enacted the punishment of transpor- the crime. He did not now speak of the offence generally, but
.“ ion whrrelt Id nm exis! before, and the result was any thing only as addressed to particular objects. A. present howler he
ret et than satis actorv. But let the Home look al the cases in would not discuss the particular clauses to which he objected,
ouesiioii • Ihe livsl he should mention was that in which a severer but should reserve for a future occasion the facts and arguments
2,,.,mlim.’nt had been Substituted for one of a milder character. which had convinced his mind that the.r Lordships could not
He alluded toa portion of our criminal law relating to certain with safely adopt tbe Bill in the form in which it had con.e up
< flenresaaainst the Excise. We had thelestimonv of an important from the other House of Parliament. . .
» ilness vvhoee name it was probable some of their Lordships had The Bill was then read a second time, and ordered to be com-
heard-he meant Mr. Carr-on this subject. On the milted on Monday.
imthoriiv of his evidence, which was unquestionable on east RETFORD DISFRANCHISEMENT hill.
such a ’ subject it appeared that the act of couoter- Mr. Adah stated that he was not prepared with his witnesses,
felling stamps io cenaiu cases previously to the year but would be ready on Friday. The further hearing of evidence
ISOS subjected the perpetrator to a penalty ef 500/.; in was then deferred till that day.—Adjourned.
that’year it was tendered a transportable offence. It also HOUSE OF COMMONS.
appeared, that from 1794 to 1806 there were nineteen convictions Members present at four o’clock, the
out of nine prosecutions for ibis offence. Here he had the result E xtrac t 0 f a letter from Lisbon, dated June 5 “ A single
of the substitution of a heavier for a f e fl“ c“t characteristic fact of the times must be recorded to-day. At
of ,I |iiakVn > g a fineabfo a transportable office. In the other the town of Montemor, in Alentejo, a wealthy farmer having
branch of legislation, the beneficial effect of withdrawing the died, his widow called the magistrate, protector of orphans,
punishment of death, and substituting a punishment more com- (Q make tbe inventory of the property on account of her
mensurate with Hie nature of the offence, would be seen ;he .... The maa i strate and his escrirao (secretary) at-
?:'^.! 0 il h tended at the w.dJs but observing a consfoerabie wealth
of lhe House of Commons, Ihat in the county of Lancaster in jewels, and gold and silver cash, they postponed the m-
tbere had been fewer prosecutions, but a greater proportion of ventory to next day, and in the night they went to the house,
con* ietioas, during the last five years, since the offence had mur( jered first a servant maid who came to the door, and then
been made transportable, than in the course of the preceding unfortunate widow and her daughter, and, forgetting that
'o< ■ e the , P«£ it aw’amd that in a little boy existed still in the house,they took away the whole
the north of Ireland, w here there existed the greatest opporlu- property. The next day they went theie very coolly, as if lo
cities of stealing iu bleaching houses, from the greater pteva- make the inventory, and gave the alarm, on nobody answer-
h iue ot the linen manufacture in that part of the country, the f ro m within. The superior magistrate being sent for, and
same thing bad occurred as in England. In the five years h ebein „ broken open, the three corpses were found.—
Soon after theU WLe cm f hole, crying bitterly,
while in the five years subsequent lo the punishment of death and being questioned by the Co-regiuor as to whom had been
bt-ing w ilhdraw n, 37 persons were piosccuted, and 17 convicted, | be assa ssins of his mother and sister, he immediately pointed
for stealing in bleaching houses. Butthere was to be found in out and accused the perpetrate.: present. They were arrested
»tss&xvOTi6tssasre<isiAß ***** ***t~* •«
" a Swh. '-b.*-•.«- ■«
silise, In the nice years , ending in 1828, out of 708 persons su ff er MM.de Potter, Tm -- us, Bartels, and Neve, to pass
Vo.-iimittrd in . api'af- chbrgrs, 334 got off, while vviiti respect to lbrou g b Prussian terri- ncs, on their way to i-Htisance,
’nimlo clmrgvs. o 558 comijlitt. d only 57 escaped. The inference j„ inated j n a mistake, »nd -hat the exiles had since been
Vas Unit intlie one instalce the law was considered as being ongjiidicu m c,
luiapteJ to the nature of the case, and was therefore strictly j permitted to pursue their journey.
sto be feared that things have already gone 100 tar tho d ’ iscussion on lhis subject wh en our Reporter left.
ms also sent circulars to all the Pachas, in which the stale of The Governor and Deputy Governor of t ? Bank had a
.(fairs in Albania is described; and they are enjoined to co- ton f erence w ; t h the Duke of Wellington and the Chancellor
•perate to the almost of their power in suppressing the insurrec- of Exchequer yesterday, at the Treasury,
ion. Even the Pacha of Bagdad has received this circular, There was yesterday a general meeting of tha proprietors of
vhich, considering how far he is from the Frontiers of Albania, t|)e Thames Tunnel Company, but a long discussion ended
icems at first sight very strange; but, according to the regulations without any positive result.
hr the transaction of public affairs ia Turkey, any decree The following promotions, it is said, follow upon the death
-manating from the Snilaa must be communicated to all the .court Lord Hill, to be Governor of Plymouth ;
.real officers in the ' )rm«by Vandelenr. the 16th Dragoons; Sir
' * —. ttm venison, the 14th Dragoons, vice Sir J. O. Vande-
In our Paper of the 15th inst. we took occasion to remark, ]eur . L ord Hili relinquishes the Governorship of Hull-
in adverting to Mr. O’Connell’s letter to the Waterford successor not named.
Chronicle inciting the Irish people to destroy the credit of It is rumoured in the vicinity of Beverley, that the head of
Chronicle, inciting me F q ~ the Maxwells, in that neighbourhood, is to be raised to the
the Banks, that we could not discern why “ the incendiary 8
i-;. ; sparsd by the Attorney General,” We have now to call j , t„. ottered tw® prizes jof 100/ *»chv f° r
tion of the public to the consequences ot hi ( , -ays, to be produced on or before the Ist day of
against private interests which provoked that remark. The June, 1831, on the following subjects First, Absenteeism;
againsc private uueic»i r . rr • re-considered after thirty years. Second, lhe
following is from the Freeman s Journa o e s ins > Population and Territory of Ireland considered with a view
quoted from the Waterford Chronicle . Improvement.
“Mr O’Connell—The Waterford Chronicle.—The sec- Qn Saturday evening last, at Paris, a Swiss named Breuher,
Ration exriled in this city, i.y the continued «'m»nd on the Member of the Legion of Honour, and was an
Banks rrsold officer in the Swiss regiments in the French service, was seized
litmdTi their discounts! and the mercantile and trading classes by the police. Having offered some res,stance the polife
necessa-dv subjected to some inconvenience. lor these nnplea- rushed on him and tore his clothes to rags, the officers thiwv
•ant results, Mr. O’Connell and tbe Waterfmd Chronicle have , )im into acoac h and upon his attempting to put his head out
been visited by the obloquy, as well of tlm respectable and h tbe door he was wounded with a bayonet on the
«■ '• e he tb p e er^Th S at a 'S and other parts of his person,and received also a sword
ion on ihl subject, for Mr. O’Connell’s considers- cut on the breast. The order for this man s arrest was signed
ior 'that the adoption of such a course must be productive of by M- Manguin, hut the cause of it is not mentioned.
lent’aery inconvenience; but we then thought, and do still Letters from Lisbon state that the bull fights, which are
believe, that it will lead to permanent iusually got up during summer for the Sunday amusements of
{«” ;;t'w e it k h in s R o much the people of ? that capital had begun, and were zealously
degree culpabfo unjustifiable; but when the British Minister patronized by Don Miguel, lhe wildest animals are said to
turned a isaf ear to the supplications of the people, transmitted ] lav e been procured, at the command, and from the Royal
to him bv ttmir representatives from every quarter of Ireland, doma j ns for the amusement of the King and the populace,
were we to si! down quietly until the rum had ()ne of them appoi.ited to be baited and destroyed on Sun-
i. bv C *c sort! n g Vo* he 'u a of !! day, the 6th, had already, it is said, killed seven persons.
thoiiEht might be wielded against him with such powerful effect. The following letter of the French Minister of Marine,
“ Le 1 no'V’.e injuries or inconvenience produced by the run addressed to the Prefets, has arrived from Calais. It seems
on the Banks be ascribed to Mr. O’Connell or to the Waterford acQ of the telegrap hic dispatch which we published on
Chronicle, but to that iron.hearted Minister pliant not, f with a slight addition of particulars
who would extract from an impoverished country its last meal JoNE l ._ S i r , the armv has landed, in eight
and its last shilling. Knowing as we proverb!, wit h its ammunition and provisions. The enemy’s posi-
insolence and obstinacy of the man, we were con incea a h * been „ lrDed and r()rried . The masses of cavalry wh.ch
nothing would affect his fi ner l e ? ,° r f p ?,f ““ p “‘ he opposed to us were repulsed, his cannon taken, and our army
d. adiy blow aimed at his " s , “' c^f’ lhe mercantile men is encamped upon the ground which, be had occnpieu.
“ '-Ve recoiosnend tlrat a public meeting h , Accounts from Spain say, that a regiment of infantry of the
and -he inhabitants of every class be Cd ' led - ?' **s, ? thove garrison of St. Jagir, another which was at Orense, and that of
opinions they may-entertain in the present «‘«« nry > d f he provincial militia of Salamanca, which have been put under
ail o her things, they should remonstrate in the strongest ter I rece ; ved orders to march to the frontiers of Portugal.
with the King’s VV to in iLq govern! The Minister of War hascashiered 43 officers ou pretence of thetr
measures which they thoo n nt proper b being Fieeniasons and Ccmmuneros.
nient of this country. have already mentioned that an Italian Opera, by an
We also subjoin two other extracts on the same subject. English Amateur, is in preparation at the King’s Theatre, but,
It is truly an lush way of punishing the Duke of Welling- the
ton, to begin with ruining themselves. exception of Dr. Avne, no Englishman has as yet achieved the
“ u»vjk Notps-Gold —AYe have been informed that the ap- iask of composing anything in the shape of an original Opera,
ti V?inn K fi,T crnlfl in exchange for Bunk notes, has been almost The Author of the Piece in question ts the first native of these Isles
P 1 !“! ? b i two dim in this city. We are bound, how- „ho has ever offered to the public an Italian Opera-the second
ver fo acknowledge that the mercantile and trading men of who has ever composed any Opera-and the ol,ly “V**?
Warn Herd w ere in general averse to any simultaneous applica- whom we are aware) of any country who has composed both the
. ■ at the Banks for gold, until it should be first argument and the music,—it Joining 1 aper.
! o .!,..rnir whc hcr tl e ( haucelh.r if the Exchequer « ould Regatta on the OusE.-On Tuesday a boat-race took place on
Shannon hU uroiected scheme for destroying the country. The the river Ouse, from Nahum Lock to the Well,case on the New
f .■! ffrniiprs however do not seem disposed to wait the Walk. The match was between the offieers of the 3d Ligh
of Mr S Goulburn’s dreams, and it is not easy now to con- Dragoons, and a parly of Gentlemen of Yoik. Previous to
ieetnrewhere orVn wtiat way the affair may end. The Duke of starting,-the whole party partook of an elegant collation at
indineiTu) drive this country to desperation; Naburn Hall, the residence of Thomas Baratow, Esq., and at
' ! : desperation do its work.”-TF«(cr- two o’clock the boats started. The York gentlemen a boat look
and if that be his feeling, let oe.pera (be , ead hut was Boon paBSed by that of the oflicers, who won the
“ THR Banks.—The run upon the Banks here has race by two minutes and a half. The day was extremely un-
we were led to suppose when writing favourable, the rain falling heavily the whole lime.
u narai!anh on this subject which appears ialheC7.ro- The New Husgerford Market -A meeting of Share-
Iv/e lt P has ß conlinned nearly the entire of yesterday without holders in this Market was held yesterday at the Crown and
tr' m i.Vion andislffielv to continue until all the Bank notes Anchor, Charles Le Fcvre, Esquire, in the Chair. He sated
shaVl'be Vent* banking houses.”—/bid: tol/Tnd'TaL^efnUr^foV^
The Freeman’s Journal, which, with all its habitual insane Tiie capital was limited to 210,000/., three-fourlhs of
violence has occasional lucid intervals, has a judicious ob- w bich were already subscribed. The meeting broke up. after
P ubuc confidence a „ d pri . at
vate credit Supposed Hydrophobia.—Yesterday afternoon an Inquest
» ... .i which the Editorof the Water - was held before Thomas Stirling. Esq., at the Doke o. Clarence,
“ The alternative he say s, wb cn tne J-.ui r " fce jn Ligson ve> on , he body 0 f Henry Read, a boy seven years
ford Chronicle felt htmse if generally adopted, that of age. It appeared that Ihe deceased was standing opposite a
attended with such frightful resul s, 8 . y tbfi p 3ilfetv of stab |e, w hen a dog which had been running under a chaise, to
we canuat define onr feelings, w hen our a horrorioflhe which it had been chained, ran out and bit the toy in the leg. He
the limited trade we now possess, conflicts w ith tne norrori oi tne w niu. . bccam( . jq and a surgeon attended him. He re-
measures that induce honest men to recommend su* •on t aft tmards Occam cm, K of his deatl) , the act of
It must have the effect of reducing the rewmne « ;^n‘Vi n g was accompanied with fits’, &c. The surgeon said,
rsXVS destructive to commerce, .hrtb. shooh. the de Mh-smtmmionc,
and even to our agricultural interests. said the dog belonged to his master, and was not vicious. He
This is to a degree sensible, but such is the hankering ot bad taken it to a veterinary surgeon, who had said that it was
these seditious paper, to inculcate recourse to force when they m'beS^edm
fail in reason, that, notwithstanding the Editors perception ot , brt . e wee ks, and the surgeon would ascertain in the interim
the ennseouence of O’Connell’s letter, he threatens, if the under what disease Ihe dog (of the spaniel breed) was labouring.
the consequence or vj ui. « > The wife of a tradesman residing id Dame-court, Dublin in
Irish Members do not act to please him, he will not hesitate to fi( of tem)lorar} . insanity poisoned herself and her two children
adopt the sentiments of O’Connell’s fire brand, the Water-
ford Chronicle, and “ strenuously inculcate them. also ale some hetself. The mother and children were then
v would really seem as if no proper notion either of removed to Mercer’s Hospital, where eveiy effort to prevent the
political rights, the constitution of Parliament, or the nature / Thirst,ay. -D«fi/-n
■ 0 f a Government, existed among many of the Irish—inso Morning Register,


SPURTING.
GUILDFO RETRACES. June 22.
His Majesty’s Plate of 100 Ruineas-foor »«<6ve,
I'.slTlb; six, list 121b ; and aged, 12st. boor mile heats.
keep Algiers; but if, as it is probable, the Cabinets of Europe
would oppose this, some old vessels might be sacrificed by
sinking them to obstruct the entrance of the port.
The Emanuel, an English schooner, arrived on the 3d instant
from Oran, at Gibraltar. She declares that the English Consul
was positively informed that upwards of 140 men belonging to
the two French brigs recently wrecked on the coast ot A gi‘ rs
were in the Bagne of that Regency. In order to preserve these
unfortunate men, the Dey had offered to the Bedouins a gratia
ration of 100 dollars for every one of the shipwrecked seamen
that should be brought to him alive. The scrupulous lulfalment
of this promise had produced the best effect.
The rapidity with which the landing seems te have bees
effected, shows that fl it bottomed boats have teen employee in
3
2
Three others started.
NEWCASTLE MEETING, June 21.
A Produce Sweepstakes of 50sovseach,h ft. Two miles; colls,
8sl 41b ; fillies, 8st.
2
built at Toulon. They weighed from three to four tons ,y a
and were capable of carrying from 150 to 180 armed men a
draw ing no more than 18 inc hes of water. Theae boat*are
what more than three metres in breadth, from 12 to ires
(36 to 39 feet) in length, and of about one metre (Hire.- j n
depth. They rake fore and aft in an angle from , u 4Q
degree*. They have been constructed on three oinerj nt , no( iel»,
varying but little in their dimensions Thirty of tbr 5e hoats are
destined for the landing of the cavalry and . for
the artillery of siege, and 12 for the field “Cillery. Those
destined for the infantry and cavalry are open _at ( , 3 , extremity
to a port hole of three or four feet broi l, shuts ai plea-
sure, and allows the raft t > be removed ; tn - tended for the
field artillery are similarly coos its arc
provided for the 1 a nd i s s v‘ e ? £ b ■ > n-0 a ■ rs - * a?-> -'
wise carried in boats tilted w-. . 0 a size
0 roporUi»natc lo the calibre, W iiii th* ae
coding of infantrv ana cV»airy ,'tiveV.,-■•-•«*> -VMiop U
Mr. Hidden s cn c uj "
One drawn.
The Tyro Stakes of25 sovs each, p p; for two yr old colts, 8st
41b; fillies, 8st, Two year old coarse, three qaarters of a
mile. i
Mr. Legrew’s ch f Tippet i
Colonel Crawford’s bf by Whisker, £
Mr. Riddell’s bl c by Doctor Sy mis "
One drawn.
Renewal of the Gosforlh Stakes of 25 sovs each 18 f “ r^' t ' r
horses. &c . of all ages. 3 yrs old V. a | owed
five years 8st 111b; six years, and aged, 9st. Mates alloweo
31b. Two miles. , 1
Lord Eleho s b o uonaouer, aju, ■
Mr. Sell’s bo Tip •••■.
«• : B-; S .,\ell’8bcby Mosreilh. b yrs .........
' Ore r. . .
2
3
CORN-E1
The favourable appearance
caused a dull market. We ha
reduction in prices would take
ket will not authorise us to ma
quotations. Our arrivals are m
IMPORTATIO
CCHANGE.
f the weather this morning has
d some expectation that a little
place, but the state of the Mar-
ke any alteration from Monday’s
oderate, but very good in quality.
NS THIS WEEK.
Wheat. I Barley. Oats.
1,700 I 380 1,200
5,020 } 1,850
1,200
English Flour
FASHION AND VARIETIES. SWANJUVER.
We understand that his the Duke of Cam- The following interesting letter from this Settlement
brid'jp is not expected to arrive in this country until the latter been received by a respectable gentleman in the City, wl o
.. i ■ ; f a ..i f j ;.v. .
end of July or the beginning of August. has
The Duke and Duchess of Clarance paid a visit on Monday
to Prince Leopold, at his residence at Claremont. Their „
Royal Highnesses partook of a dejeune, and returned in the f
has favoured us with it
The Duke and Duchess of Clarance paid a visit on Monday jj j-- KT'IT, Western Austraeia, Jan. 25,1830. 0 ,
to Prince Leopold, at his residence at Claremont. Their „ My Dear c _j bear from bome that you think me a good
Royal Highnesses partook of a dejeune, and returned in the f m)(hinK fe)loWi j n not having wiilten you before this ; but I tc
aflernoon to Bushy. j v think if you were here you would agree with me in stating, that ; r
d Th’e Dukeand Duchess of Cumberland came to town yes- middle of the day is v.-.-y great, so that till the evening I seldom
terday from their residence at Kew. The Duke dined with ptlt 0 n any clothes but a shirt and ,roua "“-the U
the Princess Augusta in the evening. evenings, and nights are delightful, and last win ,
Prince Swartzenbure, whose name has been frequently, of imper f ec t shelter we bad down on the coast, we found the rams
late before the public,'as connected with an afflicting event am , co!d w ,.»ther unpleasant enough. During the last few
in high life, is stated, in a private letter from Pans, to be [nonthB matters have assumed a very different aspect. The 0
amongst the volunteers iu the expedition to Algiers. Governor has at length gal erected a small, but comfortable, u
Cofonel Fitzclarence, son of the Duke of Clarence, is at j lon>e . The barracks are aoiag forward and the public offices,
this moment in Paris, having come from Toulon, where he jj y o flj ce w jU soon be finished, and I mean to inhabit it during r
assisted at the embarkation of our expedition.— Pans Paper. although 1 live at my cousin's, there is not room b
Algiers. ■( From ‘above to sleep in his house until it grow, bigger, which it is gradually »
miofhe^affords'lhe^inhabitants a fine prospect of the sea, and, doing. I have quite as much business on my hands as is needful
as already observed, is extremely beautiful as you approach it (0 keep one’s mind and body’-a a heaitby active slate ; hecoin- i
by wat< r. The charm dissolves, however, most efteclnally, on en- ql ,iSeaa official character from tbe pluralities 1
I uojoy—a Commissioner o: the Council and Audit Board Re-
scarcely walk abreast each other. Thisslrange style of bmlding g j st rar, Private Secretary to his Excellency, Secretary to the
is ihoughVto arise from ils affording a better shade, and more Liter ry Institution, and acting Secretary to the Board afore-
‘;lrefn?7n qa T\ e ere b aV great mosqu£ and* j said : for all which 1 receive nothing, at least at present. But ,
fifty smaller Algiers ; three public schools, with several j U kors temps viendra I hope, when the Government at home
bazars and marketplaces. Its finest public buildings ere loose Bba u fi* « hat salaries are to be attached to the abo»D two public ,
of the five Casserias, which serve as barracks for > o! ’i co3i a 5 u . e || a 3 ( 0 several othei'E which have been found necea- ,
th rtpVf Pasrhali'k. S or t>-. ’ palace, has sary to carry forward the civil government. 1
two great courts, which are surrounded yv ,,1 ‘ Seacions galleries, “You will hear many varying accounts of this settlement;
supported by two rows of nimbi, columns ■iu interior orn»- aucl pam glad that the first which will reach yon, as well as
meets chiefly consist of >"'"«>». slaves and these Sydney and Van Diemen’s Land, will not be very favourable ;
- J r J have been sufferers from the Swan mania. There are
ever no convenience for sleeping; so that those who enter tvve ] Te or thirteen hundred people here already, which is quite
Algiers from the country, are obliged to lodge at the house oi ffi ient (Q t tbe expe rimenl of a new settlement, and inves-
ligating its capabilities and attraction, for emigrants. But the
town on i’s land side extends abouMonr when it be- cry ig s mj they come !—and they do come with some ridiculous
comes mountainous. The immedia * of Agicrsissup expectations, and so ill prepared to conquer the difficulties they
posed to cout in no less than twenty uousand wneyw a n must inevitably meet with, iither from former habits or exist-
to tfZ Pielote ; r '°but e 'i.s effect is ing energy of mind, that I wonder only that many have not left
destroyed when we reflect on the people into whose possession lbe scel!4 O f ac tion, and taken their adventures and large famt-
so fine a country has fallen. The landscape is Duly de ig u , elsewbere- vVe have amongst us, however, lam happy to
resTs'lnT \Zy, ... Z .ay, a large proportion of settlers of good property and sound
closed, shewing the contempt of its barbarous inhabitants for steady Judgment. These are getting their goods and live stock
agriculture and cultivation, the place of which they supp y y oa their lands, and are contented and happy,
dedicating themselves to war and p'undcr. „ As we arfi Qa but lbe n, reBbo ld of the country, and have
Mr. Arnold opens on Thursday we.-k, at the Adel phi, wi.i bcen , ou bnBy t 0 affjrd , ime for much exploration. Six rivers.
Mozart’s Dun Giovanni ; H. Phillips is to be lt >e hero; Penson, of nQ great size but w ith excellent alluvial soil on their banks,
Leporello ; and Millar, Octavio. Miss Belts, Miss H. Eawse, beeß diBCoTerel ) f an( i f ro m reports made from the south-
aid a voting debutante of great musical promise, named <er- conn , ry in , bat direction appears,of a general charac-
giisson, will enact the heroines. It is not true, as ala e ya (e ior (0 , his> The class of people who have come out
contemporary, that Miss Patou or Mr. Wood are engaged. re much sllperior lo what has gone to anv other Colony, and,
workmen are already busy in pulling down the wal s o e when once |h are qu i e tly settled, we shall have very good
old Thealre, preparatory to the erection of a new one. 81ic iety-even now we can sit down any day at dinner with a
We have inserted in another part of the Conner a letter from Qf aa Rent|emanlyi an(i well-connected men, as we usually
Messrs. Melrose and Chapman, the Managers of the T - assocjate wilb in En( , lani) , We are never idle or dull; cither
ham-street Theatre, relative to the information which has been tbere js s Bhip arri , e d (and no less than 27 have visited us since
laid against them, apparently atthe instance of the:Corami ee of incl , u ii„ s four men of war), or there is a country to be
Drury-lane Theatre, for an infringement of their patent. VVe kangaroo 9 buntedi (capital eating), or a shooting
should regret exceedingly lo see so well conducted a theatre a J or boajing< or fijbini;i or businc.-s, or (open your eyes)
that of Messrs. Melrose and Chapman shut up by a decision „ Stirling Arms „ hotelf conBiBlio , G f three rooms, at
against them; and we agree fully to opinion with those Gen - of preemantle. Besides the last-named town we
men, that if Ihe minor theatres are to be restricted m their per- tbf pres#at seat of Gofernm . nl , called Perlh-Guild.
formances to the extent reqmred by the institutors of the present about twelve m n es higher up the river, and a new town in
proceedings, there will Wan end to the independence of he Cocbbiirn Soundt „ hich wil | prob ab!y be called George Town.
Actor, to the promotion and encouragement of talent, and to the it peel arriied la(e , y with a larKe party . and expects another
amusement of a large portion of the popuation who cannot pay wj(h additional numberB . Ashe did not arrive before the
the high prices of admission of the patent theatres or who are with GoTernin ent fell lo the
at 100 great a distance to go to them with comfort. On Ihe o. hr , round( aod he is now placed on the same footing as other <■
hand, however, it is only fair, that if the propr.etor- o. p - t< Tbis collntry w ju decidedly be a pastoral, and not an
lent theatres really sustain an injury from the per ormances jcuUural connlry> a 8 i ong a 8 we, can be supplied with grain
of minor establishments, which are contrary to law and to BOrt at the j ow rale it reac hes us at present, from Java,
the rights reserved by the patents, supposing that they have Diemen - 8 Land , and tbe Cape. Labour will necessarily be
not exceeded those right, themselves they should claim protec- „„ Htlific ,. r , > ceehanic, and workmen,
tion to a certain extent from the law; but it is a question . » d gs- day Live sicck of all descriptions I*
whether the do .certain b
of rights a necessary one ; and ills not to be forgotfen .oat are j ‘ Zlly,. ye iv‘cousideTabie trade-iol only la'the
shall command a very considerabie irad,-; not only ;a the
present .- ft cauls took thepr.-Hy which the;, .. . -uojtc Kay o f iropo r U and exports, but as a place of entrepot, owing to
to Ihe evil o( which they now comptaw, and therefoi * -hey can- i geoßrBpbica , position, many vessels out of the number before
notbesaid to be sufferers from an innovation uvk did not - c;! railed in without going out of their course above a
formerly exist. We do not believe that Mr. .. . ■ ew davs sc,and then, after trying the market, proceeded on
of Drury-lane theatre, has Ihe remotest connection with this ... |
formation- <.-:■! v. ft are triad to hear that he has disclaimed it; 1 ' '
lormallOß., sou ->e <*•« s- . , “ On investigation I hud no reason to alter the favourable
but it seems to have been understood for some time past tnat me o pj n , on j g r8 t formed of the capabilities of such a settlement,
Drury iane Committee intended, as a duty to the shareholders of A c i oser inspection may alter the minute parts of the picture, out
the theatre, to try the question. Tbat Mr. Lee is not included the outline and effect remain the same.”
with Mr. Gallic, Mr.Vioing, and other performers of Ihe Totten- r r rn runv,>
ham-street theatre, in the information, is not surprising. It would ' .
not be proper in the Committee to prosecute their own SIR-We should be extremely reluctant to inlriideour persona
noi ue proper ..... eoncerns on public notice; but as the proceedings against us at
lessee for an offence committed in an establishment to w hich he j ns tance of the Patentee Theatres cannot be regarded as a
no longer belongs; and we are quite sure also Ihat Mr # pnvate queslion, we should ill discharge our duty to the public,
* Charles Kemble does not sanction, and is not probably whose liberal patronage has exceeded onr most sanguine expect-
vr>' , ~ . T , , ations did not we not give an account of a transaction which
aware of the prosecution. Messrs. Melrose and Chapman b)g be ’ p ® hinted at by t be p resB in terms which call for our
are naturally mortified at such a result to their labours, of which (heartfelt thanks.
we cannot speak 100 highly, and Ihe public must sympathize When we took possession of this Theatre, our speculation was
with them; but we would advise them to consider the affair deemed visionary and chimerical, from the manner in which it
wuu m, >"o h;, d been previously conducted. We have, however, succeeded
with less personal feeling, for there can be no hostility to them establishing a reputation of which no manager needs be
personally, and to use every fair effort to defeat a monopoly ashamed, and we can proudly appeal lo the concurrent testimony
which is equally injurious So them and to the public. The in- of the public journals as the best proof that we have used no or-
f— i,»«h ssssssiJ&n s&tst .’teA’aass.i
of what is called the regular drama in comedies and tra- coalition, as dishonourable as it is injurious, has been formed
gedies but also for those pieces, of their own bringing out, between parties who must henceforth be branded as common in-
which’ have proved successful; in short it is attempted to tothe preft^
put down all performances in Minor Iheatres, except singing ~,l oBi n g every m i nor Theatre in the kingdom. The public, too,
aod dancing; and if the attempt should succeed, there will be u m suffer, for they must either go lo Covent Garden or Drnry-
an end to the improvement of Minor Theatres, which, during Lane, or be contented to remain at home. A man who resides
the last five years, we have been pleased to witness. The question
■will be heard to-morrow, at Bow-street, and if the Magistrates witness within a hundred yards of his own house. It would,
should convict, an appeal will be lodged by the defendants, but un- besides, Lave the public entirely at the mercy of tbe Patent Ma-
fortunately,in the mean time, any common informer may enter the » ia g er3i who might palm such actors and such pieces on their
theatre nightly, and continue to lay informations. The power with patrons as they thought fit; and we have seen enough of their
which the Patent Theatres are invested, is one which never ij ie ra!ity lo know Ihat they would take advantage of u decision
was intended lo apply to a metropolis so large aa London now is, ,vbich would leave a professional man no alternative between
or to the present state of society, and the exercise of it, even s t al va tion and the acceptance of such rack-rent terms as they
supposing it to be legal, must appear Would it not be c | loB e to offer. The selection of this Theatre for persecution is
better for tbe proprietors of all the London Theatres to agree highly complimentary to the manner in which it is conducted,
upon some plan by which the different Minor Theatres may give, b inference, it raises it to the rank of their most formidable
as in Paris, performances of different kinds, assigning lo one r j val. But why overlook Messrs. Elliston, Mathews and Yates,
the privilege of Melo-Drama—to another that of Burlettas, &c.~ [) a vidge, Farrell, kc. ? It seems, however, that we are to be
than for the Patent Theatres to institute hostile proceedings. If , }ie g rBt victims on the shrine of monopoly and oppression ;
persevered in, the result may not be so favourable as they anti* “ have set our all upon the cast,
cipate, for assuredly, in the event of conviction, a strenuous And we ivill stand the hazard of the die I”
effort will be made in Parliament to abolish the 1 a tents of the -p be mo( j e in which the initiatory proceedings have been con-
large Theatres, or at least to restrict them, as the National ,*„cted may shield the more powerful and interested of the parlies,
Theatres are restricted in Paris, to Tragedy and Comedy, and to f t oin public obloquy for ashort time; but theadvisersund promoters
alio ' Burlettas, Vaudevilles, and Melo-Dramas at the Minor r , ro know nto us; and, be the result of this action what it may, we
Theatres. We sincerely hope the parties will come to some , v ill expose them. How does it happen Ihat Mr. Lee, who was
friendly arrangement on this subject. connected with this establishment at the time specified in the
We perceive by the Papers that the Theatre of the summons, has not been served with a notice? We have the
Opera Continue is again in estate of insolvencv. Miss Smithson, positive assertion of (his gentleman that A* is not the promoter,
upera is , ~ sn ,. Can Mr. Charles Kemble have so degraded himself ? Can he
who was recently engaged at this 1 heatre at a salary ol 1,50 U B{> readily forget the circumstances in which he was placed in
francs per week, will, it is said, go to the Nomeaulh , a favourite September last, when we contributed our mite to enable him, as
theatre, which has recently come under the management of M. lt , nay appear, to oppose us ? Can those gentlemen bring proof
Laurent, who was for several years Director of the Italian that out pieces have injured their receipts ? The paltry subterfuge
Theatre. „f protecting a patent which has 100 long fettered genius and dis-
The ciicolation of Foreign Newspapers in Spain is still rigor- „ r aced the statute book, is indicative qf great insincerity. Can
ously watched, and considerable importance seems to be attached ilie public hear this shallow pretext without exclaiming CreAat
to them. The Madrid Gazette of the 86th ult contains two Royal . § manifegl|y a „ altempt deprive the poblic of a legi-
Decrees—one annulling the order against the admission ot the t;fna te and rational source of amusement, by closing all minor
Quothlienne , and the other prohibiting the receipt of the He pre • Theatres, we hope the public will support us in our effort to defeat
senium dcs Peoples , a French Paper published in London. Trusting that your liberality will induce you to publish our
Munich, June 11.—The day before yesterday there arrived sentiments. We are, Sir, most respectfully yours,
here Mr. Henry Browne, a clergyman of the English church, T. MELROSE and J. K. CHAPMAN.
.... . k„ it. r TT„i,.r.i»v ihat he ma* Tottenham-strcet, June 22.
who is sent to Munich by the London University, Ihat Ire may lottenhara-strcei, dare zi. __
make himself acquainted with our Institutions, modelled accord Hydrophobia.—On Tuesday last a sow, the property of Mr-
in" to the new plan of instruction of 1829, with Ihe view of 8.-njamin Ashmore, of Brightside, shewing peculiar symptoms
for rdinff similar ones in London. The Council of the London of illness, was visited by the Veterinary Surgeon, who expressed
founding similar ..... his opinion that the pig was in a rabid state. 1 he symptoms were
University, it seems, has found that the young men who are | <>Ba 0 f appetite, foaming at the mouth, (probably produced by
entered in the University ate, in general, not sufficiently pre continued champing, more than being characteristic of the dis-
wired for the instruction to be given them there, and it has ease), a wild expressive stare, disposed to bile at any thing thai
pared ior tut, ..... , , h „ annoyed her, at the same time making a distressed squeaking
resolved, as a remedy for this evil, to establish schools to [io j Be ending in a violent paroxysm. In the course of the even-
managed under its own inspection. According to the English die(l . s/repeLdly had it rushed violently
custom, the Council began by appointing Mr. 1 [ areinsltlre wall, that it is doubtful whether the disease was,
head master of those seboo s for he reg..!.- ion-« h«h be » on tbe bead „
ere, the immediiite caqse of
to draw up a plan. fl { r ’ b ad . It death. The appearances on examination after death induced
with Ihe Bavarian f ll , ? accented the strongest suspicion that the animal had died in a rabid state
was assumed as the foundation qf his own S c ®f , . h \ do g, the properly of a neighbour of Mr. Ashmore, died in a
with perfect unanimity and satisfaction Counci f the ( , e( , j( g dl rabldsU t e , aboul a fortnight ago; several dogs and a
University. Mr. Browne has arrived J“ B * .f ar S ®„ P ® ian pi" were known lo have been bitten by that dog; but there is no
ing the publication of the most recent plan of Ihe Bay a a p JO f that the first mentioned pig was Sheffield Paper.
schools.— rrankjurt Paper , June id, »
EXPEDITION TO ALGIERS—SIDI FERUVCH,
THE KING.
(From the Court Circular.) , The work of “ Sketches'of Algl-rsf” Hh'ly published by Win.
Both the Physicians continued at the Palace yesterday in g Tves som! .opograpf.icaUe.ails respecting this Pos.Uoo.
attendance on the King. Mr. Brodie, the surgeon, and Mr. The promon t ory where Algiers is situated termina e»
Nussey, the apothecary, left the Palace yesterday morning, weg , w r ard, in , he beautiful road of Sidi Ferruch watch n aae
■itsVsS - tT *5
° . J ' ,1 * I ......I T l .. iha oiiofman 11 Wl rirAnUUI die
rocky peninsula, which is pretty high. It might be fort.hed add
made an excellent nasal port. To the eastward of Marabout are
die anchorage and landing place. The ~ o vsa e . Ilk « «
HOUSE OF LORDS-{Thu Day.) .he anchorage and landing place. Thespring of water is likewise
w, «.w
Privileges. From the road of Sidi Ferruch to ihe fort of the Emperor the
the boyne peerage. , . ahnnt ninp miles which may be reached id six hours
The examination of witnesses in this ease was »es“med this by a ° ery good r o’ a( i. For the, first three miles the
morning, at the conclusion of which their Lordslups decl red is sterile and sandy, but afterwards it presents a smiling
that the claimant had established his right to vote at me election a gentle and smooth slope ; it is there-
for Representative Peers tor Ireland. fore w( .j| g lte j f or drawing up military foices and for manoeuvring
THE BLOOMFIELD PEERAGE. -.i « r i;ilprv
Their Lordships, after Ihe examination of wl nesses on be During alHhe expeditions against Algiers, where land forces
of the claimant, adjourned the further consideration of this claim """“L* d the disembarkation has uniformly been effected
until Wednesday next. in the road to the eastward of the town. This was certainly
the CLIFFORD PEERAGE claimant’s owing to ignorance of the coast, and of the topography of the
Several witnesses were examined in behalf of the claimants .” f jt ja nrecisely in that quarter that all its means of
right to vote at the election for Representative Peers for Ireland , y con i- e ntrated. y It is quite clear that an army could
but owing to the absence of a material witness, the further con- # , and ® ln tbe roa d of Sidi Ferruch without meeting any
sideration of the case was adjourned. obstacles From thence one single march would lead it to the
THE netherville peerage. . .. f heights which overlook and command the fort of the Emperor ;
Witnesses were examined, and Counsel heard, in behalf of / WO uld not encounter there any thing else to prevent
the claimants in this Peerage. The further consideration wa ’ gchi tbe ram parts, it could easily take the Castle by
postponed until Wednesday nest. storm or with the assistance of mines. Being once master of
COURT OF K/NG2BBFcfI-(TH. 8 Day.) °e"a sUy^oonT.iUed
bouverie v, miles. . from the ruins of two windmills, of a cylindrical form, an
This was an action by a person named Bouverie. residing in from the ruins of Fort Stan, which no longer exists, owing
the Haymarket, against the defendant, who is Surveyor ot the t 0 , be appre hensions of a jealous Government, which inust
i’avement, for interfering with some iron rails which the plamtifl necessarily have condemned it, since i t commands the citaaei ,
thought proper to erect on the pavement in front of h.s house. an( , consequently the town. After landing the army the fleet
. The question was, whether the Commissioners and Surveyors of wou | d then s!low itB elf in the Bay .to draw off the attention of
the Pavements had a right to remora any rati, or other pro- , be enemy) and the town would either capitulate or be carried
jectioos which extended over the foot-path. LordTenterden, & by Blorra . f likelv
the trial, was of opinion that the Commissioners had a right to This would be as near as possible toe plan of campa gn likely
remove any projections, and therefore directed a nonsuit. The | 0 be followed, drawn up beforehand .a s work written by an
c isc having been argued last week, on a role mat, to set aside American Consul resident at the Regency oi A.giern.
Ihe nonsuit, and enter a verdict forth, plaintiff, The telegraohic dispatch, announcing the l. rtl »P el! '*!?,
Lord Tenterden, this morning, declared the Judgment of the apprehensions occasioned by the first contrary aspect K
Court Which was— That they wer. of an opinion the case did tb9 j B9lie 0 f the expedition. All th. difficulties co sis ■: m the
not some within the Act of Parliament; they, therefore, ordered djsenibrtr kation; the army, however, be mg once ■
ihat Ihe verdict should be for the plaintiff, for One Shilling every lbin( , e ] se becomes easy; and the advantages ob.aiaed
Damages. over the troops who were to defend the shore is an ample proof
" THE KIN® V. WEEKLIN AND OTHERS. . of this assertion. . .
This was an application for a criminal information against the T he disembarkation of the materiel most have required more
defend."* and Ether members of a Free Traders' Company, id , ime , ban that of the troops ; but, if the bay of bidi t erruch
Litchfield. „ , m affords a good anchorage, nothing could prevent thetwo d visions
' Though the rule would be made absolute, Lord Tenterden already landed from commencing operations before the land ng
I hon-tit that security should be given for costs, as the persons 0 f the whole of the materiel. . . .
noon whose affidavit it was made absolute were of an inferior Ain mat ters of this description rapidity of movement is what
rank , u • of all thing, appears to be of the greatest imparlance, .1 is hoped
It was said that the real mover was a Nobleman, who having that tbe town of Algiers will be taken within twelve days. Its
a certain Parliamentary influence in the Borough, wished to pre- garrison consists of 9,000 men, and of all this number scare- ly
serve it undisturbed;however that might be.it was for the Court 6 noo are j aD i SBar i e s, who alone deserve to be taken into ealeu-
II imi'iire • but one of the arguments pressed against he defen- i at j on- As to the innumerable hordes of Arabs who hover about
d ints was’that they were not members of the Corporation, and tbe coun t ryi ih e y are incapable of making any stand before onr
lhai their proceedings were only forthe purpose of annoyance. i roo ps, and tbe measures taken beforehand may detach many of
The CotißTwas of opinion that any person, though nota member them from the cause of the Dey. .. . .
of the Corporation, might institute a legal inquiry into their There is still some talk of a treasure of 200,000,000. which is
conduct, for if such was not the case, it would be attended with conceaied in the Dey’s pa i aC e. There was a report that this
a i>reat evil, as Corporations might by the irregularity of their n)oney bad been transported to Holland; but the vigilance of
uroeeedings abuse their Charter. . , the blockading squadron renders this report very impro able.
The rule was then nude absolute on security for costsbeing j t ; s Ba j d t 0 be the intention of the French Government to
irogorV»ona!u lo the calibre, Wiia t: i v . ae
ctndiog of infantry aha V:Veairy--V u
y inclined plane* adj(itle*d to the -n to the shorn*
(From the Semaphore de Mane^
NAVAL INTELLIGENCE.
UtC DCmupmi on
{From Lloyds.) The following details respecting the exp* - ■ -re derived
Deal, June 22.—Wind N.E.-Arrived from London the froln a Boarce on which reliance may be placed, i’t appears tbat
Bestey, Johns, Teoenffe ; Royal Admiral, Fothenngham, rvew (be flept haB fonnd an exC ellent anchorage, which w. 3 unknown,
Soo’h Wales; Abberton. Perceval. Bombay. the discovery of which ensures complete success t; ■-•he op*ra-
Portsmouth, June 22.—Wind N. sailed the J nomas, (ionB Qn the 14!h, al ten ia the morning, lh« pe aonn el of the
Wallace, Quebce. , ~ . Tl , army was all disembarked; the materiel alone was Lit on
The following arrivals are given at Lloyd s -—The Deraerara, board . but if the weather continued favourable for four days,
Amphitrite, Hutchinson, from Cadiz, at the disembai kation would have been forward enough to enable
Dublin; Leggy, Tozer. from St. Johns, Now Brunswick, tbe army to ad vaoce and begin ihe siege. It is believed that i,:. e
Esslinglon, Murray, from Meroe., and Betsey. M h-aebao, tr( , t , oB base be eu divided into three corps; one to remain a! we-
from Droothiem, at Sligo; Aberdeenshire Osborne, from place wh9ic tbe was effected; another, to proceeu
Miraraichi, at Aberdeen ; Ann and Marta, \ ittery, from I aro, a | aOl , tbß coas{ and ; assossiun of the batteries that skirt
and Janet, Banhara. from Oporto, at Lynn ; Richard and Mary, j( >B(J the tWr j (o marc h .. . the heights, in order to turn
Lake, from Dantzic, Cornel, Owens, and William Skysone, tbe |OWB and attac k it on the east and south. The walls
Lloyd, from Londonderry, in the river; Eymet, M Au!ey,and QB (bat B j de are ga j d (0 be 81icb ;, ad cqndi'von, as to re-
Condor, Pyatt, from Liverpool, at Buenos Ayres. quire but a few volleys to make a breach; it Is therefore consi-
■■■-■ ■■■ ■ ~ tiered not unlikely that by this lime the town is taken, ana the
THE ARMY. expedition terminated.
The roadBt6ad of Turetia-Chica is an unexpected safeguard
On Thursday morning detachments of the 111 h Light ura- (he cxpedition an d removes all anxiety. It is only to be
goons and I6ih Lancers, consisting of two Lieutenants, tour wisbed th#t thcre may be n 0 oeed 0 f cat »l r y ; for, according to
Cornels, one Veterinary Surgeon, and 150 privates marched atcoanls fr0B) Palma, almost all the horses perished during a
from the depot in this town (Maidstone) for Gravesend, where !hjrt d . 9lay on board i be vessels. The 17th Regiment of
they are to embark on board the Maitland for the East Indies. Chasseurs will make the. campaign on foot. On the 6th, when
Maidstone Gazette. the fleet was still at Palma, a great number ot dead horses were
On Monday a review and sham tight, ol the military tbrowa into tbe Bea - tbe lew remaining were lo be employed m
quarlered in Manchester took place on Rersall Moor. At two tbe arti „ erv Service . s id i e l Ferruch is a small port five leagues
o’clock a party of the 87lh Regiment, supported by two squa- we|t of A |' iers wbele tb , Algerine Governmant ships its pro-
drons of tbe 2d Dragoons, took possession of Edgecroft Bridge, du espe ® ia i| y caU | t , for the coasts of Spain and other Euro-
and of the bridge over the Bolton Canal near it. About twenty g Two roads, one direct, the other along the coast by
minutes before three the attacking force, consisting of another Cap / CaJtine i ead from Sidi el Ferruch to Algiers; these roads,
party of Ihe 87th, two squadrons of the 2d Light Dragoons, palticularlj that a i oDg the sea-side, are intersected by chains of
and two pieces of artillery, a( ' V! ?'? C ‘; d defend mountains, which do not present many obstacles to the progress
too Road, and attacked the Canal Bridge, driving the defend- of (ravel]srBi The point at which th« French army landed was
ers from it by a charge of cavalry and a few discharges of mountf , d w ith batteries; a map recently published marks five ;
artillery. Considerable skirmishing then took place along theie mngt h , ve been a Krea ter cumber, as Sidi el Ferruch may
the road leading to Edgecroft bridge, at that bridge, and along considered tbe roer cantile port of th* Algerine capital: an
Ihe road leading to the race ground, the party advaDCing from a(u#k 0B tbat side j, striking the Refeocy lo the heart: - is
Hie Bolton-road driving the others before them, nnffl hey u f probable that the most powenm meaneof deft i.-- - s
reached the middle of tire race grqned. There, repeated charges , tirected lhat point .
of cavalry were made on both sides against the opposing in- a naval officer at Toulon writes as follows, under date of-June
fantry, who on each occasion formed in a solid square amt n Solne uneasiness is felt on account of our relations with
repulsed the assailants. The attacking party finally charged in Mde Rif , ny has left Smyrna for Constantinople. It
line, and after brisk firing on both sides th fight is believed that bis object is to watch the armament, in that port.
The whole of the troops then formed into a Ime.an bred a feu sufficiently extensive to oblige him very
de-joie, after which they marched in column passed the inspect- « Bend {qj reinforceme " t 8 »
ing officer, and performed a variety of evolutions.— Manchester 1 (From the Journal ties Dehats.)
shortly to send for reinforcements.”
(From the Journal des Dehats,)
The Cape of Sidi el Ferruch, or of Turelta Chica, advances
into the sea, and forms on either side a bay. The fleet remains
at anchor on the west. At a league and a quarter to the north-
east of this Cape is the point of the Sidi Halif. A league further
_ 1... is the Cane Caxina (Ras acconater), which is the point the fur-
ihest to tiie north. At three quarters of a league to the east of
llttle Cape Caxine is the Mers el Dhabanne, or Port of Flies. A
Mar- league and a quarter further is the Point Pescada. To the
(lav’s south, at the distance of a league, is the port of Algiers. From
.-j Turetta Chica to Algiers the distance in a direct line is four
allty ’ leagues and a half. By following this route the Castle of the
Emperor is met with; on the right aod on the left the signal
ts - post of the Admiralty, placed on the summit of Mount Boujarcah,
!0 ° ehich isatao elevation of 150 metres above the sea. It is
*5O probable that these two important points will become the object
!0 ° of the operations of our army.
Mercury.
THE MA RKETS -(This Day.)
HAYMARKETS. Brighton, June 22.—A very distressing accident occurred m
Smitheieid —Coarse Heavy Lowland Meadow Hay, from this neighbourhood yesterday. Mr. Scarnell, senior. Sea House
07'us to 2f 10s.; Useful ditto. 3f. 3s. t* 31. 10s.; Fine Up- Hotel, accompanied by another person, went out in a boat, near
land Meadow and Ray-grass Hay, Sf. 10s. to 4 1. 15t.; Clover shoreham, for Ihe purpose of shooting gulls. When the person
Hav generally 3 1. os. ta 41. 155.; Extraordinary Fine ditto who accompanied Mr. S. was in Ihe act of firing, the gun burst,
5 1 jo, . Oat Straw 2f. os. to 2 1. 45.; Wheat Straw, 2/. 4s. lo by which Mr. Scarnell was killed. The body was removed to a
2/ 8> —A moderate supply. Trade very dull at yesterday’s public house in the neighbourhood, where a Coroner s Inquest
prices, was this day held upon it, and a verdict of ” Accidental Death
COAL MARKET. Splendid Portrait of George IV.—A beautiful steel En-
Eighty-four new ships were entered for sale to-day, and the graving, from the last likeness taken of h<s Majesty, will be
«n"»lv of Sunderland and Newcastle Coal was abundant. The presented gratis to every purchaser of the Weekly Dispatch, of
Coal Exchange was well attended by merchants. Ships arrived Sunday, the 27ih of June inst. A single glance at this exquisite
during tire month, 372; during the week, 92. Best Wall’s End Engraving, w hich may be seen al the principal News Agents,
( oals 3L 61. to 85a. 6i.; other sorts 26j. od. to 345. Od. «ill convince every person that such a Portrait cannot be pur-
Shins’nt market 100 chased elsewhere, for less than half a lt will now be
- viven, together with the best Sunday Paper in England, for B£ci.
There is in Brussels a market for frogs, which are bronght l'o secure early impressions of the Portrait, immediate orders
alive in pails and cans, and prepared for dressing on the spot should be given. Such orders will be received by a.I Posimas-
Tlre hind limbs, which are the only parts used, are cut from the ter B and Ne«s Agents.— Dispatch Office, 139, Fleet-street,
bedv with scissors, by the women who bring the animals for sale. New Sacred Poem.—A subject of pand amt mipt smg mte-
— Or. Lardner’s Cabinet Cyclopedia. rest, ami highly calculated for the development of po< tic talent.
To paint the character of woman, says a French writer, yon has been made the basis of a new work of imagination by Mr.
must use the feather of a butterfly’s wing ;it appears that such Edmund Re .de. “ The Revolt of the Angela (which is its
an idea must have influenced the talented authoress of First title) is to be published, we are informed, in a few days; and wr
Love- for she has, indeed, described her sex with consummate may anteipate a considerable curiosity among the intellectual
skill and delicacy. We think no reader can rise from the perusal ~nd the reflecting portion of readers, to ascertain the style of
of these volumes without feeling tbat they are the production cf ireaiment employed upon a theme akin to those which occupied
a highly gifted and amiable mind. the highest thoughts and faculties of our illustrious Milton,


B&oAb&Mr -331
Jr ?
LOCAL JURISDICTION .
ABSTRACT OF MR. BROUGHAM’S BILL FOR ESTABLISHING COURTS
OF LOCAL JURISDICTION.
Although the Bill only provides for two Courts, one for Kent,
and one for Durham and Northumberland, its provisions may
he extended to the other counties of England and Wales, as soon
as it can be ascertained how large each juridcal district
should he.
The object of the Bill being to afford the means of trying
causes at as little expense and with as little delay and incon-
venience as possible to the suitors, district Courlsare established
under the revision of superior courts in roost cases.
The Judge of each district is called the Judge in Ordinary;
and he has a registrar, with a clerk, crier, usher, and messenger.
The J wdpe roust be a sergeant or a barrister of ten years standing.
He and the registrar are appointed by the Crown; the clerk by
the registrar ; and the other officers by the judge.
The Judge, registrar, and clerk, are paid partly by salary and
partly by a proportion of the fees collected on the business done ;
but those fees do not depend upon the number of steps or the
length of the procedure in any case; they depend only on the
number and value of the causes. The erhr is paid by salary, and
the usher and messengers by salary, and fixed fees on the service
of process. Extra messengers are to be apppointed, when neces-
sary, from the sheriffs’ bailiffs, and these are to be paid by fees
on the service of process. The constitution of the Court is laid
down in the first twelve sections, and rules of practice are to be
laid down by the Judges of the Courts of Westminster Hall.—
Section 106.
The Court thus established has six branches of jurisdiction,
three compulsory, and three voluntary or prorogated. The com-
pulsory jurisdiction is. in certain actions—in small debts—and in
legacies; the voluntary, in all actions—in arbitration—and in
reconcilement.
The Court is to sit once a month at least, except in August,
and in different parts of the district.
The Judge Ordinary is to be a Justice of Peace of that and
the adjoining counties, and in the commission of oyer and ter-
miner and gaol delivery.
1. The Court has authority to try all actions where the defen-
dant resides within the district, and the cause of action, if on a
debt, does not exceed 100/., or if on a tort SOL, and where title
to real estate, tithe, or by bankruptcy, or to toll, market, or
other franchise, docs not come in question.
2. It has authority to try, in a summaiy way, small debts
not exceeding 5/., under the like restriction as to real estate, &c.
3. It has authority to try claims of legacy not exceeding 100/.
4. It has authority to try all actions at law of all kinds and to
any amount, by consent of parties.
5. It has authority to try all matters, whether at law or in
equity, by way of arbitration, the parties consenting.
6. It has authority to hear and advise upon all disputes, with
consent of the parties, for the purpose of reconcilement.
1 —Actions.
The proceeding here is bv statement, answer, reply, and re-
joinder. Sections 13, 14, 15, 49, 51, treat of the jurisdiction
under this head. The manner of serving the defendant with the
statement, w hich stands both for writ and declaration ; of putting
in the answer, which serves for plea or demurrer, as the case
may be; of putting in the reply, which serves for both replica-
tion and demurrer; and of putting in the rejoinder, which may
ho either rejoinder or demurrer, is laid down in sections 16, 17,
18, and 19, and the consequences of making default are laid
down in section 86. The manner of pleading, in its different
stages, is laid down in sections 16, 17, 18, and 19, and schedule
C gives various forms, according to which the pleading is to be
condo led as nearly as may be. Precautions are taken to pre-
vent prolixity and misstatement of tacts, by making prac’itioners
liable for the consequences of the same, at the discretion of the
Court; but the parties have a direct interest in putting these
discretionary powers in motion ;—sections 21, 22, 23, 36, 37.
The process for summoning jurors and witnesses is laid down
in sections 80. 31, 34, 35; and schedule D—the mode of trial in
sections 29, 32, 33.
The J udge is authorised to give time to parties for pleading and
to put off’ trials; and he is also authorised to hear parties and
their attornies. and on oath if he pleases, on the matter of such
applications. Sections 21 87, 88,89.
The Judge is authorised to decide points of law raised before
him on the* pleadings.
The general mode of proceeding in trying matter of fact is
by Jury ; but ihe Judge, w ith the consent nf both parties, may
try any matter of fact without a Jury, with power, if in the
;ourse of the trial he finds the matter or any part of it more fit
for ? J ,ir y« to impannel one. He may also, with consent of both
})ar*it s » exclude strangers, and try the action in private, with or
wHhou* a as the case may be. These powers are defined
in 26, 27. 28. 93.
Any mati er lr i p d before the Judge, whether of law or of fact,
mav be revit w, ' rt b y a potion before the Judge of Assize for (he
county, the J?dge * n ordinary sitting with him, but not having a
vote in ihe dec* B * 0 ” •he appeal. If the Judge of Assize pleases,
he may hear it ,he other Judge of A: size.
ihe judgment 'if “ ,e J«dge in ordinary, in matter nf law, may
be revised by the j u<^e or Judges of Assize; and the sentence
of the Judge in ordi nary an, ‘ verrf * ct of the Jury, in matter of
fact, may be set asid?» anf ‘ a new trial ordered by the same Judge
or Judges. Powers are S‘ veD * u °der certain restrictions, as to
cosis and securities carrying ‘he matter before the Courts of
Westminster vision of the Judge of Assize; and a
discretionary power is aL° K iven t 0 the Judge in ordinary, lo
require securities before an peal by motion to the Jndgeof Assize.
Powers are also gi n. . ' n( ier certain restrictions to hath -ha
Judge ordinary and J udgesof Assize, to reserve paints and order
cases for the opinion of the superior Courts.
The subject of ap*peal is treated of in sections 41, 42, 43, 44, 45,
40. 47, 48, 51. TJpon all final judgments, execution is to be
taken out, and live process thereof served, according to rules laid
down in sections 38. 39, 40. The Judge lias power to order
payment by pastalmenis, section 39; and debts may be assigned
in satisfaction, section 40.
2—Plaints.
The pr oceeding in the small debt court of the Judge in ordinary
is by pffaint and plea. The rules relating to the service, pleading,
and notices, are laid down in sections 52, 53, 54, 55, and forms
ar.e given in schedule C.
The Judge is to sit for the trial of plaints at each place imme-
diately after the sittings for trial of actions.
He may examine on oaih the parties before him; and these
parties may appear by others, if prevented from attending.
The execution Li summary, by warrant; and there is no ap-
peal or revision, unless the Judge deems it fitting.
The trial is by the Judge without a jury, unless he thinks it fit
to have a jury.
The trial of plaints is treated of in sections 56, 57, 58, 60 —the
judgment and execution in sections 59, 61, 62.
3.—Legacy.
The proceeding in legacy is by citation and claim, serving the
office of both subpoena and bill; and by article, serving the
office of answer, plea, and demurrer.
The citation must be not less than six months after the exe-
cutor or administrator’s title accrued, and 12 months after the
death of the testator.
The rules for proceeding and pleading in legacy are laid down
in sections 66. 67. 68, 69, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78; and
forms are given in schedule C.
Wherever the executor or administrator has free assets, he
must either pay the legacy as far as bis assets go, or be must
show cause why he does not, stating the claims against the
estate, which he apprehends may be made ; and in that case he
must pay the money claimed into Court, to await the coming in
of such claims.
An appeal by way of motion lies from decisions in legacy, to
the couits of law and equity, according to rules laid down in
sections 70 and 72.
4.—General Jurisdiction bv Consent.
This extends to all actions at law. The consent of parties
must be given in writing, and filed with the statement, answer,
&c., or at whatever other stage of the cause the necessity arises
of extending the jurisdiction beyond its ordinary limits. This is
laid down in section 14, and the forms are given in schedule C.
The forms of pie ding under such parts of this head as are not
exemplified under the bead of actions are given in schedule C.
s—Arbitration.
The Judge in ordinary is a Judge of arbitration also, and may
proceed, upon any matter at law or in equity referred to him,
after the manner of an arbitrator.
The mode of proceeding is laid down in sections 79, 89, 81,
82, 83.
The Judge is to raise any question of law on the face of his
award, that either parly desires to carry before one of the supe-
rior Courts of Law or Equity.
He has also power to try any part of the matter referred to
him by a jury, subject to certain rules.
The reference to him is irrevocable; witnesses are compellable
!o attend him ; false swearing before him is punishable as per-
jury ; and his award can only be impeached if it exceeds the
terms of the reference.
Judgment and execution on the award is to be had, as laid
down in sections 84, 35.
6.—Reconcilement.
Apy parly may cite another against whom he has any claim
or complaint, or from whom he apprehends any claim or com-
plaint, before the Judge in ordinary, at a time and place epeci
fi< d in the citation and allowed by the Judge.
The Judge is to hear the parties themselves, without any
attorney or counsel, and to advise them on the matter of their
differences; subject to certain rules laid down in sections 95,96,
97, 98, 99, 100, 101.
If they agree to abide by his advice, a memorandum of agree-
ment is lo be signed by them, and this shall be binding, accord-
ing to rules laid down in section 100.
Execution may issue on whatever agreement is signed for
pay meat of money.
Ail fees, after paying the proportions of the officers of the
Court, are to be pan! into the consolidated fund, section 103.
There are clauses for punishing perjury, with a power given
lo (he Judge in ordinary of directing prosecutions at the expense
of the county, seciions 91,92.
There are clauses for regulating proceedings against persons
acting in execution of the Act, and for prosecuting persons for
extortion, sections 102, 104.
Schedules A and B prescribe the fees of the Court and
messengers.
Schedule C, the forms of pleading.
Schedule D, the forms of summons to jurors acd witnesses.
Schedule E, the forms of oaths to jurors’ parties, and
witnesses.
Schedule F, attornies’ fees
LAW REPORT,
ROLLS’ COURT, Tuesday, June 22.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL V. GOVERNORS OF CHRIST’S HOSPITAL.
This was an information tiled by the Attorney-General at the
relation of the Governors of Guy’s Hospital, against the Gover-
nors of Christ’s Hospital, for the purpose of having it declared
that the latter were bound to receive four boys or girls annually
to be educated in that establishment, on the nomination of the
Governors of Guy’s Hospital.
The facts in the case were these:—ln 1724, Thomas Guy had
made his will, and bequeathed the residue of his property for the
purpose of founding an hospital, which had since been established,
and which was known by the name of Guy’s Hospital; he also
bequeathed an annuity of 400/. to ihexPresident and Governors
of Christ’s Hospital, on condition of their receiving annually
into the Hospital four boys or girls to be educated according to
the regulations of that establishment, upon the nomination of his
executors, until the establishment of Guy’s Hospital, and after
that, at the direction of the Governors of the said Hospital. The
Governors of Christ’s Hospital had accepted that annuity, and
continued to receive it for upwards of a century ; till 1827 they had
also regularly received into fheir establishment four boys or girls
annually upon the nomination of the Directors of Guy’s Hospital.
In consequence, however, of depreciation in the value of money,
the Governors of Christ’s Hospital found that the annuity of
400/. was insufficient to enable them to comply with the condi-
tions of the bequest, and the consequence was, that in 1527 they
passed a resolution declaring that they would no longer receive
the saiii 1 : annual number of boys into the establishment, resigning
at the same lime the annuity of 400/. This resolution had been
communicated to the Governors of Guy’s Hospital ; and this
information was filed in consequence of their determination to
adhere to their resolution.
The Master of the Rolls in giving judgment said, thequestioa
was, whether this was a gift of an annual sum of 400/. to Christ’s
Hospital yearly, so long as they should continue to receive these
four poor children, or whether it was a gift of this annual sum
to Christ’s Hospital for ever, upon condition that they should re-
ceive these four children annually. If the latter were the true
construction, having once accepted the gift, they could never re-
tire from it; and it was perfectly plain the latter was the true con-
struction. for the bequest was in words— 14 1 give to the Pre-
sident and Governors of Christ’s Hospital and their successors for
ever;” and “oncondition of their receiving,” &c. After having
made this perpetual gift to Christ’s Hospital, the testator proceeded
to say, “ and it is my will that in case, and as often as the said
President and Governors of Christ’s Hospital shall neglect or
refuse to receive these children, then ray Executors, or the
Governors of Guy’s Hospital, are to apply this sura for the edu-
cation and maintenance of those children.”— i. e, notwithstanding
that Christ’s Hospital has accepted this gift, and thereby im-
posed upon the Governors the legal obligation to receive these
four children, yet they may act against the obligation which
they have incurred ; but I will not therefore defeat my inten-
tions of educating these poor children, until my Executors or
the Governors of Guy’s Hospital can, by a suit in Equity,
compel their performance of the engagement; but I shall give a
collateral remedy, that my Executors may apply for this pur-
pose the same 400/. annually. But although the testator gave
this collateral remedy, it did not at all release the Directors of
Christ’s Hospital from the permanent obligation imposed upon
them by the acceptance of the 400/.
COURT OF KING’S BENCH, Westminster, June 22.
THIRLEWAY V. SPOTTISWOODE, ESQ., AND OTHERSt
In this case the verdict obtained by the plaintiff was sought
to be impeached on the ground of excessive (iaraages.
The action had been brought against the late Sheriff of Mid-
dlesex and one of his Bailiffs (William Levy), for taking the
goods of the plaintiff, John Thirleway, under an execution, at
the suit of a person of the name of Neck, against Elizabeth
Wyatt, otherwise Thirleway. It appeared at the trial that
Elizabeth Thirleway was the wife of the plaintiff, and had
carried on the business of a milliner, in Holles-street, Caven-
dish-square, but without the interference of her husband, who
had been in service as a butler ; and she had sometimes used Ihe
name of Wyatt, and sometimes that of Thirleway. The execu-
tion had been continued in the house from the 31st of July to the
11 th of November, when it was set aside by a rule of Hie Court
of Common Pleas. On the part of the defendants, it was con-
tended, that as the wife had carried on business as a feme sole ,
with the knowledge of the husband, he was not entitled to more
than nominal damages for the trespass complained of. The
Jury, however, found for 100/.
After the case had been argued on both sides, the parties con-
sented, at the suggestion of Lord Tenterden, to leave it to the
Court to say for w hat sum the verdict should stand, and
Their Lordships then fixed the sum at 50/.
LEWIS V TONKS.
This case was argued on a rule to set aside the verdict obtained
by the defendant, and for a new trial.
The action was on a bill of exchange for 100/., accepted by the
defendant, for the accommodation of a person named M 4 Neil
the drawer. M 4 Neil gol the bill discounted by William Levy (the
sheriff ’s officer), who passed it o.cr to his step-son, the plaintiff,
Charles Lewis, an attorney. The defence at (he trial, which
took place before Lord Tenterden, at the sittings in Middlesex,
about a twelvemonth ago, was usury in Ihe discounting of the
hill, and a want of consideration on the part of the plaintiff.
The Jury, upon the question being left to them by L >rd Tenter-
den, w hether the bill had been endorsed to the plaintiff’for value,
and without c ollision or contrivance between him and his father]
William Levy, found for the defendant.
Th* A-TTop. KEY,-G?.NF.rAf. W,w use ©gainst the rule
for a new trial.
Mr. Campbell addressed the Court in support of the rule.
Rule discharged.
ex parte .
Mr. Denman said he w as instructed to move for a rule to show
cause why a criminal information should not be filed against
Mr. Alexander Scott Abbott (or Adams) the Mayor of the
borough of Cambridge, for perjury committed by him in an
affidavit.
Lord Tenterden—A criminal information for perjury is a.
very unusual proceeding.
Mr. Denman was aware of that; but there were some pre-
cedents lor it.
Mr. Justice J, Parke—The Court will only grant a criminal
information for perjury in cases where it appears that the grand
jury in a local jurisdiction have thrown out (he bill improperly.
Mr. Denman—This borough of Cambridge is a local juris-
diction. but he w r as bound to say that there was iu this case
affidavit against affidavit.
Lord Tenterden—The Court does not say that it cannot, in
any case, grant a criminal information for perjury, but it must
be a very strong case indeed.
Mr. Denman said, that after that intimation he would, in the
exercise of his discretion, withdraw his motion.
ELLIS V. MONTAGU, ESQ.
The Attorney-General slated, that since Ihe discussion on
the rule for a new trial in this case, the defendant had expressed
bis readiness lo accede to the recommendation of the Court and
of his counsel, to allow the verdict to stand for such sum as
might be found to be the real value of the wine for which the
bills in question were given.
The rase was Ihen referred to Mr. Maule, the barrister, to
ascertain the value of the wine.
COURT OF COMMON PLEAS, June 22.
POTT V. TURNER.
This was an action brought by the plaintiff to recover back
the amount of a deposit paid lo the defendant on an agree-
ment for the purchase of an estate. The ground on which the
deposit was sought lo be recovered back was, that a person of the
name of Baker, from whom the defendant had taken an assign-
ment of the property in question, and who was a ship-broker,
had become liable to the Bankrupt Laws, and consequently could
not make a good title. The Jury having found a verdict for the
plaintiff’,
Mr. Sergeant Wilde, in a former term, obtained a rule, call-
ing on the plaintiff to show cause why the verdict should not be
set aside on two grounds—first, that Baker had not carried on
my business which brought him within the operation of the
Bankrupt Laws, he having confined himself tn taking charge
of consignments, and obtaining freights, and never having sold
goods fur himself or others; and secondly, that there had not
been a sufficient petitioning creditor’s debt to support a com-
mission.
Mr. Sergeant Cross showed cause against the rule.
The Court were of opinion that the verdict ought not to be
disturbed, and therefore discharged the rule.
CHELMSFORD PETTY SESSIONS.
John Nixon , a middle-aged man, dressed in rusty black, was
put lo the bar, charged with adopting a very novel mode of ob-
taining a breakfast.
The constable of Writtle stated, that early that morning the
prisoner came to him and informed him, with apparent satisfac-
tion, (hat he had just broken the church windows, and therefore
he (the constable) must take him into custody, and give him
something to eat; adding that he had not had any food lately,
and resorted to this expedient on purpose to obtain some. On
going to the church he found that the windows had actually
been broken.
The prisoner, on being questioned, said he was a printer, and
had been in business for himself some time since at Witney, but,
being unfortunate, he was obliged to 44 tramp.” He worked
last at Newark, since which be had travelled 600 miles without
being able to obtain any employment. He committed the
offence, he said, on purpose, well knowing that, although he
should be punished, he should in return be rescued from starva-
tion. The prisoner leaned on the bar in the most desponding
manner, and the Bench seemed to entertain great doubts of his
sanity.
lie was committed for one month, and directions were giv» n
(hat he should be taken care of in the prison, and a letter sent
to Witney, in order to ascertain the correctness of his story.
Nixon states that his father was a clergyman residing at
Chipping Norton, in Oxfordshire, and that for 12 years he had
the advantage of a private tutor.
A fatal instance of hydrophobia occurred last week at
Taunton, in the case of Captain Gillam, an officer in the
half-pay of an infantry regiment; and so rapid was the pro-
gress of the malady,that from the first seizure to the fatal result
only about thirty hours elapsed. It has not been precisely
ascertained when, and under what circumstances, the unfortu-
nate gentleman received any injury from a dog, though it is said
that one ot his friends has some slight recollection of his having
made a complaint to that effect, on returning a few months since
to Taunton, after an absence of some duration in London.—
Sherborne Mercury.
I POLICE.
MANSION-HOUSE.—A young mao, of mild appearance,
named Cornel , was brought up, charged with having broken a
man’s leg in a pugilistic affair on the preceding night.
A witness deposed, that on the previous night he saw the de-
fendant in Bishopggate-slreet, striking violently at a man who
was walking along. The man hell up his hand to defend him-
self, but the activity and skill of the defendant was not to be
resisted. The unfortunate man received “ a knock-down
blow,” and when he was on the ground he said, “ Oh, my leg
is broken.” Witness saw no offence committed by the person
who fell.
The certificate from St. Bartholomew’s Hospital, where the
injured man lies, was read : it stated that the examining surgeon
had found that the fracture was a compound one, and that al-
though the patient was not in immediate danger, they could not
say that his condition would no? become dangerous.
The Lord Mayor lamented to find that young men of res-
pectable stations in life were visited by an appetite for the repu-
tation of pugilists—the most degraded of mankind. This was
the second fight within a few days in Bishopsgate-street, in
which a poor man’s leg was broken.
A female, who had been passing at the time, declared that
the defendant struck at every one who approached him, and that
not the least attempt had been made by the person whose leg was
broken to return the blows that were given to him. The de-
fendant had struck at her repeatedly, and would, no doubt, have
done her mischief if he had not been prevented by a friend of his
own.
Mr. Hohler said, that some of those gentlemen who were
so ready with their fists, and who encouraged others in prac-
tices of the kind, would be made to feel, in all probability, very
soon.
The Lord Mayor ordered that the defendant should be con-
fined in Giltspur-slreel Compter until a more favourable account
of the injured man be received at the Justice Room.
GUILDHALL,—A well dressed man, (named John Wilson ,
who has the reputation with the city police of being a “ dividend
hunter” (one who watches for and hustles infirm persons who
have received money at the Bank) was charged with stealing a
purse containing 11/., between four and five o’clock on Saturday
afternoon, in Chancery-lane. When the prisoner was put to the
bar on Monday no witnesses attended against him, hut upon
hearing his clvaracter Sir Peter Laurie remanded him till the
next day, end directed that the witnesses should be summoned.
The prisoner was remanded until Saturday.
BO W-STREET.—Yesterday Sir I*. Birnie received a letter
from Sir George Rose, stating that he had read with great pain
an account in the daily Papers of the death of five poor hay-
makers, who it appeared had perished through starvation. He
wished to know if any place had been fixed upon where subscrip-
tions could be received for those poor fellows who were still
wandering in the outskirts of the metropolis in a state of destitu-
tion, and the letter concluded by requesting Sir Richard to take
charge of 71. 10s., which had been subscribed by him (Sir Geo.
Rose) and some members of his family, for the relief of the un-
fortunate men.
Sir R. Birnir returned an answer, saying that he would carry
into effect the wishes of the benevolent donors, by sending half
of the sum forwarded to Highgate, and the other half to Acton,
in the neighbourhood of which places he knew that a great
number of poor haymakers were waiting for work. Sir Richard
added, that no Sunday last he saw above thirty of these men at
Acton Church, and their orderly and decent behaviour during
the service was remarked by himself and others. After the ser-
vice had concluded they ranged themselves in the church-yard,
but never offered to ask for charity or excite pity, although none
of them, he was sure, had enjoyed a meal for several days.
Mr. John Yeates, a surgeon, residing at No, 22, Torrington-
square, appeared before Mr. Minshull in the course of the day,
for the purpose of causing Mr. John Colcthrcad, a surgeon also,
to be bound in recognizances to keep the peace, he having
written to him (Mr. Yeates) a letter, with a view to provoke
him to light a duel,
Mr. Minshull asked to seethe letter, and upon its having been
handed to him, desired the clerk to read it aloud.
The U tter, which was dated June 19, complained of an 44 nn-
gentlemanlike and ungracious attack” made by Mr. Yeates upon
Mrs. Coielhread during his (Mr. Colethread’s) absence from
home, and concluded by intimating that a friend should call upon
Mr. Veales.
Mr. Minshull asked Mr. Yeates if he was of opinion that this
letter was intended as a challenge?
Mr. Yeates replied that the letter was preparatory to a chal-
lenge, He certainly was of opinion that such was the object of
the writer,
A solicitor, who appeared on bi-half of Mr. Colethread, said
that his client and Mr, Yeates had been in partnership, but
owing to some disagiecments, the nature of which could not
with propriety be explained in that place, the connection was
dissolved. With respect to the immediate cause of quarrel, his
client had received ft letter from Mr. Yeates prior to the date of
the one which he had sent, and which ihe Magistrate would
perceive was equally, if not more, calculated to provoke a breach
of the peace than the one which had been read.
The letter of Mr. Yeates, bearing date the 17lh June, was
then read by Mr. Minshull, who observed that the tendency of
both letters was alike. The parties, it appeared, had differed
about some disputed accounts, and as they appeared to be equally
exasperated, be ahould call upon both gentlemen to find sureties
to keep the peace towards all his Majesty’s subjects, and particu-
larly tow ards each other, for the space of one year.
The gentlemen having found the required bail, left the office,
accompanied by tacn inulual
A lad, about 16 years of age, named John Rooney , was charged
capitally with having been found at large, without any lawful
cause, before the expiration of the term for which he had been
transported.
The prisoner was fully committed for trial.
LAM BETH-STREET.—A lady, named Haddou, residing at
No. 3, Saville-row, Mile End-road, yesterday came to this office
and made the following application to the sitting Magistrate.
The lady staled, that a day or two since she found that the
boxes c r one of her daughters, a young lady about eighteen
years of age, were packed up in a manner lo induce her to be-
lieve that they were intended to be carried away. In order to
prevent this, she locked them up in a closet, and soon after went
out, and upon her return she was informed by one of her ser-
vants that her daughter, immediately after she was gone, came
in, and finding that her boxes were locked up, she went out
again and procured a number of keys, one of which opened the
closet. She then took her boxes away, and she (applicant) had
since discovered that her daughter had gone to the house of a
chyrnist and druggist, likewise situate in the Mile end-road, and
about 200 yards from her (applicant’s) house. The object of the
present application was not so much lo recover her daughter, but
lo reclaim her clothes; her daughter’s recovery would be a se-
condary consideration.
Mr. Hardwick said, the only course to be pursued was either
to grant a warrant to apprehend the young lady on a charge of
felony, or else by mild measures to endeavour lo recover the
property.
A gentleman who accompanied the lady said he was afraid,
from the temper of the young lady, that mild measures w ould be
of no avail.
Mr. Hardwick said his only alternative would be to ordvr the
young lady lo be apprehended ; but he advised the applicant to
pause before she decided on pursuing such a step, for, were her
daughter to be brought to a public office, charged with felony,
Ike stigma might rest with her for life. He thought it would be
belter for some person to go to her first, and see what she was
inclined to do.
The applicant assenting lo this arrangement, Miller, the chief
officer of this establishment, was directed by the Magistrate to go
to the young lady, and inform her of her mother’s application,
and to advise her, for her own sake, to return the property.
A man with one leg, named David Pinner , and his wife, Mary
Pinner, were charged by a policeman, named William Strong,
with being disorderly.
This case possessed no interest, except from the fact of the
woman persising in being dumb to every question put to her, and
the husband declared she was qorn so, in spile of several persons’
assertions that they had often heard her speak ; and after some
conversation between the parties, Ihe woman, apparently fa-
tigued at keeping her tongue so long quiet, declared, in an
audible voice, and with an Irish accent, that she was only
dumb because her husband told her to be so. This avowal ex-
cited great laughter in the office, and Mr. Wyatt ordered the
prisoners to be discharged.
Go Monday evening, just as Mr. Wyatt was leaving the bench,
a hackney coach drew up lo the office, out of which stepped a
woman iu a most miserable condition. Her clothes were com-
pletely saturated with water, and she was so weak that she was
obliged to be supported. She gave her name Mary Ann Cul-
verhouse.
A waterman, named Mills, stated, that about six o’clock that
evening he saw* a woman walking on the planks near Bell
Wharf, and suddenly throw herself into the river ; he was
about 40 yards from her, but immediately went to her assistance.
At that time she had gone under a boat. He got a boat-hook
and succeeded in saving her, but she had hardly got out of the
water, when she threw herself in again, but he ultimately got
her away.
The woman’s husband said she was very much given lo drink,
and would starve her children in order to get gin,
Mr. Wyatt said that gin was the devil.
The husband said that she had se\en children, and had the
same morning attempted lo cut her throat. She did not want for
any thing, and bad a comfortable home.
The womqn, in answer to a question from Mr. Wyatt, said
the devil urged her lo commit the act.
Mr. Wyatt told the husband to take his wife home and make
her comfortable, and keep a strict eye upon her in future.
HATTON GARDEN.—A young man of the name of Ed-
ward Stock was yesterday finally examined on a charge of
stealing a silver watch belonging lo William Morton, tailor, of
Bath street, Clerkenwell,
The prisoner was fully committed to Newgate.
On Sunday last, during the absence of Mr. and Mrs. Reynolds, 1
of Tittenhanger Green, a son of Mr. Reynolds, a youth about
eleven years of age, took a gun from the fire-place, and said he
would frighten some of them. At the moment a labouring lad,
of the name of James Howell, about seventeen years of age,
entered the door, a distance of between three and four yards,
when the youth immediately presented the gun, and said,
44 bang 1” the gun at the same moment discharging, lodging the
contents in the face of the unfortunate lad, taking part of i
the lower teeth, cheek, and the Jett eye. Surgical aid was j
immediately procuri*d, and the unfortunate lad was conveyed |
home to his father’s cottage, at London Colney, where he still ,
continues in the most precarious stale.— Herts Mercury,
Prom ike LONDON GAZETTE , June 22.
Whitehall , June 19.
The King Ims been pleased to appoint Dr. George Cook to be Dean
of the Most Noble and Most Ancient Order of the Thistle, and Dean
of the Chapel lloyal in Scotland, in the room of Dr. William Law-
rence Brown, deceased.
The King has also been pleased to appoint Dr* Thomas Chalmers to
be one of his Majesty’s Chaplains in Ordinary in Scotland, In the room
of Dr. Thomas Somerville, deceased-
DECLARATIONS OF INSOLVENCY.
Thomas Dainty, Northampton, grocer, dated June 15.
Onisiphorus Paul, East Griastead, Sussex, plumber, dated June &
BANKRUPTCY SUPERSEDED.
Samuel Plumbe, Great Russell-street, Bloomsbury, surgeon.
BANKRUPTS.
John Owen, Cbiswell-street, Finsbury, licensed victualler, to sur-
render June 29, at eleven, July 2, at twelve, and August 3, at eleven,
at Basinghall-street. Solicitor, Mr. Clarke, Basinghall-streef.
John Fox Bardwell, King’s Arms-baildings, Wood-street, Cheapside,
warehouseman, June 25, at twelve, July 13, at ten, and August 3, at
twelve, at Basinghall-street. Solicitor, Mr. Legge, Koll’a-buiidings,
Fetter-lane.
Francis Walker, Knares bo rough, grocer, June 29, at six, 20, at ten?,
and August 3, at eleven, at the Crown Inn, Knaresborough. Solicitors,
Messrs. Blakelock and Fiddey, Sergeant’s Inn; and Mr. Richardson,
Knaresborough.
Richard Cariile, Ashburton, Devonshire, serge manufacturer, June?
28,29, and August. 3, at eleven, at the Globe Hotel, Exeter. Solicitors,
Messrs. Anderton and Scott, New Bridge-street, Blackfriars; and
Messrs. Terrell, Barton, and Small, Exeter.
James Puckeridge, Draycott, Wiltshire, farmer, July 9,3, and Aug.
3, at eleven, at the Duke’s Arms Inn, Marlborough. Solicitors, Messrs.
Eyre and Coverdale, Gray’s Inn-square; and Mr. Woodman, Marlbo-
rough.
Thomas Aflinson and John Williams, Manchester and Scarisbrich,
coal merchants, July 8, 10, and Augusts, at two, at the Palace Inn.
Manchester. Solicitors, Messrs. Appleby and Charnocfc, Raymond
Buildings, Gray’s-inn ; and Mr. Whitehead, Manchester.
Amelia Wright, Louth, Lincolnshire, currier, July 5, at seven, 6,
and August 3, at eleven, at the Crown and Wool-Packs, Louth. So-
licitors, Messrs. Hicks and Marris, Gray’s Inn-square ; and Mr. Ailf*
son, Louth.
John Adams, Preston, Lancashire, draper, July 14, at five, 15, and
Augusts, at ten, at the Office of Air. Turner, Preston. Solicitors,
Messrs. Norris, Allen, and Anthony, John-street, Bedford-row ; and
Mr. Turner, Preston.
William Locke, Bury St. Edmund's, innkeeper, July 2, at two, 3,
at eleven, and Augusts, at nine, at the Six Bells Inn, Bury St. Ed-
mund’s. Solicitors, Mr. Wing, Bury St. Edmund’s; and Mr. Austin,
Seuth-square, Gray’s-inn-
William Snowden, Hal;ow, builder, July 3, at six,
3, and Augusts, at twelve, at the Crown, Worcester. Solicitors, Mr.
Byrne, Exchequer Office, Lipcoln’s-inn ; and Messrs. Brookes and
Hays, Tewkesbury.
DIVIDENDS.
G. J. Wigley, Coventry, Warwickshire, ribbon manufacturer,
July 93, at ten, at Easinghall-street— W. Kellewny, Norwich, woollen
draper, July 20, at nine, at Basinghall-street—W. Plenty, West Smith-
field, ironfounder, July 20, at nme, at Basinghall-street—J. Truss,
jun.. Upper Holloway, lapidary, July 20, at nine, at Basinghall-street
—J. Shackle, Milk-street. Cheapsioo, hosier, July 16, at eleven, at
Basinghall-street—C. Willett, Brandon, Suffolk, linen draper, July
20, at ten, at Basinghall-street— C, Tapp, W igmore-street, coach-
maker, July 13, at ten, at Basing!*?‘l-street— J, Sherrin, Street, So-
mersetshire, innholder, July 15, at. jx, at the George Inn, Bridge**
water—J. Knibbs, Oxford, innkeeuer, July 15, at eleven, at the house
of Mr. Bertram, Oxford—W. Hartin, Bridgnorth, Shropshire, linen
draper, July 14, at two, at the Plough Inn, Much Wenlock, Shropshire
—W. Armstrong, Birkenhead, Cheshire, draper, July 14, at two. at
the office of Mr. Frodsham, Liverpool —W. Walker, Knaresborough,
Yorkshire, butcher, July 17, at eleven, at the Court-house, Knares-
borough—J.O. Johnson and J. O’Callaghan, Liverpool, merchants, July
14, at two, at the office of Mr. Thompson, Liverpool—J. Blacklaml,
Newport, Shropshire, grocer, July 19, at two, at the Union Hotel,
Newport—E. W. Whittenbury, Leeds, woollen manufacturer, July
17, at eleven, at the Court-house, Leeds—M. Johnson, Leeds, woollen
cloth merchant, July 17, at eleven,at the Court-house, Leeds.
CERTIFICATES-July 13.
W. O. and J. Dickinson, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, merchants —W.
Dangerfield, Cheltenham, victualler—J. Howard, Warrington, Lan-
cashire, sail canvass manufacturer—W. Cartwright, Oxford-street,
horse dealer—W. Elvidge, Nottingham, lace manufacturer —Thomas
Walker, Manchester, innkeeper—J. Stephens, Plymouth, culm mer-
chant—J. L. Stevens, Plymouth, coal merchant—J. Golding, Wal-
worth, Surrey, bookseller—J. Hudson and T. Bushel*, White Lion-
street, Spitalfields, silk manufacturers—W. Ridley, Gateshead, Dur-
ham, dealer in marine stores—J. Hilton, liushden, Hertfordshire,
farmer—G. Brown, East India Chambers, Leadenball-street, scrivener
—T. Hill, Wapping-wall, ship chandler —J. Reynolds, Portugal-place.
Mile-end, carpenter—J. Barker, Tooley-street, Southwark, ham ami
bacon factor.
PARTNERSHIPS DISSOLVED.
J., C., and M. Johnson, Lisson-grove, shoe manufacturers—C. Old*
akerand B. Murrell, Evesham, Worcestershire, bankers—M. and H.
Baxter, Tottenham-court-road, milliners—J. Echersley and Samuel
Thompson, Manchester, iron founders —J. Holland, J. Wilson, and R.
Hellaby, Goldsmith-street, Cheapside, silk manufacturers—G. F ree-
man and W. Jackson, Tewksbury, Gloucestershire, machine makers—
W. Whitfield and A. C. J. G. L. De Boullancourt, Keppel-street, Rus-
sell-square, dentists—Hunter, Watt, and Co., Batavia, so far as re-
gards A. W. Bajmanno.
SCOTTISH SEQUESTRATIONS.
J. Hankine, Tradeslon, Glasgow, baker—R. Hunter and Co. Loch-
gilphead, distillers.
During some repairs to the Church of Lavant, a cell was
discovered by the dilapidation of Ike brick work, in which was
a stone coffin of the length of 6ft. Gin containing a skeleton of
a large stature. The lid was ornamented with a curious raised
cross; a pewter chalice, and the remains of a spur mu h cor-
roded, were found in the coffin. It is conjectured to have been
deposited there at least three centuries, and many antiquarians
are anxious to ascertain who was ihe person that was so re-
markably interred.— Sussex Chronicle.
On Monday week, a girl named Campbell, about seven yea va
of w.o ...ML. i*. tUo (-....1 I-IH4 at tf.ith, was
attacked by a dog, and had her left leg dreadfully lacerated ;
and on Wednesday, while a sailor was standing on the stone
pier looking at the shipping, he inadvertently stumbled on a dog
which was lying near him, when the animal fixed on his leg;
Jack, bow over, with that presence of mind which characterises
the British seamen in the hour of danger, fearlessly seized him
by the throat, which he grappled till life was quite extinct, then
pitched him over the parapet into the sea.— Edinburgh Observer .
On Saturday morning, at five o’clock, a hostile meeting took
place at Merlin-park, about two miles from Galway, between
Mr. D D , and Mr. J—— C , both of that town.
Mr. D- was attended by Captain P ,h. p., and Mr. C
by Mr. T M , After the preliminary arrangements had
been made, when the friends found it impossible to have the
affair amicably settled, the parties fired, but we are happy to say
without effect, although the balls passed immediately close to
the principals. The Gentlemen then on the ground interfered,
and the parties shook hands. The affair originated in an argu-
ment respecting the qualifications of a patriot.— Limerick Even-
ing Post.
The following extract from the will of an eccentric gentleman
who thirty years ago was Judge Advocate at Gibraltar, is copied
from the original 44 I desire that the gentlemen attending my
funeral, and a few of their friends, do meet at a tavern to con-
gratulate my getting rid of disease, and to drink a jolly toast to
my requiem, the expenses of the meeting not to exceed fifty
pounds, which sum I request my executors to pay.”— Inverness
Courier.
Gibraltar, April 19.—There has not been experienced at
Gibraltar so severe a winter as the last for upvvards of 30 years.
It was accompanied with gales and hurricanes which produced
the most alarming and serious consequences, by the sudden
destruction of houses, garden-walls, trees lorn up by their roots,
&c., presenting a melancholy and alarming spectacle to the in-
habitants. The shipping also suffered materially, and its severe
effects were seen by innumerable w’recks scattered over our bay.
On the day before Good Friday a phenomenon was displayed of
the most extraordinary and wonderful description—a shower of
frogs made its appearance in the morning, to the utmost conster-
nation and terror of the inhabitants, who had never witnessed
any thing of the kind before.
On Monday afternoon four Irishmen, whilst unloading a barge
belonging to Mr. Flower, of Rotherhithe, were attacked by 14
or 15 Yorkshiremen, who had lately been discharged from Mr,
Foster’s employment for neglect of their work. One of the
Irishmen escaped by swimming ashore, but the three others were
beaten in the most brutal manner. Three of the ringleaders in
(his disgraceful attack were immediately seized, and were brought
before Messrs. Chambers and Ely aid yesterday morning at Union
Hall, for examination; their names are Simon, Wheeler, and
Brown, three very powerful men. The Magistrates held the
defendants to bail, to answer the charge at the Sessions.
Caleb Williams.—The admirers of the vigorous and intel-
lectual style that characterizes the pen of Mr. Godwin, will be
gratified to learn that the work which so pre-eminently established
his fame, and of which the last impression has been long ex-
hausted, may be now again procured, in a revised edition. It is,
we believe, universally allowed that there is no composition, in
the whole range of novd-wriling. so remarkable on the score of
originality, as 44 Caleb Williams.”
Foreign Exclusives.—That development of the arcana of pri-
vileged society, and exposure of the moat hidden proceedings of
fashion’s central coterie , which was afforded to the curious in the
piquant production styled 44 The Exclusives,” is to be succeeded,
in a few days, we hear, by a similar exposition with regard to
the Jlite of foreign society in our metropolis, certain members of
which have rendered themselves not less amenable to speculation
and 44 cri’ica) notice” than our own most particular Exclusives.
BIRTHS.
On the 91st instant, in Portland-place, the Lady of John Jones, Esq*
of a daughter.
On the 22d instant, at the Vicarage House, Wandsworth, the wife of
the Rev. William Borrodailc, of a son.
MARRIED.
On the sth instant, at Church, 1 1 eland, Anna, niece of
Arthur Hume, Esq. Teller of the Exchequer, and grand niece to the
late Earl of Macartney, to F. L, Dames, Esq. of Greenhil), Queen’s
County.
On the 16th instant, at Great Dealings, Mr. Charles Paplar, Devon-
shire* house, Battersea, to Anna, youngest daughter of the late Robert
Gingrer, Esq. of Beatings Hall, Suffolk.
On the 22d instant, at St. Marylebone Church, by the Rev. Evan Ne-
pean, Captain William M. Gusset, of the Royal Engineers, eldest son
of Matthew Gossett, Esq. of Chandos-street, Cavendish-square, to
Louisa, daughter of the late William Walter, Esq. of Devonshire-
place.
On the 17th instant, at Lyrapstone, near Exmouth, by the Rev. John
Hatchard, Vicar of St. Andrew’s, Plymouth, Major John Cox, of the
Rifle Brigade, to Caroline, second daughter of the late Captain George
Wolfe, R.N. C.B. of Hampton-place, Plymouth.
DIED.
On the 17th instant, at Ramsgate, suddenly. Sir John Caldwell, Bart,
of Castle Caldwell, in the County of Fermanagh, a Count of Milan in
the Holy Roman Empire.
On the 21st instant,at Kemp Town, Brighton, aged two years and a
half, Merlel Barbara, daughter of the Rev. I. S. M. Ander-on.
On the 14th instant, at S Ikesworlh, in the County of Durham, univer-
sally respected, Thomas Hopper, Esq. a Magistrate of that County.
London: Printed by H. WARREN, 348, Strand; tsH Pub*
Hihed by P. BURTON, at the tarn* plact*
