

%f)t M
OF
LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.
).] SATURDAY, JANUARY 16, 1830. [Price'SeL
No. 410.]
Jbtoau laiber-


SWAN RIVER.
The subjoined Engraving represents a
Eortion of the luxuriant country on the
anks of Swan River. Its authenticity
may be relied on, as it is copied from a
well-executed print,* from an original
drawing by one of the Expedition. On
this spot Captain Stirling and his party
bivouacked in March, 1827, as shown in
the Engraving.
Perhaps the best accompaniment for
this print will be Mr. Fraser’s Report
of “ the Botanical Productions, fyc. of
the Banks of Swan River, Isle of
Buache, Geographe Buy, and Cape
Natumliste,” lately read before the
Linnasan Society. For a copy of this
Report we are indebted to the Fourth
Edition of Mr Cross’ valuable “Hints,”
noticed in the Description of Swan
River, Ac. in Nos. 368 and 363 bf the
Mirror. We there gave a few extracts
from Mr. Fraser’s Remarks ; but these
were not sufficiently numerous to im-
pair the interest of the entire report.
“ The North and South Heads of the
entrance into Swan River are formed be
low rocks of fossil limestone, in an ad-
vanced state of decomposition, present-
ing, in many instances, apertures of the
most fantastic form, in which are ex-
posed to view the appearance of masses
of roots, and trunks of trees of great
size.
“ The soil on the South Head, though
barren, produces a considerable variety
of interesting plants; amongst which I
observed a beautiful species, producing
large quantities of rich blue flowers, and
a species of reclining white flowers give
a snowy appearance to many parts of the
cliffs.
“ In tracing the River a quarter of a
mile from its entrance on the South
Bank, I observed quantities of a beauti-
ful speqjes of Brownonia, growing in
great luxuriance on the margin of a
salt-marsh; its flowers were of a bril-
liant sky blue. Here I likewise observ-
ed a magnificent species of Melaleuca
with scarlet flowers, and two species of
Metrosideros.
“ Half a mile from the entrance, I
found the soil, although apparently
sterile, to consist of a fine light brown
loam, containing a small proportion of
sand, and capable of producing any de-
scription of light garden crops. This
description applies not only to the im-
♦ Published by Mr. J. W. Huggins, 105,
licadenhsll-street, through whose courtesy we
are enabled to present our readers with the an.
ucxed view.
mediate bank as far ns the reach below
Pelican Point, but likewise to the hills,
as far as my observations went. These
hills present the appearance of a petri-
fied forest, from the immense quantity
of trunks which protrude for several
feet above the surface; but their de-
composed state renders them of benefit
rather than otherwise to the soil.
“ I was much astonished at the beau-
tiful dark green appearance of the trees,
considering that the season had been
evidently unusually dry ; but the cause
must arise from the great number of
springs with which this country abounds.
On penetrating two feet into the earth,
I found the soil perfectly moist; and I
feel confident that, had I proceeded a
foot deeper, I should have lound water.
On the beach I observed several small
pools of water, and numerous moist
spots, which, in seasons of usual humi-
dity, must be converted into springs
issuing from the calcareous rocks be-
neath.
“ The luxuriance of the herbage on
the beach itself is truly astonishing.
Here I observed a beautiful pendulous
species of Leptospermum, resembling,
in its appearance, and the situation it
prefers, the weeping willow. An ar-
borescent species of Acacia was like-
wise seen associating with it.
“ While examining the productions
of a mass of cavernous limestone rocks
on the beach, I was astonished by ob-
serving an extensive spring issue from
beneath them; its width was about
seven feet, running at the rate of three
feet in a second : the water is brackish,
but evidently fresh at some periods of
the tide. Its elevation is about three
feet above low-water mark, yet at the
lowest ebb its current was at the above
rate.
“ The soil on the North Head is
sandy; its productions are much the
same as that on the South. Two hun-
dred yards from the beach the soil
changes to a light red loam, improving,
as the hills are ascended, to that of a
fine virgin earth. The valleys separat-
ing these hills are of the richest de-
scription, and capable of producing any
crop ; the country continues of the same
description along the coast, as far as my
observations went, and inland to Peli-
can Point, beyond which its character
was not examined.
“ The limestone with which these
hills are studded renders them admira-
bly adapted for the culture of the vine,
and, being divested of timber or brush-
wmod, to immediate culture.
“ The few frees and shrubs seen on
34
I'HE MIRROR.
