

ONE PENNY.
Patriotic Pamphlets.
No. 12
Sworn Statement
BY
Horst von der Goltz,
ALIAS
Bridgeman Taylor.
Presented to both Houses of
Parliament by Command of His
Majesty. April, 1916.
CRITCHLEY PARKER,
Australian Statesman and Mining Standard,
Melbourne and Sydney,
1916.


LIST OF PAPERS.
No. 1. —Memorandum respecting the case of Horst von der Goltz
No. 2. —Sworn statement by Horst von der Goltz
Appendix (A). —Addresses of persons taken from a note-baok
found among Goltz’s effects
Appendix (B). —Letters and telegrams found among von der
Goltz’s papers


Sworn Statement by
Horst von der Goltz, alias
Bridgeman Taylor.
No. 1.
Memorandum respecting the Case of Horst von der Goltz.
Horst von der Goltz arrived in England from Holland, on
the 4th November, 1914. He offered information upon pro-
jected air raids, the source where the “Emden” derived her
information as to British shipping, and how the “Leipzig”
was obtaining her coal supplies. He offered to go back to
Germany to obtain the information, and all he asked for
in the first instance was his travelling expenses. He was
interrogated, and, as his statements were conflicting and
unsatisfactory, he was detained. Yon der Goltz was, on the
13th November, 1914, charged with failing to register, and on
the 26th November he was sentenced to six months’ imprison-
ment, with a recommendation for deportation. He served
his sentence at Pentonville Prison, and at the expiration he
was held in custody, first at Brixton and then at Reading
Prison, for deportation.
On the 2nd January, 1916, certain papers were taken from
Captain Papen, late military attache to the German Em-
bassy at Washington, at Falmouth. Among them was a
cheque, dated the Ist September, 1914, for 200 dollars in


favour of Bridgeman Taylor, von der Goltz’s alias. Thq
cheque was endorsed “Bridgeman Taylor” in von der Goltz’s
handwriting. It has already been reproduced in facsimile
in a previous publication.
On the 31st January, 1916, this cheque was shown to von
der Goltz; he admitted his handwriting, and asked to be
allowed to make a voluntary statement. He was removed
to Brixton Prison for the night, and writing materials were
supplied to him by the Governor.
On the 2nd February he was asked whether he was willing
to swear to the truth of his statements before a commissioner
of oaths. He assented, and arrangements were made ac-
cordingly.
Von der Goltz’s statements finds corroboration in the
cheques taken from Captain von Papen at Falmouth, amongst
which were the following:—
Dol. c.
*September 16: Knauth, Nachod, and Kuhne (for
Taylor, Ryan, Buffalo) 200 00
*September 22: Knauth, Nachod, and Kuhne (for
Ryan, Buffalo) 200 00
*October 14: Knauth, Nachod, and Kuhne (for
Fritzen and Busse, Buffalo) 40 00
November 21; Tauscher, New York (a small
Browning for Burth) 11 65
December 18: H. Tauscher (for Glaser Bridge-
port) , 157 56
All these names occur in von der Goltz’s statement., He
cannot have known that these cheques" had come into the
possession of the British authorities; indeed, the last two
(H. Tauscher, 21st November and 18th December),! were
paid after he had left America.
*The first three of these cheques are reproduced in facsimile in
a previous Parliamentry White Paper, ‘‘Miscellaneous, Ho. 6
(1916),” [Cd. 8174] see pp. 26 and 27.
(See “Miscellaneous, No. 6 (1916),” [Cd. 8174], Annex. 2, cheques
Nos. 53 and 70, pp. 19 and 20.
HORST VON DER GOLTZ,


No. 2.
Sworn Statement by Horst von der Goltz.
The 3rd August, 1914, licence was given to me by my
commanding officer (Mexican army) to separate myself from
the service of the brigade to which I was attached for the
term of six months, said leave to be extended at my appli-
cation. I left directly for El Paso, Texas, where I was told
by Mr. Kuck, German consul at Chihuahua, Mexico, who
stayed there, to put myself at the disposition of Captain
von Papen. I left there for Washington, D.C:, the 18th
August, and received there a letter informing me that Cap-
tain von Papen would like to meet me at New York in about
ten-twelve days. I left, consequently, Washington, and went
to stay for some days at Ashbury Park (10th August), and
arrived at New York after about five-six days (date of ar-
rival to be found in the book of the Holland House). I then
paid a visit to Dr. Kraske, vice-consul at the German Gen-
eral Consulate, and was told by him that he would inform
me by letter when von Papen would see me, in order to en-
able me to avoid being seen too much at the consulate. Two
to three days afterwards I received a letter, written by Dr.
Kraske on private paper, telling me that a gentleman who was
interested in me wished to see me at the consulate at a cer-
tain hour. The letter was written in this manner by agree-
ments.*
Attending to the request, I had at first some conversation
with Captain von Papen about recent events in Mexico, and
afterwards was asked to give my opinion about a proposal
made to the German Embassy, the writer of which, a certain
Schuhmacher, asked for financial support in order to carry
out a scheme by which he wrote he would be able to make
raids on towns situated on the coast of the Great Lakes. He
proposed to use motor-boats armed with machine guns. The
proposal being rejected on account of the Embassy receiving
unfavourable information about the writer, I was at first
requested to give my assistance to a scheme of invasion to
be put in execution by entering Canada with armed forces
*Note. —See Appendix (B),
ALIAS BRIDGE MAN TAYLOR.


recruited from tlie reservists in the United States of America,
and aided by German warships at that time in the Pacific.
The scheme, which was proposed by Captain von Papen
and Boy-Ed, was abandoned, objections having been made by
Count Bernstorff. I was told so by Captain von Papen.
Then Captain von Papen asked me to see at my hotel two
Irishmen, prominent members of Irish associations, who
had both fought during the Irish rebellion, who had pro-
posed to Captain von Papen to blow up the locks of the
canals connecting the Great Lakes, the main railway junc-
tions, and grain elevators. It was alleged that by those
means, as well as by wholesale distribution of proclamations
intended to terrify the populace, combined with rumours of
invasion judiciously circulated in the press, a panic, would
be created in Canada, which would prevent the Dominion
from giving any aid to England. I received the gentlemen
at my hotel, the men bringing with them a letter of intro-
duction written by Captain von Papen, and received, after
having taken them to my room, further details about the
matter, in addition to maps and diagrams showing the most
vulnerable points of the different canals. These maps had
been evidently cut out of books, and I returned them after-
wards to one of the gentlemen, who said that he had to put
the maps into the books again, he having made use of those
books at the insurance office at which he was employed.
I then had to get some men to help me to put the scheme
into execution, but engaged, before I went to Baltimore, only
one man, Charles Tucker, alias Tucsheimer, who had also
some conversation with one of the men who proposed the
scheme.
Receiving a letter of introduction* to Mr, Luederitz, consul
at Baltimore, who was to aid me by his counsel, I went there,
taking Tucker with me, and was received by Mr. Luederitz
at the consulate in Baltimore. He evidently had been in-
formed about the matter beforehand, for he addressed me
as Major von der Goltz, although my letter of introduc-
tion was written in favour of Mr. Bridgeman H. Taylor. He
showed very much interest, and, besides supplying me with
a revolver, my own being out of order temporarily, suggested
*Note. —See Appendix (B).
HORST VON HER GOLTZ,


to furnish me with a passport to be obtained through the
State Department, Washington, D. 0., proving me to be B.
H. Taylor, in order that I should be able to travel safely.
He also proposed to me to make use of part of the crew and
one officer of a G. ship at that time in the harbour, and
furnished me with his visit card, at the back of which he
wrote recommending Major von der Goltz, or something to
that effect, which I should give to the captain of the ship.
While I was still conversing with Mr. Luederitz the captain
of the ship was announced by a clerk, and Mr. Luederitz,
telling the clerk to bring the gentleman in, introduced me
to the captain personally. One of the clerks, a notary, made
out an application to the State Department, Washington,
D.C., for a passport purporting to be desired by a certain
B. H. Taylor. All information given in this passport was
fictitious. It was arranged that this passport was to be sent
to Mr. Buck, Hew York, who was to deliver it to me. The
following day, a Sunday, I paid, accompanied by Tucker, a
visit to the ship, dined there and selected the men intended
to be used in the enterprise personally. The men were ac-
quainted with the duties demanded from them. I also
listened for some time to wireless news received on board, read
to me by the operator, the captain informing me that he had
been forbidden by the harbour authorities to use his appa-
ratus for sending purposes. The captain promised me to
pay off the men selected at the consulate in a few days and
to send them to Hew York under the supervision of an
officer. Everything necessary having been agreed upon, I
left for Hew York to report there to Captain von Papen,
Arrived at Hew York, I selected three men recommended
to me, acquainted them with the main object of the scheme,
and agreed to pay them daily while in Hew York, their em-
ployment to cease when the object of our enterprise should
have been achieved; in that case the men should also receive
a bonus. Expecting the arrival of the sailors from Baltimore,
I spent several days waiting, meanwhile meeting von Papen
frequently at the German Club or at the Consulate.
As I needed money to furnish these sailors with neces-
saries, Captain von Papen gave me a cheque payable to
Brigeman Taylor, which cheque I had cashed through the
ALIAS BRIDGE MAN TAYLOR.


agency of an acquaintance, Mr. Stallford, member of the
German Club.
The men arrived, were quartered in several hotels; but on
my noticing that my movements were being watched, I sent
them back to make the detectives think the enterprise
abandoned.
I told Captain von Papen that it would be more easy for
him to supply me with materials, dynamite, and arms cheaply,
on account of his connections, informing him that I could
not get those materials except at a prohibitive price.
Von Papen then informed me that Captain Tauscher, of
Krupp’s Agency, had agreed to furnish me with those things,
and told me to see him at his office.
I saw Mr. Tauscher, and he gave me a letter of intro-
duction to the Dupont Powder Company, recommending B.
H. Taylor, and the company supplied me with an order to
the bargee in charge of the dynamite barges lying on the
New Jersey side near the Statue of Liberty. Captain
Tauscher told me he would send the automatic pistols by
messenger to Hoboken, New York, to be delivered there to
one of my agents at a certain restaurant, as he would be
liable to punishment if he delivered them in New York with-
out having seen my permit. The reasons why I did not apply
to the police for a permit are obvious.
In order to get the dynamite it was necessary for me to
hire a motor-boat at a place near 146 Street, Harlem, and
to put the dynamite on board of the barge in suite cases. After
returning to the station, where I had hired the boat, I went
in a taxicab, having two suit-cases with me, to the German'
Club, to sec von Papen, who told me to call for the gene-
rators and the wire again at the club. I took the dynamite
to my rooms, where I kept also a portion of the arms packed
in small portmanteaus ready to be removed, the rest of the
dynamite and arms being in the keeping of two of my agents,
one of which was Mr. Eritzen, discharged from a Russian
steamer, where he had acted in the capacity of purser; the
other one being Mr. Busse, a commercial agent, who had
lived for some time in England; the only other agent I em-
ployed besides C. Covani, who attended to me personally,
Tucker not being entrusted with any of those things.
HORST VON DER GOLTZ,


Two or three days afterwards I received from Captain
von Papen at his rooms at the club, in the presence of Frit-
zen and Covani, generators and wire, which I took to my
rooms in a taxicab.
After some days spent by conferring about the ways in
which we would try to execute the orders given to me, we
started from Central Station, New York, for Buffalo, Fritzen,
Busse, and Tucker taking care of the dynamite and arms,
Covani attending to me. - '
Arrived at Buffalo I hired rooms at 198, Delaware Avenue,
had the dynamite brought there, and spent some days trying
to get information about the precautions taken by the Cana-
dian Government. Then I transported myself and three of
the agents to Niagara Falls, New York, the 15th September.
While still at Buffalo I received a telegram sent by von
Papen and signed “Steffens,” informing that John Ryan,
lawyer, had money and instructions.* I went to see this man,
but he told me he knew nothing whatever about the matter.
I directly sent telegram to “Steffens” asking for explana-
tion. The 16th September received answer* “Ryan got
money.” On applying to the man again I received money,
Out no instructions.
Being thrown upon my own discretion, I determined to
reconnoitre the terrain where I wanted to act first, but to
do nothing further till I should receive orders.
On 25th September received notice from Ryan to come to
Buffalo. Having meantime received privately information
that the Ist Canadian Contingent had left Yalcartier Camp,
I knew that I should be recalled, the object of the enterprise
being removed. I received from Ryan the telegram agreed
upon in that case, but as I had spent most of the money
furnished to me, I asked whether Ryan had not received
money so as to enable me to pay off the men. Ryan said
he had not, but gave me some on his own initiative, and said
he would wire to “Steffens.” On the 26th September I
received telegram from “Steffens” telling me to do what I
did think best, and asking whether I had received 200 dol-
lars. Thinking it best to return to New York, all the more
as funds were insufficient, I discharged Busse and Fritzen,
*Note. —See Appendix (U).
ALIAS BRIDGEMAN TAYLOR.


who went to Buffalo, left dynamite and other materials in
the keeping of an aviator who was manager of the Fels
Restaurant at Niagara Falls, to he used again when neces-
sary, and left with Covaui for New York by way of Buffalo.
Having arrived at New York, I went to report to von
Papen at the G. Club, and when asked by him why I had
not acted on his instructions, replied that I had not received
any instructions from Ryan, and that I had temporised
awaiting further orders.
The matter having been explained to his satisfaction, he
asked me if I was ready to go to Germany. Receiving a
reply in the affirmative, he said that he would arrange with
Count Bernstorff for my passage, and that I should present
myself at my arrival at Berlin at the Department, 111. B.
General Staff.
Some days later X received from him 200 dollars to pay for
my passage, although I had myself money enough, and I
then paid off Covani, giving order that he should remove
from a house in 15th Street, New York, if I remember
rightly, Nos. 113 or 115, two suit-cases, filled with 60 per
cent, dynamite.
Whether he complied with the order I am unable to say, as
I left the same day, the Bth October, for Italy.
I received also from Captain von Papen a letter of intro-
duction to the German Consul-General at Genoa, recommend r
ing me to him.
This letter was written in favour of Horst von der Goltz,
Since that time I have had no communication with Cap-
tain von Papen.
Following I will give some facts come to my knowledge
connected with the enterprise, wfiich I have reserved, be-
cause for some reason or other they do not properly belong
to the narrative, but which, nevertheless, may prove of
portance.
Information, the accuracy of which I have no reason to
doubt, has made me believe the United States Secret Service
knew about the matter from beginning to end. I know I
was w r atched in New York, Baltimore, and Buffalo, and
telling Captain von Papen of this he replied that the men
had orders only to watch, but to interfere on no account.
HORST VON DER GOLTZ,


His statement confirmed my suspicions, to which I arrived
after careful deliberation.
Before I left Hew York a messenger arrived at my rooms
sent by Captain von Papen by previous arrangement, to
call for a portmanteau containing revolvers and automatics
which were to be used again when needed; among those arms
was a revolver, “Colts,” having stamped on the holster “El
Paso Arms Company,” or something to that effect, property
belonging to me, and some other arms I put at his disposition.
There are still in the keeping of Mr. Luederitz at Balti-
more a box of saddles and a portmanteau belonging to me.
C. -Covani is a private enquiry agent and well acquainted
with American detective agents. He speaks several languages
fluently, and has been formerly in the employ of Pinkerton’s
and other agencies. Address, 251, West 46th Street. He
came to me well recommended.
I received no remuneration for my services, but the money
I expended on hotel bills, travelling, and other private ex-
penses was refunded to me.
Of course all the money necessary for the payment of my
men, expenses for them, etc., was paid to me by Captain
von Papen in advance; only once per cheque, all other pay-
ments being made to me in United States of America Trea-
sury notes, with the exception of the money I received
through Ryan, which consisted of ordinary banknotes.
Before I left Hew York I had some conversation with
Captain von Papen about the war, and while speaking of
the end of the war Captain von Papen said, “Should things
start to look bad for us, there will something happen over
here.” In connection with other statements of his he specu-
lated on America joining Germany or on a possible uprising
in the U.S.A.
Orders were also sent by Captain von Papen to most of
the consuls or consular agents in cities near the Canadian
frontier to assist me with all means at their power.
I frequently w r as present when Captain von Papen re-
ceived information men who came to see him about
matters connected with German, Irish, and other associa-
tions, but I am unable to recall the exact topic of the con-
versations.
ALIAS BRIDGE MAN TAYLOR.


I was also present when Captain von Papen paid some
of those men, at least I saw him giving them money.
Captain von Papen informed me that he had been very
short of money to be used to gain information, till Dernberg
had arranged matters.
The facts given above are all I am so far able to remem-
ber, my memory having suffered much through my confine-
ment, but it is quite possible that I shall later on be able to
supplement the information I have now given.
I have made those statements on the distinct understanding
that the statements I have made, or should make in future,
will not be used against me; that I am not to be prosecuted
for participation in any enterprise directed against the
United Kingdom or her Allies I engaged in at the direction
of Captain von Papen or other representatives of the German
Government; and that the promise made to me by ,
in the presence of ——, that lam not to be extradited or
sent to any country where I am liable to punishment for
political offences, is made on behalf of His Majesty’s Go-
vernment.
Written by myself and signed.
H. v. GOLTZ.
i Annex to No. 2.
Names of Persons Implicated .*
Buck, N.Y.—Received passport, recommended Covani.
Agents —
Fritzen, N.Y.—Received and transported dynamite; tried
to blackmail me.
Tucker, N.Y. —Acquainted with general scheme as proposed
by Tuite.
Busse, N.Y. —Went to Dupont’s and Tauscher.
Covani, N.Y.—Acted as secretary; present when I re-
ceived money from Ryan for distribution. Can iden-
tify telegrams.
Hausemann (Eng. Co., N.Y.). —Knew of general scheme;
offered to supply guns.
HORST VON DER GOLTZ,


Luederitz.—Proposed passport; paid off men from steamer;
introduced me to captain of same under my name —not
nom de guerre.
Tauscher.—Acquainted with scheme; friend of Papen; sup-
plied automatic pistols and orders for dynamite.
Papen.—Supplied money, generators, and connecting wires.
Instigator and “'General-in-Chief.’’
Consul, St. Paul.—Name not known to me. Had been in-
formed of plans and ordered to assist me.
Consul, Chicago.—Same. Had been informed of plans and
ordered to assist me.
U.S.S.S.—Knew all about it,
Tuite, N.Y.—Made proposals, supplied maps and diagrams
of canals, etc.
Semon, Buffalo.—Knew of scheme; assisted by putting at
our disposition his knowledge of terrain,
John Ryan, Buffalo.—Received money and full instructions
from Papen. Paid out money, but said had no instruc-
tions.
Captain Hecker, N.Y., America.—Released by British
authorities on parole to stay in New York; knew of
whole scheme and assisted.
Employees of Tauscher, of Luederitz, Officers of Ship.
Mostly acquainted with scheme.
*This table was written by von der Goltz and attached by him
to the preceding statement.
APPENDIX (A).
Addresses of Persons taken from a Note-booh found among
von der Goltz’s Effects.
Papen, alias Steffens (P), 112, Central Park South, New
York City.
Schuhmaeher, Edenbower River Farm, Oregon.
Thomas P, Tuite, 372, West 120 Street, Top Floor (? New'
York).
ALIAS BRIDGE MAN TAYLOR.


A. A. Fritzen, c/o Mr. Wilbrand, 4202, Avenue, 42 Street,
Brooklyn, New York.
Busse, World Building, 40 C., New York.
Frederick Busse, 222, West 24 Street.
Tucker, alias Tucsheimer, New York.
Covani, 250, West 46 Street, Room 8, Tel. 7082, Bryant.
Karl W. Buck, 843, West End Avenue,
John T. Ryan, R. 613, Mutual Life Buildings, Buffalo.
Aviator (name not given), Fels Restaurant, Nigara Falla,
United States of America.
Dr. Colin Ross, “Zeit im Bild,” 16, Tengstrasse, Munich.
J. D. Zenner, 606, Brisbane Buildings, Buffalo.
APPENDIX (B).
Copies of Letters and Telegrams found among von
der Qoltz’s Papers.
(Translation.)
New York, August 21, 1914.
Dear Herr von der Goltz, —
I am very sorry not to have found you in to-day, when,
after another engagement, I was able to come round and try
to catch you.
I had arranged a meeting fo. yesterday morning between
you and a gentleman who is intex'ested in you.
If you call on me to-morrow morning, at whatever time
is convenient to you, I shall probably be able to arrange
another interview.
I am, etc.,
DR. KRASKE.
The covering envelope was addressed as follows:
Post Mark —New York, N.Y., Aug. 21, 1914. 3 p.m.
Baron von der Goltz,
Holland House,
Fifth Avenue.
HORST VON DER GOLTZ,


(Translation.)
New York, 27. VIII. 14.
I request the Consuls in Baltimore and St. Paul to give
the hearer of this letter—Mr. Bridgeman Taylor—all the
assistance he may ask for.
von PAPEN,
Captain in the General Staff of the Army
and Military Attache.
•
Copies of Telegrams.
Received at 50 Buta, 24 Mdr.
6 Extra. Ex. New York, N.Y., Sept. 15-14.
Mr. Taylor, 198, Delaware Ave., Buffalo.
Sent money to-day. Consult lawyer John Ryan, six hun-
dred thirteen Mutual Life Buildings, Buffalo, not later than
seventeenth. —STEFFEN, 112, Central Park South. 1245 P.
Received at 82 Buta, 5 Bowen Block, Cor Pearl and
Huron Streets.
Fx. New York, N.Y., Sept. 16-14.
Mr, Taylor, 198, Delaware Avenue, Blfo.
Ryan got money and instructions. STEFFENSUD.
114 P.
Received at Telephone Building, Church and Franklin
Streets, Buffalo, N.Y.
9 Fx. Gy. 9 Mh.
Fx. New York, N.Y., Sept. 24, 1914.
John T. Ryan, 613, Mutual Life Buildings, Buffalo, N.Y.
Please instruct Taylor cannot do anything more for him.
—STEFFENS. 1251 PM
Received at 2 N.Y., F. 11, Id.
C.P. New York, Sept. 26, 1914.
Mr. Taylor, care Western Union, Niagara Falls, N.Y.
Do what you think best. Did you receive dollars two hun-
dred ?—Ryan. 945 AM.
ALIAS BRIDGE MAN TAYLOR.


Public Money should be kept
within the Empire.
“Age” ( Melbourne) —June 20, 1916.
On an average British tenders for electrical machinery
are now not less than 10 per cent, above pre-war prices. The
American manufacturer knows exactly the difficulties that
the British manufacturer is working under, and suits his price
to the knowledge. The result is that huge profits are going
to America helping to build up reserves that after the war
will probably be used to undercut England and retain Aus-
tralian trade. As long as British companies make some bid
for the many large Australian contracts now offering it is
worth America’s while to compete on better terms. Have
we then simply turned Germany out of our market for the
benefit of America? Under existing conditions American
contractors can tender below English prices, and give a
guarantee for delivery, at least “on rail” in America <f not
in Australia, by a certain date. Contracts from Australia
worth probably £5,000,000 are pending. Some may perhaps
wait, but others are urgent. Where is the work to be done,
and to whom is the money to be paidl
Australian Statesman * Mining Standard ”■—June 22,1916.
The Government should be in a position to be able to de-
mand of any company, Australian or British or alien, that
its entire constitution should be ascertainable. Until this is
so, alien companies, which may in point of fact be enemy
companies, are at a very considerable advantage as compared
with companies purely Australian or British, The injustice
of this there should be no need to point out twice.
German Goods are UNCLEAN. Are you
buying them without knowing it ?
Wholly Set-up and Printed In Australia by Statesman and
Mining Standard, Pty. Ltd., Melbourne and Sydney.
