

SYDNEY
XMAS
POSTAL
SOUVENIR
1895-6
Price One Shilling
With Compliments of


D r WAUGH’S
BAKING POWDER
FRONT
ALWAYS
IN
T
m
7 1
m
■
(is-
-6 '1?
%
35^
«r^S
? C^*TtoWi/i
ACROSTIC POEM.
Dp. Waugh is a friend of our race,
Over most others he holds pride of place,
Caterers bless him while pastry they make,
Triumphs of art by his aid is their cake.
Our best efforts without are ever but poor.
Richness and lightness his powders insure.
Waugh’S Baking Powdep is really sublime.
Ask for none other; it would be a crime.
Underline Waugh’S when orders you send ;
Grocers must know he is their best friend.
Happy the wife who uses Waugh’S powder.
She praises it constantly louder and louder.
Dr. WAUGH'S BAKING POWDER.
Bright maids it does enamour ;
AH good housewives for it clamour;
Kitchen men for it are looking;
Infallible powder used in cooking.
Not a ship but should have in its galley.
Gratefully around it the cooks all rally.
Powder like it is a heavenly boon,
Of a truth little less than the rising moon.
Waugh’s Baking Powder ’tis certainly sure
Does all other excel because it is pure.
Eureka ! ’tis found, and we gladly will try it,
Rushing soon to the shop where we can buy it.


FIRE
Insurance Company, Limited.
The
Cash Bonus
reduces
the cost of
Fire Insurance
every year.
"V, MUTUAL
The Policies
cover all losses
by Lightning-,
Bush Fires,
and
Gas Explosion.
FIRE INSURANCE AT LOWEST RATES.
The Cash Bonus of 20 per cent, on Premiums
for the year 1894, viz. ,£8,695, divided
with Policy-holders, is now payable on Renewal
of Policies, making ,£73,575 divided in cash
between Policy-holders and Shareholders in
twelve years.
HEAD OFFICES:
120 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
KELSO KINO, Secretary


Manufactures Rvyafes de Corsets P. D.
French 1? 0 (orsets.
V?
1 JEANNE d’ARC.
JgHESE CELEBRATED CORSETS
have been Awarded The Highest
Prizes wherever exhibited, in compe-
tition with the World’s Corset Manu-
facturers, a record no o. her firm can
show.
At the last Antwerp Exhibition,
1894, the senior partner of the firm was
r appointed
PRESIDENT OF THE INTERNATIONAL
JURY, *
an honour conferred generally on the
Manufacturer who takes the Lead in his
J particular branch of Manufacture.
JuJ
‘ ‘ MARGUERITE
The P D Corset is without a rival, and
may justly be called
The Queen &
of Corsets.
The greatest flattery is imitation, nd as
a good many inferior makes, with similar
sounding names, are offered for sale, pur-
chasers are particularly requested to see
that each Corset bears the Manufactdrer’s
Trade Mark on band inside—
Stft
TRADE MARK.
$5
&
Si
in
'SQ
&
MARQUE DEPOSEE.
Wholesale Only from the Sole Agents for Australasia.
BORSDORFF & CO..
BARRACK ST., SyDNey.
252, 254 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.


SYDNEY AND SUBURBAN
XMAS
POSTAL SOUVENIR.
1895-6.
Price - - One Shilling,
Sfitmefl:
FRANK COFFEE & CO.. PUBLISHERS,
146 Clarence Street.
DESCRIPTION OF GENERAL POST OFFICE.
THE General Post Office, Sydney, is situated
in Martin Place, Sydney, and extends
from George street to Pitt-street. Its northern
front, facing Martin Place, is 353 feet 6 inches
long ; its eastern end, fronting Pitt-street, is
108 feet ; its western end, facing George-street,
is 78 feet, and its height 80 feet. The clock
tower, in the centre, is 25 feet square, and
rises to a height of 242 feet 6 inches, being
surmounted by a flagstaff, used to signal the
arrival of mails by sea. The ground floor
contains the Telegraph Office, in George-street;
the private letter boxes, delivery, registry,
inquiry, and stamp sales office, also posting
places for letters, newspapers, and parcels, in
Martin Place; and the Savings Bank and
Money Order Department in Pitt-street,
having a banking room 60 feet by 43 feet, and
24 feet in height, behind which is the despatch
room, 103 feet by 78 feet, 30 feet high. In the
basement is a large space for mail carts, the
newspaper sorting room, battery room, tele-
graph messengers’ room, &c. On the first floor
are apartments for the Postmaster-General,
Deputy Postmaster-General, Secretary, Super-
intendent of Telegraphs, and money order
branches, with rooms for cashier, accountant,
and records ; also offices for inland mails and
irregularity branches. The second floor con-
tains numerous offices for money order,
banking and telegraph business; and on the
third floor is the telegraph operating room,
the Telephone Exchange, and store department.
The whole is provided with hydraulic elevators,
electric light, telephone communication, gas,
water, &c.
The building is of sandstone, on a granite
base, with numerous polished columns of grey
granite, from Moruya, New South Wales. It
was designed in 1864 by the Colonial Architect,
Mr. James Barnett, F.R.1.8.A., and was
completed in 1887, at a cost of £335,000.


WE LEAD THEn ALL
FOR
China,
Glass, and.
Earthenware
JOHN DYNON, SON & CO.
HALL.
CHINA
265 GEORGE ST.. SYDNEY
And.
(OPPOSITE BOND: STREET),
JOHN DYNON & SONS,
LONSDALE ST., MELBOURNE.
IIWPOHTEpS ofO*
Continental Novelties and Modern
Dinner Table Decorations by each
Mail
The Latest Productions in Crown,
“""Derby, and Royal Worcester Porce^
lain
SOLE AGENTS FOR
“Brown Lichfield Dinner Ware”
WE INVITE VISITS OF INSPECTION.
Our IODg experience as the Oldest House in the Trade
offers buyers special advantages.


History of the Post Office in New South Wales.
IT will perhaps surprise many of our readers
when we tell them that for twenty-three
years after the establishment of the colony
there were no regular Post Offices, nor did
any but the most imperfect means of postal
communication exist.
The earliest mention of postal communica-
tion is contained in the Sydney Gazette for
July 10th, 1803, in which is given the regula-
tions for the passage boatmen between Sydney
and Parramatta, and also a list of charges
they were entitled to make. Amongst other
things, we find—“ Letters, exclusive of
Government Service, each two-pence,” thus
The First Post Office in New South Wales, 1810.
showing that at this early date means of
postal communication existed, imperfect
though they were. Matters remained in the
same state until 1809, when Mr. Isaac Nichols
was appointed Postmaster, and a code of
regulations drawn up.
In 1810, Governor Macquarie established a
regular Post Office in Sydney, in which all
letters and parcels were ordered to be de-
posited, previous to their distribution. Here-
with we give an illustration of this Office,
which stood in George Street (at that time
called High Street) near the Queen’s Wharf,
and has only recently been demolished. Mr.
Nichols died on November Bth, 1819, and was
succeeded by Mr. Geo. Panton, who also held
the office of Wharfinger, transacting both
those duties in a small apartment on the
King’s Wharf, which was afterwards the office
of the Landing Waiter.
Notwithstanding that the population was
fast increasing, and in 1821 was nearly 30,000,
no measures towards additional postal com-
munication were taken till 1825, when an Act
was passed by Sir Thomas Brisbane, with the
advice of the Council, intituled “An Act to
Regulate the Postage of Letters in New South
Wales." Shortly after passing this Act, Sir
Thomas Brisbane retired from the Govern-
ment of the colony, and was succeeded, pro
tem, by the Lieutenant-Governor, Colonel
Stewart of the 3rd Buffs, the commander of
the forces. On the 6th December of the same
year, he issued a Proclamation which fixed
the rates of postage and the salaries and
allowances of the postmasters, and which also
contained regulations for their guidance. At
the same time, tenders were invited for the
conveyance of mails between Sydney and
Parramatta, Windsor and Liverpool, and
between Liverpool and Campbelltown, and
from Parramatta to Emu Plains (Penrith),


Ev<?r\Jbod\) Should Insure against Fire.
Mutual
FIRE
HEAD OFFICES,
95 Pitt Street,
SYDNEY.
insurance Company, Ltd.
DIRECTORS:
Hon. JOHN SEE, M.P., Chairman.
(Late Colonial Treasurer ).
Hon. JOHN T. TOOHEY, M.L.C. JAMES P. GAEYAN,|Esq.
P. HOGAN, Esq., J.P.
P. STANLEY, Esq., J.P. JOHN DONELAN, Esq.
FII*B RIS«;S OF EVERY DESCRIPTION ACCEPTED AT
liOWEST RATES.
a (Ash 50NOS
Is paid to Policy-holders
mm^ r . . . Every Year.
Damages b\J lightning and Gas Explosion Paid
whether s?t on thereby or not.
LOSSES BY BUSH FIRES COVERED.
Transacts FIRE Business ONLY,.
BO BERT KERR 9 Manager .


and thence to Bathurst. The rules of
postage depended apparently on the distance
and difficulty of transmission. The lowest
single inland rate was 3d. and the highest
12d. s
Letters to and from N.S.W. and Van
Diemen’s Land were subjected to a charge of
3d. each (ship rate), and Id. for newspapers.
On March 28th, 1828, Postmasters were
appointed at Bathurst, Campbelltown, Liver-
pool, Newcastle, Penrith, and Windsor. The
total amount received by them as salary
during the year amounted to only .£34 7s. 9d.
The postal establishment of Sydney at this
time consisted of one principal Postmaster,
Mb. James Raymond,
First Postmaster-General of New South Wales.
one clerk, one letter carrier; and in addition
to the eight country Postmasters there was a
letter carrier appointed for Parramatta, who
was authorised to demand Id. from the public
on every letter delivered by him, and this
payment was the only remuneration received ;
the Post Office revenue being ,£598 2s.
On March 3rd, 1828, daily mails commenced
being forwarded from the post-office in Bent
Street to Parramatta and Liverpool, Windsor
and Campbelltown, twice a week, and to
Newcastle (per “Lord Liverpool” packet),
Penrith and Bathurst, once a week. This Bent
Street post-office was at the rear of the present
Department of Public Instruction, and was
simply a wooden structure like a painted
doorway, or a military sentry box set into the
wall. To the rear of the sentry box was a
small wooden shed to contain the postmaster
and his letter bags while he was engaged in
sorting. Indeed, so small were the premises
that if the mail happened to be unusually
bulky some portion was taken to the post-office,
while the balance was carried on the shoulders
of the sailors to the private residence of Mr.
Panton, then overlooking Campbell’s Wharf.
In 1829, great improvements became visible,
and in the country towns the inhabitants began
to look forward to the arrival of the mails with
some degree of anxiety.
On April 24 th, 1829, Mr. Pan ton died at the
age of forty-three. Mr. James Raymond was
gazetted as his successor on April 27th.
In 1830, the extension of the establishment
throughout the entire located parts of the
colony became general. From Port Macquarie,
the northern boundary to Inverary, 120 miles
from Sydney to the southward, and to the
Wellington Valley, 238 miles to the westward,
exercising its influence, and possessing all the
elements of a well-organised post. The mails
were regularly conveyed from the General Post
Office, now removed from Bent Street to a
handsome building in the centre of George
Street, in well-appointed coaches and fours.


This building was formerly occupied as the
police and is well depicted in the
accompanying engraving. The land upon
which it stood, and which is a portion of that
on which the present post-office stands, “was
bought,” according to the evidence of Mr.
James Raymond, given before the board of
enquiry on the General Post Office in 1851, “by
Governor Macquarie for a hogshead of brandy
and .£3O or .£50.”
A gratuity of 2d. was allowed for every
etter bearing postage conveyed by water
between Sydney and Newcastle. Letter-
carriers first wore a uniform this year.
During 1831, further improvements were
effected by the establishment of a regular Two-
penny Post Delivery twice a day, throughout
Sydney, and unpaid “receipt boxes” were
The Sydney Post Office in 1838.
fixed at different parts of the town, and visited
and emptied twice a .day, immediately before
the general delivery by messengers from the
Central Post Office; but tl e only place were
letters could be postpaid was the General Post
Office.
The mails hitherto transmitted to Newcastle
by sailing vessels were, in 1832, conveyed by
steamers plying twice a week. These were the
“Sophia Jane,” of 153 tons; and the “Wil-
liam the Fourth,” of 58 tons.
In 1834 the services of the mounted-police in
conveying the mails were dispensed with ;
contracts being taken for the conveyance of all
inland mails.
In 1835. Sir Richard Bourke, the Governor-
in-Chief, deeming it expedient to provide in a
more ample manner for the conveyance and
postage of letters, framed, with the advice of
the Legislative Council, an act intituled An
Act to Provide for the Conveyance and Postage
of Letters; by which the former Act, framed
by Sir Thomas Brisbane in 1825, was repealed.
The rates of postage on inland letters were
made chargeable according to weight and to
the distance carried, ranging from 4d. for a
single letter conveyed 15 miles to Is. for 300
miles, and Id. additional for every 100 miles or
part thereof. Packages were forwarded from
one part of the colony to another at a charge
of 4d. each, whilst newspapers were allowed
free if posted within seven days from date of
publication ; they were charged as a
single letter.
Ship letters, either despatched or received,
were charged, in addition to the inland post-
age, 3d. for a single letter, 4d. for a double
letter, sd. for a treble letter, and 6d fora
quadruple letter, or any greater weight.
In 1837, a post-office was established at
Melbourne, which city received its name on
the lOtli April, 1837, and mail communication
was established by water as opportunity
offered. In 1838, overland communication
was established. The mail ran once a fortnight
between Yass and Melbourne. It was during
this year that daily communication by steam
with the Hunter River commenced, and that a
second daily mail was despatched to Parra-
matta by the river steamers. Stamped covers
were also introduced and sold at Is. 3d. per
dozen, and a letter enclosed therein was
allowed to pass free in Sydney. These con-
tinued in use until 1852.
The revenue, which in 1828—that being the
year in which the department was first officially


recognised as a Government establishment—
was only .£598 2s. 4^d., had increased to £8390
16s. lid. ; while the expenditure, which in the
former case was only £B9O ss. B|d., had
augmented to £10,357 Is. 6d.
The number of post-offices established by the
end of 1838 was forty—five times as many as
existed ten years previously ; and the number
of miles travelled by the mails in the year,
exclusive of water carriage, was 253,830,
against 40,560 miles travelled in 1821.
At this time the Sydney Postal Department
consisted of fifteen hands—comprising the Post-
master-General, accountant, six clerks, six
letter-carriers and office-keeper.
The Sydney Post Office in 1847.
In 1839, the daily delivery by a postman on
horseback was extended to Darlinghurst, Surry
Hills, and Newtown.
In 1841, New Zealand became a separate
• colony, and the post-office situated at Korrarika,
which had previously been paid through the
New South Wales Government, ceased, in con-
sequence, to have any connection with the
Sydney office.
On the 10th June, 1841, steam connection
with Melbourne was established by the “ Sea
Horse,” and the postage was Is. 3d. for a single
letter. On the 21st January, 1842, the first
steamboat started for Moreton Bay. In 1844,
two commissioners—E. D. James and R. R.
Smith, Esqs.—were sent out by the London
Post Office authorities to enquire into the state
of the postal establishments of this colony, with
a view of placing it under the control of the
Postmaster-General of the United Kingdom.
Their visit, however, brought no such result,
the office remaining under local control.
On the 11th June, 1844, the first monthly
contract packet, the “May Sharp,” arrived
from the United Kingdom.
In 1847 sundry improvements were effected
in the structure of the Post Office. A hand-
some portico was erected, six doric columns
supporting an entablature and pediment, with
the Royal Arms (executed by Mr. Abrahem) in
the centre of the lympanum. (See illustration.)
On the Ist January, 1847, the first overland
mail to Adelaide was despatched, the distance
being 750 miles. The route chosen was via
Melbourne and Mount Gambier. The postage
rate for a single letter being Is. 6d.
In 1849, during the Government of Sir C. A.
Fitzroy, an Act to establish an uniform rate of
postage and to consolidate and amend the law
for the conveyance and postage of letters was
passed. This Act repealed all former ones.
The weight of a letter charged with a single
rate of postage was now fixed at half-an-ounce.


AMATEUR PHOTOGRAPHY.
House,
m
K
MERCHANTS IN
PHOTOGRAPHIC SUPPLIES.
MAGIC LANTERNS
and REQUISITES
AMATEUR OUTFITS
A SPECIALITY.
Cameras from 355. upwards.
FREE INSTRUCTIONS GIVEN.
Magic Lanterns from 455.
CATALOGUES POSTED FREE.
CORRESPONDENCE INVITED.
NOTE OUR ADDRESS—
BAITER \ p£E,
375 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY,
(IMMEDIATELY OPPOSITE SYDNEY ARCADE),
And at MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE, BRISBANE, and HOBART.


The postage on inland letters was twopence,
and on town letters one penny. Ship letters
were charged an additional threepence. News-
papers were charged one penny each postage.
In 1851, gold was discovered in the colony;
Port Phillip was, also, separated from New
South Wales on the Ist July —the new colony
receiving the name of Victoria; and as a
necessary consequence, the Melbourne and all
post-offices in that district ceased to be under
the supervision of the Sydney office. On the
29th May of this year, Mr. Raymond, the Post-
master-General, died, and Mr. F. L. S.
Merewether was appointed his successor.
A new Act, intituled, An Act to Consolidate
and Amend the Laws for Conveyance and
Postage of Letters, was passed, which repealed
all former Acts. Postmasters were authorised
by this Act to refuse every packet, or letter,
weighing more than ten ounces, or reasonably
suspected to contain anything likely to injure
the contents of the mails. Newspapers were
again to pass free if posted within seven days
from date of publication.
TEMPORARY POST OFFICE IN WYMYARD SQUARE.
On the Ist May, 1852, compulsory prepay-
ment of postage by stamps took place. At the
same period Mr. Merewether was appointed
Auditor-General of the colony, and Major W.
H. Christie succeeded him in the office of
Postmaster-General.
The year 1855 was a memorable one, not
only to the colonists, but also to the Post Office
Department, as being that in which the impor-
tant benefit of conveyance of mails by railway
was initiated. On the Ist October, 1855, in
addition to the mail for Parramatta, mails for
intermediate post offices were transmitted by
rail, instead of by the usual wheeled carriages.
During this year the value of stamps sold
amounted to £26,476 17s. lid.
In 1856, about 2,817,488 letters and
I, newspapers were delivered. It
was now felt that the post office building
was too small, and moreover it was so frail and
delapidated that it was often a matter of
serious consideration whether, in any exten-
sions, a new doorway could be opened with
safety. As there was no strong room hi the
General Post Office, and no accommodation
for the documents and books that had been
accumulating for 28 years, it is little to be
wondered at that the official records are now
so faulty.
In 1862 a board was appointed to enquire
into the whole management and working of the
Post Office Department. Their chief recom-
mendation was that a new post office should be
erected, and that the situation of Postmaster-
General should be a political and independent
office.
In October 1863, the old Post Office building
in George-street was abandoned, and the
department moved into a temporary building
in Wynyard-square, of which we give an illus-
tration.
In 1864 an Act was passed, imposing, on an
after Ist April a charge of Id. each on all
newspapers published in the colony. On the
Ist October 1865, in consequeiice of the
retirement of Major Christie, the Government
determined to carry out the recommendation
of the Post Office Board of 1862, and make the
office a political one. The first political head
was the Hon. J. A. Cuneen. Upon the
Postmaster-General becoming an independent
officer, the Money Order Department (which
was established in 1862, under the superin-
tendence of Mr. F. W. Hill) formerly under
the honorable Treasurer, was placed under his
control.
In the early part of 1866, arrangements
for a new postal route to Europe and America,
via Panama was concluded, the “ Kaikoura ”
being the pioneer steamer, sailing from Sydney
on 16th of June. The new Post Office was
commenced this year, and none too soon, for
the temporary building was neither safe,
convenient or healthy.
In 1867, a new Postal Act (31 Vic. No 4)
was passed, which came into force on Ist
January, 1868. The Electric Telegraph
Department, which had hitherto been under
the control of the Minister for Public Works,
was transferred to the Postmaster-General on
the Ist of July, 1867.


During 1868, 5,988,239 letters, 3,145,977
newspapers, and 102,301 parcels were posted
in the colony. The number of miles travelled
by the mails was 2,777,197. The revenue
amounted to £83,202 3s. Id., and the expendi-
ture to £88,934 16s. 7d.
On the 18th September, 1871, a Postal
Conference met at Melbourne. The result of
the Conference was an agreement for the
establishment of a fortnightly mail service
with London, despatched alternately from
Sydney, via Suez, and from Melbourne, via
San Francisco. The proceedings of the repre-
sentatives of the colony, however, did not
receive the approval of the Legislative
Assembly, which refused to ratify the agree-
ment.
On Ist September, 1871, the system of
Government Savings Banks under the control
of the Postmaster-General was established.
The opening of the new General Post Office,
of which we give sketch on our front cover,
was celebrated by a conversazione on the
evening of the Ist September, 1874, when
upwards of 1500 persons were entertained by
the Postmaster-General, the Hon. (now Sir)
Saul Samuel. The new building was subse-
quently thrown open for inspection to the
general public for a few days, and on the 21st
September the Secretaries, Accountants, and
Cashiers’ branches of the Post Office, with the
Money Order, Government Savings Bank, and
Electric Telegraph Departments were removed
from the temporary quarters into the new
building. The Newspaper Abolition Act came
into force on Ist January, 1874.
In 1878 the number of persons employed
in connection with the Head Office of the
Postal Department was 1272. The number
of letters posted was 17,013,700; of
newspapers 8,816,500; of parcels, 439,000;
of post cards, 123,720. The revenue
amounted to £155,621 19s. 6d, and the
expenditure to £165,477 17s. 6d. The number
of miles travelled by the mails was 4,389,925.
In the year 1879, a special description of
postage stamps was introduced for the use of
the various Government departments. These
stamps were distinguished by the letters
“0.5.” printed thereon in black, and were
only available for official correspondence.
The mail service performed by the P. & O.
Company between Melbourne and Point de
Galle was increased in 1880 to a fortnightly
one. The completion of the extension of the
railway to Albury enabled the correspondence
despatched from Melbourne at 6.10 a.m. to be
delivered into the G.P.O. Sydney at 7.10 a.m.
the next day.
In August, 1883, a contract was concluded
with the Orient Steam Navigation Company
(Ltd.) for the conveyance of mails, fortnightly,
between this colony and the mother country, to
alternate with that of the P. & O. Company,
thus securing a regular weekly mail to and
from England. An important feature in the
contract made with the Orient Company was
that the Government paid no subsidy for mail
matter conveyed, a fair payment per lb. being
made to the company, thus shewing that the
system of paying large subsidies for the
conveyance of ocean-going mails will soon be
a thing of the past.
In November, 1866, a conference was held at
Melbourne, the principal object of which was
the discussion of a Federal Ocean Mail Service.
The Parcel Post System was inaugerated in
this year between this colony and the United
Kingdom.
In January, 1888, a conference was held in
Sydney, at which various important matters
were considered. One result was that a fresh
contract was entered into with the Peninsula
and Oriental and the Orient Companies, for a
period of seven years.
In view of the year 1888 being the one
hundredth anniversary of the foundation of the
colony, it was determined to commemorate the
event by the issue of eight new postage stamps.
On the Ist January, 1890, a Postal Card
System was established between N.S.W. and
the United Kingdom, which necessitated the
issue of suitable cards. A card of the value of
2d. was therefore issued for use by the contract
packets of the P. &. O. and Orient Companies
only, by what is termed the long sea route, i.e
conveyed all the way from Australia to England,
by sea. A post card of the value of 3d. was also
issued for use between this colony and the
United Kingdom, overland, via Italy.
From this time to the present there has been
a marked improvement in matters connected
with the Postal Service of the Colony. Many
advantages for the public good were intro-
duced, and the facilities for postal communica-
tion have been brought as near perfection as
possible. The postage rates have been
reduced to such a scale, that a person can
send a letter under the present postal arrange-
ment to any part of the world for the small
sum of 2^d.
In the interval the Inland Parcel Post
system was introduced, and later on this system
was extended to the United Kingdom and all
parts of the world. The success attending
this scheme has been phenomenal.
The Telephone system was introduced and,
as the public know, possesses advantages which
are duly appreciated.
Indicators for showing the different clear-
ances of the street letter boxes were brought
into use, and were found of very great
advantage by the public and the Department.
They were suggested and designed by an
officer of the Head Office, Mr. McMahon.
On the 31st of December, 1894, there were
1445 Post Offices in the colony, and 1174 street
letter-receivers erected. The private letter-
boxes at the General Post Office numbered
1316, and many others are to be found in the
principal Post Offices in the colony. The staff
of the Post Office Service is as follows: Head
Office, 1363; Branch, Suburban and Country
Offices, 4373.
The latest Postal returns show that the
following correspondence passed through the
Post Offices of the colony during the year
1894, viz:
Ordinary letters ... ... 67,137,200
Registered letters ... 856,128
Postcards... ... ... 1,016,300
Registered packets ... 81,508
Ordinary packets... ... 1,483,100
Newspapers ... ... 41,667,300
Parcels ... ... ... 367,890
The declared value of the parcels trans-
mitted was ,£99,651 16s. 4d


The Hon. JOSEPH COOK, M.L.A., Postmaster-General.
The present Postmaster-General, the: Hon.
Joseph Cook, was born at Hartley, in Stafford-
shire, England, and as a small boy was set to
work in a coal mine, where he acquired a
practical experience of the hardships which
workers of this class had to endure. He came
HON JOSEPH COOK.
to Australia in 1885, and obtained employment
as a miner at Lithgow. It was not long before
his fellow-workers discovered that he pos-
sessed considerable ability, and in 1887 he was
appointed general secretary to the Miners’
Association, a position which he held until his
return to Parliament as the labour represen-
tative for Hartley in 1891. He quickly won
the respect of his fellow labour members, and
was chosen as the leader of. (the Freetrade
section of the party. The judicious modera-
tion which he displayed whilst holding this
position was appreciated by each side of
House. His speeches at all times were care-
fully prepared, and carried!much weight. He
has the distinguished honour of being the
first member of a New South Wales Govern-
ment who has been chosen from the ranks of
labour, and his presence in the Cabinet has
without doubt, been of immense advantage to
the present Ministry.


Mr. S. H. LAMBTON, Deputy Postmaster-General,
During the last twenty years no stronger proof
has been given of the advance of settlement
and civilization in this colony than that afforded
by the rapid growth of our Post and Telegraph
service. For thousands of miles in every
direction our Postal and Telegraph lines extend,
and there is no spot of any importance at the
present day that is without its Post Office. To
carry on the great work that these offices entail,
armies of officials have to be engaged and con-
trolled, and at the head of this vast number of
Post and Telegraph officials stands the subject
MR. S. H. LAM ETON.
of this sketch, Mr. Stephen Harbord La ml) ton,
Deputy Postmaster-General.
Mr. Lambton was born in Edinburgh, Scot-
land, in November. 1834, and arrived in Sydney
with his parents in 1838. After a successful
scholastic career, Mr. Lambton was appointed
a junior clerk jin the General Post Office, and
ever since he has been uninterruptedly con-
nected witli that branch of the public service.
He commencedat the lowest rung in the ladder,
and in the comparatively short space of fourteen
years reached the very top. This was achieved
by the force <of sheer merit.
During the absence in 1865 of Mr. T. K.
Abbott, the then Secretary of the General
Post Office, Mr. Lambton was appointed his
locum tenens, and while in that capacity
received the first Postmaster-General appointed
when the headship of the Postal Department
was made a political one. In October, 1866,
Mr. Abbott retired on a pension, and Mr.
Lambton succeeded him as Secretary to the
Postal Department. On the death of Major
Cracknell, Superintendent of Telegraphs, the
postal and telegraphic departments were com
pletely amalgamated under Mr. Lambton, and
he was given the new title of Deputy Post-
master-General, which he now bears. His
father, the late Stephen Lambton, was a writer
to the Signet,, in Scotland, and after his arrival
in this colony, practised as a solicitor in Sydney,
Parramatta, and Windsor successively.
Mr. Lambton, who is a Justice of the Peace,
has as a resident identified himself with the
suburb of Burwood, of which municipality he
has at different times been alderman, church
warden, member of the School Board, and vice-
president of the local School of Arts. He is


also president of the General Post Office Mutual
Benefit Society, in which philanthropic move-
ment he has always taken a very warm interest.
In that ancient and intellectual pastime—chess
—Mr. Lambton takes a lively interest, and
recently assisted to inaugurate the Burwood
School of Arts Chess Club. At this “prince of
games ” he has already won his spurs, as a gold
pendant hanging’from his watch-chain testifies.
Mr. JAMES DALGARNO, Secretary Postal Service.
Mr. 'James Dalgarno was born in 1841, and
is a’ native of the colony. It was intended
that he should follow the profession of a civil
engineer, and his education was being con-
ducted with* this object in view when his
father died,* and, consequently, the young
nian was compelled to abandon the idea and
engage in immediately remunerative busi-
ness. Before entering the public service he
(Mr. Dalgarno) spent nearly four years in the
In the extensive department over which he
presides as permanent head, Mr. Lambton is
genuinely popular, and illustrates how much
more powerful the rule of clemency and con-
sideration, allied with gentle firmness, is than
the unbending sway of official discipline. In
private life, he is cheerful, affable, sincere,
and inevitably gains friends wherever he is
known.
employ of Messrs. Brierley, Dean, and Co.,
one of the then largest mercantile and
shipping firms in the city of Sydney, and to
the experience thus gained Mr. Dalgarno
attributes much of his subsequent success in
life.
In 1860 he entered the General Post Office
as a clerk, was appointed chief clerk in 1869,
and secretary to the postal service in 1893.
In 1873 he visited Great Britain, America


EAT
19
PARSONS’
\
PURE JAMS.
PICKLES.
FLAKED OATMEAL.
ROLLED OATS.
D.S.F. MUSTARD.
Obtainable • of • All • Storekeepers.
PUBLIC NOTICE.
We desire to announce that on and after JANUARY Ist, 1896,
our Business will be conducted at HOBART, TASMANIA, and
Patrons will confer a favor by circulating this information.
REGISTERED ADDRESS—
“ TATTERSALL,”
c/o George Adams,
HOBART, TASMANIA.
and New Zealand, in the capacity of secre-
tary to Sir Saul Samuel, K.C.M.G., C. 8.,
(then the Hon. S. Samuel, M.L.C.), who was
commissioned by the New South Wales
Government to organise the mail service
between the United Kingdom and the
Australasian colonies, by way of the United
States of America. Apart from his official
work, Mr. Dalgarno has taken great interest
in the progress of the fine arts in the colony.
In 1886 he held the office of vice-president
of the Art Society of New South Wales, and,
in the absence of the president, delivered the
annual address at the Town Hall, Lord Car-
rington occupying the chair on the occasion.
Mr. Dalgarno still holds a seat in the council
of this society. He, for some years, was
president of the Sydney Mechanics’ School
of Arts, succeeding the Hon. Sir William
Windeyer. Mr. Dalgarno also took an active
interest in the early development of technical
education in the colony, and subsequently,
in conjunction with Messrs. Edward Trevor-
Jones, J. W. Sayer, and E. Cracknell,
performed the duties of' examiner in drawing,
modelling, and designing in Sydney Technical
College.
On his retirement from the position of
president of the Sydney Mechanics’ School of
Arts, he was presented with an illuminated
address, in which it is stated, —“ That the
members desire to convey to Mr. Dalgarno
their deep sense of the valuable services
which he has rendered to the institution, and
their sincere regret that the pressure of
official duties should necessitate his retire-
ment from a position which he has filled with
such distinguished ability, and in which he
has gained the entire esteem and respect of
the members.”


Mb. Windham John
Davies, the eldest
son of the late Cap-
tain John Davies,
Adjutant Royal Mili-
tary College, Sand-
hurst, arrived in
Sydney in October,
1861, and entered the
General Post Office
as a clerk on the 15 th
W. J. DAVIES, CHIEF INCTOR.
May of*theffollowing
year. He was ap-
pointed Postal In-
spector in July, 1877,
and on the creation
of the " Inspection
Branch ” in January,
1891, he was selected
to fill the position of
Chief Inspector.
E. L. DE C. RUSSELL,
INSPECTOR OR IRREGULARITY BRANCH
G. P. UNWIN,
METROPOLITAN INSPECTOR.
JOS. CLARKE, INLAND MAIL CLERK.


Telephone 476. Sanders & Co., ***
General Carriers & Parcels Delivery Proprietors.
Daily Deliveries from South Head to Hornsby and p| .« TnM uniicc APEMTQ
Parramatta, to Manly, and all suburbs. UUSIUIVI nuuat AUCDId.
Head Office, 43 King-st., Corner Kent-st., Sydney.
LUGGAGE STORED AT REASONABLE RATES.
FURNITURE PACKED and REMOVED in COVERED VANS, by Rail, Road or Sea, by experienced
men, FURNITURE STORED at our Repository, whioh is Clean, Dry and Airy, at Reasonable
Charges, Carpets Lifted, Cleaned, Altered, and Re-laid,
Speoial Vans for express journeys at all hours.
Mr. ASHER A. DAY, Superintendent of Mails.
Mr. Asher Australia Day, the Superinten-
dent of Mails, is a native of Sydney, being the
son of an old and well-known colonist. After
leaving school and spending a few years in a
mercantile office he entered the General Post
Office in a junior capacity in 1857, and after
filling several responsible positions he became
cashier in 1868.
In year 1875 Mr. Day was ap-
pointed Superintendent of Mails, and his
promotion to this high office gave general satis-
faction. He has almost an army of officials of
all grades under his control, and he has won
their esteem and affection by his gentlemanly
bearing and general impartiality. His duties
are arduous and important, and his able per-
formance of them is duly appreciated by the
public with whom he comes in daily contact.


Mr. J. T. McMAHON (Assistant Superintendent of Mails).
Mr. John Terence McMahon, the Assistant
Superintendent of Mails, entered the General
Post Office on the 10th March, 1858, one
month from the time of his arrival in the
colony. After many well deserved promotions
he attained his present position in the Depart-
ment in the year 1884, and his appointment to
this responsible office was a popular one both
inside and outside the service, for he is well
known to be an indefatigable, hard working
and obliging officer, blessed with a personality
which has helped him
through life and made
for him hosts of friends.
He is the only son of the
late Mr. P. McMahon,
€.E., of the city of Lime-
rick, Ireland, who was in
1839 and many years after
Emigration Agent for this
colony. It will be remem-
bered that when His Royal
Highness the Duke of
Edinburgh visited Aus-
tralia in the year 1868,
.an attempt was made on
his life at a picnic at
Clontarf in this colony.
On that occasion Mr.
McMahon rendered at
great personal risk prompt
assistance and saved the
Prince from further danger,
for which service he re-
ceived the warmest thanks
from His Royal Highness,
who previous to leaving
the colony forwarded to
Mr. McMahon his photo-
graph, a souvenir, and a
letter of acknowledgment
finishing with the words
“ Your services will ever
be remembered.”
Through Mr. McMahon’s
connection with this now
historical event he had an
opportunity of obtaining
an English appointment,
but he had no desire at the
time to leave the colony.
In 1876, Mr. McMahon,
with a view to giving
postal officials in receipt
of small incomes an oppor-
tunity of making (at a trifling expense) some
provision in the event of their death for
their families, formed the General Post Office
Mutual Benefit Society, which now embraces
all branches of the service. In recognition of
his labours in establishing this admirable
society, Mr. McMahon received from the
members in 1880 a very handsome silver salver
and tea-and-coffee service. Mr. McMahon,
although of a retiring disposition, has assisted
in many public movements ; one in particular,
may be mentioned, the erection of the Public
School at Bondi. This building was erected in
1882 at a cost of >£sooo, and the people of this
beautiful suburb are entirely indebted to him
for this great boon.
As a citizen soldier, Mr. McMahon was a
member of the New South Wales Volunteer
Artillery for five years, but that was in the days
before “land grants” and partially-paid
volunteers were in existence. As a rifle-shot
he has made his mark, winning from time to
time small prizes, but in the year 1885 he
ME. J. T. McMAHON.
carried oft one of the handsome prizes offered
for that year by the New South Wales Rifle
Association.
For some years Mr. McMahon devoted much
of his spare time to the study of photography,
and after some hard work became one of onr
most successful amateurs. As the result of
some later industry he obtained at the Sydney
International Exhibition of 1879-80 prize
certificates and medal in the mechanical and
chemical sections for mercantile appliances
made and submitted by him.


CHAS. CLARKE, Despatch Branch.
E. B. SEYMOUR, Registry Branch.
JAS. McNEILLY, Delivery Branch.
R. R. IREDALE, First Officer Receiving Branch.
H. R. DAVIES, Manager Parcel Post.
G. L. LITTLE, Despatch Branch.


The Great PILE REMEDY !
“|OjWSARDIA.”
(REGISTERED).
%
r
more than thirty years this remedy has been favourably known in
that part of Italy whence it derives its name; and, it has been used
with such results, that throughout Lombardy its fame is a house-
hold word.
The prescription was secured by the present proprietor (a widely known
Sydney business man) after he had had opportunities of seeing for himself
the wonderful cures effected by the Ointment during a visit to Italy made
some years ago.
It can be said of this specific that, in any case where it has Jbeen
applied, it has never failed to afford relief.
The introduction of “ LOMBARDIA ” has been so favourably received
by many persons of long standing and repute in Sydney, that the proprietor
is determined to increase the facilities for obtaining the salve and place it
within reach of all who suffer from the complaint. He is confident of the
continuance of the already established reputation of the Remedy, and
certain that the fame of its good qualities will precede it throughout
Australia.
As a guarantee of bona-fides the proprietor submits the following
names of gentleman who will testify, if needs be, to the curative properties
of the great Lombardy Remedy: —
(C) Mr. G. Kiss, iun., " Mr. S. Fielder,
Auctioneer, Sydney. *• ''' Randwick.
Mr. J. Whiteman, Hotel, Liamore. Alderman M, Chapman,' Town Hall, Sydney.
Mr. Archibald Yuille, Auctioneer. Melbourne. Mr. Wi. Forrester, Warwick Farm.
Mr. Throssell, Bookseller, Market Street, Sydney. Mr. W. Mooney, Queen Street, Brisbane.
Mr. H. Hill, Burrabogie Station, Hay. Mr. A. M. H.Levy, P.O. Chambers, Sydney.
Mr. P. Sullivan, Brougham Street, Sydney. Mr. Alf. Hill, MungyerJStation, Narrabri.
Mr. John Hourigan, Victoria Street, Sydney. Mr. Robt. Hill, Butterbone Station, Macquarie River.
Mr. P. K. White, Barrister, Sydney. Mr. H. Palmer, Bank of NewlSouth Wales, Sydney.
The Public are requested to make the strictest enquiry from any of these gentlemen before remitting Orders.
One POT of this certain Remedy will be sent to any address in Australia on receipt of a Postal
Note or Post Office Order for 10s., ss. and 2s. 6d., made payable to
“jO/yigAHPIAy” • 110 SYDNEY, Plre ctiy qpp. g p.o.
Or may be obtained from ELLIOTT BROS . O’Connell-st. HOFFNUNG & Co , Pitt-st.
The AUSTRALIAN DRUG CO., O’Connell Street. FELDHETM, GOTTHELF, Barrack Street,
and from all Chemists and Storekeepers throughout the Colony.
COUNTRY STOREKEEPERS LIBERALLY DEALT WITH TERMS ON APPLICATION. ALL ORDERS MUST
be accompanied by remittances. Bead Parcel Post facilities elsewhere in this pamphlet.


F. BUTLER, Registry Branch.
J. W. KENNY, Parcels Post Branch.
E. F. FALCONER, Receiving Branch.
Translator of Foreign Languages.
CHAS. BRADY, Despatch Branch.
S. B. HILTON, Delivery Branch
J. C. WHEELER, Charge Clerk.


Mr. Andrew J. Doak, also a native
of the colony, entered the Money Order
Department of the Post Office in 1864,
and was appointed in 1889 Superin-
tendent of the Money Order Office and
Government Savings Bank.” On the
Ist February, 1890, he was appointed
Chief Accountant to the Post Office,
under the scheme ofj amalgamation,
and Controller of the Money Order
Office and Government Savings Bank ;
and, later on, the Postal Note System,
was introduced under his care.
Arthur Robert Docker was born
on his father’s estate at Thornthwaite,
near Scone, N.S.W., in 1848, and is
the fifth son of the late Hon. Joseph
Docker, M.L.C., who held for many
years the Chairmanship of Committees
in the Legislative Council, and also
held at various times the portfolios of
Postmaster-General, Colonial Secre-
tary, Minister for Works, Vice-
president of the Executive Council, and represented the Government of which he was
A. R. DOCKER,
Chief Clerk Money Order Branch.
A. J. DOAK,
Chief Accountant and Controller of Money Order Office
and Government Savings Bank.
a member in the Upper House. The
subject of our sketch received
his education at the Collegiate
School, Cook’s River, and after-
wards entered the Postal Service in
January, 1867, and attained his
present position of chief clerk of the
financial division in 1889. During
his length of service the business has
assumed very large proportions, for
in 1871 the Government Savings Bank
Act came into force, and is worked in
conjunction with the money order
system, and in 1898 the postal note
system was introduced. In both in-
stances, Mr. Docker took an active
part.
Mr. Docker has the immediate
supervision of the work of those
officers (numbering over eighty) in
the Money Order, Government Savings
Bank, and postal note division of the
Postal and Electric Telegraph Depart-
ment, forming part of that branch
under the control of the chief accoun-
tant and controller ; he is considered
a capable officer, and is well liked by
his brother officers.


INTERIOR MONEY ORDER, POSTAL NOTE, AND GOVERNMENT SAVINGS BANK DEPARTMENT, G.P.O., SYDNEY, WITH PERMANENT
[?] 1895.


JVfoney Oiitlsr OfficES in 9outf| WalES,
BUSINESS PERIOD ENDED 30tk SEPTEMBER, 1895. (1st January- 30th September, 1895).
Kindly Supplied by the Officials of the Money Order Department Head Office.


INTERIOR OF AMERICAN DINING CAR.
mm
m
■
m
II
m
m
<- - :
i
s®
88**e
a
*
'A,-
:'
'4m.:
m
■
VjV**
V '>
TO GREAT BRITAIN AND EUROPE.
A. & A, M©UTPEe
«»ROYAL MAIL EXPRESS SERVICE.**
Avoiding alike the Heat of the Red Sea and the Cold of
Cape Horn.
Under contract with the Governments of New South Wales. New Zealand, and United States
the steamers of this Line leave Sydney and Auckland for Apia (Samoa), Honolulu, [and San
Francisco EVERY FOUR WEEKS.
Passengers booked to all the principal parts of Europe, United
States, and Canada at Lowest Fares.
Including stop-over privileges at any point, choice of railway routes and Atlantic steamers,
the finest and largest afloat.
ROUND THE WORLD TICKET BY ANY ROUTE.
TITHE waters of the Pacific are proverbially smooth, the weather mild and pleasant, and the
Jl l ports of call frequent and interesting. The overland journey is surpassingly grand, '.full
of novelty and variety of scenery, and the Trains veritable pa.la.ces On wheels,
with all the comforts of a first-class hotel. Add to this visits to the Greatest Cities of the
American Continent—Chicago, New York, &c.—and intercourse with the most enterprising
and inventive people of the age. All this and more is only part of the itinerary included in
ordinary through tickets, and can be accomplished without extra charge.
Full Particulars, Illustrated Guides, Maps, &c., gratis, on application to
UNION STEAMSHIP CO. of N.Z., Ltd.,
Or Passenger Office, Moore St., near G.P.O. 15 Bridge Street.


Major P, B, WALKER, Secretary of the Telagraph Service.
Majob P. B. Walkkb, M.1.C.E., M.1.M.E.,
and member of the Engineers’ Association of
N S W., "was born at Charlton Kings, near
Cheltenham, England, on the 28th February,
3840. Bis father, the Rev. James Walker,
M.A., was headmaster of Cheltenham College,
and later of King’s School, Parramatta,. He
is a brother of Mr. Critdiett Walker, C.M.G.,
Principal Under Secretary, and Mr. R. 0.
Walker, lately librarian at the Free Library.
He arrived in the colony in 1843. He joined
the Telegraph Service in 1858, at which time
MAJOR P. B. WALKER
there were only seven miles of telegraph wire,
while now there are upwards of 32,000 miles
of telegraph and telephone wires throughout
the colony. In 1886, Major Walker, having
obtained twelve months’ leave of absence,
took a trip round the world, visiting China,
Japan, America, Great Britain, and the Conti-
nent, and during this trip he visited every
telegraphic and electric light establishment of
note extant, including Edison’s celebrated
electric light manufactory at Newark, New
Jersey, U.S.A. Many good results have been
the outcome of this trip, as improvements have
been introduced into the service since, which>
have been of great value to the department.
The energy and ability brought to bear upon
the department by Major Walker in his
capacity as Assistant Superintendent are
widely known, and have contributed largely
to the success of the telegraph service of the
colony. On the death of Colonel Cracknel!,
Superintendent of Telegraphs, Major Walk* r
succeeded him as Secretary of the telegraphic
Service (the departments under the Post Office
having been amalgamated), and as officer
commanding the Submarine Miners. Mr.
Walker was appointed electrical expert to
represent the Government of N.S.W. and
Queensland at the laying of the New Cale-
donian cable, in August, 1893. Extremely
severe weather was encountered, but the cable
was successfully laid in about six weeks. Mr.
Walker completed his 37th year in the depart-
ment in February last.


Major Walker has also been an active officer
in the Volunteer and partially paid forces of
the colony for over 33 years, during 23 of
which he has held Her Majesty's commission;
and whilst the war scare was on in 1885, at
the time of the Soud »n disturbances, he laid
down a submarine mine field in Sydney
Harbour, for which he received the special
thanks of the Acting-Premier, the late Hon.
W. B Dailey, P.C. He also holds the title of
Director of JVJ ilitary Telegraphs, to act on the
Major-General's staff when required.
MR. W. WILSON, STATION MANAGER.
Mb. W. Wilson, Manager of the Telegraphic
Service of N.S.W., was born in Londonderry,
Ireland, on the 26th February, 1843, and
arrived his parents in Victoria in 1850.
In 1856 his family removed to New South
MR. W. WILSON.
Wales, and lie joined the service of the late
Mr. T. Woolley, wholesale and retail iron-
monger, where he remained for 18 months,
when he entered the Electric Telegraph
Department as a probationer. After a short
time he obtained the appointment of station
master at Parramatta, which he opened in
August, 1858, and subsequently filled similar
positions at more important stations in the
colony, after which he was transferred to the
head office, to his present position of manager
in 1873. He was for many years connected
with the Torpedo and Signalling Corps on its
being separated from the Naval Brigade, and
held the position of first lieutenant for seven
years. He was then promoted to the rank of
captain, and subsequently retired on his rank
in 1888.


THE QUADRUPLEX OPERATING ROOM, TELEGRAPH DEPARTMENT, HEAD OFFICE, SYDNEY.




NEW
FOR CASH OR ON TIME PAYMENT.
V
mm
B
mm
head of the new home.”
js>w
M
:
m
mm
,L
WRITE FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE.
UNDER VIEW OF THE " NEW HOME."
J. W. JOHNSTON & CO.
746 GEORGE-STREET
(Hlaymarlset), Sydney;
280 BOURKE-ST., MELBOURNE; 67 QUEEN-ST.. BRISBANE.


PROCLAMATION I
OH, YES!! OH, YES!! OH, YES!!
BE IT HEREBY KNOWN to all the Members of the Postal
and Telegraphic Service of the Colony of New South Wales
that on and after the Ist Day of January, 1896, all good Citizens
who desire peace of mind and strength of body will smoke only
EAGLE CIGARETTES.
Like other popular bearers of good tidings, Eagle Cigarettes
are dressed in Scarlet Coats, and are fully stamped with
the approval of all appreciative smokers. They are never
under weight, and contain nothing contrary to Postal Regu-
lations or those of the Board of Health, being simply a machine
made Combination of the Finest Selected Virginian Sun-dried
Tobacco and the Purest Rice Paper.
Eagle Cigarettes are Reliable, Fragrant, Cool and
Sweet, and are retailed everywhere for 3d. per Box of 10.
-*• NOTICE.-^-
Any Member of the Postal and Telegraphic Service of New
South Wales desiring to test the quality of Eagle Cigarettes
will receive GRATIS a Sample Box of 10 Cigarettes & Holders
upon his forwarding his Name and Address, together with One
Penny for postage, to
THE EAGLE TOBACCO CO.,
237 & 339 CLARENCE ST., SYDNEY.


Parcels Post Service.
The Parcel Postal Service is, so far as New
South Wales is concerned, a comparatively
recent facility having only been established
since Ist October, 1893. The system has
rapidly grown in public favor and is recog-
nised as having provided a long-felt public
requirement. It is availed of largely by the
inland trading community for transmission of
goods such as jewellery, millinery, silks, and
similar fabrics, medicines, drugs, and other
commodities of small bulk and light weight.
The growth and extent of the business during
the first year of the operation of the system is
best illustrated by the comparative statement
hereunder, showing the local business for that
period, with the business of the adjoining
colonies of Victoria, Queensland and New
Zealand for the year 1894 in each of which the
system has been in existence for a number of
years.
N.S.W. Vic. Q’land. N.Z.
No. Parcels posted for
circulation within the
colony 315243 181524 54876 149150
Posted for despatch
beyond the colony ... 24300 28800 4500 6540
Received from beyond
the colony 28350 21000 8100 18560
The Metropolitan business is transacted at
the Postal Parcels Depot, 149-151 Castlereagh-
street, Sydney, beween Park and Market
Streets. Some idea of the extent and import-
ance of this business can be formed when it is
mentioned that over 400,000 parcels circulate
through the office during a twelvemonth, the
estimated value of the contents of which
would not be less than .£600,000.
And we are informed on the authority of
the manager, Mr. H. R. Davies, that the office
is in a position to account for the disposal
of every parcel that it has received since the
commencement of the system. This is a
remarkable fact, and another little less so
considering the nature of the transit is that
the cases of loss and destruction of parcels
within the knowledge of the office would not
average one in five thousand of the parcels
handled.
Some interesting statistics might be fur-
nished respecting the system, but as our space
is limited and the object of this article is to
afford practical information to those availing
themselves of the Parcel Post, we give the
following information for their guidance.
Places of Posting. —Every parcel should
be handed in at the counter of a Post or
Receiving Office, and the sender should be
particular in inquiring of the official receiving
it that the regulations governing its accept-
ance and transmission have been complied
with, and should obtain an assurance to that
effect. Parcels placed in receptacles provided
for the reception of other mail matter are
treated as irregularly received, and when
found not to be in conformity with regula-
tions are subject to surcharges and liability of
return to sender, or disposal of by the Depart-
ment.
Time of Posting. —Parcels will be received
at any Post Office during the hours of Postal
business ; to ensure their transit by any par-
ticular mail, however, they must be posted
half an hour before the time of closing the
letter mail for such destination.
Parcels are accepted at the Chief Parcels
Office, Sydney, between 9 a.m. and, 6j r p.m.
Monday to Friday; 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. Saturday.
Parcels intended for onward transit same day
must reach Parcels Depot:—
For destination in Suburbs:
4.30 p.m. Monday to Friday.
12.30 p.m. Saturday.
Southern and Western Districts :
6 p.m. Monday to Friday.
1 p.m. Saturday.
Victoria, S. Australia, W. Australia:
3 p.m. Monday to Friday.
1 p.m. Saturday.
Queensland:
4 p.m. Monday to Friday.
1 p.m. Saturday.
All Australian Colonies : —United Kingdom
Canada, Foreign Countries:
2J hours before advertised
time of departure of the
vessel.
Rates of Postage. —The full postage on all
parcels must be prepaid. The rates for places
within New South Wales are:—Bd. for the
first 21b. or any part thereof and 3d. for each
additional lib. or part of a lb. For places
within Australasian colonies, inclusive of
Fiji, Bd. for first lb. and 6d. for each addi-
tional lb. or part of a lb. For United King-
dom, Is. 6d. for first 2lbs. or part thereof, and
9d. for each additional lb. or part of a lb.;
Canada Is. per lb. The rates for Foreign
places vary according to weight. They can
be ascertained from “ Postal Guide,” but
senders are advised to make inquiry at a
Post Office in all cases of parcels for foreign
destinations.
Restrictions Respecting Weight ani>
Dimensions. —No parcel will be accepted
weighing over 111 b. for distribution in New
South Wales or for transmission to a destina
tion in the Australasian Colonies, United
Kingdom, India, and Canada. For the under-
mentioned places in New South Wales to
which localities mails are conveyed for part
of the distance on horseback, parcels of only
31b. weight will be sent.
A parcel intended for distribution in New
South Wales and above countries must not
exceed 6ft. in combined measurement of
length and girth, and must not measure over
its widest face more than 3ft. 6in.
The dimensions and weight of parcels
admitted into other countries vary consider-
ably, and senders forwarding parcels to such
destinations should make inquiry at the local
Post Office for information in this respect
prior to the preparation of their packages.


Restrictions as to Contents. —Parcels for
circulation in New South Wales must not
contain any communication other than
invoices, printed circulars, business cards,
price ‘lists* advertisements, particulars of, or
for receipted accounts for the contents of the
parcel.’ I '' No money either in coin or bank
notes, bars of gold or gold dust, any article
liable to sudden combustion from concussion
or friction, or offensive, dangerous, destruc-
tive, orj explosive; live animals, reptiles, nor
anything likely to do injury to persons or
parcels,* nor any indecent or obscene article,
print,JOphotograph, lithograph, writing,
MR. SAMUEL JOHN WATSON,
Manager of the Telephone Branch.
Me. Samuel John Watson was born in
London, 1836, and arrived in Melbourne in
1857. He was employed in constructing the
second telegraph line in the Australian
colonies —viz., from Geelong to Ballarat. He
erected the first wires from Melbourne to
Albury, and from Sydney to Albury. On the
completion of the lines he joined the New
South Wales telegraphic service as line
inspector, at Albury in August, 1858. He has
since held the position of station master at
engraving, book or card, must be enclosed
in any parcel. The contents of parcels for
places beyond New South Wales are subject
to the Customs laws and restrictions obtaining
in the respective countries of their destina-
tion, and senders of such parcels should make
inquiry with regard to these before despatch-
ing their parcels in order to avoid the
confiscation of the parcel on its arrival at
destination.
Addressing and Marking of Parcels.—
Special attention should be given to this in
order to provide for complete identification of
and proper delivery to addressee.
Wollombi, Singleton, Newcastle, and at the
head office at Sydney. For sixteen years he
was inspector of railway telegraphs, during
which time he initiated the block system, the
train’s tablet, the electric train staff, the signal
repeater, and telephone in connection with
railway working. He was appointed manager
of the telephone branch in June, 1891, and has
made a number of improvements in connection
with the service.


BALMAIN POST OFFICE.


BURWOOD POST OFFICE.
EAGLE CIGARETTES are the coming smoke.


V
OOOOOOOOOCLQ
N&W *
Books
-■•-By
Cv££Y
Mail
G^R
■
?SS
m
OIESALE
fflCTlQpi
«fa I&ETAI L *
OGJ^ELLERS
t H$J ST PRY
Bj!9GRApMy
GE*ROBERTSON!
So
J§f-ATIQNE.RS
* TraVeu>
RlbmsHers
foLTRy
—
MediciNe
L_
GE° ROBERTSON&C?
IHEQU?Gy
Science
Law
fc6S§TREET
-AfJo -A'*”
UP" |? gsg|:
LoNdoN, Melbourne. Adelaide & Brisbane.


J,
ry of medical science]
[ERYA *
I
ITTERSJ
Jatable,Refreshing,
U:
ll Medicine-Vendors, f
odera
i\e
0'
I
TO
Wine.
*|o/sic -
Deci*xCiou3»
&£:rfijc:s*-ixwG ,
NoaiMSHUiIG, BoE£6'rOSJLttG*
P/t£&c*taro £y /’/roj*//t£t*r P//Ki/c/Ana . All Me ojc//>/£-y£HOoAS.


REDFERN POST OFFICE.


p
tm
r-.
nil- •
mm
T.
Mg
f r~?i
r
m
r'f,
.rfgga^
PETERSHAM POST OFFICE.
S you are in need 3f . . .
A DENTIST !
GO TO . .
§>
0
SSQ
H 5 KING STREET,
ENTRANCE i JOHN ROARTY & SONS, PHOTOGRAPHERS.
RELIABLE! CONSCIENTIOUS! MODERATE
FULiLi Sew op <seewh From
£1 Is.


GROUP OF SYDNEY LETTEE CARRIEES.




GROUP OF SYDNEY LETTER CARRIERS.


TABLE
DESPATCH AND ARRIVAL
POST OFFICE MAKES IN NEW SOUTH WALES,
1838.
J.T. FJ‘Maho*i.
Syd-vuxy Mey
DESPATCH.
ARRIVAL.
fXLOSff SYDNEY.— Fot Pattern *U». Windsor, Penrith,
Liverpool, and Campbelltown, daily, (Sundays ex*
eeptea,) at 5 o’clock r. m.
For Hama’s Wslls, Bathurst, snd Wollongong,
every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, at 5 p.m.
tot O’Connell, patty Monday and Friday, at 5 p.M.
For Wellington, every Monday at 5 p- m.
for Cawdor, Berrima, Marulan, Goulburn, and
Bungonia* every Monday, Wednesday, and
Saturday, at & r. u.
for Lake George, Yaas, and Queanbeyan, every
Wednesday and Saturday, at 5 P. m.
for Braidwood, every Saturday, at 5 p. vt .
fer Melbourne, Port Phillip, ever second Saturday,
at 5 p. M.
for Newcastle, Raymond Terrace, Htoloo, and
MaiGand, with the Packets as often as they sail,
at 0 p. at.
fer Dirliugton, (with the Packets,) every Monday.
Wednesday, ind Thussday, su 3 p. m.
for Carrington, Duogog, Paterson, Musciebrook,
Invermeio, Jerry’* Plains, and Merton, (with the
Packet*,) every Monday and Thursday, at 3 P. »t.
For Murrurundi, (with the Packet,) every Mooday,
St 0 P. M.
for Caaailis, (with the Packet.) every Thursday,
at 0 P. x.
for Brisbane Water, Pott Macquarie, Moreton Bay,
and Norfolk laland, by the different Vessels as
often M they nil.
Although the Malle net leave until five o’clock, ihe
p M I OAfce i* neceMarily closed for their despatch from
half-past four till St# i and letter# for transmission by
the same day’s Poat, tnuat be delivered into the Post Office
BOt later than half-pAat four. Except letters for the Mails,
•hieh do not leave til) six o’clock, for the receipt ol which
tIM Poat Office i* a(*in open till half-past five.
WESTERN DISTRICT.
fftOM PARRAMATTA.—For Sydney, daily, (Sundays
excepted,) early Mail M 0 a. m., late Mail at
8 a.m.
For Wlndaoraad Panrub, daily, (Suodaysexcepled.)
at-7 F. m.
for Hinsn’i Wall* tad Bathurst, every Monday.
Wednesday, And Friday, at'7 r. u.
For O'Coon ell, every Monday aod Friday, at 7 p. x.
For Wellington, every Monday, at 7 p. M.
FROM WINDSOR.—For Sydney and Parramalta, daily,
(Sunday# excepted,) at 3 a. m.
for Richmond and North Richmond, every Tuesday,
Friday, and Sunday, at 9 A. u.
tot Wilberforce,.ev*ry Tuesday, Friday, and Sunday,
For Pill-town, every Tdeeday, Friday, and Sunday.
si 4 P M.
For Wiseman's Ferry, every Wedoesday, at 7 a. *t.
FROM PENRITH.-For "Sydney and Parramatta, daily.
(Sundays excepted,) at 3 a. M.
For Haassn's Wall* and Bathurst, every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday, at 10 p m.
For O’Connell, every Momltyaod Friday, at 10-p m.
For Wellington, every Monday, at 10 p. m.
fROM HASSAN’S WALLS—For Sydney, Parramatta,
and Penrith, every Mouday, Wednesday, aod
Friday, at I P X.
For Bathurat, every Tuesday, Thursday, and
Saturday, at 3 p. M.
FROM BATHURST.—For Sydney, Parramatta, Penrith,
and Hamo'i Walls, every Monday, Wednesday,
aod Friday, at 4 a. M.
For O’Connell, every Wednesday and Sunday, ai
For Wellington, every Wedneeday, at 8 a m.
fROM O’CONNELL—For Sydney. Perramatta, Penr.lh,
aod Bathurst, every Tuesday aod Thursday, el
3 P. M.
FROM WELLINGTON.—For Sydney, Parramatta, Peo-
rith, and Bathurst, every Suuday, at nooo.
SOUTHERN DISTRICT.
JRON LIVERPOOL—Fo* Sydney, daily, (Suodays
cepted,) *1 5 *■ x.
For Campbelltowo. daily, (Sundays excepted,) M
BP. x. .
Fdr WoHongong, every Mooday, Wednesday, and
Friday, at 8 p. x.
.For Cawdor, Berrima, Marulan. Goulburn, and Bun-
gonia, every Monday, Wednesday, aod Saturday,
at 8 p. X. t
for Yaaa «na Qultubeyao, evepj Wednesday and
'Saturday, at Sr. x.
For Melbourne, every aeeond Satordiy, at 8 p m.
•ROM CAMPBELLTOWN For Sydney and Liverpool,
daily, (Sunday* excepted,) At 3 a. m.
For Wollongong, every Tuesday, Tburaday, aud
Sktwrdrtr*!
For Cawder, Berrima, Marulao, Gdulburn, and
BuDgonia, every Tuesday, Tburaday, aud Sunday,
at 0 a. x.
For Yaaa and Queaubeyan, every Thursday aod
Suoday, at 0 a. m.
For Melhourne, every aecond Sunday, at 0 A- M.
FROM WOLLONGONG—Fur Sydney. Liverpool, and
- ’ CainpheWown, overy Mooday, Wednesday, and
Friday, at I r. X.
FROM CAWDOR.—For Sydney, Liverpool, aod Camp-
.briltown, every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday,
for Berrima, Coulbura, and Buogooia, every Tow*
ita/, Tburaday, tod Sunday, at 9 4. x.
For Yass. and Queanbeyao, every Thursday and
For Melbourne, every second Sunday, at 9 a. m.
FROM BERRIMA—For Sydney, Liverpool, Campbell-
town, Cawdor. Marulan, Goulburn, and Bungonia,
every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, at Ua. m
For Yasa and Queanbeyao, every tiooday and
Friday, at fi a. m.
For Melbourne, every second Monday, at 0 a. m.
FROM MARULAN—For Syduey, Liverpool, Campbelltowo,
Berrima, and Bungonia, every Sunday, Tuesday,
and Thursday t at 9 a. m.
For Goulburo and Bungonia, every Monday, Wed-
nesday, and Friday, at 11 A. it.
For Yass and Queaubeyao, every Monday and
Friday, at 11 a. m.
For Melbourne, every second Monday, at 11 a. M.
FROM GOULBURN.—For Sydney, Liverpool, Campbell-
towo, Cawdor, Berrima, Marulan, and Bungonia,
- every Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday, at 0 a. a.
For Lake George and Yass, every Tuesday and
Saturday, at 3 A. M.
For Melbourne, every second Tuesday, at 0 a. M.
FROM LAKE GEORGE.—For Sydney ind Goulburn,
every Mooday and Wednesday, at 10 *. w.
FROM YASS.— For Sydney, Liverpool, Cam'pbelUowo,
FROM MELBOURNE.— Liverpool, Camp-
belltnwu, Cawdor, Berrima, Marulan, Goulburn,
FROM 1-iverpwl, Campbell-
town, Cawdor, Berrima, and Sfarulan, every
Sunday, Tuesday, and Thursday, at £ past 7 a. M.
For Marulan and Goulburn. every Monday,
Wednesday, and Friday, at 9 a. M.
For Queanbeyao, every .Monday and Friday at 3
For Braidwnod, every Monday, at 3 p. m.
FROM BRAIDWOOD—For Syduey. and Bungonia,
FROM QUEANBEYAN For Sydoev, Liverpool,Camp-
belltown, Cawdor, Berrima, Marulau, and Bun-
gonia, every Sunday and Friday, at 7 a. m.
NORTHERN DISTRICT.
FROM CARRINGTON—For Sydney and Raymond
Terrace, every Tuesday and Friday st doou.
FROM NEWCASTLE.—For Syduey, with eacb of the
return Packets.
Fur Raymond Terrace, Hinton, and Maitland, with
the Packets as often as they pass.
For Darlington, (with the Packet*,) every Tuesday,
Thursday, aod Friday.
FROM RAYMOND TERRACE—For Sydney, New-
castle, Hinton, and Maitlaud, with each of the
For Carrington, every Tuesday and Fririay-al noon,
or immediately after arrival of the Packets.
For Dungog, every Wednesday and Saturday, at G
FROM DUNGOG.— For Sydney and Ktvmond Terrace,
FROM HINTON.— lor Sydney, Newcastle, Raymond
Terrace aud Maitland, with each of the Packets.
For Patemon every 1 uesday aod Friday at noun, or
immediately alter the arrival of the Packets.
FROM PATERSON.—For Sydney and lltoion (to meet
thereturo Packets,) every Tuesday aud Friday, at
FROM MAITLAND—For Sydney. Newcastle, Raymond
Terrace and Hinton, with each of the return
Packets-
For Darlington, every Tuesday and Thursday at
For Musciebrook, Interim-'i., Jerry'* Plains, and
:> *"m°' y y
For Murrurundi, every Tuesday *• Noon. '
FROM DARLINGTON -For Bvdnev. Newcastle, and
Maitland, everv Monday, Wednesday, aud Friday,
dips
For Musciebrook. Invermein, Jerry’s Plains, and
Merlou, every Wednesday at •> A. w., and Salur-
FROM Ml SCLtulutOK.—For Sydney. Maitland, and
Da rung ton. every Monday and Friday, at 7 am.
For lov-rmein, every Wednesday at II a. m., aud
For Miirmrnodi, everv Wednesday at 11 a m
FROM INVERMEIN. - ForSvdney. Ma. Hard. Darlington,
and .Musciebrook, every Monday anil Friday, at
5 a. M.
FROM MURRURUNDI—For Syduey. Maitland, Dar-
lington, Musciebrook, and Inyermem, every
FROM JERKY’S PLAINS.— For Sydney. Maitland, and
Darbogtnn, every Monday aod Friday, at 8 a. at.
For Merton, every Wednesday at 9 ». M., aod
Saturday at 4 e. m.
FROM MERTON.—For Sydney, Maitland,Darlington, and
Jerry’* Plains, every Monday and Friday, at &
For Cassilis, every Sunday, at 9a. st. ,
FROM CASSILIS—For Sydney and Merton, every
Wednesday, at 9 a. m.
FROM BRISBANE WATER, PORT MACQUARIE,
MORETON BAY, and NORFOLK ISLAND,
as opportunities offer.
AT SYDNEY.— From Pammatta daily, (Sundays ft-
cepted,) evrty mail at S o’clock, late mail at J past
From Windsor. Penrith, Liverpool, and Campbell-
town, daily, (Sundays excepted,) at 8 a. M.
From Kansan's Walls,Bathurst, Wollongong,Cawdor,
Berrima, Marulan, Goulburn, and Bungonia,
everv Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday at 8 a. M.
From "O’Connell, every Thursday, and Saturday,
From Wellington, every Thursday at 8 A. M.
From Lake George and Yaaa, every Thursday and
Saturday, at 8 A. M.
From Queanbeyao, every Tuesday and Thursday,
From Braulwood, every Thtrrsday, at 8 a. M.
F rom Melbourne, Port Phillip, every second Sauir-
day, ai 8 A. M.
From Newcastle, Raymond Terrace, Hinton, and
Maitland, with the Packets as often as they arrive,
at 8 a. M.
From Darlington, (with the Packets,) every Monday,
Wednesday, and Thursday, at 8 a. x.
From Carrington, Dungog, Paterson, Mnaelebrook,
Invermeio, Jerry’s Plaioa, and Merton, (by the
Packets,) every Monday and Thursday, a) 8 a. m.
From Murrurundi, (with the Packet,) every Thurs-
day, at 8 a. M.
From Camilla, (with the Packet,) every. Monday, at
8 a. M.
Prom Brisbane Water, Port Macquarie, Moreton
Bay, and Norfolk Island, by the different Vessels
as often as they arrive.
WESTERN DISTRICT.
AT PARRAMATTA—From Sydney, daily, {Sundays***
crpted) at 7 p. M.
From Windsor and Penrith, daily, (Sunday* ex*
cepted) at 6 A. X.
From Hassan’s Walla and Bathurst, every Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday, at 6 a. m.
From O’Connell, every Thursday and Saturday, at 0
From Wellington, every Thursday, at OA. X,
AT WINDSOR.— From Sydney and Parramatta, daily,
(Sundays excepted,) at 10 P. M.
From Richmond and North Richmond, every Tues-
day, FridJy and Snnday, at noon.
From Wilberforce, every Tuesday, Friday and Sun-
day, at 3 P. m.
From Pitt Town, every Tuesday, Fnday and Sun-
day, at O’ p. m.
From Wiseman’* Ferry, every Thursday, at 6 P. u.
AT PENRITH.—From Sydney and Pammatta, daily,
(Sundays excepted) at 10 P. M.
From Hassan’a Walls end Bathnrst, every Tuesday,
Thursday and Saturday, at 3 A. u.
From O’Cuuneli, every Thursday and Saturday, at
3 A. M.
From Wellington, every Thursday, at 3 A. M.
AT HASSAN’S WALLS—From Sydney, Parramatta and
Penrith, every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday,
at 3 p x.
From Bathurst, every Monday, Wednesday and
AT BATHURST—-I rum Sydney, Parramatta, Penrith and
Ha>sai.'a Walla, every Tuesday, Thursday and
Saturday, at 11 P. M.
From O’ioonelt, every Tuesday and Thursday, ar
From Wellington, every Toesday, at 6 p.X.
AT O’CONN ELI From Sydney, Parramatta, Penrith
and Bathurst, every Wednesday and Sunday, at
10 A. M.
AT WELLINGTON.—From Sydney, Parramalta, Penrith,
and Bathurst, every Friday at noon.
SOUTHERN DISTRICT.
AT LIVERPOOL—From Sydney, daily. (Sundays et-
Fruro I ampbelliowo, daily, (Sundays excepted,) st i
From Wollongong, Cawdor, Berrima, Marulan,
Goulburn. and Bungonia, every Tuesday, Thurs-
day, and Saturday, at 5 A. M.
From Queanbeyao. "e*cry Tuesday and Thursday, ai
From 1 as., every Thursday and Saturday, at 5 a. m.
From Me.bourne, ev.ry aecond Saturday, at 5 A. M.
AT CAMPBELLTOWN.— From Sydney and Liverpool,
daily, |Sundays excepted,) at 10 p. M.
From Wollongong, Cawdor, Berrttna, Marulan,
Goulburn, and Bungonia, every Monday, Wed-
nesday, and Friday, at 0 p. m.
From Yass, every Wednesday aud Friday, At 01 .M.
From Qneanbeyan, every Monday and Wednesday,
From Melbourne, every second Friday, at 6 P. m.
AT WOLLONGONG.—From Sydqpy, Liverpool, and
t .mphetltoWD, every Tuesday, Thursday, and
AT CAWDOR—From Sydney, Liverpool, and Campbell-
lowu, every Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday, at
9 a. at.
From Berrima, Goulburn, and Bungomf, every
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, at f p. m.
From Yarn, every Wednesday and Friday, at 4 p. M.
From Qneanbeyan, every Monday and Wednesday,
From Melbourne, every second Friday* 414 f. 8*
AT BERRIMA.—From Sydney, Liverpool, CampbellloWft,
Cawdor, Manilan,Goulbura,and Bungonia, every
Tuesday, Thursday, and Sunday, at 6 p. m.
From Yass, every Tuesday and Thursday, ai 6 p. m.
From Queanbeyan, every Sunday and Tuesday, at
From Melbourne, every second Thursday, at 6 p. M.
AT MARULAN.— From Sydney, Liverpool, Campbelllowa,
Berrima, and Buogooia, every Monday, Wednea*
day, and Friday, at 11 A. u.
From Goulburn and Bungonia, every Tuesday,
Thursday, and Sunday, at 9 A. H.
From Yaas, every Tuesday and Thursday, at 9 A, u.
From Queanbeyao, every Sunday, and Tuesday at 9
From Melbourne, every second Thursday, It 9
AT GOULBURN.— From Sydney, Liverpool, CampbelU
town, Cawdor, Berrima, Marulan, sod Bungonia,
every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, at 6 P. U.
From Lake GeOrge and Yaw, every Monday too
Wednesday, at 3 P. M.
From Melbourne, every second Wednesday, at 0
AT LAKE GEORGE.—From Sydney and Goulburn,
every Tuesday and Saturday, at 6 P. m.
AT YASS—From Sydney, Liverpool, Campbelltown, C*W.
dor, Berrima, Marulan, and Goulburn, every
Tuesday and Saturday, at 0 P. M.
From Melbourne, every aecond Tuesday, at 6 P. B«
AT MELBOURNE.—From Sydney. Liverpool, Campbell*
town, Cawdor, Berrima, Marulao, Goulburn, and
Yass, every second Motiday'ifkraoon.
AT BUNGONIA—From Sydney, Liverpool, Caropbell-
town, Cawdor, Berrima, and Marulan, every
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, at 3 P. M.
From Marulan and Goulburn, every Sunday
Tuesday, and Thursday, at 1 P. M.
From Queaubeyan every Monday and Saturday, II
From Braid wood, every Monday, It I P. m.
At BRAIDWOOD.—From Sydney and Bongonia,
Tuesday, at 5 p. x.
AT QUEANBEYAN—From Sydney Liverpool, Campbell*
town, Cawdor, Berrima, Marulan, and Buogobil*
every Wednesday and Sunday, It ngou.
NORTHERN DISTRICT.
AT CARRtNGTON.—From Sydney and Raymond Tef»
race, every Tueoday aud F-aiday, at 5 p. M.
AT NEWCASTLE.—Horn Sydney, Raymond Terrace*
Hinton, and Mahlaad, With each of the Packet*
as they pass.
From Darlington, (with the Packet*,) every TuaadaJ*
Thursday, and Saturday.
AT RAYMOND TERRACE—From Sydney, Newcastle*
Hinton, and Maitland, with each of the Packet*
From Carrington, every Tuesday and Friday, ft
From Dungog, every Monday |nd Thursday, ll
AT DUNGOG.—From Sydney and Raymond Terrace, every
Wednesday Saturday, at 6P. M. '
At HINTON From Sydney, Neweaaile, Raymond Ter-
race, and Maitland, with each of the Packets as
they pass.
From Paterson, every Tuesday and Friday, at
0 P. M.
AT PATERSON.—From Sydney and Hinton, every Tues-
day and Friday, at 1 p. m., or one hour and a-half
after arrival of the Packet at Hinton.
AT MAITLAND—From Sydney, Newcastle, Raymond
• Terrace, and Hinton, with each of the Packets.
From Darlington, every Mouday, Wednesday, and
Friday, at G p. m.
From Musciebrook, Invermein, Jerry’s Plsins, and
Merlon, every Monday and Friday, at 6 P. M,
From Murruruudi, every Monday, at 8 p.m.
AT DARLING lON. From Sydney, Newcastle, and Mail*
land, every Tuesday and Thursday, at 6 r. »•»
and Saturday, at noon.
From Musciebrook, Invermein, Jerry’s Plains, ind
Merton, every Monday and Friday, at boon.
From Murruruudi, every Mouday, at noon.
AT MUSCLEBIIOOK.- From Sydney, Maitland,'and Dal*
lington, every WedneaOay, at 11 A. SO®
Saturday, at & p. M.
From Invermeio, every Monday and Friday, v
From Murrurnndi, every Monday, at 7 A.K.
AT INVERMEIN,—From Sydney, Maitland, Darlington*
and Musciebrook, every Wednesday, ft 1 P. M<|
and Saturday, at 7P. M. *
From Murrurundi, every Snnday, at 4 P. M.
AT MURRURUNDI—From Sydney, Maitland, Darling
ton, Musciebrook, and Invermein, every Thursday*
AT JERRY’sTVIaINS.-—From Bydney, Maitland, ah*
Darlington, every Wednesday, at 9 a. Bf., *s*
Saturday, at 4r. M.
from Merton, every Monday and Friday, atB A. W
AT MERTON From Sydney, Maitland,'Darlington, and
Jerry’s Plains, every .Wednesday, at 11 Ar 8*»
and Saturday, at 7 P. X.
From Caaailia, every Thursday, at 6 P. il*
AT CASSILIS—From Sydney and Merton, every Moodaj>
AT ÜBISBANE WATER, PORT »tACQUARI|*
MORETON BAY, and NORFOLK ISLAND*
l)j Vessels u opggrtuuiiiea offer*
MINTED AT TtIF “ HERALD" OPFICK. LOWEtt 6EOWi*»STaEET. »»#«».
FAC SIMILE OF POST OFFICE TIME TABLE IN 1838.


Mm » arfJ
~v -i# 1
■- . to?/**■*'«?*# •* • J
*K
r.-
fv%
:-. s- •'
m
m
■%m
i£s\
***
,
-
IS
" A
•iSS
ASHFIELD POST OFFICE.
at
cz
President ...
Vice-President
ESTABLISHED 1832.
... HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR.
The Hon. GEORGE THORNTON, M.L.C.
Trustees :
EDMUND FOSBERY, Esq.
CHARLES SMITH Esq.
CHARLES COWPER, Esq.
WILLIAM HEZLET, Esq.
HENRY CLARKE, Esq., M.L.A.
The Hon. JAMES WATSON, Esq., M.L.C,
MAHLON CLARKE COWLISHAW, Esq.
ROBERT CAMPBELL CLOSE, Esq.
JOHN SEE, Esq., M.L.A.
Managing Trustee : Accountant :
SIR GEORGE R. DIBBS, K.C.M.G. HENRY S. MORGAN.
Branch Examiner : Accountant Southern Branch.
DAVID MITCHELL, G. F. PHILLIPS.
Solicitors :
Messrs. W. W. BILLYARD, ANDREWS & MOSELEY.
Head Office—BARRACK STREET. Southern Branch—BoB George St. South.
The Bank is open on Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, from 10 to 3,
Saturdays 10 to 12 o’clock, both to pay and receive money ; and on Saturday Evenings to
receive Deposits only, from 7 to 9 o’clock.
Interest allowed for clear months on sums from £1 to £2OO, notice of withdrawal not
required.^3^^rs. r >^vX^ZJ(2Dg9.
Money dvanced upon approved security at current rates.
The Bank is Closed for the First Seven Days in January of each year, for the purpose of calculating
the Interest on Depositors’ Account*, and for the Annual Balance of the Books


«HE Cellular Neglige Shirt fitted with soft
fronts of pleated Cellular Cloth and Cuffs,
and Collar Bands of Linen or French Print, are
recommended for Golf, Cycling, Biding, and all
Athletic Games.
This form of Shirt is becoming fashionable also
for ordinary day wear.
PRICES. ■—
A.
A.
12. —White Cellular Body, with superior
quality Linen Cuffs and Band
10. —Colored Cellular Body (pink or blue)
and French Print Cuffs and Band
}7/6
}B/6
fICELLULAR
NEGLIGE
SHIRTS
HEALTHY! COMFORTABLE! DURABLE!
• • •
CELLULAR PYJAMAS. DRESS SHIRTS.
TENNIS SHIRTS, SINGLETS,
PANTS, HOSIERY, Etc.
• • •
Detailed Price List of Ladies* and Gentlemen’s
Goods, and Illustrated Pamphlet, post free.
• • •
Cellular Clothing Dcpof_^>
And
305 & 307 GEORGE-ST.,
~ fNrnrly Opposite Hunter Street)
75 KING STREET,
(Between George and Tork-sts).
aoents DAVID BRAHAM & Co.
FOR N.S.W.
DHIZID BRHHHM 5 C°-
luzchawt Bc
High-class Tailoring at Cash Prices
Sac Suits to Measure, from £3 15s
Choicest Designs and the Largest and Best Selected Stock in Sydney.
A Special Importation of Hard-wearing TWIST TWEEDS, SCOTCH & IRISH TWEEDS, HOMESPUNS.
IMPORTERS OF VICKERMANN’S & FOXE’S NEVER-FADING SERGES.
Call and Inspect, or Write for Samples to
©4TOIR4I4M 4 Ifc, f« B-*
(BETWEEN GEORGE AND YORK STREETS.)


Orient S.N.Co
Peninsular & Oriental
S.S. Co
Messag.Mar . .Marseilles
Union S. N. Co.
Norddeutscher Lloyd...
Company and Route.
. ~~~ ~
Reference to
Footnote.
Ordinary
Letters.
tc tc tc li to &
tS|W *
Not exceeding
4 oz.
to tote to top- I And for every
| addl. t oz.
CO CO CO CO CO CO p*
Fee in addition
to ordinary
Letter Postage.
Regstd.
Letters.
: : :
Post Cards.
Newspapers.
H-» »— * • »-» K-»
For each
Newspaper.
: : : : : P 4
Not exceed
4 ozs.
Each paper
by weight.
: : : | : Pj
Every add.
4 ozs. or fr.
thereof.
«Ci j
Reference to
Footnote.
Book Packets.
HHHH h-* p 1
Not exceeding
2 oz.
HHHH K-» p 4
Every addit’n’l
2 oz. or fraction
thereof.
POSTAL. INFORMATION.
CLOSING OP ENGLISH MAILS.
British and Foreion Mails close at the G.P.O. by the various routes as follows:
Via San Francisco. —For Registered Letters, Newspapers, Books, and Packets, at 1 p.m. For Unre-
gistered Letters, 2 p.m. Late Letters, for the United Kingdom, Canada, United Statesl of America, and
Honolulu will be received up to 3.30 p.m. at the G.P. Office. Late fee, 24d. Posted in late fee box.
Via Vancouver. —For Ordinary Letters, 11.30 a.m. For Registered Letters, Newspapers, Books and
Packets, 10.30 a.m. Late Letters, for the United Kingdom, Canada, United States of America, and
Honolulu will be received up to 12.30 p.m. at the G.P. Office. Late fee, 2sd.
Via Colombo and Brindisi. —For ordinary Letters, other than for United Kingdom, 2.30 p.m.,
and for United Kingdom, 3 p.m.; and for Registered Letters, Newspapers and Book Packets, at 1.30 p.m.
Late Fee Letters for United Kingdom only, up to 4 p.m. at G.P.0., late fee, 2Jd.; For Continent of
Europe up to 3 p.m. Late fee, 24d.
Via Suez.— For ordinary Letters, other than for United Kingdom, at 2.30 p.m.; for United
Kingdom, 3 p.m. For Registered Letters, Newspapers, Books, and Packets, at 1.30 p.m. Late Letters
for United Kingdom will be received up to 4 p.m., late fee, 2|d. And Continent of Europe up to 3 p.m.
Late fee, 2|d.
Via Marseilles, per Compagnie des Messageries Maritimes. —Ordinary Letters, 3 p.m.; Registered
Letters, Newspapers, &c., 1.30 p.m. Late Letters for United Kingdom received up to 4 p.m. Late
fee, 24d. %
Via Brindisi, per Norddeutscher Lloyd G. Co. —Bates, &c., as Marseilles above.
BATES OF POSTAGE TO THE UNITED KINGDOM
g Packets of Patterns must not exceed 1 lb. The size of a packet of patterns is limited to 2ft.
in length, Ift. in width, or depth.
I Unpaid as well as insufficiently paid letters will be forwarded, and charged double the amount
of deficient postage; but packets must be partially prepaid.
Patterns—ld. every 2 oz., Id. additional 20z., or fraction.
Prices Current may be sent as Printed matter, Id per 2ozs., Id. each.
Letters not specially marked will be sent by first boat, either Orient or P. & O.
Letters intended for despatch by U.S.N. Co., via San Francisco for United Kingdom, must be endorsed
“ via San Francisco.”
Letters intended for despatch per German Co. must be endorsed “ per German Line.”
Letters intended for despatch per French Line must be endorsed “ per French Line.”
PARCEL POST. — United Kingkdom.
Parcels not exceeding 3 ft. 6 in. in length, or 6 ft. in length and girth combined, nor 11 lbs
in weight, may be received from, and despatched to the United Kingdom. They must not contain
explosive, combustible, or dangerous articles, articles likely to injure other parcels, or the admission
of which is not authorised by the customs or other laws or regulations; nor may they contain any
written communication; and the postage (up to 2 lbs. Is. 6d., and every additional pound or fraction
thereof, 9d.) must in all cases be fully prepaid by means of postage stamps. Parcels must be taken to
a post office, and not be posted in a letter-box.
British Columbia and Vancouver’s Island.
The following rates of postage are levied on parcels posted in N.S.W. for transmission to Canada :
For the whole of the Dominion (including British Columbia and Vancouver’s Island)—For the first lib. or
fraction, Is. lid.; between lib. and 21b , 2s. 7d.; 21b. and 31b., 3s. 9Jd. ; 31b. and 41b., ss. Od. : 41b. and
51b., 6s. 2Jd.; 51b. and 61b., 7s. 5d.; 61b. and 71b., Bs. 7id.
For postage, weight, and size of parcels for Foreign countries, via the United Kingdom, see Govt.
Postal Guide, or enquire at Post Office.
, Parcels for Germany not exceeding 11 lbs., and 2ft. in any direction, 6s. Bd. (via Bremen).
NEWSPAPERS.
Newspapers for the United Kingdom are chargeable with one penny each.
Newspapers for British Colonies and Foreign Countries, sent through the United Kingdom, &c.
are subject to special rates, viz., Id. up to 4ozs., or fraction thereof.
LETTERS FOR THE CONTINENT OF EUROPE, &c.
Letters for the Continent of Europe marked via Italy, and intended to be sent in the direct
mail to Italy, with insufficient postage thereon for that route, will be treated as wholly unpaid letters,
forwarded and charged upon delivery.
Letters posted without being marked to be forwarded by any special route, or posted without
sufficient no“t,age for the route marked thereon, will be sent at the discretion of the Department.


—
Post, Closes at General Post Office.
Letter Carriers leave G.P. Office
7 and 11 a.m., 2 and 4 p.m '
(Saturdays excepted).
8 and 11.30 a.m., 2.30 and 4.30 p.m.
Sat. 8 and 11 30 a.m. only, except
Suburbs
7 and 11 a.m. on Saturdays.
7 a.m., and 1 p.m. daily
when the English mail arrives on
Saturday, when they will also leave
about 2.30 p.m.
Country Districts —
Mails close at General Post Office.
Daily, 8 a.m. as far as Blacktown and for places towards Richmond, and
9 a.m for Rooty Hill and places beyond towards Blayney. Daily 3.30
p.m. as far as Penrith. Monday to Friday 6.30 p.m. for Penrith and
places beyond. Saturday 5 p.m. for Penrith and places beyond
towards Bathurst. Saturday 9.30 p m. for Penrith and places beyond.
Daily. 8.30 a.m. as far as Minto and for places beyond towards Goulburn.
Illawarra Line
Monday to Friday 4 p.m. as far as Picton, and for Bowral, Moss
Yale, Goulburn, Yass, Cootamundra, Junee, Wagga Wagga, and
Albury. Monday to Friday 4 p.m. for Campbelltown and places
beyond. Saturday 4 p.m. as far as Douglas, and 6 p.m. for places
beyond towards Goulburn. Saturday 9.30 p.m. for Campbelltown
and places beyond.
Daily 7 a.m. as far as Hurstville and for places beyond to Kiama, Gerrin-
Northern
gong, Berry, and Nowra. Daily 1 p.m. as far as Sutherland. Daily
3 30p.m. as far as Hurstville. Daily 4.30 p.m. for Helensburgh and
1 places beyond to Kiama, Nowra, Milton, and Ulladulla. Daily 9.30
p.m. for Helensburgh and places beyond as far as Nowra.
Daily 8 a.m. as far as Gosford, and for places beyond towards Quirindi.
Monday to Friday 3.30 p.m. as far as Gosford, and 4.45 p.m. for
places beyond. Saturday 5 p.m. as far as Gosford and for places
beyond towards Singleton. Saturday 9.30 p.m. for Newcastle and
places beyond. Daily 9.30. by Hunter River steamers.
RATES OX CORRESPONDENCE TO PLACES BEYOND THE COLONY.
Africa 0 2
Alexandria 0
Algeria ••. . P
Argentine Rhlic. v.Brindisi " 24
Do. do. v. Rio Janeiro 0 24
Austria (via Italy) ... 0 24
Batavia ... 0 24
Belgium 0 24
Brazil ... 0 24
British Columbia... ... 0 24
Bulgaria (via Italy) ..: 0 24
Do. via San Frisco. 0 24
Canada ... 0 24
Cape of Good Hope ... 0 24
Ceylon ... ... ... 0 24
Chili 0 24
China, Hong Kong, &e.... 0 24
Do. Torres Sts., direct 0 24
Constantinople ... ..0 24
Cuba ... ... ... ... 0 24
Cyprus 0 24
Dardanelles 0 2^
Denmark 0 24
Egypt ... 0 24
Fijilslands 0 24
Prance 0 24
Friendly Islands 0 24
♦Germany ... ... ... 0 24
Gibraltar 0 24
Gold Coast 0 24
Greece 0 24
Guatemala 0 24
Hawaii 0 24
Hayti 0 24
Heligoland 0 24
Honduras, 0 24
Honolulu ... 0 24
Italy 0 24
India... , 0 2j
Japan ... ... ... 0 24
Lord Howe Island ... 0 2
Manila 0 24
Malta ... 0 24
Marquesas , 0 2
Mauritius 0 24
Mexico 0 24
Natal 0 24
New Brunswick 0 24
Newfoundland ... 0 24
New Guinea (British) ... 0 2
New Hebrides ... ... 0 24
New Zealand 0 2
New Caledonia 0 24
Nova Scotia 0 24
Norfolk Island ... ..0 2
Norway ;via Italy) ... 0 24
Panama 024
Peru 0 24
Portugal ... 0 24
Queensland 0 2
Roumania 0 24
Russia (via Italy) ... 0 24
Scutari 0 2$
St. Helena 0 24
Singapore 0 24
3pain (via Italy) 0 24
Sweden 0 2?
Switzerland 0 24
South Australia 0 2
S.S. Islands 0 2
Tahiti 0 24
Tasmania 0 2
Turkey ... ... ... .0 24
United Kingdom,via Italy 024
United States . 0 24
United States of Columbia 0 24
Vancouver’s Island ... 0 24
Venezuela ... 024
Victoria 0 2
Western Australia ... 0 2
West Indies. Bahamas,
Barbadoes, Bermuda,
British Guiana, British
Grenada, Honduras, St.
Lucia, Jamaica, Tobago,
St. Vincent, Trinidad,
Turks’ Islands, and Lee-
ward Islands, Antigua,
Dominicia, Montserrat,
Nevis, St. Dominga, St.
Kitts’,Tor tola,and other
places 0 24
The above rates are per 4 oz, or fraction of 4 oz. For Registered Letter, Book Packet, and
Newspaper Rates, enquire at G.P.O.
Or bylGerman steamers, 2Jd.
General Postal Arrangements.
The City Letter Carriers deliver four times a day (Saturday excepted), and Suburban Carriers
twice daily. The hours of closing and despatch are stated below, viz
LATE LETTERS for despatch within the colonies, bearing a Late Fee of 2d., in addition to
egular postage, will be received at the General Post Office as follows :
WESTERN DISTRICT—This side of Penrith, Daily, 8 a.m. to 8.15 a.m.; as far as Pen-
Do. rith, 3.30 to 345 p.; beyond Penrith as far as Bathurst,
a.m. to 9.16 a.m.; to Bathurst & beyond 6.30 to 7.15 p.m.
SOUTHERN DISTRICT —as far as Goulbum, Daily, 8.30 to 8.45 a.m.
Do. for all places beyond Picton, Daily, 7 to 7.30 p.m
NORTHERN DISTRICT—for Grafton steamers, 9 to 9.15 p.m
Do. for Hunter River steamers, 9.30 to 9.45 p.m.
Do. to 5 p.m.
ILLAWARRA LINE—7.IS, 8.15 a.m.; 3.45 and 7.15 p.m.
For COASTWISE STEAMERS —15 minutes after the time fixed for closing mali
INTERCOLONIAL —Melbourne, 5.5 p.m.; Adelaide, 3.45 and 7.15 p.m.
Books, Packets and Samples intended for despatch to the Country Districts must be posted as
follows viz :
WESTERN DISTRICTS —7 a.m. and 2.30 p.m. as far as Penrith; and places beyond, 6 p.m.
SOUTHERN ~ 7 a.m. as far as Goulbum; 3 p.m. to Picton; and 6 p.m. for places beyond.
NORTHERN „ 4 and 7 p.m.
Newspapers tor the West must be posted by 7 a.m. and 3 p.m.; South, 7.30 a.m. and 3 p.m. and
for the North by 7 a.m., 2.30 p.m. and 4 p.m. Newspapers for North must not be posted on steamers.


edPatCil ** Btriamers dre olodeJ oae hour Previous to the advertised time of the
Mails are made up for despatch by sailing vessels twice a day, viz —at Noon
The Letter Delivery Office is open from 8.45 am to 9am • nVwA “ o d 6 p,n i‘ „
The Dead Letter Office is open from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., Saturdays excented wtif 8 i a ’ m ’ *+ ? P ’ m#
The Inquiry Office is open from 9 a.m. to 5p m , and Postage Stamps Sii,» hffi? en - lt clos ? s a * l P-m-
-to 9 p.m. The Registered Letter Office is “pen from 9 I mtoB o ffl« e °Pen from 8 a.m.
intended to be forwarded by mails, to be despatched between the hours'menMou^d-i 0 / ‘mend’s
p.m (except the English mails and for mails sent south to Picton and places beyond closed^’
Savinas ,or t, “ ° io “ s 01 W&5352;
day, 9a!m P to r i e p S m POSt iS ° Pen fr ° m 9 a ’ m ’ *° 6 P ’ m ’ dail F’ Satwd ay excepted, and on Satur-
The foUowing arrangement will be observed on all public holidays, viz.:—
The General Post Office will be open from 8.30 a.m. to 10 a.m
The first rTday? 6 effeCted by L@tter Carriers at 8 a ’ m ’ No deliver y on Christmas
The Country Mails (usually despatched in the afternoon and evening), also the Coastwise
The Tl“ te p^ lon^ al ai^ d Fo ~ l l. B - will close at 9 a.m., unless otherwise specially intimated’
The Iron Pillar Receivers and Receivers at Suburban Post Offices will only be ctearedUtthe
first usual hour on such days. y oiearea at the
_ ... LETTERS (TOWN).
Tor delivery within the limits of the city or town in which letters are posted
Not exceeding i oz., Id. Every additional $ ounce or fraction of 4an ounce, Id.
m, n ., _ t , SYDNEY AND ITS SUBURBS.
ine City or Suburban Rate of Postage—viz., Id. the It ounce is levied mmn ail
pond 6 e d in the F# 0f s y d . ne y f .°r delivery at.the Post Offices mentioned below, P and also upon corres-
pondence posted many of such Post Offices for the said City, or for any of such Post Offices:—
Abattoirs CanleyVale Glebe Linfield Paddino+on ~ 0
Annandide CarUngford Glenfield Liverpool Parramatta Strathfield E ‘ *
f an^l ale Carlton A Gordon Longueville Peakhurst Summerhil
t Chatswood Granville Lower Botany Pennant Hills Sutherland
Ashfield Como Greenwich Macdonald Town Petersham Sydney and its
Auburn Concord Guildford Manly ProsDeet PiL ni T
Balgowlah Croydon Guildford R.St’n. Marrickville Prospect RVr Office? h
Balmain Darlington Harnleigh May’s Hill Pymble SylvaSa
Bankstown Druitt Town Holdswonhy Merrylands Randwick Temp?
Row! Drummoyne Homebush Middleton Street Redfern Thornleigh
Dulwich Hill Hornsby Milson’s Point Riverview Turramu?a
Bexiey Dundas Hornsby June. Moorebank Rockdale Upper Bankst’n
Dpoela East Balmain Hoxton Park Mortdale Rookwood WansWl*
Blakehurst E t Carlingford Hunter’s Hill Mortlake Roselle wJteriS?
Condi Eastwood Hurstville Mosman Rydalmere
Bonnyrigg Edgecliff Ingleburn Narrabeen Ryde W?verley 7
Botany Enfield Ironcove Bridge Neutral Bay St. Ives Wentworthvilln
Brookvale Ermmgton Kingsgrove Newtown St. John’s Park Wethlrill Park
Burwood Erskineville Kogarah North Botany St. Peter’s Willoughby
Camperdown Fairfield La Perouse Nth Parramatta Smithfield Woniorf
Cabramatta Five Dock Leichhardt North Ryde Sane Souci Wooßahra
Canterbury Gladesville Lilyfield North Sydney Stanmore Road Woolwich
Also within a 12-mile radius of—
NEWCASTLE-Indudmg Adamstown Ash Island, Belmont, Cardiff, Carrington, Charlestown. Cockle
Creek, Dudley, Hunilton, Islington, Hexham, Lambton, Merewether, Minmi, Mosquito Island
Newcastle Newcastle West, New Lambton, Stockton, Tarro, Teralba, The Junction, Tighe’s
Mid Young W all send.°' Wallsend - Plattsbur - Waratah, West Wallsend, Wickham, William Town,
Within a 13-mile radius of—
West Maitland-Including Abberglasslyn Allandale, Bishop’s Bridge, Branxton, Buchanan Cess-
nock Dalwood, East Maitbmd, Eskdale, Farley, Glenoak, Gosforth, Greta, Hexham, Hinton
Lamb s Creek, Lochmvar, Miller’s Forest, Morpeth, Mount Vincent, Nelson’s Plains, Pat?rson
Maitland* wSXiUe^ ermCe ’ Rosebrook * Rothbury, Seaham, Tarro Railway Station, Vacey, W?s “
BOOKS, CIRCULARS, AND PACKETS (New South Wales).
Books, not exceeding ... 2 oz., |d.; 4 oz. Id.
And for every additional 4 oz. or portion of 4 ozs. (up to 31b.) Id
Circulars, not exceeding 2 ozs £d.
And for every additional 2 ozs. or portion of 2 ozs." (up to 16 0z5.)... Id
Packets, not exceeding 2 ozs Id.
And for every additional 2 ozs. or portion of 2 ozs.' (up to 1 lb.) ... Id.
RATES—AUSTRALASIA, &c.
“ft?' G “ 1 "“ <““>• <*«*>,
Letters, every § oz. or under 2d
Post-cards, each
Do. Reply (double cards) )" 2d
Circulars or Packets, every 2 oz, or under j" id
Books, every 4 oz. or under id
Newspapers (except for Queensland, South Australia, and Victoria,—’*
If posted within 7 days of publication Free
Posted after 7 days of publication ", Id each
Queensland —Not exceeding 10 oz " id
Every additional 10 oz. or fraction id each
South Australia or Victoria |d each
Bulk parcels containing Newspapers over 7 days old, or printed out of the Colony and posted hv
registered newspaper publishers or by newsvendors for transmission within the Oolonv or for other
Australian Colonies (except South Australia, Victoria, aud Queensland). New Zealand Fi if arid Nri™
Guinea (British), are charged Id per lb. or fraction thereof. 1 a anCtj * IJl > and * ew
Bulk parcels containing Newspapers, not exceeding 141 b. in weight, posted by registered news-
vendorsjand publishers, for transmission to Queensland, are charged Id per lb or fraction thereof
Bulk parcels containing Newspapers, posted by registered publishers or newsvendors for Smith
Australia or Victoria, are charged Id per lb. or fraction thereof. newsvendors tor bouth


WOOLLAHRA POST OFFICE WITH STAFF IN FOREGROUND.


RATES FOR OTHER PARTS OF THE WORLD.
Letters, for every | oz. or under . 01,1
Post Cards, each ’ _ p d
Do. Reply (double cards, each half impressed with lid stamp) 3d
Newspapers to United Kingdom, each ... . ld
Newspapers, for other places, for every 4 ozs. or fraction thereof !” id
Printed Matter, for every 2 ozs. or fraction thereof ... ... id
Commercial Papers (up to 4 lb.) — not exceeding 4 oz. ... ' 2Jd
Do. do. not exceeding 6 oz. j.j 3 d
Do. do. every additional 2 oz Id
Patterns or Samples—For United Kingdom (up to 1 lb.), for France,
Italy, Egypt, or Hawaii (up to 12 oz.), for other places (up to 8 oz.).
Rates—For every 2 oz. or fraction of 2 oz. Id
ETTER CARDS AND POST CARDS.
, Le , tter Ca .^ 8 >i 8 double cards, which may be closed against inspection, and Post Cards.
rL be ,. tra^ Sm ! tted A W1 * hl » the colon y> and to Queensland, British New Guinea, Victoria, South
Australia, Western Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, and Fiji.
~ _ The front or stamped side of the card is reserved for the address and directions with regard to
the Postal Service (such as “Registered,” “Acknowledgment of Delivery,” &c.).
If anything is enclosed in a Letter Card it will be regarded as a letter, and if the stamps be not
equal to letter rate of postage, be treated as an insufficiently prepaid letter.
NEWSPAPERS.
Newspapers for Queensland. Victoria, South Australia, Western Australia, Tasmania. New
Zealand, British New Guinea, Fiji (if printed in New South Wales, and duly registered as herein-
before provided), are charged a half-penny each up to 10 ozs., and a half-penny for every additional
10 ozs. or fraction thereof.
Newspapers from Queensland, South Australia, Victoria, Western Australia, Tasmania New
Zealand, British New Guinea, Fiji, received in the colony, are delivered without charge if thev have
been fully prepaid. 0 '
Newspapers received from beyond the colony are, when reposted, subjected to a charge of a
half-penny each for every 10 ozs. or fraction of 10 ozs. if addressed to places in Australasia, British
New Guinea or Fiji: a, penny each for any weight up to 4 ozs., and a half-penny for every additional
2 ozs. if for the United Kingdom; and a penny each for every 4 ozs. if for other parts of the world.
PARCELS POST.
• Parce l s , 1 u P to 31b - in weight, 3ft. 6in. in length, or 6ft. in girth and length combined, will be
received and delivered at all post offices in the colony; but parcels exceeding that weight and up to
lllbs. will be accepted at and forwarded to post offices to which mails are wholly conveyed by rail
or coach, or steamer, or by all three: that is to say, parcels in excess of 31b. in weight cannot be’
transmitted to offices to which mails are conveyed on horseback.
The postage, which has to be prepaid by stamps, is 21b. or under, Bd.; each additional lb
3d. The stamps have to be affixed to an adhesive label, obtainable at any Parcels Post Office in the
colony. No parcel will be accepted unless it is fully prepaid.
Parcels posted in letter-boxes or not duly handed to an officer of the Department will be
regarded as irregularly posted. If not exceeding lib. in weight (or 51b. in the case of books) they will
be forwarded under the rules relating to packets ; but when in excess of those weights they will be
forwarded by Parcel Post, and, if insufficiently paid, double the deficiency will be charged on delivery
-Parcels may be registered upon payment in stamps of an additional fee of 3d., and for an
additional 2Jd., the receipt obtained on delivery will be forwarded to the sender by post
No parcel should contain a letter, money (coin or bank-notes), bars of gold or gold dust or
consist of or contain two or more parcels or other postal packets of the same or of different
descriptions, addressed to different persons at different addresses. This Regulation does not
prohibit the enclosure of invoices, business cards, or printed circulars, or advertisements, price-lists
particulars of contents of or receipted account for such parcel. No parcel must bear on the outside
any indecent, obscene, profane, or libellous address, signature, marks, words, or designs, or contain
any indecent or obscene print, photograph, lithograph, writing, engraving, book, or card, or other
indecent or obscene article; nor must there be enclosed in any parcel articles of an offensive nature
or liable to sudden combustion, or of a dangerous, destructive, or explosive character. Live animals
reptiles, or anything likely to do injury to persons or parcels, will not be forwarded. Parcels con-
taining fruit, millinery, toys, confectionery, pipes, clocks, musical instruments, flowers, watches
jewellery, liquids or semi-liquids, such as jellies, pickles, varnish, paint, medicines, &c., will be
accepted conditionally upon their being so securely packed that the contents cannot escape, and the
vessels in which they are contained being sufficiently strong to prevent breakage in transmission.
All parcels are liable to examination by officers authorised in that behalf by the Postmaster-
General, and, in the event of prohibited articles being found in any parcel, such parcel, according to
the nature of its contents, may be charged as an insufficiently paid letter, or be confiscated. Should
the contents of any parcel become offensive or otherwise objectionable while in the possession of the
Department, it may be forthwith destroyed. It is not obligatory that parcels should be open at the
ends, but it is advisable that they be not sealed, so that, if it be considered necessary, they may be
conveniently examined. J
If, prior to despatch from the posting office, the sender applies for a return of a parcel, it will
be handed back without charge, but no refund of postage will be allowed. If, prior to delivery at
address, the sender of any parcel desires its return, the request will be complied with, if practicable
upon his applying to the Postmaster-General, and paying, before its return, postage equal to the
amount originally paid on such parcel, together with the cost of telegram of advice, if such be
requisite.
Parcels will be delivered as addressed in Sydney, Sydney suburbs, and certain of the larger
cities and towns in the colony by carriers under contract to the Department. At other places where
letter-carriers are employed the parcels will be delivered subject to the rules relating to letter
deliveries. 0
Parcels will be received at all post offices during such times as they may be open for transaction
of postal business.
LETTER-WRITING CONVENIENCE
In order to meet the public convenience, Postmasters are authorised to supply to anyone so de-
siring note paper and envelopes at a reasonable charge of (say) one halfpenny for a sheet of paper and
a like sum for an envelope, provided accommodation exists for writing independently of the office
itself, which must not be entered by the public. Where there is a Telegraph Office combined with the
Post Office, it must be clearly understood that anyone desiring to write a telegram should have pre-
oedence in the matter of using desk or table space.
SHIPPING MAIL NOTICES.
One copy of Ship’s Mail Notice, published each day, will be supplied to box-holder on paymen
n advance, of 2s. 6d. per annum, to date from Ist January.


Steamers with Mails
by route named.
Signalled at first port
connected by tele-
graph.
Approach to Sydney Heads.
Mails ready for delivery.
Day-time.
Via
San Francisco
London, Brindisi and
Adelaide
London, Naples and
Adelaide
Marseilles, Suez, and
Adelaide
Italy, Bremen and
Adelaide
Vancouver
(Auckland)
Union Co.’s Flag
(King George’s S’d)
P. & 0. Co.’s Flag
(King George’s S’d)
O.S.N. Co.’s Flag
(King George’s S’d)
Fr. Mail S.S. Co.’s
M M Flag
(Adelaide) Norddeu-
tescher Lloyd Flag
White Flag, letter H in fly.
House flag U. S. Co. iu upper
left-hand corner.
'i r
Mails by these steamers are
landed at Adelaide, and
brought overland to Sydney ]
except when the Railway)
| Time Table from Adelaide i
1 offers no advantage over 1
transit by steamer to Mel-
I bourne, whence they are 1
J brought by rail to Sydney. 1
Blue Flag, letter H in bright
green iu fly. House flag C. A. S.
Co. in upper left-hand corner.
Red flag
Blue flag
White flag
Green flag
Green and Red flag
Blue and White flag
POSTAGE STAMPS AND STAMPED ENVELOPES.
Every postmaster is required to keep for sale to the public a sufficient stock of postage stamps,
stamped envelopes, post cards, and newspaper wrappers.
Postage stamps at present in use —id., Id., 2d., 2pi., 3d., 4d., 5d., 6d., 7»d., Bd., 9d., 10d., Is., 12,d.,
5 S 10s 20s.
* One-penny stamped envelopes, 25 in a packet, in size 4i in. by 2i in.—2s. 3d. per packet.
Two-penny stamped envelopes, 25 in a packet, in size 4i in. x 2| iu.—4s. 4d. per packet.
Double and Single Post Cards, Id. each. Do. for United Kingdom only, lid.
Newspaper wrappers, id. and Id. each.
Half-penny, penny, and two-penny stamps will he impressed on envelopes supplied by
the public for the purpose under the following regulations .
Ist. Not fewer than 500 envelopes of any one size can he received at any time.
2nd.' No envelopes can he received for stamping which are too thin to bear the impression of
the die, or are coloured.
3rd. Envelopes provided by the Post Office Department, with the proper stamp thereon, will
be substituted for any which may be spoiled in the operation of stamping.
4th. No fee is charged for stamping.
sth. Payment for impressing envelopes to he made in advance.
Envelopes for registration purposes, with embossed registration stamp, 4 in. x 2J in. and 5 in. x
3 in. and 9 in. x 4 in.—3d. each. ... . . . _ , .
Arrangements have been made by wbicb brms, etc., may print their names on the bach or
postage stamps, or perforate their initials in each stamp by means of any machines submitted to and
approved of by the Postmaster-General. Postage stamps so marked must not be purchased by any
postmaster or other persons, as the object of placing a private mark thereon is to prevent the stamp
being stolen and sold.
Duty stamps cannot be used as postage stamps.
MAIL SIGNALS AT G.P.O.
The following Signals will be hoisted on the “ Flagstaff,” at the General Post Office, to denote
the arrival of “ Mail Steamers
REGISTRATION OF LETTERS.
All letters, packets, &c., having valuable contents, should be registered.
The registration fee to all places is 3d, exclusive of postage, and Stamped Registered letter
Envelopes can be purchased at 3d each. . ...
Any person can have a letter, or other article, registered by affixing on it, by means ot the
proper stamps, the amount of the registration fee, in addition to the proper postage, andpresentmg
it at a Post Office during office hours, when a receipt for the same will be given. As the Post Office,
however, is not responsible for the loss of any letter, whether registered or otherwise, parties
sending Bank notes or d-afts are advised to take the numbers and particulars, and to cut such notes
or drafts in halves, and to send them by different posts. . ,
A letter intended for registration must not he dropped into a Letter Box, but must be given to an
officer of the Post Office to be registered, and a receipt obtained for it.
MONEY - ORDERS.
Monet Orders may be obtained and made payable at any of the Offices in New South Wales
between the hours of 10 a.m. aud 6 p.m. daily (Saturdays 10 a.m. and 1 p.m.), and at Chief office,
Sydney, 10 a.m. to 3p.m., except Saturday, when the office is closed at noon. Suburban Offices close
4 p.m. daily (Saturdays excepted) : Saturday, 10 to 1 p.m.
All Money Orders must bear a penny duty stamp, to be provided by the remitter .
Rate of Commission. —For any sum not exceeding £5 —6d.; exceeding £5, but not exceeding *lO
Is. ; exceeding £lO, but not exceeding £15 —Is. 6d.; exceeding £l5, but not exceeding £2O 2s.
•Intercolonial Orders. . .
Monet Orders will he issued at all Money Order Offices in New South Wales payable in Victoria,
South Australia, Western Australia, New Zealand, Queensland, and Tasmania. Money Orders will
also be issued at all Money Order Offices in the before-mentioned Colonies, payable m New South
Rate of Commission. —For any sum not exceeding £2, 6d.; exceeding £2, hut not exceeding £5, Is.}
exceeding £5, but not exceeding £7, Is. 6d.; exceeding £7, but not exceeding £lO, 2s. _ .
Telegraphic Monet Orders can he transmitted between this Colony and the Colonies ot Victoria,
Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, and Perth (Western Australia).
Rate of Commission. —The usual Money Order Commission and the Fee for a Message of ten words
from the Issuing to the Paying Postmaster, the Remitter also advising the Payee by Telegraph ana
paying for the Message according to the number of words used.
United Kingdom.
Monet Orders will be issued at all Money Order Offices in New South Wales, payable inGreat
Britain and Ireland. Money Orders will also be issued at all Money Order Offices in the U nited
Kingdom, payable in New South Wales. _ _
Rate of Commission. —For any sum not exceeding £2—ls.; exceeding £2, but not exceeding £s—
6d. ; exceeding £5, but not exceeding £7—3s. 6d.; exceeding £7, but not exceeding £lo—ss.


NEWTOWN TOST OFFICE WITH STAFF IN FOREGROUND.


Monet Orders issued at all Money Order Offices in this Colony payable at all the principal towns
in India, Cape of Good Hope, United States of America, Germany, France, Algeria, and Japan at the
following rates :
For any sum not exceeding £2—ls.; exceeding £2, hut not exceeding £s—2s. 6d.; exceeding £5,
but not exceeding £7 —3s. 6d.; exceeding £7, hut not exceeding £lo—ss.
Orders drawn on the above places will be paid in the currency of those countries.
Money Orders will also be issued at all Money Order Offices in the above named countries, payable
in New South "Wales.
All Money Orders of the value of £2 or upwards, and paid in the colony, must bear a two-penny
duty stamp, provided by the payee.
No Money Order will be issued for a larger sum than Ten Pounds.
Lists of the Money Order Offices in Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania, Western Australia,
New Zealand, Queensland, and the United Kingdom may be seen, and further information obtained, at
any Money Order Office in New South Wales.
POSTAL NOTES.
Postal notes may be obtained at all Money Order offices in the colony, and are payable only at
Money Order offices. The notes are issued for Is., Is. 6d., 2s. 6d., 35., 45., 55., 7s. 6d., 10s., 155., and
205., and the poundage or price charged ranges from Id. to 4d. Postal notes may be crossed (like
cheques), when they will be only paid through a bank. Every person to whom a Postal note is issued
should keep a record of the number, date, and name of office of issue, to facilitate enquiry if the note
should be lost. Postal notes are payable at all Money Order offices in South Australia, Queensland,
Victoria, and Tasmania, and Post il notes issued in the latter colonies are payable in New South
Wales. Particulars of the notes can be obtained at any office in the colony.
TELEGRAPHIC INFORMATION.
Sydney Office. —Open from 9 o’clock a.m. until 10 p.m., Sundays and public holidays excepted.
PUBLIC HOLIDAYS.
In future, all Telegraphic Offices throughout the colony will be open from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m., and
between the hours of 6 p.m. and 8 p.m.
SCALE OF CHARGES. Each
Ten words, additional word
s. d. s. d
Between all Stations in New South Wales, except Suburban Offices 10.. 0 1
Between Sydney and Suburban and City Branch Offices 0 6 ... 0 1
Between Armidale and Armidale Railway Station 0 6 ... 0 1
Between Bourke and North Bourke 0 6 ... 0 1
Between Broken Hill, Broken Hill Railway Station, and South Broken Hi 11... 0 6 ... 0 1
Between Cooma and Cooma Railway Station 0 6 ... 0 1
Between Grafton and South Grafton 0 6 ... 0 1
Between Narrabri West and Narrabri 0 6 ... 0 1
Between Newcastle, Adamstown, Carrington, Charlestown, Hamilton, Lamb-
ton, Merewether, Minmi, Newcastle West, Stockton, Tighe’s Hill, Walls-
end, Waratah, and Wickham 0 6 ... 0 1
Between Wagga Wagga and Bom en 0 6 ... 0 1
Between West Maitland, East Maitland, Morpeth, and Hinton 0 6 ... 0 1
Between Yass and Yass Junction 0 6 ... 0 1
Border Stations.
Between Albury, Corowa, Howlong, Moama, Mulwala, Euston, Wentworth,
Jingellic, Wagra, and Tocumwal, and all Stations in Victoria 10 ... 0 1
Between Broken Hill, Silverton, Thackeringa, Euriowie, Purnamoota, South
Broken Hill, Tareena, Torrawangee, Wentworth, and all Stations in
South Australia 10 ... 0 2
Between Barringun, Boggabilla, Chinderah, Cudgen, Goodooga, Hungerford,
Jennings, Mungindi, Murwillumbah, New Angledoor, Tumbulgum, Tweed
Heads, Yetman, and all Stations in Queensland 10 ... 0 1
Press Rates.
Between all Stations in New South Wales, 10 words and under 6d
Every additional word up to 34 words id.
Over 34 and up to 100 words Is. 6d.
Every additional 50 words or portion thereof 6d.
No “ Collect ” messages will be accepted unless in answer to a “ reply paid ” or Press. Stamps
are to be sold by the officers who may receive the telegrams. No charge will be made for date, address,
or signature of the message.
Regulations in regard to Press Messages.
1. —That the said notice shall not apply to Intercolonial or Foreign telegrams.
2. —That if, during any other hours, the line on which a Press telegram is desired to be sentsis
clear and unoccupied, such telegram, of whatever length, may be sent at Press rates; provided that
if, during the transmission of such telegram, any private or business telegram or telegrams is or are
required to be sent on such line, the Press message so being sent shall be, from time to time, stopped
to allow of the transmission of such private or business telegram or telegrams. (This regulation will
be strictly carried out.)
3. —That no Press message, Intercolonial, Foreign, or otherwise, shall at any time be sent to a
greater extent than 500 words, if there be any other Press message or messages required to be sent on
the same line; but Press messages shall be sent in rotation as they come in to the extent of 500
words at a time.
QUEENSLAND.
Between all Stations in New South Wales and Queensland.
Uniform charge of 2s. for the first 10 words, and 2d. for each additional word.
Thursday Island (via Queensland). —Same as Queensland rates.
VICTORIA.
Between all Stations in New South Wales (excepting Border Stations) and Victoria.
Uniform charges of Is. for the first ten words, and 2d. for each additional word.
Border Stations. —ls. for the first 10 words, and Id. for each additional.
After office hours, 50 per cent, additional will be charged.
Sunday Rates. —Ordinary messages will be ch irged 100 per cent, extra.


SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Between all Stations in New South Wales and South Australia.
Uniform charge of 2s. for the first 10 words, and 2d. for each additional word.
Sunday Rates. —Ordinary mess iges will be charged 100 per cent, extra.
TASMANIA
Between all Stations in New South Wales and Tasmania, for 10 words, 2s. 6d.; each additions
word, 3d.
The Address and Signature ot Telegrams to Tasmania will be sent free, if they do not together
exceed ten words; each word above that number will he charged for.
Messages for transmission to Tasmania on Sundays will be charged at the ordinary dayrate. The
Tasmanian cable will be open for business on Sundays from 8.20 to 9.20 a.m., a nd from 8.50 to 9.50 p.m
WESTERN AUSTRALIA.
Between all Stations in New South Wales and Western Australia.
Uniform charge, 3s. for the first ten words, and 3d. each additional word.
NEW ZEALAND.
From all Stations in New South Wales —for 10 words, 35.; each additional word, sd.
N ote. —Messages will be counted and charged for under rules provided for International business.
NEW CALEDONIA.
From all Stations in New South Wales—for 10 words, Bs.; each additional word, Bd.
SCALE OF CHARGES.
For telegrams, inclusive of names and addresses, from any station in New South Wales to places
situated in the following countries: —
Price per word
Aden £0 4 11
Canary Islands 0 5 5
China —Hong Kong 0 5 11
„ Macao, Canton ... 0 6 4
„ Amoy, Foochow, and Shanghai... 0 7 7
„ Nankin, Hankow 0 9 3
„ Tien Tsin 0 9 3
„ Pekin 0 9 3
„ Cochin China 0 4 11
Corea 0 9 8
Cyprus ... ... ... ... 0 4 11
Egypt—Suez 0 4 11
„ Othei Stations 0 411
Europe direct 0 4 11
Price per word.
India ... 0 4 11
Ceylon 0 5 0
Japan ... ... ... ... 0 911
Java ... ... 0 3 11
Madeira 0 5 6
Malacca, via Singapore 0 4 5
Manilla 0 7 8
Penang 0 4 5
Siam —Bankok and other stations ... 0 5 5
Singapore 0 4 5
St. Vincent 0 6 11
Tonquin—Tliuansu 0 6 1
„ Haiphong 0 6 1
UNITED STATES AND DOMINION OF CANADA.
Price per word.
Alabama £0 6 2
Arizona, California 0 6 5
Arkansas 0 6 4
Canada (Ontaria & Quebec), Cape Breton 0 5 11
Colorado Territory—Denver, Leadville... 0 6 4
Columbia, District of; Delaware 0 6 1
All other places 0 6 1
Columbia, British 0 65
Connecticut .. 0 5 11
Dakotah Territory 0 6 4
Florida —
Jacksonville, Lake City, Pensacola 0 6 2
All other places ... .. 0 6 4
Georgia 0 6 2
Idaho Territory 0 6 5
Illinois, Indiana ... 0 6 2
Indian Territory, lowa, Kansas Territory 0 6 4
Kentucky 0 6 2
Louisiana—
New Orleans 0 6 2
All other places 0 6 4
Maine, Massachusetts .. 0 5 11
Manitoba Territory 0 6 5
Maryland ... 0 6 1
Michigan 0 6 2
Minnesota ... ... 0 6. 2
Mississippi 0 6 2
Price per word.
Missouri—St. Louis £0 6 2
~ All other places ,064
Montana Territory 0 6 4
Nebraska Territory 0 6 4
Nevada Territory, New Mexico 0 6 5
New Brunswick, New Hampshire ... 0 5 11
Newfoundland 0 5 11
New Jersey 0 5 11
New York-
New York and Brooklyn 0 5 11
All other places .... 0 6 1
North Carolina 0 6 2
North West Territory 0 6 5
Nova Scotia 0 5 11
Ohio, Virginia, Virginia West 0 6 2
Oregon 0 6 5
Pennsylvania 0 6 1
Prince Edward’s Island, Rhode Island... 0 5 11
St. Pierre, Miquelon 0 5 11
South Carolina and Tennessee 0 6 2
Texas 0 6 4
Utah & Washington Territories 0 6 5
Vancouver’s Island 0 6 5
Vermont 0 5 11
Virginia .. 0 6
Wisconsin—Milwaukee 0 6 2
Wyoming 0 6 5
Press Messages may now be sent to the United Kingdom at the rate of Is. lOd. per word.
Repetition of Messages. —The telegraph authorities in Great Britain have fixed six days—or 144
hours —as the limit of time after which they decline to repeat telegrams at the request of the receivers.


WAVERLEY POST OFFICE WITH STAFF IN FOREGROUND.


Year.
Bevenue.
Orders Issued.
Savings Bank Deposits.
Orders Paid.
Savings Bank Payments.
No. op
Offices.
No.
Amount.
No.
Amount.
No.
Amount.
No.
Amount.
O
S
Sav.
Banks
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
£ s. d .
85
14,243 5 6
337 856
1,169,569 5 10
170,750
1,201,776 7 4
298,582
997,960 19 1
75,600
1,020,813 12 1
427
270
86
14 ; 927 1 0
345,825
1,134,954 18 1
167,161
1,123,966 10 11
309,576
982,235 11 5
87,169
1,172,555 5 4
451
299
87
14,960 7 6
360,759
1,131,883 17 0
172,823
1,076,987 0 5
330,594
1,010,269 13 11
84,110
998,838 13 8
469
313
88
15,879 5 6
388,416
1,215,131 16 10
196,120
1,219,000 12 5
368,081
1,116,433 4 9
89,961
1,041,233 19 11
495
335
89
15,947 18 6
400,406
1,188,226 14 2
208,174
1,115,863 4 1
388,274
1,108,098 4 11
104,522
1,118,547 16 3
518
372
90
16,938 16 0
442,425
1,252,305 0 0
223,428
1,198,293 17 6
441,845
1,193,954 0 0
109,940
1,115,505 6 0
548
396
91
19,197 17 3
488,326
1,577,744 0 0
265,659
1,581,657 0 0
507,849
1,518,987 0 0
125,298
1,304,099 0 0
569
415
92
19,309 7 0
522,805
1,762,713 0 0
278,578
1,711,978 0 0
561,164
1,739,812 0 0
156,157
1,511,355 0 0
605
450
93
Postal
Notes
1 18,860 12 6
J 573 17 10
530,546
59,659
1,615,885 0 0
24,878 0 0
296,077
2,915,650 0 0
523,747
54,896
1,556,238 0 0
23,140 0 0
182,003
2,038,561 0 0
603
465
94
Postal
Notes
\ 15,751 14 0
J 3,877 13 4
430,588
429,546
1,315,818 0 0
159,033 0 0
294,317
2,160,608 9 1
393,985
416,129
1,257,921 0 0
156,808 0 0
183,926
1,880,852 0 0
616
482
RETURN SHOWING TOTAL NUMBER AND AMOUNT OE MONET ORDERS ISSUED AND PAID AND OF
SAYINGS BANK DEPOSITS AND WITHDRAWALS
&
o
m
in
§
s
o
w
y
>
fa
w
. cn
fa
>
u
CO g
O fa
g g
HH w
Q
fc H
H I
CO §
as H
< *
pH W
Q
fc
W fa
Eh W
H
O
Sz; >-
a w
ft w
fa
fa
fa
fa
m
fa
fa
<
in
W
fa
fa
O
fa
fa
in
fa
U 5
H


THE CITY - OF SYDNEY
Is bounded on the west by Newtown-road, commencing at the junction of Cleveland-street, and.
thence to George-street west; from thence by Bay-street to the shore of Black Wattle Cove, thence
by the waters of Port Jackson to the bridge at the foot of William-street east; thence by Rushcutter s
creek upwards to a culvert on the Old South Head road; thence again on the east by Dowling-street
to Church-street; thence by the southern boundary of Paddington, being Victoria Barracks, «c.,
Leinster and Gordon streets, to Park-road; from thence the boundaries of the city include ailtnan
piece of land known as Moore Park, and from thence the southern boundary is Cleveland-street to tne
point of commencement. „ , _ _, „
The City includes Woolloomooloo, Pott’s Point, Elizabeth Bat, Miller s Point, Daeling-
htiest, Moore Paek, Surey Hills, Steawbeeet Hills, Ultimo and Pyrmont.
Sydney was proclaimed a municipality on the 20th July, 1842, and is divided into eight waras,
each represented by three aldermen, whose term of office is respectively 3 years, eight aluermen
retiring from the City Council on the Ist of December in every year, when a new election ot eignt
aldermen takes place.
In the month of December in each year, the aldermen elect one of their body as Mayor ter tne
ensuing year,[who takes office on the Ist of January following.
MEMBERS OF THE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL OF SYDNEY, 1896.
THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL ISAAC ELLIS IVES, Esq., MAYOR.
Aldermen:
GIPPS WARD—
George Smail, Miller’s Point
Peter Francis Hart, 178 Cumberland Street
Isaac Ellis Ives, Argyle-street.
BOURKE WARD —
Alex. Dean, 22 Castlereagh Street
W. P. Manning, 12 Castlereagh Street
Charles Edward Jeanneret, Hunter’s Hill
BRISBANE WARD —
John Booth, Dowling Street
Thomas Jessep, York Street, Sydney
John Taylor, Sussex Street, North
MACQUARIE WARD—
Samuel E. Lees, 21 Roslyn Street
Michael Chapman, Hereford Street, Glebe
Sydney Burdekin, 195 Macquarie Street
cook ward —
John C. Waine, 336 Park Road
Alfred Mackey, Surry Hills
William Kippax, 387 Bourke Street, Surry Hills.
FITZROY WARD —
F. Penny, Darlinghurst Road
J. C. Beare, 102 William Street.
Henry Chapman, 100 William Street.
PHILLIP WARD —
John Harris, Jones Street, Ultimo.
Robert Fowler, Australia-street, Camper down.
J. W. Johnston, Petersham.
DENISON WARD —
George Landers, 54 McArthur Street, Ultimo.
Francis Buckle, Union Street, Pyrmont.
Matthew Harris, Crown Road, Ultimo.
OFFICERS OF THE MUNICIPAL COUNCIL FOR THE TEAR 1896.
Town Clerk, H. J. Daniels, J.P.
Assistant Town Clerk—John R. Palmer.
City Treasurer, A. J. Speer.
City Surveyor, R.W. Richards.
Assistant City Surveyor, James Do we.
Inspector of Sale Yards, Hugh Gordon.
City Solicitor, C. G. Waldron.
Health Officer, Dr. Gwynne-Hughes.
Inspector of Nuisances, Richard Seymour.
City Auditors 1 James Robertson, 173 Pitt St.
(two) ) Geo. Christie.
Treasury closes for receipt of rates at 3 p.m. Town Hall offices close 4 p.m., with exception ol Treasury
CAB AND VAN FARES.
In each cab must be provided a table of fares, to be taken at the option of the passenger.
To give facilities to the officers to recover lost property, passengers should be careful to
take a ticket from the satchel of any cab they may hire.
Any person calling a cab or van, and not using it, shall pay the ordinary fare as if it had'
been used.
No driver, having agreed to take a fare from any place at anytime, shall delay or neglect to do so.
Drivers are entitled to full return fares back to the city boundary if discharged beyond the
following places:—Double Bay Wharf, Old South Head road, at Ocean-street; Rand wick and.
Bunnerong-roads, at Toll Bar; Botany-road, at McEvoy-street; King-street, at Church-street,
Newtown; George-street, at Church-street, Camperdown; Abattoir-road, at Crescent-street,
Balmain. The weight of luggage allowed to be carried in a cab without extta pay is, when one
passenger, 84 lbs.; when two passengers, 50 lbs. Any weight in excess has to be paid for at the rate
to Is. for every 50 lbs. or part thereof.
FARES.
The fares of cabs are calculated by time.
For each person carried above the licensed number, one-third more fare to be paid.
Cabs
To carry two persons,
if required).
("Not exceeding fifteen minutes ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• J ®
Every subsequent fifteen minutes, or part thereof ... ... ... 1 0
(.After the first hour, every subsequent fifteen minutes, or part thereof... 0 9
{F©r removal of goods from any wharf, stand, or place in the City or
Police District of Sydney, for any time not exceeding one quarter of an
hour 2 0
For every subsequent quarter of an hour or part thereof ... ... 1 0
The removal of household furniture shall be by the hour. For the first
hour or part thereof ... ... ... ... ... ... ••• 2 6
Eor every subsequent half-hour or part thereof ... ... ... 1 "■
it'ot two-horse waggons the fare to be, for the first hour or part thereof, 45.; for every
subsequent half-hour or part thereof, 25.; or by special arrangement.
Additional/ares after 10p.m. andbefore 6 a.m. —One half the ordinary fares extra.


THE NEW CUSTOMS DUTIES.
Under the provisions of the Customs Duties Act of 1895, which will come into operation on
the Ist January, 1896, the following are to be the Import Duties levied and collected upon the good*
specified:—
SCHEDULE A.— Permanent Tariff.
s. d
Spirits—On all kinds of spirits and spirit-
uous compounds imported, and not
otherwise enumerated, per proof gallon 14 0
No allowance beyond 16’5 shall be made
for the underproof of any spirit of a
less strength than 16’5 underproof.
CaseJlSpirits—Contents of two, three,
four, or five gallons shall be charged—
Two gallons and under as two gallons.
Over two gallons and not exceeding
three as three gallons.
Over three gallons and not exceeding
four as four gallons.
Over four gallons and not exceeding
five as five gallons.
Bitters, essences, fluid extracts, sarsapa-
rilla, tinctures, medicines, infusions,
and toilet preparations containing—
Not more than 25 per cent, of proof
spirit per gallon 3 6
Not more than 50 per cent, of proof
spirit per gallon 7 0
Not more than 75 per cent, of proof
spirit per gallon 10 6
If containing more than 75 per cent, of
proof spirit per gallon 14 0
If containing spirit overproof to be
charged as spirituous compounds
per proof gallon 14 0
Methylated spirit per gallon 0 1
s. d
Spirits—Perfumed spirits,perfumed waters,
Florida water, and bay rum
per liquid gallon 20 O'
Wines—Sparkling: for six reputed quarts,
or twelve reputed pints 10 0
Other kinds per gallon 5 0
Other kinds—For six reputed quarts,
or twolve reputed pints 5 0
Beer, ale, porter, spruce, or other beer,
cider, and perry—
In wood or jar per gallon 0 6
In bottle per gallon 0 9
For six reputed quarts, or twelve
reputed pints per gallon 0 9
Tobacco—Delivered from ship’s side or
from a Customs Bond for home con-
sumption—manufactured, unmanufac-
tured, and snuff per lb. 3 0
Unmanufactured, entered to be manufac-
tured in the colony. At the time of
removal from a Customs Bond or from
an importing ship to any licensed
tobacco manufactory for manufactur-
ing purposes only into tobacco, cigars,
and cigarettes per lb. 1 (>
Sheepwash per lb. 0 3
Cigars and Cigarettes (including wrappers
in latter case) per lb. 6 0
Opium and any preparation thereof per lb. 20 0
DIMINISHING DUTIES.
s. d.
Candles, per lb., or reputed package of
that weight, and so in proportion for
any such reputed weight, night lights,
and stearine per lb. 0 1
From Ist July, 1897 per lb. 0 0J
From Ist July, 1899 Free.
Oil, kerosene, naphtha, and gasoline, per
gallon ... 0 6
From Ist July, 1896 ... per gallon 0 3
From Ist July, 1897 Free.
Oils, except linseed oil (raw or boiled), fish
and seal oils, black whale, cocoanut,
sperm, palm, and essential oils, per
gallon ... 0 6
From Ist July, 1896 ... per gallon 0 3
From Ist July, 1897 Free.
Sugar—Refined per cwt. 6 8
From Ist July, 1897 ... ~ 5 4
From Ist July, 1898 ... ~ 4 0
From Ist July, 1899 ... ~ 2 8
From Ist July, 1900 ... ~ 1 4
From Ist July, 1901 ... Free
Sugar—Raw and Solid Glucose per cwt. 5 0
From Ist July, 1897 ... „ 4 0
From Ist July, 1898 ... ~ 3 0
From Ist July, 1899 ... ~ 2 0
From Ist July, 1900 ... ~ 1 0
From Ist July, 1901 ... Free
s. d.
Sugar—Molasses and Treacle—Glucose,
Liquid and Syrup per cwt. 3 4
From Ist July, 1897 ... „ 2 8
From Ist July, 1898 ... ~ 2 0
From Ist July, 1899 ... „ 14
From Ist July, 1900 ... ~ 0 8
From Ist July, 1901 ... „ Free
Biscuits per lb. 0 1
From Ist July, 1898 ... „ 0 0$
From Ist July, 1900 ... Free
Confectionery (including cakes, comfits,
liquorice, liquorice paste, lozenger of
all kinds, cocoanut in sugar, sugar-
candy, succades,& sweetmeats)...per lb' 0 2
From Ist July, 1898 ... ~ 0 1
From Ist July, 1900 ... Free
Fruits—Dried, candied and prunes (exclu-
sive of dates) per lb. 2 0
From Ist July, 1888 ... per lb. 0 1
From Ist July, 1900 ... Free
Jams and Jellies—per lb. or reputed pack-
age of that weight, and so in proportion
for any such reputed weight ... per lb. 0 1
From Ist July, 1898 „ 0 0i
From Ist July, 1900 Free
Preserves and canned fruits, fruits boiled,
peel drained, or dry per lb. 0 1
From Ist July, 1898 ... ~ 0 0£
From Ist July, 1900 ... Free
DUTIES TO CEASE ON 30th JUNE, 1896
The duties authorised to be levied and collected by the "Customs Duties Act of 1892" upon butter
(which shall, however, be levied at the rate of one penny per pound only), cement, plaster, and
Hydraulic lime, cheese, bacon, and ham, chicory, dandelion, and taraxicum, roasted, ground, or mixed
with any other article, chocolate, plain, or mixed with any other article, chocolate creams, cornflour
and maizena, cocoa prepared, paste, or mixed with any other article, coffee roasted, ground, or mixed
with any other article (except coffee essence), fish, dried, preserved, or salt, iron galvanised, in bars,
sheet, or corrugated, galvanised wire netting, milk condensed or preserved, sporting powder, shot,
rice, salt, timber dressed and undressed, doors, sashes, and shutters, respectively, shall continue to
be levied and collected under the said Act until and inclusive of the thirtieth day of June, one
thousand eight hundred and ninety-six.


Land and Income Tax Assessment Act.
As the collection of taxes under the Land and Income Tax Assessment Act will
date from the Ist January, 1896, it concerns people who will soon have to pay to know
how they stand. The Commissioners appointed under the Act will cause to be
delivered to every taxpayer a very elaborate schedule. This being filled up with the
fullest information on the part of recipient, it will be sent back to the Commissioners,
who will fix the assessment. Against this the citizen can appeal to the court of
review if dissatisfied, but must meantime pay the amount demanded. Penalties of
£2O to £lOO are provided for neglect or fraudulent misstatement in making returns,
also for other breaches of the Act. Every person who fails to pay the amount
payable in respect of the Land and Income Tax respectively before the expiration of
sixty clear days after the same has become due, is compelled, in addition to the
amount of such Land and Income Tax, to pay, by way of fine, a sum equal to £lO per
centum thereof. No one is released from the obligation to make returns by reason
of being within the exempted amount.
THE LAND TAX.
As to the Land Tax, £240 is first deducted from the unimproved value of private
land, representing the statutory exemption. For every pound sterling over and
above £240 the owner is liable to the State for Id. A person owning land worth
(apart from buildings or other improvement) any sum up to
£240 will pay nil.
300 will pay £0 5 0
400 will pay 0 13 4
500 will pay 118
600 will pay 1 10 0
700 will pay 1 18 4
£BOO will pay £2 6 8
900 will pay 215 0
1000 will pay 3 3 4
5000 will pay 19 16 8
10,000 will pay 40 13 4
100,000 will pay 415 13 4
THE INCOME TAX.
The exemption is £2OO, at or below which the recipient pays no tax, but
beyond which he is liable to the extent of 6d. in the £. Persons with incomes up to
£2OO will pay nil.
220 will pay £0 10 0
240 will pay 10 0
260 will pay 1 10 0
280 will pay 2 0 0
300 will pay 2 10 0
350 will pay 3 15 0
400 will pay 5 0 0
£450 will pay £6 5 0
500 will pay 7 10 0
600 will pay 10 0 0
700 will pay 12 10 0
800 will pay 15 0 0
900 will pay 17 10 0
1,000 will pay 20 0 0
5,000 will pay 120 0 0
Incomes of municipal or other local corporations, dividends and profits of savings
banks, funds and incomes of trades unions or friendly societies, or of ecclesiastical,
charitable, or educational bodies of a public character, and incomes of persons not
resident in New South Wales (which incomes are derived from Government stock),
and certain incomes derivable from land, are all exempt from taxation. As to private
persons, they are entitled to have deducted from their taxable incomes, outgoings
actually incurred in the colony in the production of their incomes, premiums not
exceeding £5O on life assurance or fidelity guarantees, sums paid in repairs of
premises or machinery, employed for purposes of business, reasonable wear and tear
(to be assessed by the Commissioners, and a few other deductions connected with
land. No deduction is to be made for the maintenance of a family or establishment,
domestic or private expenses, loss recoverable under insurance, income and land tax,
or income earned in the colony and carried to reserve or capitalised. Neither is the
taxpayer exempt from payment on account of the following matters:—Moneys not
wholly laid out for purposes of business, rent of or repairs to premises not occupied
for business, interest which might have been made or debts other than such as the
Commissioners may estimate as bad. In order to estimate the sum on which income
tax is payable, the amount of income from all sources received in the preceding year
shall be the basis of calculations ; no tax is payable in respect of income earned out-
side New South Wales, and shillings and pence shall not be included in the taxable
amount.
A solution of corrosive sublimate in water let into all crevices where the bugs
lurk will utterly destroy both them and their eggs; carbolic acid would do so also in
solution, but the smell is sometimes objected to.
A few grains of salt sprinkled on the coffee before adding the water brings out and
improves the flavour.
A few drops of kerosene, applied on a piece of soft flannel, much improves the
appearance of polished furniture. It must be well rubbed in.
Do not soak fresh fish in water before cooking, as this treatment always ruins the
flavour, and makes it soft.


USEFUL INFORMATION.
Curing Earns and Bacon.— The following is a first-class Essex receipt and the
quantities given are for two good sized hams Pound in a mortar frmr-
ounces of saltpetre, and well rub the hams; let them lay two days, then mix two
pounds of coarse sugar, two pounds of Liverpool salt, two quarts of water and half
a-pmt of vinegar together. Boil these well, and skim off whatever may rise • nonr
this boiling hot on the hams, turn and rub every day for six weeks. Smoke in
building or chimney over a wood fire. Another Plan— Take the hams as soon as the
hog is cold enough to cut up, rub them well with common salt, and leave them for
three days to drain; throw away the brine, or boil and skim for future use • and for
two hams, fifteen or eighteen pounds each, mix two ounces of saltpetre, a pound of
brown sugar, and a pound of common salt. Rub the hams with these, lay them in a
deep pickling dish, with the rind downwards, and keep them for three days well corned
with the salt and sugar; then pour over them a bottle of good vinegar and turn them in
the brine and baste daily for a month. Then hang them up to dry, and after they are
perfectly dry, smoke. In choosing hams a pig ought to be over twelve months old
and corn-fed. Half the hams and bacon cured in the colony are spoiled from want
of attention to this point. If under twelve months old, no ham will acquire that
mellow flavor so desirable and so appreciated. In boiling a ham in the East of
England, a handful of sweet-scented upland hay is put into the boiler with the ham
after soaking for twenty-four hours. In some parts of the continent of Europe a
bottle of red wine is popped into the pot. The best months for fattening are any of-
the autumn months, and killing and curing may be carried on until August and
September. 6
Whitewash.—A. good whitewash for outdoor use can be made as follows : Take a
clean, water-tight barrel or other suitable cask, and put into it half-a-bushel of lime
Slack it by pouring boiling water over it, and in sufficient quantity to cover five inches
deep, stirring it briskly till thoroughly slacked. When slacking has been effected
dissolve in water, and add two pounds of sulphate of zinc, and one of common
These will cause the wash to harden, and prevent it from cracking, which gives an
unseemly appearance to the work. If desirable, a beautiful cream colour may be
communicated to the above wash by adding three pounds of yellow ochre. This wash
may be applied with a common whitewash brush, and will be found much superior
both in appearance and durability, to common whitewash. Alum is one of the best
additions to make whitewash of lime, which will not rub off.
Value of Hot Water— lf hot water be taken an hour before breakfast it will ward of
dyspepsia. If drank flavoured with lemon and sweetened with sugar, when one has been
out in the cold, it will ward off chills. The same medicine taken early enough in the
progress of a cold will stop it. Hot water will relieve the pain of a nervous headache
Nothing is better than hot water for tired eyes, inflamed eyelids, &e. Sop the eyes with
a cloth dipped in boiling water. Sprains may be greatly relieved by soaking in hot water
for half an hour at a time the afflicted member, and then binding it with a flannel
bandage. Bruises, too, may be healed by the same treatment. Treat wounds and sores
by pouring the hot water on them. If one pours very hot water over a cut it will stop the
bleeding. Those who suffer from sleeplessness will find themselves drowsy after a hot
bath. Wrinkles will flee before it. Hot water is a useful, practical, and tested friend
Forecasting the Weather.— A simple means of forecasting the weather from a morning
cup of coffee is given by the Leeds Mercury , which asserts that it has proved more trust-
worthy than the official guesses. Drop two lumps of sugar carefully into the middle of
the cup; if the air bubbles remain in the centre of the cup it will be fine; if they rise
rapidly and go at once to the sides it will rain all day; if they gather in the centre and
then go in a cluster to one side, look out for showers.
Leap Year.— The 29th of next February, it is not generally known, will be the onlv
29th of February till 1904, since the year 1900, which most people are looking forward
to as a leap year, will really be an ordinary year. For the solar or actual year consists
of 365 days 5 hours 48 minutes 50 seconds, or 11 minutes 10 seconds less than 3654 days
with which the calendar, by intercalculating a 29th of February every four years credits
it; and so in the course of a century the calendar goes wrong by 18 hours 36 minutes 40
seconds. Accordingly, at the end of the century, in order to get tolerably right again
the calendar, three times in four centuries, drops a 29th of February, and makes a leap
year an ordinary year. It thus, instead of going wrong almost a day every centurr eo es
wrong only about a day every 5000 years. 6
Drinks for Sot Weather.—Broum Bolin.— Take lib. treacle, a teaspoonful salt
and pour over it a kettleful of boiling water, and stir till melted. When a little cold
add one teacupful of brewer’s yeast or one ounce of German yeast, add to it enough
cold water to fill one dozen bottles, and let it stand 24 hours; then bottle and cork
tightly. Ginger Beer.—Slice 4 lemons and crush 2oz. ginger, add to them lumn
sugar and 2oz. cream of tartar. Pour on the mixture 2 gallons of boiling water and
when nearly cold 1 teaspoonful of barm. Bottle next morning, and tie down the
corks. In two days it is fit for use. Instead of the barm beat up the white of one
egg and put it in and let it stand four days and bottle.


To Exterminate Cockroaches. —Borax is one of the best of roach exterminators.
There is something peculiar, either in the smell or touch of borax, which is certain death
to them. They will flee in terror from it, and never appear again where it has once been
placed. It has also the great advantage of being perfectly harmless to human beings,
hence there is no danger to poisoning. The borax should be pulverised and sprinkled
around the infested places. Cockroaches and crotton bugs can be destroyed by the
following means: —Boil loz. of pokeroot in one pint of water until the strength is
extracted; mix the decoction with molasses, and spread it in plates in the kitchen or
other apartments which are infested with these insects. Paris green sprinkled around
the apartments will also exterminate them, but should be used with caution, as it is very
poisonous.
Life Assurance Policies. —An Act to remedy the loss or destruction of life assurance
policies was assented to on the 25th November, 1895, the principal clause of which runs:
—“ln the event of a life assurance policy issued in New South Wales or recorded in the
books of any life assurance office in New South Wales being lost or destroyed, the com-
pany which is liable upon the policy may, upon such evidence as to its loss or destruction
as the company may deem sufficient, issue to the person entitled thereto a special policy,
and if the company fail to issue such a special policy within two months after being
requested in writing so to do by such person, a judge of the Supreme Court or of Metro-
politan District Court may, after due notice to the oompany and upon such evidence as
to its loss or destruction as he may deem sufficient, direct the company upon such terms
and within such time as he may determine to issue to the person entitled thereto a
special policy.”
Age of the World. —How old is bhe world ? is a difficult question to answer, and
scientists differ upon the point. Sir Charles Lyall, basing his estimate on modification
of certain species of marine life, assigned 240,000,000 years as the required length
of geologic time. Darwin claims 200,000,000 years.
Cleaning Sewing Machines. —When the sewing machine gets very dirty, take the
machinery apart, and drop the mechanism carefully into boiling soapsuds to which
you have added a teaspoonful of ammonia. When thoroughly cleansed take out all
the bits of works, dry them thoroughly with a warm cloth, and let them stand in a
warm place till every bit of dampness has evaporated. Set it on the stand, oil every
part, adjust the belt, and the machine will run like a new one.
Preserving Eggs. —Nearly every farmer’s wife has a plan of her own for preserving
eggs for a few months when they are plentiful. Some pack in lime, salt, bran, saw-
dust, &c.; others keep them immersed in salt water, lime water, &c.; and many use
oil, varnish, &c.; and some even parboil them. The following plan has been most
successfully practised:—Have shelves made to fit your store-room, the latter being a
cool room; pierce the shelves with holes suitable to the size of an egg, say twelve
shelves to hold twelve dozen each. It is important to operate upon the egg the day it
is laid. As soon as the daily eggs are gathered, oil them with salad oil, not leaving a
spot untouched; place them in the holes, and turn them once a month. They will
keep this way for six or eight months, but they ought to be oiled the day they are laid.
The shell of the egg being porous, the object is to keep the air from the animal matter
inside and producing putrefaction. A most effective plan is also to use patent air-
tight glass bottles, or rather, jars fitted with india-rubber joints; but this is,
perhaps, too expensive a plan.
Tanning Kangaroo Skins. —Collect some wattle bark and make a strong decoction,
either by boiling or steeping. If you have a tannery near you it will be easier to buy a
bushel of crushed bark. Before you steep the skins, scrape off all the fleshy parts. A
large square watertight case is preferable to a hogshead, for it is best not to double the
skins up more than can be helped. Look at the skins once a week, and not only scrape
them over again, but change the liquor. The same liquor will do if you boil and skim it.
It will take six weeks to tan large skins. For ’possum skins, a month will be long
enough.
Wonders of the Heavens. —There are 18 stars of the first magnitude. These are at
least 211,000 times farther from the earth than is the sun, and their light takes over
3 years to reach us. There are 55 of the second magnitude, their light taking over
6 years to reach us. 170 of the third magnitude, their light reaching us in over 9
years. 500 of the fourth magnitude, their light taking 12 years to reach us. Stars
as distant as those of the sixth magnitude, their light taking 36 years to traverse the
intervening space, are visible to the naked eye. Of these there are about 6,000. A
9-foot telescope reveals stars of the twelfth magnitude, about 10,000,000 in number.
An 18-foot telescope reveals about 43,000,000 stars, including those of the thirteenth
magnitude, whose light takes 2,700 years to reach us. Each of these stars is thought
to be the centre of a solar system like our own. Our own solar system consists of the
Sun, and the following planets revolving around it: Mercury, nearest the Sun, is
35,000,000 miles distant; Venus, 66,600,000 miles; the Earth, 91,000,000 miles; Mars,
139,000,000 miles; the Asteroids, about 266,000,000 miles ; Jupiter, nearly 476,000,000
miles; Saturn, 872,000,000 miles; Uranus, 1,754,000,000 miles; and Neptune,
2,746,000,000 miles from the Sun.


WEIGHTS AND MEASURES.
The origin of weights and measures in England was derived from a grain of
wheat; vide statutes of 51 Henry 111., 31 Edward I. and 12 Henry VII., which
that 32 of them, gathered from the middle of the ear, and well dried, were to
make 1 pennyweight; 20 dwts., 1 ounce, and 20 oz., 1 pound.
It was subsequently thought better to divide the penny weight into 24 equal parts,
oalled grains.
William the Conqueror introduced into England what was called Troy Weight,
from Troyes, a town in the province of Champagne, in France, now in the department
of Aube, where a celebrated fair was held. The English were dissatisfied with this
weight, because the pound did not weigh so much as the pound in use at that time in
Bngland. Hence arose the term Avoir du pots, which was a medium between the
French and the ancient English weights.
Avoirdupois Weight was first made legal in the reign of Henry VH., and its
particular use was to weigh provisions and coarse heavy articles. Henry fixed the
stone at 14 lb., which has been confirmed by a recent Act of Parliament.
With respect to measures of length, it is recorded that the various denominations
were constructed from a com of barley, 3of which, from the middle of the ear, well
dried, made an inch. Other terms were taken from portions of the human body,
such as the digit ($ of an inch, or a finger’s breadth), a palm (3 inches), a hand (4
inches), a span (9 inches), a foot (12 inches), and a cubit (18 inches), being the
length of the arm or bone from the elbow to the wrist. A pace (5 feet), or 2 ordinary
steps; a fathom (6 feet), from the extremity of one hand to that of the other, the
arms oppositely extended. It is stated that Henry 1., in 1101, commanded that the
ulna or ancient ell, which answers to the modern yard, should be made the length of
his arm; and that the other measures of length wt*e hence derived, whether lineal,
superficial, or solid.
All measures of capacity were first taken from Troy weight, and several laws
were passed in the reign of Henry 111., enacting, that 8 lb. Troy of wheat, taken
from the middle of the ear, and well dried, should make one gallon of wine measure,
and 8 such gallons make a bushel.
Weights and measures were invented 869 b.c.; fixed to a standard in England,
a.d. 1257; regulated, 1492; equalised, 1826; supervision entrusted to Board of Trade,
Ist January, 1879.
Long: Measure.
Inches. Feet. Tarda. Poles. Chains
Foot ... ... ... ... 12
Yard ... ... ... ... 36 3
Pole or Perch ... ... ... 198 16$ 51
Chain ... ... ... 792 66 22
Furlong ... ... ... 7920 660 220 40 10
Mile ... ... ... ... 63,360 5280 1760 320 80
Square or Superficial Measure.
This measure is used for all kinds of superficies measuring, such as land, paving,
flooring, roofing, tiling, plastering, Ac., and anything having length and breadth only.
Flooring, roofing, thatching, &c., are measured by the square of 100 feet, and
bricklayers’ work by the pole of 16$ feet, the square of which is 2721 feet, though this
is partly a cubic measure, as the brickwork is reckoned to be 14 inches, or if brick
Inches. Feet. Yards. Poles. Chains.
Square foot 144 1
Square yard 1,296 9 1
Rod, pole, or perch ... 39,204 272$ 30$ 1
Square ohain 627,264 4,356 484 16 1
Rood 1,586,160 10,890 1,210 40 2$
Acre 6,272,640 43,560 4,840 160 10
A square mile contains 640 acres, 2,560 roods, 6,400 chains, 102,400 rods, poles, or
perches, or 3,097,600 square yards. The square of any number is obtained by multi-
plying it by itself—l 2 by 12=144, the square of 12.
Apothecaries’ Weight.
20 Grains = 1 Scruple.
3 Scruples = 1 Drachm.
8 Drachms ... ... ... ... ... = 1 Ounce.
12 Ounces ... ... ... ... ... ... = 1 Pound.
This weight is only established by custom, and not by any Act of Parliament.
Apothecaries compound their medicines by this weight, but buy and sell by
avoirdupois


EQUIVALENTS.
A rod is 16} feet or 6} yards.
A mile is 320 rods.
A mile is 1,760 yards.
A mile is 5,280 feet.
A square foot is 144 square inches.
A square yard contains nine square feet.
A square rod is 272} feet.
An acre contains 43,560 square feet.
An acre contains 4,840 square yards.
An acre contains 160 square rods.
A section or square mile contains 640 acres.
A quarter section contains 160 acres.
An acre is 8 rods wide by 20 rods long.
An acre is 10 rods wide by 16 rods long.
An acre is about 208} feet square.
A solid foot contains 1,728 solid inches.
A pint (of water) weighs 1 pound.
A solid foot of water weighs 62} pounds.
A gallon of water holds 231 solid inches
A gallon of milk weighs 8 pounds and 10 ounces.
A pint of water holds 28} solid inches (28.875).
A barrel (31}) gallons holds 4} solid feet (4.211).
A Eolid foot contains nearly 7} solid pints (7.48).
A bushel (struck) contains 2,150 solid inches.
A bushel (heaping) contains 1} struck bushels.
A struck bushel contains about 1} solid feet.
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES FOR COOKS, &C.
1 pound of Wheat Flour is equal to 1 quart
1 pound and 2 ounces of Indian Meal make ... ... ... 1 ~
1 pound of Soft Butter is equal to ... 1 „
1 pound and 2 ounces of Best Brown Sugar make ... 1 ~
1 pound and 1 ounce of Powdered White Sugar make 1 „
1 pound of Broken Loaf Sugar is equal to 1 ~
4 Large Tablespoonfuls make } gill
1 Common-sized Tumbler holds } pint
1 Common-sized Wine-glass is equal to >w } gill
1 Tea-cup holds ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1 ~
I Large Wine-glass holds 2 ozs.
1 Tablespoonful is equal to . H >M ... } ~
HOW TO MIX PAINTS FOR TINTS.
Mixing Red and Black makes ... ... ... ... Brown
„ Lake and White makes ... ... ... ... Rose
„ White and Brown makes ... ... ... ... Chestnut
„ White, Blue, and Lake makes ... ... ... Purple
„ Blue and Lead Colour makes ... ... ... Pearl
„ White and Carmine makes ... ... ... Pink
„ Indigo and Lampblack makes ... ... ... Silver Grey
„ White and Lampblack makes ... ... ... Lead Colour
„ Black and Venetian Red makes ... ... ... Chocolate
„ White and Green makes ... ... ... ... Bright Green
„ Purple and White makes ... ... ... ... French White
„ Light Green and Black makes ... ... ... Dark Green
„ White and Green makes ... ... ... ... Pea Green
„ White and Emerald Green makes ... ... ... Brilliant Green
„ Red and Yellow makes ... ... » m ... Orange
„ White cud Yellow makes ... ... ... ... Straw Colour
„ White, Blue, and Black makes ... ... ... Pearl Grey
„ White, Lake, and Vermilion makes ... ... ... Flesh Colour
„ Umbex, White, and Venetian Red makes ... ... Cream
„ Blue, Black, and Red makes ... ... ... Olive
> „ Yellow, White, and a little Venetian Red makes... ... Buff


(Sr
N. S. W.
Fresh Food &• Ice Co. It d
PIONEERS OP
The, (Country 3/Cillc Trade. — v -
The factory System of Butter 3/Caking
(Which has done so much for the Colony and Colonies).
The Creamery System of Butter S/takirig
(Which has done more).
Refrigeration. ilce 3/Caking.
The Company sells only the Very Best Articles, supplying all the
principal places of Sydney with
/VH1I(, Cream, Ice, Rutter, Fish, Gam?,
Poultry, Pastry, &c.
Visit the CITY DEPOTS (Refreshment),
92 KING STREET * 23 ROYAL ARCADE
FOR AFTERNOON TEA.
NOTE—Arrangements may be made at either of the several Depots
for Afternoon Teas for Private Parties.
Th? Fish Shop at 135 KING STR66T is on? of th?
3cst in th? World.
SEND ORDERS TO THE HEAD OFFICE:
25 HARBOUR STREET.
They will receive Prompt Attention.
AGENTS EVERYWHERE.
H. PATESON, Manager.


(fIIGAGO
C 5)
v i
art*
it
IS
• 4
EfssgP
«a
I f
m
>v
4,
V
'■K ■
A®s
\ ,
x US ,
Wrn. CA/VIERON <&• 5R0., Petersburg, Virginia, U.S.A.
