

Sydney
Harbor
BY E.J.BRADY.


SYDNEY
HARBOR
builder Printing Works,
FINE ART PRINTERS,
527 KENT STREET, SYDNEY.


Sydney
Harbor.
HERE is a young geologist in Sydney who has advanced a striking theory to account for the
pBl existence of the finest harbor in the world. A lakh of years ago, contends this seer, a
volcano existed from eight to ten miles off Sydney heads. This volcano, more active than
—x Mt. Pelee and higher than Vesuvius, occupied its business hours in making physical
S# geography. The curious volcanic dykes or clefts, to be seen at Watson’s Bay, and which all
Pjs converge on a central point to the eastward are advanced as proof. It is only necessary to add,
if in order to strengthen the mental digestion of those who require a sauce of reason for everything,
I that the Harbor is a gigantic fissure of the same type, enlarged, altered and deepened by
natural forces since the post-triassic period, with a final result of splendid achievement not to
I be paralleled along the entire coast lines of the world. Ages before the old Endeavor plunged
If heedlessly by Port Jackson Heads, while her commander sat at dinner below with his officers,
it Nature was busily hanging a whole Royal Academy of sylvan masterpieces along the foreshores of
iff Sydney Harbor for the appreciation of future critics. The result is so admittedly fine that neither
pen,nor brush,
nor lens, nor
even a com-
bination of all
three, can ever
be expected to
render it ade-
quate justice.
The fame of


this incomparable port has gone out clarion-tongued across the waters,
and school children, from Delhi to Ottawa, learn
to know it as the “finest harbor in the world.”
Subsequent happenings have rendered the
traditional fame of ordinary seaman Jackson, of
the historical coal boat Endeavor, almost as
great as that of Cook himself. Since her petty
bulk of 370 tons sailed slowly past the rocky
headlands of Sydney Harbor, Time has covered
the primitive vista of surrounding hills with
engardened mansions. To-day, huge steamships
disgorge their rich oversea freights on the busy
shores of those silver bays which flitted silently
across the astonished vision of the Endeavor's
lookout. Armored fleets, with their
Two-foot walls of twice-tempered steel
And grinning tiers of guns,
are moored where Phillip’s clumsy wooden trans-
ports were brought to anchor a few years later
to land the first Australian settlers. The
aboriginal tribes which sparsely peopled the
shores of Port Jackson have become a mere
ethnological memory. At the foot of the Hornby
Light on South Head-—built in 1858, consequent
on the wreck of the Dunbar, and named
after Admiral Sir Phipps Hornby, G.C.8., Gov-
ernor Denison’s father-in-law some long for-
gotten tribal artist one idle day over a century ago
carved deeply into a flat rock the outline of a
kangaroo. No more lasting monument of his race
remains. Some distance further along the southern
harbor shore are the cave dwellings of his people, now
tenanted by a quaint little community of beachcombers and
fishermen. These white troglodytes, like their aboriginal
antecedents, drone out a healthy open-air existence, paying
tithes to no landlord and rendering service to no inaster. To my friend
Murphy, whose portrait and residence appear on page 6, 1 owe much occult
knowledge of Port Jackson and its environs not to be acquired from printed
books. Originally “ Murph ” hailed from “the
Loo,” which is colloquial for the Bay of Wool-
loomooloo; but grown weary of the stress and
din of streets where tall houses hide blue skies
and white stars, this interesting gypsy shed civili-
sation like a worn-out garment and with other
congenial characters found free dwelling by the
waterside. But yesterday my breakfast table w r as
graced by a succulent schnapper hooked by
“Murph” on a fifty-fathom line at the gates of
the bay. The ways of the oviparous Port
Jackson shark are known to him, and he has
stories to tell of the great Blue Nose, who
watches with cruel, wicked eye along the
Sydney wharves for daring bathers or stumbling
marine drunkards whose errant feet have fatally
missed the nets below the gangway. When
the net fishermen of the harbor are awaiting
incoming shoals of mullet, garfish, whiting and
bream, the line fisher and his peers row out to
the well - known feeding grounds of red-bream,
nannagai, rock-cod, teraglin, groper and morwong,
and if the bait in hand prove acceptable, subse-
quently offer their spoil for sale upon the ferry
wharves to home - going business people, or
returning holiday - makers. Their free and
simple lives are far more interesting
and perhaps happier than the lives of
many among the half-million residents
who move and have their belli gs by
the shores of this wonderful harbor.
The shipping of Port Jackson
for the year 1903 will totafi on a
rough calculation, over six million
tons. The trade of the port in value, on the estimate of experts
is expected to equal more than fifty million pounds sterling. The
VOLCANIC
CLEFT AT
WATSON'S BAY.


THE GAP, WATSON’S BAY


State of New South Whiles, if the prophecies of our commercial
Josephs are to be accepted, has seven years of prosperity before
it. Seven lean years of drought lie behind their asperities softened
by the golden promise of the seasons. So it is within the horizon
of possibility that he who figures the commerce of Sydney for igio’
export and import, may set it down at a hundred millions of value.
He will have precedent to support him, for in 1870 the port’s trade,
entered and cleared, was credited at 750,000 tons. In ißqo—twenty
years later—it stood at 3,000,221 tons! A business which more than
quadruples its turnover in twenty years has a hopeful future before
it. The reasons for the steady development of
Port Jackson shipping need no dubious
search among tangled mazes of statistics.
Port Jackson, besides being the railway
terminus for a rich State as large as an
European Kingdom, is the only possible
port along the entire seaboard of that
State a stretch of 600 miles. The half
million people who abide to-day by the
shores of Sydney Elarbor have occasion to
bless the memory of that defunct volcano
wdrose burial place has been theoretically
located by the young geologist before
mentioned. When I undertook to treat
this congenial subject—without hope of
ever being able to render it justice—l
waited upon Mr. G. A. Waterhouse, and
being a conscientious geologist, he gave
honor where honor was due. I have much
pleasure therefore in according to this volcano
primary honor for all that follows. The
good that volcanoes do should not be inter-
red with their bones. This particular crater
deserves at least honorable mention. It is
geologically responsible for a port with an
inland shore-line of 200 miles ; 200 miles
A CAVE
DWELLER.
of the most picturesque and useful salt water margin on the face
of this round earth, with a deepwater entrance a mile wide and
a ship-berthing area of 15 square miles wheieon the navies of all
Europe might securely ride at anchor from January to December.
To a host of kindly authorities I am indebted for a mass
of salient information concerning Sydney Harbor —a tithe of which
only can be embodied in these pages. It is a well - governed
port, and the overlords who rule and regulate its life take pride
in their work. Their hours of labor by night and by day are
enlivened by many interests and sweetened by the accident of the
beautiful. Even though the florist be no poet his duties are cf
a kindlier nature than those of the factory hand, and so the voices
of those with whom I have spoken for
the purposes of this publication were
softer from the influences of pleasant
associations. It is easy to be patriotic
when one has a country of which one
may feel proud.
Sydney is justly proud of her perfect
port; so much so that the “beautiful harbor”
joke is more frequently perpetrated in
this city than any other current witticism.
No one with a soul of poetry or a sense
of the picturesque will view it for the
first time without experiencing w’onder
and delight. Even to those fortunate
citizens who have been cradled by its
lovely shores it is a constant source of
pleasure and admiration. Sydneyites have
been described by certain serious-minded
tourists as pleasure - seekers pure anti
simple. Perhaps there lies within their
reach a more radiant temptation than is
offered to the people of any other city in
the world. A sunlit stretch of laughing
waters, blue as the Aegean, with winding
bays and secluded coves, with endless
arms and reaches, cooing and calling
through the summer hours, holds frequent inducements which the
pleasure seeker could not be human and resist.


THE SPIT, MIDDLE HARBOR.


ality as great an event in the
history of that port as the arri-
val of Governor Phillip. To
that rat and its afflicted compeers
we owe a revolution in the administra-
tion, and a transformation in the
appearance of our harbor. The feared
and trembling citizens who, at the
beginning of 1900, with the imperative
voice of United Democracy called
upon their rulers to avert the uplifted sword of Black Death, now
begin to realise that the bubonic rat was really a predatory paraclete
heralding an era of reform. The fear of actual death, when in it is
suddenly shared by an army of indignant electors, is a force no intel-
ligent Australian Government can afford to ignore. The Government
of the day, being passably intelligent and anxious to retain office,
met the outcry against insanitary wharves and waterside dwellings
with the Harbor Trust Act. This measure, perhaps the most socialistic
enactment of our socialistic Legislature, is proving an operative and
beneficial measure of legislation. Not only was another source of
State Revenue created, but the conditions of a
vast population have been im-
proved and the health of the city
safeguarded. The administration of
the present Minister for Works,
Hon. E. W. O’Sullivan, has been
severely criticised in this reference,
but time will probably prove that in
assisting and giving full effect to
tire principles of the Harbor Trust Act Air. O’Sullivan is justified in
what his prudential critics have been pleased to categorize as “an
enormous expenditure.’’ The sum total involved in the Harbor Trust
Pesumptions is certainly great, but it is returning a seven per cent,
interest on the capital outlay and the people of the State are
collectively richer by the ownership of a magnificent real estate
which every year increases in rental value. By the terms of the
Act a property was acquired which can never be alienated from
the State. Bike our railways and tramways, the Harbor Trust will
he made not a mere asset, but a source of national revenue. It will be
the means moreover, of finding employment for a large number of public
servants at adequate wages. Being always under direct State jurisdic-
tion, the efficiency of harbor administration is assured as far as sani-
tation and repair are concerned. The administration of this valuable
area is vested in an official triumvirate. The salary of the President,
by Act of Parliament, is fixed at per annum ; that of his two
commissioners at £ 1,000 each. These three harbor governors hold office
subject to provisions for a period of seven years, enjoying perpetual
succession and a common seal, with power to levy and collect cer-
tain tolls, dues, rates, rents and charges, and to take, purchase,
sell, lease and hold lands, goods, chattels, and other property within
the Port of Sydney. Under the Triumvirate, a harbor master, chief
engineer, and secretary overlord a small army of engineers, sur-
veyors, inspectors, accountants, clerks, collectors, and watch dogs,
whose complicated duties are carried out with the precision and
correctness of a well-regulated dynamo. By the gracious per-
FK O M obscure
causes, in all
the world’s his-
tory, great results
have evolved. The
arrival of a plague-stric-
ken rat on the shores of
Port Jackson about the
end of 1899 was in re


SYDNEY HARBOR, FROM CREMORNE


mission of these vigilant servants of an Australian democracy,
ships of all nations, in decorous seeming, enter the port of
Sydney, take up their positions according to uttered command, and,
having completed their missions, are courteously permitted to depart
in ordered rule of going. The polygot company must abide by the
rules of the Trust. Nor shall the manner of their discharging
and loading freights be other than as the harbor masters ordain.
And if any aggressive shipman refuses to “'cast loose” his vessel when
ordered, then it shall be lawful for the harbor master’s minions to
cast him loose at his own risk and expense ; and he may, more-
over, be dealt with by further fines and penalties most grievous to
his purse and person. The bed and shores of the port are rested
in this august body, together with all light-houses, light-ships,
leading-lights, marks, buoys, beacons, and wharves. At their disposal
lie huge cranes whose iron hands lift
and lay concrete blocks of 40 tons
weight. Dredges,fire
boats, and tugs wait
their orders. They
hold and administer
as well, bonded
stores, private resi-
dences, and even
model lodging hou-
ses ; so that many
millions of the tax-
payers’ monies fall
under their control
yearly. By the hands
of the Triumvirate
are orders issued for
the dredging of the
port and the keep-
ing of its waters in
tit and proper condition for navigation. From the high places
where they sit, they look out with a hundred eyes in that no ship-
man can shovel out ashes to the pollution of their trust, or sur-
reptitiously discharge ballast overside in the dead watches.
If, from the action of the elements, it befalls that the channels or
waterways of the port lie in danger of silting-up, it is their bounden
duty to send forth vast machinery for the alleviation of such evil.
At time of scribing, on the word of the chief engineer whose
word is law unto a toiling multitude—four powerful dredges are
working double shifts so that no reproach may fall upon the
administration in this matter. The Act —to which, and which onlv,
the Triumvirate pays obeisance-—sets down an iron command that
“ The Commissioners shall keep, or cause to be kept, in fit and
proper condition all their wharves and quays.” They are given full
control of the traffic of the harbor. Subject to the Governor's
approval and a sufficiency of public funds, they may resume any
wharves, jetties, lands, buildings, enclosures, or premises for the
“ purposes of harbor improvements and the development of trade.”
They may, moreover - of a right
possible to be enforced by the cannon
and soldiery of the
Democracy, if the
civil force prove in-
sufficient “ enter
and survey lands
within their juris-
diction,” and they
may, and do, grant
leases of any land
vested in them by
the Act as sites for
ship - building, stor-
ing of merchandise
or other
and the erection of
workshops or foun-
dries connected with
shipping,” They
are empowered to erect depots and sheds for the reception of
goods, and in the two years of their existence have already spent
thousands of pounds in this direction ; beautifying and rendering
sanitary and clean stretches of commercial foreshores which ofttimes
EARLY MORNING ON THE HARBOR.


GOVERNMENT YACHT
“VICTORIA."


reflected scanty credit on orignal owners. The Comissioners are
empowered to construct and erect public baths, and charge fees
for admission thereto, or lease the same as they may determine.
The Commissioners may “ purchase and provide apparatus for search-
ing for drowned persons and for restoring animation to persons
apparently drowned,” and may seize the living persons of those who
have committed offences against their jurisdiction. Finally, their
functions and powers are general and absolute as far as the harbor
is concerned and their rule ex-
tends —by high water marks —
from the nner scarp of the
North Head, round the
ultimate reaches of the
Lane Cove and Parra-
matta Rivers down to
the northernmost point
of South Head, where
clean Pacific rollers
smash up against the
cliffs and the rule of
the Board of Navigation
begins.
Tw o years after
George IV. became king
—and his loyal subjects
on the shores of Sydney
Cove still wore powdered
wigs and knee breeches on
occasions the shipping of
this coast made a brave total of
71 vessels for the year, with an
aggregate of 22,924 tons. In 1901, the port of Sydney harbored
ISB4 inward ships, whose total burthen came to three million tons,
and the import and export trade thereof was valued at over 41
millions of pounds sterling. Like Carthage, the daughter of Sidon
and Tyre, the remote colonial settlement has grown to an imperial
city, whose argosies, rich laden with the spoils of commerce,
voyage to and from the Motherland. Her pioneers have founded
new houses, and where primitive Passion, skin-clad, ruled roughly
on a rude, barbaric throne, Culture in silken garments finds call for
softer sway among the flowers. Her provincial traders have become
rich city merchants, whose iron-heeled triremes pour out their wealth
of import upon busy wharves, and, re-laden with native export, rich
as that of old Cathay, fat-bellied, churn out across the seas again.
There is an old muzzle-loading cannon at the summit of Fort
Denison bearing on its breach the date 1804. We may take pride
of the fact that during the long
span of years through which
the sight of this super-
animated piece has pointed
faithfully down the bay,
the hills of Port Jackson
have never echoed a hos-
tile utterance from its
grizzled mouth. The
disappearing guns at
South Head—well-
groomed dandies of a
later military day, cheer-
fully prepared, if neces-
sary, to hurl steel pro-
jectiles seven miles across
the Pacific for the dis-
couragement of hostile
fleets —sneer doubtless at
the homely old watchdog
on Ills obsolete stone tower.
They are King Edward’s
line gentlemen, forgetting in
their arrogance of automatic loading, hydraulic elevation, steel
casemates, and other modern vanities, that grandfather on the tower
was a gay gallant in ordnance circles when George the Fourth was
King. The fort, with its ancient armament, is one of the heri-
tages of the Harbor Trust. Its convict history calls for little
reference here. In the black and ghastly silence of the dark cells
beneath the tower, mayhap, unquiet ghosts react at night the
FORT DENISON.




horrors and obscenities of the past, while the electric-lighted ferries,
like fiery caterpillars, glide to and fro outside. Little reason why
the laughing lads and lasses of Sydney town, on their way to
pleasure down the bay,
should bestow more than a
passing glance on that
old stone prison stand-
the stone grooves in
which rested the butts
of the soldiers’ muskets
outside the guard house
door remain, but the black leaf is turned down and a brighter page
glows before us. The grass has greened through many southern
springs over the graves of tyrant and slaves and both alike—
“To no such aureate earth are turned,
As. buried once, men want dug up again."
At the outbreak of the South African War some energetic
jokist landed quietly on the island before daylight and having loaded
the cannon with a canister of powder, roused the city from its
slumbers and left the Boer flag floating ovor Fort Denison in the
mysterious shadows of the dawn. The retired salt, who
constitutes the defending force of the fort, has kept the iron
ing gauntly in the
fairway. To the
casual visitor its
reminiscences
conjure up only
the half-pleasant
shadow of horror
—the emotion
excited by a tra-
gedy on the stage.
The convict cells,
the stone walls,
hewed by chained
slaves out of solid
rock, the iron
doors, and even
doors at the foot of the tower securely locked since this episode.
Since the Trust assumed control new laws have been made by
which all shipmen must abide—under stated penalties. No vessel
shall traverse the waters of Sydney Cove at a greater speed than
six knots an hour ; no single ended ferry shall back out therein, but
swing round at her moorings in manner prescribed, orderly and of
loyal allegiance to the regulations. No oversea ship may enter the
Circular Quay except at stated times, nor after nightfall, and large
vessels shall swing in the fairway and not turn within the cove.
So that there is great order and safety for them that go down to
the sea in ships and no man is permitted to jostle his neighbor.
Ihe arms of this great public Trust have reached out and, with
utilitarian fingers, have seized many opportunities for the beautifying
and improvement of the harbor. The Chief Engineer has proved
himself a man of artistic taste and useful instincts, and one to whom
a grateful futurity may some day erect a monument by the shores
of the finest port south of the Line. The Chief, perceiving that the
old galvanised iron style of roofings was not only unbeautiful but
inappropriate to a subtropical climate, has roofed all his dainty
new' wharf sheds and ferry offices with red tiles. In no case has
the useful been immolated on the altar of the ornamental, but the
general result in order, in art, and utility is in such harmony as
would delight the soul of a William Morris, and affords a complete
contravention of the theory that the phase of economics which the
'['rust represents spells the death of culture and refinement. Thirteen
years ago there was little sympathy in Sydney for the principles
of public administration. A few days since, at the kindly invitation
of the Harbor Trust, the writer inspected a magnificent storage
shed with suites of offices, complete to kitchen and clock tower,
which the Socialistic Trust was erecting for the occupation of one
of our largest firms at an adequate rental. And furthermore
included in the lease granted to the good old Company in question
are clauses providing for the construction by the Commissioners of
a large wool store for the said Company, “which will be 287 feet
long by 132 feet wide, with a front of seven stories high, facing
the new wharf.’’ Thirteen years ago these firms were absolutely
antagonistic to what was then termed “ undue State interference.’’
They are now beneiitting largely by the new system. Time holds


WOOLLAHRA POINT


curious contradictions. Time in new countries is also the fertile
matrix of unexpected wonders. The Trust is deriving an annual
revenue of £i6,soo from the wharves and jetties within Sidney
Cove, or that portion of the harbor more familiarly known as
Circular Quay. Crowded ferry steamers ply to and fro across the
harbor from this central depot all day and night. Here the
leviathan liners of the Norddeutcher Lloyd, Messageties, Orient
and P. and 0., with the American and Japanese mail steamers
rest themselves in their appointed places for a brief season, and
then, fresh - cleaned and repainted, steam out resplendent to
music and cheering and the farewell wavings of many handkerchiefs.
The departures of the mail steamers are usually timed for
Saturdays. Then the wharves are brightened by a passing glimpse
of fashion. Butterflies with silken wings hover for a few laughing
moments about the gangways, and tarry odors of shipping are
sweetened by blended subtleties, hinting perfumed femininity ; lorries,
laden with luggage, come rattling down from the hotels exciting
the imagination of travel-loving beholders the kaleidoscopic visions
of foreign places arousing the envy of those who remain at home.
Travellers, their eyes alight with expectations, lean over the
steamer's railings to exchange pleasantries with farewelling friends.
There is a raucous sound of striving winches. The anchor forward, torn
rudely from its bed, drips mud into the discolored waters. One
by one, in response to hoarse commands, the stout shore lines are
slackened and cast off, the tug boat screams, and slowly the
outward liner swings into the stream.
The government of these matters and of all others apertaining
to incoming and outgoing shipping is now entirely in the
hands of the Trust. In order to minimise the possibility of
accident at this crowded terminus of harbor thoroughfare, the Board
recently erected at Fort Macquarie two new jetties of five berths,
providing also a large passenger waiting-room of particularly artistic
design with refreshment and tea rooms and other modern con-
veniences. From this point all the picnic traffic of the harbor
departs and returns. On holidays it is invariably a scene ot
packed humanity jostling good - naturedly upon mutual paths of
pleasure. In one day 20,000 people have embarked and landed
at these jetties. In all matters of construction the Trust has made
YACHTING
ON THE
HARBOR.
provision against the dreaded plague rat. All its new stores and
sheds have been based with concrete, on which rest wooden blocks
or thick hardwood flooring. The shed at Market-street wharf cost
£35’ 21 5’ the total expenditure in repairs and alterations to
wharves for the first eight months was Altogether over
£160,0n0 was laid out during that period -which may be regarded
as public money well expended on payable real estate for the
benefit of the people. In eight months the dredges of the Trust
lifted 317,500 tons of miscellaneous deadweight in Sydney Harbor-
The Commissioners keep about 700 people constantly employed,
and a number of the streets and wharves belonging to the Trust
are lighted from the three electric stations under its control.
Several small launches and a fire tug capable of pumping 2500
gallons a minute have been added to its plant. The tug is kept
continuously' under steam and has already' seen active service in
fire fighting among the shipping. Although the Pilot service is
outside the Trust’s jurisdiction the beacons of the port are under
the hands of the Commissioners, who have replaced the old basket
buoys with Kate Greenaway lights of more aesthetic appearance.


BALMORAL BEACH.


The cost of lighting the Port is set down at about Pi 200 per
annum.
Sanitation is the watchword of the Trust and a staff of in-
spectors and cleaners is kept constantly on the alert, so that no
by the light of sun, moon or stars; nor shall the patent medicine man
any longer paste his awesome words along the wharves of a cultured
democracy. Wide is the scope of the Trust and great is its power.
It rules all public baths with iron rods of regulation, and one of
the conditions of its leases is that public school children shall be
.admitted to such baths free twice a-week.
The influences of the Trust are far-reaching. It administers
803 properties, including hotels, bonds, shops, factories, stores and
dwelling-houses. It draws fixed rentals from all these places and
keeps them in due repair. Not the least difficult of its tasks
is the collecting of rents from its 500 tenants, some of whom
are inwardly convinced that he who robs his paternal govern-
ment doeth no wrong. The 200 odd workers who constitute the
permanent staff of the Trust are by no means idlers and give
constant service in return for the £“34,000 absorbed annually in
salaries from a £“281,000 revenue received through wharfage, ton-
nage, rent and other channels. Handsome new offices are being
erected for the staff at the Circular Quay, and there the supreme
authority to which the harbor humbly bows will be centrally
located. Each night the boats of the Trust proceed slowly along
the wharves on the east side of the city, where the grain and
man may give his
horse or his ox un-
lawful interment in
tidal waters and
evade correction.
The Trust controls
with a firm hand
all matters of ad-
vertisement; with-
in its jurisdiction
no unsightly hoard-
ing is allowed to
flare its vulgarity
produce trades are mostly carried on, and with powerful steam jets
scald the vermin in their haunts. Scavenging and cleansing are
among the functions of the new administration. The annual
report quaintly mentions—
“ The work carried out by the scavenging boats is shown by
the following list of carcases, Ac., removed and destroyed : —1975
rats; 784 cats; 968 dogs; 225 bags of meat; 236 bags of fish;
1150 fowls; 25 parrots: 19 sheep; 11 pigs; 1 bullock; 5 calves;
3 flying foxes; 2 goats; 3 hares; 2 sharks: 118 rabbits; and
100 bags of chaff.” The expenditure in connection with this work
was £“481 os. fid.
All this, despite the fact that a stringent regulation provides a
penalty of £lO for offenders convicted of throwing into the
harbor any dead animal or offensive matter. Of the Harbor Trust
Regulations there are 219, and they cover a wide field of adminis-
tration. From the launching of vessels to the licensing of water-
men—all things are ordered with decorum by the Regulations. It
is w r e!l that visiting seamen provide themselves with a copy of
these harbor laws and peruse them in a proper spirit. It is decreed
wharves ;” and that “ Every hawser and rope by which a vessel is
made fast to a wharf shall be defended (against rats) by a metal
disc;” Should any seaman or other person die on board any vessel
in the Port the Regulations provide that the remains shall not be
by the Regulations
that ‘‘ All vessels
entering the Port
shall unshot their
guns before they
come inside the
Inner South Head
Reef;” that “No
rafts of timber shall
lie in the fairway;”
that “ Safety nets
shall be suspended
below the landing
stages of all ves-
sels moored at the
AN
OCEAN
LINER.
MOSMAN BAY FERRY.


MIDDLE HARBOR.


put overboard to save funeral expenses, but “ brought ashore and
duly interred By the Regulations “ hotel touts, loiterers and
inebriates are banished from the wharves, and ‘’all watermen, ferry
men, stevedores, diivers, porters, carriers and other waterside
workers shall obey the lawful orders of the Harbor Master."
By and according to the Regulations finally are over a million
tons of commerce passed in and out and two thousand oversea
ships--exclusive of a vast fleet of coasters and harbor craft—taxed
and treated in a single year. ft is a well organised government,
and a competent one, worthy of '‘the Finest Harbor in the World."
BLESSED is the stranger whose ship approaches the tall
headlands of Port Jackson in the early morning. Behind
him the sun in burnished splendor rises triumphantly over
the Pacific verge. Floating cloud-fleeces blush to the impetuous
caresses of Day, and the waters shyly attire themselves in their robes
of blue. The mile-wide gates offer a golden pathway
to the vessel’s swift feet, and the long incoming
rollers scatter largesse of silver upon the shores.
The mechanism in the light-house tower, which
cleaved the dark hours with electric swords, has
ceased to revolve, and the signal station displays
new-hoisted bunting. The pilot steamer noses
the velvety roll kittenishly from her as she
crosses the heads to meet the incoming ship.
As his vessel swings round South Head, the
newcomer catches a glimpse of Middle Harbor
winding away westward, and facing North Harbor he sees the houses of
Manly sleepily resting in the cool morning shadows. While his
ship steams slowly in by the Southern Channel a splendid sweep of
sunlit harbor rolls out like a silver dream before him. The near
hills are still garmented by grey bush, save where occasional tiles
mark' encroaching residences: but his eye, roaming westward, falls
upon the towers and spires of a fairy city dreaming in mystic
quiet among emerald gardens and sapphire bays. Across this
harbor, east and west, lie white beaches curved like the arms of
radiant women, and upon its still bosom sleep islands whose sand-
stone rocks are gilded by the morning. Awaiting the health
officer the steamer halts for a few minutes in the placid shelter of
Watson’s Bay, her anchor splashing noisily into twelve fathoms of
clear water. The stranger has passing leisure to feed his vision
with a plenitude of beauties ; to enjoy the sparkle of wavelets
over which white sails glide safely, and to make glad his heart
with nature’s grace and bounty. On his left he the historic
grounds of Vaucluse, where dwell William Charles Wentworth, tiie
father of responsible government in Australia, and where, in an iron-
railed chapel hidden by the trees, his honored bones have rested
quietly through many changeful years.
The perspective ultimates in a hazy line of hills where the


WATCHDOGS.


Blue Mountains sun their eastern slopes, and the middle distance
is varied by points and bays. Having exposed a reproacbless
tongue to the Government Health Officer, our stranger is at liberty
to sweeten the excitement of arrival with many panoramic visions.
As his ship steams slowly up harbor he passes upon his right
hand and upon his left placid coves half-circled by headlands, each
in itself a miniature harbor. The straight masts and sweeping
yards of oversea ships are silhouetted against a background of varied
interest. The red-tiled houses on the heights of North Sydney
and Mosraan glow with a hospitable light. The well-kept lawns of
Elizabeth Bay and the “ Points ” are still fresh with dew. The
shore-coming breeze, bears a scent of pittosporum and magnolia,
for our traveller must have come in the Spring to enjoy
at their fullest the delights of the Harbor City. As his steamer’s
bow swings from her temporary anchorage en route to her appointed
berth, a huge liner laden with wheat and wool —the country’s
fatness—comes champing down, outward bound. The shadow from
her smoke blackens for a moment the sails of a coasting schooner,
tediously tacking up-harbor on a fickle wind. Flags of many
nations droop over hulls of all descriptions of marine architecture.
During the year Sydney sees ships from nearly every trading port
in the world, and a polygot chatter forever resounds upon her quays.
Regular lines of steamers ply to Liverpool, Marseilles, San Fran-
cisco, Capetown, Vancouver, Hongkong, Calcutta, Yokahama, Ostend,
and the island and coasting trade pours in and out continuously.
The stranger observes everywhere indications of a vast commerce
spreading over all the seas ; but it will be only after many days
that his inquiring mind will grasp the true extent and magnitude
of this trade. The harbor scenes which Sydney loves are cine-
metographed before him. The Bottle and Glass, on whose curious
rocks white gulls are preening, slips past. Historic Vaucluse glides
across the screen, and Rose Bay, a sweeping circle of white beach
holding a stretch of broad water, opens out before a vista of man-
sions and bills where the rich of Sydney abide.
The huge cranes of the Naval Dock at Garden Island loom
up ahead, and breasting' F'arrn Cove the incomer sees the heavy
outline of the Australian Squadron—neutral-tinted “dogs of war”
tugging at their chains. The flagship suns her iron bulk at the
outer buoy, with her lighting brood clustered under her flanks.
Crowded ferry steamers cross and recross the vessel’s bows as the
busy city people lare townward, looking up casually from the
morning paper at the liner home from overseas. Inside the ring of
warships watching on the doormats of Commerce —lies much mer-
cantile shipping at Woolloomooloo Bay, where the great cargo-
tanks of the German- Australian and other companies gorge and
disgorge. Well-kept trees at Lady Macquarie’s Chair spread coo]
shadows on the grass. The visitor beholds, with immediate admira-
tion, the grassy slopes and vivid lawns ot Sydney Botanica]
Gardens, from which uprise the dark floral spires of Norfolk Island
pines. The castellated walls of Government House appear behind
masses of varied foliage, and the minarets and domes of many fine
buildings appear beyond. The ivy-covered tower of Sydney Obser-
vatory with time-ball and signal flags stands out conspicuously. St
Mary’s Cathedral and the Colonial
Secretary’s office are prominent
features in this far-spreading pic-
ture. An excursion steamer crowded
with happy children leaves the picnic
jetty as the liner draws abreast of
Fort Macquarie, the excited young-
sters drowning with their
chatter and laughter the
growing noises of
streets and quays.


FROM MOSMAN.


trees and take his fill of dreaming bays
and sweeping reaches. He will, under the
guidance of patriotic friends, embark on
many ferries and harbor steamers and
ride on many waterside tramways. He will make “the round
trip,’ by electric tram to Watson’s Bay, catching glimpses of Rush-
cutter’s, Double and Rose Bays eu route , and return by steamer in
the moonlight, when the harbor offers her naked silver to the
kisses of an impassioned Spring moon. He will follow the pleasant
windings of the Lane Cove and Parramatta Rivers, and catch a
breath of tropic bloom from rich orangeries along the slopes of
Ryde, blended with the fragrances of peach and pear blossom in
adjoining orchards. Mayhap his friends at
Lane Cove, being musical, will take him
a-rowing by moonlight along mystic waters,
and drift him to Elysium upon the strains
of violin and guitar. Well in sooth for him
if his bachelor days be not yet over, for
there dwell sirens by these beautiful shores not less seductive than
those who poured temptation in the ears of Jason’s sailors. He
will go a-picnicing and land on pleasant islands, and he will go
a-yachting and taste the exhiliration of “ hanging out ” with a
jovial crew. Forgetting all conventionality, he will lustily roar in
the chorus of many songs, racing homeward under white sails as
the sunset falls. Among his yachting acquaintances he will find
enthusiasts and experts, for Sydney harbor has bred a vast com-
pany of sturdy yachtsmen, keen sportsmen and jolly fellows, whose
tanned faces and sinewed arms give w'arrant of freedom and fresh
air. He will attend at crowded regattas, and follow straining con-
tests with a beating of the heart. He will hear occult discussions
upon the sailing merits of rival craft, and in the matter of yacht-
ing gear and build he may become almost as wise as the com-
modore of a Sydney yacht club. He will find also that rowing and
swimming claim hundreds of anient votaries whose summer days are
pleasured by these healthful sports. In fine the delighted stranger
will discover that by the shores of the harbor dwell an exceedingly
happy people, who know' how to enjoy in full measure opportuni-
ties which exist not elsewhere. Like many another stranger he will
probably become a lotos eater and, forgetting less hospitable coasts,
take some sweet Sydney maiden to be his bride, and from the
cool verandah of his own harborside villa look out in pride of
citizenship upon this glory without end. Then day by day will
he see the rising sun come over the Eastern watergates and magi-
cally transform a grey city into a city of rose and gold. Then will
he watch the midday sparkle of blue waters and behold the setting
sun pour out his heart, pierced with the spear of Night, upon the
hills and blood the waves of the bay as he slowly dies, a pilgrim
[F our tourist be
of a romantic
disposition, and
can spare a week
or so of his travel-
ling time, he wall‘accu-
mulate in Sydney Harbor
ample material for happy
recollection. There are scores
of accessible pleasure spots,
each worthy of a visit, and
hundreds of beautiful scenes
whose memories will live to
delight future days. Panoramas
will he unfolded before his en-
tranced eyes, and he will lounge
in the quiet shade of secluded


HARBOR FROM MOSMAN.


victim in the West. Perhaps with hothouse flowers of metaphor
and glowing leaves of rhetoric our stranger would in time also be
found secretly weaving garlands of song to lay upon the bright
altars of fair deities who doubtless—like the nymphs and naiads
aforetime - preside over particular beauties and call for especial
poetic devotion. If he be of aesthetic temperament, or if his soul
is brightened with a love of art, this, and more, are possible unto
him who bideth by the bay.
But there is also a realistic aspect to this subject. For him
whose emotions are more readily roused by sounds and scenes of
Commerce, there are the wharves and woolstores loud with the
triumph of Trade. In the wool season, when the brown bales of
fleece —Australia's staple product are rolling in by long miles of
rail from Western plains and Southern downs, the harborside is like
a vast hive. Heavy lorries, groaning beneath their high-piled loads,
come grinding to the stores. The straining draught horses back up
their laden bulk of wool against wide-opened doors. Swearing
draymen unhitch strained rones and a band of storemen armed with
sharp woolhooks fall upon the load like ants upon a prey. Bale bv
bale the wool is rapidly wheeled to the hydraulic presses, whose
irresistible jaws close for a moment while the steel bands are
passed round and rivetted securely. Sometimes in the process a
band flies and a man is removed to the hospital. The closely
compressed square -- worth perhaps £\o —is hurriedly stensilled by
youths with color-stained hands : seized by the woolhook, wheeled
again to the shoot and among a long procession of bales
finds its way to the wharf, where it is picked up by noisy
winches and swung into an open-mouthed hold, there to be crammed,
packed and squeezed by powerful screws in a solid block of wool
cargo for transport overseas. In the hot, fluffy darkness of the hold
sweating stevedores shout rude choruses to the rattle
of the screws. There one hears the quaint, uncouth
harmony of the deep-sea chantey, curiously musical,
calling up sadly-pleasant impressions of grey sea-
scape, white decks, creaking blocks, sundown and
a smell of tar.
Everywhere are life action and human character.
Over the polygot jargon of foreign curses, foreign speech
and foreign songs, rises a smell of foreign cooking in which are blended
the odors of the Briton's flesh pots with the spiced dishes of the East.
As the wool freight comes in on the port side a collier is sending up her
coal from starboard. Providores’ carts unload at the gangways, and
the ship is fed at a dozen mouths. At the season's height men
reel about the wharves red-eyed from lack of sleep. The rattle of the
screws ceases not by night or day ; tally clerks sleep on the office
tables, their heads hard-pillowed on the copying presses, and time-
keepers and paymasters labor till the grey of dawn computing wages.
AN
AMERICAN
TIMBER
SHIP.


MIDDLE HARBOR.


At length—when the voice of the foreman stevedore is husky from the
utterance of extraordinary blasphemies; when the last ounce of energy
has been extracted from his toiling minions ; when the drip of hot
oil from the bearings of the winches has spattered all the adjoining
decks, the last bale swings inboard and the last tier is jammed.
Then staggering crowds of laborers come up from below, hatches are
battened down, shore lines cast off, and with a hoarse cheer from
the wharf, the outward-bound ship turns her bow towards the
looms of Antwerp and Manchester.
Some of the old bond stores by Sydney harborside have
interesting histories going back to the whaling days. When Bobby
Towns was a great and mighty chief and
the Pacific Island trade had not been
walled in by a ring fence of statutes and
regulations, these bonds were often the
repositories of strange cargoes. The
present Admiralty Court would regard
with legal severity transactions which were
not then considered outside the ordinary
risks of trade. Rakish schooners came
up bravely through the Heads, and after
quietly ' landing their freights, faced out
again with store of barter and goodly
stock of Sniders for the profit and
pastime of waiting island kings. From
the East Indies, from New Guinea, and
the green Solomons, came these wooden
brigs and schooners of a byegone time. In the ear of him who would
hear tragic stories stranger in truth than fiction was poured
many a secret tale. From ancient mariners who sailed with
captains of more than mythical daring, the writer has heard
romances which make the leaves of our modern, everyday life
read like dull prose by comparison. Until the last decade, when
Progress, with paint pot and varnish brush began to veneer the
landmarks of Sydney harbor, the spirit of those roaring days still
hovered over the old stores. In their dark recesses lay forgotten
shipments whose consignors and consignees alike were mouldering in
churchyards, parted by the hemispheres. In cobwebbed cellars,
where the rats held unclean Sabat, the ghosts of dead buccaneers,
sitting astride of rum barrels, were often seen at night by aged
watchmen.. No watchman left his box upon the wharf
without occasion, and then proceeded cautiously with dog and
staff and lanthorn. By day the bond was a scene of much
activity. Doors stood open for the delivery of goods, and
cases of spirits, crates of merchandise, tierces of tobacco were
swung from upper stories into waiting drays. In the cellar—
whence rose a drunken odor of earth long-soaked in alcohol —there
was a sound of coopering and the starting of bungs. Customs
gaugers passed to and fro with copper measures and instruments
Gr testing the “proof” of liquors. The
head storeman searched carefully for mis-
sing bond marks, and adopted divers
occult devices for the deliveiy in full of
ullaged liquors. The delivery clerk —
secure behind his ticket window---earned
the hatred of insistent carters by undis-
turbed hauteur and offensive calm. City
merchants came in cabs to complain to
the bond manager of overcharges in
storage. The “free” freights from dis-
charging ships alongside were triumphantly
borne off by loud-voiced lonymen without
necessity of entry. Clerks with stamped
bills of lading, bond certificates, regauge
orders, repack permits, and all the corn-
mercial literature of shipping passed busily to and fro across wharves
littered with miscellaneous merchandise. Odors of spices, of dried
fruits, of wines, made rich the atmosphere. One caught a breath of
India, of Arabia, of China, of the Levant, as Orient and Occident
poured out their stores. Teas of the rich mandarins of Pekin went out
the gates side by side with furniture from the factories of New York.
Silks of Cashmere, cottons of Manchester, jutes and damasks, cheap
whiskies of Glasgow and rare wines of Bordeaux passed through the
same coarse hands and sped on to their various destinations. The
tastes of the rich, the needs of the poor, received for a brief
moment the haughty attention of the delivery clerk, and went in
A WOOL SHIP.


WHITE WINGS.


case, cask and package upon their missions of human gratification.
Upon all things that men wear, eat, drink, and do jointly and
severally use, the delivery clerk in his
might imprints hand and seal. Not so
much as one bottle of table beer shall
legally go out without his approval, for
he is general of merchandise, and chief
adjutant of trade. But when Night, with
moccasined feet stalks silently along the
darkened wharves ; when a sinister tide,
floating suggestive objects upon its sur-
face, crawls about the piles, and strange
gasps and gurgles are heard in the
water shadows, then the old Bond, half
hidden in the gloom, is full of mysteries
and stories. Whisperings and mutterings,
which the watchman declares are not
natural, sound faintly in dark recesses,
and noises, which may be of rats but are certainly unpleasant
to human ears, echo in the cellars. Each ‘ door being duly
locked and sealed at sunset by the King’s seal no man may
enter without fear of penalty, and Darkness is lord within. lis then,
of course, the ghostly pirates and traders meet with bottles of
‘ square - face ’ before them to collogue
upon wild deeds done in the flesh when
‘ Bullv ’ Hayes was buccaneering in the
South Seas. Whaling captains, sitting
cheek by jowl with beachcombers and
supercargoes, retell the roaring days, and
if the storeman finds unaccountable empty
bottles in odd corners next morning it
is onlv because these ghostly recollections
needed some washing down. If the store-
man finds also that a certain case of black
tobacco has been mysteriously uilaged over-
night and that the rusty Sniders —which
came in years ago titter some unofficial
New Guinea exploring expedition—bear
tin appearance of having been recently
fondled, he wisely keeps the matter to himself. But, selecting the
proper keys, he unlocks the heavy doors and floods the scene of
ghostly revelry with the light of modern day.
MANLY PIER.
PANORAMIC VIEW WATSON'S BAY.


AT REST.


Out of this youthful idyll I was suddenly called by parental
voices and a glorious news poured into my delighted ears. Within
an hour I was on my way to Sydney —and I would for the first time
behold the sea ! Not all the ringing of the bells of Fame, not all
the velvet fondlings of Fortune could give me now such absolute
happiness.
Next morning, with my own eyes, I saw this very harbor shining in
the sun, and ships, real ships—which till then I had known only from
pictures—at anchor in its many bays. Some I knew were peaceful traders,
Indiamen and Atlantic clippers, but some were surely pirates and
Barbary corsairs. Visions of pearl islands, of treasure caves, of
piratical junks, of smugglers and buccaneers flashed through my
mind and had I not been restrained by hard, unsympathetic, domestic
tyranny, I would forthwith have offered my sword and services to
some shipmaster in search of an enthusiastic recruit—aged nine.
Apart from the charms of beauty and association, Sydney Flarbor
will always be dear to my heart, inasmuch as it was the
V\ //HEN I was a childish
\X/ dreamer in the bush,
over twenty - five
years ago, nothing delighted
my young imagination more
than stories of the sea. Well
do I remember reading, be-
neath a favorite willow by the
creek, the glowing pages of
Marryat, beloved of boys the
world over. The late moun-
tain Spring had come, sweet-
ening the paddocks with clover
and brightening them with
flowers. The lorys flashed
their scarlet plumage amidst
the grass, the rosellas sought
suitable nesting places in
the trees, and the creeks
made liquid music among the
rushes.
golden portal through which I peeped one morning and saw for
a brief moment wide mysterious domains of Glory and Romance
spreading out and away across the whole world. I remember
very distinctly being taken to view the steamship “ Whampoa,”
which in those days was considered a very fine vessel. I am afraid
that now-a-days, alongside one of the great hulls of the Orient or
Norddeutscher Lloyd she would appear a very minor craft indeed.
She was something below the “Cotopaxi” and “Chimborazo” class
of the following decade, when iron began to finally displace wood
in ship building.
Our coasting trade may not have developed side by side
with the advances in foreign shipping, but it has retained much
of the fashion of the antique that makes for variety. Rough
sailorrnen, skilled in wind and tide, still work their ketches and
schooners out and in through Sydney Fleads on tracks of coastal
trade. Horny-handed skippers, with more than a pilot’s knowledge
of the shoal waters, negotiate treacherous bars of the North Coast
and return in safety to Port Jackson laden with timber, oysters,
or maize.
The average citizen, who is familiar enough with the up-
holstered smoking rooms and gilded dining halls of the Orient
or P. and 0., knows little of the hard faring, salt-dried life led by
these modest mercantile heroes of the everyday. Their homely
fleet, with patched sails and permanent lack of paint, goes to and fro
North and South, year in, year out, unnoticed. Lumbering brigs
and clumsy schooners, which in my boyish imagination twenty-five
years ago, cut fine figures of romance, slip unostentatiously across the
bows of ten-thousand-ton steamers wanting neither wind nor tide to
thunder out of Sydney Harbor, like lords of conquest on their chosen
w 7 ays. Yet sometimes, in the early morning from the open window
looking out upon this w'ondrous reach of haven, as I see some
humble coaster droning up the bay, I sigh for the days of w T ood
and canvas, when the World’s great heart, like mine, was young.
But Youth, after all is eternal and if the elder desires to bask in its
sunshine, let him go forth upon a holiday with the crow T d which seeks its
pleasure by the harbor-side. Humanity in all guises and garbs
crowds the Quays. Yellow faces wear wrinkled smiles, but laughter
finds a sweet nestling among the dimples of rosy cheeks. Stout
A CALM.


MOSMAN BAY.


mothers with young broods clutching their skirts fuss and scold.
Young eyes look love into eyes that answer blissful acceptance.
The sun a faultless diamond burning in a setting of perfect
sapphire floods the bay with sparkling wonder until the heart
quickens as in response to wine. Steamer after steamer leaves her
appointed pier, crowded down with laughing, living freight, chasing
the butterfly pleasure to secluded haunts, where woodland and
waterside make union fecund in beauty and delight. The Great
Australian Democracy—practi-
cal in its politics, as poetic in
its pleasures—accepting oppor-
tunity with joyous hands, goes
out, Grecian, to sylvan dance
and song. Secure of the future,
it is happy in the present, and
even the poor toiler who has
worked the week through in
menial service, with his drab
domesticities around him, now'
ruffles it with his peers, as
keen and appreciative of the
gods’ gifts as the haughty
youth of heritage who wears
a silken lady on his arm.
From early morn till high
noon they pour out across the
bay and a hundred happy
places re-echo with laughter.
Those w'ho have boats to hire,
or fruit or refreshments, or
hot-water to sell to thirsty
and hungry wayfarers thrive in these golden hours, and may
he seen at the day’s close counting gains in quiet cor-
ners with apparent satisfaction. For the fish who frequent the
bay alone it is a day of darkness. From a thousand specious
hooks is the tempting bait suspended, and the finned victim had
better hie him away to safer feeding grounds along the coast.
On every beach the twinkling feet of children, and maybe youths
and maidens are lightly tripping through the shining hours. Every
dancing pavilion is packed with flushed humanit} 7 , all its cares
forgotten in the warm excitement of motion. Lunch baskets,
unpacked in shady places, are surrounded by voracious mouths.
Delicacies carefully prepared in anticipation are offered by judicious
girls to prudent young men shyly contemplating matrimony. Cupid
laughs in the branches, Venus finds devotees in every grove, nor is
Bacchus without worshippers.
Let him who has never
beheld the Bay of Sydney
call up in imagination a
shore of charming varieties,
in which sky, sea and sun
pour out all their delights
upon the greenness of nature.
Let him people bis harmon-
ious fancy with laughing
bands of Austral-Greeks, well-
nurtured, well-clothed, happy
and strong, pursuing, under
the aegis of Freedom each
his particular pleasure. Let
him take music and laughter,
love, dayshine, and all that
sweetens human life, and the
atmosphere of his fancy will
reflect in some, measure 1 the
spirit ot a Sydney Harbor
holiday. As the day draws
all too quickly to an end
white-winged yachts go gliding homeward across the darkening
waterways; and steamer after steamer —deep with singing crowds—
churns out from the piers of Manly, of Pearl Bay, of Cremorne.
Watson’s, Clifton Gardens, Clontarl and a score of popular resorts,
freighted with pleasant memories, with love stones new told, with old
lives gladdened, and young lives colored and fresh-sweetened by the rose
TROOPSHIP “BRITANNIC."


THE MOON’S PALE BEAM.


ROUIGH WEATHER: REASY FOR PATOROL
the new body should be borne by the ship owners. In 1862 ail
the branches of the police were by a consolidating Act brought
under the control of an Inspector-General.
They are bluff and hearty, albeit stolid fellows, the members
of the Water Police. Most of them have at some period
been either men-o’-warsmen or sailors of the mercantile marine.
Some are necessarily linguists. This latter qualification is essential
inasmuch as the duties of the brigade bring it into daily touch
with all nationalities. In the Babel of foreign tongues the Scan-
dinavian and German dialects are most frequently heard. The
crews of sea-going ships nowadays are largely recruited from
Northern Europe—particularly the Baltic. The duty of a Water
THE policing of this
great waterside terri-
tory forms a depart-
ment in Itself. Over sixty
years ago, by the special
Act of an early administra-
tion, a body called the Water
Police was established to
supervise the shipping of
Port Jackson. The im-
mediate purport of the
Act was “the further and
better regulation and govern-
ment of seamen within the
colony of New T South Whiles
and its dependencies.” Much
delay and inconvenience had
up to that point been occa-
sioned to the owners and
masters of vessels arriving
at Port Jackson and other
harbors in the colony by
the desertion and other im-
proper conduct of the sailors,
and so it was decided that
the expense of maintaining
Police Officer is no sinecure and his life is a patchwork of variety.
The particular function of the Water Police is the constant patrol
of the harbor so that no man break the King’s laws if it lie
within the power of officialdom to prevent it; or, if having broken
the said laws, that he may be brought speedily to justice. Two launches
are kept under steam night and day. One of these, the “ Argus,”
is the fastest craft in the harbor, and trails in and out among the
shipping like a hound on the scent.
The men of the Water Police—thirty in all —are told off in
three watches— 6 a.m. to 2 p.m., 2 p.m. to 10 p.m., and 10 p.m.
to 6 a.m. Each relief consists of nine non-commissioned officers
and men. An officer and two men patrol the harbor constantly in
one of the skiffs. Another officer and two men are regularly
employed in the launch patrol, and the remaining officer and two
men overlook the wharves and Circular Quay. In addition, two non-
commissioned officers and a reserve man are engaged in attending
to the work of the station and court business.
The old Water Police Court hard by Circular Quay has a
history of its own, familiar enough to Sydney citizens. Many a
full-grown legal reputation first put forth timid buds of advocacy
in this temple of Themis by the somewhat odorous shore. Many
a celebrated criminal has stood behind the dock railings; and year
by year a constant stream of nautical inebriates and minor offenders
have appeared before the magisterial dais—to be duly sentenced or
reprieved. It is part of the genius of British colonisation that wherever
the Briton carries his arms—offensive and defensive—there also he
carries his schools and his law court. Sometimes Learning is
seated in a mud hut and Justice dispensed beneath a roof of
bark- but the principle remains, and the principle is good.
The appointments of the Water Police Court are still primitive, but
a vast amount of official work is carried on within its dingy walls
during the year’s course. The Harbor Police affect no high man-
ners and wear no gorgeous uniforms. They go about quietly in
sober sailor garb. If the stranger occasionally becomes recalcitrant
and endeavors to prove the British idea of law and order inopera-
tive, he is usually convinced of his error without bloodshed. An
examination of the sinewed arms of my friend Sergeant Scott—with
whom, at word of Inspector Strachan, I recently did the harbor


WATER POLICE.


patrol, convinces me that the misguided sailor or long-shoreman who
goes to war with the Water Police will get plenty of violent
exercise for his pains. It chances sometimes that the foreign sea-
man argues questions of national policy with his sheath knife, in
which case there are inquests, arrests, and morgue duties for the
Brigade.
The Water Police are sadly familiar with the morgues —one of
the least pleasant of their duties being the recovery of dead bodies
from the harbor. Sometimes it is a sailor who has blundered
overside, sometimes an unfortunate who, weary of the burden, has
drifted out of the cruel streets to find Nepenthe in the starlit tide.
There is a little building on the Western side of the Ouay, sur-
rounded by a high fence and hidden by
dusty cypress trees, where tire tired
harbor people rest on clean slabs for
a time. The world thunders by out-
side, the wharves are crowded with eager
humanity, the rattle of winches and the
curses of stevedores make blatant all the
day. But tire tired harbor people hear
and heed them not. On their guttered
slabs, from which the water drops thickly,
they bide in this halfway-house of the
dead with cynical smiles upon their faces.
Strange faces these; faces from which the
actor’s mask has been lifted at last, faces
A HABOR
FERRY.
that haring looked upon the Tragedy of Life, now mock coldly at
the Farce of Death. Good reasons have the Water Police for
stolid and serious bearing, for thev hear many strange stories and
look upon many strange pictures of human life.
It may be said, in justice, that the policing of Sydney Harbor
is well done. At night, when the law-abiding citizen is snugly
coiled between warm blankets, listening to the tain upon the roof,
as the Post Office clock looms out brazen tidings of midnight, the
screw of the W titer Police laum h churns the dark waters of Circular
Ouav. As quietly as 'tier engines permit, the launch backs out
into the fairway under shadow of overhanging hulls and sets her
bow down the harbor upon her night!v patrol. The electric kins
of great steamers burr softly after ter as she glides away. In the
rain-spattered waves distorted reflections of ships’ lights dance strangely.
From the misty shadows of the city is heard only the intermittent
rumble of late hansoms or the hiss of an overhead wire where the
last electric tram comes quickly home to the sheds. As the police
launch rounds the tossing buoy at Fort Macquarie, her lookout
sees a grey stretch of water, across which a cold southerly wind
drives sheets of rain. The warships are passed in misty darkness
and familiar land marks need much straining of eyes to locate
correctly. Past the dripping shadow trees on Lady Macquarie’s
Chair, round the sleeping Naval Stores, past the shrouded points
and bays of the Southern Shore goes the patrol. Rounding the
Pilot Ship at Watson’s Bay she crosses
the Heads, tossing the incoming rollers
into spray from her bows. The lights of
Manly twinkle through the rain to star-
board, the launch runs up Middle Harbor
as far as the Spit, down along the
Northern Shore by the Docks at
Cockatoo, and round again by the wharves
of Darling Harbor to her berth at the
Ouay as the grey light of dawn struggles
through the clouds.
The patrol has kept a sharp look-out
for evil-doers by the way. The King’s
laws must be respected on sea and land, by
night and day, through the dark hours as well as in the open
daylight. So the officer of the Harbor Police, with sou’-wester
close buttoned, goes on his quest without deference to wind or
weather. Whether the cold salt spume be cutting across wintry
stretches of water, cr the clear skies be powdered with stars, his
duty lies always before him. Thirty men to keep the peace along
200 miles of shore through 0,7b0 hours in the year —and thirty
men to keep it well!
How well ’tls kept, the yacht thief, the smuggler, and the
longshore robber have had good opportunities of learning. The
continual patrol of the wharves saxes many a pound to the
importer and the property owner. With temptation piled hi vain


THE HARBOR FROM
KIRIBILLI.


able confusion along the wharves ; with assorted merchandise offer-
ing specious attractions to dishonesty, it is remarkable that harbor-
side pilfering is not more frequent : —to the keen-eyed watch turd
ward of this little brigade alone can the credit fall.
Apart from their actual dealings with offenders, the Water
Police perform many useful duties. They supervise the arrival and
departure of mail steamers, see that vessels at the wharves are
provided with gangway lights, meet ships on their arrival from
infected ports, overlook the ferry service, serve all legal processes
upon shipmasters, regulate regattas, act as a life-saving corps to
THE HARBOR
FROM WATSON’S BAY.
overturned yachtsmen and boatmen in bad weather, and salvage
missing boats for owners without fee or reward.
Finally, when Parliament is sitting late at night —according to
a wise and far-seeing regulation —it is the duty of the Water
Police to “convey to their homes'’ members of the Legislature who
happen to reside across the water. When questioned upon this
last function officers become discreetly reticent. As no man is a
hero to his valet, it may he that no legislator looks really dignified
at three o’clock in the morning.
A HOLT a mile from South Head, on a high commanding
cliff, stand the Lighthouse and Signal Station. From the
tower, sharp eyes watch continuously through powerful tele-
scopes for ships in the effing. Hundreds of feet below', the
great Pacific rolls and breaks its Titan strength against resisting
rocks in spray and thunder. In the near horizon the ocean heaves
its great back like a restless animal ; but out at the skyline lies
calm and still. The narrow neck of land slopes down in a rocky
Eastern decline to the calm waters of Watson’s Bay, where the
pilot steamer “Captain Cook” lies at her buoy. The hawser “for-
rard ” is attached to a drum which, being painted white,
can readily be picked up at night if necessary, and is
as readily cast off from the cleats. Five pilots, all deep-
sea captains, dwell snugly at the Bay. One of these
sturdy Five will assuredly be the first citizen of New
South Wales to greet the voyager, whether he come
from Alaska or the Adriatic. One of the Five will
be the last to give him farewell on his departure,
whether he be bound to Cuba or Cathay. These
Five know the Port of Sydney as well as a Bishop
knows the Lord’s Prayer. Bach of them carries upon
the grey surface of his outer consciousness a mental
map of the harbor, with embellishments of leading-
lights, beacons, buoys, and soundings. It is set down
upon the chart that at the Sow and Pigs shoal there
are a mere one and three-quarter fathoms of water,
but a safe seventeen off Shark Point in the near
channel. Between Pott’s Point and Garden Island is a
narrow gut where the soundings give only two and a half
fathoms, while anywhere from Bradley’s Head to Point Piper the
lead will not find bottom under sixty to eighty-four feet. These
facts and a thousand others the Five carry wisely in their heads,
so that the gold-laced autocrat whose word is otherwise law upon
the bridge of a ten-thousand-ton mail steamer pays them due
deference. From the time the pilot—a quiet weather-beaten gentleman
in ordinary civilians’ clothes comes abroad from the “ Captain
Cook ” outside the Heads until the last shore line is fast to the
wharf and the engine-room telegraph has ceased to clang, the voice


NEUTRAL BAY.


of the gold-laced autocrat is not heard. During that period
pregnant with interest to passengers the high-lord of Ocean,
whether he have graduated from the Naval Reserve or come in
through the hawseholes, hs in no sense master of his
own ship. He is, in sooth, the servant of the
weather-beaten gentleman—and attends dutifully to his
commands.
One of the Five is always aboard the Pilot
Steamer. The halliards up at the Signal Station
speak a language which he thoroughly understands.
To the casual visitor at the Bay the tiutterings of
certain little flags by the watch tower have no
meaning; but to the Pilot they talk as intelligently as
the Morse-code instrument talks to the telegraph clerk.
They tell him just exactly what ship has appeared
upon the horizon, her rig, build, owner, charade
PILOT STEAMER
AND CREW.
and position upon the Planet at that particular moment.
She may be a barque from Boston or an oil tank from the Black
Sea, and she may be a full twenty miles away, shut off by high
cliffs from actual vison, but the variegated bunting shouts out in a
loud voice all the information necessary. When the Pilot is ready,
the “Proceed” Hag runs up to the mast head, the painted drum
with hawser attached,
splashes back into the
water, the “Cook” points
her bowsprit Nor' by East
and dives through the
Heads at a thirteen knot
speed. Sometimes she
faces out with only a
long sleepy roll to rock
her on her way; but
there are other days when
the figure-head of the
great commander under
the sprit points deliber-
ately at the exact centre
of the earth, and then
swings up, pendulum-
like, to zenith. In those
days lovers of the majestic (well waterproofed and goloshed) come
down by tram and boat to watch, from gusty heights, grey-green
seas —goaded to madness by spiteful Southerlies —hurling themselves
frothily against cyclopean rocks and roaring out futile defiance to
the shores. In those days the Pilot’s nerve is steeled by danger
and his back stiffened by responsibility. In those days the Five,
wise of wind and weather, take council together in the cabin of
the “Captain Cook.” Then also the officers, engineers, sailors and
firemen, seeking shelter from the rain, study the flag halliards with
emotions less atrophied by routine.
For the past nine months this pilot steamer has been a cen-
tral figure in the writer’s vision. Even as he scribes these random
words on a sunlit Sunday morning, she has slipped away from
her moorings—with sound of six bells—to bring in a tired ship
that has finished her battle with three oceans and pines for the
quays. Once during those nine months it happened that the resi-
dents of our little military, nautical, and fishing suburb w r ere roused


FARM COVE.


LAVENDER BAY.


LAVENDER BAY


from their slumbers at four in the morning by the firing of a
cannon. The rain was lashing furiously at roof and window, and
the wind shrieked in chorus. It was a Walpurgis night in which
uncouth spirits held revelry with the Storm. But our sleepy
householders knew full well, that over this pandemonium of wind
and weather, the signal guns called help for human beings in peril
at sea. Candles were hurriedly lighted, and peop'e peered through
rain-wet windows in the
direction of the pilot ship.
Those who were first awak-
ened, beheld her red mast-
head light swing round, and
following with strained eyes
saw T it heading like Hope
through the darkness. Al-
ready there had been sounds
of hurried feet along the
Marine Parade, and voices
half drowned by the noises of
the storm were heard shout-
ing anxious questions. With
telegraphic rapidity the
news spread that a ship
w r as in danger off North
Head, that she had shewn
signals of distress, and that
SENDING OFF
A PILOT.
the pilot steamer was towing the life-boat outside to the
rescue. Luckily, as we afterwards learned, the pilot
herself succeeded in getting a line aboard the belabored
vessel and drew her away from the certain destruction
which threatened her. The life - boat crew were
somewhat local heroes next day and each in due time
received the bonus, paid (in addition to a £1 a month retaining
fee) to those who are not wanting in the hour of duty. The ship
was an American, timber-laden from Vancouver, and her skipper
allowed that he had had a “ close call.” He had fared badly
two days before in the gale, and being taken in tow for Sydney
the hawser parted off the Heads. A few minutes farther drift
“ would have landed the entire outfit In Eternity.” The Americans
are a favored people.
The pilot steamer is supplied with a complete rocket apparatus
which, so far, owing to the great security of entrance, has never
been called into actual requisition. Sydney, unlike Melbourne, is
a sale port—the safest on the whole Australian coast-line. Taking
into account the immense trade, immunity from accident may
be considered almost complete. Since the “Dunbar”
fatality of half a century gone, Port Jackson has
had no shipwrecks of account to chronicle. Liners
enjoy equally with petty coasters the advantages of
a splendid haven unaccompanied with risks of nego-
tiation or quittance. Consequently the duties of the
Sydney Pilot Service, though onerous and constant
enough, are unattended by the anxieties and risks
that wait upon similar ser-
vices elsewhere. At the
same time the service is
adequate and thoroughly
efficient.
The life-boat is under
the jurisdiction of the Chief
Pilot, Captain Chudleiglpan
old skipper of the Australian
coast. Like an army corps
in time of peace, the life-
saving service has occa-
sionally fallen in for criti-
cism at the hands of the
Sydney press, but it is
probably as well manned
and appliances! as similar
institutions elsewhere, and as capable of performing its heroic duties
should occasion arise.
From time to time, moreover, it happens that daring yachts-
men come to grief on the lower harbor, and the pilots have on
several occasions played a gallant part in rescue work about the
Heads.




AMONG the many aulhoiities exercising control over the Port,
the Health Department holds imperative power. No ship
dares to defy the Health Officer, and people of all nations
must abide by his official utterances. He is a tall man, of com-
manding presence, this Health Officer ; and new arrivals put out
their tongues to him in great deference. If he find upon either
sailor or passenger ought that may be designated as contagious
disease, behold, the ship and its belongings proceed no further ;
but, with a yellow flag hoisted, turns shamefacedly round to the
Quarantine Station, there to remain until fumigated, cleansed, and
with a clean certificate, it is graciously permitted to touch the
clean shores of this State. The Quaran-
tine Station is situated in one of the
most picturesque and healthy parts of
the harbor. Nestled in a bight under
the shadow- of North Head, with a high
promontory to break the asperities of
Southerly winds, with a large reserve of
beach and hillside, ferny gully and painted
foreshore, it becomes a pleasant place of
biding for those passengers who have been
“ ordered to Quarantine.” The amenities
of Fate are railed against no longer and
the gods instead receive thanksgiving for
a harvest of unexpected idylls.
To the average Sydney resident the
Quarantine Station is necessarily terra
incognita. When the yellow- flag is flying
from the flagstaff on the point he who has the temerity to land
within the prescribed area will assuredly be detained. Once two
respectable, elderly gentlemen, contending that the notice boards
were mere matters of form, landed within sight of the Hospital.
Whereat they were pounced upon by brawny officials, who haled
them before sundry authorities, who deliberated gravely, and having
read the fatherly jokists sundry severe homilies retained them in
Quarantine where a number of smallpox patients were incarcerated.
Nor did any influence secure their liberation until the period
appointed.
The example of these elderly gentlemen is presumed to have had a
deterrent effect upon the general populace, and even yachting
crews —famedly without respect for conventionalities or rules—give
the place a wide berth. There is quite a little township of dwel-
lings under the North Head. Surrounded by wondrous wealth of
wild flowers, with sky and sea to lend the landscape endless loveli-
ness, the Quarantine Ground is by no means a dull retreat, and
enforced visitors have been heard to express regret when their term
of detention was over. The station has really been fitted out as
an hospital on a scale calculated to meet all requirements. Like
many of our public bodies, the Board of Health has, at various
times, fallen under the fierce light of criti-
cism, but it is safe to say that nowhere
else in the world could a better system of
isolation and treatment be found. Sydney
Harbor has a health government worthy
of its magnitude, its importance, and its
necessities. It is a government constituted
in the light of modern science, and it safe-
guards the health of half-a-million people
with adequate supervision and care. The
future of our young Democracy is assured
when we find Science thus walking hand-
in-hand with Administration. Far apart
from the ancient corruptions of despotisms,
our self-governing States are in many respects
wfisely showing good examples to the nations.
With all things that make for the betterment
of Humanity—the improvement of social conditions as well as the
alleviation of suffering and the prevention of disease —we are justly
concerned. Even by this alone shall our Australian Commonwealth
prevail.
At this Quarantine Station we find the humanities largely in
evidence. Cleanliness and sanitation are advertised all over its
pleasant area. It is a model village by the sea. Six hundred
beds stand always ready for occupation, and a thousand people were,
on one occasion, comfortably accommodated. A well - ordered
Democracy makes due distinction for classes. The Station is so
CIRCULAR QUAY—EASTERN SIDE.


MILSON’S POINT.


laid out, that the distinctions which prevail on shipboard are retained.
First in position come the disinfecting rooms, then the hospital,
next the buildings for the housing of saloon and second-class people,
then the biding places for steerage passengers and European and
Asiatic crews. Thus, when a mail steamer is ordered into quarantine,
she lands not only her passengers but the entire complement of crew
and servants. Stewards and cooks take up their duties ashore just
as they did during the voyage, and enjoy less leisure than the
firemen or fo’castle hands whose labors are not transferable. The
Asiatics and seamen are cleanly berthed in barracks in double tiers
of iron bedsteads. For the third-class passengers rooms of two beds
each are provided, opening out on wide verandahs. The seconds
and firsts are not allowed to nurture sedition, inasmuch as due
deference is paid to their tastes in the matter of dadoed dining
halls, drawing and music rooms for the ladies, and billiard rooms
for the male prisoners. The hospital is completely isolated, so that
no infection may be conveyed from the actual patient to the suspect.
All convalescents and the doctors and nurses are required to bathe
and put on fresh clothing when passing out from the hospital.
On the rocks leading from the Station buildings are many
inscriptions, mostly done by quarantined crews in hours of enforced
idleness. The Arabic, French, Persian, German, Chinese,
Japanese and other caligraphies here set forth —with more or less
attempt at humor—the views of different nationalities
upon Australian Quarantine Laws. Stringent as these
laws may be in spirit and letter, they are framed upon
the underlying principle of the greatest good for the
greatest number —hence the rigidity of the Board of
Health is never relaxed, and with its officials there is no
“line of least resistance,” for the Board—sensible of its
responsibilities—strenuously and imperatively resists all
along the line any encroachment upon the laws relating
to contagious diseases. Should the King himself one day
arrive—as all loyal Australians wish—at Port Jackson
Heads, and his ship be declared unclean by the tall,
commanding medical officer, whose launch waits at
Watson’s from sundown to sunset, the King himself
would have to go to quarantine!
SINCE the establishment of the Commonwealth, the administra-
tion of Customs has been under the Federal Government.
In fact, it has constituted the chief function of our new
Australian Parliament. The collecting of revenue is a patriotic
and interesting duty, altogether apart from preferential trade or
other national considerations. Before proceeding to its particular
bearings upon our subject we will depart into a side issue:
What time the Federal Parliament, in its wisdom, fixed a
national tax upon tea, it also passed into law a much - debated
measure entitled the Naturalisation Act. This Act, by some cur-
ious amenity—peculiar perhaps to a fledgling Legislature—has been
deputed for its executive to the Customs Department, and when
recently I called upon Mr. Walford, the Tide Surveyor of Sydney
Customs House, I found that busy gentlemen closely perusing the
distinguishing marks of a person certificated—for statutory purposes—
as Ah Wong. It is possible that Ah Wong’s lineage may go back
to Genhgis Khan. His ancestors might even have received the
peacock’s feather from the Asiatic Potentate of the period. On the
other hand, Ah Wong might be a mere Mongolian commoner with
no more claims to consideration in his own country than one of his
country’s edible dogs. In either case the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia cares nothing. Ah Wong is simply an Asiatic—a person
whom the Legislature in its wisdom classes as an undesirable citizen.
But Ah Wong has been a
resident in this State for the
past twenty years. First, as a
digger and fossicker, he dis-
covered small particles of
gold under the shadow of
Australian hills. By frugal
living and infinite industry he
pouched one pennyweight of
wealth with another until he
accumulated enough to pur-
chase a country store. Prac-
tising year after year a system
of personal economy, which
enabled him to undersell his
A STIFF BLOW.


NEUTRAL BAY.


ADMIRALTY HOUSE


FARM COVE.


white competitors, Ah Wong became comparatively rich. At length
he decided to revisit his native land and pay respect to the bones
of his ancestors. But since his advent to these exclusive shores
politics had advanced. A stringent . Naturalisation Act had come
into force, absolutely excluding all undesirable immigrants, and
directed specially against his own race. So that if the subject of
A CERTIFICATE OF DOMICILE.
our sketch wishes to return to this country, after he has paid
deference to the remains of his grandfather in China, he must pro-
vide himself with a passport. A permit is duly made out at the
Custom House and stamped with the Commonwealth Seal. It carries
a close description of the holder, and on the reverse side an im-
pression of his left hand, together with two photographs—in full
face and profile. A duplicate is lodged at the Tide Surveyor’s
Office and another goes to the Department of External Affairs at
Melbourne. Ah Wong on his return must produce his certificate
and thoroughly satisfy the authorities that he is entitled to hold it,
or he will not be permitted to land. Since the Naturalisation Act
has been law all shipowners and masters are compelled on arrival
to furnish a list of the colored members (if any) of their crew.
Should any passengers of color be aboard they are brought up, in
terms of the Act, for examination. This examination cr test is the
calling on candidates for Australian citizenship to write-in any
European language —a passage of 50 words as dictated by an officer
of the Customs. A new test is supplied once a fortnight. By
means of the text quoted herewith some low-class Mexican gypsies
were recently prevented from landing.
15TH TO 31ST JULY, 1903.
The tram system is one of the finest in the world, and most of the lines
are worked by electricity. Within the city the ordinary fare is ten cents, so
that you can ride for an hour or more for fourpence. The streets in the older
parts are narrow.
If it is not intended that the applicant should be debarred, the test is
given in English, but it may be applied in Italian to keep out an Afghan
camel-driver, or in Hungarian to defeat a Hindoo coolie. Should
the colored passenger fall and if he be colored his chance of
admittance is very remote —the onus of his deportation is thrown
upon the ship. On the departure of the vessel from the port, alien
members of the crew and restricted passengers are duly mustered.
If the number be short, action is promptly taken against the master,
the maximum penalty being for each person unaccounted for.
Thus the unwanted applicant is stiffly bowed off Australian shores.
Resident Asiatics, who leave the country without having first
provided themselves with a certificate of domicile are, as we have
seen, treated with similar severity.
Unlike the Cdrinese Restriction Acts, the new Commonwealth
law decides that aliens still remain prohibited persons after payment
of a fine. When vessels with aliens aboard intended for other ports
arrive at Sydney', the agents, owners, or masters are called upon to
deposit £IOO a head on each individual as a guarantee. Formal
application is then made for permission to tranship or to remain


THE HARBOR FROM
BOTANICAL GARDENS.


aboard until the vessel resumes her journey. Should any alien
succeed in landing and be afterwards discovered within the Com-
monwealth the usual tests are applied. Failing to satisfactorily
answer them, the undesirable is forthwith arrested and
imprisoned until deported by order of the Federal
Minister. It was, doubtless, the intention of the
Commonwealth Parliament in framing this Act to
achieve absolute prohibition against all classes of
immigrants whom the Australians considered it wise
to debar. The object of the Act has certainly been
attained, inasmuch
as that out of a
large number of can-
didates who have
presented them-
selves only a very
small percentage
have been allowed
to land. As long
as a majority of
our people desire
this law to remain
operative, it is likely
to prove much more
effective against in-
truders than the
Great Wall of China.
J. BAXTER, ACTING-COLLECTOR.
Before the Australian Federation evolved out of
the chaos of nebulous politics and became a solid
constellation in the firmament of legislative fact,
Sydney was a Freetrade port. A new Protective
Tariff for the States having been framed by our
Commonwealth, the import trade of Port Jackson
now adds a vast sum to the national revenue. The
collection of this revenue affords constant occupation
for over two hundred officers of the Customs Department. Tide
waiters, landing waiters, lockers, King’s warehousemen, clerks and
accountants perform their functions within sound of busy quays.
From the time a foreign ship comes inside the three-mile limit—for
the Commonwealth is absolute to a distance of three miles from shore—
she is under the jurisdiction of the Customs. Apart from the
revenue on landed goods due by consignees, the
ship herself must pay duty on the stores she con-
sumes during her stay in Australian waters. This
latter clause is in some cases inoperative, but with
larger vessels like the Orient or P. and O.—where
a strict system of book-keeping prevails—it is easy
enough for the Department to check consumption
on dutiable goods.
As soon as the in-
coming vessel pas-
ses the doctor her
hatches are duly
sealed by an officer
of the Customs, and
by an officer of the
Customs alone may
the seals be broken
under a penalty of
£lOO. It is the
bounden duty of
the Customs men
to see that no duti-
able goods are re-
moved from the
L. H. WALFORD, TIDE-SURVEYOR.
wharf (save and except to a registered bond, with due
fomalities) unless the Commonwealth’s tithes have been
well and fully paid. All ships are carefully watched with
Argus eyes for attempting smugglers. Passengers and
their chattels are subjected to a rigorous examination.
The Customs employ a number of lady searchers who
scrutinise female arrivals and their belongings for
hidden laces or jewellery. The ancient profession of
smuggling was mostly followed by unpicturesque brigands, ready if
occasion arose to empty their flintlocks into the revenue men. In these
days—-when the ascendancy of women is so marked—ladies are reputed
H. PASSMORE, WAREHOUSE-KEEPER.
W. LAWSON, FIRST LANDING SURVEYOR.


CIRCULAR QUAY.


to be the most successful smugglers. The advantages of dress,
external innocence, and a lingering chivalry, are advanced as
explanations. In any case the department protects itself and the
public from female wiles by employing female searchers. Next to
the lady smuggler, although handicapped in competition with her,
the Chinaman is undoubtedly the most expert follower of this
ancient profession. No Cornish adept of the eighteenth century
knew more than Ah Sin knows in the art of getting contraband
goods ashore. Vessels arriving here from India and China are
closely watched all the time they remain in port; their laundry is
carefully overhauled, even the ashes from the cook’s galley are
sifted, if the officer has reason for it. Disregarding with Oriental
placidity that atmosphere of cold suspicion in which he finds him-
self, the sleek Chinaman goes about his duties with a bland and
smiling face—open and innocent as the day. Should a “ cousin ”
from ashore visit him, he pretends not to be unduly elated at the
appearance of his beloved relation. He converses with him in
hearing of the landing waiter about the weather, the scenery, agri-
culture in Central Asia, any subject but cigars and opium or import
duties. At the same time both he and his cousin are arranging
devious, plans for getting portable goods ashore. It will avail the
Custom’s officer little to search the bunk and belongings of Ah
Sin. That astute individual, with precedent to guide him, has
his opium concealed in hollowed-out lumps of coal, in a false drawer
in the blameless chief mate’s locker, or in some other safe receptacle
devised by his Oriental ingenuity. It is rarely that Ah Sin’s cache
is discovered aboard. Most of the arrests are made on the wharf or
alongside. Even when Ah Sin is caught in the act, with smuggled
opium upon his very person, his fortitude rarely deserts him. Inscrut-
able as the Sphinx, calm as the ruins of Baalbec, he is mutely led to the
white man’s prison with all the patient stoicism of long-suffering Asia.
No matter where his ship may berth—above the swinging bridge at
Pyrmont, or by the old whaling stores at Mosman’s Bay—no captain
shall defy the Customs. All things must he do as the Act and Regula-
tions decree. Nor shall he break the King’s seal, nor put freight over-
side without payment of duty, under severest penalty. Thus all ship-
masters respect and honor the Customs officer—paying him great
deference and tribute of cigars and wdiisky. But the officer is sparing
of their use, inasmuch as there are steep holds, and dark ship places
requiring constant negotiation. Not infrequently it happens that a
Customs man goes into hospital with a broken limb through accident.
There are no holidays in the Customs and no Sundays ; if a ship comes
up the Bay on Sunday or Christmas Day her requirements must be met.
Despite these little amenities, the Customs are a jolly people, full of
welcome words and hearty jests for mariners safely home from ports
across and over. These, of course, be honest mariners. But it is sternly
set down elsewhere that one thousand pounds in forfeit shall be paid to
the coffers of the King by “any ship or boat within one league of the
coast having false bulkheads, false bows, sides or bottoms, or any secret
or disguised place adapted for the purpose of concealing goods or having
any hole, pipe or other device adapted for the purpose of running goods.”
Or if the smuggler be of less than two hundred and fifty tons registered
tonnage, then his ship shall be confiscated to the King.
In such wise are the interests of the Commonwealth protected and
its tariff collected, and even the King’s own ships of war may be boarded
and searched for contraband if the Collector of Customs in his might and
wisdom deem it necessary to be done.
When the friction, which was naturally occasioned by the introduc-
tion of a new tariff is overcome, the administration of Customs in the
greatest revenue port south of the Equator will move still more smoothly,
and the tall ships will offer their cargoes for toll without fear of legal
troubles ashore. In due sympathy for the feelings of merchants who
have suffered by unexpected rigidity of tariff, the writer feels bound to say
in conclusion that those who supervise the dutiable freights of Port
Jackson perform their official functions exceeding well.
Attached to the Sydney Custom House, but not yet under
Federal authority, is the Government Shipping Office. This is the
oldest shipping office in Australia, and thousands of seamen are
benefited by it yearly. In accordance with the provisions of the
Seamen's Act, the department's chief function is the shipping and
discharge of sailors. At present the office is under the control of
Captain Lindeman, who, with seven busy officers and clerks to assist
him, provided berths—during the year iqoc—for no less than 14,879
seamen, and paid through the office £ 55,105 in wages. It is
interesting to note that seventy-eight per cent, of the applicants for
berths were British.


GOAT ISLAND.


Crews arriving at Sydney in British ships, register at the Shipping
Office, sign their discharges and receive the balance of their wages
there. Vessels registered in Sydney are allowed to pay off their crews
aboard, but even then they are called upon to send the discharges to
the office and the men can demand to be paid off before the Shipping
'Master if they so desire. '['he Master often acts as an intermediary
between skippers and their crews, and many minor disputes are settled
in that way without recourse to Law. It a sailormau is ill, the office
sees that he is duly put in hospital. If he is unable to work and
decrepit, the Master has power to send him Home to the Board of
TYPICAL
SYDNEY FERRY
BOAT.
Trade. If he has the misfortune to be shipwrecked on the coast, the
Master can provide him with clothing and necessities. In this
respect however, it is only fair to say that the philanthropic attentions
of that noble institution, the National Shipwreck Relief Society, and
similar organisations usually render this unnecessary. Many a ship-
wrecked crew arriving in Port Jackson, God-delivered from the howl-
ing waters, have had reason to bless the Society.
In fine, the Government Shipping Office does good and useful
work, and seamen who enter Sydney Harbor can rest assured that the
formalities of shipping and discharge will receive due attention, and
that matters of advance notes and wages will be adjusted with all
regard for the legalities. Deserters can also feel certain that the
office will do its best under the powers of the Act to trace them out.
All ship-masters are compelled on their arrival at this port to
supply the office within 24 hours with “ a true list, in writing, con-
taining the names of crew and passengers.” It is ordained, moreover,
that the master of every ship, other than ships trading coastwise,
which has arrived from ports beyond seas, shall, before leaving our
port, deliver to the Shipping Master a copy of the articles of agree-
ment under which such ship or vessel arrived, and shall produce the
original thereof to the Shipping Master, who shall compare the same
with the copy, and the said Master and the Shipping Master shall
verify the said copy by their signatures.
Attached to the Government Shipping Office is a waiting-room,
where sailormen congregate in rainy weather. For him who w r ould
read the lives of them that go down to the sea in ships, this room
is rich in incident. The casual passer-by elbows his way to
the Quay through a motley crowd of nondescripts who drably
adorn the pavement without the Shipping Master's door. Roughly
clothed in garments smelling mouldily of the slop-chest ; with bristl-
ing growth of beard and hair showing under their caps, these squalid
fighters of the seas lounge about, plug-chewing, yarning, and venti-
lating the sailorman’s thousand grievances, until they are called to sign
again and go. The aesthetic ways of cities are unknown to them. Wealth
and Leisure, perfumed and raimented like the lily, heedlessly pass
them bv. The longshore folks eye them askance; mentally catalogue
them as “ human brutes,” and go their ways. Clean linen is not for
them, nor dainty food, nor red wines, nor the cost' fireside, nor the
lips of mothers and the kisses of children.
They go out in their floating dens ‘Torrard,” coarsely fed,
foully bedded, herded like cattle and driven like swine. They are the
losers and forsakers of all kind things. Their mouths house blas-
phemies, their skulls roof unclean imaginations, and with the degra-
dations of all nations tire they lasciviously familiar. But their un-
couth lives are heroic in the light of Promethean surroundings.
Squalid actors on a dingy stage, they stand out, flare-lit, before a back-
ground of Tragedy and Fate. Such as they are their conditions have
made them, and if, in its wisdom, the law still deals strictly with
them, it affords them greater measure of justice than the law afore-
time ever allowed them to reap. To such institutions as the Govern-
ment Shipping Office they stand indebted.


PARRAMATTA RIVER.


CLIFTON GARDENS.
STEAMING up the harbor the most conspicuous of the numerous
pleasure resorts that catch the incoming traveller’s eye is
undoubtedly Clifton Gardens. The magnificent hotel and com-
modious dancing pavilion stand out boldly
from a background of thickly-wooded hills.
At Clifton Gardens the visitor enjoys all
the comforts of civilisation within easy dis-
tance of secluded nooks and primieval glades.
The illustration which appears herewith
gives a very fair idea of the general appear-
ance of this popular resort, but the camera
cannot emphasize the contrast between the
white buildings and the deep green of the
woods; also the area of flat and well-kept
grounds between the pavilion and the foot
of the hills has been unavoidably obscured.
Ample provision has been here made for
foot racing, cricket and other forms of recrea-
tion, and splendid seating accommodation
is provided for spectators.
Refreshments, etc., are obtainable in
abundance on the grounds, at moderate
prices, and visitors who can appreciate a
well-served luncheon at moderate rates,
should not fail to visit the Marine Hoteb
which is only a few steps from the grounds.
Magnificent views of the harbor can be
obtained from the lawn in front of this
hotel, and delightful views are presented to
the eye of the visitor. Mr. D. J. Thompson,
the proprietor of this popular resort, makes a speciality of catering
for visitors, and arrangements made with him for picnics and other
celebrations will be found in every respect thoroughly economical and
satisfactory. Clifton Gardens can be cheaply and expeditiously reached
from Sydney. Steamers ply from Fort Macquarie at frequent intervals
on Sundays and holidays, and the ferry to Mosman and tram to a
point on the Military-road brings the visitor within five minutes
walk of the grounds. By either route the fare is only a few
pence, and the trip bring the visitor along some of the most pic-
turesque portions of the harbor. Select popular concerts are held
on the hotel lawn on Sundays. The return boat fare, including
admission to the grounds, is 6d. All information regarding the hire
of the grounds for picnics, etc., is obtainable on application to Mr.
Thompson, by letter or telephone—’phone number 31, Mosman.*


BERRY’S BAY.


L' ENVOI.
THE pages of this book have been scribed by the author with
no attempt at literary continuity. The subject is one which
does not lend itself to regular treatment. It is a subject,
moreover, of such extended interest that in a work of this nature
much must be left in outline and suggestion. Some effort has been
made to give readers an idea of the management and government of
the finest port in the world. Various departments have received
passing description, and various offices casual review. Much more
might have been set down under this head, but it is impossible to
clothe dry bones of statistics with garments of interest. The Admiralty
section and a quantity of collected matter of actual bearing on
Sydney Harbor have had, perforce, to be passed over. To
compile a complete treatise in detail of the port’s administrat on
would require a full volume, which, like the average Blue Book, might
furnish only very dull reading after all. On the other hand, to
describe, page by page, natural beauties of even such unrivalled
attraction as the Harbor possesses would be tedious and wearisome.
The aid of the artist and camera has been largely evoked,
but it has been left to the poor powers of the author to
convey some idea of the giandeur and extent of this glorious
haven. Its importance as the mighty mother port of Australia can
hardly be estimated —nor its future predicted. In a little over a
hundred years, it has seen a great modern city of half a million
people, evolve from a primitive British settlement. Where stood
the scattered huts of Phillip’s soldiers, proud buildings of the most
ambitious architecture rear their tall heads. Where primeval forest
echoed the barbarian shouts of naked aborigines, now are heard the
reverberating roar of Commerce, the beating of the anvils of Manu-
facture, the paen of Industry, the tramping of Civilisation’s feet shod
with Iron—but heeled with Gold.
The accident of the port itself has had most to do with this
marvellous advancement ; this spreading of streets and uprearing of
houses. Sydney Harbor has been the outlet for the rich pro-
ducts of the Mother State. To Sydney Harbor have her thousand
imports come. With its tide sweeps in and out the tide of
wealth also. Our good fortune has been the envy of our enemies,
the congratulation of our friends.
W T e have a patriotic love for our beautiful harbor, and no matter
where we may winder, inland or overseas, our hearts go back to the
old familiar places, and our memories call up tenderly visionary pic-
tures of sunlit and golden sand. It has been thought that this
book may fill a pleasant function in this respect, and that exiles
abroad may in some slight degree, recall by medium of its pages
scenes always dear to Sydney folk. It is also intended in this brochure
to offer a souvenir for travellers who might wish to bear away a
memento of the Harbor, or for those who desire to convey to
friends abroad some idea of its beauty and importance.
WITH
TILLER
AND
SHEET.
Beyond the window of the room in which this book has been
written, the author has had ever before him the full sweep of the
harbor from Watson’s Bay to the Circular Quay. A few yards away
from his desk the little harbor waves break ceaselessly on the beach.
On sunlit days this scene has been a poem in color, light and shade •
on grey days, mellowed by cloud and softened by mist, it has taken
on another charm. At night, when the moon mirrored her silver disc
in the shadows and flooded the open reaches with sheeted silver, it
has gleamed like an enchanted sea. Through the starlit hours with
its mysterious lights and dark water distances, it lay, in dreaming


BALMAIN.


THE BRIDGE, LANE COVE RIVER.


BAKER & ROUSE PROPRIETARY LIIiITED
The Leading Wholesale and Retail Photographic Supply Stores in the Commonwealth.
CAMERAS, by all leading makers, from the most costly to the least expensive.
SB
43,
* .j!F
The “PREMO’' and “POCO” Cameras,
“PREMO” PACK FILMS. From 25/- to £25/-
n all style?., with which car. be used
the wonderful
ROSS, ZEISS, and GOERZ TRIEDER BINOCULARS W*
Of endless variety, from £6/6/-
The New AUSTRAL Cameras, for Pictures on Roll Films or Plates
from 6/- to £4/4'-
$
The Famous I
iV)
Dry Plates and Pearl Papers,
FRESH FROM THE FACTORY.
PHONOGRAPHS, G PAN APH ONE AND LANTERN NOVELTIES
2.000 Edison Standard Phonograph Records.
1.000 Circular Disc Qramaphone Records.
SEND FOR ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE, 200 PAGES, POST FREE ON APPLICATION.
BAKER & ROUSE Proprietary Limited,
375 George 5t., SYDNEY.
AND AT MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE, AND BRISBANE.
SYDNEY HARBOR,


quiet, a magical lake holding within its possibilities marvels and
wonders. Looking back upon these pages and out upon his subject,
the author is driven to confess in all humility that the achievement is
not adequate. But, such as the words are, let them pass ! It is not
given to the mouth of any man to proclaim fully God’s wonders; it is
not given to the pen of any man to write fully of Nature in her moods.
Such as the work is--let it stand! To have done full justice to
this canvas a Turner would have to be born again. To have given
this subject all its due, such as a Keats would need to revisit the
earth. Who knows ? Mayhap some day a greater than either of
these —kings in Art and Letters though they be—cradled under the
blue Australian sky, environed by the harbor-side, may sit and tell in
songs of fire the story of the
Finest Harbor in the World.
E. J. BRADY.
Sydney , October 27th, 1903.
LIFEBOAT CREWS AT PRACTICE.
Printed and Published Ini the BUILDER PRINTING WORKS, Pine Art Printers, 527 Kent Street, Sydney.


P7SNOR7SMXC


e View of sVdNeV h^RBO
TAKEN FROM NORTH SYDNEY.


HARBOR.
