

IP . I
■' B
B
fl
I iNf'• *(2' ' iS^
. —


fjl
~r«^" EI<GUSON OI ' Il - CII \ |T
['(( XATI°NAI. LIBRARY' J jj






SYDNEY LINTON:
FIRST BISHOP OF RIVERINA.
HIS LIFE AND LABOURS.
EDITED BY
VV. CHARLES PRITCHARD, M.A.,
Incumbent of S. Paul's, Geelong, Victoria, and formerly
Incumbent of S. Pauls Pro-Cathedral Hay, iV.S.W.
Melbourne =
CHAS. TROEDEL & CO., PRINTERS,
230 FLINDERS LANE.
1896.




I
i • i i
«Aj
4 4 ,." H * #
X
i'jK.f . V^:
iJBfc, - ,u/: w
• ,
jl«?V * JBm Hfeb
-5 4 •' > ,*,
:,>. y. ; : .; ■ ' ; •; <g; - ' : -


fr 3
VO/^N


EDITOR'S PREFACE.
iT HAVE spoken of this brief memoir as "edited" by myself
because that word most truthfully describes the character
of the book. It is mainly a compilation from the Bishop's
journal-letters to his friends in England, who were joined in an
" Association for Prayer and Help." The first two chapters
are written by a relative in England, the third and fourth by
Mrs. Linton. I have to express my thanks to many friends-
who have supplied with newspaper reference, letters and inci-
dents. I am under special obligation to Mr. George Meeson,
of Hay, for preparing the valuable map. I have endeavoured
to reproduce, as far as possible, the Bishop's own writing, and
to weave it into a narrative of his life and labours. It is my
hope that thus a truer memorial of him may be preserved, and
that the pleasant homeliness of his writing may picture for
many that beautiful simplicity and noble high-mindedness which
endear his memory to all who knew him. It has also been my
aim, at Mrs. Linton's desire, to record such things as may
hereafter guide and help other pioneers, for there is surely
many a diocese yet to be in the future of Australian church
life. My work has been done somewhat hastily, amid the many
engrossing claims of a large parish, but it has been a labour
of love.
I earnestly pray that they who read these pages will find
some such help and comfort as h«vfe come"tb* me in writing
them, and that so the memoirs of one who was " good" in the
truest sense of the word may have a yet wider influence. Of
Bishop Linton's life and labours it may be truly written, as of a
missionary Apostle long ago, " He yvas a good man, full of the
Holy Ghost and of faith, and much people was added unto
the Lord." " ; • *
W. CHARLES PRITCHARD.
S. PAUL'S PARSONAGE, GEELONG,
19M March , 1896.




CHAPTER I.
EARLY LIFE.—IB4I-1867.
" Sweet is the smile of Home ; the mutual look,
When hearts are of each other sure ;
Sweet all the joys that crowd the household nook,
The haunt of all affections pure."
IN the pleasant county of Huntingdon, about half way
between the county town and St. Neots, lies the little
village of Diddington. It is a pretty spot, embosomed in
trees, not far from where the Great Ouse rolls on its tortuous
way to join the Cam. The vicarage house immediately adjoins
the great north road from London to York, and commands
a pleasant prospect of the Ouse valley. It was here that the
future Bishop of Riverina was born on the 2nd of July, 1841.
His father, the Rev. Henry Linton, afterwards Hon. Canon of
Christ Church, and Rector of St. Peter le Bailey, Oxford, had
been first Curate, and afterwards Vicar, of Diddington since
the year 1827, and was a clergyman widely known and greatly
respected.
The population of Diddington was small, never exceeding
two hundred people, and this enabled Mr. Linton to devote a
considerable portion of his time to good works outside his
parish. The vicarage at Diddington was the centre of a number
of agencies, all tending to benefit the neighbourhood and the
county, and to promote the spread of the Gospel abroad. In
the study of the Vicar was a large book-case filled with Bibles
and Prayer Books and other publications of the Society for
Promoting Christian Knowledge, and from this source the
books circulated into all the neighbouring villages. Mr. Linton
was also, either as County Secretary or as an earnest supporter,
the mainstay in the county of the Church Missionary Society
(then struggling with its early difficulties), the Society for
Propagating the Gospel, the Bible Society, the Society for
Promoting Christianity among the Jews, as well as warmly
interested in the local charities of the neighbourhood. Once or
twice in the year he would also be absent for some time in
more distant parts of the country, acting as "deputation" for
one or more of these Societies, and always returning with much


to tell of his deeply interesting experiences. The income of the
Church Missionary Society, as raised in the county of
Huntingdon, advanced, through his instrumentality, from £35
to £5OO a year, and that of the Society for the Propagation of
the Gospel to £4OO a year.
It was a busy house, therefore, in which the future Bishop
passed his childhood, and, as a boy, the example was ever
before him of zeal and ardent devotion in the work of extending
the Kingdom of the Lord Jesus Christ.
If Sydney Linton had an example of earnest work in
his father, he had no less a stimulus in the daily life
and ceaseless activities of his mother. Mrs. Linton came
herself of a clerical family, and had been accustomed to-
active work among the poor from a child. Her father was
the Rev. William Richardson, Vicar of Ferry Fryston, in
the County of York, a clergyman well known as a man of
ability and energy in the North of Lngland. As the wife
of the Vicar of Diddington, her influence in the parish and
neighbourhood was like that of a mother over a large family*
It was to her that every woman, young or old, turned in every
trouble. The children in the parish were all as if ihey were
her own. The schools, both on Sunday and week day, weie
her special charge. The training of the singers in church (long
before the days of parish choirs) was her weekly privilege.
Herself a woman of commanding presence and boundless
energy, Mrs Linton was one with whom it was impossible to
come in contact without catching something of her enthusiasm
for all that was good and pure and holy.
In this home, so full of life, and such a centre of usefulness,
the subject of this brief memoir was the fourth of nine
children. To one who remembers the domestic circle as it was
at that time, the scene comes back as the very picture of
cheerful family life. The garden, with its mulberry tree and
its bee-hives, the orchard and its multitudes of apples, the plots
of ground diligently cultivated by each of the children, the
boisterous games of merry boys and girls, the family worship,
with its always devout and helpful exposition of scripture, the
texts out of the Bible, committed to memory by master, and
mistress, and children, and servants, and visitors, and repeated
by all in turn —who can forget these things r Perhaps the
most characteristic part of all that English home was the
outdoor life of the glebe and the garden. Both the father and
mother were skilful and most painstaking cultivators of all
that is beautiful and useful in a garden. None understood
better the pruning of fruit trees, the budding of roses, the
cultivating of every kind of vegetable in its season. 1 hose who
know the delight that his Australian garden, with its vines and
peach trees, gave to the Bishop of Riverina, will not b<r


surprised to learn from whence he acquired both his taste and
his skill. It would be pleasant to tell of the happy Sundays in
the little village church, where the villagers, both old and
young, hung on the lips of their pastor; of the rambles in the
woods, and the glow-worms in the grass, in the warm summer
evenings; of the skating and the genial country games in the
winter; the many-sided aspects of boy-life in England; but
space forbids.
From such a home it was that Sydney Linton went to his
first school, in the adjoining town of Huntingdon, in the year
1850. This was a private school for boys, kept by the Rev.
H. Margetts; here he learnt the rudiments of Greek and Latin,
and laid the foundation of all the knowledge that he after-
wards acquired. At this school he continued, returning home
for the periodical (and much expected) holidays, until his
father purposed to send him to Rugby, at that time one of the
best of the great English Public Schools. He did not, however,
proceed direct to Rugby, but to a Preparatory School at
Overslade, in Warwickshire, then under the charge of Mr.
Congreve. To this he went in 1853. Hei*e he remained two
years, growing into a tall and strong athletic boy, of much
promise in football and cricket and all that interests boys;
and entered the School at Rugby, in the boarding house of the
Rev. G. G. Bradley, the present Dean of Westminster, in the
summer of 1855.
What the character of Rugby school was at this time is well
described in the following words of the Rev. R. H. Hart-
Davies, a life-long friend of the future 1 ishop, who was at the
same boarding house at the same time: —
"We were fortunate in being under the Headmastership of
one who, next to Dr. Arnold, has done more, perhaps, for
Rugby than any man—that is, Dr. Temple, the present Bish< p
of London. We were fortunate, too, in the quality of the staff
whom Dr. Temple gathered round him. Amongst these I may
mention, in addition to the Rev. G. G. Bradley and the Rev.
Charles Evans (who held their appointments before Dr Temple
came), the Rev. E. W. Benson (now Archbishop of Canter-
bui'y), the Rev. A. G. Butler, Dr. Jex-Blake, the Rev. J. M.
Wilson and the Rev. J. Percival—all of whom subsequently
became Headmasters of great Public Schools. Ihe tone of the
school was at a very high level, and its University successes
unsurpassed by any previous generation."
Mr. Hart-Davies thus describes Sydney Linton at the time
when he entered the school: —
"He was some two years older than I was; and an old
family friend, a boy in another boarding house, placed me
under his care. He was able to help me in many ways. He
was my instructor in games, my counsellor and protector, and


I owe to him more than I can say. There was an element of
roughness among the boys, during my first year especially,
from which he was often able to shield me; and, as we went
up the school and gained in influence, I think we were successful
in ' softening the manners 'of our generation. He was a fine,
well-grown boy, foremost at cricket and football, and a good
runner and fives player. Without any pretence to brilliancy,
he gave himself thoroughly to his work, and was justly a
favourite with the masters, who knew that he might always
be trusted to do his best. No one exei'cised a more useful
influence in the house than he ; and this was due to his con-
sistent truthfulness, his manliness, and his consideration for
the feelings of others I cannot remember that we could ever
put him out of temper. We were proud of him as an excellent
'back' in our famous football ground, as a powerful hitter in
the 'eleven,' as one of the best of long-distance runners, and as
a model sixth-form boy."
It was at this period of his life that bis father removed from
Huntingdonshire to Oxford, and became the rector of one of the
well-known poor parishes in the Univers-ty city. It was a
great change for a country clergyman, no longer young, but
admirably it showed the wisdom of those who made the
appointment. Mr. (or, as he was afterwards, Canon) Linton
soon became the centre of an attached and growing congrega-
tion, and made for himself large opportunities of usefulness,
both in his parish and in the University. He laid himself out
specially to be of service to the undergraduates, and his always
hospitable house became, to successive yenerations of them, a
second home. To this home Mr. Hart-Davies refers, in
describing a visit to it during one of the holidays of the
school at Rugby :
" The tedium of the long half-year was broken by a short
'exeat;' and one of these 'exeats' I spent in Sydney Linton's
home. The impression then received of family union and
happiness has never passed away. It was this pure family
life, and the inspiration of one of the noblest of our English
Public Schools, at one of its most prosperous and healthful
eras, which gave to Sydney Linton the training which would
have fitted him for any work in life, and which he turned to
such signal account in the subordinate field of Curate and
Vicar at home, and in the wider opportunities which opened
before him in his vast diocese in Australia."
In the year 1861, Sydney Linton proceeded from Rugby to
the University of Oxford, where he entered as a Commoner at
the interesting old College of Wadham. His repute in athletic
sports had preceded him, and he speedily was called to appear
in the University "eleven." Through the three years of his
University career it was chiefly in athletic sports that he was


distinguished, but he by no means neglected the proper studies
of the place, and he took his B.A. degree, with a second-class
in Law and Modern History —by no means a low place in
College estimation—on a cold winter's morning in the year
1864.
He was now old enough to be ordained, and might at once
have entered the Christian Ministry; but he had serious
doubts of his fitness for so sacred and holy a calling. He
most wisely determined, therefore, to defer this important
step, and sought for and obtained a tutorship in the family
of a widow lady who was seeking both a tutor and a com-
panion for her sons. With this family he continued for about
two years, deriving signal benefit from the opportunities of
reading which his occupations afforded him, and still more
from the experiences which he enjoyed of foreign travel. In
the company of his pupils and their mother, he spent some time
in Rome, in Florence, and in other towns in Italy; he made
considerable progress in the study of the Italian language, and
greatly enlarged his mind by intercourse with all classes of
men. He learnt in this way to sympathise with the manners
and thoughts of foreigners—a knowledge which proved emi-
nently useful to him afterwards in Australia, where a few
Italian words spoken to a sick man in a hospital, would some-
times both win swift access to the heart and kindle a bright
light in the eye.
CHAPTER 11.
ORDINATION AND EARLY MINISTRY.
1867-1884.
" O, by Thine own sad burthen, borne
So meekly up the hill of scorn,
Teach Thou Thy priests their d lily cross
To bear as Thine, nor count it loss."
the summer of 1866 an event occurred which had a lasting
4!, effect on the mind and on the life of Sydney Linton. This
was the death, in India of his eldest brother, Henry.
Henry Linton, after being educated at Harrow, had also gone
through the University of Oxford, and had afterwards obtained
an excellent appointment in the Civil Service, under the


Government of India. At this time he had been nearly five
years in India, had risen rapidly, and served as Head Assistant
to the Collectors, both of Nellore and of the Godavery. He had
recently been appointed Under-Secretary to the Government of
Madras, and was considered one of the most promising young
men in the Civil Service. He was also an excel lent cricketer and
horseman, so that his name was well known in Southern India.
Suddenly the news came of his early death at Madras. There
can be no doubt that this bereavement greatly affected his
brother Sydney. It was shortly after this that, with all
seriousness and earnestness of purpose, he began to prepare
himself for the Christian Ministry. At the actual time when
the sad news came from India, he was holding a temporary
appointment as an Assistant Master in the Public School at
Haileybury. On relinquishing this post he steadily pursued
his preparation for Holy Orders, and was ordained Deacon by
the Bishop of Gloucester and Bristol in the spring of 1867.
The curacy to which he was ordained was that of St. Mark s.
Cheltenham. To this he was led by the wish to succeed an old
friend and former curate of his father's, the Rev. Arthur
Hoskins. The Vicar under whom he served was the Rev. P.
G. Griffiths, who continued ever afterwards his most intimate
friend. Mr. Griffiths writes as follows respecting his consistent
life and work at Cheltenham :
" He was always regarded, by his first and only Vicar, as a
willing and earnest fellow-worker, a genial companion, a true,
brave, and constant friend. Mr. Linton came to Cheltenham
at a time when severe domestic sorrow had befallen his \ icar;
and Vicar and Curate were thrown into the closest intimacy.
The Christian kindliness of heart of Mr. Linton was thus drawn
out in all its warmth and tenderness, and a sincere friendship-
ripened and deepened which lasted for life.
In the services of the Church he was a devout and reverent
reader, and a careful and painstaking preacher, but his leading
characteristics were Christian sympathy, untiring activity, and
gentleness and humbleness of spirit. In his lodgings he
regularly gathered the household for family worship, and took
great pains in his daily exposition of Holy Scripture. He
was unwearied in his visitation of the sick and poor, and was
greatly beloved throughout the length and breadth of the Parish.
When he left us, in 1870, the feeling of fond esteem and
affection with which he was regarded, showed itself in the
handsome testimonials presented to him, so that, as he expressed
it, the people 'loaded him with benefits.' "
Mr. Griffiths adds a characteristic anecdote, which must not
be omitted :
" Let me add one little incident in his life here, which came
under my personal observation. Scarlet fever was in the


Parish, and he went into a house whei*e there were two deaths
arising from this cause. On finding the mother worn out with
anxious watching day and night, and the tea things on the
table—not washed up and put by, because her strength was
gone, he tucked up his sleeves, and set to work to put things
straight, telling the wearied mother to lie down to rest. One
of the neighbours came in and found her clergyman thus
employed."
Of this period of his life Mr. Hoskins writes as follows:
" During his residence in Cheltenham he was most kind, and
■often most helpful to me. In those days, and afterwards, our
chief companionship was in walking expeditions. Whether on
the Gloucester hills or the mountains of Switzerland, he was
always the same genial companion and sagacious guide. In our
journeys on the continent, he was the interpreter who gained
information ; and by his bland manner smoothed over many an
asperity and relieved us of many a difficulty. The memory of
the days and scenes in which I enjoyed his company and con-
versation will always be among the most pleasing of the mental
records of the past."
After three years experience in the ministry, as Curate at
Cheltenham, it was felt that a more responsible post should be
found for Mr. Linton, and in the year 1870 came the offer of
the Incumbency of Holy Trinity, Oxford. This was a Parish in
the poorest portion of the University city, with a comparatively
new church, and almost unprovided with schools, or with any,
even the most meagre, parochial machinery. It needed a strong
and vigorous clergyman, and this it found in its new Incumbent.
Within a very few years, by diligent effort, he had provided it
with a large block of buildings, containing three most excellent
schools —for boys and girls and infants, had set on foot clubs
for the sick and poor, had instituted efficient and thorough
visitation of the people from house to house, and, with the
assistance of two curates, had provided all that was needful in
a thoroughly organised and well-worked parish.
In the matter of elementary education, his work had to be
done at a time when great changes were being effected in
England. He succeeded to the Incumbency in the same year in
which Mr. Forster's famous Education Act was passed, and he
speedily made himself familiar with all its details. The new
Schools, which he erected and superintended, occupied a large
amount of his time and attention, and the interests of the
children were very near his heart. This especially showed
itself at a time when scarlet fever was rife in the parish, which
it took all his energy and determination to subdue. He was
exceedingly beloved by the children, and that illness should
decimate the ranks of his scholars was a sore trouble to him.
As an instance of his attachment to them it may be mentioned


that on one occasion he took the whole school out for a ramble
in the meadows by the river Cherwell.
The following testimony having reference to this portion
of Mr. Linton's work, was borne to him by the Regius Professor
of Divinity, Dr. Ince, some years afterwards, on the occasion of
his being presented with a Doctor of Divinity's degree :
" After three years spent elsewhere, on his return to Oxford,
within the limits of a very poor parish, he preached the word
of the Gospel, and tried to raise the sick and the wretched.
Nor did he refuse other work. By his diligence, prudence, and
ability, he so commended himself to public estimation that he
was unanimously elected to be one of the School Board of this
city, in carrying out the duties of which office he gained the
admiration and regard of all his colleagues, even of those who
held opposite opinions to his own."
From the Parish report for Jun , 1877, the following extract
is taken :
• " The chief feeling in our minds is sorrow for the loss of the
Rev. S. Linton. Now that he has left us we are better able to
realize his varied interest in our welfare, his energy, his
liberality, his power of organization, his devotion to duty
however disagreeable, and above all his faithfulness to that
Lord who called him to His service. (It will be no easy task
for the Bishop of Oxford to find a worthy successor to Mr.
Linton. Most men of experience look naturally forward to a
' better' living than Holy Trinity, and jet a man of experience
is surely needed for the somewhat trjing work of the Parish)."
CHAPTER 111.
MARRIAGE, AND LIFE IN NORFOLK.
1877—1884.
" And there are souls that seeui to dwell
Above this earth —so rich a spell
Floats round their steps, where'er they move,
From hopes fulfill'd and mutual love."
TjtOß seven years, without a house, on a stipend of £lOO
•fT a year, which went to his curate, Sydney Linton lived in
his father's home, a mile and a-half away, and worked
faithfully, goingto and fro night and morning to his parish.


The offer came to him most unexpectedly of a large and
important parish in the suburbs of Norwich, numbering some
6000 people.
He went to see the Bishop, the Parish and the Vicar. The
district had been newly divided, the church, schools and
parochial rooms lately built, and it needed vigorous work to
keep all in working order. The church and parish room stood
in the pleasant garden of the vicarage. The house was the
first home that Sydney Linton could make.
He used often to say afterwards, in his quiet, humorous wav,
that he decided to accept the living—to be married—and who
his future wife should be —at the station before reaching Oxford
on his return journey.
This was the daughter of his father's life-long friend from
College days —the Rev. Dr. Heurtley, late Margaret Professor
of Divinity, Oxford.
The engagement was a short one—the new parish needed
him —and on Commemoration Day, June 13, 1877, he was
married by the late Dean of Canterbury, Dr. Payne Smith,
in Christ Church Cathedral, to Jane Isabella Heurtley, the
enthusiasm of the parishioners making it a sort of public
wedding. The honeymoon was spent in the stimulating climate
of the Engadine. Without parochial ties or cares, by the banks of
the Inn he drank in its life-giving air and renewed his strength
and energies for future work. He was so wearied that he
would fall asleep if he sat still for a moment—a faculty peculiar
to his family, and to himself all through life Given five
minutes he would fall asleep at once and wake a new man.
Often, in busy, anxious times afterwards, he would write till
midnight, and fall asleep the moment his head touched the
pillow, which singularly helped his calm mind, and fitted him
for work on the morrow.
" Go, sleep like closing Mowers at night,
And Heav'n thy morn shall bless."
Early in August he was in the full swing of his new work.
"How long would you like to stay here r" his wife asked,
as they drove in to their first home. " Seven years," he said,
smiling, and, strange to say, it was exactly that space of time
before he was called to the episcopate.
Here began an organised system of parochial house-to-house
visitation with curate, lay agent, and district visitors. He
believed that no work told so much in a parish as getting to
know the wants and characters of the people to whom you
preach. Each week a careful survey of the work was made and
fresh work allotted. Order and method were Sydney Linton's
strong points, and it was wonderful how much was accom-
plished. What he did himself, he expected in others. His


" biographies," as his wife used laughingly to call the notes he
made of his daily visitation, had to be written out carefully
before he went to rest. These were statistics of the inmates of
the house visited, name of occupant, occupation of the father,
number in family, health, names of children, age, notes as to
baptism, confirmation, Ac. These, all labelled according to
streets, were filed for future reference. Each week the cuiat(
met in his study for Greek Testament reading and prayer.
The reminiscences given by Mr. Holford, Headmaster of the
St. Philip's Heigham Boys' School, in an August number of a
iournal, will best convey what the effect of this disciplined,
regular life was on others. In his domestic life, the man
ripened into the affectionate and considerate husband and
counsellor, and, as children were born, the tender and devoted
father. One little noisy voice after another broke the quiet ot
the home; each was baptised by its father in the presence of
the large Sunday School, the event being used as a means of
inducing others to bring their children to Baptism.
The tower of the church was finished. Ihe Pelham memorial
room was built in memory of a son of the Bishop of Norwich,
who, whilst acting as curate, met his death in the mountain
district of Switzerland. . i ,
The Church of England Temperance Society was as yet
unorganised in the diocese of Norfolk, and Sydney Linton
volunteered to act as honorary organising secretary till a paid
secretary could be obtained.
For this purpose he travelled over much of Norfolk and
Suffolk, and this largely added to his correspondence and
business. He was always a punctual anil good letter-writer.
Himself for years a total abstainer, for the sake of one poor
man in his Oxford parish he continued to be so till his death,
for he used to say 44 It is better to say, 4 Do as I do than Do
as I say,' " and his influence and example were great. His
whole heart was in sympathy with his people, and his work to
help the drunkard to reform, to cheer such an one in the
depression which follows a drinking bout, was a special gif
with him: often he has been sent for at night to cornfoi
the dark hours of such a man, who was struggling against the
craving for drink. The infectious hospital was in his parish,
and he was a fearless visitor, as in Oxford during an epidemic
of small-pox.


CHAPTER IV.
" Thou who didst call Thy saints of old
Thy chosen flock to teach,
Who mad'st the fearful-hearted bold,
And quick the slow of speech.
Still Thou dost ask whom Thou shalt send,
And who will go for Thee,
To feed Thy lambs, Thy sheep to tend ;
' Lord, here am I; send me.' "
fHIS quiet, unostentatious parish work was suddenly broken
in upon by a letter from the then Bishop of London (Dr.
Jackson), November 17, 1883. It was the only letter by
the afternoon post, and he threw it across to his wife without
comment. "You will have to wear gaiters," was hers. It
was the offer of a pioneer bishopric, in a district taken out of
the Dioceses of Goulburn and Bathurst, and endowed by the
Hon. John Campbell, of Sydney. It was to an unknown
country that their thoughts now were turned, and there were
four little ones in the nursery above. Confirmation classes
were going on, and Mr. Linton was anxious that nothing should
divert the minds of the candidates, so he wrote to the Bishop,
asking for a month's delay in giving an answer.
During those weeks both husband and wife went to and fro
amongst the people, and no word was ever spoken on the
subject. There was one house, however, that received constant
visits, for there the mother had a son working on a station
near Bathurst, N.S.W., and these letters were often read with
much interest. Strange to say, that very son the Bishop met
in his travels more than once, and he spent some hours at
Bishop's Lodge, in passing through Hay, and has since married
and died in Melbourne. The confirmation over, Mr. Linton went
up to London, saw the Bishop, his own father, and his father-
in-law. " I little thought," said his father, now an old man,
" that when I advised another to refuse, on the ground of
health, I was preparing the way for my own son, to whom I
can't say, ' Don't go.' "
As he was returning from these interviews to Norwich by an
evening train, he bought a London Times. Was it coincidence
or the guiding Hand o'f God ? that paper contained a
leading article of the future greatness of Australia, and the
importance of the work of those who had to do with the
moulding of its people. The three hours in the train were
again spent in an all-important decision, and when he arrived
his mind was made up, and only needed his wife's consent to
clinch the matter. This was in December, 1883, and on
January 1, 1884, Bishop Barry was consecrated Primate of


Australia and Bishop of Sydney, in Westminster Abbey, and it
seemed fitting that he should be present.
After the midnight service he and his wife caught the
first London train and reached the Abbey in time for him
to act as Chaplain to the Bishop-elect. Afterwards he was
the guest of his old house master, the Dean of Westminster
(Dr. Bradley.) The Archbishop of Canterbury sat opposite to
him, under whose headmastership Linton had been during a
portion of his Rugby school days. " I remember you," said
the Archbishop, but you hadn't that beard."
His own consecration was fixed for May 1, 1884, in St.
Paul's Cathedral, the first Bishop of Southwell being conse-
crated at the same time.
The Archbishop of Canterbury officiated, and the Cathedral
was thronged. Five Bishops took part in the laying on of
hands —the Bishops of London, Ely, Lichfield, Lincoln, Norwich,
Oxford, St. Alban's, Algoma, and the Bishop-suffragan of
Nottingham. The Cathedral clergy present were the Dean,
the Archbishop of Middlesex, Canon Scott Holland, Dr. Wace,
Prebendary Tucker, and others. Amongst the eminent laymen
present were the Lord Chancellor of England (Lord Selborne)
and the Mayors of Nottingham and Derby. The respective
fathers-in-law of the two Bishops-elect (Lord Selborne and the
Rev. Dr. Heurtley, who sat opposite to each other, have since
passed away within the same week. The Communion service was
chorally rendered to music by Schubert, the anthems exquisitely
sung by Sir John Stainer's fine choir while the Bishops-
designate were vesting being Mendelssohn's " How lovely
are the Messengers," and Stainer's " How beautiful upon the
Mountains." After the sermon the Bishops-elect were pre-
sented to the Archbishops, that duty being performed for Dr.
Linton by the Bishops of Oxford and Norwich.
" The most striking part of the service," says a spectator,
" apart from the reverence and the dignity of the ceremonial,
was the silence of the vast building, with sometimes only a
single voice to break the stillness, and beyond, the roar of
mighty London—like the roar of a vast ocean; the traffic and
business going on without, and within this consecration service
in the sanctuary set apart for the worship of God in the centre
of the hum and the rush of men —the opening hymn, ' The
Church's one Foundation,' sung as the procession moved up
from the great west door, was a sound to be remembered —the
body of voices swelling louder and louder ; at first, the faint,
distant notes, and at length of volume of sound as it reached
the choir." When the offertory was counted afterwards, a
packet containing ten sovereigns, addressed to the Bishop of
Riverina, was found, from some artisans in a former parish,
who wished to acknowledge now in a time of prosperity, the


help given in a time of adversity. This was a nice sum in
starting the fund which Sydney Linton set himself to raise for
his diocese before leaving his native country.
On May 1 he resigned his parish, though he returned to
work in it till the end of the month. He took a house in
Oxford, where his wife and children remained till their
departure. From thence he travelled all over England, raising
funds, and interesting all with whom he came in contact in his
future work. From this dates an Association for prayer and
help, which he started, and which has singularly helped to
uphold his hands in the difficult work that was before him.
By a half-yearly letter written from Australia he kept in
touch with these fellow-helpers till his death on May 15, 1894.
During those months in Oxford another son was born—
Philip, called after his old parish, and because he was bound
for Port Philip when he arrived in the world. This
ehild was christened by his grandfather in the Cathedral
where his parents were married, and many will recall the
faltering voice of the then aged Canon as he pronounced the
solemn words over the unconscious infant, whose future was to
be so eventful.
On January 15, 1885, the last farewells were said at Graves-
end—a fitting name for such leave-fakings —and, on board the
P. & 0. Parramatta , the Bishop left his native shores, never to
return again.
He took with him two helpers - one already ordained and
one who had acted as lay helper in the Diocese of Victoria.
Each day he gathered those of the passengers who liked for
short morning prayers, and each Sunday had morning and
evening service. The Holy Communion was celebrated when-
ever weather did not absolutely prevent, "all which," writes
the Bishop, " could not fail to elevate our life and lessen evil,
as well as add to the enjoyment of each day."
CHAPTER V.
FIRST DAYS IN AUSTRALIA.—IBBS.
" In lands where bright blossoms are scentless,
And songless bright birds;
Where, with fire and fierce drought on her tresses,
Insatiable summer oppresses
Sere woodlands and sad wildernesses
And faint flocks and herds."
SN Sunday, March 1, the Parramatta arrived at Glenelg.
The Bishop of Adelaide (Dr Kennion) was the first to
welcome Bishop Linton to Australian shores. Strangely
enough, Bishop Kennion was also the last who was able to


show hospitality to Bishop Linton. It was at Bishop s-couit,
Adelaide, that he stayed for a few hours on his last sad journey
from Broken Hill to Melbourne. Throughout his episcopate
he found in Bishop Kennion a genial and faithful friend.
Melbourne was reached on Tuesday, March 3, the Bishop
and Mrs. Moorhouse waiting on the pier to welcome the travel-
lers. The same evening there was a welcome service at Christ
Church, South Yarra The sermon was preached by Canon
Chalmers, now Bishop of Goulburn. The writer well remem-
bers the newly-arrived Bishop acknowledging, in few but
heart-spoken words, the warmth of the welcome which greeted
him. Leaving his place in the sanctuary, he stood at the
entrance to the choir and, with dignified presence, made his
brief address. "I thank God and take courage, said he,
" because of your hearty welcome."
He was warmly welcomed in Sydney and at Goulburn. At
the latter place Bishop and Mrs. Thomas kindly entertained
Mrs. Linton and the family for a month while the Bishop went
on to Hay. He was installed at Hay on the 18th March, 1885,
in the small building that did duty both for school and church.
It was intensely hot, and all the surroundings were typical of
the worst discomforts of a Riverina summer. The Primate
(Bishop Barry) and other visitors were made well acquainted
with the difficulties under which the new Bishop began his
labours. After the installation at Hay, the Bishop, accom-
panied by the Primate, journeyed to Deniliquin, eighty miles
off, where there was again a hearty welcome. Distant journeys
were then made to Balranald and Went worth, to place there
the clergy who had accompanied the Bishop from England.
In April Mrs. Linton and the children came to Hay, and a
house on the outskirts of the town served well as a temporary
home, being named Bishop's Lodge.
Hay had been chosen as the town for the Bishop's residence
because of its fairly central position, and because it was on the
whole the most accessible centre both from Sydney and Mel-
bourne. Hay is situated on the Murrumbidgee River, in the
centre of vast plains. No hills are visible for many miles
round Hay. The flat country is in the main treeless. There
is a good growth of native grasses, and wide tracts of the low
shrub known as salt-bush. In good seasons it is just the land
for the extensive sheep-runs which surround Hay. The pre-
vailing flatness is broken by belts of timber which mark the
course of the river, or of the occasional billabong —as the
creeks are called ; on very low sandhills there is a more varied
growth of trees and shrubs, and wherever there is a slight
depression in the plain the accumulating rain-water has occa-
sioned the growth of respectably-sized trees, which also give
variety to the plain lands. Amid such surroundings stands the


See-city of the Diocese of Riverina. It is a town of some 3000
inhabitants. It is well laid out, and its municipal government
has given it a name in New South Wales as a well-kept town.
The river water is made available by a well-managed water-
works' trust. A gas company has long ago cared for the good
lighting of the place. The central street, wide and well
planted with various trees for ornament and shade, is lined
with public buildings and shops of imposing appearance.
When Bishop Linton arrived he found the church much
behindhand in the matter of buildings. The temporary church
in which he was installed had been used for many years as
both church and school-house. It was so small that when
every available inch was used, it would only accommodate 120
persons. Another building was in course of erection, and
was completed in the same year of the Bishop's arrival, but
the first intention was to make it a permanent school-room and
Synod hall. However, it was afterwards so arranged and
improved that it still serves well the purposes of a church, and
will doubtless a\ail for some time as the pro-Cathedral.
Soon after the Bishop's arrival he took pains to organise a
Church Society for the Diocese. Some such Central fund has
been found essential in most of the dioceses of Australia, and
the Bishop lost no time in setting this on foot. On the 21st
April a meeting was held in S. Paul's Church, Hay. The
meeting was attended by a fair number of influential persons
in the town and district. The Bishop, in a brief address,
explained the purpose of the meeting. " The Church had its
business side as well as its spiritual side, and this had its
importance as well as the other. The latter was brought for-
ward rightly more prominently and constantly than the former,
but the business side must be attended to if the spiritual were
to make due progress. It was with business they had chiefly
to do that night. A Church Society was a sort of central
reservoir for receiving and disbursing funds for the various
operations of the church, to which local associations would
serve as tributary streams. It would be a necessary piece of
machinery in Church matters, of which money would be the
fuel. Each Australian Diocese found a Church Society a
necessity, if sometimes it had a different name."
The lliverina Church Society was duly established with the
following chief objects :
(1) To aid in providing a Sustentation Fund for the clergy
of the diocese. (2) To obtain additional clergymen for unsup-
plied districts. (3) To aid in erecting, repairing, or enlarging
churches and parsonages. (4) To assist in training candidates
for Holy Orders. (5) To circulate the Holy Scriptures, the
Book of Common Prayer, and other religious and useful books, by
means of Diocesan Depot; to form lending libraries, &c. (6) To


establish or encourage missions to the aborigines or other
heathen races. (7) To give and to encourage religious instruc-
tion in elementary and other schools.
The rest of the Bishop's first year in Australia was mainly
occupied in journeying throughout the vast tracts of this
diocese. Most of this journeying was by coach or buggy.
The Bishop never spared himself in the least from the fatigues
of travel. His unwearying activity on these long journeys, no
doubt hastened, if it did not bring about, the internal compli-
cations from which he suffered, and which eventually caused
his death.
The Bishop's own words, from his first journal-letters, will
best describe these early journeys, and their character: —
"My journeys have been long and frequent, more so than
perhaps they need be in succeeding years. Since arriving in
the diocese, I have travelled not less than five thousand miles,
receiving constant kindness and hospitality, and being readily
forwarded from one squatter's station to another, or conveyed
about by the clergyman of the parish. This has given me the
opportunity of making pleasant acquaintances, and acquiring
colonial experience, as well as of holding services where they
rarely or never are held, and urging the practice of individual
and family religion. These bush services, coming seldom, are
valued and well attended. Rarely does anyone of any class
stay away because belonging to some other body of Christians.
In the long drives there are good opportunities for useful indi-
vidual intercourse, and many interesting incidents occur. I
have baptized many children in outlying parts. Sometimes I
have found communicants who for years have had no oppor-
tunity of partaking of the Sacrament. At one small town-
ship on the Lachlan, which is looked after by a Bathurst
clergyman on the border of the diocese, 1 met the son of some
Oxford friends with a young man in Government employ. We
had a service in the evening, which was attended by the neigh-
borhood, and finding that he had had no opportunity sii ce
landing in the colony of partaking of the Lord's Supper,
though as often as he could he rode 25 miles to church, I
offered to give it next morning before we made our early start
in different directions ; this was gladly accepted, and five of
us partook at seven o'clock next morning. He is now forty
miles from church, and lately wrote and told me with how
much joy he looked back to that occasion.
Another pleasant incident was in the far north-west of the
Colony beyond my diocese. We were the guests of some grand
pioneers, an excellent couple with a large family. From an
impediment in his speech, the husband cannot vocally take
his own position as priest in the family; his wife, therefore,
has a Sunday service for the family, dependents, and any


neighbours who like to come, as many do. We found a con-
gregation of 53 on the Saturday evening, and four children to
be baptized (one a black who was brought up in the family).
Next morning, Whitsunday, we had the Communion Office
with address for all, and for the celebration which followed
twelve remained. This was over a hundred miles north of
Silverton and Wilcannia, and barely once in the year had they
a visit from a clergyman. The same lady referred to above is
doctor for the neighbourhood and works many cures by her
combined common sense, courage, and use of simple remedies.
How great a blessing she is in that far off region is beyond
words to express."
One other object of the Bishop's first cares was the oversight
of the remnants of the aboriginal races in his diocese. There
was a Mission Station named Warangesda, subsidised by the
Government and worked under the auspices of the Church of
England. To this station the Bishop paid two visits during
his first year. He writes, " I have been a second time to
Warangesda, and am thankful for the appointment of Mr. and
Mrs. Thwaites, who have been over a like institution in Victoria.
We had a well-attended service in the evening, and, as before,
Holy Communion for the staff and several of the blacks next
morning. I shall hope to hold a confirmation here not so very
long hence."
The Bishop also visited the Mission Station for Aborigines
at Maloga, on the Murray, near Moama, conducted by Mr.
Mathews, a Wesleyan. He writes with ready acknowlegment of
the good work done there, and in hearty sympathy with those
who labour at the Mission Station. His sense of the import-
ance of this direct missionary effort was evidenced by the
prayer for the aborigines which he included in the printed
paper of prayers for the Association. Thus the Bishop s first
year was a year of vigorous enterprise and untiring effort to
fulfil his holy office as overseer of so vast an area and so
scattered a population as distinguish the Diocese of Riverina.


CHAPTER VI
GRADUAL ORGANISATION.—IBB6-7
" Go up and watch the new-born rill
Just trickling from its mossy bed—
Streaking the heath-clad hill,
With a bright emerald thread.
Canst thou her bold career foretell,
What rocks she shall o'erleap or rend ;
How far in Ocean's swell
Her freshening billows send ? "
§N such a diocese as Riverina the growth of organisation was
, necessarily slow. The first Bishop showed his wisdom in
recognising this, and did not hasten on the erection of
machinery before there had been due preparation and a sufficient
knowledge of diocesan needs. He, therefore, continued his
journeys through another year before summoning a diocesan
synod. But in the autumn of this year he summoned a con-
ference of his clergy and took the first steps towards the
formation of a Synod. The time chosen for the conference was
the first anniversary of the Bishop's installation. Archdeacon
Julius, of Ballarat (now Bishop of Christchurch, N.Z.), had been
invited to attend and give addresses. " All passed off well and
profitably," writes the Bishop. " The addresses to the clergy
by Archdeacon Julius (well known in Norwich and North
London) were eminently suitable and most helpful to them in
their circumstances of solitude and deprivation of Christian
fellowship. His sermons to the people were excellent and
calculated to do great good. The church was crowded on each
occasion."
The first meeting took place on 23rd March. Ten out
of thirteen licensed clergymen in the diocese were present.
The Archdeacon of Ballarat had also been specially invited.
The Bishop's opening address on 23rd March dealt with the
formation of a Diocesan Synod—the election of Representatives
for the General Synod in October—a Special Service for use in
the Bush and Cemeteries.
Papers were also read during the Conference —on " Religious
Education," by Re?. R. H. Christie, of Narandera; on a
" Diocesan Book Depot," by Rev. A. D. Mitchell, of Hillston;
on "The Church Society," by Archdeacon Pownall, of Wagga;
and on " The Clergyman in a Riverina Parish," by Rev. S. B.
Holt, of Deniliquin.


The following motions were agreed to: —
1. " That the Bishop he requested to take such steps as are
necessary for the formation of a Diocesan Synod, to he held
next year, in the last week of April or the first week of May."
2. " That the Bishop be requested to draw up a Special Form
of Service for use in the hush."
3. That the Bishop be requested to draw up a Syllabus for
the furtherance of religious education in schools. That a
committee he formed for the purpose of starting a Book Depot
in Hay, and drawing up a Report, containing full particulars
as to Diocesan Book Depots, to he circulated in the diocese at
least a month before the meeting of the synod."
A public meeting, on behalf of the Riverina Church Society,
was a feature of the gatherings. At this the clergy and
visitors, with the Mayor of the town, and other public men,
were present. Encouraging statements of the progress of the
Society, and hopeful anticipations for the future, characterised
the meeting.
The Bishop's individual interest in his clergy was always
very great. An instance of this is shown in the following
extract from his journal-letter of this year :
" In February an exchange took place between the Rev. F.
Davis, of Corowa, and the Rev. W. Clarke Hose, a Melbourne
clergyman. Though my going involved a journey of over 300
miles each way in very hot weather. I determined to go in
person for the induction. Local circumstances, as well as
those of the colony, make it desirable that the influence and
position of the Clergy should be as much as possible upheld
and strengthened. I was glad, therefore, to use the oppor-
tunity, not only of showing my interest in the commencement
of a new ministry but also of speaking earnestly to the people
as to the relation of pastor and people, and how the interest
of the latter is be?t served on their part by right regard
for and sympathy with their clergyman. I preached from
1 Thess. v.' 12, 13."
Bishop Linton was fully alive to the difficulties which arose
in Church work from the circumstances of the country. The
following extract is interesting as showing this, and also
giving an accurate description of the main features of pastoral
life :
" Nearly all the Riverina is Crown land, and the tenure
leasehold; five years has been the length of tenure hitherto,
always renewable. On this any number of people might
select 640 acres each for farms, gradually purchasing it. In
the case of land not hitherto occupied, a squatter would take
up, say 100,000 acres He has to spend a large sum in dividing
it into paddocks of from five to twenty square miles with post
and wire fencing, in excavating large tanks (perhaps thirty


yards square and fifteen feet deep) to catch rain water, or in
sinking wells. Often there are disappointments—no water is
struck, or it is too brackish for use (the stock like the water
somewhat salt). A homestead, perhaps an out-station or two,
huts for the men, and other buildings have to be erected.
Then there is the stock to be got. The expenditure for these
things is most often got from the banks at 8 or 10 per cent,
interest. When a run has been thus improved the speculator
either sells it or works it so as to recoup himself his outlay and
leave him a profit; and the profits are great when wool is dear
and the seasons are good If, on the other hand, the seasons
are bad, little or no rain falls, and the feed is burnt up by the
sun, hot winds, or fire, and sheep perish ; or if the price of wool
falls, as recently, not only is the interest not paid, but the
money borrowed is increased. Now, for several years the
seasons have been very bad, and sheep have diminished in
New South Wales by millions. As an illustration of this,
there passed through Hay, not long ago, ewes, which
had been to the mountains 150 miles east of this for the
summer, so as to obtain grass. This being eaten up, and cold
coming on, they were moved back to their own pastures for
the lambing season. No rain fell; it was starvation to remain.
They picked up what they could on the roads —hundreds of
pounds were spent on fodder —all was done that could be done,
but between here and their destination, 100 miles north,
died; and of the remainder, it was feared, many would not
survive. In addition to such losses a Land Act has this
year come into force, by which half each run is resumed by the
Crown, to be broken up into smaller blocks or holdings of
10,000 acres, and the rent on what is left largely increased ;
and though the tenure is increased to fifteen years, all improve-
ments are to belong to Government. More than this, the law
compels the rabbits, which have become a pest, to be destroyed,
which is ostly. Thus, to have bad seasons, wool at low price,
stock diminished, a less area on which to work, higher rent,
extra cost for rabbits, no allowance for improvements, has had
the effect of a large number of hands being discharged, stopping
all expenditure on improvements. The towns, too, suffer,
owing to vastly diminished stores being required. The conse-
quence of which is that both in town and country the contribu-
tions to Church purposes are considerably less, and stipends of
Clergy, raised by the parishes, may need to be supplemented by
diocesan monies."
In the same letter reference is made to one of the minor
difficulties of Riverina life—the dust-storms which mark a dry
season: —
" On Good Friday, both morning and evening, the congrega-
tions were fair ; probably, they would have been larger but for


a dust-storm of the day before, which was far the worst I have
ever seen. For about seven hours we were enveloped in dust,
so that the sun was not visible, and at 4.30 p.m. I needed to
light a candle in order to write. Even with the windows and
doors shut, the rooms were filled with dust, which found its
way, like riven snow, through each crack and cranny. The
toil of cleaning a house after such a storm is great; first the
sand must be got out almost by the shovelful, then a more
careful cleaning must be followed by a third. This occupied
people on Good Friday before any comfort or cleanliness could
be enjoyed indoors. As great heat prevails during these dust-
storms, one's own person, too, needs much soap and water.
Dust-storms are of frequent occurrence in Riverina, especially
in droughts, and give infinite trouble, usually taking place when
the weekly cleaning is just finished. There is this consolation
about them, that they are usually the climax of a period of
extreme heat, and about sunset the wind suddenly veers round
to the cold quarter, and life is again tolerable."
The Bishop's thorough devotion to his work and anxious
desire to turn all the circumstances of his life to the glory of
God and the good of His Church, were strikingly exemplified
on the occasion of the baptism of his youngest child, which
took place in this year, as he thus records:—
" Our little Australian daughter,- born on 14th May, was
admitted into the church in Holy Baptism on the Sunday after
Ascension Day, and named Muriel. I had asked to have a
children's service on the occasion, in order to make the matter
public. I did this for more than one reason. Some of the
people are backward to bring their children to be baptised at
all; others like, if possible, to have the baptism privately in
their own homes, as if ashamed of the Sacrament It was a
gratification to us that only a week beforehand the Font arrived,
and our child and that of one of the church-wardens were the
first children baptised in it. A large congregation, both of
children and adults, were present, when 1 catechised the former
on the subject of baptism."
A tour in the Hillston parish, to the north of Hay, was
undertaken soon after this. The tour lasted 17 days. Holy
Communion was celebrated in five places, four confirmations
(about fifty miles apart) were held, and twenty services.
Then came a visit to Deniliquin and Corowa. Of the first
stage of the journey, the Bishop writes-
" I went there by coach on a very wet night; the sound of
plunging and splashing through mud and water was almost as
if one was upon the sea. We were six large men inside, and,
though they said nothing, it was impossible for their faces to
disguise the satisfaction they felt when I told them they would
have my room instead of my company onward."


At Corowa the Bishop spent 12 days, holding three con-
firmations at different places in the widely scattered parish.
It is here that the first mention occurs of illness. "An other-
wise pleasant visit was a little interrupted with by an attack
of lumbago, brought on, no doubt, by the damp from daily
rains. . . Some effects of this attack I have felt more or
less, aggravated, no doubt, by the almost incessant travelling
since. It is now very slight indeed, and I hope will soon be a
thing of the past." Some of the Bishop's friends think that
these attacks of lumbago, henceforth not of infrequent occur-
rence after much travelling, were premonitions of the trouble
which developed fatally some years later. But, by the mercy
of God's providence, no fears for the future hindered in the
least degree the Bishop's unwavering devotion to the work.
CHAPTER VII.
THE OUTPOSTS OF THE DIOCESE.
1886-7.
" These are the tones to brace and cheer
The lonely watcher of the fold,
When nights are dark, and foeinen near,
When visions fade and hearts grow cold.
How timely then a comrade's song
Comes floating o'er the mountain air !
And bids thee yet be bold and strong—
Fancy may die, but Faith is there."
AS was mentioned at the beginning of the last chapter, the
Bishop's plan of organisation led him to make careful
and intimate acquaintance with the whole diocese before
a synod was constituted or measures of legislation attempted.
He. therefore, undertook a very long journey after his return
from Corowa in August, 1886, and made a pastoral visitation
of the most dis'ant parts of the diocese. A brief notice of this
journey will afford opportunity to describe some of these out-
posts —so far distant as many of them were from the head-
quarters at Hay.
On Thursday, 26th August, the Bishop started northward,
driving 56 miles that day to the township of Booligal. "There
had been much rain," he writes, " and the tracks (no road
made all the way) were heavy—black clay most of the way;
moreover, they were cut up by teams taking stores to the
stations for shearing time, and also to the townships." Bv the


following Sunday the Bishop reached Ivanhoe—some 100 miles
north from Hay—having travelled from Booligal by coach.
" Owing to the rain," he writes, " the roads for the first ten
miles out of Booligal were frightful." The description of the
Sunday spent at Ivanhoe shows the Bishop's delight in the
Australian spring-time. "Ivanhoe, August 29th, Sunday.—
The morning service is just over. Three confirmed. One was
sick and could not come. 1 here was a fair congregation at ten
at Holy Communion; the day was lovely. After breakfast I
went out to meditate in a paddock; the wild flowers were
beautiful, the birds singing, the cows placidly grazing in the
now abundant herbage; six gelahs (the pink and grey parrot)
were on the ground, dividing their attention between me and
their 'tucker' (bush parlance for food). . . Ivanhoe is
rather a nice place, on sand, with scrub-country around, amid
which there are many flowering shrubs. There are there in
abundance the yellow everlasting ; they are identical except in
colour with the lovely rose-coloured one, ' Rhodanthe maculata.'
After breakfast I sat under a tree among wild flowers, thinking
out my sermon and addresses, and much enjoyed the quiet and
the sense of God's wisdom, power and love."
From Ivanhoe, two days' coaching to the north-west brought
the Bishop to Wilcannia. He speaks of "really enjoying" the
journey, and notes both the lovely aspect of the country by day
in its spring verdure and also the glorious appearance of the
stars by night. He often used to speak to the writer of
the help to be gained in Riverina from the object-lessons of
Nature. Especially was this the case in a land where many
conditions of life answered exactly to those which are made
the subject of illustration in the Bible narrative.
On the way from Ivanhoe, one of the stopping places was at
the Gypsum Palace, an hotel built out of blocks of gvpsum,
which abound thereabouts. Wilcannia, the next stage of the
tour, has become noted for the deposits of opal which have been
discovered in the neighbourhood. At this time Wilcannia was
in the Diocese of Bathurst, though it was afterwards included
in the boundaries of Riverina by mutual agreement between
the Synods of Riverina and Bathurst. Of his Sunday at
Wilcannia the Bishop writes, " September 6th, Wilcannia.
We had nice services yesterday; twelve confirmed, thirty-three
at the Holy Communion. The church was very prettily
decorated with bush-shrubs and flowers, and garden flowers.
1 n the afternoon a children's service, and flower service, with
baptism. I gave an address on Is. lviii. 2, 'Ye shall be like a
watered garden' We had special lessons and thanksgiving for
iain, and an anthem."
Two hundred miles had yet to be travelled to reach Silverton
and the journey was resumed on the Monday. Here is a char-


acteristic record: —" Next da}* we held service in one place for
a rabbiter and a boundary rider, and reached Mount Gipps at
5.30, doing sixty miles in the day." Such an incident shows
what a true and faithful shepherd was Bishop Linton —glad to
seek out the scattered members of the flock and ready to
minister to all.
Broken Hill and Silverton, the most distant places of this
journey, were important outposts of the extensive diocese.
The Bishop had visited them the year before —soon after his
arrival. He then travelled by a more direct cross country
route with a Government Ministerial party, the Hon. Joseph
Abbott and others. This had been a pleasant means of gaining
a first knowledge of the country. In a published report of the
journey allusion is frequently made to the Bishop's presence,
and many a little reference shows that he quickly won the
favour and regard of those with whom he travelled.
On this second visit he found that the short lapse of a year
had been a time of much change in the mining townships. Of
Broken Hill at this period the Bishop writes :
'' This has become a township of 1,200 people where twelve
months ago there were only a few prospectors. The houses are
poor and hastily run and the shops and hotels are meagre,
because at present there is no certain tenure of land ; the govern-
ment is so slow in surveying and putting up land tp auction.
The Church of England people have put up an iron church
and are very energetic. I have just been over the mine, —a very
rich one, —not into it: have looked down the several shafts and
examined ore from each, several specimens of which have been
given me. I saw also the smelting and refining operations,
and had a beautiful button of pure silver nearly an ounce in
weight given me. Silverton, sixteen miles from Broken Hill
was connected with the latter place by a tramway. It was at
first thought that Silverton would be a town of some importance
and for a while it showed many signs of prosperity. But it was
afterwards almost completely eclipsed by Broken Hill. At the
time of the Bishop's second visit, however, he saw the need of
immediate and vigorous improvement. He had along committee
meeting and incited them to organised effort both in regard to
the clergyman's stipend, and also in the matter of a Church
building. The clergyman at Silverton was the Rev. E. La Barte.
He has ever preserved the most grateful recollections of the
Bishop's exceeding kindness and ready help.
From Silverton, the Bishop, accompanied by Mr. La Barte,
turned south-east to Menindie, on the river Darling. The first
night was spent at Redan station. Of this name the Bishop
remarks —" All the blocks of land about there are called by
names connected with the Crimean war. " The incidents of the
brief stay at Menindie are thus narrated :


" The out-station where we had lunch was surrounded by the
desert pea, thousands of plants growing wild making a scarlet
carpet relieved by the glossy black eye. It grows generally on
stony hills of sandy soil.
"We had good congregations here yesterday. Several candi-
dates for confirmation could not get here owing to the floods ;
so that only three were presented. Afternoon service for child-
ren. I taught this morning in the State Schools.
" I visited many houses on Saturday, Sept. 22nd. On Monday
evening we had a grand thunderstorm ; ninety-one points of rain,
which was very refreshing after wind and dust. 1 sat on the
verandah and watched the lightning and its reflection in the
water, and that of the big eucalypti, and listened to the pleasant
music of the rain. "
At Menindie a new experience awaited the Bishop, a journey
by a river steamer. In this he travelled to the next parish,
Wentworth, a fair-sized town, situaled at the junction of the
Darling and the Murray rivers. His experiences are best des-
cribed in his own words :
" 1 had a cabin all to myself on the upper deck, small but
clean. Jam enjoying the life. There were fifty shearers, who
had just finished a shed, on board. They have made things
lively, being full of spirits. Some sang capital songs; two are
wags. Last night when we anchored for the night we had
service, —' Rock of Ages,' a few prayers, and an address on St.
Matthew (whose day it was). Some were on the steamer, some
in the barge, some leaning on a wood pile, some round a huge
fire, whose weird light lit up the scene. All were very attentive
and quiet.
"This morning we passed the place where the grog steamer
sank—the 'Excelsior!' Only her funnels above water; but
a steamer and barge are engaged in lifting her.
" Last night we moored at Moorara Station, where I gave a
service to the scourers and station hands, a goodly number. The
wool shed was too far off. Last year I gave a service here, too.
Mrs. Wreford took me round her lovely garden by lantern
light, and gave me an excellent cup of cocoa. We left at 5 a.m.
" One of the disagreeables of a river steamer is that fair-sized
embers of wood are ever issuing from the funnel, and if they
light on your hat or coat they burn holes through. At night
the sight of the embers is like rain of gold. We tied up forty
miles from Wentworth, Thursday evening; and two men and
a woman came on board for evening service.
At Wentworth the usual careful visitation was made. One
noteworthy feature of the Bishop's work on these visits is here
recorded—" Wednesday, I taught in the State school." He
was most anxious to use the good opportunity afforded by the
N.S.W. State-school system of ready access for ministers of
religion to these schools.


The homeward course from Wentworth was along the Murray
River to Euston, thence to Balianald, where the Bishop was
met by his own buggy. In this he drove the remaining 120
miles in two days, reaching Hay on Saturday evening, after an
absence of some five weeks. The distance travelled in this
journey was 1265 miles. It was followed by a journey to
Sydney, to attend the General Synod, and afterwards by a
confirmation tour. 1492 miles of travelling was the record
before the Bishop again reached home. "My total mileage foi*
the year, he writes, " has been 6358." Thus he was well
prepared by intimate knowledge of the diocese for the work of
further organisation which was connected with the summoning
and directing the first synod in the following year.
CHAPTER VIII.
THE FIRST SYNOD. 1887
" Meanwhile with every son and saint of Thine
Along the glorious line,
Sitting by turns beneath Thy sacred feet,
We'll hold communion sweet.
Know them by look and voice, and thank them all.
For words of hope, and bright examples given,
To show through moonless skies that there is light in Heaven."
YtfHILE the headings of our chapters denote the character-
istic events of the succeeding years of Bishop Linton's
too brief episcopate, our aim is also to give in due
sequence some of the incidents whicli made his own journal-
letters so bright and readable. We continue, therefore, some
extracts which relate to the early part of the year succeeding
the long journeys which our last chapter recorded. He thus
writes of an unpleasant experience on a Sunday in Hay early
in 1887 :
" Early in the morning a thundershower fell, with three-quar-
ters of an inch of rain, which, with the heat of a February sun
(English August), caused not only a tropical heat, but also at sun-
set a regular plague of mosquitoes, which, attracted by the gas-
lights into the church and by human blood, quite thickened the
atmosphere at the evening service, and made desperate attacks
upon priest and people, not excepting the Bishop. The scene
was almost ludicrous during the sermon, each lady using her
fan, and each gentleman his handkerchief as a punkah to keep
those bloodsuckers at bay, and every now and again making a
dash down to his ancles to resist their assaults. There were
literally heaps of dead insects beneath each gas lamp. Person-


ally, I never preached a sermon under such difficulties, needing
to defend myself to keep up my own attention and that of some
dimly seen heads amid waving fans and handkerchiefs. Had
my sermon not been one in which I was deeply interested, I
must have dismissed the people after prayers.
In March a visit was paid to Urana, where a new church,
dedicated by the name of St. Philip's Church, was opened, free
of debt. In recording the event, the Bishop has much to say
in commendation of the energy of the Rev. R. Thwaites, who
had not long been ordained deacon, and had laboured with
much success in the parish of Urana. A visit to the Mission to
the Aborigines at Warangesda, which followed immediately, is
thus pleasantly described :
"I found the place en fete. It was St. Patrick's Day, which,
in this colony, the Irish, who are numerous, celebrate with foot
races, generally in the grounds of some public-house. Many
of the aborigines are good runners, and in order to meet any
temptation to them to go off to these sports outside, foot races
and swimming races were the order of the day. The result
was good —no one strayed ; and I arrived in the midst of the
fun. scene was very picturesque. The bank of the river
was the chosen spot, and beneath the huge red gum trees
swarthy forms, in correct racing attire, were visible, as well as
a grand tea, nearly ready on my arrival, of which I gladly
partook; I was then a spectator of some excellent i unniug
men, women and children severally competing. As the shades
crept on we retired to the ISlission Station and haci
evening prayer, and I gave an address from the second lesson,
which, as so frequently is the case, was the chapter of all
others'in the Bible most suitable to the occasion, viz., 1 Cor. ix.,
where St. Paul illustrates the Christian life by the Isthmian
games. The subject naturally gained me wrapt attention, and
as I spoke very slowly and distinctly I believe all took in what
I said. I slept at an hotel about three miles off; the house in
which I have previously stayed being unroofed on account of
improvements. I returned early next morning to give the
Holy Communion to the Mission Workers and a few devout
blacks, after which the superintendent drove me to the train,
twelve miles off. I believe a good work is going on, considering
the difficulties; though were the laws relating to aborigines
identical with those of Victoria, which restrain a little more
their wandering habits and forbid them to take their children
away from the Mission, still more satisfactory work would
be the outcome."
A visitation to the Parish of Coolaman was made under some
difficulties. Most of the journeying was done on horseback :
" We rode on the Tuesday afternoon sixteen miles, and after
a meal had service in a farmer's house for all who would come.


The room was crowded, and we talked afterwards both about
building a church and raising a stipend for the clergyman ; a
site was agreed upon, and steps have been taken to get the land.
" Next day we rode twenty-four miles, calling by the way on
many families in order to hold a service, after which we had six
miles more to go; and on the following day we started early,
and rode twenty miles into Wagga, where the Archdeacon lent
us a buggy and horse, by means of which we were able the
same day to go twenty miles south of the river, visiting a* we
went. We slept at a farmer's house, in which next morning a
good congregation assembled. It being Lady Day, I gave an
address upon the recorded life of the Virgin Mary, taking the
beginning of the Magnificat for text. The Lord's Supper was
administered, and some children were baptised."
Then followed visits to the large towns of Waggaand Albury,
in the Goulburn Diocese, with " quiet days" for the surrounding
clergy at each place and address. After Easter a visit was paid
to Melbourne, in company with Mrs. Linton, to welcome the
newly-arrived Bishop, and to be present at his installation.
After a journey to Ballarat, Bishop Linton returned to Hay in
time for the meeting of synod.
There is a touching allusion to the solemn anniversary of his
consecration, which fell on the Sunday before the synod met: —
"On May Ist, being also Sunday, and our midday Com-
munion, I asked the prayers of the communicants to be joined
with yours, and we used out loud the special prayers, and
realised —in some measure —the strong bond that exists between
us, though thousands of miles intervene, and how precious a
treasure we have in common in the Atonement and Risen Life of
our Master, at that time so forcibly brought before us, with
the well-founded hope and assurance that one day, if not upon
this earth or in mortal frame, we shall meet again to rejoice in
God for ever."
The Synod duly met on Tuesday, 3rd May, in the evening, at
the Masonic Hall, when the President delivered his address.
A celebration of the Holy Communion took place the following
morning, with sermon by Archdeacon Pownall, of Wagga, in
the Goulburn Diocese. The Synod consisted of all the clergy
of the diocese and lay representatives —one or more from each
parish and parochial district. The Bishop thus writes of the
Synod meeting and the events connected with it:—
" Owing to God's blessing and the valuable help of three
clergy and three laity well versed in such proceedings, much
good work was rapidly done, no time wasted in useless words,
and good temper invariably manifested. One important result
is the creation of a Diocesan Council, consisting of six clergy
and six laity, to which large powers are committed by the Synod
between its sessions, and which serves as a council of advice to


myself. Half are elected by the Synod out of its own number,
and half are nominated by the Bishop, who is not restricted to
the members of the Synod. The Bishop is President. This
council contains a body of useful men ; and judging by its action
in its three earliest meetings, is likely to advance and consoli-
date the work of the Church in the Diocese. Of other measures
passed, the most interesting were for the election of succeeding
Bishops, and for assuring the lives of the Clergy for pensions
and for their widows and orphans. At the Synod eleven out of
fifteen clergy were present (one from three hundred miles dis-
tant fell ill on the road), and thirteen out of twenty lay repre-
sentatives. We had our house very full of members of Synod,
nine guests being packed away somewhere and somehow ; and
our Australian servants shone in the midst of the extra work,
taking a delight in ministering to the large number of visitors."
The next two days were "Quiet Days" for Clergy, most of
whom were able to remain. This conclusion to the Synod, which
was almost wholly occupied with business matters, was felt to be
most suitable and beneficial. And I trust and believe that the
Clerg} 7 went away to their parishes strengthened and refreshed
for coping with difficulties and carrying on their holy work.
The following Sunday, taking advantage of the presence of
the Archdeacon and several Priests, in view, too, of the expense
and difficulty of getting priests together at other times, although
not an Ember Day, I ordained the Rev. M. Moran priest, who
had passed two fair examinations at six months' interval since
being admitted into the diaconate, and had worked his district
with great diligence."
The following are extracts from the Bishop's speech as Presi-
dent at the opening of the Synod :
" For clergy and lay representatives to meet together in
such a diocese as this, of such vast extent, with so scattered
a population, so few of the leisured class, and 110 city of such
superlative importance as to be a centre of attraction, consider-
able difficulties have to be met, and great toils to be endured by
many of our number. Yet for consolidating the work of the
Church of England in the Diocese, and patting important mat-
ters upon a safe and good footing, there cannot be too much
labour bestowed, and I am glad to see here the number present.
If it is business rather than spiritual improvement that calls us
together, let us not forget that great interests are at stake, and
that the better the machinery the better will be the results in the
high and holy aims of our own ancient Branch of the Holy Catholic
Church of our Lord Jesus Christ. If we have prayed for and de-
sired the guidance and control of God's Holy Spirit, let us believe
that our prayer and desire is granted, and go about our business
in fhe tone and temper which He blesses. Our roll of repre-
sentatives lacks some names held in honour in the districts in


which they live, which we would fain have seen inscribed on it;
names of men who support their Church nobly, and would have
been of great assistant e here, but who from distance, calls of
duty, or other causes, are unavoidably absent."
In the course of an allusion to the Queen's Jubilee the Bishop
made this interesting reference: —
" It has been during her reign that the fatal lethargy that had
crept over the English Church has been in a great measure
thrown off, and a vitality succeeded which has astonished her
enemies. We cannot fail to notice that it is in the same period
that the Colonial Episcopate has been so largely increased, with
a corresponding increase of clergy, and happy results from their
labours. The Bishops in the colonies, then but 8, are now 75.
On August 12th of the present year, a century will have passed
since the first colonial bishop, Dr. Charles Inglis, was conse-
crated for Nova Scotia."
On the subject of greater visible unity among Christians, the
Bishops adds :
"Personally, I yield to none in my attachment to the Church
of England, and value exceedingly her lines, and believe that
she has been miraculously or providentially preserved for very
important service to her Lord, and that she will, from her
standing point, have a large share in promoting that re-union
for which she longs and prays ; but I dare not blind my eyes to
the fact that God's favour and blessing, if largely granted, are
not confined to her, but that the Catholic Chux-ch is wider than
any branch, and that souls are newborn, converted, sanctified,
under sacraments and ministries other than hers, even the most
unlikely —as human wisdom would suggest —and I rejoice, and
ever will i*ejoice, at each triumph of redeeming and sanctifying
love wherever manifested. If we believe in the worth and
usefulness of our branch of the Catholic Chui*ch let us prove it
by increasing its efficiency, by breadth of love, by unweai*ied
labour, and by disinterestedness of service. Thus best shall we
recommend the l'eligion we profess, and the machinery God has
put into our hands. Thus shall we have a happy share in pro-
moting the visible unity of the Church; we shall not indulge
much in empty talk about it; we shall not make unwise over-
tures to others, or foolish attempts which are sure to fail, but
pray for this end, which is dear to the heart of our Lord, and
find His favour, and have His blessing in endeavouring to keep
the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace."
Dealing with statistics, the following statement was made
" When I arrived at Hay for my installation in March, 1885,
there were but six clergy in the diocese, viz., at Corowa,
Deniliquin, Hay, Hillston, Narandei'a, and Warangesda, of
whom two have since resigned their posts, and one effected an
exchange with a Victorian clergyman. Since then clergy have


been located at Balranald, Coolaman, Moama, Silverton, Urana,
and Wentworth; two gentlemen from England, seeking health
in our salubrious climate, render valuable assistance according
to their powers at Deniliquin and Narandera. Two deacons
help in the work in the vast districts ministered to and from
Balranald and Corowa. Our staff of licensed clergy amounts
to fourteen."
The Bishop gives evidence that he had acquired a very prac-
tical knowledge of the difficulties which beset the clergy in
their work:—
"It is a work indeed to traverse these endless plains of
gloomy monotony, at one time in burning heat, at another in
the bewildering thickness of the blinding dust-storm, at an-
other in the withering cold of the winds, unbroken by any
shelter, with the necessity of arriving fresh for a service after
the journey. Yet is the heart cheered by the remembrance
that the messenger goes not merely of his own accord, though
of his free will, but authorised, sent, not to gain a livelihood—
if the Bible rule be that he that preaches the gospel shall live
by the gospel —but to bring peace and calm to the anxious, the
knowledge of pardon to the sinner, comfort to the sad, light to
those in darkness, the removing of burdens from the heavily
laden. This is our joy in the midst of our work, much of it
painful in itself. We may well believe that God will bless it,
and others will recognise its character, and feel that to uphold
their Church's work and aid its extension is to make a use of
money about which there will be no regrets, but deep satisfac-
tion, in the long ages of eternity."
The closing words of the Bishop's address make hopeful
allusion to the inauguration of the First Synod of the Diocese
of Riverina:—
"I am thankful to see our synod constituted. I have been
hitherto in the dangerous position—which I hope I have not
abused —of a despot. I shall now be more of a constitutional
ruler with a responsible government, elected advisers, and
more definite rules by which to overlook this diocese. It is a
great comfort to have about me in this first synod such veterans
in diocesan work, such loyal and useful members of our church,
as Messrs. Bedford; Donaldson, Godfrey, and Robertson; as well
as Archdeacon Pownall, Rev. S. B. Holt, and Rev. W. C. Hose
among the clergy. I am hopeful that in all w r e say we may
one and all seek God's glory, the good of His Church, the
welfare of all sorts and conditions of men, and that the whole
tone "of this synod may be such as pleases Him from the spirit
of love and moderation, the absence of party spirit, prejudice,
and ill feeling, and special care not to waste time in idle and
unnecessary words."


One very important measure passed by the synod was an
Ordinance for instituting a Clergy Assurance Fund, to which,
as we have just noted, the Bishop made reference. This
ordinance was prepared and introduced by Mr. L. S. Donaldson,
of Narandera, to whose business capacity and energy its adop-
tion is no doubt mainly due. Its main provision is the aiding
of clergy to insure their lives on the endowment principle, thus
making due provision for superannuation ; a Board, appointed
under the ordinance, providing for the payment of premiums
and holding all the policies of assurance. The scheme has so
far worked well, and is well worthy of attention, with a view
to the extension and more general adoption of the admirable
principle on which it is based.
The First Synod thus accomplished very important results
and set the organisation of the diocese upon a permanent foot-
ing. It was suitable that at the close of the session the Bishop
should receive the congratulations of the members upon the
success of the synod. It must have been an immense help and
relief to the Bishop to feel that his diocese was thus supplied
with such necessary machinery of order and government.
CHAPTER IX.
THE GROWTH OF THE CHURCH IN
AUSTRALIA.—IBB7-8.
"We must leam to see in the seed that same eternal
life which is in the perfect flower and fruit —to believe
that God will bring the one out of the other."
T]T VERY true churchman is cai'eful to jemember that the
Church is greater than his own parish or diocese. In this
mark of true churchmanship Bishop Linton led the way.
In the events of the next two or three years we have frequent
evidence of this, as his sympathies were called forth or his help
claimed in matters affecting the growth of the Church in
Australia. But while we notice this leading characteristic,
we will continue, as before, the sequence of the Bishop's inter-
esting journals. He gives an account of the shearing season
and his work at that time in the letter succeeding his report of
the first synod :
" Soon after posting my last letter I went with my own
buggy and horses on a round of visits to stations in the Hay
district. It was the shearing seaspn, and there was a busy and
interesting scene at each shed. Thousands of men come from
Sydney, Melbourne, and Adelaide, as well as farmers fiom


each colony, for shearing, for which they can clear about ten
shillings per day. The work is very hard, and manfully they
stick to it during working hours. The shed is usually a paral-
lelogram of large size. At one end the classing, sorting, and
pressing of the wool takes place. The remainder has pens on
either side, with an open space in the middle the whole length,
where the shearing takes place. The men stand to shear ;
they are paid one pound per hundred, finding themselves in
food and shears, and paying their own travelling expenses.
They are fined if they kill a slieep or seriously injure it, and
may be dismissed if they do not shear well. The work is
carried on somewhat roughly and hurriedly, which is not sur-
prising when the sheep on a station mu«terfrom thirty thousand
to two hundred thousand. Lads carry off the fleeces as soon as
shorn to the classer, and sweep up the bits. Another set of
men fill the bales and press them, and yet another set load up
the waggons which take the bales to the railway or steamboat.
A further set of men scour the dirty wool, in order that there
may be no waste in cost of carriage. As may be imagined, the
men are pretty well tired after a long day's work, bat few if
any ate too tired for a short service in the evening, coming as
it does but once in a way. This is get erally held in the wool-
room, and men sit on the bales, tier above tier. The light is
bad from the slush lamps (pots filled with mutton fat, a bit of
wool for wick), and books are out of the question. A couple of
well-known hymns are generally read verse by verse, and sung,
a selection of ptayers is used, with a short pointed address. A
young clergyman out from England, in hopes of regaining his
voice, was my companion on these journeys; being a good
violinist he was of immense use in accompanying the hymns,
and gave great pleasure in the houses where we stayed. I
spoke on more than one occasion on the place of tvork in God's
providence, as bringing health and happiness and good habits
of life as an antidote to evil: as being a distinction for man in
that he is made a fellow-worker with God in producing food
from the earth for a hungry world, and clothing from the sheep
for all climes : that, therefore, work is not to be worshipped, or
only carried on for money's sake; moreover, that a higher
labour is taught us, even for the meat that perishes not, which
the Son of God gives. Some of the men rarely have any
Christian instruction except on such occasions as these. Some
are in the habit of attending church when at home. One can
never tell in this life the good that may be done by a word in
season, and it is to me particularly gratifying to address such
an audience as is to be found at shearing time."
The work thus described may truthfully be taken as a
description of much similar pastoral labour in nearly every
Australian diocese. By such direct ministrations the Church


is extended, and the blessings of the gospel brought home to
those whose roving life has its special dangers. And the work
of a clergyman in the shearing season is not without its attrac-
tion and encouragement. So many incidents of the life furnish
ready illustration to the preacher. One is bound to meet with
eager and interested audiences, and not least is the benefit to
oneself from the training in ready and effective address, per-
sonal and direct exhortation, and that closer intercourse with
men by which the faithful priest cin best commend the Gospel
of Christ.
In September the Bishop visited Melbourne, not shrinking
from the unpleasant duty of seeking to get help for the Church
from property-owners in Riverina who resided in the city. He
laments this interruption to his more directly episcopal work
" This Melbourne journey, which seemed necessary, prevented
my eroing last year to Silverton, Went worth, and Balranald ;
for which I am sorry, as the Bishop's visitation seems necessary
in the present state of things for keeping up, reviving, and
infusing fresh interest in matters connected with religion.
The clergy, too, deprived as they are of clerical intercourse
from their isolation,depend much upon an annual episcopal visit.
Soon after this the Bishop journeyed to Sydney, and was
present at the meeting of the Provincial Synod :
" After about a week at home I left again, Mrs. Linton
accompanying me, for Sydney, where I had to attend the Pro-
vincial Synod, i.e., for the six dioceses in New South Wales.
This forms the intermediate synod between that of the diocese
and that of Australia in general. The most important matter
settled was a memorial of the centenary of Australia in 1888.
It was decided to attempt to raise in New South Wales a sum
of £*200,000 for church extension, spiritually and materially,
and an ingenious scheme was put forth by which this might be
done. We hope that it may have an educational force in the
matter of giving: that children and servants and labouring
men, commencing to give toward this scheme, may be trained
henceforward to give regularly. At present, before the scheme
has really been thoroughly put into effect, about £40,000 has been
given or promised. The fund will be an immense help toward
such dioceses as that of Riverina, where church work is in its
infancy, and assistance in pioneering is requisite. One of the
secular newspapers of the colony describes this memorial fund,
which is the idea of our Primate, as a ' splendid audacity.'
"We had the pleasure of being guests of the Primate at
Bishop's Court, which is splendidly situated on high ground,
looking down upon the sea and several lovely rocky bays."
Soon after his return the Bishop had an experience of what
is known in Australia as being "bushed." He was visiting in
the district near Coolaman, accompanied by the Rev. Mr. Moran.


Deceived by some burning stumps, which they mistook for
the lights of the house, they lost the track, "whereupon,"
writes the Bishop, " we had to camp out, and so pass the night.
This was my first experience of the kind. Though I could not
but feel that we deserved a bed, I rather enjoyed the novelty
of the thing. The horse was tethered to a fence, close by
which was plenty of grass. We piled up a huge fire of dead
timber which lay about, and, seated on the buggy cushions,
kept quite warm, and had some sleep, and were none the worse
afterwards. We reached the station to which we should have
gone, in time for breakfast, with capital appetites, and after
wards gathered the family together for prayer, hymn, and
exposition. We had been only a quarter of a mile from the
house when we made the unfortunate turn off to the burning
timber. It is very easy to miss the way in country such as
this, where fresh farms are constantly been taken up, old
tracks stopped by new fences, and other tracks made."
A journey soon after this to Urana and Jerilderie is the
occasion of the following graphic description of the grasshopper
plague:
" Whilst in that district I saw the ravages which grass-
hoppers and locusts make when they come in numbers. Gardens
which had been brilliant with flowers and green leaves, kitchen
gardens which were full of vegetables, orchards with rich
abundance of fruit, vineyards luxuriant in growth and promise,
were denuded of everything green in a few days, and left as
though it were drought-time. These creatures come in myriads,
first hopping, and eventually winged. They eat up everything
that comes in their way, with few exceptions. The mulberry
they do not touch. Larkspur they eat, but are poisoned by it.
They even invade the house, thronging the verandah and walls,
and pouring in if a door or window is opened. In several
houses in which I stayed, though all pains were taken to
exclude them, some gained entrance, and attempted to eat
curtains and anything starched. They crept in between the
sheets and blankets of the beds ; and one crunched them under
one's feet as one walked about. They have a way, too, of
creeping into wells and tanks, and polluting the water by their
dead bodies ; and perhaps such a tank may be that on which a
whole family depends for drinking until the next rain. Great
trouble is taken to get a garden, and to keep it alive with
water. Vegetables and fruit are essential in a hot climate.
Flowers and green leaves are a great relief to the eye after the
dull monotony of the native trees and bare plains. Away from
towns (where the Chinese produce vegetables) there are no
fruits, or vegetables, or flowers to be got, except what are
grown on the premises. So that a plague of locusts is looked
upon as a very real disaster."


In January, 1888, the Bishop, with Mrs. Linton and the
children, spent a few weeks at Manly, a very lovely place on
the coast, facing the Pacific Ocean, about ten miles from
Sydney. The new Bishop of Bathurst (Dr. Camidge) was
enthroned during this month, and Bishop Linton journeyed
northward to be present at the ceremony. Later in the month
he took pait in the proceedings which marked the celebration
of the first centenary of the colony: —
'"We have also found ourselves in the midst of festivities in
celebration of the first centenary of the colony. On the 26th
of January, 1788, the band of soldiers and exiles arrived and
settled down in Sydney Harbour. A statue of the Queen, by
Boehm, was unveiled; a Centennial Park dedicated ; the corner
stone of new Parliament Houses laid ; the Governors of all the
Australasian colonies and many statesmen came; and a banquet,
at which eigrht hundred and fifty guests sat down, myself
among the number, was held. The religious celebration con-
sisted of simultaneous services on the 22nd, with special form
of prayer; a united service on the following Sunday afternoon
in the Exhibition building, at which seven thousand persons
were present, and an almost equal number failed to gain
entrance; and a gathering of all Sunday scholars on the
Saturday after. I had the honour of preaching in the Cathedral
on the evening of the 22nd.'"
The sermon here referred to was entitled "Looking Back —
Looking Forward." We give some extraots as illustrating the
Bishop's broad outlook upon the Australian life, and his care
for the growth of the whole Church. On some questions of
special importance his words have a present reference, which
heightens their value :
"We are at this time celebrating the completion of the first
century of this colony's existence, and of our own church in it.
And viewing the state of things now, as compared with a
hundred years ago —the great growth from small beginnings —
we are led to exclaim, ' Who hath despised the day of small
things ?' Viewing the 3,000,000 now peopling this continent
by the side of the mere handful that then weie here, we say,
'The little one hath become a thousand.' When we consider
the millions of sheep, cattle, and horses, the numbers of sheep
and cattle stations and farms ; the hundreds of miles of fencing,
which divides the whole of the interior in this colony up to the
boundary of the other colonies into paddocks, with wire fencing ;
the conservation of water in arid regions in dams, tanks, and
creeks, sufficient to water the stock for months together; the
mines that put forth untold wealth in one form or another; the
miles of railway lines and telegraph wires, the postal arrange-
ments, the villages, towns, cities, headed by this great metropolis,
with its enormous trade and commerce ; the progress is so


enormous that one's breath is almost taken away by the figures,
and the wealth that is represented by these things is almost
fabulous. That elementary education of a superior kind is
provided, not only in the cities and towns, but in small villages
and groups of selectors, and that these schools are officered by
competent teachers, and are carefully inspected and examined, is
a fact worthy of attention, and proving the interest shown in
the mental improvement of the people.
" At the same time, we must avoid the danger at the present
juncture of indulging in a spirit of self-laudation and self-
glorification, and too little regarding the great duies and
undertakings that are before us. There is a fear of our regard-
ing the matters 011 which there may well be congratulation, to
the exclusion of those wherein there is not only great room for
improvement, but also great and crying need for reform. A
fear lest there be an unwholesome contentment with past
attainments, and a lack of ambition to rise to the far higher
state to which we ought to hope to rise."
He then dwells upon the needs of the future if substantial
progress is to be insured. He gives counsel of enduring value
as to one great want of our new lands :
" It seems to me, and I imagine I am but echoing the feelings
of a large number of my fellow-colonists, that, in order to stem
the tide of evil —in order to promote real prosperity, and to
earn a good public name for our country —the great want is
fatriotism; a great, deep, burning, thoughtful love of country
so weighty, so all-prevailing, that it shall consume and put an
end to all mere self-interest or party spirit, as well as what is
worse —shall cause to cease the sacrifice of right to party ends,
the sacrifice of public interest to private ends, the sacrifice of
interests of country to those of the metropolis —shall recreate
public opinion, and make jobbery and wrong to be so looked
upon that they shall disqualify for public service, and be con-
sidered a disgrace to those who indulge in them."
He makes an interesting reference to the growth of the
Church :
" VY r heu we turn to our own Church, we see likewise marvel-
lous growth and expansion since the days when one chaplain
landed on these shores and found little encouragement in his
work. Not till 1836 did a bishop preside over the Church,
since which time the one has become thirteen, and the sc re of
clergy some seven hundred, with numberless churches, great
and small, and corresponding services. Ido not mention other
bodies —Roman and Protestant —not from failing to recognise
their existence, their increase or their work, but partly from
ignorance, and partly because time will fail me to speak of
more than the Church of England. People tell me in the back
country that the state of things has remarkably altered for the


better in the last ten or twenty years, owing, in large measure,
to the increased number of ladies, and to fresh arrivals from
the great centres of population, where religious opportunities
and religious influences are greater."
One of the great needs of the growing Church in Australia,
the need of a native-born ministry, is thus clearly pointed out
and urged:—
"It is a matter of distinct regret that in the past so few
native-born men have offered themselves for the ministry, and
that it is necessary to import men from Great Britain. What
is the reason of this scantiness of supply ? Why is it that so
few families of the wealthy ever so much as think of devoting
a son to the ministry of the Church of England ? Should Ibe
wrong in saying that if the desire were in the heart of a boy or
young man that desire would be nipped in the bud, and the
hope of its fulfilment absolutely forbidden ? How comes this
state of things to exist r Why do so few desire the priesthood
of the Church of England ? Why is there an unwillingness to
give sons to it t Can it be this—that from earliest childhood
the most that has been heard by boys of the family, touching
the minister of God. has been criticism of his life, his utter-
ances, his manner, much blame—perhaps not always deserved
—little appreciation expressed, and little or no recognition
shown, of his exhausting, multifarious duties, and little or no
sympathy felt in the difficulties, trials, and temptations which
beset him more than any man in any other honourable profes-
sion ? Is it the case that want of respect to the man and to
his office is taught in the home from earliest days? that he is
not esteemed very highly in love for his work's sake (if not for
his own sake) and will it be a matter for wonder that a rising
generation is not drawn to the ministry ? Is it that parents
care not to devote their sons to the ministry because they can
rise to no higher test of a profession than that 4 it does not pay ?'
It is certainly not creditable if the laity do not rightly provide
for their clergy ; and if any class of men should be free from
anxious thought as to the necessaries of life, it is those who
may not take up any business, but whose whole life is conse-
crated to God and to the good of men, and who are, therefore,
specially and rightly dependent on support by them. But is it
the case that unless a profession will lead to increase of riches,
it must be eschewed, and erased from the list of those which
shall be allowed for a son's choice?"
Some words from the conclusion of the sermon, on the
position of the Church of England, will fitly close the present
chapter and evidence the Bishop's noble outlook on the whole
Church :
" Did we read carefully, and make ourselves masters of our
English Church history, and study the genius of her Prayer


Book ; know how providentially her Lord has guided, and kept,
and moulded her through the 1500 years of her existence; has
given her, while holding to the Primitive and the Catholic, to
be willing for necessary reform and adaptation to each age;
to resist the efforts of Home to draw to slavery, and of Puritans
to throw off Catholicism; how capable of revival after a sad
period of death-like sleep; enlisting intellect, art, music, for
the service of God, thus elevating man to the holy, and lovely,
and delightful; how the Church of England is likely to be,
under God, an instrument for drawing together, not necessarily
into herself, but into unity with one another, the unfortunately
divided Christendom —surely, did we consider these facts, we
should be more earnest, vigorous, energetic, in building the
walls and strengthening the defences, and beautifying the sanc-
tuaries of our English Zion, and recommend her fold by the
reality of our faith, the devotion of our lives, and the sacrifice
of our powers."
THE CHIEF PASTOR.—IBBB-90
"Whose joy is, to the wandering sheep,
To tell of the Great Shepherd's love."
T T was during these three years that the writer had the privi-
"J-j lege of working under Bishop Linton as parish priest of
Hay and the surrounding district. Among the many un-
fading impressions which make the Bishop's memory ever
sacred, that which is expressed in the title of this chapter is,
perhaps, the most prominent. And to dwell upon it in recording-
some of the incidents of those years will be most in keeping with
the purposes of this memoir. The Bishop's relations with one
of his clergy are a type of his kindly dealings with all. I hope
that in writing, as I must needs do in this chapter, something
of myself, I shall be able to illustrate the beauty and lovable-
ness of the character of him whom all his clergy learnt to love
and revere as their father in God.
In February, 1888, the Bishop returned to Hay, and held an
ordination on St. Matthias' Day, ordaining two priests, the Bev.
H. Richards and the Rev. R. Thwaites, and admitting one to
the diaconate (Mr. Bradshaw). In the smaller Australian
dioceses it is not always possible to keep to the Ember seasons
for ordination. Now, as on other occasions, the Bishop had to
take the opportunity of the presence of a sufficient number of
pi'iests at the Diocesan Council. In March a long journey was
taken to Broken Hill. The Bishop's record of it shows the
roundabout route which was often necessary in order to reach
this distant part of his diocese :
" I left home March 20, and travelled via Melbourne and
Adelaide by train all the way. This route, though over 1300


miles, was quicker than that across country by buggy or coach,
which would only have been 400 or 500 miles. Time was an
object to me then on account of the approaching synod. I had
five hours in bed at Albury, four hours of business in Melbourne,
slept the second night, in a most comfortable sleeping berth in
the Adelaide express, was met by the Dean, and hospitably
entertained and lionised in Adelaide for six hours, and slept my
third night in the train, which took me to Broken Hill by about
10 a.m. on Friday. Fortunately, there were but few passengers,
and I was able to lie down and sleep all night in an ordinary
car (no sleeping cars on this line). I was met by Mr. Ashworth
and some laymen, and driven in style in a four-in-hand drag to
the hotel, where room had been secured for me."
He was astonished at the change in the place. Three years
before there had not been so much as a hut; two years earlier,
at his last visit, it was but a village; but "now," he writes,
there are long streets, large stone hotels, shops in abundance,
and dwellings by the thousand, poor and common many of
them, it is true, but scattered over an area of upwards of two
square miles." He spent some time in the place encouraging
the clergy and seeing what could be done for the spiritual needs
of the people. Palm Sunday was spent at Broken Hill. Good
Friday and Faster Day at Silverton. The clergyman here, the
Rev. G. La Barte, was then leaving, owing to ill-health. The
Bishop writes of this and of the festival spent at Silverton:—
" Our Easter Day was a very happy one. The congregations
were good, and the Holy Communion well attended. I preached
twice, and catechised children in the afternoon, before which
service the church was dedicatecf to God, in memory of His
first martyr (St. Stephen), whose b.ight example I pray many
may follow here This church is built in singularly good taste,
and is so constructed that, when feasible, a chancel may be
thrown out of the arch which already exists, and also, when
necessity arises, a transept can be added from an arch in the
north side. Moreover, the porch is so strongly built that a
turret is eventually to rise from it. The material used is the
local stone, faced with good red bricks. The ventilation is
admirable; and the whole church does both architect and
builder credit. This and the half of a stone parsonage are left
as material monuments of Mr. La Barte's incumbency. The
spiritual results of his ministry we canrot sum up, but I am
sure that the great day will not show a blank. The apprecia-
tion of him by his parishioners was marked by the presentation
of a purse of 100 sovereigns. He has taken a curacy near
Melbourne until his health is re-established; but his liking for
bush life will, I hope, one day lead him back to this diocese, to
be numbered once more upon my staff of clergy."
It was on the Bishop's return from this journey that he


visited the Church where I was serving as curate, St. Andrew's,
Brighton, and after the service on the morning of the First
Sunday after Easter, made himself known to me. He had
quietly taken a seat among the congregation during the service.
His kindly courtesy at once attracted me, and the result of a
pleasant interview the next day was m}' ready acceptance of the
appointmeut at Hay. At once I felt that the Bishop was
indeed a chief pastor. He was most considerate in allowing
the needful time before such an important move was made, and
as the date fixed drew near, how kindly he urged the taking
of a ref-t, and sent me Dr. Vaughan's helpful book for a time of
retreat, " Best awhile." Nothing could have been kinder than
the warm welcome which was given at Bishop's Lodge to my
sister and myself. At once we were made to feel at home in the
pleasant family life. Our intercourse with the parishioners
had the pleasant beginning of a garden party at Bishop's
Lodge the day after our arrival. This was but an earnest of
the ready help which the Bishop always gave me as the parish
priest. The Church being also the Pro-Cathedral, our relations
were defined by mutual agreement. I always had the feeling
that in all responsibilities and difficulties the Bishop was a
ready supporter and sympathiser, and nothing could have
been happier than our work during the two brief years of my
incumbency. Every week it was the Bishop's custom to invite
me to his study, where we conferred, first on parochial and then
on diocesan matters. Then followed prayer in common, and I
went away strengthened beyond measure, and rejoicing in the
privilege of such true sympathy, fatherly counsel, and un-
grudging aid. I quote some extracts from the Bishop's journal
letter of this year :
" During July and the first part of August, in the vacancy in
the incumbency, I had been carrying on the church work in
Hay, assisted by the Rev. J. W. Eisdell. On the 17th, the
Rev. W. Charles Pritchard, the new incumbent, arrived,
together with his sister, who lives with him and keeps house
for him. His induction, after the necessary preliminaries had
been gone through, took place in the evening in the Church, a
small congregation meeting to join in the special service. On
the following Sunday morning Mr. Pritchard read the Thirty-
nine Articles, interspersing suitable remarks and explanations,
which made them the more interesting and edifying ; declaring
at the close his hearty assent and consent to the contents of
them. In the evening he preached from 2 Cor. iii. 4, 5.
I personally introduced Mr. Pritchard to many of the leading
inhabitants of Hay, and took him round the greater part of the
district in my buggy holding services at almost each place. At
one small village, called Oxley, we were both busy in different
directions. After visiting each home in the afternoon, he held


service in tlie village, while I went in another direction to do
the same at the station wool-shed. Next morning he taught
in the public school, while I gave prayers at the station itself.
During the visit there were six infants baptised."
Such is a fair specimen of the Bishop's usual practice,
showing himself simply as a chief pastor —delighting in the
full exercise of his pastoral office, and gladly taking a share in
every department of clerical duty. By this means he not only
strengthened the hands of the clergy, but established personal
relations with the laity, so that they looked upon him with the
more affection and regard. Lately a former parishioner told
me how greatly touched he was by the Bishop's thoughtfulness.
He had long been wanting a Bible of larger type for failing
eyesight, and had mentioned this casually to friends. It
came to the Bishop's ears, and one day to the parishioner's
grateful surprise the Bishop called at his house with a Bible
from his own store of just the kind that was wanted. Another
gentleman, a squatter some 20 miles from Hay, wrote lately to
me of the Bishop's exceeding sympathy in time of trouble. He
enclosed a copy of the Bishop's letters to him after a bereave-
ment, and again after a severe accident; said that such words
of kindly sympathy and thoughtful remembrance convinced
him more than anything of the true nature of the Bishop's
character, so that no one holds his memory in more sacred
regard.
Instances of this kind might well be multiplied. But we
must pass on to the order of events as narrated in the journal
letters. The closing months of 1888 were spent in a long
journey to the west and north. At Balranald there had been
a visitation of typhoid fever. Here a week was spent, and as
usual there was much pastoral intercourse with clergy and
people. From Wentworth a visit was paid to Mildura on the
Victorian side of the river some distance further. Of this a
brief description is given : ,
" Lately, by agreement with the Government, Chaffey Bros.,
Canadian irrigationists, have taken possession of the district
and have formed a colony, which is most interesting and pro-
mises to be of great wealth and importance. They provide all
the machinery for pumping, and pipes for conveying water,
construct dykes, and supply water, and, at a price, if desired,
clear and level the land, and plant it with fruit trees. They
then sell the land in town allotments of half-an-acre, suburban
villa sites of two acres, suburban farms of twelve acres, and
more distant ones of forty acres. Fruit will be the chief pro
duce, and already millions of trees are planted. This will be
dried, canned, preserved, or sent ripe to the Melbourne market
when a railway is constructed, as will be the case before the
trees come to full fruit-beading. The Chaffeys have set apart


good sites for churches, and take an interest in religion, and
will have no public-house upon the settlement."
On the return journey from Wentworth, the Bishop had an-
other experience of ' camping out." Sufficient time had not
been allowed by an over-hospitable friend, and darkness) came
on before the Bishop and a companion reached their destina-
tion. He gives a cheerful description of the adventure :
" The night was not cold, but the wind blustering, and
variable in its direction. Having attended to the horses —a
bushman's first care —I cut down with my tomahawk some
bushes to make a shelter ; then piled up a huge fire, which
was fed with dead timber, of which there was plenty; then
made a bed of buggy cushions below, macintoshes above these,
with a famous rug of New Zealand wool to cover us, and a
chaff-bag for our pillow. My companion slept well, and I am
thankful to say was none the worse. I had some sleep, but
awoke witb each little noise. At daybreak I again fed the
horses, and as soon as possible we started, and after retracing
our tracks, soon came on the road to the ford. The owner of
the station showed us where to cross. It was like driving
down the high and steep embankment of a railway. I put the
brake on, but going down rather too much on the slant, on a
track used for coming up, the wheels on the upper side lifted,
and I nearly capsized the buggy. Thank God, it righted, or
things might have gone very seriously with us : the water in
the river came nearly up to the horses' backs. The tug up the
other bank was severe, even though I got out; but our faithful
servants pulled up well, and we then only had a mile to go,
and our joy at getting there and at finding breakfast almost
ready, made us put up cheerfully with any banter we had to
endure on the score of where we had passed the night."
During 1888 the episcopal residence was begun, but was
somewhat delayed by difficulties with the contractor. It was
not until September of the following year that it would be
occupied. It was designed and built under the Bishop's
personal supervision. The features of the building are that it
is constructed of iron—this being used for both the inner and
outer walls. The space between the two walls is filled with
sawdust. The wide verandah entirely surrounds the house.
The ceilings are of polished pine wood, and the interior walls
are relieved by wooden beading round the sheets of iron,
which gives the appearance of panels. The Bishop thus
writes of it: —
" The home surpasses all our utmost expectations for comfort,
convenience, and for beauty. The painting of the interior of
the iron walls is lovely, and is done in admirable taste. The
exterior is quite plain, but not ugly, having no ornamentation
beyond the Christian sign over the main entrance, and a mitre


carved in the wood-work. We can now speak of the house as
being admirable for a summer residence, and cool beyond any
other in the town, partly from its construction, partly from the
fact that air can at night be admitted into any room from the
quarter from which the air comes. The thermometer has never
exceeded 90 deg. within the house. There has been abundance
of opportunity for testing it -this summer, during which the
heat has been more continuous than during our previous expe-
rience. The registration in the enclosed cutting from a local
newspaper will illustrate this. The figures given are of the
heat in the shade ; that in the sun would be often 50 deg.
higher. Another cutting from a Deniliquin paper shows that
our neighbours, eighty miles south, have fared even worse:—
' Yesterday and to-day were two of the hottest days we have
had this summer, the thermometer registering 107 deg. each
day. Since Sunday, 4th inst., the day on which the mercury
touched 111 deg., we have had only three days under 90 deg.
From the date named to the 24th inst. (to-day) inclusive, we
have had seven days 100 deg. and over, two days over 90 deg.
and under 95 deg., and eight days ranging from 95 deg. to
99 deg. The mean maximum heat for the twenty days specified
is 98 2 deg.' "
Further on, the Bishop describes the chapel of the new
home:
"The chapel will look very well when finished. It has a
painted glass window, manufactured in Sydney, from instruc-
tions given by me. The artists are Lyons, Wales, Cottier,
and Co., and admirably have they performed their task. The
window is in three panels. In the centre is our Lord, with St.
Peter and sheep, the text appearing above, ' Feed My sheep.'
On the left is a young man sowing, rivers appearing in the
landscape, with the text above, 'Sow ye beside all waters.' On
the right is an older man reaping, water still appearing, with
the text, 'ln due season ye shall reap, if ye faint not.' It will
at once be perceived that the allusion is to the rivers, which gave
its name to the Riverina, and to the object of Christ's Church
in one of its aspects. I have delayed the furnishing of the
chapel, because I received a hint that the clergy wished to
present the Holy Table, and till it arrived I could hardly be
sure about measurements for seats. This kind gift, in oak,
and of the most suitable design, and beautifully constructed
under the superintendence of the son of one of the Sydney
clergy, only arrived a few days ago. lam now ordering seats
to match. The furniture for the Holy Table has been presented
by relations; we still need the sacred vessels. A kind gift of
£25 from a relation will, I hope, more than cover the cost of
the seats. The linen was given by a relation before we left
England. When all is complete, I hope to have an opening


» 4
service, with a dedication of the chapel and all it contains
to God."
We pass over the record of many unwearying labours of these
years; they were in great part the repetition of the earlier
experiences. A notice of visits to Narandera illustrates the
thoroughness of the Bishop's pastoral oversight: —
" I returned again to this place, which is rapidly increasing
in size and importance, in November, in order to institute Mr.
Eldrid, who came to tis from the Grafton and Armidale Diocese,
as incumbent. We had a celebration of Holy Communion
on All Saint's Day morning", and at night there was a conver-
sazione, at which their new clergyman might meet his parish-
ioners, and they express their welcome to him. This was a
great success, and many not of our church were present. Next
morning I instituted Mr. Eldrid in the church, using a service
composed by the Australian Bishops for such occasions. Yet
again have I been to Narandera in the present year, partly to
preach on their first Hospital Sunday, January 12th ; partly to
confirm three well-prepared candidates, in the case of whom
there were strong reasons for holding a special confirmation ;
partly to meet the church-wardens, who desired advice on a
question which had arisen. I was glad to find that communi-
cants, congregations, and offertories, had increased under the
new regime , and that there was an enthusiasm infused into
church matters which was new to the place. It seems likely
that there will be a large number for confirmation later on in
the year. There are a large number of selectors within a radius
of forty miles around the town, and there is work for three
men instead of two, if only a third could be supplied."
On February of the following year the Bishop conducted two
<l quiet days" for some of the Sydney clergy. Thirty-six clergy
were present for part or all of the arrangements. His brief
record of the event marks his humbleness of mind:
" I received afterwards an encouraging letter from the Rural
Dean, assuring me of the help that he and the others had found
in the prayers, meditation, and counsel. I hope, indeed, that
the time was as useful to others as it was to myself."
I well remember the unfeigned joy with which he told me
some time later of a clergyman who, since the " quiet days,"
had been a changed man, and had worked a complete revolution
in his parish.
The synod of 1890 was the last occasion on which I was
present as one of the diocesan clergy. It was a time made
memorable by the opening of the chapel and by gratifying
evidence of the laity's desire to acknowledge their affection and
esteem. To quote from the Bishop's letter: —
"On the next day, St Philip's and St. James', the anniver-
sary of my consecration, there was a combination of interesting


events. First came the dedication and opening of the little
chapel in Bishop's Lodge, with Holy Communion, special
prayers, and address. Then, in the afternoon, at a garden
party for the members of the synod, some gifts, value £llO,
were made to me by some friends to mark our occupation of
the new residence. Mr. A. P. Stewart, a leading bank manager
and useful citizen, addressed me as follows: —' I have great
pleasure in presenting you, on behalf of a few of your friends,
with a small token of their esteem and a memento of the occa-
sion on which you entered into possession of this your new
home, and I must ask you not to measure our affectionate
regard and high respect by either the intrinsic or sentimental
value of our small gift, because between it and them there is no
comparison, and I know and assure you that throughout this
large diocese good and kindly wishes and high respect foi
yourself are growing every day and ever} where, not only
among the members of your own church, but among all sorts
and conditions of men. We wish you and your family many
prosperous years, and it goes without saying that we are suie a
life which has been so useful in the past will be useful in the
future; and we know you will be happy, because between
happiness and usefulness there is a natural and inseparable
affinity. Accept our assurance of readiness and cheerful
willingness to encourage and assist you in the arduous but
great work that is before you, a work in which your earnest-
ness and efficiency keep pace with one another, and are acknow-
ledged by all; a work in which we know you to be the well-tried
and faithful servant of the Great Master, who came down from
His home of endless peace to die that we might live.' "
Much might be written to show how abundantly these words
were justified. But, doubtless, what has been set down in this
chapter will give to those who read the conviction which
personal experience has stamped indelibly on my own heart
that Bishop Linton set before him and carried out continually
the highest ideal of his office and work as a Chief Pastor in
the Church of God.
CHAPTER XI.
" THE BURDEN AND HEAT OF THE DAY."
1891-92.
Think not of rest; though dreams be sweet,
Start up, and ply your heavenward feet.
Is not God's oath upon your head,
Ne'er to sink back on slothful bed,
Never again your loins untie,
Nor let your torches waste and die,
Till, when the shadows thickest fall,
You hear your Master's midnight call.


7TJHE work of a pioneer Bishop of necessity involves a great
call to self-denial and the bearing of many a burden
unaided by sufficient help from others. This was especially
the case with the first Bishop of Riverina. So soon as he
had fully determined how he should lay the foundations, and to
what work he should address himself, he found that the
undertaking of the duty was the severest strain upon himself
as leader. But he did not shrink for a moment from the work.
In a report read before the Synod of 1890, the Bishop's generous
and self-denying action in the matter appears very clearly: —
" When His Lordship the Bishop arrived in Hay some six
years ago, and had not yet made choice of the part of the
diocese in which he would fix his home; very strong, not to say
gushing, representations were made to him that if he would
take up his abode in Hay an episcopal residence would be
provided for him, and many non-members of the Church of
England expressed in definite terms their willingness to give
their assistance by way of inducing the Bishop to settle in Hay.
In the meantime, however, there was but one suitable house
available for his use, and this was taken at the enormous
rental of £275 per annum, which the Bishop was quietly
permitted to pay out of his own pocket, with the exception of
£lOO annually contributed by Messrs. Learmonth Brothers, of
Groongal. But it was felt that this high rental was an undue
tax upon him, and a few of the principal churchmen and
-citizens took steps to erect a suitable episcopal residence. A
committee was appointed to carry out the work."
After giving various details as to the progress of the work,
the report continues :
" It is proper here to mention that a grave misapprehension
appears to have taken a firm hold of the minds of many people
with regard to this matter, viz., that the grounds are the
absolute property of the Bishop, and that he is building the
house for himself. We, therefore, deem it our duty to dispel
the misapprehension by thus stating the exact facts, which
are : —First, that the land and buildings are (subject to the debt
which is upon them) the absolute property of the diocese;
secondly, for the purpose of conveniently financing it was
necessary to vest the property in some one person, and the
committee elected the Bishop as trustee of the property, and
they hold from him a proper declaration of trust; thirdly, the
Bishop, in addition to his own munificent donation of £lOOO,
has made himself personally liable for a debt of over £4OOO,
due by the diocese to a bank, and pays, out of his own pocket,
the interest on that debt. What, then, is the sum of the whole
matter ? Simply this. That our worthy Bishop and his father
have between them subscribed £2OOO for the benefit of the
diocese of Riverina, and the Bishop has found and is paying the
cost of £4OOO more for the same purpose."


In such a diocese as Riverina it was evidently impossible that'
the Bishop should have near him a staff of clerical helpers.
He must needs to a great extent bear his burden alone. He
wisely refrained from any hasty attempt at copying the
cathedral system of a settled Knglish diocese under circum-
stances where its adoption would have been little else than
nominal. But at the meeting of Synod in 1891 the Bishop-
appointed the senior clergyman of the diocese to the office of
Archdeacon. " A celebration of the Holy Communion took
place on the Wednesday morning, at which service I instituted
the Rev. S. B. Holt, of Deniliquin, to the office of Archdeacon.
This is the first dignitary I have created. The time for so
doing seemed to have come, and universal satisfaction has been-
expressed at the appointment
In his address to Synod the Bishop thus spoke of the
appointment: —
"Considering that the Church supposes that there shall be
an Archdeacon in the diocese, and that certain offices are
assigned to him, and, moreover, that our diocese has provided
who shall be the Bishop's substitute in his absence foi*certain
purposes, it seems befitting that there should be such an officer.
The appointment rests with the Bishop, and he is sometimes
described as the oculus eptscopi. laking
consideration, I have asked the senior clergyman in the diocese
—the Rev. S. B. Holt, incumbent of St. Paul's, Deniliquin—to
do me the kindness, and the Church the benefit, of accepting
the office. Six years' knowledge of him has fully enabled me
to appreciate him as a man, a learned man, a man of Cod, who
has accomplished the difficult task of so methodising time and
opportunities that diligent study is carried on, as well as
systematic performance of the duties of a parish priest. In
consulting with him I have always found wise advice, with
good reasons for his opinions. And I shall not be alone in my
belief that there are few Australian clergymen who are deeper
theologians than he. I am glad to be able to report that.
Mr. Holt assents to my request.'
To my successor as Incumbent of Hay, the Rev. J. 8..
Armstrong, the Bishop also refers in the same address. in
succession to the Rev. Charles Pritchard, after one week s
interval, I was able to institute the Rev. J. B. Armstsong, M.A.,
of St. John's College, Cambridge, whom 1 was glad, for my
sake, as well as for that of the Church in the district and
diocese, to secure for the post."
From the same address some further quotations give us a
picture of the Bishop's vigour and power of work after seven
years' episcopate, and when he had thoroughly settled down to
his Australian life :
"During the year I visited all the principal places in the


diocese, omitting only a few out-of-the-way villages. The
mileage I travelled was not less than 10,000 miles. This
included two visits to Sydney—one connected with the election
to the Primacy, and the second to attend the enthronement of
the Primate, Dr. W. Saumarez Smith. It is cause for
thankfulness on my part to God that 1 met with no accident,
and enjoyed the best of health amid so much locomotion, and
met with the greatest kindness, help, and hospitality from all
with whom I had the pleasure of being thrown—both clergy
and laity—to whom I were ungrateful indeed did I not publicly
express my warmest thanks. The work of a diocese like this
must be full of difficulty to Bishop, clergy, or office-bearers.
In the midst of difficulties, however, there has been courage
and perseverance, and there is some progress to note."
He makes an interesting allusion to his visit to Melbourne
for the consecration of the Cathedral:—
" The diocese of Melbourne is heartily to be congratulated
upon the completion of the main part of the Cathedral, and its
consecration for the worship of Almighty God. This marks an
epoch in the history of the Church in that diocese, and gives
opportunities for usefulness which the authorities will not be
slow to employ. The event has been long looked forward to,
and great were the rejoicings at the opening services. I had
the privilege of being present, together with our Chancellor
and three of the clergy. Being called upon to deliver one of
the sermons during the octave, I seemed constrained to speak
on your account as follows : —' In the name of the diocese which
I represent, I congratulate you, and praise God for this
manifestation of His good hand being with you. I take
courage likewise for the future of the youngest of the Australian
dioceses under its first Bishop. The first Bishop of Melbourne,
with his clergy and faithful laity, could but sigh and hope for
the stage which you have now reached. To the second Bishop
and his helpers it was given to select the site, lay the
foundation, and see the walls arising. It is to the third Bishop
and his clergy and laity that it is given to see the top stone in
place, to arrange its consecration, and to hold high festival
within the sacred enclosures of St. Paul's Cathedral. The day
of small things is not to be despised. The difficulties from
circumstances, from scanty appliances and means, demand
sympathy in a young diocese. But these difficulties and
hindrances are no greater than those which the pioneer Bishop
and clergy encountered in the early days of this diocese. Pains,
prayers, counsel, devotion, and liberality have received, and will
receive, their reward and blessing from God. Your progress
has a stimulating effect upon those who are in the thick of
difficulties, and makes them thank God and take courage.
And so let it be with us, my brethren of the clergy and laity."


From the same address we quote the following wise and
sympathetic remarks on the Archbishop s judgment:
" The Archbishop of Canterbury has pronounced his judg-
ment in the case of the Bishop of Lincoln. A voluntary
society calling itself the Church Association hired persons to
go to services where the Bishop officiated, to take notes of pro-
ceedings, and then take action against him. It is to be noticed
that these were not ' aggrieved parishioners, or persons speci-
ally interested in the matter. The sympathy ol the Church
in general was by no means with the Association. Its actions
have alienated many of its former adherents, and have helped
to spread and make popular that which it has sought to restrain.
It is much to be regretted that the large sums of money uselessly
spent in this and similar prosecutions should not have gone
towards the extension of the Church in its conflict
and its extension throughout the world. Ihe Archbishop s
judgment, if it does not satisfy all, as is not likely to
be the case, will be thankfully viewed by the Church of
England at large. After the Archbishop's judgment it will be
hard for any to sample with, to them, the worst of brands, viz.,
4 Roman,' many customs and practices which are Catholic and
primitive; which have perhaps dropped out in the days of the
English Church's depression, but which have no superstitious
meaning, and are innocent and helpful to devotion to many. He
condemns the use of the sign of the cross in the absolution and in
the benediction, and the mixing water with the wine in the
service. He justifies this latter when done beforehand. It
would naturally he done by our Lord Himself; it was onl} in
northern races that wine was drunk unmixed. Horace speaks
of a man who so did as drinking like the Scythian ' the type
of brutality.' It sometimes scorches the throat nowadays,
when the wine is—as often— 44 fortified," to take even a mere
sip. The ablution is meant to be an act of reverence.
Looking at the matter apart from prejudice, that the priest as
leader of the people should face the same way with them, is at
least seemly, and far more convenient for consecration than to
move the elements to the north end ; at the same time that
those few persons who desire to see the manual acts should be
gratified, it should be done visibly. Singing after the consecra-
tion and before the reception of the elements is allowable.
Two lights are allowed as signifying that Christ in his twofold
nature is the very true Light of the World. The Archbishop
concludes with a rebuke to the Association for hiring witnesses
to intrude on the worship of others for purposes of espial :
with a deep regret at the incongruity of minute questionings
and disputations in great and sacred subjects, and the diversion
of time and attention thereby from the Church's real contest
with evil, and building up of good, both by those who give and


by those who take offence unnecessarily in such matters ; he
cautions that the apostolic judgment as to other matters of
ritual applies here too, viz., that things which may necessarily
be ruled to be lawful do not for that reason become expedient;
and points out that public worship is one of the Divine institu-
tions which are the heritage of the Church, for the fraternal
union of mankind ; and that the Church therefore has a right to
ask that her congregations may not be divided either by need-
less pursuance, or by exaggerated suspicion, of practices not in
themselves illegal. This judgment, with the concluding
remarks, seems full of common sense as well as of reasoning, and
should result in peace and mutual forbearance."
The usual long round of journeys was undertaken during the
year. The Bishop writes with hope and encouragement of the
state of the Church at Broken Hill: —
" Broken Hill has grown since my previous visit more
houses, more people, 20,000 within a few by this year s census,
and more shafts, more chimney-stacks vomiting volumes of
dense, black, poisonous smoke, which is seen from miles distant.
It is a very busy place. The Parsonage and Temporary Church
or school-room is a regular hive —no drones: only working
bees! —from early morning till late at night. Mr. \\ heeler,
finding that many of our children were attending the Roman
Catholic schools, and also feeling that it would be a great help
to the progress of religion to have a school conducted on Church
principles, established one in January, which has increased in
numbers each week, until there are now t~wo hundred scholars.
The chancel is curtained off, and the school held in the body of
the iron building which, for the present, serves as church. Mr.
Wheeler is headmaster, and is a firm disciplinarian, having, at
the present time, the affection of the children. Ihe lady who
keeps house fr»r him manages all money matters, and teaches
music, drawing, and needlework. Two of the lay readers teach,
and two femaie teachers. The day begins with them at 6.30,
Mr. Wheeler giving an hour's instruction to the candidates for
holy orders ; Matins follow at 7.30; then breakfast. One of
the staff is out in the parish, teaching in one or other of the
four large public schools, or visiting the sick or the hospital.
The rest start at 9.30 in school, and are there till 12.30, and
from 2 till 3.30. Visiting follows till dinner, at 6.30. In the
evening the young men are mostly free for reading; but there
are two district churches in which there are Thursday evening
services, and choir practice for the Sunday services. There is
Sunday school, too, in these districts. More young men are
needed here for the like work ; and a band of sisters would be
of the greatest advantage, in a place where there are few
women of a type to influence for good their sex and the
children.


At Wilcannia the Bishop writes of the camel traffic :
" Wilcannia is in a very region, and transport is often most
difficult from the lack of water. To meet this difficulty camels
are put into requisition. I was sitting writing one day when I
heard a snorting, gi'unting, and grumbling which I knew at
once could proceed from nothing else but camels, and looking
up saw a string of them, with an Afghan in charge. Their
burdens were placed in two divisions, with a space between, to
which the camel was brought and told to kneel down, which he
did in an ungx-acious manner; the load was hitched on to the
saddle, and then he rose and proceeded a few steps, and when
all were loaded the camels marched away in single file, the
halter of the one fastened to the tail of one in front. Another
day as many as twenty-five came in laden with bales of wool,
which they carried to the river bank, then knelt down, and the
bales when loosed i-olled into the steamer. Distance can be
covered much quicker with camels than with hoi*ses and
bullocks, and they go long distances without water."
The Bishop went on to Menindie by a river steamer. "By
the coach," he says, " I could have done the distance in sixteen
hours; the Decoy took nearly thx-ee days. This was owing, in
great measure, to the fact that the captain was disappointed in
several places of fuel."
At Menindie, then in charge of the Rev. E. Wai-d Thomas,
the Bishop writes of a pleasant Sunday, " as usual," with good
congregations :
" During my visit a social evening was arranged, when the
following address was presented: k We, the members and
adherents of the Church of England residing in Menindie,
desire to offer you a cordial welcome on this your fifth visit
to this pox-tion of the diocese. We beg also to express our
attachment to the Church and to yourself as chief pastox*, in
whom we x-ecognise a true father in God. We trust that your
visit on this occasion will convince you that some progress in
spiritual matters has been made, and that the future is not
dark or uncertain. Again assuring you of our regai-d, and of
our conviction that your periodical visits will animate us to
further effort towards the extension of the Redeemer's king-
dom. We are, &c.' The people of this little village are
thoi'oughly united in their efforts in maintaining the chui'ch
and their clergyman, whom they much value, and in caring for
the best interests of the rising generation."
In September was the meeting of the General Synod at
Sydney, which assembles once in five years :
•'The component parts of the synod are the bishops and
representatives of the elergy and laity from the thirteen
dioceses. Never before had so many bishops been present
at a synod, the only absentee being the newly-conseci'ated


Bishop of North Queensland, who was in England. Bishop
Dawes, who assists the Bishop of Brisbane, made the number,
however, up to thirteen. The opening service on Tuesday
morning consisted of Holy Communion and an admirable ser-
mon by the Bishop of Tasmania. The procession of robed
bishops and clergy was long and noticeable. In the afternoon
the Primate delivered his opening address, which was considered
by all to show great power and grasp of subject. Various
subjects were under discussion, and some of them became matter
for legislation during this and the following week, the only breaks
being, on Saturday, a garden party at the Governor's (Lord
Jersey), another at the Primate's, and a missionary meeting.
" A false impression seems, judging by the utterances of
English Church papers, to have been formed in the old country
as to our wishes on the subject, for which I do not remember
anything to have been said to justify that impression. These
newspapers seemed to have gathered that in our desire for
re-union with Christians outside the Church of England we
were ready to sacrifice the distinctive features of our Church.
I am at a loss, and others, too, to discover what can have given
rise to this impression. Certainly none are willing to make
such sacrifices, however desirable and devoutly to be prayed for
that re-union assuredly is.
" Our time was very fully occupied with session afternoon
and evening, with committees, and meetings of bishops during
the mornings. I preached in the Cathedral and in three parish
churches, and felt much refreshed by intercourse with many
members of the synod, as well as invigorated by the discussions
on several of the subjects in hand."
The prevalent influenza attacked the Bishop during his
journeys after the synod, He was somewhat hindered by the
attack and the succeeding weakness which always follows.
But in November he set oft' again on a long tour through the
district attached to the parish of Hillston, in charge of the
Rev. J. Verso. He thus writes of a visit to one part of this
enormous district: —
"On Friday wearrived at Lake Cargellicoand visited the Church
people in the town. Next day I rode to Euabalong, twenty
miles away, in order to be ready for morning service on Sunday,
and visited all the people before nightfall. The congregation
was good, many coming in some distance, a few communicating.
After this I started back for Cargellico, taking dinner at a
station half way, and then got in in good time for evening
service. Here is always a good congregation, though I am
sorry to say they are far from being liberal givers. Mr. A erso
had remained here and given them a morning service. This is
one of the prettiest spots in the diocese; a large lake filled
when the Lachlan River is in flood, and the waters held up in


the lake, whe'i full, by a dam across the narrow creek through
which the water passes. Around are hills which are most
pleasing to the eye of one who lives in the absolutely flat
country around Hay. The rainfall is fair, and there are many
farmers who would prosper greatly if only there were a railway
running into these parts." Returning to Hillston, the journey
was continued northwards
"On Tuesday, December Bth, I left Hillston for Ivanhoe and
Mossgiel, which had been left for six months without services,
and for a long time with but few. I held services at stations
on my way, and reached Ivanhoe on Saturday afternoon, suffi-
cient time remaining to visit the few inhabitants. Sunday was
cool, and the congregations good. I baptised five infants in the
afternoon and catechised children. Next morning early I was
unwell and unfit to proceed. It was providential that I had
made no engagements for a few days, and was able to remain
quiet till Wednesday, under the kind care of my good hostess,
who was both doctor and nurse to me in a most efficient way,
for which I cannot thank her sufficiently. Then I went to a
station for the night for service, which was well attended and
hearty. The next day to Mossgiel station, whence I visited
the neighbourhood, and held services on Sunday, which were
well attended. Between leaving Ivanhoe and Sunday night I
baptised sixteen infants."
The rabbit pest is the subject of an interesting and vivid
description :
" Here it was almost impossible not to notice the work of
rabbit destruction being carried on : both eye and nose testified
to the widespread mortality. The method adopted here was
poisoned water. The rabbits, which have multiplied to that
extent that the sheep have diminished very considerably, cannot
do without water when the grass is dry. Consequently all
water is fenced off from them, and troughs of poisoned water
are placed within their reach. Tens of thousands lie about
dead, and for a few days are most offensive ; but, owing to the
dryness of the climate, and the ravages of birds (which eat the
eyes) and of ants and beetles, in an incredibly short time all
that remains of them is a dried up piece of furry skin Poisoned
wheat is also used, sticks dipped in poison, and large traps
near tanks, into which they can enter, but not return. In
such traps it is no uncommon occurrence to find one thousand
caught in one night. These are knocked on the head and
carted away to decompose in the sun or to be burned. Near
the railways, in winter, thousands are sent by train to Sydney
for consumption. In some places the skins are dried, and sent
in bales to the sea-ports, and fetch a good price. Some are
used in this country, more are exported. The skins are used
for the manufacture of hats, and the fur is largely taking the
place of lamb's wool.


" Owing to the plague of rabbits, the numbers of sheep have
been reduced by one-half on some stations; some tracts of
country are given up to rabbits, and all land-holders are put to
enormous expense in fencing their country with wire netting,
and in the destruction of this troublesome quadruped. At the
same time much employment is given to labour in connection
with the rabbit. The church suffers much financially, owing
to many being ruined, and many brought to the verge of ruin, by
this evil. Refusals to contribute to church funds are frequently
made on this score; incomes are reduced, and expenditure in-
creased thereby. At the time of the terrible famine in Russia,
and the destitution of the poor in the large cities, one could
wish that means could be devised to transport the millions of
rabbits, which here are treated as a pest and left to rot upon
the ground. Few in the infested districts will eat a rabbit,
which is looked 011 as in the same category as rats and mice.
Rabbits were introduced by the whites, with the idea that they
would be good and useful for sport and food, none imagining
that they could become the evil they have proved."
A brief reference to the work of the missions to the heathen,
with which I will conclude this chapter, shows that the
Bishop, in all his work and anxiety, set the example of a lively
interest in the Church's missionary work.
" With regard to missions to heathen, the manager of
Warangesda died in October of typhoid, which broke out there.
The leader of the mission to New Guinea of the Church of
England in Australia, Rev. A. A. Maclaren, died of malarial
fever last month on board of a steamer which was bringing him
away in the hopes of recovery; he was buried at Cooktown,
North Queensland. He was an admirable pioneer, and seemed
to have considerable power with the natives, as well as influence
with church people in interesting them in the mission. May
God raise up one in his place, and give additional workers!
We could ill spare him who is gone. Our mission to the
Chinese in the diocese has not yet commenced; as each three
months of the training of the Catechist in Sydney terminated,
the Chinese missionary there asked that he might have another
like term. No doubt he will be the better man for this, but we
have been disappointed about the delay. I saw him when in
Sydney in September, and was pleased with him. He sat with
about a score more Chinese Christians at the missionary meet-
ing then held, an evidence that this work of the Lord was not
in vain. He cannot speak much English yet, and will not be
able to hold much communication with the clergyman, Rev. C.
Eldrid, at Narandera, under whose guidance he will be ; but no
doubt he will improve in our language."


CHAPTER XII.
IN JOURNEYINGS OFTEN.—IB 92-93.
"A land of lonely rivers and level grey plains."
a title, it may be said, describes most of the years of
Bishop Linton's episcopate. But while this is true, it
was in these closing years that at times the excessive
strain of such constant travelling began to tell. And the un-
wearied zeal which the Bishop showed was a proof of his
detoted purpose to let nothing stand in the way of his work, so
long as God gave him strength. It was early in 1892 that,
when I met him at the Melbourne station, the Bishop told me
■that he WHS going to consult a surgeon about some internal
trouble. It might, he said, involve a slight operation, but he
did not think it of great consequence. This was really a
symptom of the last illness. But God, in his mercy, veiled the
future, and granted to the Church two more years of a life so
willingly spent to His glory. The Bishop, with Mrs. Linton
and family, spent a happy rest-time at Mount Martha, a
beautiful watering-place on the shores of Port Philip. So
much was the Bishop charmed with the locality that he pur-
posed buying a piece of land there, and hoped to establish a
house of rest for his clergy in the course of time. During his
stay at the Mount Martha Hotel he undertook the duty of
ministering to the spiritual needs of those in the house and
neighbourhood. Of this he writes :
" There being no church nearer than four miles off, to which
few could or would have gone, I gave two services each Sunday,
which were well attended, and that in the evening by most of
the servants. The large number of children there made it the
more imperative that the day should be marked, and that they
should not be left to their own devices. A gentleman present
undertook the musical part of the services, for which he was
fully competent —an act the more agreeable, as he was very
hard worked all the week. On most of the Sundays we had
a celebration of Holy Communion. When I went away I was
able to hand to the over-worked and underpaid clergyman of
the district a substantial sum from the offerings made at the
services, which gave pleasure both to him and to me."
On the return to Hay, great heat was experienced. The
register for four successive days was 104 deg., 110 deg., 108 deg.,
110 deg. This was early in March. "On March 13th," writes
the Bishop, " I took our monthly services at Carrathorl and
Groongal, and, on the day after my return, received notice of
the death of the Bishop of Goulburn, and next day set off for
his funeral, arriving in the middle of the night. He was buried


in the afternoon, the Primate and the Bishop of Newcastle also
being present and taking part in his service. In my synod
address I have spoken of him and his services to the Church.
Most of the clergy of that diocese were present, and a large
number of lay people. Rain falling constantly made the scene
the more mournful. That evening, at 10 o'clock, 1 started
back to Hay, arriving at 4.30 p.m. on Saturday, having travelled
six hundied and forty miles in the fifty-four hours."
The Bishop made the following reference to this sad event in
his address to Synod the month after: —
44 Looking outside the Diocese, one cannot forget that one has
been called away in God's Providence from the province who
has been a prominent figure in Church life in New South Wales
for nearly thirty years. I allude to the Bishop of Goulburn.
Where he has lived, there he has died, and is buried, and seems
to have taken possession of the land for Christ in a more special
way by leaving his body in it, than if he had died and been
buried elsewhere. But two Bishops heretofore have died in
Australia : Dr. Sawyer, the Bishop of Grafton and Armidale,
drowned soon after his episcopate began, and Dr. Tvrell, of
Newcastle, for thirty-two years Bishop. The Bishop of Goul-
burn has left his mark behind him, and has erected in his life-
time his monument, in churches and parsonages, in a Bishop's
residence, in a noble cathedral, and in a newly-formed Diocese,
for the existence of that of Riverina may in large measure be
attributed to him. In many parts of this Diocese he is well-
known for brave endurance of hardships, as one who recounted
journeying incidents in which he bore a part in a charmingly
interesting manner , as inciting to energy in Church work, and
still more in preaching righteousness, and recommending the
holy religion of Jesus Christ, which was the mainspring of his
life. Your sympathy will extend itself only naturally to the
partner of his life, Mrs. Thomas, who shared all toils, halved
all sorrows, doubled all his joys, and wherever she went shed
rays of love and kindness, the spontaneous outcome of that
which filled her heart, upon all with whom she came in contact."
The meeting of this synod in thus noticed by the Bishop in
his journal letter: —
"The synod opened on Tuesday evening, April 26th, with a
good attendance. We had the Holy Communion on Wednesday
morning. An excellent spirit prevailed, and much work was
done, needing close attention until Friday afternoon. Some
work of previous sessions needed slight amendment, and a
new ordinance of great length was passed relating to Church
Management, both as to property and as to rights, duties, and
powers of church wardens and parochial councils. The object
of this was to make such provision for these matters as may
serve for the whole province of New South Wales, and take the


place of some almost obsolete Acts of Parliament of William
IV., much of which does not apply to, or provide for, present
emergencies, and which we hope to get repealed. Vacancies
were filled up on different councils, boards, and committees."
In the course of his address, the Bishop thus referred to life
insurance for the benefit of the (Jhurcli. Alluding to the
meeting of the General Synod in Sydney during the preceding
year, he said :
" I had the honour of being chairman of a select committee
to consider the increased use of life insurance in providing
funds for the benefit of the Church. It was considered that
our Clergy Superannuation Scheme strikingly illustrated the
soundness of the principles and the profitable nature of this
mode of accomplishing the ends desired. Ihe committee was
fully convinced that'there could be no valid, legal or moral
objection to this method of providing for funds. In regard to the
creation of funds for parish or diocesan endowment, the com-
mittee recommended endowment insurance funds, through which
members of the Church might be encouraged to insure their
lives, and to transfer their policies to the bishop or to trustees
appointed for the purpose, paying the premiums, as their con-
tribution to such endowment fund. In addition to the sugges-
tion of this committee, it seems to me that, whei*e it is desirable
to erect church buildings which are to be gradually paid for,
members of the church would be much more likely to be
guarantors, if, in case of death, their families were protected
against possible loss by an insurance upon their lives, of which
the premum should be paid by the Church ; in the case of such
death, the policy would pay the sum guaranteed. Where a
certain annual endowment of a loan could be made, the policy
might be for an annually decreasing amount, with similarly
decreasing premium."
The journeys of this year were greatly incx-eased by the help
given to the neighbouring Diocese of Goulbuim during the
vacancy of the See :
" The Diocese of Goulburn being vacant, and the work being
considerably in arrears, the Vicar General (Dean Pownall) asked
the surrounding bishops to take confirmations near their respec-
tive dioceses. To this we agreed, and on May 10th I left by
train to perform my part of the agreement. I confirmed during
this tour 300 candidates at twelve centres, and at the end of
June 21 more at another place; also dedicating a new church,
and confirming 19 more at Junee last Monday. lhe sceneiy
was utterly different from this diocese, being hilly and even
mountainous. Many deserted diggings were passed by, new
lonely, but years ago busy with thousands of miners and the
hum of machinery, now lying idle, rusty, and rotten. 1 laces
were pointed out encounters with bushrangers had taken


place, and in cemeteries 1 noted more than one memorial
stone over police shot down, some in cold blood, some in fight.
I ended this tour with a visit to Corowa, near which place I
found myself, and spent a Sunday in that district—at Mulwala
in the morning, at Corowa in the evening; hoping to return
there later in the year for a confirmation. I was fortunate in
having fine weather, except while at Corowa. Hay was reached
on the last day of May, 1236 miles having been traversed."
A little later in the year the Provincial Synod held its
triennial meeting. In the course of his notice of the meeting"
the Bishop tells an amusing anecdote: —
" The Diocese of Riverina was represented at the synod by
four clergy and four laymen; the numbers from each diocese
being more or less in proportion to the clergy in it. One of
our laymen took a very prominent part in most of the subjects
under discussion. He has a stentorian voice, which gave rise
to an amusing incident. Upon a point of order arising, this
gentleman said to the president, 4 My Lord, at the proper time
1 shall demand to be heard in reply,' to which the Primate
demurely answered, 4 Yes, sir, I am quite sure that you will
be heard,' to the great amusement of everybody, shared in by
the individual in question as much as by others."
In August the Bishop left home for a long tour in the west
of the diocese, going by train through Melbourne and Adelaide
to Broken Hill. It was the time of a great strike at the mining
centre:
44 Broken Hill, as I anticipated, presented a sad appearance.
There was none of the busy look which this seat of a great
industry usually has. No smoke from the chimneys, or fumes
from the smelters ; no brilliant light at night from the electrie
light on the mines; no emptying out of red-hot slag, which
made a striking firework display all the night long; no miners.,
their faces grimy with toil, hurrying home after their shift ;
almost all trains had ceased, hands were discharged from almost
all shops and stores, and many hundreds —not strikers —had
been thrown out of employment through no fault of their own,
and with no strike pay to supply their necessities —to live as
they could.
44 The strike was most wanton and uncalled for. As in many
other strikes, the men would not look at facts. The price of
silver had diminished, and the best of the ore had been extracted
from the mines—far too many hands were employed —and it
became necessary to economise; moreover, the Union rules
were intolerable. The men insisted on all being carried on as
before, and threw up their work without any notice: and this
at a time when unemployed labourers flooded the country, and
when great depression prevailed. Of course, they had to give
in finally, but did not do so until hundreds of men had been


imported. Some mines have not opened since, the others have
taken less men, and thousands have had to take work elsewhere.
The three last great strikes in this country have proved disas-
trous failures to the strikers, and have driven much trade away
from Australia."
A visit to Wilcannia was included in this tour:—
"At Wilcannia I remained two Sundays the guest of our
clergyman and Mrs. Bradshaw, who seem to have won golden
opinions here, and to have been carrying 011 well their difficult
work, making some progress. I remained here two Sundays 011
account of the great isolation of this place, and the little, or
rather absence of, intercourse that a clergyman has with his
brethren ; the expense being too great, and the journey too long
for him to get to the synod. The place is also somewhat de-
pressing, trade and population having largely deserted it for
Broken Hill and Bourke. I visited the members of our Church,
attended a reception arranged for the people to meet me, con-
firmed seventeen candidates on the second Sunday, and paid a
visit and gave a service at a station about nine miles away.
The country around was most desolate. After a long drought,
whatever verdure was produced by rain was being consumed bv
a plague of caterpillars, and even the salt-bush, which stands
drought, was being destroyed by these greedy vermin."
October found the Bishop again in Sydney, where he was
obliged to attend the adjourned meeting of the Provincial
Synod. He was somewhat disappointed with the general
results of the gathering. The following extract shows how
practical and definite was his sympathy with Australian
misions: —
" We had, however, a very important meeting of the Board
of Missions, which is the organisation of the Church of England
in Australia and Tasmania for evangelising the heathen. This
board knows no parties in the Church, and has good men of all
schools upon it. It has its missions in New Guinea and Melan-
esia, and to the Aborigines, Chinese, and Kanakas in Australia
itself. Of this the C.M.S in England, and Messrs. Stewart and
Stock, seemed to be utterly ignorant when they came out, at the
invitation of a few in Sydney, to form a C.M.S. association. It
is a sad pity in a new country to have divided missionary
interest, and thus weakened forces. These gentlemen were
invited out by a few in Sydney, who think that God cannot
bless or own any missionary work except that of the C.M.S.,
and who would not support or give to the Board of Missions.
While I trust that missionary enterprise in general will have
received an impetus by the visits of these gentlemen, and I am
sure that they aimed at this, yet still a very great impetus has
been given to the diverting missionary interest from the Aus-
tralian channels into those of the English society, and empha-


sising the division of missionary effort. And this, when the
Australian missions need all the money, men, women, and
prayer thit it is possible to obtain from our small population
and very limited resources."
On his return he paid his annual visit to Narandera. He
•chronicles with evident satisfaction the fact that " a vigorous
work is carried on in this parish, which embraces much
•country." He alludes with encouraging sympathy tp the work
of the clergy, the Rev. E. Eldridandthe Rev. F. W. M'Donnell.
He commends a new industry which had been started —a factory
for chilling meat for the Sydney market and also for boiling
down sheep for tallow. "By the former process, the unfortunate
sheep are saved the miseries of a long train journey to Sydney,
suffering from hunger, thirst, jolting, and often death by suffo-
cation ; and the meat is far better for food. The latter process
is a profitable way of diminishing the superfluous stock, especi-
ally old sheep, when prices are low and when there is a fear
that pastures may fail."
The work of the Chinese mission atNarandera is next noticed —
" The Chinese catechist, Leongßong, is making good progress
with his work, and seems to have made some impression on his
countrymen I shall not be surprised to hear soon of baptisms ;
but we do not want to be too much in a hurry. He is improving
in his English, in which Mrs. Eldrid helps him; and another
lady teaches him music. He played the " Old Hundredth "in
my presence. What I cannot get here, hut must try to get
from missionaries in China, is theological books in Chinese, in
order that he may increase his learning in that direction. He
generally brings to church on Sunday a few Chinese, whose
places he finds for them in the Prayer-book. He is very handy
in all sorts of ways —cooking, gardening, and carpentering ; and
seems to me a most genuine character, who cannot fail to make
his mark. He, with many others, was brought to Christ in
Sydney, through the help of the Chinese missionary there.
Similar work goes on in Melbourne and Brisbane. "
Then follows an account of a visit to Goulburn, for the conse-
cration of the new Bishop :
" On Monday afternoon, the 31st, we left for Goulburn, which
we reached at 1 a.m., November Ist. On this, All Saints' Day,
took place the consecration of the new bishop of Goulburn,
Canon Chalmers, of the Melbourne Diocese. This was an epoch
in the Church of England in Australia, and a distinct advance.
The Synod elected a clergyman already serving in this country,
and did not, as has been done hitherto, send to England for a
bishop. This may have been necessary in the past, but now is
no longer so. There are good men with colonial training in
many a diocese, well fitted for the episcopal office and qualified
for most of the Sees, with the exception, perhaps, of such as


Adelaide, Brisbane, Melbourne, and Sydney. The Diocese of
Goulburn could hardly have chosen better, and one predicts a
useful course for its Bishop. The consecration took place in the
morning, the Primate being assisted by the Bishops of Ballarat,
Brisbane, Melbourne, Newcastle and Riverina. The arrange-
ments of Dean Pownall were admirable, and were carried ont
without anything to mar the solemnity of the service. The
enthronement took place in the evening. Canon Vance, an old
friend of the new bishop, preached in the morning, and the
Bishop of Melbourne in the evening. A goodly number of
Victorian clergy came to testify their interest in their brother
now appointed to a high office in the Church, and to aid him by
their sympathy and prayers. Bishop Chalmers had as chaplain
the Rev. W. C. Pritchard, who was for two years at Hay. "
The rest of the year was occupied with visits to Urana, Hill-
ston, Ivanhoe, and Mossgiel, bringing the mileage for the year
up to 9,827.
The year 1893 began with another holiday at Mount Martha,
and then follows the same chronicle of continued journeys. At
Broken Hill there was a sign that such unwearying labour could
not last: —
" After so much travelling and two nights in a train, I took
the day easily, walking a good deal as the best change.and
exercise after much sitting. Towards evening I was attacked
with a disorder which now and then troubles me, and was put
quite hors die combat next day, and, only with difficulty, preached
in the parish church, morning and evening, and in a mission
building in the afternoon on Sunday.
In his address to the Synod of this year, the Bishop gave
valuable information as to the population of the diocese:—
"The census of 1891 gives to us the population of the
diocese at that date, and shows a considerable increase in the
decade since 1881. This has principally arisen from the
aggregation of souls at Broken Hill. For if Corowa r Hay,
Hillston, and Narandera have increased in numbers, there has
been an equal diminution in such towns as Deniliquin,
Went worth, and Wilcannia. The country population has not, I
think, increased, but has been migratory; if selectors have been
multiplied in one district, they have vanished from another.
The total population of the diocese is 74,177, of whom 27,567
are Church of England, 1620 are Chinese, and 1375 Aboriginal.
The Church of England population was represented to me,
when first I came to this country, as being 21,000. The figures
which I have quoted above are supplied to me by the courtesy
of the statistician for the Colony."
One other extract from this address gives us the Bishop's
attitude on the question of the unity of Christendom :
"In this one Holy Catholic Church for all nations, for alt


time, we find ourselves. We are, by our belief, alas! somewhat
in opposition 011 the right hand and on the left—to the current
undenominationalism on one side, and to the exclusive claim of
the Roman Communion on the other. Undenominationalism
represents men as first becoming Christian by an act of
individual faith, and, after that, combining into Christian
societies, greater or smaller, as suits their predilections. This
is the opposite of the theory that they become Christians in the
first instance by incorporation into the Christian Society, and
then, after that, are bound to realise individually their Christian
privileges. Whether this seems advantageous or disadvan-
tageous we are not responsible for it. It is part of that which
comes to us from our master, Christ; it is the only theory
sanctioned by the original documents of Christianity. We do
not unchurch others who differ, or deny God's blessing upon them,
but we cannot but hold fast to that which we have received.
Unable toaccept theundenominational conception of Christianity,
we can 110 more accept the claim of Rome. We cannot give
her the title of the Catholic Church when we remember that a
considerable majority of members of the Church are outside
the Roman Church. And besides this, the more anyone studies
the subject, the more clearly he must see that, whatever graces,
powers, excellencies that Church has, still she is a one-sided
development of Christianity—a development of certain qualities
of Christianity, powers of discipline and order, with which the
Latin genius has special affinity, but a development ignoring
other qualities at least as Christian, such as the strengthening
of individuality which it is intended to promote, the respon-
sibility which Christianity teaches for personal enquiry, the
love of bare truth, the considerateness and fairness it ought to
foster."
We must pass over the interesting account of other journeys,
and come now to a brief notice of the last journal-letter written
by the Bishop not long before his death. It begins with a
notice of the prevalent financial depression :
"The times fall very heavily upon our clergy, who, never
having but very modest incomes, find them decidedly reduced
just now. Contributions have been lessened or withdrawn in
all quarters, and offertories are decreased. The Diocesan
Council has been obliged, from sin inking of the General Fund
of the diocese, to reduce all grants by 20 per cent. The grants
are made to the clergy in weaker parishes, and to assistant
clergy and candidates in the larger parishes. These younger
clergy and candidates are thus being trained to fill posts when
required, and are an important item in our existence."
An interesting account is given of the successful beginnings
of mission work amongst the Chinese at Hay, and the faithful
efforts of Leong Bong, the Catechist. The Bishop writes with


a just appreciation of the usefulness of the Chinese inhabitants
of the land, while not advocating the removal of legal restrictions
on their immigration.
There is an interesting reference to artesian wells in an
account of a visit to Urana and Narandera: —
" After visiting several stations and holding a missionary
meeting on the Tuesday evening, an association being formed, I
went by buggy to Narandera. I was driven by a Government
Inspector of Tanks and Wells, who had had a very varied
experience in India, New Zealand, and this country, and was a
most interesting cortipanion. Latterly he had been connected
with the work of tapping the earth, by means of the artesian
bores, for water. Many of these have been successful, and
millions of gallons of good water are gushing forth by day and
by night, and forming lakes and streams where there were
none previously. The value of these supplies of water is
immense, both for drinking purposes for man and beast and for
producing crops by means of irrigation. God seems to be
teaching us that we must not expect him to alter, because we
come to it, the state of nature which prevails in a dry country
with small and precarious rainfall, but to look for other sources
which he has prepared, and which are to hand, and may be
utilised after pains are expended. Man is to subjngate the
earth, to exercise dominion over it, and to extract its riches.
But this means the use of brains and muscle, and sometimes
even then disappointment will follow. These earthly matters
suggest many a parable of spiritual application.
One more incident of the many journeys will illustrate
the Bishop's good-humoured way of making light of discomforts,
and literally " enduring hardness
"On Saturday, the 9th, [ went to Euabalong. The weather
just then was very hot. I was allotted a room, where 1
was kindly entertained, five miles from the township, the bed in
which was in a corner beyond the reach of any breath
of air It had, moreover, a feather bed upon it. The
atmosphere swarmed with hungry mosquitoes. The question
arose, can these evils be cured, or must they be endured ? To
endure them meant a sleepless night and unfitness for Sunday
duties. I, therefore, placed my rug upon the gronnd between
the window and door, portmanteaux and bags on either side of
me, and fixed over these a large piece of mosquito netting,
which I always carry in case of need. Thus I had a cool bed,
and was defended from my cruel enemies, and was astonished
how soon daylight appeared, proving to me that I had not
slept badly."
This was an incident in the last journey which the Bishop
thus chronicled. Cf the distance travelled he says, '* The tour
was one of 445 miles, all by buggy."


Almost tlie last words of this final letter, as it proved, are
most significant and striking "On New Year's Day we had
a celebration of the Holy Communion in the Chapel here,
leaving times for silent prayer, secret confession of sin to God,
and petition for special graces needed for onr life in this
country."' Surely this simple record is most touching. It
throws a backward light on the motives which prompted the
unflagging zeal and energy of the past; it reveals the secret of
strength ; it witnesses to the leality of a living faith.
It was the beginning another season of labour and devotion,
the taking up anew the burden and trials of a new year. But,
by God's mercy, it was not to be so. That was to be a short
year on earth, for soon should begin for the faithful servant the
"bright endless year" of the life beyond. Soon was to come
the call to Paradise, the summons to depart and be with Christ
—with the Master he loved so well and served so faithfully.
CHAPTER XIII.
THE CALL TO REST.-1894.
Sleep on, beloved ! sleep, and take thy rest 1
Lay down thy head upon thy Saviour's breast ;
We lore thee well, but Jesus loves thee best—
Good-niglit.
Calm is thy slumber as an infant's sleep,
But tliou shalt wake no more to toil and weep,
Thine is a perfect rest, secure and deep —
Good-niglit.
Until, made beautiful by love Divine,
Thou in the likeness of thy Lord shalt shine,
And Lie shall bring that glorious crown of thine —
Good-night.
JXJHE beginning of this year was marked by a visit toHobart,
J® to attend the Church Congress. For an account of this, as
of the other events which marked the last few months of
the Bishop's life, we are indebted to Mrs. Linton's Letter to the
Associates in England. To my delight, I found that the
Bishop was a passenger from Melbourne by the same steamer.
Then, and during the Congress, I had the pleasure of some
friendly intercourse. Other visitors to the Congress have often
spoken to me since of the impression which was made upon
them by his gentle courteous bearing, and his kindly humour.
One little incident of the journey illustrates his thought for
others, and his readiness of resource. We had landed late from
the steamer at Launceston, and were obliged to take the train


for Hobart forthwith. Desperately hungry, we looked eagerly
at the first junction for a refreshment room ; but, alas ! there
was none to be seen. The train waited for a few minutes.
Just as it was moving off, the Bishop jumped in with a bag of
biscuits and some raisins, which he had procured at a neigh-
bouring store. With these he fed his famished fellow-travellers,
enjoying heartily with them the provisions thus hastily snatched
by the way.
The week at Hobart was memorable to us all. Bishop Linton
read a paper at the devotional meeting on the subject of
" Awakening and Sanctification." Of this the Bishop of
Tasmania writes to Mrs. Linton: —"I can recall him :is he
read his beautiful paper at the devotional meeting of the
Congress, and 1 loved him the more."
On his return to Victoria he went with the other Bishops to
Ballarat, where a round of services, meetings, Ac., had been
arranged. He left for Hay on February nth. On the way
home he met two of his children at Junee. A touching little
picture is given of the home coming. " That day it was 109
degrees in Hay. Many will long remember the delight of
meeting with his children. The clinging of the little one of
eight, the talk of all they had seen and done, the pigeon in one
basket, the white kitten in another, till, when they reached
Hay, the double buggy could scarce hold the accumulation
of luggage." And again, two or three days later, another
incident shows the strength and sweetness of the home love. "As
we drove the boys to school the morning they left, I said to Denys,
4 You have had happy holidays.' 'Not so nice as other years,'
he said, 'because father was away part of the time.'" A longer
quotation from Mrs. Linton's letter shows how ready the
Bishop was at all times for the Master's call, and yet how
vigorous and well, so as to give no cause for thinking that the
call was to come so soon.
"On March Ist, he mentions in his diary, he began to read
Milligan on ' Our Lord's Ascension.' This book he took with
him on his last journey ; he preached from the thoughts
gathered from it on Ascension Day in the Cathedral at Mel-
bourne —the last sermon I ever heard him preach, the last
in Melbourne. He preached again on the subject the last
Sunday at Broken Hill and Silverton : and when I came to
pack up his things after his death, his mark was in the last
page he had read, and beyond that the leaves were uncut. It
is pleasant to think the ascended Lord was the last subject of
his thoughts, and that his mind had dwelt much on that future
world, for which he was at all times so prepared.
" The month of March was spent at Hay, at which time a
violent outbreak of typhoid fever occurred. Each Sunday,
during these quiet weeks at home, he preached and helped in


the services, often walking in and out three times a day, making
seven-and-a-half miles in all, besides the standing during the
services, and yet he never knew what it was to be tired.
" On March 30tli he left for Whitton by train, visited all
Saturday, preached at the Aborigines' station at Warangesda
on Sunday, April Ist, in the morning; in the afternoon at
Darlington ; and in the evening at Whitton, driving long dis-
tances between ; returning home again on the Monday."
And so the last Easter festival drew on, and the time passed
quickly by until the meeting of the Synod. A new departure
was made at its opening :
" The Presidential Address was delivered this year for the
first time in the church. There had never been so good an
attendance. There was a short choral service with a full
gathering of choir men, and then the Bishop stepped out in
his doctor's robes, and stood at the lectern, and in his earnest,
quiet way read the address, for which a place will be reserved
in this report. Many remember how well he looked, how calm
and serene his manner was, how self-possessed he seemed.
Everything was well arranged, and all went without a hitch.
" There was no hurry or bustle after the service, as the
meeting of Synod was held in the hall close by ; and that night
seven clergy and laymen slept at our house, the rest being taken
in by kind friends in the town. His gaiety of manner at meals,
his cheerful talk making all harmonize, and his quiet arrange-
ments for every one's convenience made him what he was, the
■courteous Christian gentleman."
The address was the usual careful review of the events of the
past year with sympathetic reference to Diocesan changes.
The Hobart Congress was the subject of a useful summary. We
quote the Bishop's reference to social questions following on his
comments on the Hobart discussions :
" Leaving the Congress, but still touching upon the question
just considered, 1 should like to draw attention to a quotation
in an article in the Argus on the 17th inst., mentioning that
Mr. Herbert Spencer, one of the greatest thinkers of the day,
has consistently set his face against the crude theories of State
Socialism which prevail in certain quarters; and that Pro-
fessor Tyndall, who had widely differed from him at one time,
had been gradually coming round to his point of view. His
faith in free institutions, which was originally strong, was
rapidly decreasing, his reason being that people show no sense
of the great responsibility that has been placed upon them, and
no special fitness for the duties which are required. ' A nation,'
he says, "of which the legislators vote as they are bid, and of
which the workers surrender their rights of selling their labour
as they please, has neither the ideas nor the sentiments needed
for the maintenance of liberty. Electors or classes of electors


must not desire to bind down their representatives in Parliament
to vote as they bidthem,but must leave them absolutely unfettered
except by their own sense of right.' lam glad to see that the
so-called labour members of Parliament in Sydney refuse to bow
down to the dictates of a narrow labour caucus. It will be a
gross piece of tyranny if trade unions forbid their members to
work upon a reasonable reduction in wages, and by so doing
reduce them and their families to starvation, and to become a
burden upon the public. To avoid such a deplorable state of
things, it is to be hoped that the members of the Shearers'
Union will not yield to any such tyranny in the near future."
The final words of the address read now like a last blessing
on the diocese :
" May God hear our prayers and bless us in our work, and
through us bless the diocese ! May He give to all, both clergy,
and laity, a ready will to obey and carry out the directions of
the Synod, which are binding morally upon all—bishop, clergy
and laity. May God, even our own God, bless us; to whom,
bather, t>on, and Holy Spirit, be honour and glory, now and
evermore !"
On Wednesday, St. Mark's Day, the Bishop ordained to the
priesthood the Rev. F. W. M'Donnell. The synod closed on
Friday, and then came the farewells and the preparations for a
journey to Melbourne. He left Hay on Saturday night, by
the Deniliquin coach. "It was a terribly rough experience,"
writes Mrs. Linton, "being bumped and jarred and shaken for
more than twelve hours, for it was late on Sunday (9 a.m.),
before we arrived in Deniliquin . . . That night the Bishop
preached, and I marvelled at his brain being "able to do so
much, after the tiring week's work and the rough night
journey."
1 uesday, Ist May, the festival of St Philip and St. James',
was the tenth anniversary of his consecration. The consecra-
tion of Dr. Green, Archdeacon of Ballarat, to be Bishop of Grafton
and Armidale, took place that morning at St. Paul's Cathedral,
Melbourne. I well remember Bishop Linton's warm friendly
greeting in the vestry. There was always such a strength and
comfort in his manner of greeting and farewell. One felt so
much the real significance of these conventional signs of fellow-
ship. " Good-bye' —the Bishop often said when parting for a
long distant journey—"l mean it in its best sense —God be
with you"—and then came a look of sympathy and affection
from the clear blue eyes that made one feel, as another of his
clergy put it, " One would do anything for such a Bishop !"
My last meeting with him was on the morning after the conse-
cration, when we had a walk in the grounds of Bishop's-court,
and much pleasant converse. He said, in reply to my inquiry,
that his old physical trouble had passed away, and he was no


longer anxious about it. He was reading Milligan's book, and
I left him preparing his sermon for Ascension Day. One more
look I had—the next morning ; I saw him running to a tram
and springing lightly on the car f full of athletic vigour, as it
seemed.
But the summons was very near. Tte long journey to
Broken Hill, whither he travelled before the following Sunday,
revealed the old trouble. He took worse on that Sunday, and
endured a long drive to Silverton and back. Hut during the
week alarming symptoms increased, and by Whitsun Eve the
doctors found out the worst. Yet, up to the last he was full of
anxious care for the diocese. Two of his clergy have sent me
letters written by him just before he left Broken Hill by express
for Melbourne at the doctor's order. "The letter is so like him,'
writes the Rev. G. W. Carter, who was to be ordained the next
Sunday—"so full of thought for others.'' This letter was
written on Whit Sunday, the very day of his leaving, and when
he must have been suffering severely. There is an extract
which well illustrates the Bishop's careful exactness in detail
and thoughtfulness for his clergy.
" I am leaving for you (now in Mr. Griffith's room) (I) Hobart
Congress report. (2) 'Pastor Pastorum', which, after reading,
pass on to Bradshaw, and ask him to pass to Sisam. (3) 2 doz.
Congress cards. (4) 2 doz. little books for communicants,
which 1 think very good. There may also be a few 'Narrow
Way.' I am very sorry to have to go, but am not my own
master in the matter. Pray for me that all may go well. '
On Whit Sunday night began the long journey by train ta
Adelaide. The Rev. J. Wheeler accompanied the Bishop. At
Adelaide Bishop and Mrs. Kennion met him and did all that
they could. Their exceeding kindness was a great comfort to
Mrs. Linton. The long journey to Melbourne must have been
very trying to the poor suffei*er. Mr. Wheeler felt terrible
anxiety. But here are little incidents which show the Bishop's
tender fatherliness even at such a time :
" On Monday he asked for his pocket-book in the train, and
finding it was May 14th, said, ' I think it is my youngest child's
birthday, and I want to send her a telegram.' Mr. Wheeler
got out at the first station and sent off the message, ' Many
happy returns of the day !'
" Some children were in the same carriage, and their playful
noise troubled Mr. Wheeler for the Bishop's sake ; but on ask-
ing him, he said, ' I like to hear it;' and when in the early
morning it ceased, he was not satisfied till he inquired of the
conductor where they were, and found they had got out at
Ballarat."
Melbourne was reached in the morning of the 15th, and at
once the sufferer was taken to Dr. Fitzgerald's Hospital. Mrs.


Linton met him, and was with him all the day. But, alas ! it
was too late for earthly skill and care. The call to rest had
come, and the same night, in quiet peace, and without a
struggle, he passed away.
"God's finger touched him, and he slept."
" For him there was no sadness of farewell. No passing
through the valley of the shadow of death. No long drawn-out
pain. His calm, patient, self-controlled spirit needed no special
preparation. He was always ready. He had lived so near to
God, it was but a step into His actual presence. To me,"
writes Mrs. Linton, "it seemed as if God had answered his
prayer. Near midnight, at his usual hour, he fell asleep—calm,
peaceful, undisturbed." Not long before his wife had said to
him, "Peace, perfect peace." "Ah, yes!" he said, "that is
heaven."
We need not dwell upon the sad and solemn services of the
funeral. The news caused an outburst of grief in all parts of
the diocese and an abundant expression of sympathy, which was
most touching in its genuine sorrow. The Bishop of Melbourne
and Mrs. Goe showed themselves Mrs. Linton's truest friends,
and most lovingly they helped and strengthened her. The
Cathedral in Melbourne was tilled with mourners. All that
Christian faith and hope could do was done; and so we laid his
body to rest at a beautiful spot in the Booroondara Cemetery at
Kew, wit'i a far-stretching prospect of hill and valley and
surroundings that speak of peace and rest. A simple cross of
purest marble marks the grave, and on it is the inscription so
simple, and for that reason so beautiful—
SYDNEY LINTON, D.D.,
First Bishop of Riverina,
Who from the midst of his work,
In the N.W. of his Diocese,
Was called to his rest. 15th May, 1894.
"O man, greatly beloved, Peace be to thee !"
From many memorial notices we will select only one, written
by the Rev. J. B. Armstrong, of Hay, in the parish paper. It
well expresses what many others unite in testifying:
"In a thinly populated country, what a man is, what he
does, what he says, how he behaves, are points noticeable to an
extent impossible in a crowd, and the effect is consequently
more fraught with general good or evil. Therefore, in spite of
our sorrow, we should thank God for the Bishop we have had.
There was a time, now nearly ten years ago, when our portion


of Riverina, surprised to find itself made into a new diocese,
was perhaps inclined to deny the necessity of the £act. Now,
there is nothing but the sense of how well it has been for us,
and how much we have gained by that action ; and this we
owe to the man who then came to be our Chief Pastor. We
hardly reckon with the difficulties that he had to encounter in
a diocese where everything was in the outpost stage ; where, in
many cases, parishes were to make, men to be found, and every-
thing to be organised. Yet, now it is acknowledged amongst
the other dioceses that Riverina stands close to the fore in
settled ox'der and far-sighted arrangement; and the steps by
which it has been led to that position have all been taken under
a leadership which exemplified the mighty power of patience in
work committed fully to God. Our Bishop faced the harassing
difficulties of the diocese with an equanimity through which
men came gradually to behold the stedfast shining of great
spiritual strength: and the work accomplished under that
influence, together with the good it wrought far and wide on
individual lives, is a record to look back on for which we humbly
thank God. 4 Young as this diocese is—the youngest but two
of the thirteen in Australia—we already possess a tradition,
the lovely tradition of this life lived in our midst.' In the
Middle Ages they sometimes gave their famous Churchmen
specially descriptive titles ; if, in our diocese, we had to choose
one now, it would be " The Beloved Bishop." There can be but
very few of us who have known another instance where a
public loss has approached so nearly to the nature of a family
bereavement, or where the loving esteem of all sorts and condi-
tions of men has been so undesignedly won, or so insensibly
accorded. Time will inevitably dull the keen edge of the
present sorrow, but the memories that hold us now will be part
of our minds so long as they are active; and, though the lines
of his beautiful character may for some of us gradually blend
into one, that one will survive as the broad impression, helpful
to us all, of the high, the eternal "beauty of holiness."
S>eo (Sratias.
" Sleep, calm in earth, a Bishop robed,
Waiting God's golden morrow.
O memory, leave the wound unprobed,
Nor bring too sharp a sorrow.
Let love draw near, and hope and faith,
Where the good saint lies sleeping ;
His white face beautiful in death,
His soul in Christ's own keeping."




COLONY OF \
I T 40 I I 22°T~" 3 ' T Z0J 225 J ) PLAN-=^
I 1 I — I j
- I j DELALAH THOU -CANNA j • SHOWING
I 27 TONOOWOKO 127 278 j _
• P °°XrH "T'l j Y —rX —« —r i Diocese of Riverina ,
_» Tibbooburraf , | */ -f
1 " 1 '59 1 J 1ST 1 / N.S.W.
309 259 283 L /
i L rn / Scale —24 Miles to 1 Inch.
16* i— — i — 160 i 3I8
23g ULARARA Compiled by GEO. MEESON, Hay, N.S.W., 1896.
. • Milperinks g3 1 .
M t Brown \
I I I . n , — 92 L } NOTES.
249 L I / / j
• KJv.nhaM 1 r — —X-X Boundary of Diocese shown by Red edging.
1 Salisbury Downs T j—
EVELYN U I • 114. I J County Boundaries indicated by Blue edging. a
—| j Territorial Boundaries shown by Green edging.
1 U gj 204 | r __ 0 | Station Boundaries shown by firm Black lines.
i I 156 • Yancann; a i56 p , 75 P \ Area of the Diocese—115,387 square miles.
126 213 j I Area of the Colony of N.S.W.—309,175 square miles.
1__- J I"! 274 .298 J 2 j Perrr ''
Co I 195 J YUNG FULCRA 55 /'' KrLLARA \
99® L_ . . Wuntbcrunbe 1 y/ \I \
1 MOOtWINCEE I —1 j < 103 7 \
I farnell „ 1 1— j-j —1 f-Aj \, ,XyX XA
1 Corona ' ,131 |3 2 /
X I ■ VmjNCX J Wilcanj|ram! 19 g /\\ "
, 73 /~~ goo | k
—— 1 1 — r / / // VOOR^k^nda^A
I TAN 19
I GO A f\ \ /^ 6 MOURAMBA
1 J79ll j 244 I / ? —J--1/ U!L__ / \
m 252 r--— 154 ~ -7—H 243 / I 222 \ 159
uj 130 MENINDEE \. r 1 M T ~1 I —
I INertletoeVP a V k) r— ——I 10 I 238 / L I I \
Wo jl I j [i~l / I / ' 62 \ 499
i| 67 " V — Ivinh 1 B LA)(.L jjNDT^r^\
R \A/.Mnrvrn < 194 165 2 ' 2 218 I J \ 33
WINDEYER /T V 1 1 ——L r— J / / „ c MO / WY \ '79 i 33
V / MANARA I / p-c / / / r— —A-Z? / " 6 V\ \ 3i, \ / i\ Condobolin
1 I > / PERRY [ VJ>*. Li.,, J —' / / 7 \\]
ri v O Y .. r / M6 as y Wy f 4asW^N w ./
I Pop, II. L 1 , 1 r -< Varna lL 28 810 1_ j ; YTXr- 1 , 2i 0 3 /
i 1 1-"'" 8 ;" ' ——TYfgzA.lS).
L. I 305 r f ' 2 I I \ 854- — 725 1 —Y
, 17+ 23 |\ 157 ~ I XjfjHMIston 1 W LIN G~~~-/ 397 /
) l °r J 7 26 c "" l '' un? i—i 39 16 138 I 187 y-^\ l00 y^\ 3 " I \ / n"~r —
I 'y 6j y c '' l^ °" :,8 j 4S vv ' aljeers 270 V\ L ' m yj
TARA Lis 261 f KILFERA kv. k W^T/
, i«r\M ; l \V / I ' L,,,, r \ NlSCHOLSdN fT —f— IU / •
1 LiyJ J I 1 J__ I "» \ J } r 7n" \ 196 29 1 / 684- /
JlC- WENTWO RT H —-CH \ Bo vM 424 R7 , \ „ n \ I I /T
I -r c <r ) 1 14 128' \ Xt \ \ 675 \ 420 \ / —/ 808 T 1
U V S J L , —' ' /> \ \ r "I 23S '05 K~L L 887 L 7 '3
\ ) I 61 1 A \ fte] {\ l^~l
f \ k A "9 <( \ - ~]~43q t j "7 <529 j —j / 37 / /2j
I Tareena \Vicloriaj 102 L j N 664 \ \ r 3 T" ~f r * 2 6 4- j ' I |
02 f 9 ' 60 241 \ AA V A L \l / 54
\yk^°°y r yip. i ta i CA ,v A yj—!yAAtA yy i2o 3,5 6s9 r 6 l w i'A«/ L-fAy^^o
Aa 106
( — f ™/ , / ——i£*T" fl *i2 xfrn cn,
? I X A | I I X L I '* 72 1 7 —$~30UH K E
\ 263 320 A* 1 6« f Xi 7 1 \ / JLA 26 X15?5 r
v u-> V g a / rana |cj|1J / I / / I [A L / ~~ T — yA 4 ' 9
\ L5 7 C 72 i6/ / 46 3+7 /S 8 °r D 582 / Narra A «6 /
vkr / p/ 171 / r 680 AT, — ■— pAA /
'o 1 — Ly 8 / 56^!"^ y 1 1 1 / —~—r~j 630 A NvA 96 / lAwyx
NUMERICAL INDEX TO NAMES OF STATIONS. / S^lsJ 23 J S9 I 626 j f^AA! 0 / 4 " H *" *" MS A/
' OF HOIBINC. '' I OF HOLBIWC. Ho - OF HOLOIHC Ho " OF HOLDING. W HOLOIHC. Ho ' OF HOlilHC So - OF HOLDIHC. H °' OF HOLDING. Ko ' OF HOLDINO. Ho " Of HOUPHO. - 4 38T*\~ -, 8 88 60+ j // X FA/.-,
EASTERN DIVIs'lON. ' ' LJ \ XOP.. ( tX\ \U , 0 X„ // , ---XoO AX >X/r7e Wa^a
13 |Jerra Jerra 1 102 JWalla Walla |l62 |Eound Hill |185 |Buckargingaip7 |Brown's | |Gregory |291 |Eillabong |438 |Dudal Come 1615 (Walbundrle V. Av W A /s j 294 / ' I A a[ /?4 / | 403 > , - \ / // // / IVIITCnELL >7
' Pnug A \h XA-i^ALA / X A / <09 r—r / 2 42/ rAJ\ 342 AAyX / nrrT
CENTRAL DIVISION. ) \ \\ 108 f/406 A / / v U / I AcO f A IP7A 475 AXi /\
+ ivf/m n il<?^ remby | 7fi vt7, e 7 18ey J82 Egan c r eek 210 Jenlderie 2H2 Werai |S57 Collindiua 430 Groongal 502 Mimosa 533 Bygalore 6.59 Howlong 0 4 239 / }\*X —\/L /X . 7 /A r IfioAS Z-ixM : - / ~~j{227 7
« « ly n / a , rF „ IS SXP? 217 Oxl e y 284 Thellangerlng 358 8. Uraua 431 Kulki 507 Coreen 697 QbatQuatta 664 Ulonga .S WA n H ill A V VVP,/ / Xt(X\/ / p65)7j63 _^ y / /X>
14 82 Merool Creek 152 Bull 1'lam 220 Bygoo East 360 Malonga 452 Kentucky 515 Hungary W. 601 51 undaiv a- 072 Co bran O Wd II H HIV VkAx/ / / \\ / \OW N S ElfJ D/\ _ / \IT —2/V ' *C / 4-7 Q A 7 7 /
Mulwalaud 89 Mooloomoon 1A> Murrnlebale 224 Colombo Pn. 288 Emu Plains 860 Sandy Kidge +53 North East 517 Lower derra 673 Nowerdnie \ A-rl / / , 1/ A. L 3C ] —/,X0® / / v/ 1, /"'/
16 Marrar 96 m wi™ 8 227 Hanging 292 Bent's Hill 371 Warbreccau Mangoplah Msthul Ck. 603 Mathoura 675 Gun bar } \_6I5/ V / 30J> 1 / \ 494 / \ T / Jenlderie 158 /S X£J \ \ / / /
20 Fn ratha lm J- *JP 2, <w.o ock 204 ilun-ah 375 Howlong 454 Goree 618 Moonbooldool 604 Bundure 682 S. Malonga Vvv - y —J \ 5 / \ _„ ft / ... 282 1/ \ / \ A / / ,/ 67t / \ \ \ / / TV /
23 Beiidnck S ?' 3ath , on g 228 Gelam gSBallaudry 376 Coree 455 Willurah 525 Goolgumbla 615 Meliol 683 Mahonga \ / \ 729 / 235 / ) / \/ / /~~i / 0/J / \23S \ X J I \t
26 Wramlera fj I u T a , ?" i Singoramba A 299 Murray Dns. 381 Huroja 462 Slaneoplah 526 Quiamong 619 Slelra 684 Valcogrin N. 1 /\ \ / / SoM \ / 465 409 3 76 / 2 Ifl / L / Xy-v/33S / \ Wx. I / Xl '—
29 Kerrt mi Cocketgedong J3 Berrembed N. 300 Wooloondool ssa Buckinbong 463 Guuambil 529 Yalcogrin S. 620 Tubbo 685 Kolkibertoo O XA X / /ocT/' Ol i t- J ° 7 D / C,U / pi / 000 / / V.60I l/Y« 1
31 taZLn, 1°1 ffangarnong 167 Taia 235 Beremegad 815 Larary 392 Wee Waa 87 465 Hemliquin 635 622 Grong Grong North xl /»«X ] / / / r-_X M / \ /l7 73
MlSnT 105 rXr 1 .", P 170 Gorman s 238 N. Coonamble 329 Brewarina 401 Comal la 466 Eunonyha- gombtn. 623 Merringreeu 688 Warwillah >• tXtf / \ j / -PI / / /^ , / / 4fi 3 I 692 \ / V / 29/
37 Unner Wvalono- S™ E ' T HlU - i' 0y ? n4 , 885 Burrangong 403 Moonbrla reenya 539 Faradhan 626 Woorooma 692 Wallandoon X " - dk ° o1 R /I+>r>i"I,n.,.Y / / / °° I V. W, 0 /L 7 '
3 along, 108 Ayang 171 Toganmain 241 feaiidy Creek, 339 Cogeldne 405 Huntawang 467 Burhurgate 547 Bolero A N. 627 Ariah 695 Waneanella / . V / \ 371 WiJerilliqUlU J / / L ~L~~± / CC O ?\ T\ Z44(S/v Y
89 Pliek'awidffee m Mh ■ 178 Pomlnga- Wagga 342 Coonong 406 Barratta 470 Bundyu- 548 Boree Ck. 630 Yarrabee 699 KiandraCk. A, / 1 / C / J / 263 / 7 — _ / O03 r A. fV / 1 /
43 Nvanlav in v 242 Barooga 343 Perricoota Urn Hartwoad lumbla 661 Jlungadal 634 Kooba 711 Walbundrie XY 11 CCI / . \ //X / IRfl —/ ,?40\ Weal /
46 EH I Iaah 117 ti ko '. . 256 Canoon Pt. 846 O'Brien's Ck. 410 Up. Wyaloug 473 Brookong 565 Carnery 635 Naneunia 712 Upper S / A7P \ /// V x / ' "U 268 1041 \ ~ 7 — LzJ Sv ,6 ?i~X —
54 West Sltndamah 190 l iS IAO -e 257 Caroonboon 847 Burrabogie 418 Yamma 479 Mittagong 566 Tcbelery 638 Bourke's Ck. Wyalong (2) Apv S \ A ° /C i ~~~l J } 7 7 I " / cny \ 7 / \ (\ /
67 IWutaK i« 261 Bmya 349 Bulgandra 420 Cowl Cowl 482 Bundldgery 567 Carbucky 6.51 Barbara 725 Uundoo Hills <X 2 ~-v \ / I TTf lT ) K. At /" LJ ]682 / 711 I 2 r X- — /d2 // (
68 Nan Van l'S iLJPi SS n SS Harrow Plain1350 Aratula 42lYanko 485 Barellan 577 Grubben Pns 654 Mooyeo 728 Gonn X Spi V I W |A (. / — I 1 LJTF~L fi7|/ n J / I '" 515 f/\
70 NMaloLa lsi 208 Bei-remOed. 209 Lar. ry 851 Murray +22 Berry Jerry 487 Back Wardrj 582 Kerarbury 658 Pulletop 729 Noorong \ V I A\ c _. ?//L\ / JLj K. ,« ICO 7 miMC X/ \
.Malonga ldl Moroco 209 Pariah 280 1353 S. Merrowie 424 S. Thononga 494 Morago 603 C/l)40lF\l r —/ DpNISOllMf / / f J
WESTERN DIVISION. A-_ \ XX>- - /'3 jD / 6 LU. 94P 1 I CTIq/381 452]AA |y
2 •lYreHa r ° a » wL» 5? SS S?4? in 5 ton J* 6 Wanamtnta 160 Urisino 1 184 Curranyalpa 219 Moolbong 1244 Kinchega 286 Huaba \ A A miT I l~ I \ Jl / / / , . / , / /ll / /
4 Iunesowen M \™wl c a, Wallandra 186 Arumpo 161 Pack Saddle 186 Groeolcche 220 Olive Downs; 24.5 Willandra 287 Darling Dns. \ OA DL L L / (i / 31 4- I / / / / / \
SPortGrev S ?|S,L S S on „? lDi , e Dns J2S 138 Alma 162 Dine Dine 186 Gnalta 221 Euston 246 Mossgiel 288 Osaca \ X / X A L U 1 14 ... L X /o, / lL^
9 Huckanbee 36 « i J° 'ap'o 139 Waverly Dns. 163 Coumbie 187 Merungle 222 Eremeran 249 Bulka Lake 289 Newfoundl'd \ w/y-V ' / / / 164 / /csi r°\ <1
10 Moolah i T?i P n 68 Neelierboo KB Marra 140 WirchiUiha 164 Yandama 190 Thackeringa 223 One Par 256 Tara (No. 1) X- -A/C /") X 357 / 583 M 51
II TiMhurst W WioL 18 ™ 141 Start's 165 N. Abbotsford 191 Topar 224 N. Merrowie 228 Corrrng 291 Tankerook N. X 543 Rid Y/ S N I \/P7 D Ai/ /I ./ 1 3/
13 Mellyambo +2 SnSSnti I? J. ,aro " ha , Meads. 166 Tanngo Dns. 192 Fuiham 225 Burrawinnia 259 Warratta 297 Kew • f /l/ V C. t\ / X / I I I /
14 Turlee +1 PwmL? n Sss Mo17 Boondara 142 Wangaron 168 Outer 195 Corona Down 26i Para 298 Turkey Ck. C _ T/ C V^-/ ! K J I VL \ y 7
15 Noontharnniree i5 JI ii i? . J J Glenlyon 143 Mt. Monara Nalallie 196 Murice 227 Tintinaleggy 262 Wittabrana 805 Oberwells <}- / \ CorOWH a//
16 CoulDataro +7 fST. TO Hi Bootra 144Lranaway 169 Kagnligah 197 Urella 229 Billilla 263 Cana'ly 307 ilount L / \ WWUiUWd Y
18 Bueltwaroan 48 . en £ e ?. woa K JJ 3 i® ol °. H c BotoN.E, 170 Lake Victoria 200 Nundora 230 Wirlong 269 Erlbend'y Boorilhumble / /n —y c —
20 Mount Ginng 49 Sn"i' a o , JS 148 Gql Gol 172 Tongo 202 Moorna 231 Boolegal 274 Kayrunneh 309 Mt. Stuart X / yf IX
21 Cobbani Lake 51 F'niare «s Baden Park 119 lupra 150 Tibora 173 Poolamacca 203 Netley 232 Bedoona 278 Berrawinnia 310 Mulurulu y 7 ! // t f T f~) D / A
si Tr da «7 v d p e , e Ool°wra 151 Mount 174 Avoca 204 Monoion S. 237 Manfred 1.8) Downs 811 Euabalong *W~fS V / L / U fil A iHIDUlY
23 Ma ara I5 I S,, w m w Bunnertnge Arrows'th 175 Torrens Ck. 207 Thurloo Dns. 238 Nartwood 279 Ophara 812 N. Peak ' / noama
24 Coan Downs X Toiamn m J2S K°. ul , J 81 Marfleld 170 Teltagoona M2 Conoble 239 Mt. Poole 28.1 Mt. Stewart 313 Caryapundy
25 Kilfera 59 Cnnniaoidi-;,. a? At 11 ef* Hn 5 elalab I 56 Yancannia 178 Cultowa — 213 Mordem 240 Dunlop 284 Carapundy Swamp
26 Tareoola m s m e u 1 21 H? S urta 157 Garnpung 179 Booberoi 214 Cuthro 241 Paika Swamp 314 Do. West
27 Mt. King 61 Marma 93 Grasmere 159 Mt. Mood 181 Belford 218 Mulgah 243 Thule 285 N. Euabalong 316 Boundary
' — — —— LJ I TROEDEL 1.C® MELB*SVD.
QUEENS LA N D




---TV— - •
'
*
« '
-
#
«
■
TROEDEL & Co., PRINT.
♦
t >








1508
00227033 3
—»-


MMmffigyj jx T ■
&
