

SYDNEY
TO
CROYDON.
(NORTHERN QUEENSLAND.)
An Interesting Account of a Journey to the
Gulf Country with a Member of Parliament.
BY "SALTBUSH"
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
Sydney:
"CAX TON” PRINTING WORKS, 247 GEORGE STREET.
1889.


ANGUS & ROBERTSON LTD.
N ew & Secondhand Booksellers
Publishers to University
89 Castlereagh St. Sydney.


SYDNEY
TO
CROYDON.
(NORTHERN QUEENSLAND.)
An Interesting Account of a Journey to the
Gulf Country with a Member of Parliament.
BY “SALTBUSH.”
PRICE - - CITE SHILLING.
cSglmcg:
“ CAXTON ” PRINTING WORKS, 247 GEORGE STREET.
1889.




FROM SYDNEY TO CROYDON.
BY “SALTBUSH.”
HAYING received letters and telegrams from an old mate of mine
who has been on the Croydon goldfield for some considerable
ttime in all of which communications he strongly advised me to pay a
visit to the field in order that I might judge for myself as to its rich-
ness and permanency and its suitability for investment—it being in his
opinion the grandest goldfield ever discovered in Northern Queensland.
I finally decided to make the trip, and in company with a friend of
mine, who with myself, had on a former occasion visited Normanton
and the Gulf-country before Croydon was ever thought of, we started
from Sydney on Monday, the 25th July, and as the incidents of our
journey may prove interesting to many others who may visit the
locality in the near future, I have ventured to jot down a few
experiences and impressions picked up during the journey. We waited
upon Messrs. Burns Philp and Co. in Sydney and made all arrange-
ments as to return passage from Brisbane to Normanton, having
decided to proceed overland from the capital of New South Wales to
the capital of Queensland, ray friend, who had never travelled that
route, being particularly anxious to have a good look at the New
England and Darling Downs country, more especially as I was pretty
well acquainted with it, and could furnish him with some information
■concerning it that might be eventually both useful and profitable.
Having packed our travelling trunks and various necessaries for the
voyage, and confining ourselves to such articles as were absolutely
indispensable, in order to make our “impedimenta” as light as possible—
knowing from experience that too much luggage is a terrible handicap
on a Ion" journey—the first step was to secure berths on the Hunter
River Steamship Company’s fine boat, “the Namoi,” which left the
wharf at half-past eleven, for Newcastle. With the assistance of
“ Alick,” the well-known and genial bedroom steward, we secured a
very comfortable cabin to ourselves on the upper deck, and a more
obliging and attentive steward than the same Alick I never wish to
drop across in my travels, as nothing seemed any trouble to him and
he relieved us of all anxiety concerning our luggage by looking care-
fully after it whilst in transit on the steamer, and then, on our arrival
At the coaly city, by conveying it on board the Northern train advertised
to leave at a quarter-past seven, a.m., on the morning of the 26th,


As we had half-an-hour to spare before its departure we stepped
across the street from the Railway Station to the Terminus Hotel,
where we interviewed a very old friend of mine in the person of Walter
Sidney, and imbibed a refresher in the shape of a tirst-class glass of
whiskey and milk, which proved very refreshing in the sharp morning
air, when we strolled into the main street; passing the Post and
Telegx’aph Office and turning to the right, we climbed the hill at the back
of the town, from which point of advantage we had a most glorious
view of the city and its surroundings—the Pacific Ocean spreading
away to the horizon on the right; Nobby’s, with its light-house lying
in front of us, Carrington, late Bullock Island, to the left, and the city
and its environs at our feet, altogether formed a most delightful
panorama, viewed as it was under favorable circumstances, the morning
being beautifully fine and clear with a crisp, sharp feeling in the air,
which rendered our stroll truly refreshing and enjoyable.
Returning to the Station we found the train on the point of
starting, so securing our seats and a supply of literature, in which the
“Town and Country,” “ Sydney Mail,” “Evening News,” “Echo,”
and “ Bulletin ” figured prominently, we made ourselves as comfortable
as circumstances would permit, having for fellow passengers, Mr. and
Mrs. Blunt—the former the contractor for one of the sections of the
Homebush and Waratah railway extension—who were on their way to
Muswellbrook to spend a few weeks at home and enjoy a well-earned rest.
Leaving Newcastle we steamed along past Honeysuckle Point,
then onwards through Hamilton, Waratah, Sandgate and Hexham,
where we commence to traverse the famous swamps, rendered memorable
as the breeding-grounds of the well-known and duly appreciated
“ Hexham Greys,” those noted mosquitoes, which beyond all question,
are able to climb the trees and bark, whilst it is also an equally well-
known fact that many of them weigh a pound, but as this is not the
real mosquito season we escape any very pressing attentions on their
part, and running along through this flat swampy country with the
Hunter River shining brightly in the morning sun on our right, we
gradually strike into better country, and by the time East Maitland is
reached the land looks about as good and as fertile as they make it in
this part of the world.
Passing the gaol on our right, where no doubt many an unfortunate
is bitterly regretting the hour in which he strayed from the paths of
rectitude, we shortly afterwards pull up at East Maitland, where the
guard and porters inform us that passengers for Morpeth change here,
and after a few minutes delay we again proceed on our journey, calling
at High Street (West Maitland) where the inevitable newsboy supplies
us with the “Maitland Mercury,” one of the best country papers in
New South Wales—conveying, as it does, an enormous amount of
information on every conceivable subject to its numerous readers— and
a journal of which the proprietary may feel justly proud. On, past
Farley, formerly known as the Wollombi Road, where most of the fat
cattle are unloaded for the Maitland market, past Lochinvar, Allandale v


Greta, with its noted colliery, Branxton, famous for the excellence of
its wines, Belford and Whittingharn platforms, and we emerge on to
the famous Patricks Plains, passing through the valuable estates of
Messrs. Dangar—Baroona lying to the left of the line situate on a
commanding site, overlooking a most charming and extensive view of
the surrounding country, Neotstield being hidden away to the right,
whilst the paddocks with their wealth of pasture are thickly dotted
with groups of cattle in splendid condition, who seem highly content
with their comfortable quarters. Past Dalcalmah, the beautiful
residence of the late D. F. Mackay, who I remember years ago as the
proprietor of “ Bullamon ” and “ Nindygully ” Stations on the Moonie,
in the colony of Queensland —before the Messrs. Fisher became the
purchasers —and where he passed many years in the pursuit of his
occupation as a squatter, roughing it with his men through fair weather
and foul, and where, no doubt, he contracted the seeds of the disease
that eventually terminated his life; past the magnificent Beebeah
Vineyard, the property of Mr, A. Munro, whose vines have won a
deservedly high reputation for purity and flavor, and we pull up at
Singleton, 49 miles from Newcastle, about half-past nine, quite ready
for the breakfast which awaits us, and which we have been anxiously
looking forward to for the last half-hour.
Several old friends greet me on the platform, amongst them being
Harry York, formerly a well-known host at Jerry’s Plains, and Joe
M'Alpin, who is now the boniface of the old Caledonian Hotel, and
who looks as though the life agreed with him down to the ground.
Breakfast over, we get under way again, and pass over the bridge
across the Hunter, where a former member of the New South W ales
Legislative Assembly now does duty as gatekeeper ; and that reminds
me of a racy story told at his expense, as follows : —During his Par-
liamentary career lie on one occasion received an invitation to dinner
at Government House, which, of course, was- duly accepted ; and at
length, arrayed in full evening costume, he had the pleasure of sti etch-
ing his legs underneath the Governor’s mahogany. W aiting at table
was at that time reduced to a science in the “ uppah suedes, and our
worthy M.L.A., who felt rather at sea in such high and dignified com-
pany, awoke some compassion in the bosom of his right-hand neighbour,
who, to relieve his embarrassment and to make him feel at home,
engaged him in conversation on the various topics of the day. Soup
was duly served, when a remark from his right-hand neighboui caused
our friend to lay down his soup spoon and turn his head to reply. In
a twinkling his plate disappeared, to our friend s utter astonishment,
but a supply of fresh fish brought peace to his soul for the time being,
when “ A glass of wine with you, sir,” from his friend caused him to
relinquish his hold upon his fish-knife and fork, turn his head to reply,
when, lo and behold ! the balance of his fish, plate and all, disappeared
like a flash. Turning round to continue his meal, our friend discovered
his loss, and corning to the conclusion that some practical joke was
being played upon him, he determined to keep a sharp watch during


the remainder of the repast. Everything progressed to his satisfaction
until the joint was served, when the same performance was likely to be
iepeated; but our worthy legislator was equal to the occasion, and,
seizing his knife, he wheeled suddenly round as he saw the waiter’s
hand stretched forth to grasp his plate, and in low but impressive tones
said to the astonished waiter ; “ By Jove ! if you remove that plate
until I have finished with it I will chop your blooming hand off.”
Jableau. Still onwards, passing through some lovely country, both
agricultural and pastoral, of Avhich the famous Ravensworth Estate
forms no inconsiderable portion, noted in years gone by for the excellent
bleed of horses raised there by Captain Russell, we at length arrive at
Muswellbrook, the great store cattle market of the colony, where
thousands of horned stock from distant parts of New South Wales and
Queensland are annually brought under the hammer and disposed of to
various buyers, a great number of them finding their way into the
grand fattening paddocks of the Hunter River valley, there to be
topped up for the metropolitan market.
There is a sale advertised to take place on the day we pass through;
and away on the hillside, at the south-eastern corner of the town, we
obseive the saleyards filled with cattle, whilst drovers and stockmen
are hurrying hither and thither, giving life and animation to the scene;
whilst buyers are congregating from different parts of the district in
order to supply their requirements.
Mr. and Mrs. Blunt leave us here; and away we go past Aber-
deen, pulling up at the bridge Avhich here spans the Hunter, to replenish
the water tanks of our engine. On past Turanville, of which a splendid
a iew is obtained away to the left; and Scone, Avhere thousands of
pounds have been spent in the extermination of that terrible pest, the
prickly pear. On through the fertile and beautiful valley of the Upper
Hunter, past Wingen, with its famous burning mountain, and into the
a alley of the Page, tributary of the Hunter, eA r entually pulling up at
Murrurundi, nearly 120 miles from Newcastle, about a quarter to one,
and where we are allowed ten minutes to stretch ourselves and refresh
the inner man if Ave feel so inclined.
W e change engines here; in fact, we obtain two for one, it being
absolutely necessary to attach an additional locomotive in order to
climb the Liverpool Range at the head of the valley, and which I have
many a time climbed on foot in the coaching days of King Cobb, when
Murrurundi Avas the terminus of the Great Northern line, it being more
than even their noted good teams of horses could do to drag a heavy
load of passengers and mails to the summit.
OnAvards and upAvards Ave go, winding around spurs and alongside
steep ranges, obtaining some magnificent views of the town and A r alley
below, the prospect in some places being most lovely and enchanting,
with its background of noble-looking hills; and at length Ave plunge
into the tunnel and intense darkness, from which Ave emerge into the
far famed Doughboy Hollow, a famous camping ground in the olden
days, where the teamsters Avho had surmounted the difficulties of the


range were glad to rest themselves and their tired cattle before tackling
the black soil plains of Breeza, and where they would gather round
the camp fires at night relating their various adventures by flood and
field, backing “ Doughboy ” and “ Damper ” against “ Bally ’ and
“ Brindle,” and swapping lies generally, until it was time to go to roost.
On past the Willow Tree, Braetield platform, Quirindi—a thriving
little inland town, situate in the midst of some splendid agricultural
country—the whole of which, from here to Tamworth, must in the
course of time come under the operation of the plough, and find
employment and food for thousands of people—we at length pull up
at Werris Creek, at half-past two, 156 miles from Newcastle, where, in
exchange for half a-crown, we are allowed to discuss an ample repast in
one of the largest and best refreshment-rooms in the colony, twenty-five
minutes being allowed for the operation ; and as a lavatory is attached
to the establishment, we find a good wash very acceptable and refreshing
before proceeding to dinner.
Here part of our train is detached, it being the junction of the
North-Western line, and with its complement of passengers proceeds
onwards, via Breeza, Gunnedah, and Boggabri, to Narrabri, the present
terminus of that portion of the line j although it will be a good day
for the colony when the extension is carried out via Moree to Queens-
land border, the country in that direction being some of the finest
grazing land in the whole of the colonies, which must eventually become
populated, as means of communication are provided for the people ; the
roads, so called, being simply impassable in wet weather, and many a
time and oft have the inhabitants of that part of the colony been
threatened with famine in consequence of their supplies being detained
for weeks and months at a stretch in transit from Narrabai to their
destination.
However, I suppose all that will come to an end when the colony
is blessed with a progressive Government, and in the meantime we will
proceed on our journey, via Ourrabubula and Dui’i, to Tamworth. We
pass through beautiful open forest and plain country, every acre of
which seems fit for cultivation, and is dotted here and there with
comfortable-looking homesteads and smiling farms, and shortly pull up
for a few minutes at West Tamworth, where I greet a very old friend
on the platform in the person of Mr. David Browm, of Menedebri
Station, who is beginning to look “ like a flour bag” now, although stilt
as sMart and active looking as 1 remember him in years gone by, when
he was bossing the Millie South run on the Galathera Plains, then the
property of his father, and where a traveller was always secure of a
real Australian welcome. He was riding, as usual, a splendid-looking
specimen of a hackney, being always reckoned a good judge of a horse;
but as the train waits for no one, except perhaps a Minister for
Works or a Railway Commissioner, we bid each other good-bye and
steam away for Tamworth proper, crossing the valley of the Peel and
the river itself by a long viaduct and bridge, and curving away to the
right, shortly afterwards pull up at the station, where on the platform


I espy another old and esteemed friend, Mr. Frank Wyndham, who
formerly owned the Boronga Station on the Macintyre River, but after
many years of hard work and anxiety finally had to succumb to the
combined forces of droughts, bad markets, and excessive rentals ; but
being one of the old sort, who never say die, he has established himself
in business in Tam worth as a stock and station agent, and I was very
pleased to learn he has succeeded very well in his undertaking, and is
doing much better than he did in his squatting ventures. He deserves
all the good fortune that time may have in store for him, for he is a
“ real white man,” whichever way you take him.
The town of Tam worth is pleasantly situated at the foot of a bold
chain of mountains and on the Peel River. The soil on the flats is
very rich, and has been occupied and under cultivation for years ; and
on the border of the town is situate the famous Little Paradise garden,
a most lovely and charming resort during the summer months, which is
duly appreciated by the citizens and those visitors who may be staying
in the town for a few weeks’ change.
Skirting the foot of the ranges, with the river fiats on the right
cut up into farms and paddocks of every size, and tending eastward
and northward, with signs of cultivation and occupation on every hand,
we at length reach the Moonbies, and commence in earnest our climb
to the tablelands of New England.
Onwards and upwards, following the course of a romantic-looking
stream, containing some beautiful pools of clear, sparkling water, at
one of which, where an overshot dam had been constructed, we pull up
for a few minutes to replenish our water supply. Then, still onwards
and upwards, we at length reach the summit, the first station on the
tableland being the Macdonald River, 208 miles from Newcastle,
a splendid stream of water, cool and clear-looking, and enough to
make a dweller in the back blocks suffering from drought turn green
with envy.
As it is now nearly six o’clock and darkness is setting down over
the land, my powers of observation are for the time restricted, and can
merely discern that we are passing through rocky granite country of
poor character, although where patches have been cleared and ring-
barked, it shows decided improvement, on past Walcha Road, Kentucky
and Uralla. At 7.40 p.m., we alight cold and hungry at Armidale, 260
miles, where tea is provided, and for a cold, cheerless, uncomfortable
meal, the tea at Armidale “ takes the cake.” As the air is piercingly
cold no fire is visible in the dining-room, whilst the viands are neither
tempting nor appetising, but the fifteen minutes allowed soon expire
and away we go again, and still rising we cross Ben Lomond—the
highest point of elevation on any railway in New South Wales, it being
4471 feet above the sea level—3o2 miles from Newcastle, about a
quarter to ten. Coiled up in a corner of the carriage with my rug
wrapped round me I make myself as comfortable as possible, fall fast
asleep, and do not awake until we reach our destination at Tenterfield,
the present terminus of the line, at five minutes past one in the


morning, and bitterly cold we find it on stepping out of the carriage •
and making our way to the coach in waiting to convey us to Biow
w v,pxe fortunately a good tire and a warm welcome await us,
but we are not Jong in. being anxious to obtain a tevv
hours rest in a comfortable bed before resuming the journey. At 5
o’clock Wednesday morning we are roused up by a knock at the door and
a voice saying, “ Breakfast will be ready in a few minutes,” and shortly
afterwards appear inthe breakfast-room whereawell cooked andappetising
repast is quickly placed upon the table, to which we do ample justice, and
a few minutes past six take our seats on the box of Cobb & Co. s coacli
with luggage aboard, to compass the 13 or 14 miles of road between
Tenterfield and Wallangarra on the border and the terminus of the
Queensland line. v ,
Our driver is “ Old Larry,” a well known whip on the Northern
roads, and quite a character in his way, so that we have a remarkably
pleasant drive in the crisp mountain air, and being well wrapped up we
defy the cold, for it is cold without a doubt, many of the little pools by
the wayside being coated with ice, whilst the frost in the valleys is thick
and heavy, and the air ten degrees colder than on the summit of the
hills, where the beams of the rising sun are dispersing the mists and
warming the atmosphere. The steam rises from the horses in t e
frosty air, but they are staunch and good, and about eight o clock we
cross the border, and shortly afterwards transfer ourselves and luggage
from the coach to the train at the township of Wallangarra, on the
Queensland side. , .
I am afraid this township has not a very bright future before it,
the sorrounding country being of remarkably poor quality and evidently
incapable of maintaining anything like a large population, and I should
fancy that the branch of the Royal Bank of Queensland established
there can hardly pay expenses, whilst the hotelkeepers must have all then
work cut out to make both ends meet. However, I wish them all sorts of
good luck—for any man deserves it who would live in such an out-ot-
the-way hole. . , .
Our train starts about half-past eight and is not long in running
into Stanthorpe, formerly a very thriving town and the centre of alaige
and important tin-mining industry, but judging from what we saw
during the few minutes the train stopped, I should say now that the
principal residents are goats and Chinamen ; in fact, the place seems
almost handed over to the Chinkies, and I hear that the Chinese Com-
missioners on their overland journey to Brisbane had a hig o time
of it here with their countrymen during their short stay, being driven
round to the principal mines in the vicinity, and being made much o
•-•enerally, to say nothing of the wine consumed in their honor.
Granite rocks and boulders are the principal features of interest as
we steam along, but a few miles out of Stanthorpe the line follows the
course of a lovely looking valley for some distance, giving us some
charming views of mountain scenery from our coign of vantage, we
having secured a very comfortable compartment right at the rear or the


train, having a platform on which we can stand and view the
surroundings and have a smoke in peace and comfort whilst viewing
the hue of rails disappear in our rear. The country shortly afterw«-i-
--begins to improve, and as we near Wai 'Wtolz oouiu rancl' agricultural
land dotted here and there with farms comes into view, the train
presently coming to a standstill at what will shortly be the main
station, on the eastern side of the town. A goods shed has already
been completed and the station buildings now in course of erection will
bear favorable comparison with anything of their kind along the line,
being built in a most substantial manner of a very superior kind of
freestone, which I was informed was obtained at a quarry about twelve
miles distant to the eastward, where there is an inexhaustible supply.
After a few minutes’ delay we steam slowly across the Condarnine River
o\er a substantial bridge, and following a bend of the river to the
westward, pull up at the present main station where twenty minutes is
allowed for dinner, and a right good meal is served about half-past
twelve, to which we do full justice, our five o’clock breakfast at Tenter-
field having vanished into the mists of the past by this time—the
■\ iands being plentiful, the cookery excellent, and the country girl who
waits upon us very attentive, the charge also being moderate—two
shillings and for the life of me I cannot understand the difference in
the tariff on the overland journey between Melbourne and Brisbane.
At Seymour, in Victoria, they give you a splendid tea for eighteen-
pence, but for one early breakfast at Albury, and for any other meal on
the New South Wales lines nothing less than half-a-crown is charged,
so that protected Victoria will certainly compare favorably with
fi eetrade New South Wales in that respect, whilst Queensland strikes
a balance between the two, and gives you as good a meal as either of
them for two shillings. However, the bell rings and again we take our
seats, shortly to commence our journey over the far-famed Darling
Downs, as soon after leaving Warwick the panorama opens out and some
magnificent stretches of country meet the eye on every side, the view
being enchanting in the extreme, more especially as we are favoured
with exceptionally fine weather, whilst the temperature is becoming
decidedly warmer, making travelling far more pleasant than it was
during the cold hours of the night and early morning coming through
New England. Grand agricultural country this, as well as pastoral,
farms being thickly dotted over the landscape, whilst splendid stacks of
hay, visible at various stations, speaks well for the forethought of those
who, having doubtless learnt a few severe lessons during our seasons of
drought, have made preparations for the future. Passing Allora, a
thickly populated farming district, with signs of cultivation visible on
every hand, we pass over some splendid rolling downs divided into
paddocks, and evidently forming a portion of the famous Clifton Estate,
in which we discern some grand specimens of pure Devon and grade
cattle, whose condition speaks volumes for the richness of the pasture,
the water supply evidently being obtained from wells, with pumps
worked by means of windmills of the solid-wheel type, numbers of


which can be seen at work as we pass along, with cattle grouped
around the troughs and tanks in their vicinity, whilst the prospect
extends almost as far as the eye can reach.
A splendid hare is handed to the guard at one of the Clifton cross-
ings, and we shortly afterwards pull up at Clifton Station, where the
passing of the train appears to be the event of the day in the eyes of a
few bushmen congregated under the verandah of the Clifton Arms ;
whilst the horses hitched here and there show that the arrival of the
mail is evidently of some importance to the settlers resident in the
vicinity.
The country continues of the same splendid desci’iption past
King’s Creek and Cambooya, where the south-western traffic, via
Leyburn, Inglewood, and Goondiwindi, joins the railway line, and
where a splendid reserve is available for the carriers on that road.
Still on, through grand farming country, passing under the road
leading to Toowoomba through Drayton, past one or two small plat-
forms and we pull up for a few minutes at Cowrie Junction to refresh
our engine. Here the main western line from Mitchell, Roma, Yeulba.
and Dalby, junctions with the W arwick and Stanthorpe line ; and
another eight miles, through farms, orchards, and gardens, with soil of
the real Toowoomba color, brings us to the capital of the Darling
Downs. We run out on a substantial trestle-bridge, and by means of
a triangular section of railway back into the station, so that we have a
clear run outwards when resuming our journey to Brisbane.
With a quarter of an hour allowed for refreshments, we step out
and stretch our legs, have a cup of tea, obtain a couple of good havanas,
and again resume our seats, and passing outwards towards the crest of
the range obtain a very fair view of the town and its surroundings, the
excellence and fertility of the soil being conspicuous on every hand.
Just as we commence the descent a lovely place is visible to the
sight perched on a plateau at the summit of the range, a splendid
orangery being a conspicuous feature in the surroundings, whilst the
view obtainable therefrom would be hard to surpass in any part of the
colony.
Onwards and downwards we go, mile after mile, the views from
various points being magnificent in the extreme and extending for
miles, comparing very favourably with some of the most romantic
scenery of our own far-famed Blue Mountains. On round sharp curves,
over spidery-looking bridges that look almost as though a strong gale
would blow them over; across deep ravines fringed with beautiful shrubs
and trees of every description, plunging through short tunnels built on
the curve to such an extent in some instances that one wonders how on
earth they managed to construct them safely—Hie whole forming a
lasting monument to the en ineering skill that managed to overcome
the almost insurmountable obstacles that stared them in the face in
their endeavours to open up railway communication between the capital
of the colony and the Darling Downs. One particular feature of the
journey struck me as an example worthy of imitation on the various


lines throughout the different colonies. I allude to the numerous peach
trees bordering the line, planted thereby the gangs of fettlers employed
in the maintenance of the permanent way between the summit of the
range and Highfields, these trees being a treat to see during the
summer months, and affording an ample supply of beautifully cool,
juicy fruit during that time to the numerous employees on this heavy
length of line.
Highfields, where we stay for a few minutes to replenish the water
supply, is a most romantically situated spot, sheltered from the hot
westerly winds that generally prevail on the Downs by a range clothed
in verdure and greenery almost surpassing description, and I have often
wondered why some speculative individual has not taken advantage of
the natural beauties of this most charming retreat amongst the moun-
tains and erected an hotel, to which the tired denizens of the city could
resort during the hottest months of the year to renew their health and
energy, feeling sure that the speculation would be one of the most
profitable of its kind in the colony if properly carried out; for if our
own colony can support hotels and boarding-houses by the dozen on the
Blue Mountains, surely the colony of Queensland could maintain one
of the kind, at least, in such a lovely spot, with a perpetual spring of
pure water available for every purpose, which would enable anyone to
turn the place into a veritable paradise on earth.
Leaving Highfields, with its sanatorium still in the womb of the
future, Ave proceed onwards and downwards, passing some magnificent
blocks of freestone of excellent quality stacked along the lino, awaiting
conveyance, the quarry from Avhich it is obtained being situate in a
gorge of the mountains immediately below, and with a supply evidently
inexhaustible. Past Murphy’s Creek, at the foot of the range, Ave
shortly afterwards pull up at Helidon for tea, where the good opinion
Ave have already formed of the quality of the meals supplied on the
Queensland railways is still further strengthened; the establishment
being under the control of an old friend of mine, Avitli whom I had
often spent a pleasant hour in Brisbane, when he Avas managing a very
large business venture in that city. Very pleased indeed we Avere to
meet again ; but the iron horse allows of scant delay, so with a hearty
grip Ave part—l to resume my journey, and he to remain looking after
the wants of travellers like myself; and if they never get into worse
hands they Avill never take much harm.
Night has now settled down upon us, and shortly after passing
Grandchester, with its beautiful plane trees groAving alongside the station"
I drop off to sleep, passing the intervening stations, including Ipswich,
Avith very faint recollections, and am finally roused by my travelling
companion as the train slows down just outside the Brisbane terminus
for the collection of tickets, about a quarter past ten at night.
Shortly afterwards, Avith our belongings stoAved away on board a
Avagonette, we are on our way to the Metropolitan Hotel, where I
reneAv an acquaintance extending over many years Avith its jolly pro-
prietor, Mr. J. A. Philips, but unfortunately have to interview him in


his own private room, as he was laid up with a severe attack of the.
gout, and unable to leave his bed.
However, I find him as jolly as ever, making light of his affliction,
and looking upon it as a matter of course j but he takes good care that
our wants are duly attended to ; and shortly afterwards, pretty well
tired out with the long journey, I retire to rest, and sleep the sleep of
the just until roused by the loud tones of the gong calling me to
breakfast in the morning , '. . ,
Just to °ive your readers an idea of the time occupied on Lie
overland journey between Sydney and Brisbane I will summarise it as
We left Sydney on Monday night at half-past eleven ; arrived at
Newcastle early next morning; left there by tram at a quarter-past
seven a.m. on Tuesday; travelled all that day reaching the present
terminus at Tenterfield at a quarter-past one on Wednesday morning ,
left there at six a.m. the same morning by Cobb’s coach, and arrived at
Wallangarra about eight o’clock, finishing the journey at Brisbane at a
quarter-past ten the same night, . , . , .
The steamer for Normanton had been advertised in Sydney to
leave Brisbane on the Thursday, the day after our arrival, but on going
to the office to make inquiries as to her time of departure, we were told
that in consequence of having been delayed by running aground in
the Brisbane River on her way up to the wharf, she could not possibly
leave before Friday afternoon, so that we had a clear day to loot
around the city and hunt up our acquaintances Not having seen
Brisbane for a couple of years I took advantage of the opportunity to
ascertain what progress the city had made since my last visit, and must
say that the sight of the buildings lately erected gave me a very strong
idea that the community must be in a tolerably prosperous state to
enable them to erect such structures in their midst.
The Queensland National Bank, the » Courier ’ buildings, the
offices of Macdonald-Paterson and Co., Grimes and Pettys, fimney,
Isles and Co., the Imperial Hotel, and many others, would compare
favorably with anything in the colonies, and would certainly be a ci edit
to any city in the world. I also paid a visit to Parliament House, and
must certainly admit that the lower chamber is far and away supeiior
to that of Sydney in every respect, it being arranged much after the
style of the Council Chamber in the latter city, but the accommodation
for the public, and more particularly the gallery set apart for ladies, is
perfect in its way, and offers an example that the older colony might
well follow whenever it is decided to erect something more suitable tor
the purpose than the present barn-like structure that passes muster as
the Legislative Hall of New South Wales. With regard to the re-
freshment room, Sydney has the advantage; in fact, I think it won c
be hard to find a finer dining-room than the one attached to the
Legislative Assembly of the old Colony,but like the railway arrangements
for meals, in this respect also, Queensland bears the palm, the tanfl foi
all meals to Members of the House being one shilling only, and available


every day, both in session and out, the consequence being that many
Members of the Legislature who appreciate good cookery at a moderate-
rate, desert the clubs at meal times and give the preference to the
-Parliamentary cuisine.
■ r with several Members of the Lower House, notably,
Mr, Macdonald-Paterson, Postmaster-General, and Mr. Macrossan
the late Minister for Works; the former, a fine jovial specimen of
i uinanity who did his best to make our stay as agreeable as possible,
and who certainly left a most favorable impression on my mind as a
courteous and affable gentleman of whom the colony may well feel proud.
However, it is not my intention to weary your readers with a
description of Brisbane and its surroundings, so will proceed to relate
more particularly the incidents of our voyage northwards, which may
prove of more interest than descriptions of men and cities told many a
time and oft by abler pens than mine.
The ss. Rockton, 2000 tons, was the vessel destined to convey us
to the port of Kimberley, in the Gulf of Carpentaria, passengers‘and
luggage being transferred there into the s.s. Dugong for the remainder
of the voyage up the Norman River, it being as yet impossible to get
vessels of the Rockton s tonnage and draught across the bar at the
omi r T the r iTvf nd f )oat a ( l uart er-past five, p.m. on Friday, the
-9th July, we left the wharf in Brisbane and steamed slowly and care-
fully down the nver, being one day behind at the start through the
before-mentioned accident to the vessel on her inward voyage. The
usual bustle consequent on the departure of a large steamer with a full
complement of passengers took place—many tearful farewells and *ood-
jyes were uttered, many hearty hand-shakes given, and many a white
handkerchief waved as we cast loose from our moorings, but there was
little or no confusion, Captain Leggett and his officers reducing every-
thing to apple pie order in a very short space of time, whilst the
passengers began to look about them trying to discover whe were their
companions for the voyage and what sort of a prospect was held out for
a pleasant passage, as it depends very much upon the company one
happens to meet whether matters go smoothly or not, and judging from
personal observations, we were evidently in for a sociable and enjoyable
We got safely out of the river just as the night came on, bore
across for the light on Moreton Island, got safely over the outer bar
and the voyage had fairly commenced, our first port of call heme
ownsville; and as by this time it was about a fair thing, I turned in
and had a good night's rest, the sea being comparatively smooth, whilst
the steamer, with the wind abeam, was going a good twelve knots and
by resets 6l7 Pl ° SPeCt ° f * mpid P assa S e ~ a promise fully borne out
On we sped, passing Frazer Island and the Great Sandy Cape on,
Saturday morning, very little occurring to break the monotony of the
voyage, except that off the Cape we noticed thousands of sea birds
engaged in fishing a very interesting performance to those who had


not previously witnessed anything of the kind—and as we were \ ery
-close to them, in fact they almost surrounded us, we had a splendid
view of the operation. ,
A bird would rise from sixty to a hundred feet above the surface
of the sea, then turn, and with head down, wings folded closely to its
sides, come down like a stone, disappearing under the water tor a tew
seconds, when it would emerge—in most instances with its fanny prey
secur ed—and after paddling on the surface for a few yards, disposing of
its capture, it would again take wing, and mingling amongst its fellows
again and again go through the same evolutions with varying success.
We had also some glimpses of lovely islands scattered here and
there on the calm surface of the sea, which, together with the glorious
views of the mainland, combined to form a most exquisite picture ever
■changing and ever enjoyable, more especially to those who had not
previously taken a trip along the lovely northern coast.
We had the usual variety of games by which travellers on ship-
board manage to while away the time—deck quoits, whist cribbage,
penny nap, draughts, and chess, and amongst those who affected the
latter game was “ Uncle John,”—a perfect character in his way, and a
never-failing fund of amusement to his fellow-passengers,—who was en
route to Oooktown on business connected with the construction of t ic
railway from that place to May town. A jovial old card at all hours
and under all circumstances was “Uncle,” ever on the watch to persuade
a friend to join him in “ viewing the alligator, 1 ' ever ready to join in a
round game at cards or meet an opponent over the chessboard, where his
preternatural look of wisdom and “ whuskey,” combined with his witty
remarks on the progress of the game, would afford a regular go as
you please” entertainment to his delighted auditors, chief amongst
whom was a little four-eyed specimen of the tribe of Israel, whose
lau"h at “Uncle’s ” sallies was loud and continuous,until it finally became
monotonous, and created a murderous desire in the breasts of those in
the immediate vicinity, more especially when he followed the old mar
about with a pressing request that he would again entertain him with
the funny story of u The broken clown walls of Jerusalem. ic i
de pest yarn, sho elp me neffer, dat I efer hear in all mine life, untl gome
unci dell it to dis shentleman; he was not hea it at all yet, until we all
had it by heart. . . , . u
At meal times also “ Uncle ” was a regular picnic all to himselt,
and a chop trying a wrestling match with the « old un invariably
came off second best, for, seizing it by the shank end, it would disappear
■down his capacious maw with a rush, the bone reappearing immediate y
afterwards as bare of meat as a black gin’s shin-bone ; whilst he would
dive the fork he was using into the dish of spuds and impale one with
unerring aim, to the great “ amusement ” (?) of his nearest neighbours.
As for the dessert, particularly the oranges and bananas, the way it
■disappeared was a caution to boa constrictors. And as nc e was
never sick or sorry, but always on hand whenever the saddling ie
rang, I am afraid the purser did not get much the best of the deal.


However, the old boy was a jolly good old sort, able to give a joke-
or take one with perfect good humour, and the last we saw of him was
going over the side and down the companion bidder into the ship’s boat
for delivery in Cooktown, with the following label secured firmly to his
coat:—" l am out for the night; when full, take me home; address,
Uncle John, Cooktown Gaol.” And one of our passengers who went
ashore in the same boat says the old chap was safely landed, the last
words he heard him utter being, “ Stand up, lads; my shout this
time ! in the bar of Poole’s hotel.
We also had on board Mr. B. Cribb, who was on his way to Croydon to
act as P.M. and assist the Warden at that place in getting through the
vast amount of work caused by the large influx of diggers, attracted
by the reports current throughout the colonies of the richness of the
xT^i7 t 0 With Messrs - Hassall and Waddell, members of the
JN.b.W. Legislature, who were taking advantage of the recess to pay a
visit to the field ; and many others, including a brother of Mr. Cribb’s
Charley Street, a well-known expert telegraph operator, who had been
told ofl to help the unfortunate post and telegraph master at Croydon
(who was nearly worked to death) pull through the enormous amount of
business which was being done since the opening of the office; Mr.
Wilson Le Couteur, the possessor of a magnificent voice and an
extensive repertoire of songs, with which he whiled away many a
pleasant hour, who had been instructed by the A.U.S.N. Co. to proceed
to -Normanton and report upon the best means of doing away with the
delay that now exists in landing and lightering the vast quantities of
goods shipped to that port.
It was high time some decisive steps were taken in reference to
this important matter, affecting, as it does, the future welfare of nearly
the wdiole of the residents of the Gulf country, who are at present, and
will be for years, mainly dependent upon outside supplies for the
necessaries of life; the country around here which has come under my
observation being totally unfitted for agriculture. And in view of the
immense increase in business which has taken place since the discovery
of the Croydon goldfield, of which the A.U.S.N. Co. are reaping the
direct benefit, it was a good stroke of policy on their part to send a
gentleman of Mr. Le Couteur’s ability, knowledge, and tact to discover
and report upon the best means to be adopted in order to attain the
end in view ; and, speaking for myself and many others who have made
this trip more than once, sincerely hope that suggestions made by him
to the company he represents may be carried out in their entirety and
without any unnecessary delay. J
The rest of our passengers were of the usual mixed order found on
board most coasting steamers—a fairly representative collection of the
various trades and professions incidental to colonial life, who fraternised
together in the usual way, and, as a rule, did their best to entertain
each other during the voyage; the number being largely increased
on our arrival at Townsville by an influx of miners, machine owners
and speculators from Charters Towers, some of them accompanied by


their wives and children, and evidently intent upon settling down at
Croydon and giving the place a fair trial in a thoroughly practical way.
We arrived at Townsville on Monday morning, and cast anchor in the
bay shortly before eleven o’clock, but it was some little time before the
steam tender came off' to convey mails and passengers ashore , oui
captain, Mr. Cribb, Mr. Le Couteur, and one or two others being
accommodated with a seat in the Customs’ boat, which had come along-
side in the meantime. The usual inconveniences of landing at Towns-
ville were experienced on this occasion, for, notwithstanding the large
sums of money spent in trying to improve the port by erecting jetties
and by dredging, it is almost as difficult to land now as it was years
ago, when the first rush took place to Charters Towers.
° The steam tender took us as far as the bar at the end of the jetty
right enough, but there the trouble commenced as we had to tranship
into the steamer’s boat, which the officer in charge had taken the pie-
caution to tow behind us, and from that we were transferred or landed
on the northern jetty, climbing up the blocks of stone of which it is
composed as best we might, winding up with a fairly long walk under
a glaring sun over a pretty rough track with a heavy patch of sand to
wind up with, and finally pulling up at the Criterion Hotel foi a
refreshei’, where I met several old and valued friends, including Mr.
Fred Johnson, who looks as well and hearty as when I met him nearly
ten years ago, Mr. Hubert, Tom Coyle, and many others.
As we had about eight hours to spare I utilised the time by having
a look around the city, and found that many improvements had been
made since my last visit, and from all appearances the place has eveiy
prospect of a prosperous future, although just at present matters are as
dull as the proverbial ditch-water; Townsville, like many other places
throughout the colony, having suffered severely from the effects of the
late drought, but signs of improvement are visible in consequence of the
present really good season, and the beef and mutton exhibited in the
shops of Messrs. Castling and Johnson would compare favorably with
anything in Australia.
Townsville has long been noted for the excellence of its hotel
accommodation, and years ago when the Queen’s Hotel was under the
management of Mr. and Mrs. Harry Boulton, now of Pfahleits Hotel,
Wynyard Square, Sydney, the name was a household word amongst all
travellers whom business and pleasure took northwards, for the
excellence of its arrangements ; and under the present supervision of
Mr. and Mrs. Oran it has lost none of its former prestige, whilst the
“ Imperial,” established by Mr. D. Buchanan, and now conducted by
Mrs. W. Eaton, late of the Criterion Hotel, Rockhampton, will compare
favorably with anything of the kind in the colonies.
The news of the good crushings at Croydon had created quite a
stir, and many of the old pioneers of the north were thinking of paying
a visit to the new “El Dorado,” in order to ascertain from personal
observation what the future prospects of the gold-field were likely to
be, and their opinions will doubtless be looked forward to with a great


deal of interest by their immediate circle of friends and acquaintances,
as well as many others who will rely upon it before making a start for
this as yet comparatively unknown country.
We had been instructed by the “ Skipper” to be at the Company’s
wharf about 4 o’clock, and about that hour crowds of people are
congiegated in that locality—the majority of them being passengers,
attended by their relatives and friends, who have come to wish them
God-speed on their voyage—and on the tender putting in an appearance
and making fast to the wharf quite a rush took place to secure seats on
board, the little vessel being crowded to its utmost capacity with
passengers and luggage. As the tide is making we get out safely, and
without any delay, are shortly aboard the “ Rockton,” the anchor being
weighed a few minutes after 7 p.m., and with a fair wind and smooth
sea we continue our voyage, taking the outside track round Magnetic
Island, obtaining a splendid view of it and the Palms as we steam along.
Nothing occurs to break the monotony until we arrive at Cooktown,
where the anchor is let go about 5 p.m. on Tuesday, the ship’s boat
jeing \ery quickly in readiness to convey the captain, purser, mails
and passengers, ashore, but as it is pretty rough I prefer staying on
•oaid, gi\ ing our genial old friend, “ Uncle John,” a parting salute as
he goes over the side with about as much ballast aboard as he can carry.
We are only delayed about five hours when everything is again in
leadiness to resume our voyage, the passenger list being supplemented
by a few fresh arrivals, causing some of the state-rooms to bo rather
inconveniently crowded, but as the nights are warm and the weather
keeps gloriously fine many of us prefer sleeping on deck, and by the aid
ot pillows, mattrasses, and rugs, succeed in making ourselves perfectly
comfortable. Captain Thompson, whose duty it is to take charge of
the vessels belonging to the A.U.S.N. Co. during the passage between
Cooktown and Ihursday Island, and vice versa , comes aboard here for
the purpose of superintending the intricate navigation of this portion
of the eastern seaboard, and as vve also have the services of Captain
Keating available in that capacity, in addition to the practical seaman-
ship and knowledge of the coast possessed by Captain Leggett, we have
every prospect of pulling through in good time and without the necessity
of having to anchor at night; more especially as the nights are
beautifully fine and clear with a good moon, which renders, by means
of its light, most valuable assistance.
I have often wondered how it is, that further south where plenty
of sea room is always at command, accidents of the Ly-ee-moon and
Cahors type should be of more frequent occurrence than they are in the
intricate navigation between the Barrier Reef and the mainland, where,
if such calamities did happen, it would not be so much matter for
wonderment, and some excuse could be made for those in charge of
valuable human lives and property, and can only account for it by the
fact that the danger renders everyone connected with the vessel most
vigilant and attentive j pilot, captain, and officers, being always on the
alert to secure the safety of everything under their control.


On Wednesday morning we have a rare bit of fun. One of our
passengers—the little Jew, wearing specs., before mentioned—was
coming out of his cabin, and hearing a commotion going on in the fore
part of the steamer, asked a steward whom he chanced to meet, “ Vat
vhas all the row aboud T There was a sail in sight ahead, and on the-
look-out man giving notice of the fact everyone on deck was rushing
about to try and get a sight of the stranger ; hence the bustle and
noise noticed by the Jew. “A sale ! a sale !” says the child of Israel.
“ Mein gott, steward, vhy dont you got me a ‘ kateelog’; de tings vhas
all sold pefore I make me any monish.”
About breakfast time we were abreast of the Channel Rock light-
ship, and as we had some packages on board for them, the whistle was
sounded and a boat manned by four men—one of whom was the
possessor of, I think, the finest beard I ever saw on a man—put off
from the lightship and was shortly alongside, the steamer being stopped
for a few minutes to enable them to obtain their letters, papers, and
goods, amongst the latter being a large bale of aboriginal blankets for
the use of the blacks in the vicinity of Cape Melville, where they are
still pretty numerous. How t on earth the unfortunate beings condemned
to pass their days on this lonely lightship manage to exist without
losing their reason passes my comprehension altogether, for a more
desolate-looking spot it would be hard to find on the face of the earth,
viewed as we saw it from the deck of the Rockton, with the lightship
anchored about three miles from the shore ; a few ugly rocks just
showing above the surface of the sea indicating the dangers of the
channel; the mountains of rock piled together in most admired disorder,
and almost bare of vegetation, in the background—the whole scene
being one of such utter desolation that I could not help a feeling of
pity arising in my breast for the poor devils, whose only intercourse
with the outer world is limited to an interchange of a few words once
a week with a passing steamer.
Some little time after passing the lightship, and when neari-ig the
Flinders Group, a blackfellow’s canoe was descried in the distance, and
as we drew nearer we could see that it contained four darkies, who were
paddling with might and main trying to intercept us—no doubt for the
purpose of begging food and tobacco, or any other articles which the
charitably disposed might feel inclined to bestow upon them. Their
canoe, which was fashioned out of a hollowed tree and fitted with an
outrigger to prevent its capsizing, was making good headway under the
frantic exertions of its dusky crew, being well away on the starboard
bow ; but as time was precious, our genial skipper did not care to slow
down for the purpose of holding an interview, and we gradually drew
abeam of them : but they struggled gamely on until we left them astern
and they saw pursuit was hopeless, when, with a gesture of despair,
they threw up the sponge and, squatting down in their frail bark,
watched us steam away, regretting no doubt their hard luck at missing
a breakfast and a smoke which had seemed almost within their grasp.


We shortly afterwards passed the Flinders Group, a most remark-
able landmark on this route ; and I was informed by Captain Leggett
that splendid oysters of most delicious flavour can be obtained in almost
any quantities just off the point of the most westerly of the islands, he
having discovered them on a former voyage when commander of the
Gunga. Ihe sea is as calm as the proverbial mill pond, and we seem
as though steaming along some broad and beautiful river, the points of
the Great Barrier Reef showing plainly on our right, whilst on our left
we have the mainland, in some places bold and well defined, and in
others low and indistinct, from which at times dense columns of smoke
are seen arising, denoting no doubt the presence of some of the wild
tribes of blacks who still find a safe retreat in the recesses of Cape
York peninsula.
We shortly come in sight of Claremont Island Lightship on
the Northern side of Princess Charlotte Bay, where Captain
W ilson, his wife, and assistants find a quiet retreat from the
noise and bustle of the outside world ; and here also we see a little
daughter of Pilot Thompson’s, who is suffering from an affection of the
brain, and has been recommended by a medical man thorough rest
and quietness for a time ; and no better place could have been selected,
for certainly, to judge from appearances, nothing could ever occur here
to jar the nerves of the most sensitive, whilst there is a little more
a ariety than is apparent at that lonely Channel Rock, there being a
beche-de-mer station visible on a low-lying coral island a short distance
away to the eastward, with which doubtless the dwellers on the lightship
keep up communication.
There are many low islands and patches of coral reef distinctly
visible on either side as we steam along, rendering the utmost vigilance
on the part of pilots and captain indispensable, but we have a relay of
good men in Pilots Thompson and Keating and Captain Leggett; so we
make good headway in spite of all obstructions ; and shortly after
leaving the Olaremonts we meet the British India Steamer Catterthun
bowling merrily along on her course southwards, with whom we exchange
the courtesies usual at sea. We are evidently in tropical climes this
morning, judging from the light and exceedingly airy costume in which
one of the gentler sex appears on deck, causing quite a feeling of
astonishment amongst the lady passengers who have not yet learnt to
appreciate the coolness and luxury of a robe made of mosquito netting
and fine linen, and a flutter of excitement amongst the male portion,
who, like myself, believe that beauty unadorned is admired the most.
But the Captain, like the good general he is, soon puts matters straight,
and the excitement gradually subsides as we settle down listlessly to
pass away the hours as best we may.
On Thursday morning, about eight o’clock, we enter the beautiful
Albany Pass, certainly one of the most lovely spots on the whole coast
of Australia, and nearly everyone is on deck to admire the lovely scene
presented to their view.


There is a terrific tide rip at the entrance, the water fairly surging
over some low-lying rocks on the port side, running down from a point
of land covered in all directions with ant-hills of a beautiful red coloi,
with which one lady seemed excessively charmed ; and not being quite
sure of what they consisted, asked another lady friend if that was the
lovely red coral of which she had heard so much, but was unable to
obtain any definite information on the subject; and I am still under
the impression she retains the belief that some of the grandest coral
ornaments in the world are to be obtained at that particular spo .
The ever-changing views obtained as we steam through the Pass bring
forth expressions of admiration and delight on every hand, culminating
in one spontaneous burst as w 6 round the point, which reveals a view
of the old Government residence at Somerset, and now occupied by Mr.
Frank Jardine, who has a large cattle station in this portion of the
peninsula—the house being situated upon an eminence surrounded by
dense tropical foliage, bringing out in strong relief the cleared ground
in the midst of which the buildings are erected, whilst down on the
beach are the boat and beche-de-mer sheds, with a neat little schoonei
and her attendant fleet of small boats lying peacefully at anchor-
making, altogether, a picture long to be remembered.
At the northern end of the Albany Pass lies the Sextant Rock, so
•called from the circumstance of the great navigator, Captain boo
having landed there to take observations; and as j we <iraw near to
Thursday Island, just before entering the Prince of Wales Channe ,
we see away to the north-east some few miles distant the wreck of ic
ship John-de-Costa, which ran aground on the North Torres Reef, a
little over two years ago, whilst on her way from Melbourne to Calcutta
with 150 head of horses on board for the Indian market.
There she lies nearly high and dry with a slight list to starboard,
looking in the distance like a vessel at anchor, a grim monument to
the dangerous navigation of these coral seas ; and shortly after she was
wrecked, whilst horses, stores, &c., were still on board, the lot was
submitted to auction at Thursday Island, and bought by a syndicate o
the residents in the immediate vicinity at the following figures : 1 ie
vessel with all standing rigging was sold for £170; the horses and
about 30 tons of fodder only realised £2O; cabin stores, £2O , dec v
stores, £2O; and 125 iron tanks of 400 gallons each, £2O.
All attempts to get the ship off the reef have proved futile, nit
about 100 of the horses were saved, being transhipped into small vessels
belonging to some of the pearl-shellers, in lots of four and five at a
time, and then landed at Thursday Island, from whence they were
finally sent on to Normanton, the majority being conveyed by Captain
Leggett in his various trips with the “ Gunga,” so that the speculation
on behalf of the syndicate must have turned out a very profitable
venture. We steam round the northern end of Hammond island and
Hammond Rock, the latter looking like some immense boulder, round
which the tide is rushing at the rate of a good five knots an hour, am
here we catch the first glimpse of Goode Island and the lighthouse, with


homing in the distance; and shortly afterwards pass tl
lecca Reef, so called from the fact of the steamer of that name havii
there become a total wreck.
thr J\ is i f ° r co "S‘-atulatio.i amongst us that we have con
tin ough safely, it being almost impossible to over-estimate the difficu
ties attending navigation through these dangerous and intricate channel
which necessitates a uniform rate of speed in order to keep a correc
reckoning, so that great reliance has to be placed on the chief engineer
of all steamers taking this route ; the beacons placed here and there o
olainwT erO T r ke V eefS Wi - h Which the P lace bounds denotin
plainly even to the most unpractised eye that the life of a captain i
belong f S 18 Certaml { not , all beei ‘ and skittles ; and excuses migh
found for an accident in this locality which would be entirely wantin
M J* 1 ® reefs extend right across to the Ne\
hi ordpr tn ’wU & t 0 C ° mo C '° Se t 0 G °° de
m order to get through the narrow channel of some half-mile in widtl
IrriLv I'" T ’ aUd WMCI \ j n the <>£ an invasion of ou
tenitory by a foreign power could be fortified at comparatively triflins
expense, and render an attack from that direction almost impossible.
™ e * tee ;: 'T* the n S rt J iern end of Goode Island, obtaining a fine
of the lighthouse and keeper’s quarters, romantically perched oi
wtl h g fT ?° lnt ° f i H,K - ! n the lsland ’ havin g Friday and Prince o
VV fi J' S andS r T nght; Goode a,ld Hammond Islands on the left
with Horne Island in the background, Thursday Island lying deac
Going through this passage we encounter a very strong tide
the buoys marking the passage being half submerged by the fierce rush
of water which reminds one very much of the current in a mighty
mer , but the Rockton is equal to the occasion, and our progress is
certain, if not very rapid. There are several shelling stations in sight
and I was particularly struck with the beautiful situation of the one
known as “ Waiawea,” which is on a small island lying between
Hammond and Goode Islands, and looks, with its grove of palms
surrounding the residence, a veritable paradise on earth.
Fleets of shelling boats are lying at anchor at the various stations*
whilst one small schooner, evidently making for the anchorage at
hursday Island, has had to drop anchor through not being able to
make headway agiunst the tide, and forms a very picturesque object,
with her colored crew forward and the boss, evidently chewing the cud
of reflection, seated near the stern. We entered the port by a different
c lannel to that which I entered on a former occasion in the City of
Melbourne in consequence of the water being too shallow to admit a
vessel of the Rockton s draught coming through the nearer passage-
but we rounded the point on which is situated the Government
residential quarters and laid a course for the hulk Star of Peace along-
side which our Captain laid the Rockton in a thoroughly workmanlike
manner, without any of the noise and fuss generally noticeable on such
occasions.


\V e soon boarded by Mr. Milman, the acting Government
resnient, in a smart water police boat, who shortly afterwards goes
ashore, taking as passengers Messrs. Oribb and the parson who had
come to settle down amongst the “Thirsty Islanders,” whilst several
friends and myself are invited to take passage in the remarkably smart
boat belonging to Messrs. Burns, Philp, and Co., manned by a colored
-crew of boys, dressed in a neat blue and white uniform, white caps
with tortoiseshell peaks, and commanded by Mr. Bromley, the agent
here for the great northern firm who monopolise the greater portion of
the business done in this quarter of the globe. The colored population
is very conspicuous, shore boats manned by Cingalese being an especial
feature-; and some howling swells are visible amongst the various crews,
■one joker in particular being especially remarkable for his flowing
petticoats, tortoiseshell comb, bald head, and a few long locks of hair
behind his ears and on the back of his neck.
Cingalese traders also come aboard with heaps of Brummagem
stuff, dear at any price, and do their best to drive a bargain, but with
very little success, the majority of our passengers having been there
before,and had some little experience of these guileless colored gentlemen.
We cast anchor at a few minutes past noon on Thursday, and as we had
to discharge about 70 tons of cargo and take aboard 100 tons for
Normanton, our skipper, who was anxious if possible to get away again
that night in order to catch the tide on the Norman River bar on
Saturday, tried his best to expedite matters; but he had to deal with a
lot of colored wretches who had evidently been born tired, and con-
sequently required a certain amount of rest, so that, strive as he would,
the fates were against him, the loading and unloading process lasting
well on to midnight, when it was too late to make a start, so that we
had to remain where we were until daylight on Friday morning.
We had a commercial traveller aboard with a heap of samples who
got fairly on the war-path because he was unable to induce Mr.
Bromley to let him stow his luggage in Messrs Burns PhilpandCo.’sgig, a
-craft certainly never built for or intended to carry cargo, and never used
for that purpose even by the firm themselves. Then he tried to induce
Captain Leggett to place one of the ship s boats and crew at his service,
evidently wishing to get his goods ashore on the cheap, and not caring
what delay or inconvenience might be caused to a whole ship’s company
by the proceeding as long as he got his own turn served.
The Captain told him that as he was anxious to proceed on the
voyage that night if possible, he could not spare the boat’s crew, but as
there were plenty of shore boats available, why not engage one of them
if very anxious to get his samples landed. But this did not suit the
■drummer’s book altogether, so he relieved his feelings by blackguarding
everybody all round, and swearing vengeance on Bromley, Captain
Leggett, and all concerned, but I noticed he took the shore boat at the
finish, when he found it impossible to save the expense of the trans-
action. There are thousands of people like him in the world who care
nothing for the loss and inconvenience their actions may cause to


others as long as they can get their own turn served, and sa™
which are only fairly and legitimately incurred in the prosecution of
their own business transactions. Going ashore at Thursday Island is a
bit of a pic-nic, especially for ladies, there being no wharf to land at,
and as the water is very shallow for some distance from the shore, boat
are unable to come right in, consequently, passengers have to be con
veyed from the boats to the beach on the backs of the colored boys who
compose the crews—so that a heavy weight on a light built boy stand
a fair “ six to four’ chance of coming to grief, and carrying more watei
ashore in his clothes than he bargained for.
There are some very nice buildings and residences visible from tin
beach, the Queensland -National Bank and the private residence o
Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co.’s manager shewing out prominently ; then
aie also two hotels, which are very fairly conducted and look extreme!)
cool and comfortable, but I can hardly understand why customers have
to pay a shilling for a drink, as they surely ought to be able to lane'
liquors as cheaply here as they can in Normanton, where the price is
only sixpence. We had a stroll round the place, but it does not take
long to encircle the settlement, and I was more interested in a visit
paid to Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co.’s Stores under the guidance ot
Captain Pearson, an old resident of this locality, than with anything
else I saw upon the Island. Jhe front store abounds with supplies of
every description required in the Island trade—a large business being
now done with the natives of New Guinea, whose curios and implements
of warfare form a conspicuous and very interesting exhibit, the Company
having a large stock of them for sale.
In the back stores they showed us tons of pearl shell, some of
which, recently discovered in a patch off the coast of New Guinea, was
of excellent quality, several specimens of the golden-lipped variety that
were submitted for our inspection being something magnificent in size
and appearance ; whilst ranged in bags round the walls were the different
species of beche-de-mer, first and foremost being the teat fish, which
realises a high figure in the Chinese market, it being esteemed by the
disciples of Confucius as one of the rarest of delicacies when served at
table in the form of soup.
Having fairly explored the settlement, which certainly is one of
the most picturesque and interesting spots on the eastern coast of
Australia, and has a resident population of about four hundred souls,
embracing, of course, the islands in the vicinity, as well as a floating
population of about twelve hundred, comprising whites, blacks,
Lascars, Coolies and Chinese, we signal the boat, in order to return to
the ship, and on our way witness a rather novel sight.
A number of fat bullocks had been shipped at Townsville on board
the Rockton to the order of the only butcher at Thursday Island, and
as the ship was as previously described, lying at some distance from the
shore, it proved a matter of some little difficulty and danger to land the
stock without running the risk of loss by drowning ; so to minimise the
risk as far as possible, the following plan was adopted :


A rope with running noose at one end was first placed round the
horns of each bullock as they stood in their stalls on deck, when the
slings were placed under them, and one at a time they were hoisted into
mid air, and then gradually and gently lowered into the water along-
side the ship, where boats were lying in readiness to take them in
charge, in order to tow them ashore. The ropes round the horns were
grasped and secured to a ring in the stern of the boat, whilst two stout
rowers pulled with might and main towards the shallow landing, the
butcher, or one of his assistants, being seated in the stern of the boat
to steer and watch that the cattle did not come to grief on the journey.
Thus, partly swimming and partly towing, slow progress was made,
until eventually the cattle struck the sandy beach—when the fun
commenced—as, finding they had foothold and something to charge at,
they madly plunged at the boat, necessitating the exercise of con-
siderable skill on the part of the boatmen in keeping out of harms way ;
but what with the confinement on board ship and the resistance offered
by the water, the poor animals were soon exhausted, and seeing a few
green bushes and some tempting green grass at the edge of the water,
they slowly made their way ashore, and under the welcome shade of the
trees, stood ruminating, no doubt upon their novel experiences of the
last twenty-four hours.
On board again once more, where all is hurry and bustle in order
to save the tide, Captain Leggett being anxious to get through the
passage that night if possible, and in the meantime we are favoured by
numerous visitors from ashore and afloat, if I may use the term,
“ everybody who is anybody,” making it a point to avail themselves
of the hospitality of our worthy skipper whenever he drops his kellick
in these waters —to say nothing of the opportunity afforded to these
convivial and thirsty souls of “ interviewing the alligator ’ at the, to
them, moderate charge of sixpence, when compared to their own island
tariff of a “robert.” We had the brave Baron Wilkins, the bold
commander of the 4< Von der Sluyt,” as grand a hulk as ever stored a
cargo of coal, accompanied and supported by a true specimen of the
British Tar, in the person of Captain Williams, of the equally celebrated
clipper “ The Star of Peace,” now, alas, also condemned to the ignoble
but useful role of storing coal and cargo for the ships of the A.U.S.N,
Co.
A SHARK STORY.
Many others came, amongst them being Captain Anderson,
an old sheller in the waters of Torres Straits, and the owner
of a complete plant and station on Friday Island. He has in his
possession a splendid collection of pearls obtained by him in the
pursuit of his avocation during the last ten weeks, their value being
about £3OO, one of them weighing carats, an egg-shaped pearl of
remarkable beauty and lustre, and without a flaw, being valued by him


at £150; and as he also collected three tons of shell worth £UO per
ton at the same time, his venture was, to my mind, pretty successful
On my making a remark to that effect, he said the life was not all beer
and skittles, having its full share of dangers as well as its pleasures ;
and as an illustration he related to me one of his diving experiences,
when he had a fight with a shark. “He said I was working at the time
with my boat’s mate and crew, about 15 miles from Captain Hovell’s
Shoal, out to the westward from here, and was down in my diving dress,
in about twelve fathoms of water. As I was walking along I espied a
shark lying on the bottom close to a coral cup or and
apparently fast asleep, so walked over towards him, and lifting my foot,
shod with the heavy leaden sole which it is necessary to use in connec-
tion with the dress, I kicked him fairly in the head. But I made a
great mistake that time, for in about three seconds my noble shark
came at me like a bulldog. I was carrying a bag with about ten shells
in it, which partly hid my right hand ; but, unfortunately, my left
hand was exposed fairly to view, and the monster descrying it came
towards it with a terrific rush, and succeeded in touching it with his
nose. Before he had time to turn and seize upon it I managed to wrap
the bag aiound it. I moved backwards and the shark struck me twice
with his tail, nearly knocking me over, when it would have been all
u. p.; but I managed to keep my feet, and obtaining a little room,
kicked him faiily in the teeth with my diving boot, which gave him a
start, and to my intense relief he turned tail and cleared at the rate of
40 miles an houi. I can assure you that no one was more pleased than
myself at the termination of the encounter, as I was fairly stunned
with fright, and was totally unable to draw my dagger, which, in order
to keep bright and useful, is inserted in a watertight case, and has to
be turned four times in the sheath before it can be withdrawn.’”
We weighed anchor on Friday morning, having, after all, been
delayed longer than we expected, got safely through the passage in a
strong ripping tide, and after an uneventful voyage down the Gulf of
Carpentaria, we sighted, about midnight on Saturday, a light that
pointed out the anchorage off the mouth of the River Norman°
We steered a course as straight as an arrow for the lightship,
shewing that our captain and his officers must have kept a very good
reckoning, and I cannot close my remarks upon this part of our journey
without bearing ample testimony to the kindness and courtesy of
Captain Leggett throughout the voyage, and to the care and attention
bestowed upon the passengers by one and all connected with the ship.
W’e cast anchor oft the Borman River bar between twelve and one
a.m. on Sunday, and the steam tender “ Dugong,” under the command
of Captain Campbell, came alongside in the small hours of the morning
to convey passengers and luggage up the river to Borman ton, so that
we had to turn out pretty early in order to save the tide, and partake


of a seven o’clock breakfast before starting, the transfer of luggage
being rapidly and safely effected in the meantime, after which the
whole of the passengers are transhipped without delay, and we bid
good bye to the good ship Eockton, which has carried us so far safely
on our journey.
The anchorage at Kimberley is a wild dreary looking waste of
water as viewed from the deck of the small steam tender, it being fully
fourteen miles off the shore with scarcely anything visible to break the
monotony of the scene, the land lying very low and fringed with the
mournful looking mangroves so prevalent on the northern coast of
Queensland ; but steam is up and away we go, shaping our course by
means of the buoys laid down to mark the course of the very circuitous
channel which we have to follow, bounded on either side by shallow
sand banks covered with sea birds of various kinds, who here find a
congenial home, the only land in view being on the starboard side and
only just discernible above the water’s edge, whilst some few miles off
lies a ship which has brought out a cargo of rails for the Gulf railway,
but has made the mistake of keeping too far out, she having anchored
in five fathoms of water and unbent her sails preparatory to discharging
her cargo, but as it was almost impossible for the lighters to lay along-
side in such an exposed position, her captain was making preparations
to bring her a few miles closer in and nearer to the lightship, in order
to enable them to get through the work. We cross the bar safely and
shortly afterwards sight the Telegraph Station at Kimberley, and as the
Dugong is making fair progress we are not long before entering the
mouth of the river, and a blast from the whistle brings off old Bob, the
boatman, to receive a few telegrams, conveying the fact of our arrival
to the Normanton agents of the Company, who have to make provision
for our conveyance from Baffle Group to the town, as the Dugong,
drawing six feet of water, is unable to proceed any further than that
point in the present state of the tide.
The Telegraph Station is situate on the left hand bank of the river
as we enter, and seems a lonely enough spot in all conscience, but I am
told the old man in charge has been there for years, and seems fairly
contented with his lot; his immediate neighbours consist of a tribe of
aboriginals to whom he is very kind, but they all received a terrible
fright during the hurricane that almost destroyed Burketown, as it
came tearing across here with terrific force sending a wave of water
right across the point, reaching half way up the little house with the
red door, situate on a sandbank a short distance from the beach, and
making the darkies believe their last day was at hand. The river here
is a noble looking stream carrying about five fathoms of water, the
depth from the bar to the mouth averages about four, and is nearly a
mile in width, and taking into consideration that not one pound of
public money has been spent in its improvement, it is, in its natural
state, one of the finest rivers in the colony; but the bar sadly wants
dredging in order to allow ocean-going steamers to enter the river,
where they could obtain safe anchorage in all weathers and discharge


cargo without risk, damage, or delay. Old Bob comes oil in obedience
to the signal whistle, seizes the line thrown to him and hangs on until
the telegrams are handed over, when he clears for the shore, off which
are lying the old pilot cutter, the new steam launch which has super-
seded it, and a lighter belonging to the rail ship before mentioned.
Lhe bank on the right hand as we steam up being very low and densely
covered with the everlasting mangrove, forming a splendid breeding
ground for the Gulf mosquito, but the land on the left is of much
superior character, consisting of lightly timbered forest country, well
grassed, and of fair fattening capacity, and now in the occupation of a
small syndicate, who, by means of a butcher stationed at Mrs. Arm-
strong’s old selection, supply the pilot and Telegraph Stations, together
with the various vessels calling at the port, with beef of excellent
quality, both horses and cattle keeping in grand condition, more
especially after the old grass has been burnt and young green feed
springs up, which it does in about a fortnight after the tire has died away.
Here we observe the blackfellow in all his native dirt and ugliness
—numbers of both sexes, many of whom are clad in the costume of the
Greek slave—standing on the bank watching us as we steam rapidly by,
and shortly afterwards we pass Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co.’s steam
launch undergoing an overhaul on what Captain Campbell calls his
gridiron—a slip invented by himself for the purpose of occasionally
having a look at the bottom of the vessel he commands.
About ten miles from Kimberley we pass the Red Bluff, a low-
lying red ridge, situate about a mile back from the river, and chiefly
remarkable for the agitation that has lately sprung up with regard to
the construction of a railway from there to Kormanton; but one can
hardly recognise as sound economy the idea of running a railway over
flooded country, on a course parallel with a navigable river, especially
as the surrounding land seems to consist entirely of swamps and salt
clay pans, which could never be made available for any useful purpose.
Fifteen miles up we pass the mouth of Walker’s Creek on the left
hand, on which there are some good waterholes about twelve miles back
from the river, near where the telegraph line to Kimberley crosses it,
as well as some very fairly gi’assed country of decent quality ; and some
distance further on we pass the mouth of Wells Creek, also coming in
from the same side, whilst on either hand we pass numerous mangreve-
lined small inlets ; in fact, one could almost call them ditches so narrow
are they, whilst the country is so level that the windings of the river
itself are something to be remembered, our boat’s head being pointed to
nearly every quarter of the compass during the passage; and some idea
may be formed of its twistings and turnings by the knowledge that it
is fully 50 miles from Kimberley to Normanton by the river and only
20 in a direct line by land.
As it is now about mid-day we have the pleasure of interviewing
the steerage passengers at dinner, and a fearful and wonderful per-
formance some of them go through in the operation, two or three
individuals being exceptionally expert at the Japanese trick of knife


swallowing. It was a wonder, as I heard a passenger remark, that
they did not cut their blooming throats, whilst the way others would
load up, and after disposing of a loaded forkful within their capacious
jaws, dive the fork they were using viciously into the nearest dish of
potatoes for a fresh supply, was a caution to snakes. Proceeding
onwards we pass the barque Florida and schooner Budgeree, both of
Sydney, the Scandinavian skipper of the latter having the cheek to ask
the Dugong to give him a tow up to Double Island, which reasonable (!)
request was, of coui’se, politely refused.
Passing Double Island I was astonished at the enormous number
of Spoonbills perched upon the trees; they were literally packed in
thousands, this being a favourite breeding ground for them, and some
distance higher up the river the Captain gave me the word to look out
for an alligator, and sure enough, on arriving at the spot indicated,
near one of the beacons erected as a guide, we saw the scaly monster
sunning himself on a grassy bank, and succeeded in getting within
twenty yards of him before he glided silently into the water, where,
with a swish of his tail, he quietly disappeared from view.
He caused a great commotion amongst our passengers, many ot
whom had never seen such a sight before, and all were on the look-out
for another of the tribe whose habitat was a little further on, their
curiosity being duly gratified as the saurian was at home, but hearing
the steamer approaching he also backed quietly astern, and as we came
abreast, his jaws and little twinkling eyes were all that could be
discerned for' a moment as he plunged silently beneath the wave. Some
little distance below the Battle Group we passed the barque Lucy and
Adelaide, of Sydney, with her nose in the bank, and evidently aground
till a good tide should give her a lift, making it rather difficult foi us
to pass, but we managed it safely, and shortly after one o clock we
made fast to the primitive landing at the Group, where a string of
wagonettes, buggies, <fcc., were in waiting to convey us to town.
Planks were run ashore, passengers and light baggage landed, the
balance being transferred into a lighter for conveyance up the liver to
the wharf at Normanton, and we take our seats in the conveyances
provided for the six miles drive which has to be covered before oui
journey is ended, and in about an hour we are safely deposited at
Hely’s Transcontinental Hotel, where a cordial welcome fiom tie
hostess and many old friends greets us on our arrival. .
After a good bath and a cup of tea we drive down to the wharf in
the hotel trap to secure our luggage which had just arrived in the
lighter, a crowd of people being congregated on the same errand , anc
I witnessed about as good a rough-and-tumble performance in connection
with it as I ever wish to see again.
The light packages, portmanteaus and tin travelling trunks, had
been bundled down into the bottom of the hold, and the heavy packages
thrown promiscuously upon them, bursting open and squeezing
them out of shape in a manner very annoying to their owners ; and
many were the curses, not loud but deep, bestowed upon the hghtei s


<sre\v in consequence, but fortunately my own came through tlie orciea
all right, thus saving me from expending a certain amount of profanity
which may prove useful on a futur e occasion. I meet many old friends
at Normanton, among them, Major Colless, Messrs. Heydon and Brodie
Ciiarhe Hely, and others, and we have a long chat over the late rac
meeting, at which Heydon and Brodie’s “ The Moor,” secured the lion’
share of the spoil, and to shew the sporting instinct of the residents o
tins go-ahead town, a sweep of £5O each was duly entered into by fou
well-known individuals, the conditions being that one and all shouk
keep sober for six months; or, in the event of any of them breaking th
pledge before the expiration of the time, his or their deposit shouk
become the property of the one who kept the agreement intact.
Fortunately, they all renounced whiskey until the time expired
when they had an old-time spree just to treat resolution, and then, ]
believe, handed over the whole of the stakes to some charitable institu
tion. We have to wait in Norman ton from Sunday until Tuesday
morning, and in the meantime amuse ourselves as best we may but
there is very little in the town or its surroundings to interest the
traveller, and time passes listlessly enough to those who have neithei
business or occupation to while away the time. The town of Normanton
itself is very well situated, being built on a hard, red ironstone rid-e
winch no amount of traffic ever cuts up; the only inconvenience
suffeied being caused by the clouds of fine red dust that occasionally
sweep through the streets, and which clings to one’s clothes with the
tenacity of a Bathurst burr. It is also well supplied with banks, the
New South, Queens! an cl National, and Royal being well represented,
whilst the hotels are also numerous and well kept, Hely’s
O fehaughnessy s, Rafferty’s, and Davis’ being amongst the principal
ones but I must not forget to mention the hotel kept by the Meriga
family, it being quite an institution in Normanton, and received a very
suggestive appellation in the olden days when residents and visitors
did not care to walk too far for a “nip,” as in consequence of its bein«
fully a quarter of a mile from the nearest house of entertainment they
found that the walk made them so excessively thirsty that it was
unanimously christened “ the dry stage,” a title it still retains to the
present day ; and between ourselves, there are many worse ways of
passing away an hour than a visit to the above place in the evening as
in the first instance, you have an opportunity of cultivating a thirst
that you would not sell to a lushington for less than a “ fiver,” and
secondly, there are two of the nicest and brightest girls one could wish
to meet, ever ready to entertain visitors with a musical treat such as
one rarely hears, and certainly never expects, in such an out-of-the-
way place.
It was on a Tuesday morning at 4 o’clock when I was woke up to
make ready for the journey to Croydon, as Cobb and Co.’s coach starts
punctually at 6. An appetising breakfast was placed upon the table
shortly after 5, to which we pay strict attention, and, with luggage
packed, are at the booking office shortly before the time appointed,


where a regular rush ensues for seats, there being ten applicants for
the eight places on the coach ; but having taken the precaution to wire
from Brisbane for a box seat I am all right, having for my mate Mr. B.
Cribb, the others managing to stow away somehow, one riding on the
footboard, another on top of the coach and six inside, whilst fully half
a ton of mails are stowed away on the rack, on top and in the boot,
which with passengers’ luggage makes altogether a tidy load for our
team of five horses.
Some little delay occurs through the absence of a break-block, it
being unsafe to proceed without that very necessary adjunct to our
safety, but at length we get properly fixed, and steering for the river
are soon safely on the punt and being towed across to the other side, all
hands being requested to alight during the operation for fear of an
accident.
We get across all right, and stowing ourselves on board get fairly
under way for the diggings, and I am pleased to find we are in charge
of a very experienced whip in the person of Jack Leonard, a well-
known driver in times gone by on the Namoi River, in New South
Wales, where he used to tool the coach between Narrabri and Walgett
for Bob Nowland, at the time he was running opposition to M‘Namara,
Vickery and Co., when passengers were carried 150 miles for <£l. We
swap yarns about old times, and many are the anxious enquiries Jack
makes about old friends, many of whom have gone over to the great
majority since he left that part of the country, and his heart fairly
warms as I give him the latest news concerning those still left behind.
Our route lies through miserable-looking country, the principal
features consisting of level teatree flats, with patches of quinine and
coolabah, all of stunted growth, scattered throughout with here and
there noisome-looking swamps, at some of which we observe carriers
camped, whilst the sound of the bells on their horses and bullocks
resound on every side, there being over 150 teams on the stretch of
road 120 miles in length, between Normanton and Croydon. The dust
as we proceed becomes something frightful, in fact, in all my travels I
never saw anything like it, as it is inches deep every where on the tracks,
smothers the trees and bushes by the roadside, and follows us through-
out the journey like a cloud, settling on our clothes, burying itself in
our hair, finding its way into our boots, and penetrating to our lungs in
the most aggravating manner, and we are not sorry for a short respite
obtained at one of the carriers’ camps abovementioned, as Jack, who
seems to be universally well knowm, observes some goats being milked,
and pulling up his team produces a whisky bottle, and with the addition
of some fx*esh milk begged from the carrier’s wife, concocts a very
welcome refresher. We pass enormous flocks of crows, who seem to
hang to the roads in a very suggestive manner ; pass some very lengthy
bullock teams containing from 18 to 24 bullocks, all in very fair con-
dition and in some instances really fat, and following the course of the
Carron River, arrive at the Twenty-mile, our first stage out, where we
change horses, have a cup of tea, and shortly afterwards are again


speeding on our way, the road improving as we proceed, although the
dust is as bad as ever, whilst there is also a slight change for the better
in the appearance of the country. We soon rattle over this stage, it
being only 15 miles in length, at the end of which we are told dinner
awaits us, but on this occasion are doomed to disappointment, as the
driver has forgotten to bring along any beef, consequently we have to
be satisfied with a liquor up and a smoke, and a bite of chocolate cake
which one of our party has taken the precaution to bring with him
from “La belle France.” However, the hostess makes a cup of tea,
which proves very refreshing and helps to clear the dust out of our
throats. This place is well named The Rocky, there being some beauti-
fully clear holes of water in the creek surrounded by rocks, and it is
evidently a favorite camping ground for travellers, many of whom have
turned out in the vicinity. We indulge in a little revolver practice
here. One of our party hangs his overcoat on a bush and wagers that
another of the party cannot hit it at 15 paces, but the coat suffers, and
as the horses have not yet been put to we start for a walk along the
road, partly to escape the dust and partly to stretch our muscles, and
succeed in throwing four miles behind us before we are overtaken by the
coach, which for this stage has a good although rather mixed team
harnessed to it, there being two grand horses for leaders, whilst the
wheelers are a couple of likely looking mules, who slip along with us at
a very fair rate of speed.
We pull up for a few minutes at Munro’s, have a refresher and
away, shortly afterwards meeting a carrier, who, with the proverbial
Queensland hospitality, invites us one and all to “ have a booze,” at the
same time producing a bottle of the real “Mackay,” but as we have no
water with which to dilute it, we have to pass, and shortly afterwards
pull up at our stopping-place for the night—a fairly comfortable hotel
kept by Mrs. Paterson—where we obtain a plentiful supply of water to
enable us to get rid of the dust—a good supper of wild duck being in
the meantime prepared, to which you may rest assured we paid strict
attention when placed upon the table.
The Croydon coach meets us here, and after solving the problem
of stowing away fifteen passengers in six rooms, we are very soon safe
in the arms of “ Murphy,” and sleep the sleep of the just until day-
break next morning, when the cry of “All aboard !” rouses us to prepare
for another day’s journey. After a hearty breakfast we make an early
start, with a change of drivers, Jack taking the back track to Norman-
ton, our whip turning out to be a genuine specimen of a “Frenchman”
from the Emerald Isle, named “ Barney,” who is a real gem in his way,
and enlivens the journey by many quaint remarks, and more especially
by the way in which he renders the chorus of two or three popular
songs, his performance of “Jack’s come home today” being simply
indescribable.
As the track on this stage has again become very heavy we have a
five-head team, four horses and a mule, the latter getting fits from
Barney, and being continually sneered at as “Irish,” for “shure, yez


know, the divil a bit o’ good is he, the spalpeen,” but we manage to get
along very well, and at about 10 o’clock arrive at Mother Foot s Lagoon,
a grand sheet of water 18ft. in depth in the deepest part, and which has
never been known to fail in the driest seasons.
There is a nice, clean-looking hotel here kept by Mr. Griffin,
formerly well known about St. George, and some distance away on the
bank of the lagoon the irrepressible Chinaman has settled down and
formed a very fair garden, with the produce of which he supplies
carriers and travellers, as well as the hotel.
Between the hotel and the Chinaman’s garden I come across a spot
where repose the last remains of poor old Frank Stubley, at one time
one of the richest miners in Charters Towers, and a man well known
and esteemed throughout the whole of Northern Queensland for his
liberality and generosity. He lies at the foot of a box tree, a short
distance from the water’s edge, and on the tree is carved the following
inscription : —
SACRED
TO
F. STUBLEY’S
MEMORY.
“J. Gill, 7th May, 1887.”
Poor fellow ! He died at last in poverty, but I with many others
can safely say that he was no one’s enemy but his own.
We have a bit of trouble at this stage as the groom is as drunk as
an owl. There are no horses in for a change and the team we have
been driving is pretty well tired, but we fix the nosebags on them in
case we have to go further, and in the meantime scour the country in
the immediate vicinity to try and discover the missing mokes ; but all
efforts are fruitless, and after a spell of a couple of hours we again yoke
up and proceed upon our way—leaving the drunken groom riding around
in a vain endeavour to discover the objects of his search. We managed
to nail one fresh nag, which did not belong to the firm and had never
been in harness before, so were treated to a bit of life at starting, as he
bucked and kicked, mixing himself up in the traces and going neai’ly
mad ; but he eventually kicked himself clear and away we went, Barney
being quite equal to the occasion.
The dust still brings forth curses both loud and deep, but the
country gradually improves, although still of very poor character, and
we meet on the way many carriers, some of whom are accompanied by
their wives.


Oui team by this time, through having to run the double stage, is
get ting near ly done, so shortly after leaving Green Creek most of us get out
and walk the distance between there and the Carron River, a good
oui miles stretch, that under the warm rays of a tropical sun increases
our temperature considerably • the tedium of the journey being now
and then varied by the remarks of such carriers we pass on the road,
who call each others attention to the style of locomotion adopted by
the passengers per Cobb and Co. The crossing of the Carron is very
heavy, being a bed of deep, wet sand, so that all hands have to alight,
but the change is only a few yards distant, and we are very pleased to
see a fresh team awaiting our arrival, as we are all pretty well baked,
and in no humor for another long stretch on foot. So while the fresh
horses are being put to, we stroll over to the tent occupied by the
groom and his wife, where we find a “ drop of the craytur ” and a very
acceptable cup of tea. The road, after leaving the river, is very heavy
foi about eight miles, consequently our progress is but slow, and it is
nearly sundown before we get on to better travelling country ; but
.Barney here lets them slip, so that we get over the ground pretty
rapidly, although it is nearly dark when we cross the “12 mile,” where
we discern a range of hills on our left, being the first elevation we have
seen smce leaving Norman ton. Six miles from Croydon we pass the
Golden Gate, a very suggestive and appropriate name for the first claim
met with on the main road to the field, but as it is now very dark, and
tiie track is full of ruts, stumps and other obstacles, we have to proceed
very slowly and carefully for fear of accident, there being no lamps on
the coach to guide us on our way.
Two or three miles from Croydon we cross Station Creek, where
there is a very good waterhole, into which “ Barney ” drives for the
purpose of giving his horses a drink, water being rather a scarce article
in the town itself. We get a bit mixed with a couple of stumps
between here and the town, but extricate ourselves safely at length,
and shortly afterwards we come in sight of the lights of Croydon
twinkling ahead, pulling up in a few minutes to deliver the mails at
the post-office, from whence we proceed down the main street, and about
9 S’ n *V^ 6 , , Y ahght at our j° ur ney’s end on the verandah of Harries
and M Cabe s Imperial Hotel, where a large crowd is assembled to
witness our arrival. Host M‘Cabe turns out to be a very old friend
w iom 1 had lost sight of for some years, and consequently we were
mutually pleased to renew our former acquaintance, and for my own
part 1 felt de ighted to meet some one in a new country like this whom
lac ormer y mown so well, as it made me feel quite at home from
the start.
A good kath and a good supper soon put everything to rights, and
the fatigues of the journey are soon forgotten, so we stroll round to the
ballroom, where about 12 couples are enjoying themselves on the light
antastic, the fair sex being especially conspicuous by their dresses and
good looks.


Strolling round next morning I was very much struck by the
inconvenience and delay caused by the inadequate provision made for
the public when seeking letters or telegrams at the hovel that at present
does duty for a post-office. Just imagine a crowd of people waiting
outside a pigeon-hole cut in a sheet of galvanised iron, at which one
person only can be attended to at a time, with an individual inside
attending to their wants who is just about as slow as they make them
on earth, and who certainly might materially improve his performance
of letter-sorting 100 per cent, by practising shuffling and dealing with
.a pack of cards in his leisure moments.
A friend of mine said to him one day—
“ Did you ever attend a funeral ?”
“ Yes. Why do you ask ?”
“ Well, I was wondering if you did, how on earth you managed to
keep up with the procession.”
And I wondered as well, after calling two or three times at the
office for letters.
They do a great business at Croydon in telegrams, for since the
office was opened the receipts for 24 days’ work amounted to £27 6
not a bad performance by any means, either on the part of the depart-
ment or the public.
Outside the hotel at night, after tea, whilst smoking the calumet
of peace, we congregate together, discussing the news of the day and
retailing anecdotes, in which performance the well-known agent for the
A. M.P. Society in Northern Queensland, Jack Warby, stands pre-
eminent. His yarns about “ Greasy Bill ” and the “ Lamb of God”
are very rich. The former, an old northern prospector, is noted for his
antipathy to water ; in fact, he has not been known to wash either
himself or his clothes for years, and on one occasion, when he felt very
ill, the doctor was called in to see what could be done for him, and
prescribed, to Greasy’s horror and astonishment, a hot bath. “ Good
heavens,” says Bill, “it would kill me for certain. Wouldn’t a bucket
of warm slush do as well?” Whilst “The Lamb” could almost give a
rabbit a fair start in sandy ground, his peculiarity being, that when
thoroughly overcome with liquor—a very common occurrence— he
selects the softest spot he can find outside the “pub,” and lying down
at full stretch, face downwards, gropes and scratches the sand over
himself until he is almost out of sight, when, thoroughly comfortable,
he sleeps off the fumes of the drink, and arises from his burrow like a
giant refreshed.
Social life on the goldfield, like on all new rushes, is of a very free
and easy style. Footracing in the streets is a common occurrence,
whilst many a time and oft a fight will occur to vary the monotony.
A word or two with regard to the situation of Croydon—its food
and water supply, »fec.—may not be out of place and will help to give
some idea of the town and its surroundings to those who may feel
inclined to visit it in the future.


The site selected for the township is fairly picturesque, with its
background of hills in the immediate vicinity ; but lam of opinion that
a far more healthy and convenient spot could have been chosen within
a few miles, either on the banks of Station or Cork Creeks, where a
permanent water supply could have been secured at comparatively small
cost for a large and thriving township such as I feel assured Croydon is
bound to become in the near future, but judging from present appear-
ances there will be some difficulty in obtaining a full and plentiful
supply of that necessary element for the wants and requirements of the
residents at present situated; whilst as for the sanitary arrangements,
I am afraid if immediate steps are not taken with regard to the
necessary precautions for the preservation of health, there will be such
an outbreak of typhoid fever by the time the next wet season comes
round that will carry terror to the hearts of every resident on the field.
Notwithstanding the cry raised by some that there is bound to be a
terrible famine when the wet season arrives, I to a certain extent beg
to differ from them, as there will always be an ample supply of beef of
first-rate quality available, which, together with the vegetables—sweet
potatoes, <tc., supplied by the Chinese gardeners who have settled in
large numbers on the various creeks—will stave off starvation pure and
simple for an indefinite length of time; besides, there is yet plenty of
time before the wet season to lay in sufficient stocks of flour to carry
them through until the roads are again dry and hard enough for
wheeled traffic.
The Divisional Board have done good work by sinking a well 100
feet deep, which now contains 60ft. of water of excellent quality, which
fairly supplies the wants of the inhabitants, so that there is no
immediate fear of a water famine ; but increased provision will be
necessary as the population increases before another summer comes
round. The hotel charges are most reasonable, as I obtained verv
comfortable quarters at M'Cabe’s for two guineas per week, the table
being excellent, the waiting and general attendance first-class, whilst
the beds were clean and comfortable to a marked degree, spring
mattrasses being the rule, and one fully appreciates tlie luxury of a
spring mattrass in a climate like this ; whilst during my stay a bath
was always available, so that altogether one might be in far worse
places than Harries and M'Cabe’s Hotel. Horses can also be pro-
cured at reasonable figures for riding about to inspect the various lines
of reef—lss. being the charge for a full day and 10s. for a halfday
from Messrs. T. Banks and Co., through Mr. M'Cabe, and I have to
thank the latter gentleman for many kindnesses shown to me during my
visit, not the least of which was his accompanying me in my various
rides round the field, acting as pilot and giving me much useful and
valuable information, not only with regard to the various well-developed
mines, but also to many new finds and good shows which have not yet
been properly tested. Of Croydon as a goldfield I cannot speak too
highly, after a thoroughly careful inspection of the field, but it is no
poor man’s diggings. It will require time, machinery and capital to


develop its hidden wealth, and I strongly advise one and all not to rush
to Croydon without they have the means to support themselves for
fully six months, or great misery and destitution must be the inevitable
result. There is plenty of time during the next two or three years for
the investment of capital and labor, the field being of such large extent,
and I hold the opinion, shared in by many others, that the workings
are as yet only on the outskirts of the gold-bearing country which
extends for miles from south to north-east of the present workings.
An account of my trip to Croydon would scarcely be complete
without a few facts with regard to the returns from some of the
principal mines on the field; and a short statement regarding the
discovery of payable gold may not be out of place. Mr. W. 0. Browne,
who was the manager of the Croydon cattle station, had some idea that
gold existed on the run, and about two years ago had a couple of men
named Walter and Dick Aldridge working at the station under a
contract for fencing. These men were old diggers, and on the com-
pletion of their contract Mr. Browne supplied them with rations, tools
and horses, and paid them wages to go out and prospect the surrounding
country in the vicinity of the station, as the locality abounded with
quartz reefs cropping here and there above the surface, the outcrop in
some places extending for miles. They discovered gold in a few days,
and reported the find to Mr. Browne and also to Warden Samuels, of
Georgetown, at the same time making application for a reward for the
discovery. The warden came over to Croydon, and after careful
inspection was well satisfied of the payable nature of the field. He
laid off the Lady Mary Prospecting Claim, giving a reward claim of
500 ft. in addition to the four men’s ground applied for, making the area
700 ft. by 400 ft., and at the same time laid off the Lady Mary Ko. 1
north, on behalf of two men named Derisley and Flowers, who set to
work and raised 14 tons of stone, 6 tons of which were sent over to the
machine at Georgetown, about 150 miles distant, as a trial crushing, it
not being expected to yield more than 3oz. to the ton, but the return
was 7oz. 3dwt. per ton, the stone not being picked in any way, but
forwarded just as it was taken out of the ground. This handsome
result, on being made known, immediately caused a rush, and notwith-
standing the counter attractions of Kimberley in Western Australia,
which for a time delayed the development of the field by taking away
many of the mining population, the Croydon of to-day is a monument
to the enterprise and perseverance of the Australian miner, and bids
fair before long to rival, if not surpass, any goldfield in Australia.
Taken right through, and judging by what I have myself seen and
inspected, there is a great and prosperous future in store for Croydon,
but very little will be done to develop the undoubted richness of the
field until after the next wet season, the machinery at present erected
being utterly inadequate for the requirements of the place j but as this
defect will soon be remedied —there being several large crushing plants
now on the way to Croydon—the country will have a better chance of
being prospected, and those who have been waiting for months to obtain


a chance of getting their stone crushed will be able to realise some
return for their labor and perseverance. But the field requires time,
machinery, and the introduction of a little foreign capital to thoroughly
develop its resources, and I cannot too strongly impress upon the minds
of your readers the fact that it is no diggings for a poor man, and that
no one should venture there without having at least sufficient for their
support for fully six months, otherwise they are bound to suffer, as all
branches of skilled labor are well represented, and there being far more
cats now on the field than are able to catch mice.
The cost of passage is as follows:—.From Brisbane to Normaiiton,
h} .A.U.S.B. Co. s boats, every alternate Thursday, saloon, £l4 ; steerage,
£9, By Cobb and Co. s coach, Normanton to Croydon, leaving every
Tuesday and Saturday 6 a.m., £3 10s., two days’journey, 120 miles;
2s. 6d. for meals and bed on the road, whilst good accommodation can
be obtained at the principal hotels in Croydon for £2 2s. per week.
Hie first claim visited by me after arriving on the field was the
Caledonian P. 0., Mr. Tom Carvill being the Manager, and he kindly
constituted himself my guide, philosopher and friend during my
inspection of this grand property. The main shaft was down 56 feet,
the reef averaging about 2 fee-t, between well-defined foot and hanging
walls. Levels had been driven each way from the shaft for a distance
of 30 feet, and there were from 250 to 300 tons of stone at grass giving
prospects of fully 3oz. per ton, and with the stone in sight in the claim
it struck me that it was a regular bonanza to the fortunate share-
holders. It was discovered in rather a singular manner, by a diggei
who, in searching for his horse, happened to get “bushed”; wandermg
about for hours and eventually stretching himself out for a rest on the
cap of the reef, and whilst lying down thinking, as Paddy says, of
“ nothing at all, his eye was attracted by the promising appearance of
the stone, which induced him to break off a portion, when to his
surprise and delight he saw specs of the precious metal imbedded
theiein , and whether this discovery was tne means of restoring his
bump of locality to its normal condition or not may be a matter for
conjecture, but the fact is that he shortly afterwards made his w r ay
the main camp of the diggers situated on Station Creek, arriving there
shortly after darkness had set in, when he acquainted a man named
Connolly with his discovery, showing him the specimen and describing
the locality to the best of his recollection,
Connolly saw him safely wrapped in slumber—and worn out as
he was by his ramblings, you may rest assured he slept very soundly—
when believing in the old proverb “ The early bird catches the worm,”
he started aw T ay before daylight, succeeded in finding the place indicated
by Hallen, followed up the tracks, discovered Avhere the piece of quartz
had been knocked off the reef, pegged out a claim of four men’s ground
and returned quietly to camp almost before his absence had been
remarked. But he acted in the meanest possible w 7 ay to the man who
gave him the information, by refusing to give him a share in the ground
he had secured, prefering rather to give it to his own particular friends.


I heard this claim had been sold to a syndicate for £12,000 cash,
and in my opinion and that of many others, they have got a long way
the best of the deal. We next had a look at the Highland Mary line,
which some think is a continuation of the Caledonian, in which opinion
I hardly share as I fancy they are two distinct and separate lines of
reef, the Highland Mary running north and south with a dip to the
east, whilst the Caledonian runs nearly east and west dipping to the
south. I went down the Highland Mary P.O. for 90 feet on the
underlay, following a well-defined reef about two feet thick all the way,
which seems to improve as it goes deeper—and the next claim visited
was No. 2 South, on the same line. This is a grand claim ;is down on
the underlay 135 feet, with a two foot reef shewing good gold; has
between 120 and 130 tons of stone at grass prospecting for nearly 4ozs.,
their last crushing of 211 tons realized 8380z5., and to shew the estima-
tion in which this line is held I may state that nearly the whole of it
has been blocked off and shafts are being sunk to catch the reef at a
depth. The line extends some considerable distance, and further south
takes the name of the Sir Garnet, which has crushed 326 tons for
873 ozs., but there is no doubt it is all one and the same line of reef.
Next day, Friday, we started for Table-top, and I may remark
that coaches run to this place daily, so that visitors to the locality will
have no difficulty in reaching their destination, passing on the way the
Mountain Maid line, near which is erected Bibby’s mill on Belmore
Creek, about 3 miles from town ; then the Welcome Reef, seven miles
out; and about fourteen miles out pull up at the Rising Sun P.O.
claim, better known as the ten men’s ground, and as the miners are
just having their mid-day meal, we are invited with true bush hospitality
to partake of a pannikin of tea and a slice of bread and beef, which
invitation we heartily accept. Thei’e are three reefs in this ground,
which belongs to Thomas and party and the one they are at present
working is three feet in thickness; there is a large body of stone at
grass estimated to crush 4ozs. to the ton, and I have no hesitation in
saying this is really a splendid property, which must become very
valuable when properly developed. The road to Table-top from Croydon
runs through ridgy country shewing every sign of being gold-bearing,
but the dust fiend is with us in all his intensity for the whole of the
journey, and we are not sorry to pull up at Busted’s Hotel for a wash
and refreshment. In the afternoon we wander about on foot looking
at the various claims in the vicinity ; visiting “ Mount Morgan ” and
“ The Federation,” to the south of the township—the former, a well
developed mine with good prospects, and the latter in an embryo stage,
but with a very good show T .
In the evening we wander northwards visiting the celebrated
“ Bobby Dazzler ” P.C., a grand mine with wide, well-defined reef,
situate in the face of an immense bluff, plainly visible from the main
street of the little town —The Republic—The Great Eastern The
Surprise—and a prospecting area not yet named, all of which were
discovered by an old hand named Jack Murphy ; but the travelling is


very rough indeed and the ranges are particularly hard on muscles and
shoe-leather, so by the time we return to the hotel we feel pretty Avell
tired out.
Table top at night is not the most lively place in the world, there
being little or nothing in the way of amusement as yet provided, if w
except a shooting gallery and a sort of free and easy held in the dining
loom of Bells Hotel to the strains of a cracked concertina, wher
between twenty and thirty men have congregated together to pass
musical (?) evening, and pay their attentions to a lively looking servam
girl, who seems to have a kind word and a smile for one and all. The
buildings, as well as the inhabitants, are of the rough and ready type
the former being constructed entirely of saplings and galvanised iron
put together in a hurry just to answer present requirements, the native
earth still doing duty for a floor, boards being far too expensive
luxury to indulge in at present; whilst the dust, which is thicker and
more penetrating even than that of Croydon, envelopes the place like
a cloud.
Ihe butchers shop, if the term can be applied to an open shed
roofed with boughs, contains some splendid beef, in fact, I never
remember seeing meat of better quality exposed for sale even in Sydney,
and the diggers are to be congratulated on the fact that an inexhaustible
supply of that indispensible necessary of life is always procurable at
) easonable rates \ whilst it is evident that rest and refreshments will
not be difficult to obtain in future, there being already three hotels in
full swing—Busted’s, Bell’s, and Mulvey’s—with two more in course of
erection; but lam sadly afraid the water supply is none of the best, its
permanency being a matter of very grave doubt. Coaches run daily
between Table-top and Croydon, the service performed by Messrs.
Carrington Bros, being thoroughly reliable, whilst others are also
available, but for scouring the country in the vicinity horses are almost
a necessity— except one prefers to explore on foot—the country being
a ery rough and broken. We obtain a shake-down at Messrs. Black
and Co.’s store, who have a monopoly of the business here in that line
at present and appear to be doing very Avell indeed, and as a good
supply of blankets is available, manage to make ourselves very
comfortable, passing a quiet and peaceful night, and awaking thoroughly
refreshed from the fatigues of the previous day.
On Saturday AA r e take a run out toAvards Laycock’s and inspect a
prospecting area known as the “ Harry Lee,” or “ Bellbird,” which
contains three reefs in the ground and prospects very fairly, but as the
claim has not yet been developed to any great extent, it is rather hard
to predict Avhat its future may be, although to my mind, it appears
very promising indeed, whilst the Grace Lee, The Golden Valley Co.,
Coles the \ asco de Gama, Black Diamond, and other lines speak well
for the prosperity of this portion of the field. We start back for
Croydon in the evening by way of the Twelve-mile and Homeward
Bound, and travelling as we are in a light buggy, find the bridle-track
we are folloAving fearfully rough and very trying to our pair of ponies,


who "et stuck amongst some boulders on a rather steep pinch, and
try in" to extricate themselves with a bit of a rush manage to snap the
main bar where it crosses the pole, putting us in rather a fix as we had
no tomahawk, but I manage to break down a sapling and inserting i
between a couple of trees snap it off about the required length, and by
the aid of a few straps doctor it up sufficiently to answer the purpose,
but unfortunately a few miles further on one of our nags starts kicking
in going down a steep gully, and demolishes the lot. Nothing daunted,
we again set to work and succeed in effecting repairs, taking ie
precaution to drag the buggy across the gully before harnessing up,
and from that out get on all right. ~
We have to climb a nasty spur covered with boulders leading on
to the ridge on which the Homeward Bound line of reef is situated, so
all alight, and two of us lead the horses whilst the remaining one of our
party pushes hard behind; but the ponies are staunch and true, and
although during the process everything falls out at the back, including
cushions, whip, screw-wrench, specimens, Arc., we eventually gain the
summit without further mishap.
We pulled up at the Homeward Bound No. 1 and 2, amalgamated,
and I was very much struck with the permanent character of the reet
running down between remarkably well defined foot and hanging was,
and evidently making and improving as the depth increases, whilst the
heap of stone, about 300 tons, at grass augurs well for the prosperity
of the shareholders and speaks volumes for the systematic working o
the mine, as the stone is of excellent quality, well impregnated with the
precious metal, a trial crushing of 40 tons having returned a to a o
188 oz. lOdwt., whilst in many of the lumps of quartz now in the
paddock gold is distinctly visible. . .
I also have a look at the Homeward Bound P. 0., a splendid claim,
reef well defined, ground 350 ft. by 400 ft., trial crushing, 58 tons tor
170 oz. The Homeward Bound No. 1 South, 10 mens ground, •
by 400 ft., with equally good prospects. The Waterfall Nos. 2 and 1
North on a grand reef about 2ft. 6in. in thickness, the latter claim also
shewing a good cross line of reef dipping south into the grounc 0 e
Waterfall, P.C., 500 ft. by 400 ft., one of the best claims on the field,
having a splendidly defined reef from 18in. to 2ft. in thickness running
right through the ground, which has prospected remarkably well on
both the north and south boundaries, thereby proving its permanency,
and which crushed 85 tons for 3360z5. of gold, value £3 11s. lOt. per
ounce, the highest price yet realised for any gold discovered on ie
field. This claim has a shaft down 80ft. on the underlay, and t ey
are now putting in levels preparatory to stoping out, and to shew tie
estimation in which this property is held, the land to the eastward las
been blocked off, notwithstanding that they will have to sink ovei
200 ft. to cut the reef, and a shaft 70ft. in depth put down, the share-
holders working night and day.
On the south boundary of the Waterfall comes No. 1, ie
Ayrshire,” ten men’s ground, belonging to a Townsville Company, an


400 ft ItTi f°t 2 ’ B ®’” fo “‘- »»’• S™nd, 200 ft. by
L’nos. trld 3“ “ The Prid6 ° f theHUls ’” P -°"
“i' 1 * ‘ lle ch ' ln * 6 of names tliis is ,-eally the one line of
WaferfLlX » o\ OUtCrOP t 0r . mileS tIITOU S h the Homeward Bound
S«fiSS=SHB*S3aS
been totolTS ? OSS ““ “ wllWl «"«1 claims have
U, , n!f n P ’ aI J showing good prospects, which will, in my opinion
S£“P ; -“ —WJ « r/;5
pn , , lont,a y. accompanied by host M‘Cabe, I went out in a south
T p “ sed b '
is now Obtaining good gold ; ’then acress^
on wSch m a aLroTaims g £ ™f 7 PC - ha ™* ™'-d £££?
Ea£“-S!^i2
obser J vable e im| tS - elf ‘"t “f Hat as a table with freely *ny dip
r &&
out very eas iv 7 UeB , ol f r , for "'orkiug, the stone being token
tth°r°i gh terst
.tone, alarge f ntity beinglw
and crush, from this line have gone as high as°27o Z s. K ton.
, lot ~f 1 ’, 2 ', 3 a "d 4 North have all opened out along the line of reef
il l I Tn k ha ™« heeil do " e aml sol ne grand heaps of stone stacked
ready for the machine, whilst a lot of about 50 tons from No 2 which
went through at the time of my visit, realised 145055. an^W


100 tons of equal quality being ready for the stampers. No. 1 also,
has over 400 tons at grass, estimated to go fully lOozs,
This line is also blocked off from end to end, one shaft being down
about 70ft., and from all appearances will prove a very valuable
property.
I also paid a visit to “The Richmond,” lying east of the “ Croydon
King,” and found it to be a grand reef about 2ft. in thickness, situate
about one-third of the way up a large bluff range and dipping easterly
into the hill, shewing splendid prospects along the face right through
the P.O. and No. 1 North, some specimens that were shewn to me
being fairly dazzling in their richness, and I should not be at all
surprised to see this line turn out almost as well as anything on
the field.
The “ Mountain Maid” and “Babe” lines lying parallel to each
other on the short-cut to Table-top were also visited, and although not
crushing a very high average per ton still they have a wide reef, which
renders it unnecessary to do any dead work in taking out the stone, so-
that they are fairly valuable properties, and will, no doubt, impro\ e at
a depth.
I also had a look at the « Ironclad” and “ Mark Twain ’ P.C., a
crushing of 95 tons from the former realised 2540z5., and from the
latter 174 tons turned out 3240z5., the reef averaging from 2ft. to sft.
in thickness and going down perpendicularly, so that there is not much
likelihood of the claim being worked out in a hurry.
The “ Croydon Queen ” is also a main line of reef, some saying it
is identical with the Croydon King, and if such is the case it extends
for miles and must prove one of the backbones of the field, as the P.C.
crushed 200 tons for 7870z5., whilst many of the numbers also ha\e
given good returns, causing the line to be blocked off for a considerable
distance, on which claims sinking is vigorously proceeded with. Last,
but certainly not least of the claims I visited is the “ Iguana Hill, a
splendid property judging from all appearances, situate on the border
of the township and just above the Company’s mill, to which the stone
could be conveyed at a minimum cost by means of a tramway. There
is an immense quantity of stone in sight, the shaft being down about
170 feet on the underlay with a grand reef varying from two to five
feet in thickness, showing gold freely, the country being easily worked,
which materially reduces the cost of raising stone and makes this
particular claim, from its proximity to the mill, body of stone, and
other advantages, in my opinion, one of the most valuable mining
properties in the North,
Appended are the returns of the crushings from various claims to
the date of my visit.


CROYDON QUARTZ-CRUSHING COMPANY’S
MILL.
Date.
Claim.
Yield.
1887.
TONS.
ozs.
DWT.
January 3
Caledonia No. IE.
136
630
o
14
Highland Mary
... 183
460
o
20
Caledonia P.C. ...
... 154
1,073
o
25
Highland Mary, No. 1 S.
153
328
0
February 5
Sir Garnet
176
525
o
12
Lady A|ary P.C.
... 164
824
0
15
Harp of Erin P.C.
96
586
19
22
Come at Last ...
140
98
s
March 11
Iguana Hill P.C.
254
685
8
April 1
Alice ..
... 360
484
17
5
Better Luck P.C.
46
160
0
6
Day Dawn
* 30 J
51
0
9
Iguana Hill, No. IE.
65
196
16
13
Croydon Queen, No. 9 S.
44
56
6
15
Highland Mary, No. 1 N.
69
105
0
20
Burns’Croydon Queen ...
15
61
19
25
Lady Mary (surface)
33
47
19
28
29
Miners’Bight, No. 1
Highland Mary, No 2 S.
... 21£
... 211
29
831
3
5
May 6
Better Luck, No. 1 E.
55
55
18
10
Little Wonder ...
11
14
o
10
Lady Norah
12
37
1
13
Lady Mary, No. 1
... 201
1,180
o
13
Salamander
40
31
o
23
Frost’s Claim, Springs
19
28
0
27
Sir Garnet
... 150
318
18
28
Just in Time, No. IE. ...
63
112
14
28
Alice, No. 2 S ...
10
16
11
29
June 8
Post Hole
Black Snake
36
40
227
190
17
o
8
Miners’ Right P.C.
30
38
8
10
Croydon Queen P.C.
... 200
787
3
11
Alice, No. 1 N....
25
45
3
17
Nancy Lee P.C.
30
28
3
21
Lady Mary, No. IS.
25
27
19
23
Post Hole
64
s
5
26
Lady Mary P.C.
... v 2
... 279
535
1
28
Banner of Freedom. No. 1 S.
24
22
7
July 14
Chance P.C.
45
131
i
5
15
Just in Time. No. 1 W.
62
61
17
16
Morgan's (surface)
10
21
0
Total
... 3,724£ 11,183
10
CROYDON GOLD RETURNS.
Complete returns of the crushings from the Croydon Reefs, from the
opening of the field to the end of August, 1887 :
Average— 3oz. Odwt. I’gr.


BIBBY’S MACHINE.
Date.
Claim.
Yield.
TONS.
ozs.
DWT.
1886
December 9
Mountain Maid P.C.
187
245
O
1887
January
3
7
Mountain Maid No. 1 S—
Sovereign P.C. ...
Stephen’s (surface)
74
58
169
214
0
7
12
16
62
17
18
Alice No. 1 (surface) ...
121
140
19
24
Pride of the Hills ... .'
78
93
r>
14
28
Post Hole
42
547
February
8
17
Iron Duke, P.C.
Croydon Queen No. 2 S.
122
98
253
666
9
4
24
Mountain Maid No. 1 N.
107
1 /7
12
March
9
Phoenix P.C.
54
106
5
9
True Blue P.C.
53
i i
5
April
May
25
3
Homeward Bound No. 1 and 2 S.
Sir Walter, P.C.
95
100
262
673
9
•>
8
Waterfall, PC.
85
33o
15
17
Sir Patrick, P C.
56
75
O
17
True Blue No. 1 S.
54
136
0
18
Caledonia (surface)
9
26
12
23
Rainbow No. 3
8
5
9
23
Hay thorn’s (surface)
14
13
24
Chance, P.C. ...
28
28
171
0
27
Homeward Bound, P.C.
58
0
June
3
Rainbow No. 1 N.
104
101
1
9
Lady Catherine, P.C.
87
52
2
20
Banner of Freedom, P.C.
137
122
1 1
22
Babe, P.C.
96
102
i
25
Mountain Maid No. 3 N.
86
68
13
July
2
o
President, P.C.
Sunset, P.C-
44
162
62
125
17
0
30
Babe No. 2 S. ...
n>
18
16
30
Babe No. IS....
55
55
5
August
8
20
Mountain Maid No. 5 N.
Golden Gate P.C.
115
214
156
183
5
16
Total
2,633
5,529
2
BYCE’S MACHINE.
Date.
Claim.
TONS.
Yield.
ozs.
DWT.
1887.
July 1
G
10
25
August 5
20
Croydon King (surface) ...
Croydon King (Fogg’s surface) ...
Just-in-Time, P.C.
Sovereign No. 1 W.
Glengarry
Croydon King No. 2 N. ... •••
Blankstongs from Croydon Queen
PC.
12
24
104
74
156
54
6
25
240
228
628
437
758
30
0
0
0
0
0
12
0
Total
430
2,346
12
Average—2oz, 2dwt.
Average—soz. 9dwt. 3gr.


SPENT’S MACHINE.
Date.
Claim.
Yield.
1887.
tons.
ozs.
DWT.
April 7
Dan’s P. A
May Queen
6
15J
14
39
34
10
g
Harp of Erin No. 1
17
14
Whorman’s P. A
Rivers’ P.A.
Highland Mary (surface)
6i
... Hi
... 300
14
18
268
8
14
10
Mark Twain P.C.
... 174
327
0
Kregg’s P.A. ...
6
12
10
Cooper’s P.A. ...
36
77
0
Dan’s P.A.'
37
32
0
Break of-Day
224
81
10
Emperor P.C. ..
22J
81
10
Foultons P.A. ...
15
13
o
Ironclad, P.C. ...
... 95
254
o
Mark Twain No. 1 N,
Dan’s P.A.
... 24i
22
26
9
9
10
Babe No. IN....
80
71
o
Woldts P.A.
3
6
27
300
0
0
o
Kelmers
Problem P.C. ...
13
... 108
Taylors P.A.
6
3
5
Golden Gate No. IN
80
85
o
London P.C.
22
24
o
Wards P.A.
13
49
0
vpra cta — 1 r\v
Total
1
. 1,133
1,872
9
CROYDON STONE CRUSHED AT
GEORGE
TOWN.
Date. Claim.
TONS
Yield.
ozs. #
DWT.
Baal Gammon ...
.. 18.15
238
2
Croydon King (surface)...
... 6.10
25
17
Croydon King
... 2 0
32
8
Croydon King No, 2 N.
... 10 0
165
o
Golden Gate P.C.
... 8 0
34
9
Croydon King No. 3 N ...
... 41 0
731
19
Croydon King P.C.
... 10 0
276
o
Croydon King No. IN...
... 10 0
245
0
.
Total
;race— 17oz. I5dwt.
... 99.5
1,781
15
CRUSHED AT CHARTERS TOWERS.
Claim.
Yield.
tons. ozs. dwt.
Croydon P.C. ...
8 33 0
Average—loz. 13dwt.
Average—l7oz, lodwt.


GRAND TOTAL.
Stone. Yield.
Average.
TONS CVVT. OZ. DWT.
OZ. DWT, GR.
8,019 15 23,713 8
...
2 16 15
Assayed Value per Ounce of Gold from
Various Claims.
Highland Mary, No. 1 S. ...
..£211 4
Lady Mary, P.C ..
... 2 10 10
Miners’ Right, No. 1 N. ...
... 2 0 10
Post Hole
... 2 5 S
Highland May, No. 2 S. ...
... 2 15 11
Better Luck, No. IE.
... 2 19 2
Little Wonder ...
... 2 12 7
Lady Norah
... 3 111
Lady Mary No. 1
... 2 12 6
Salamander
... 218 6
Sir Garnet
... 2 11 5
Just-in-Time, No. 2 E. ... ...
... 2 13 4
Croydon Queen P.C.
... 2 14 7
Black Snake
... 0 14 5
Miners’ Right, P.C.
... 1 13 2
Lady Mary No. 1 S. (surface)
... 2 12 5
Nancy Lee, P C.
... 2 18 6
Banner of Freedom ... ...
.. 2 18 1
Chance, P.C.
... 2 19 7
Homeward Bound, No 1 N.
... 3 6 10
Sir Walter
... 2 11 0
Waterfall, P.C. ...
... 3 11 10
Mark Twain, P.C.
...3 5 0
True Blue. No. 1 S.
... 3 2 4
St. Patrick
... 3 4 4
Homeward Bound, P.C. ..
.. 3 4 4
Mountain Maid ...
...3 2 0
Babe No. 2 S.
... 3 4 1
Babe No. IS.
... 3 6 11
Croydon Queen, No. 2 ...
... 1 19 2




