

Original Message
Subject: Airconditioning Ducts
Date; Tue, 24 Jun 2008 10:59:04 +lOOO
From: Katrina Schlunke
<katrina.schlunke@uts.edu.au>
To: Naomi Stead <Naomi.Stead@uts.edu.au>
Dear Naomi
These could be called pillars or pipes. Stuck to
walls with a
steeplechase of brackets the largest of these take up
a framing task, they shape the building - more of it
than upon it. The thinner ducts are usually in
multiples and run, often in fours along the backs of
buildings „ like overheated
veins. Once you see
them somewhere, you notice when you can’t
see them. You wonder where they are. You
might think about the layers of building skin
gone into hiding these markers of cooled
breath - doesn’t anyone else want to know that
the air that is chilled comes somewhere at
sometime from outside the building and that
the air that has been breathed is released,
somewhere outside the building?
Perhaps we don’t want to know too much
about the air that we breathe inside the city,
inside our cool buildings. We want the sensa-
tion to be natural and ordinary - we don’t need
to be reminded of ducts like we don’t need to
be reminded of the alveoli in our lungs. And
these ducts are less the tiny air cells of our
lungs then the arteries and veins. Carrying in
anefout the refreshed and exhausted air of a not
climate. They are too important to know too
well. Too much attention and we might think
again about what we breathe, in this some-
times steamy city.
Perhaps it is that organised not knowing that
shapes the sense of familiarity and decorum
that makes up my response when I see, again,
the ducts I know best. It was not imagined
when they were erected that I would see them
as I do now. Then, they would have sat, high
on the backs of two buildings in a modest and
appropriate spot and we would always have
had to look up from below. Now an overhead
pedestrian bridge means that I see them at my
eye height. They sit either side of the bridge
and thus inaugurate a second level of space
and meaning. As if all along their role was to
make this high in the air space, make sense.
Curiously their formal organising doesn’t last
long. If you look too long or to often they
become friendly and soft. Fat slugs come to
mind. Pupae and squashable things. All those
struts now seem to strain against their
softness. You sense that if left to their own
devices these ducts would fall to their natural
home, the ground and begin to burrow into soft
earth. Or perhaps they could eat, caterpillar
like, off giant leaves in some unknown aerial
jungle. But their task is here. To help in the
conditioning of our air. The two I know best
frame the smallpedestrian bridge that crosses
Harris Street. They are painted blue at the
moment and hang somewhere between soft
and hard and in these times when I stop to
sketch them I feel suspicious and draw badly.
And maybe it is rude, maybe it is too intimate
- like watching someone sleeping. Here I am
watching a building breathe.
Sorry this was written from my notebook and
fails the direct address of the email but this
task is like writing back to a city. I want to
write a whole book on air con ducts now- and
i certainly want to talk to the air con
AIRCONDITIONING DUCTS
man - but the point is to have more to say isn't
it? Sorry to be so slow was caught up with
affect over the weekend. I'll try and scan the
bad sketch! I am into writing in-situ, en plein
aire and i guess this is the time we try every-
thing??
I will get faster!
s a 1 u t
k
Original Message
Subject: cracks
Date: Wed, 30 Jul 2008 15:23:24 +lOOO
From: Katrina Schlunke
<Katrina.Schlunke@uts.edu.au>
To: Naomi Stead <Naomi.Stead@uts.edu.au>
Dear Naomi
There are some cracks that seem whole. They form
a whole shape, not simply bent lines and their
scalloped edges suggest a giant oyster shell has
been stamped into the asphalt or is emerging from
jt. Other cracks tiy to complete some geometrical
imperative to join diagonals or neatly divide
squares and some form letters in some leftover,
hesitant alphabet. Many cracks act as the memory,
the mark of another mark; the reminder that that
telegraph pole, that sign, that manhole, that thing -
was put into the city, put into earth, concrete, layers
of wires and tubes that were already there. So
cracks are not only reminders of what now exists
and didn’t, they also speak of what will come.
Cracks describe the forces of the city; the going up
and the coming down, the moving out ana moving
in. Cracks drag up concrete ana asphalt into tiny
hillocks and bluffs so we know there is something
alive beneath us. And cracks sink down into the
surface so that we can see what forces are always
pushing from above, further and further down.
That like some godly accordion we are pulled with
the city back and forth, each noted movement a
small, sometimes unseen fissure. Below are the
pockmarked surfaces on other surfaces, pits of
wires, rivers of pipes, other ruins that are run
through by the geological tremors, squeezed and
hugged by teutonic forces. Above is the pounding
of cars, the grabbling of roots, the weight of fifty,
70,100 storeys - and so the cracks tell us, this city
is alive. And we, we humans, are one more down-
ward force being held up.
Cracks are always being papered over. In the city
the ‘paper’ is machine gunned tar, filler, cement;
another layer, another expansion joint or contrac-
tion seam until the next moment, the next move-
ment in one direction or another. To deny cracks is
to deny the pace a city sets. Deny the pulse that
spreads in
CRACKS
unpredictable ways through people and places.
Nothing in the city disappears when it ‘falls within
the cracks’. It simply goes a certain way down and
is thrown back up along waves of rubbled infra-
structure. It makes you think about ‘cracking up’.
When you crack up, the insides get shown on the
outside, we spill our guts through our eyes or
mouth as madness or laughter. For what are cracks
but wild seams, showing not where things came
together in some state sanctioned marriage but
came together too quickly or were pulled too far
apart by time and temperature. Thus the street
slides over itself or splits. The wear and tear of
existing with each other marked by cracks that
mean we have made enough space to try again.
In this city in any season when highly coloured
leaves or bright dirt drifts into them, the cracks
materialise a litter of gold and light - a pavement
patina. It is easiest to see this at dusk. Hardly ever,
when working over these roughed up landscapes in
the middle of the day do we see what an encrustra-
tion of cracks produces for we must all the time
look at our feet to watch that we are not
Original Message
Subject: Baggies
Date: Tue, 01 Jul 2008 17:52:44 +lOOO
From: Naomi Stead <Naomi.Stead@uts.edu.au>
To: Katrina Schlunke
<katrina.schlunke@uts.edu.au>
Dear Katrina,
Often on the ground, on the footpath or in the gutter on
my way to work there are small clear plastic zip-lock
bags. They last until the next time the verges are
mown, or the street sweeper makes his slow way along
and they are taken up with the dead leaves and
cigarette butts and screwed up bus tickets. Baggie. The
term arrives immediately when I see one. That seems
to me an American word, I wonder where I could have
got it from, probably one of those desultory slacker
gen x movies, the kind with improbably witty dialogue
and characters comical and loveable in their hopeless
slovenly ennui. Are they called baggies here as well?
They could be called drug paraphenalia, in that pecu-
liarly anachronistic legal term. This is probably the
smallest module that such bags come in, about three by
four centimetres, with the distinctive red line across
the very top then four raised ribs of clear plastic then
the zip seal beneath that. Small enough for very small
things, beads, maybe, or very small buttons, or pills
and powders more illicit. That must be the major
market, they are a pretty specialised item, and I
wonder whether the industrial designers acknowledge
that amongst themselves, whether they try to serve
their customers by improving their fitness for this main
function, whether this is a kind of open secret, that
they have their ostensible purpose but are known to
really be used for some other, unspoken thing, whether
this is acknowledged in the ooardroom or not.
They are quite nicely proportioned, as a composition,
although many of the ones I see have been doubled by
being opened along the side seams, which tear cleanly
since the joint is heat-bonded, folded simply over at
the bottom. When I see the unfolded bags discarded I
have a powerful mental image of a broad tongue seen
from very close, coated a pale uneven whitish yellow,
the taste buds picked out as red dots, the saliva pushed
and bubbled against the clear plastic as the slug of wet
muscle drags its way across the plastic surface. The
residue, see, not to leave any of it behind. What wild
njghts or mundane days do people come along here,
discard these small plastic envelopes, on their way to
something
BAGGIES
else, someone else. Walking, or letting it flutter away
in the rush and slide of air through a side window. To
what journeys sordid or euphoric is this an index. And
then the other associations so innocuous and mundane
- the larger bags with their multigrain sandwiches,
their frozen remnants of chopped parsley, their pieces
of cheese, all sealed carefully for freshness.
Eegad this is difficult, tricky, now my turn to apologise
and slow things up. But there it is done, such as it is,
what it is. I assume each email is a reply to the one
before, so it gets longer and longer and longer? The
string? Hey the guy from Object got back to me, I will
go and see him about it all when I get back from
Ararat. Maybe this one is too marginal, too much of
the minutiae, I do have that tendency to the abject. It's
having read Bataille in my youth what done it to me.
Hope you are well and merry, looking forward to the
next.
Yours,
N
caught by
these same
cracks. Look
too long at
cracks and a
faint suspi-
cion enters
the scene.
Am I looking
to stage an
accident or
am I finding
proof of my
fall, my
twisted
ankle, my
bruised back
- someone
must pay for
the crack
attacks. But
who moves a
city? Who
turns on the
cold or the
heat, the rain
or wind or
weight or
anything that
helps a crack
grow?
Just after rain
cracks paint
a picture of
the city as a
place criss-
crossed by
tiny rushes of
tiny rivers.
As the
surrounding
paving and
paths dry the
water still
trapped in
the cracks
become a
dark contrast
to the red and
grey paving.
Minute green
debris fie in
some of the
wider gaps
and a life of
islands and
dark Conra-
dian rivers
appear
beneath our
feet. Some
are so small
they are
more like
veins than
rivers and
that is when
you realise
that cities are
simply states
of deep
vascularity.
Wishes for d
katr i n a
Original Message
Subject:
decals, doors and dooknobs
Date: Mon, 18 Aug 2008 12:58:15 +lOOO
From: Naomi Stead
<Naomi.Stead@uts.edu.au>
To: Katrina Schlunke
<Katrina.Schlunke@uts.edu.au>
Dear Katrina,
I was having trouble so I talked to some
people about D. My first ideas were ineli-
gible - they were urban atmospheres or
types like dodgy or dodgy bloke, which
would have been about the feeling you get
sometimes in the city when a situation or a
person feels subtly wrong or threatening,
and how over time you develop a hyper-
sensitive awareness of this, especially if you
are a woman, especially if you walk at night,
and how fascinating it is that police and
self-defence professionals say you should
trust this intuition absolutely anti react on it,
how they call it a sixth sense, when you’d
think these would be the most pragmatic and
rational of all people, the kind who would
countenance five senses and five senses only
for the knowing of the world, but instead
they say that that ineffable apprehension it is
your best defence for recognising and avoid-
ing danger. And it would have been about
the way that when I came back to Sydney
from Stockholm my own dodgy-meter went
into overdrive, and I realised how it had
been muted there in those safe and orderly
streets, and that the dodgy character and
characters of Sydney have quite a specific
flavour. But dodgy is not a thing and this is
about things. So demolition was no good
either, even though the Carlton United
Brewery is being dismantled and taken
down, and every day a new skyline appears
in the places where buildings have been
undone, and some parts like the darkly
smogged brick chimney are being protected
and preserved while the rest is falling and
there is a cold smell of damp concrete dust
creeping out from under the hoardings and
the site fences. But demolition is not a thing,
and everything else I seemed to think of -
dyke, Dionysian, deliquescence - were
also not, and this is about things. And the
things that I could think of - dogs in particu-
lar dachsunds or dalmatians, delivery
vans in particular white, dice in particular
fluffy and hanging from rear-view mirrors,
dollars in particular dollar coins found on
the grouna- were not thingly enough to
excite me. So I talked to some people about
D, and I told them the game and the
constraints, and I asked for suggestions.
They got quite
excited. In the beginning it was a kind of
improbable fictional eye-spy with drom-
edary and danish and dill pickle, then it
settled a bit with daybed, but this was ruled
invalid by the group because an item of
interior furniture and not urban enough,
even though it was agreed that sometimes
people have daybeds on the front porch of
their terrace houses. Someone suggested
doors and doorknobs and sure, that gives a
whole lot of scope to talk about entry and
threshold and the delicate scale that
stretches between the public and the private
realms, what it means to step through one
invisible membrane after another antiknock
your actual knuckles against the actual
material interface, whether you then step
backwards again, whether you stand
sideways or look down while you wait for
someone to come, whether you knock
differently depending on whether this is the
door of a friend or a stranger. And there
would have been scope to talk about shop
doors and the doorways of public institu-
tions, and car doors which close with the
satisfying pneumatic thunk of the engi-
neered capsule, and doors which open on a
sensor and can either make you feel
affirmed and validated
DECALS,
DOO R S
& DOORKNOBS
when they open for you, or when they don’t
can bring on a little metaphysical crisis - if
this door does not recognise me does that
mean I don’t exist? Am I being judged by
this door? Do I not measure up to the door-
determined standards of being human?
Someone suggested decals as in stickers, the
kind you put on walls or windows, the Kind
that are fashionable at the moment, stylised
flattened silhouettes of chandeliers or deer
heads, with that ambiguity about whether
this represents the cast shadow of one of
these olde-world luxury furnishings or
whether it is simply an image of it collapsed
and popularised and made wittily available
to everyone, and the others thought this was
good because it could also cover any kind of
stick-on image including more properly
urban ones like bumper stickers or the trans-
lucent coloured dolphins and rainbows with
which hippies and children decorate their
house and car windows, or the various
modes of no-junk-mail sticker on the letter-
boxes you pass. On Wilson street is a terrace
house, part of a long row, where once there
was a small hand-written note about the size
of a business card stuck low down on the
door near the letter slot, and even though it
meant stepping through the gate and into the
front yard 1 had to know what it said, and
written small in blue biro were the words
‘please don’t leave junk mail or I will cry.’
As a decal on a door in Darlington, does that
do?
Well that is a bit of a baggy monster of an
entry. I'm afraid, what with its multiple
participants and indecisiveness and wander-
ing. Interestingly, I have realised that the
word desultory does not refer to laziness, as
I always thought, but rather to a statement or
conversation which leaps all over the place
without apparent sequence. Appropriate,
perhaps. Anyway let's meet to discuss it all!
It is time for sherry!
N
Original Message
Subject: Escalators
Date; Tue, 02 Sep 2008 17:36:12 +lOOO
From: Katrina Schlunke
<Katrina.Schlunke@uts.edu.au>
To: Naomi Stead <Naomi.Stead@uts.edu.au>
Dear Naomi
The thing about city things is that they disturb more
than most the assumed logic that the person is
always outside of the thing. In the city we are not
certain where the human ends and begins for we are
most certainly one part, one pull, of this bigger
thing called city. But which part? Which pull? And
which part of what we would once have understood
as a single self joins with what part of the city in
what way? Multiple selves? Assemblages? Becom-
ing different things? - What set expression
describes this world of being moved in multiple
directions while seemingly moving as one? Perhaps
the word is escalation?
To step onto an escalator is to step onto and into a
thing. There is always a tiny hesitation as the body
catches up to the rhythm of the mechanical and the
mechanical comes down to the feet and together we
become something more. This is not a moment that
can be reduced to simple observation by others but
it is with others that we catch and so create, this
order of escalation so that we move smoothly, oh so
smoothly, faster just that much faster, then we could
walk. Until that escalation ends and we are broken
down and apart and the steps descend and depart
and the body that walks, returns. Those first few
steps away are a fleshly beating of feet on floor, a
short, violent mourning of the humanical. Until the
next crowd, the next thing, the next moment when
we realise again that we are only human when we
are in relation to others, to other things. That’s why
we can’t write of city things or thingmg cities with-
out also writing of other people and feelings and
sixth senses for its through the material we have the
corporeal.
There is a magic in the escalator. The sympathetic
magic of modernity that refigures and returns the
ancient. The ancient in the escalator is the horse.
As steps moved we rode them. The moment of esca-
lation is also the moment of reclamation, we are
riding again. And these magical stairs cany that hint
of the animal that begins with the anxiousness of
climbing aboard, of adjustment to something not us
and then, one, two three - we are riding. Not steps
and stairs but escalation.
The logics of the escalator have to be leamt. As a
small child I came from the country to Sydney with
my family for the first time that 1 remember. We
were children used to finding our way across
paddocks, responsible in our negotiations of creeks
and swamps, sensible of danger and knew to plan
our routes of return. My parents let us go in David
Jones. 1 found the escalator and classified it in the
minor order of sideshow alley rides that I knew
from the country shows. To step on was certain and
thrilling. I didn t know at first that I could move on
them, tripling the power of every step I took into the
air, but I leamt. And I kept arriving higher and
higher, following my fellow travelers around the
top to the next one and the next one. Higher and
higher until there was nowhere to go. Then I was
lost. How did 1 go down? And then I saw that they
also went down but by walking around a longer
loop. It was a knitted sequence, up, up, drop one,
round, return, down, down. Going down felt wrong,
against the order of nature. 1 felt about to topple,
girded myself against bumping, against the over-
neady sensation of descent. But at bottom I was not
where I started. The escalators divided particular
layers but I had no idea with what layer I had begun.
I began the grim return; up, up, up, but with short,
increasingly panicked excursions out from the
ESCALATORS
top of each stair. Every time having to return again
and again to those always moving steps. I began to
think I had missed something, somewhere - I had
been glided away from my bearings. I knew 1 had
been gone longer than 1 should have. Then I saw the
miracle of my father, simply standing with a bit of a
smile on his face and 1 surprised him by crying into
his thick wool sports jacket and pure wool woven
tie that everyone who grew wool wore then. ‘We
were starting to get worried’ was all he said softly,
smiling as if of course children always returned
from exploring a city shop, from
riding the escala-
tors, in tears, over
wrought and
thankful for a
moment, for a
father from the
country.
An indoor escala-
tor is all about
moving people
through layers of
possibilities, of
buying, becoming
and looking. But
the outdoor esca-
lator leftover,
some shaggy old
lion pacing out its
real capacity in a
cage that creaks
against what it
could once have
done. The escala-
tor I know is
always breaking
down and why
wouldn’t it with
all the tiny gaps
that rain and dirt
would fall into
and wind would
blow upon? That
vulnerability
makes it seem
old., and venerable
and riding it in the
open is a privilege
- an illumination
of escalation and
air. The rules,
stated as always
in three instruc-
tive panels are the
same. Children
must occupy a
separate step and
retain contact
with their moth-
ers, men must not
stand with their
legs apart, and
dogs (small dogs
only?) must be
carried. The rules
about dogs adds a
certain Parisian
flair to the indoor
escalators to the
escalators that
join hosiery to
cosmetics and the
food hall to mens-
wear but outdoors
one pictures some
terrible industrial
accident - a tail
caught, the horror
of a small paw
taken even for a
second. Outdoors
the escalators
grind, indoors
they glide.
katr i n a
Original Message
Subject; Figs
Date: Thu, 18 Sep 2008 18:33:14 +lOOO
From: Naomi Stead <Naomi.Stead@uts.edu.au>
To: Katrina Schlunke
<Katrina.Schlunke@uts.edu.au>
Dear Katrina,
The smell of Sydney is the smell of rotting figs. The
decadence of it, the fecund vegetal putrescence, is
perfectly suited to this place of warmth and ferment and
slow corruption. Figs seem a primary element in the
food chain here, something like krill or grass or
guillemot eggs, eaten by things which are eaten by things
which are eaten by things. On a summer evening the fig
trees are full of the screeching and crashing of flying
foxes and a rain of half-gnawed fruit falls on the dead
leaves below. Like many fruiting trees, there is a
metonymic transference where the name of the fruit and
the name of the tree are one. Except that there are so very
many kinds of fig, and the kind I am thinking of have
fruit that humans would not eat. Small and hard and
unrewarding, these fruit bear yet a family resemblence to
our table figs, their seeds pale specks in a soft darker
flesh. The trees I have in mind are also not the tamed,
potted figs found in waiting rooms, their leaves polished
weekly by a receptionist with a soft cloth and a can of Mr
Sheen. Those pale svelte delicacies bear hardly any
resemblance to the kind I mean, which are dark and
scabbed and primeval. These knobbled crones are not
suitable even as street trees, since they push up the
footpath and the gutters with their blunt nosing roots,
erupting the bitumen in small slow earthquakes. So they
stand atone in parks. Their enormous mushroom-cloud
canopies, their buttresses, make a whole universe of
crannies for lizards and spiders and frogs. Small pools of
dark brown water collect in their hotlows and writhe
with mosquito larvae. The scabbed skin sprouts lichen.
The leaves are thick and dark green. But the striking
thing about these figs is their aerial roots, hanging down
in great matted clumps so the tree takes on the
appearence of
FIGS
a deranged, unkempt rapunzel, their stringy tresses
matted and lank, monsterous. Their closest vegetal
resemblance is to the celeriac bulb.
Looking through the camera lens at the bulging skin I
see that it is impossible to take a photograph of a fig tree
that is not vaguely pornographic, since the camera sees
the thrusting of limbs, the elephantine muscularity
through wrinkled grey skin, the slits and secret orifices.
And likewise there is something voracious about these
trees which will absorb their own flesh back into them-
selves - loosely braided roots eventually merge into one
solid member, single stems emerge from the trunk only
to disappear again. It is impossible to tell whether these
started downward or upward, as root or branch, before
being eaten by the whole. There is a frightening vitality
in such a dinosaur tree, such a sprawling, grasping,
unruly eruption of a tree, lewd and hairy, hunched ana
carbunkled. Such lumpy crones will not be domesti-
c a t e d
Ah, so, there is figs. Am back from my travels now as
you can see, though regrettably as tardy as ever. My god
I am tired. Must go home and rest my weary, but I have
pictures (of figs, that is, not Venice, although naturally I
have them too). Will send separately. God speed you
with G. Remember it's the last of the musical notes.
Naomi
Original Message
Subject: Grates
Date: Tue, 30 Sep 2008 21:05:15 +lOOO
From: Katrina Schlunke
<Katrina.Schlunke@uts.edu.au>
To: Naomi Stead <Naomi.Stead@uts.edu.au>
I passed a man standing in a group,
holding an uncovered iced cake.
His back was to the street but he
had a sense of precarious space
around him. There were cars
parked behind him but they were
not moving, his friends were at a
friendly distance, and yet there
was vulnerability at his feet. I
realised as 1 passed that he was on
the lip of a drain, his heels infini-
tesimally edged over the grate.
The grate was one of those
rectangle ones with squared holes,
darker than the rest of the street
waiting to be fed that cake from
GRATES
feet up. But is this right? Do grates
menace? They have a role to play
as connoisseurs, as critics, decid-
ing in themselves what stays out
and what goes down the drain. To
go down the drain means to fall
into waste, be washed away, to
lose, but in this city what goes
down the drain is privileged as
something pure enough to enter the
sea where we will swim, where
fish will play, where dolphins
breed. So a grate is rite of passage,
a checkpoint of whether you make
the grade - an objective KPI. But
old orders linger. The ornate
grates cut from a pattern of vees
sit at the edge of the streets extend-
ing out from the usual cement
labias to take up some small
squares of gutter and road space.
These grates cover the holes of the
city like perforated hymens but
what lies beyond them is not the
multi walled swelling and
contracting vagina but tunnel after
tunnel, dram alter drain, pipe after
pipe until the processing plant or
the sea. To bend and touch the
grate attracts attention and feels
obscene even as it becomes more
obvious that it needs a clean and
has butts trapped in the comers of
its cracks. And it pushes me back
as I bend over some more and all at
once have glistening viscera
staring back at me. The stomach of
the city is sitting there under this
grate, exposed in the gaps of the
grate like some horrible wound
that must breath through an open-
ing in the skin. On a hot dry night
what you see through the grate is
wet, waiting for more than cake.
Waiting to be cured, waiting to be
cleaned and remembered, waiting
for more water so that this matter
that stares back can be washed
away and sorted. The grate
constantly negotiating swamp,
cunt, clean, hungry, cured, full, the
waiting in-between matter in and
out of place in this city.
k x
Original Message
Subject: Hats
Date; Tue, 07 Oct 2008 12:57:40 +llOO
From: Naomi Stead <Naomi.Stead@uts.edu.au>
To: Katrina Schlunke
<Katrina.Schlunke@uts.edu.au>
Dear Katrina,
It would be possible to trace and map the history of
the city through hats. What date was the height of
the homburg, and how were they distributed,
massed and clustered? When and where was the
peak of the fedora, the boater the pillbox, the flat
cap, the trilby, the snood, the cloche. These days the
dominant form is the baseball cap, followed by the
beanie. Dress hats are hardly common items today,
apart from the occasional dandyish foray, or special
occasion. They have largely lost their rofe as a regis-
ter of social status and rank, or the uniform of
professional modernity. But there are still hats
nevertheless, and sometimes strange urban conflu-
ences of them, glancing blows of social and political
interest.
One such confluence of hats occurs at 12.43 pm on
Saturday 27th September. I am at the railway square
bus interchange, leaning against the tubular
stainless-steel not-seats that thwart anyone wanting
to lie down. I am waiting for a bus to Maroubra. It is
a bright and hot afternoon. I am idly tracing the
shadows cast on the footpath by the
structure of the canopy above me.
a series of darkened spines across the
footpath. They almost, but don’t quite, line
up with the cracks between the paving slabs.
As I wait, still, squaring these with my eye,
the city flows by. A group of hats crosses the
road towards me and stands in a loosely
ragged group at my bus stop. There is much
loud debate between
HATS
them about which stop, which bus, what time
it will be coming. They are clearly going to
the races. How can one tell that? What is it
that signifies the spring racing carnival in
these hats? Most have no practical purpose -
made of black sheer chiffon and
flowers, they
perch atop
these glossy
heads, orna-
ments and
trimmings
actively repudi-
ating the role of
weather protec-
tion. Some are
hardly defin-
able as hats at
all, they are
‘fascinators,’
visual lures of
swaying
feather and
lace,
to mesmerise
and entrance.
They are a kind
of ikebana for
the head. There
is one white
straw cowboy
hat, but it
seems out of
place,
awkwardly
sensible, not
feminine
enough in this
hyper-feminine
company. But
there in the
middle is the
most remark-
able hat, the
centrepiece
around which
the others are
clustered, the
subject and
Sose of this
w ering. It is
a bright pink
plastic top hat.
Acr o w n
with a cluster
of faux flowers
is a long gauzy
white veil, the
upper side of
the brim is
trimmed with
white fur, and
on the vertical
sides of the hat
are a series of
words on stick-
ers: party girl,
bride to be,
girls night out.
The hats are in
high spirits,
restless and
fractious in
their waiting.
So. A long one.
That's what
happens when
you throw a
public holiday
into
the mix. Hope
all is good with
you and you are
returned safe
and well
from travels.
n
Original Message
Subject: Intercoms
Date: Tue, 21 Oct 2008 20:34:32
+ 110 0
From: Katrina Schlunke
<Katrina.Schlunke@uts.edu.au>
To: Naomi Stead
<Naomi.Stead@uts.edu.au>
Dear Naomi
This is all about the finger. And inter-
ruption. The finger? If you pause
outside the back of the Great Syna-
gogue you will be able to read their
explicit instructions: ‘Press button
wait for response and speak into
intercom’. You see? At no point does
it say: ‘Take finger off button’. It is
this small, lost instruction that has led
to the sense that intercoms, small or
large, outside single buildings or vast
piles of flats - can be difficult. This
isn’t just the difficulty of getting the
right name and the right number of
the flat and getting the right end of
those hundreds of exactly the same
looking rectangles outside some mon-
ster ofan apartment block where you
are trying to find one tiny friend - no,
this difficulty is more profound. It’s
the finger. It’s the finger pressing.
This is the real interruption, the
disturbance, to one person being with
another. Leave the finger on the
button for too long and the friend, the
lover, the business-to-be is squealed
and buzzed at for way too long. Take
the finger off a second too quickly
and communication will never be
established. And you will have to
begin again. Nervous now about your
finger and the button. When to press?
When to release?
Because I have been reading the
intercom instructions of city build-
ings I have had some attention from
security. Outside one building there
was a man smoking and he immedi-
ately asked what I was doing. And
then a woman, also smoking came out
as I was explaining ana laughed.
There was a security camera on the
other side of the door and when I was
staring at the sign Press button wait
for response and speak into intercom,
the security man inside had said to her
; ‘What’s the matter with her? Can’t
she read?’ In most places you just feel
the cameras. Looking at those secret
intercoms with a button and a
speaker and no words at all except
‘Press Button’ or ‘Ring Bell’ (even
when it’s a button) make me feel
giddy, like I am higher off the ground
than I intended to be. And sometimes
there is a small set of initials above
the Airphone: TWC, GHT, Bet, KF,
NSF. What do they mean? Those
intercoms are for masterful types
who will not hesitate as they Dark
their secret password into the phone
and pass seamlessly through. But
when I finally see someone going into
NSF he is short and fumbles with his
mobile phone and seems to be wear-
ing a polyester suit. I step quickly
away -1 don’t want him to think lam
looking or trying to overhear his
secret, intercom word.
I have seen a man take off his cap as
he pushed the intercom button. His
delicate sense of dignity already
telling him that with the pushing of
t mt button he was in
INTERCOMS
t ie company of another. That pressing
tie button was the equivalent of
standing in front of another. His
finger went out and pressed and
having passed he seemed to stiffen up
and I imagined him three steps on,
putting his cap back on.
k
Original Message
Subject: jellyfish
Date: Wed, 29 Oct 2008 20:43:33 +llOO
From: Naomi Stead
<Naomi.Stead@uts.edu.au>
To: Katrina Schlunke
<Katrina.Schlunke@uts.edu.au>
Dear Katrina,
How many cities have jellyfish? Many, I
suppose, although perhaps not as numerous or
as close as in Sydney, where armadas of them
are carried into the harbour on the currents
and collect in quiet inlets and eddies. They
gather there almost horrifyingly abundant,
just under the surface, sometimes washed onto
the strand like rejected desserts. They seem
strangely
JELLYFISH
urban creatures, there at the edge, close to the
shore, like emissaries from the fish world
trying ineffectually to make contact across sea
walls of concrete and stone and timber. Of
course you can't call them jellyfish any more,
since they are not fish, and the marine biolo-
gists have finally gotten their way. Jellies,
then, like their namesake foodstuff, just a little
thicker than water, a moment of decreased
viscosity in the brine, like gelatin, something
made in a mould and then tipped out, like
aspic. And imagine it - a transparent animal!
An animal made of congealed water! With the
finest of filmy tentacles, and the whitish
shapes of the mouth and reproductive organs
more densely translucent, arranged symetri-
cally and geometrically like patterns in lace,
the bell close to perfectly
round but with a delicately
scalloped edge like a fine linen
hem. The Moon Jelly, easy to
see where it gets its name.
Andwhat an idea - the harbour
seething with tiny moons! Like
vague ideas, like non sequiteurs,
like improbable hopes floating
around in the blue! Undulating
like ten thousand underwater
doilies wafted by ten thousand
delicate hands!
You can see them down by
Wooloomooloo Wharf, in the
striped shade of the water under
the boardwalk, where fish cruise
along nibbling the weed on the
timber piles. The jellies are
down there too. The bellying
vessel, the form expanding then
contracting to encompass then
expel water, an astonishingly
weak means of propulsion if you
ask me but then if you spend
your life drifting on the tides I
guess you don't need to exert
yourself. You can see them at
Circular Quay, close by the ferry
docks near the sea wall, washed
in on the wake of the boats and
then deposited there in pale
cloudy clouds. Floating pale
among the dead leaves they nave
the look of debris, like sodden
tissues or used condoms or
plastic bags just under the
surface, but given away always
by that slow rthymic motion, the
compulsive repeated muscular
contraction that without thought
or mind still guarantees them as
living, beating gently away
there. You wonder what happens
to them in the powerful jets that
shift the ferries sideways or
backwards, their chopping
propellers and metal hulls, the
water seething and churning. It
must be hell in there for a jelly-
fish. At least they find some kind
of stillness right by the edge, by
the built shore, peered at by
semi-disgusted tourists over the
balustrade rail. They have a bit
of an image problem, jellies,
although these ones are quite
harmless to humans.
One day - it was New Years Day,
some years ago, as hot as hell,
and we were swimming at Dawn
Fraser pool in Balmain (what
were we thinking, swimming
there? In the inner harbour? 1
would never do it now, with all
the mercury and the two-headed
glutinous pollution monsters)
and the water was dark green and
deep, impossible to see the
bottom, and treading water there
the temperature graded vertically
down, from a warm sunny
slopping around your neck all
the way down the column of
your body to a slow cold murk at
your feet. And that feeling, that
pure visceral terror of reeling
something - something - brush
lightly against your lower leg,
down there in the deeps, and the
thing to do was shriek in half-
hilarity half-horror and swim
away as fast as you possibly
could, kicking wildly, splashing
and spitting and gulping, to
climb the ladder ana flop laugh-
ing onto the hot timber all goose-
bumped. It was jellies, probably.
Probably.
Well there is J. I had ideas about
jam, as well, as an index to a
given cafe's culinary sophistica-
tion or cosmopolitanism, but that
will have to wait for another day.
I await pigeons with great and
breathless anticipation.
x n
Sydney Letters An Alphabetic Correspondence, or the Beginnings of it, in which Katrina Schlunke and Naomi Stead Write to One
Another in Emails where the Subject is the Object, and Thereby Attempt to Map out a Taxonomy of Urban Things, or also to Write a Portrait of Sydney
through its Objects, in a Kind of A-Z of Material-Culture that is Yet Only up to J, and is Here Laid Out as a City of Words.
