

I-
1877.
SYDNEY WATER SUPPLY.
RE VIE W
ON THE REPORT OF
WILLIAM CLARK, ESQ.,
HYDRAULIC ENGINEER,
ON THE QUESTION OF
By JAMES MANNING, Esq.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAMS AND CO., STEAM PRINTERS,
WATER SUPPLY FOE SYDNEY,
186 Pitt Street.


% M*'
r }■
w
ajUcmcQ- (fin (K
W’i Oo'Zi inStt


SYDNEY WATER SUPPLY.
REVIEW
ON THE REPORT OF
WILLIAM CLARK, ESQ.,
HYDRAULIC ENGINEER,
ON THE QUESTION OF
WATER SUPPLY FOR SYDNEY.
By JAMES MANNING, Esq.
SYDNEY;
F. CUNNINGHAMS AND CO., STEAM PRINTERS,
186 Pitt Street.




SYDNEY WATER SUPPLY.
PREFACE.
TO THE PARLIAMENT OF NEW SOUTH WALES, CITIZENS OF
SYDNEY, &c., &c.
The ensuing Articles are a Review of the Report of W. Clark,
Esq., Hydraulic Engineer, on the question of Water Supply for
Sydney. They appeared in the Sydney Morning Herald between
16th June and Ist August last, almost in their present shape.
Appendix 1 contains my official letter to the Government
of 15th November, 18/6, detailing the Loddon and Wingecarribee
water scheme.
Appendix 2 contains a copy of that portion of Mr. Clark’s
Report which refers to that scheme.
• The annexed Diagram shows the routes or courses of the
Upper Nepean and Loddon and Wingecarribee schemes respec-
tively, with the rivers, creeks, &c., appertaining to each, and the
character of the conduits by which in each case waver is pro-
posed to be conducted.
The Review has been dictated by a conscientious belief that
the course recommended by Mr. Clark involves a serious menace
to some of the best interests of this community, and that its
adoption by our authorities will be productive of a lasting injury
to the citizens of Sydney.
I regret that these articles have not appeared earlier in this
form, but the delay has not been with me. In July last I wrote
to the Government to know whether they would publish them


PREFACE.
for general information. They instructed their printer to report
upon the cost of the publication, and at his request I furnished
the manuscript for his inspection. Nevertheless, at the end of
two months they refused the use of the Government press. I
accordingly placed the work in the hands of a private printer at
once.
JAMES MANNING.
Sydney, 24-th September, 1877.


SYDNEY WATER SUPPLY.
EEVIE W
ON THE REPORT OF
WILLIAM CLARK, Esq.,
HYDRAULIC ENGINEER.
I purpose, in a few articles, to survey the report on this subject lately
furnished to our Government by Mr. Clark, the hydraulic engineer. In
doing so, I trust that I shall receive credit for candour, and for having
the interest of the people at heart; and I also express a hope that
the matter which I shall adduce will be carefully read and digested,
without reference to the seeming seal of authority which the subject
has received. It is impossible to ventilate this question too much,
or too strongly to insist on its vital importance; and I sincerely hope
that the citizens will rouse themselves to a personal critical considera-
tion of it, so that what they eventually resolve to do, they may do
with their eyes open, and of their own individual motion, and with
such an intimate knowledge of the facts of the undertaking as will
enable them to bear the responsibility themselves. An immense
amount of the public money is involved, and the owners of it ought
to look well into the proposed investment; and now is the time for
inspection, for once launched into it there will be no getting out.
I purpose to treat this subject under three heads :
I. To inquire whether the Upper Nepean scheme, which has
been recommended, is really the scheme which it is represented to be.
11. To inquire into the quality of the Loddon and Wingecarribee
scheme, which, along with others, has been rejected.
111. To contrast the two schemes.
I.—Upper Nepean Scheme.
Mr. Clark, in his letter to the Colonial Secretary forwarding his
report, says, or rather conveys the assertion, that this scheme has the
merit of bringing about 80 million gallons daily into the city of
Sydney, subject only to sufficient conduits being provided for the last
fourteen miles. The city of Sydney of course means the whole
suppliable population.
'lt will readily be believed that this would be more than the
utmost growth of any scheme for the supply of Sydney. At per head
of population, it is something like eight times greater than the present
supply of Glasgow, and two-thirds of the supply of London itself. I
may, therefore, for argument’s sake, safely assume, that this would be
the utmost growth of this scheme, if it could ever grow to it under


Storage power
Deduct 89 days’ consumption at 80
7,110,000,000
millions daily, say
7,110,000,000
Add 89 days’ influx at daily average for 8
months . . ,. ..
1,290,500,000
Deduct 89 days’ evaporation
569,600,000
Leaves 9 days’ supply
720,900,000
the most auspicious conditions. Let us now see to what extent in
fact it is capable of realizing the representation.
I will here enunciate the fact that in ordinary average seasons,
when our rains are fairly frequent, in the mere matter of quantity
of water, all the schemes are good, and one scheme is nearly as good
as another; and as to those which we are here discussing, neither
has any superiority. Comparisons are only admissible, and Mr. Clark
has only drawn them, in respect of their behaviour in dry times and
under minimum rainfalls; and it is such behaviour only that will here
be taken notice of, and such dry times and minimum rainfalls will
be deemed, for the purpose of the argument, continually present.
Mr. Clark began at the outset to cast about for a test, and in
searching the record of our seasons, lighted upon a certain period, viz.,
eight months (August, 1875, to March, 1876, both inclusive), during
which less rain fell than ever fell in any recorded period of the same
length, viz., by the Oordeaux rain gauge, 16 - 92 inches.
On the theory that what has once happened may at any time
happen again, he treats this “ dry period,” and its minimum rainfall,
as a climatic fact capable of indefinite recurrence, and from it deduces
a crucial test, which he applies without distinction to all the water-
schemes submitted, viz , a capacity to supply the demands of the city for a
dry period of 8 months by the storage and the flow of the minimum rainfall
of such 8 months.
It will presently be seen that in this uncertain climate, neither 8
months, nor any other number of months, nor any known period what-
ever, can be depended upon or trusted to for such a purpose as the
above, and therefore I will not now stop to discuss this point; but
I must remark that, assuming for argument’s sake that there is virtue
in any arbitrary period, Mr. Clark ought at least to have taken 9
months into his reckoning, for the month immediately preceding
his “ dry period” was drier than any month within that period, except
one. But lam dealing with bis Report as it stands.
The demands of the city are an unknown quantity, and may
be any number of million gallons daily, according to circumstances,
such as increase of population, extension of service, cheapening of
price, and so forth. By possibility the demand may be 80 millions
daily; and a power to supply that quantity cannot be claimed as
a merit unless the demand is able to approach it, there being no virtue
in wholesale waste of water any more than of any other article of con-
sumption. The merit being claimed I assume the use.
Let us now submit the Nepean scheme to Mr. Clark’s test at
an 80-million gallon rate. Upon the figures in the report, the follow-
ing is the case
Gallons.


That is to say, at an 80-million gallon rate, the reservoir will
be dry in 98 days or 3 months, and for the remainder of the drought
or dry period, of whatever length, short or long, the daily supply will
only be the influx less the evaporation, nominally averaging about
8 million gallons for 5 months, and after that running from a
maximum 8 millions downwards.
This is the outcome of this claim ; whether it be supportable
or not in wet seasons, in such a one as Mr. Clark selects for a basis, it
entirely fails.
As a matter of practical fact, such a power of delivery, even if it
existed, would be no merit to any scheme for Sydney purposes. ihe
utmost demands of this city will never reach it; and enough is as good
as a feast. I will now examine into the efficiency or otherwise of this
scheme under more reasonable and probable demands.
The water commissioners in 1869 expressed themselves to the
effect that 12 million gallons per day is requisite for a population of a
quarter of a million, and that any scheme to be considered adequate
and acceptable for the supply of Sydney should be able to reach 24
million gallons daily, for, say, half a million souls. The Health and
Sewage Board subsequently increased this requirement to a minimum
of 30 millions.
These functionaries assumed to speak the opinion of the public,
and their utterances should be respected and their demands complied
with. Moreover, the requiring of 30 millions has the merit of much
wisdom and foresight. It foreshadows the true principles of water
schemes, viz.—if possible, complete exhaustive construction at the out-
set ; expansion of consumption, not of supply, of the people to the
water, not the water to the people ; elasticity of supply rather than of
extension. This 30 millions is (Mr. Clark says) exactly the present
actual Glasgow rate with half a million souls, three times our popula-
tion, and it is called the best water supply in Britain. Practically,
there is no human probability of Sydney ever exceeding that number
of inhabitants, though in theory we may approach it, and by possibility
may be as big as Babylon. Then what can we want more than this ?
It would be eminently liberal for our population expanded to the
utmost limits likely, while at the same time it would not be open to
the objection*of being extravagantly in excess of our possible wants.
I have, therefore, no hesitation in saying, 30 million gallons daily is the
true rate for Sydney supply.
The best, cheapest, and only perfect compliance with the official
demand for this rate is, not to provide a part of it now and other parts
or increments from time to time, but to provide the whole at once. The
expense of constructing a scheme in whole is much less than of con-
structing it in pieces, though the first outlay is greater; and such
course has immense countervailing advantages, such as greater supply,
cheaper water, knowing how much we have, and how much we have
to pay for it. Further, we are not only justified, but in duty bound to
our successors, to expend the capital of the country in productive and
permanent works ; and since it now appears that a waterwork is
essentially of this profitable character, and all the more so if finished
out of hand, there is no longer any ground for contending (as I seem


8 months ,.
Deduct 237 days evaporation
.. 3,436,000,000
.. 1,516,800,000
Leaves 64 days supply
.. 1,919,700,000
to have done in my letter to the Government, from the point of view
of expense only) that we should not go beyond the wants of the
present generation.
Mr. Clark, therefore, seems to me to fall short of perfect compli-
ance with the requisition put forward by our authorities, and has not
proceeded on the best possible basis in providing a 12-million gallon
rate with increments of 6 millions; and so his estimates for cost per
1000 gallons become unsettled, and his comparisons of one scheme with
another for this purpose require remodelling. At one place in his
report he approaches the neighbourhood of the 30-million rate by
mentioning the figure 29 millions. But a careful examination of the
text, shows that this 29 millions is only the carrying capacity of a
certain portion of conduit, and is mentioned not as any indication of
power in the scheme or propriety of rate, but only as a matter of
detail and elaboration of the works, in no way connected with the
amount of supply to be delivered.
Let us now submit the Nepean scheme to investigation at a 30-
million gallon rate. Upon the figures in the report, the following is
the case;—
Gallons.
Storage power 7,110,000,000
Deduct 237 days consumption at 30
millions daily 7,110,000,000
Add 237 days influx at daily average for
That is to say, at a 30-million gallon rate, there is 8 months
supply from store, and 2 months additional supply from the flow of
that 8 months, and the reservoir will be dry in 301 days, or 10 months,
and for the remainder of the drought or dry period, of whatever
length, short or long, the daily supply will only be the influx, less the
evaporation, running from a maximum 8 millions downwards.
This deduction shows the Upper Nepean to be a very fair scheme,
so far as quantity of supply is concerned. It is perhaps even better
than its supporters thought. But it is no merit to any scheme to have
sufficient supply, for without this it is no scheme at all. If supply
were the only thing needed, the best project would be Port Jackson,
with a steam condenser at Dawes Point. Therefore, the Upper Nepean
scheme is not entitled on this ground to take precedence of all others,
unless it also appear, either that it has special merits and no blemishes,
or that the other schemes have not sufficient supply, or having supply
have countervailing blemishes. There are others among the rejected
schemes possessing sufficient supply, some of them greater than the
Upper Nepean; and if any one of these has the supply, with special
merits and no blemish, the Upper Nepean must also show special
merits and no blemish, or else it must take rank as a rejected scheme.
We shall now inquire how it will come out of this investigation ;
and first we will look into the special merits claimed, which are as
follows :


1. Large Extent of Watershed.
The collective watershed of the Upper Nepean scheme is said to
be 354 square miles. It is divided into two distinct parts of widely
different qualities. One is the low country, lying below an elevation
of 1,000 feet or thereabouts, a low-class watershed, for the most part
barren, rocky, and dry, yielding in dry seasons an almost infinitesimal
flow, immense in extent, and during spasmodic rains a fruitful cause
of floods. The other is the top sources above the 1,000 feet level, a
high class watershed, comparatively limited in extent, full of permanent
water-bearing swamps, and yielding in all seasons a comparatively
large discharge. The permanent flow of the Nepean streams, which
in dry seasons, to which we are limited in all our considerations, is the
only supply that the Upper Nepean scheme can count upon, is nearly
all from these top sources, where the rainfall is heavier and steadier,
the evaporation less in proportion to it (owing to the natural humidity
of the dimate, caused by proximity to the sea and the high elevation),
the soil moist and retentive, and the flow regular and equable. The
flow from these top sources has to travel immense and exhausting
distances in its natural channels through the low country, and in its
passage pays the penalty exacted by sun and wind, and a parched and
thirsty soil. So the two discharges, the minimum from the poor water-
shed and the maximum from the rich, mingle on the lower levels and
together pass along.
These physical features of the watershed seem to have been only
partially observed by Mr. Clark, and their natural consequences are
unnoticed.
Mr. Clark, by deduction from observations taken in the Nepean
streams, finds the flow of the rivers to be l-20th of the whole rainfall
on the collective watershed. This is a figure for flow unknown, as far
as I am aware, to any experience, and should have prompted some
inquiry into the causes of it. The cause will be seen above —the flow
of the two watersheds have mingled, and the result is the mean
between them, the richness of the one going to supplement the poverty
of the other. Therefore, this figure, 1-20 flow, does dot represent the
distributive flow of the Nepean watersheds; and as a figure for general
application to all watersheds (top sources among others) it has no
value at all, but is worse than useless, being deceptive.
We shall now be able to ascertain what is the real value of the
entire Nepean watershed. The ordinary average yield of British
watersheds, according to Humber and other authorities, is not less than
2-sths (8-20th) of the rainfall; and in my letter to the Government I
pointed out numerous instances in proof of this. Beyond all doubt or
question, the top sources of the Nepean waters as a source of permanent
supply are, mile for mile, equal to the best of these. Hence they really
yield at a rate eight times better than the whole Nepean watershed
apparently yields, so that one-eighth of the whole at the high rate
would do as much work as the whole at the low rate. Therefore, after
allowing an ample margin, the entire Nepean watershed, as a staunch
working watershed at top sources rate of flow, is not worth 100 square
miles.


2. Large Storage Capacity.
This is a true claim so far as it goes, but since we have seen that
this scheme will go only 10 months at a 30-million gallon rate, and it
will subsequently be shown that, among others, the Loddon and Winge-
carribee scheme will go longer and stand better at the same rate, it is
difficult to see how this is any special merit. If, as Mr. Clark seeks to
point out, the Prospect reservoir resembles the Yan Yean in quantity
of store, it will also probably resemble it in the future experience of the
working power of that store. Melbourne has already found that she
must supplement the Yan Yean reservoir.
3. Superabundant Supply and Collateral Advantages.
We hgve previously seen that this claim at an 80-million rate is
untenable. We have also seen to what extent it is tenable at a 30-
million rate. We shall presently see that the Loddon and Wingecar-
ribee scheme possesses the same merit in a still greater degree.
The collateral advantage claimed for the Nepean scheme is, that
the Nepean River, while providing a water supply scheme for the city
of Sydney, also provides an irrigating scheme for the intervening
country.
If this were really true, it would be a great virtue of the Nepean
River. But there is no faith to be placed in any combination of water
supply and irrigation, unless it be on a very small scale, or else from
an utterly inexhaustible source (which the Upper Nepean is not), such
as could be furnished by means of snow-fed rivers, or by such dams as
the great P onah dam in India, or Mr. Woore’s proposed dam at
Warragamba, both of which do or would have thrown back waters for
sixteen miles. The Poonah dam, with cheap and abundant labor, was
more than seven years in building, though 100 yards short of a mile.
As a matter of practice and actual fact, this application of Nepean
waters, even if possible, would be found to be a dead letter. The
Government will never build the requisite irrigating dams because it is
no business of theirs. The owners of the country capable of irrigation
will also never build them, for the works would be of too great magni-
tude for individual enterprise, and they could only be carried out by
unanimous concerted action, which would be most difficult, if not im-
possible, to bring about. Further than this, supposing the dams con-
structed and the irrigating scheme in working order, it would be found
that the store and the inflow would always be least during those seasons
when the demand for water would be greatest. Further still, since the
recipients of irrigation would most urgently want the flow of the canal
at the times when the city would be least willing and able to give it,
antagonism and conflicting interests would be likely to arise. Thus this
feature of the scheme, however intrinsically good, lacks practicability,
and therefore is not entitled to the merit with which at first blush it
was credited.
4. Cheap Water.
At a 30-million gallon rate, the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme
could deliver every 1000 gallons for twopence. And here I must
entirely object to Mr. Clark’s method of estimating cost of water by
small increments of supply. This plan may suit some sorts of water


schemes, but there is no principle involved in it, and as applied to the
Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme it is altogether inappropriate and
foreign to the quality, and encumbers it with a load of expense with
which it is no way rightly chargeable. The minimum Nepean price of
1000 gallons at an 18-million rate is 2 - 45 pence,* always assuming that
the scheme can be constructed for the figures alleged ; and for the extra
12 millions the reduplications of necessary works would be so costly
that I think the price would not come down.
5. Immunity of Storage Reservoir from Channel Force.
As compared with river schemes, whose great dams (mostly with
inadequate by-washes) stand in the main streams themselves, and have
to bear the rush of millions of tons of storm waters coming off immense
and unmanageable tracts of country with all the debris and impurities
which such country yields, this isolation of the storage reservoir is un-
doubtedly a merit; but as compared with such a scheme as the Loddon
and Wingecarribee, whose watersheds are all top sources, clean, com-
pact, and controllable country, whose dams are comparatively small and
low, and almost free from risk, and where nearly all the storm waters
can be directly impounded for use, and they scarcely less clear and pure
than the natural flow itself —this feature of the JNepean scheme is in no
way a peculiar virtue.
6. Permanent Security of Works and Small Repairs.
Let no one try to make me believe that the Prospect dam is safe.
Eighty feet high (besides extra height for wash), one mile and a
quarter long, and two million cubic yards of earthwork ! There can
be little doubt that its presence will depreciate the value, whatever that
may be, of the property in the neighbourhood below, which, if a
casualty were to happen to the dam, would be submerged for miles.
It yet remains to be proved that the weir and compensation dam
will be safe. These are both integral parts of the works, and indeed
upon them depends the whole issue.
No doubt the repairs would be small; so they would be in the
works of many other schemes, among others, of the Loddon and Win-
gecarribee.
7. Resemblance between Prospect and Yan Yean Reservoirs.
This comparison is rather important, and unfortunate for the
Nepean scheme. The resemblance goes thus far, that the acreage of
each reservoir is much alike, each is about the same distance from the
city, they hold about the same amount of available water, and both are
removed from the river channel. Here the comparison ends and the
dispaiities begin. The'Yan Yean dam is 48 chains long and only 25
feet high at the deepest point; the Prospect dam is 108 chains long and
80 feet high, and with a cubical content as big as the Yan Yean, the
Coliban, and the Ballarat dams put together. The entire storage of
Yan Yean is available for consumption ; Prospect has 3,525 million
gallons of unavailable water in it. Yan Yean elevation is 600 feet
* Note. —Mr. Clark gives two figures for this price, 2 - 45 and 2'65 pence. Clearly one or other
must be wrong, so I have given the scheme the benefit of the doubt.


above sea level, and discharges into one large distributing reservoir at
Preston, six miles from Melbourne, •which commands with 300 feet high
gravitation every height for miles around, extending as far and further
than our Parramatta distance, by pipe service alone. Prospect
elevation is only 170 to 195 feet above sea level, far below the top
height of Sydney, discharges into the Crown-street reservoir and other
small distributing reservoirs about the town at the low levels, and as
to the inhabited levels above Crown-street, they can only be got at by
pumps. And yet this is called a gravitation scheme!
I have thus discussed all the special merits claimed by the Upper
Nepean scheme, and the result shows that few of them are tenable. I
will now examine into the blemishes, or defects of the scheme, which
are mainly as follows :
I.—lnsufficient G-rayitation, and its Consequences.
There is no room to doubt that there was, and always has been
among our citizens, a strong desire for a gravitation scheme in prefer-
ence to any pumping plan, either in whole or in part. This feeling was
induced by a plain straight-forward view of the case, requiring no
engineering knowledge, and dictated by common sense and reasons too
obvious to require statement. So much so was this the case that I
believe the public, or at any rate the reflecting portion of them who
guide public opinion, would gladly pay more money for a thorough
gravitation scheme than for any plan which had the element of pumps,
on account of the high natural pressure and other superior qualities of
the former. The Water Commission in 1869 echoed only the senti-
ments of the people when they looked diligently about for a good
gravitation project, and they recommended the Tipper Nepean only because
they could not find a better, and concluded by inviting scrutiny and criticism,
and suggested that better schemes might yet he found. These general views,
and the reasons which prompted them, and the sentiments of the
Water Commission as the mouthpiece of the community, had right to
be respected, and therefore special inquiry should have been made into
such of the schemes submitted as would, on this head, have efiectually
satisfied such general views.
Notwithstanding this evident leaning to gravitation principles,
Mr. Clark has expressed an opinion that these views are scarcely
tenable here, and implies that as between pumps and gravitation it is
only a matter of money.
To say the least, this is a plea for pumps, and must mean that he
holds gravitation in no particular esteem. The result is that the real
gravitation schemes get no special, investigation for the sake of the
gravitation feature, and finally we are told that there is nothing better
to be had than the Upper Nepean, which is low delivery and pumps.
Let us now inquire into the consequences of all this.
(1.) It is stated that water will run from Prospect to receiving
reservoirs at Crown-street, Petersham, and Newtown, and that pumps
at Crownstreet and Paddington will raise water to Paddington, Wool-
lahra, and Waverley, and that from these six centres the whole city
and suburbs can be supplied.
What about North Shore ? It is not once mentioned in Mr. Clark’s
report, and would seem to be no part of the city. It can scarcely be


included by implication among the areas above Crown-street levels,
for he specifies those areas as being Cook and Fitzroy Wards, Padding-
ton, Eandwick, and Waverley. It is therefore not provided for, and
this is an oversight which must be corrected. Moreover, the supply
must come from the Sydney side, for there is no water to be had on the
spot, at least so far as lam aware. Whether there is any tr be had or
not, the cost of adequately supplying North Shore with water, from
whatever source, must be immediately chargeable agains' any Sydney
water scheme.
Mr. Clark proposes to allow the specified areas above Crown-street
level 1J million gallons per day, and capitalizes the cost of lifting this
(with an average lifting height of 108 feet) at £44,000. If the high
levels on the Sydney side get all this, well and good, though there is
nothing very wonderful in it as a supply, and before the Nepean scheme
is ready to deliver, those levels will probably want more. But if it is
sought to abstract any of this for a North Shore supply, I contend that
1£ million is, or very soon will be, quite inadequate for the population
on all the high levels. North Shore is an integral part of the city, and
has a right to and could now take nearly as much water as Woollahra
and Waverley, and should have one million gallons daily provided for
its present and immediately prospective wants. , The capitalized cost of
lifting this to the top heights of St. Leonards (the lifting height not
being less than 159 feet from Crown-street) is just about another
£44,000, exclusive of the cost of the carrying main and North Shore
reservoir. Therefore this amount, and more, is immediately chargeable
against the Nepean scheme over and above Mr. Clark’s estimate.
The fact is, the supply of North Shore is a difficult task for this
scheme. This suburb is growing larger and larger every day, and
must continue to grow without ceasing. Its healthiness, height, great
extent of building sites, and easy access to the business centres, render
it impossible to doubt that it must eventually be the greatest extension
of the city. This £44,000 is only a minimum cost, in fact is no more
than an instalment of what will have to be paid in the end ; for want
of water is the main drawback of North Shore, and once give it that,
it will increase with immense rapidity, and soon the pumping power
must be reduplicated, and there goes another £40,000, besides extra
conduits.
These remarks apply with parallel force to the Waverley and
Eandwick side. There is an immense extent of high elevations
available for residences, stretching from South Head nearly to Botany.
These places are not built on yet, because they are more or less difficult
of access, and there is no water. But once lead the water there, and
the population will follow it for the sake of the coveted elevation, and
the consumption of one gallon of water will be the groundwork for the
consumption of two more. So the pumping power provided would
soon be overtaken, and then away goes another £40,000 for extra
power on the Sydney side, besides additional conduits.
Ihe upshot of all this is, that we should never know when we
have done with paying, and expense would go on repeating itself every
few years, and the desirable element offinality is absent from the scheme.
All these troubles and difficulties, born of the low delivery defects,
are intensified by the plan of providing the city by small increments


of supply. There is no comprehensive nature or forward action in this
plan, and, so far as Sydney is concerned, its situation and character of
locality render it peculiarly unsuitable and expensive. It is a pity
that the Health and Sewage Board, when they raised the rate per day
to 30 millions, did not also insist upon works immediately adequate to
deliver that rate.
(2.) Another consequence of this low gravitation is that the works
from Prospect to Sydney are rendered unnaturally expensive. After
the first 11 miles through a complex and costly system of canal,
aqueduct, and syphon, with 31 feet fall, there are only 23 feet of fall
to Crown-street, 10 miles through cast iron pipes. Velocity in water
means the saving of size and expense in the carrying conduit—the
greater the velocity, the smaller the conduit and the cost, and vice
versa ; and as the velocity in this iron conduit is minimum, therefore
the size and expense are maximum. So valuable is velocity in the
construction of high-level schemes, that I shall be very little out when
I say that the cost of piping to bring >3O million gallons a day from
the Loddon to Waverley will be no greater than the cost of piping in
the Nepean scheme to bring the same quantity from Prospect to Crown-
street, though more than twice the distance.
(3.) It is stated that the height of Crown-street and the other
receiving reservoirs is 141 feet above sea level. The surrounding
localities are very populous, and in some cases the populous neighbour-
hood extends some miles, and may yet extend much further; and,
indeed, for the purposes of water supply, must be credited with
indefinite extension. This is the case in Melbourne ; the whole six
miles from Preston to the city is populated, and the consumption of
water per head is large, for they are accustomed to abundance and
know nothing whatever about stint or intermittent supply. The
following is a proved fact in Melbourne : By the time the water reaches
the sea levels of the city from Preston , th « 6 miles' intermediate abstraction
of water in times of heavy consumption eats up , hy the friction generated,
150 feet out of the 300 feet head with ivhich it started. Sydney may
fairly be expected to grow as populous as the sister city, and her
citizens may reasonably look for the same efficient water supply.
What is true of water in one place is true of it in another ; that is to
say, in Sydney, if water seeks to run by ordinary mains from Cr>wn-street
6 miles in any direction through a district as populous as that between
Melbourne and Preston , the intermediate abstraction of water , when the
draught is heavy , will eat up the 141 feet head, and the water will not
reach to the end of the 6 miles. This can only be met by more and more
expense, either in laying down larger service mains to neutralize the
friction and give the water play, or in constructing more assistant
reservoirs in the outlying districts (to be filled intermittently when the
heavy abstraction is off), or else in applying more steam power, to
pump down hill.
This would be a pretty state of things, a nice outcome of a low
delivery plan. Yet such must be the inevitable result if this scheme
be used, and Sydney grow large enough to prove it. It shows con-
clusively that the Nepean scheme would be least valuable when most wanted.
(4.) As a power for the extinction of fires, with the necessity
to pump to and from various levels, there is no dependence to be placed


2. Cost.
This subject had come up already, and on the wrong side for the
Nepean scheme. There are certain other matters connected with this
portion of the subject which require investigation.
Mr. Clark has said that in his opinion many of Mr. Moriarty’s
prices (as revised from his original estimates) are sufficient, but others
of them not. I have not the slightest doubt that Mr. Clark examined
those figures as carefully as he could, and with all the light he could
obtain, and that as an expression of his own belief this statement is
entitled to the highest respect. But if I am right in saying that
colonists know more about prices current and ruling in their own
country than a stranger can possibly be expected to know, and that we
have among us contractors and other people well able to make
estimates and calculations in such matters, then I say that the public
ought to be allowed an opportunity to see and examine those figures
for themselves.
As we have not yet been furnished with these revised estimates,
we must, for argument sake, assume them right, so far as they go.
Now let us see how far they do not go.
Since our authorities have declared that any acceptable scheme
must be able to provide 30 millions daily whenever required, it is clear
that the only proper estimate of its cost is one which will cover all the
works necessary to provide that 30 millions. The proper complete cost
of the Nepean plan, therefore, is something like the following
1. To bring 12 millions daily to Sydney ; —
Works, land, superintendence, and contingencies, as per
report .. .. •• •• •• •• •• £1,126,768
Capitalized value of raising \\ millions to high-level, Sydney
side, as per report .. .. .. .. .. 44,000
Ditto 1 million, North Shore side, say .. .. .. 44,000
in this scheme. When the house which is on fire is at the low levels
of the town the water would certainly have some power, that is to say,
just the same as the present Sydney supply has, which is little enough.
But if the house be on or more or less a little below the level of the
Crown-street reservoir (and a large portion of the town is on that level)
or of any other reservoir with which its main connects, there is little or
no power at all, and in some cases indeed the water could scarcely
crawl into the ground floors, far less reach the roof. The consequence,
therefore, would be (or rather, should be, in order to preserve a true
balance of risk) that the premium for a fire insurance would vary with
the situation; and if, as might easily be, a big fire at any time broke
out on these unprotected levels, the disasters of Boston or Chicago
might be repeated.
2. To bring the remaining 18 millions. Without the revised
estimates before me, it is impossible to get at this
more than approximately. From Mr. Moriarty’s figures
in 1869, of which Mr. Clark required revision, owing
to the great difference of prices between 1869 and
1877, we find something of the following kind :
Cast iron piping for 10 miles into Crown-street .. .. 279,164


Reduplication of syphon pipe to cross Duck Creek, without
charging anything for extra work on canal and aque-
duct, &c., from Prospect., .. .. .. .. 52,000
Capitalized value of raising 2J millions to high levels
(being the one-eighth part which Mr. Clark allots),
millions to North Shore side, having greatest capacity
for extension, say., .. .. .. .. 54,000
and 1 million to Sydney side, say . . .. .. 30,000
Enlargement of reservoirs and all contingencies not in-
cluded
£1,629,932
The above estimate of cost to reduplicate for the whole balance of
18 million gallons, is for one large reduplication at once. But the
Nepean plan of proceeding is not to reduplicate in one whole of 18
millions, but in three increments of 6 millions each. This course would
immensely swell the figures for the cost of the cast iron piping, for the
expense of three 34-inch mains carrying 6 millions each would, with
little doubt, be double that of one (say) 48-inch or larger main carry-
ing the whole 18 millions at once. Mr. Clark’s suggested modification
to 36-inch mains would go but little way towards modifying the
general expense.
Here then is the proof of that which has so long been generally
believed, viz., that the Upper Nepean scheme will cost far more money than
its promoters say. The above estimates are merely approximate, wholly
inexhaustive, prepared upon a basis of cost admittedly too low, and
beyond any doubt would work out to a far higher figure. And yet we
are asked to believe that the total cost of the undertaking will be
£1,170,768, when here is the moral certainty of an eventual two
millions sterling !
The “ 12 million and 6 million increment ” plan is again respon-
sible for this discrepancy in price. The figures in the report for cost,
to the general reader at least, would seem to mean cost of scheme; but
in point of fact they only mean cost of a certain instalment of water out
of a scheme. The distinction is a vital one.
It is known and acknowledged that the building of the Nepean
scheme would take ten years, during which time the works would be
unproductive, and the scheme should bear the burthen of the interest
of the money which its works will absorb. Mr. Clark has omitted this
as an item of charge, saying that it cannot be readily estimated, and is
common to all schemes
Had he said that a reasonable time for construction is common to all,
there would have been no objection to the remark. But ten years is an
unreasonable time ; and if any other schemes could be constructed in a
reasonable and shorter time, the Nepean must be charged interest of
money for the difference of time. It will subsequently be seen that this
means a very large sum of money, which must be added to the Nepean
cost beyond all question.
3. —Impurity of Water,
Mr. Clark has said that he does not think filtration necessary.
This may, perhaps, be true of the 12 million gallon rate, because to
supply this quantity the influx of ordinary seasons would be sufficient


without letting in floods or freshes. But it is certainly not true of 30
millions. The average daily influx into the Prospect reservoir for the
eight years of observation, as shown by the figure of the report, is at
most 51 millions—floods, freshes and everything. This is only 21
millions more than the daily draught, so that the scheme to maintain
its store can ill-afibrd to shut out anything. The influx of dirty storm
waters for a day or two would impurify the whole of the supply in the
reservoir, and the impurities would probably not bo settled to the
bottom before another influx of storm waters would renew the impuri-
fication. Thus the store of water would practically be in a continual
state of cloudiness, and an elaborate system of filtration would be
indispensable. But gravitation is necessary for filtration works, and
the scheme has none to spare—having no more than enough to deliver
its waters at the distributing reservoirs; so that there is practically no
option in the matter, except between cloudy water or no water at all.
4.—Danger of Prospect Reservoir, and its Consequences.
It is of the essence of the Nepean scheme that the Prospect reser-
voir should always be as full as it can manage to be, because, if the
water gets low, and a drought comes on, the influx is insufficient to get
the store up again, and the 10 months’ store becomes a myth, and
the qualification of sufficiency is gone. But if there is danger in any
dam (other than river dams), the greatest causes of it are immense size
and depth, and this necessity of fulness, and the pressure on the lower
strata of the dam, acting upon the slightest flaws—which flaws cannot
be found or known until the money is all spent, and the water in, and
damage past remedy. Mr. Cordon, hydraulic engineer-in-chief of
Victoria, in his report on the new Ballarat supply, says that “the risks
of failure increase in a greater ratio than the square of the height, and
it is no disparagement of the skill of any engineer to state that fact,
nor will anyone who has had experience in making high dams be
inclined to make light of it.” All these causes of danger are present
in the Prospect reservoir to a maximum extent, and therefore in its
complete form it contains the seeds of imminent peril.
But it is not only dangerous, hut it is the only storage reservoir—
unless the Bull’s Hill site be also used by way of obviating the danger,
and to obtain this security, the Nepean scheme must pay a quarter of
a million and upwards over and above its full estimate, and when built
the dajn is no safer than Prospect, being bigger and more un wieldly still.
The Van Yean scheme possesses the same element of risk, but only in
theory, for the comparative smallness of the dam, shallow depth of
water (never more and rarely so much as 25 feet), and steady influx,
render the fulness of the reservoir, though, of course, highly desirable,
not absolutely essential, and reduce the risk to a minimum. Even the
small risk which the Yan Yean does run, Melbourne is now proposing
to obviate—the new dam which the people are about to build will
serve not only to supplement and better ensure the supply, but also,
if accident should happen to either, to preserve the balance of safety by
a pair of safe reservoirs. But the Nepean scheme as elaborated has no
such safeguard, and this is one of "the greatest blots upon it. If
accident should happen to the Prospect dam, to say nothing of the
damage inflicted to the neighbourhood, the city would have a water
famine.


I have now finished the examination of the Upper Nepean scheme.
I have found it to be a scheme possessing sufficient supply, no special
merits, and many glaring defects. There are many matters yet
deserving comment, such as the possibility of the compensation dam
not coming up to expectation, and leaving the Upper Nepean dry—the
impropriety of charging unequal water rates between the high and low
levels, when the people themselves pay for the erection of the works at
a uniform rate—and others of more or less consequence. But time and
space do not permit. I shall, therefore, next proceed to the second
part of the subject, viz., —to inquire into the Loddon and Wingecarribee
scheme.
11.—Loddon and Wingeoaeeibee Scheme.
Before proceeding to the discussion of this subject, it is only right
in its behalf to say that its rejection by Mr. Clark should not set it at
any disadvantage in the reader’s mind. A proper appreciation of the
recommended scheme can only be arrived at by seeing it through the
light of another, and I desire to throw that light through the medium
of the scheme now before us.
The vicissitudes of our climate are such, that the only indubitable
truth about it is this— dry and wet periods alternate without any known
principle of alternation. Our best skill and science has failed as yet
to arrive at any more definite conclusion. Droughts and floods, and
every conceivable intermediate phase of season, come and go, and
we cannot tell when they will come, or how long they will stay, or
when they will go. There have been droughts of every length, from
three months up to two years ; there have been wet seasons the same,
some with floods, some without floods, and some with two, three, and
four floods consecutively. We live in the dark as to what climatic
issues to expect. It is in no man’s power to affirm that the least
of these evils will ever happen again, or to deny that the worst of them
will begin to-morrow. Again, we cannot assume that as it is in
one locality, so it will be in another. Severe seasons of both kinds,
wet and dry, have been experienced at one and the same time within
the influence of the Eastern Cordillera. Some localities seem always
more or less dry, others always more or less wet, in some places it
rains little and often, in others seldom and much. Further still, there
is a great variety of soils—some are hard and dry, and absorb only so
much rain as they want themselves, and waste the rest; while others
are moist and spongy, and hold the water and give it off moderately
and equably. And so the changes, of different rainfalls and different
results from rainfall, are rung almost ad infinitum.
Many theories and beliefs have been from time to time advanced
by way of solution of these apparent anomalies; but none of them
have stood any lengthened test, and we are invariably compelled to fall
back baffled, and to confess that the laws of our climate are a sealed
book to us.
As touching water schemes in our own climate, there are three
plain inferences to be drawn from these facts.
1. There is no period known or recorded which can be treated as a
climatic fact, and the assumption of any such as a guiding principle is
perilous and wrong.


2. The storage capacit} 7 , that is, the lasting or staying power of a
scheme, is the only certainty, and therefore the true and only standard
by which all schemes must be judged.
3. The rainfall and flow of the rainfall in one locality is no
criterion of the rainfall and flow of the rainfall in another.
The first of these truths upsets Mr. Clark’s arbitrary eight months
“ dry period,” which he assumes to be a climatic fact, capable of
indefinite recurrence. The second he admits himself. (Report, page
6.) The third proves the impropriety of assigning the same qualities
as to rainfall and flow to all watersheds alike ; and is equal to saying
that the rainfall due to any water scheme is the minimum observed
rainfall on its own particular watershed during the lasting period of its
store, and that the portion of rainfall available for supply is that
portion of the minimum observed rainfall which the particular water-
shed discharges during that lasting period.
Hence it becomes evident that Mr. Clark’s test of our water
schemes —viz., capacity for 8 months’ supply out of storage and 8
months’ minimum flow—is not a true test of all our water schemes.
It is, therefore, not necessarily true of any, and, as a matter of fact, it
is untrue of some, and if true of any, it is by accident. It must,
therefore, be given up and a better one found.
The better and true test is comprehended in the above investigations.
Storage capacity is the standard of judgment, and the lasting period of
the store varies with the rate demanded, and the yielding power of the
watershed during that lasting period is such and such an observed flow
out of the minimum observed rainfall of that period. Hence we have
the true test of all water schemes in this and other uncertain climates,
viz., capacity to supply a given daily rate for an unlimited time hy the
storage and the flow of the minimum, rainfall on the watershed during the
lasting period of the store.
Any water scheme which can absolutely satisfy this test is perfect
as to supply ; and by so much as one scheme satisfies it more nearly
than another, by so much that one is superior. As lam now dealing
with the Loddon and Wingecarribee, I will give it first trial by this
exhaustive test, and I will subsequently submit the Upper Nepean to
the same.
The first thing to be done in the matter is to ascertain the entire
storage capacity of the scheme, for upon this depends the whole issue.
And before beginning my investigation, I desire to premise generally
that I differ materially from Mr. Clark in some things, and that some
of my remarks will not be acceptable to him. But truth and the
public good are the first objects of my search, and if in that search I
cross the views of others, I ask credit for good intention. Also I ask
the readers’ leniency if my figures should sometimes lack mathematical
precision, but they will be found to be quite accurate enough for the
purpose of the arguments to be drawn from them.
The storage capacity of the reservoirs on the Loddon watersheds
is 2892 million gallons, capable of being held in the Loddon lake alone,
if it were necessary (which it is not, owing to the existence of relief
reservoirs), and the following is the proof.
The Loddon lake, as at present surveyed, is far below its possible
size, and with the cross sections for cubical content at present taken, it


lias a dam of only 55 feet high, (like a flattened V, in a narrow gorge)
an extent of 408 acres, an average depth of 13 feet, and a cubical
content of 1446 million gallons. The ranges rise steadily on either
side of the dam, and further dam construction is easy, and in my letter
to the Government on the subject, the power of large augmentation is
distinctly claimed for the reservoir. Mr. Clark, therefore, wrongly
calls 55 feet a maximum height, (Eeport, page 16), and I now exercise
the power to increase. 13 feet more dam will double the surveyed
store, and the spread, which would be immense, is not counted, but
given in for any purpose it can serve.
The Madden’s Plains and Tunnel reservoirs are together 63 acres
minimum, and drain not less than 4,000 to 4,500 acres; but not having
been surveyed for cubical content, these are not counted as independent
stores, but given in as supplementary reservoirs to meet any supposed
or possible deficiency of the Loddon Lake. This means the storage
only without the flow.
The storage capacity of the reservoirs on the Kangaloon watershed
has not been ascertained by survey. Though I could not be expected
to go any further than I had gone in the way of private expenditure
for a public matter, in my letter to the Government I intimated my
belief that one reservoir site could be found there having of itself alone
a storage power only second to the surveyed power of the Loddon lake.
Mr. Clark applied to me for surveys of this, and for the above reasons
I referred him to the Government as the proper source of such work.
It seems he did not adopt the reference, though why I cannot tell,
since he called upon the Government for further surveys in respect of
nearly all the others schemes. However, when speaking to my state-
ments on the subject of Kangaloon storage power (Eeport, page 19),
he expresses his willingness to assume “ that one or more such sites
could be found where, by the construction of dams, it would be
possible to impound at reasonable cost as much water as has been
calculated for Lake Loddon.” Since then, in the absence of surveys,
Mr. Clark and I are in accord, I call the storage capacity of the
reservoirs on the Kangaloon watershed 1446 million gallons.
The storage capacity of the reservoir on the Wingecarribee water-
shed is 9555 million gallons, contained in the Wingecarribee swamp
alone, and the following is the proof.
This swamp, in its present natural state, is a great water-basin 6
miles long, 1170 acres in extent, having a depth of more than 20 feet*
in many places where tried, and believed to average 20 feet deep and
upwards. Its surface is covered by a dangerous quaking bog of peaty
nature. It is not quite level, but has a very slight fall from end to
end, not perceptible to the naked eye, and dips a little more just at the
outlet, where the Wingecarribee Eiver forms. The outlet proper, that
is, the stream course, is very narrow, and the land rises bluff on one
side to great height, and gradually on the other to a height of some-
thing like 50 or 60 feet in about a mile.
The storage of this swamp is of two kinds, natural and artificial.
The natural storage is what is in it now, or rather what will be in it
when the swamp is levelled off by damming the outlet, which is easy
and simple, as Mr. Clark knows. From the body of water thus confined,


this scheme claims to be able to draw as the available portion of the
natural store, 10 feet of water out of the average 20 feet depth of the
swamp. For this I have Mr. Clark’s warrant, as he that he is
willing to take a part of these waters. (Report, page 19.)
The facilities for tapping the swamp by tunnel at its lowest levels
(owing to the fact that this tunnel has nearly 200 feet of available fall
to work upon) are such, that every other drop of water in the remain-
ing depth, if ever wanted, could be drained out of it for use. But
the collective storage of the scheme will be found to be so great that
it is quite unnecessary to depend upon the lower levels of the swamp
for any supply, and accordingly I fix 10 feet of water for the purposes
of estimate. 1,170 acres, 10 feet deep, means not less than 3185
million gallons.
The artificial storage is what will be got on top of the natural
store, by heightening the dam at the outlet. My necessarily inexhaus-
tive elaboration, and my high opinion of the natural store (which I
may here remark is, together with the Kangaloon and Loddon stores,
already more than equal to the whole Nepean store) led me to be
satisfied with the latter, and rightly #so, and to make no further call
upon the capabilities of the swamp. But since insufficiency of storage
has become the main ground of rejection, the scheme, in refutation of
this ill-founded charge, has a right to display all its dormant powers,
and which should, beyond all doubt, have been critically inquired into
before judgment was pronounced. The power to raise the Winge-
carribee dam is one of these, and on behalf of the scheme I now
exercise it.
If, then, this dam be raised 20 feet, as it can with ease and at
reasonable cost, 1170 acres 20 feet deep means not less than 6370
million gallons, and the spread, which would be immense, is not
counted, but given in for any purpose it can serve.
All necessary evaporations wall be subsequently allowed for at
Mr. Clark’s own rate.
Hence the result : the storage capacity of the Loddon find Winge-
carrihee scheme is 13,893 million gallons fnearly as much as two JSepean
schemesJ, equal at a 30-million gallon rate to 15 months' supply without rain
or flow.
These are not mere matters of belief, but absolute existing facts,
and I put them forward as such. It now lies with the public authori-
ties to do what they should have done long ago, that is, have these
matters properly sifted, and verified, or otherwise, for the public
interests. They have never yet received the inquiry they deserve, and
every attempt at any such has been persistently baulked, as is w’ell
knowm, and the community in general are the losers; for of all the
blunders that were ever made in the management of our civic matters,
there is not one to compare with that of rejecting the Loddon and
Wingecarribee scheme, on the ground of insufficiency of store.
Mr. Clark has stated (Report, page 19) that the entire quantity of
water stored by this scheme is only 2892 million gallons. The
immense disparity between his figures and mine must strike people as
strange, and they naturally ask lor an explanation.


I confess it was some time before I could find one myself. At
length it struck me that there was an error of addition, and the
discovery revealed the fact that the scheme has had no credit for any
portion of its Wingecarribee store. Mr. Clark admits a proved
possible store of 1446 million gallons in the Loddon Lake. He also
admits and agrees wirh me upon a possible store of 1446 million
gallons in reservoirs on the Kangaloon watershed, which watershed
can abundantly supply this by itself, without assistance from the
Wingecarribee or any other source. But the sum of those two stores
is all the credit given to the scheme; that is to say, the Wingecarribee
swamp, the greatest store of all, is not counted !
But this is not all. This mistake is rendered all the more extra-
ordinary by the fact that the question of damming the Wingecarribee
swamp was a prominent feature in the intercourse between Mr. Clark
and myself during cur visit of inspection in January last. From the
earliest time of my discovering this high-level scheme, the outlying
watersheds, then known to me only faintly and geologically, but which
have since developed into the Kangaloon and Wingecarribee, were
distinct portions of the general plan, and claimed by me as such (in
proof of which I refer to my published papers read before the Royal
Society of New South Wales in 1874-5). They did not receive such
early notice as the Loddon, simply for the same reason that Rome was
not built in a day, and my limited facilities prevented my elaborating
all the details of the general plan as exhaustively as they richly
deserved. Among other things, the Wingecarribee part of the scheme
could not be said to be perfectly elaborated until the facility of
damming the outlet of the swamp was established. As I had not
referred to this in my letter to the Government, and, in order that the
scheme might have the full benefit of this ability, and to establish its
storage capacity beyond the possibility of doubt, I took Mr. Clark to
the outlet of the swamp, that he might see the feature for himself.
The result of our careful inspection of the site was a satisfactory con-
clusion that the damming of the Wingecarribee swamp , if and whenever
wanted, would he practicable, simple, and inexpensive.
Yet, not one word of all this in the Report. Not only no reference
to the facility of damming the swamp, the easy extension of which
results in an immense artificial store ; not only no credit given to the
scheme generally for its natural store, known and admitted by Mr.
Clark ; but the swamp is actually treated as a sluice, storing nothing !
Such blunders as these are very serious, and I much regret that it
necessarily devolves upon me to expose them. But when I find that
this Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme is condemned on the ground,
among others, of insufficient store, while the fact is, that it possesses one
reservoir alone superior to the whole storage capacity of the Upper Nepean
scheme, and that Mr. Clark had the means of knowing it, then delicacy
has no longer any place, and I am bound in duty to the community
and to myself to show up the mistakes.
I have now ascertained the storage capacity of this scheme, and
established its sufficiency on this head, and upset the main ground of
the rejection. The next thing to be done in the matter is to find the
means of filling the store.


I have shown that this scheme, with its reservoirs assumed as full, ART
will stand for 15 months at a3O million gallon daily rate without help. Px.
I have also shown that the rainfall due to any scheme is the minimum
observed rainfall on its own watershed during the lasting period of its
store. Therefore, this scheme is entitled to the minimum observed
rainfall on its own watershed for 15 consecutive months.
The entire extent of catchment area available to discharge into
the stores of the scheme is 30,000 acres minimum. Mr. Clark says
48P square miles; but this is rather more than lam aware of, and I
will not count upon the excess.
It may be well to mention here that these catchment areas are
perfect as to management. The reservoirs of the scheme absolutely
command the country, and such a thing as escaped rainfall does not
exist. In this respect the scheme differs widely from the Nepean
scheme, which can gather into its reservoir per day only 84 million
gallons at most, no matter how much water may be going down the
Nepean Eiver. This subject will be found further discussed at page 33.
The situation of these watersheds is on the landward side or
summit of the barrier south coast range, under the direct influence of
the sea, and, as Mr. Clark says, they intercept the rain-clouds and
mists coming from the sea, and (aided by the prevailing west winds),
condense these waters on their areas. The elevations are very high,
nothing under about 1100 feet, and some Of them as high as 2,500!
Independently of their including some of the head sources of George’s
Eiver, they are the top sources of and give rise to the Cataract, Upper
Nepean, and Wingecarribee rivers, which are three of the main streams
which eventually form the Hawkesbury, and as against the Upper
Nepean and Warragamba water schemes, whose large watersheds
include these small ones, this scheme has prior title to, and is the true
possessor of, these watersheds. Mr. Clark, speaking of the Loddon
climate (applicable in an equal degree to the Kangaloon and Winge-
carribee country), says (Report, page 17): “Itisto be borne in mind
that the atmosphere of this district is frequently loaded with moisture,
which, though not measurable by the rain gauge, will probably assist
in saturating this swampy area. . . , Moreover, exposed as the
region is to the south-east winds and close upon the seacoast, the rain-
fall is_ considerable.” This is probably one of the causes of the
formation of swamps, which are the characteristic feature of these
watersheds, and are to be met with at turn, even on the hill-tops
themselves.
I need not further enlarge upon the rainfall question. I have said
enough to show conclusively that it is far heavier and steadier in those
high regions than at any of the points of observation on the Nepean
streams, all of which are several hundred feet lower, and more or
less out of range of the climatic influences which create the heavy wet.
I shall, therefore, err against the scheme, and be entirely on the
safe side, in assuming that the minimum rainfall on the Loddon
and Wingecarribee watersheds is at least equal to the minimum rain-
fall at Oordeaux, which is the nearest point of observation, and whose
gauge is adopted by Mr. Clark as universal.
The driest 15 consecutive months during the eight years of
observation are from April, 1875, to June, 1876, both inclusive, and


comprise Mr. Clark’s “dry period.” The minimum observed rainfall
at Cordeaux during that 15 months was 59-79-100 inches. For the
above reasons I will take a small further credit of 21-100ths of l-sth
inch for the Loddon and Wingecarribee watersheds, just for the
purpose of making an even figure of 60 inches. The rainfall due to
30,000 acres, at 60 inches in 15 months, is 40,837,375,000 gallons. It
now becomes necessary to ascertain the flow or discharge of that rainfall.
From observations taken on Nepean streams, Mr. Clark finds that
of the rainfall due to the collective watershed of the Nepean scheme
for a dry period of 8 months, l-20th only passed down the rivers.
Having been furnished with none other than Nepean observations, he
assumes all watersheds to be of the same class and character, and
applies the figure l-20th flow to all alike.
If this figure, l-20th flow, really had any meaning, it would be an
argument for giving up the Nepean scheme. I believe the world does
not furnish so poor an example, and for the credit of our climate
we should look, before deciding, for some nearer approximation to
general experience.
In the first part of this article I proved the impropriety, as a
matter of climate, of judging one watershed by another as to rainiall
and flow. In a previous article (No. II.) I pointed out that the
Nepean scheme possesses two distinct kinds of watershed, having very
different qualities of flow —one, the low country, large and poor, the
other, top sources, small and rich, and that with regard to their
behaviour in dry times the poor watershed yields an infinitesimal flow,
and the rich a comparatively large discharge, and that the recorded or
deduced flow is that of the mixed watersheds only, a mean figure, and
true of neither distributively.
Since then, as a matter of principle, this indiscriminate application
of one fixed rate of flow is improper, and the fixed rate, l-20th, is not
true even of the distributive watersheds which have been supposed to
give it, I am at liberty to reject that rate as not necessarily truo of the
Loddon and Wingecarribee watersheds. We must, therefore, search
for some other figure for dow which will be true of them distinctively.
The watersheds of the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme comprise
the majority of the rich portion of the Nepean watersheds, being, in
fact, as above stated, the top sources of the George’s Liver, Cataract,
Upper Nepean, and Wingecarribee rivers, all country of precisely the
same class as to water discharge. Therefore, whatever is true of the
rich Nepean catchment area is true of the Loddon and Wingecarribee
watersheds.
The richness of the rich portion of the Nepean watershed lies in
its saturating power, by which it absorbs the rains when falling up to
saturating point, discharges the surplus, if any, at the time of fall, and
gives ofi' the saturation steadily and equably from its body after and
independently of rains. Hence Mr. Clark’s remark about them
(Report, page 12): “ There are, moreover, numerous swamps in this
upper portion of the catchment area which retain the water falling
upon it. preventing its rapid discharge by the rivers and rendering
their flow more equable.” The poverty of the poor portion consists in
the comparative absence of this saturating power, so that it can only
give off water from its surface in harmony with the rainfall, whether
that be steady or fitful.


If, then, the rain should fall on the whole watershed as steadily
and equably as the rich portion of it gives off the saturated store, the
flow of the whole mixed watershed, poor and rich together, would
most nearly approximate to the flow of the rich watershed alone, and
would only never equal it, owing to the fact that the rich portion
itself helps to produce the approximation.
The nearest possible approach to and the only receivable type of
rainfall producing such a result, is the rainfall of all the observed
seasons as evidenced by the average flow of all those seasons. By
deductions from figures in the Eeport (page 6) I find that average flow
to be 35-100ths, or more than one-third of the rainfall. Therefore, this
figure, 35-100ths, plus something besides for the individual extra credit
of the rich watershed, is a minimum figure for the flow of that rich
watershed, and must be substituted for the l-20th hiLherto applied to it.
This is in unison with the world’s experience. British water-
sheds yield an average flow in excess of 2-sths (40-lOOths), and the
average flow of the watersheds of 25 schemes instanced by the Water
Commission (page 106 of their Eeport) is more than 499-1 OOOths—that
is to say, one-half.
From personal observation of the features of those rich watersheds
themselves, Mr. Clark says (Eeport, page 16): “The area has been
carefully inspected, and its characteristic feature is the large extent of
swamps of which it is composed. These swamps are not deep, but
even during a somewhat dry period at the time of my visit in
December* (sic) last, they were saturated with moisture/’
Therefore, having got 35-100ths absolutely and an unascertained
extra by deduction from Nepean observations, and having the world’s
experience in further support, and Mr. Clark’s high opinion of this
portion of the Nepean watershed as a source of flow, I shall do
no more than bare justice to these rich watersheds by crediting them
with a flow of 40-100ths, or 2-sths minimum.
I have thus established for the watersheds of the Loddon and
Wingecarribee scheme a clear claim for 2-sths flow ; therefore, out of
the 15 months’ rainfall for which it has credit, there will be discharged
into the reservoirs in those 15 months 16,335,000,000 gallons.
With regard to Mr. Clark’s remark (Eeport, page 17) “that
the evaporation from a swampy area is most probably largely in excess
of the average,” I will remark in passing that, even if such should be
the case, which is more than doubtful, it cannot fairly be used as
an argument against the flow of these watersheds, inasmuch as their
rainfall (owing to high elevation and proximity to the sea) is admittedly
superior to the rate of rainfall on which the estimates are made,
and the excess of rain, even after allowing for any such extra evapora-
tion, will give the scheme a credit balance.
Notwithstanding the eulogiums passed by Mr. Clark upon the
quality of the Loddon and Wingecarribee watersheds, he yet,
strangely enough, speaks (Eeport, page 17 and 18) in discouraging
terms of their ordinal y discharge. He says that on the occasion of
his inspection the discharge of the Loddon Eiver was insignificant, and
that there was a stream of about three million gallons daily running into
the Wingecarribee swamp at the upper end, and that the river draining
the swamp is occasionally dry.


I have proved the amount of rainfall, and I have proved the pro-
portion of flow, and it seems to me that this is sufficient answer, and it
is unnecessary to say more. But it is perhaps as well to answer those
objections pointedly as well as generally.
As to the London Eiver, neither Mr. Clark nor any one else,
except myself, has ever gauged it, and my gauging showed a discharge
of 70 per cent., or nearly double the 2-sths claimed and proved for if,
and establishes the similarity of that watershed to many English
watersheds, concerning some of which engineers Bateman and Cope-
land have stated that from 70 to 80 per cent, of rainfall could be
obtained for use.
I have seen the Nepean Eiver, at Camden Bridge, so small and
insignificant that I could step across it ; and even the Murrumbidgee
itself, above the Tumut junction, I have crossed on stepping stones.
The experience that I speak of happened before the recorded seasons,
which contain nothing like it; and lam informed by old colonists still
alive, that in 1828, a yet earlier date than mine, matters were far
worse still. These events may easily happen again, and if they prove
anything at all, it is the worthlessness of these enormous watersheds,
and the value of the small controllable ones.
It is nothing whatever to the point, how small the volume of
water in a natural watercourse may become in a dry time, so long
as there is facility for impounding the large volume of water that
passes down the watercourse during wet times. It is a popular error
to suppose that a source of water supply, to be any good, must show
a continual efficiency in its natural state before its works are con-
structed. Such an argument would eventually lead us to the absurdity
of condemning every water scheme which requires the assistance
of storage reservoirs. Indeed, in an uncertain climate such as ours,
the most perfect qualification which a water scheme can possess, is to
have abundance of good storage room, so as to be able to store all
the water that comes whenever it comes, and to provide well against
and be independent of subsequent emergencies. And this virtue the
Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme claims to possess in an eminent
degree. But not so the Nepean scheme. It has comparatively limited
storage room, and it can only take water into store at a limited rate
per day, and all the surplus, when there is any, perforce runs to
waste, and no sufficient store is put by to meet a long drought; and
when there is no surplus, but a deficiency, the scheme must do
without supplies, however much it may want them, and then the
drought comes, and the scheme fails us.
This subject will be found again discussed at page 33, therefore
it is not necessary to proceed farther with it here.
As to the Wingecarribee swamp, the influx of the particular
stream referred to was never gauged by Mr. Clark, not even roughly,
and the eye is a false guide in such matters, and should not be trusted
when important results are depending. I am given to understand
that other competent spectatprs fixed the stream at same date as nearly
double Mr. Clark’s estimate. Even allowing his guess to be true,
I am informed by residents, and know of my own knowledge, and
Mr. Clark acknowledges, that the combined influx of the Wingecarribee
swamp is counted by dozens of streams.


As to the Wingecarribee River, it has never been known to be
dry. I know that on some rare occasions it ceased running on the
surface of the outlet, but still it ran underground, for the water
appeared again some little distance below, somewhat after the nature
of the Indian streams dammed by porous “annicuts.” This objection
is silenced by damming the outlet by sinking for proper foundation,
and is not due to the swamp.
As a matter of fact, the stream at the outlet was running in large
volume when Mr. Clark saw it. (Report, page 18.) It was a dry time
(January 1877), but there had been a night’s rain just before inspec-
tion, and, therefore, he rejects the large volume as being no indication
of the ordinary flow.
The rejection of this indication of flow was wrong, and clearly
shows that Mr. Clark little knew the character of the Wingecarribee
swamp. I have been furnished with a simple answer to this objection,
viz., that on one occasion at least (and no doubt there are many
others) it rained for four days without making any material alteration
in the volume of the outlet stream. Then it rose with astonishing
rapidity, and the rain of only one or two more days made one of the
largest floods remembered there.
To return to the main subject. From the above-mentioned amount
if flow must be deducted the evaporation of the stores. At 32-5 inches
ibr 8 months—Mr. Clark’s rate, which, I should here remark, is far in
ixcess of the practically proved rate upon Victorian reservoirs—the
ivaporation for 15 months is about as follows :
Gallons.
On Loddon reservoirs ~ .. 564,000,000
Kangaloon reservoirs (only half store
assumed, but same evaporation
allowed) .. .. . . .. 564,000,000
Wingecarribee reservoir .. . . 1,592,000,000
Wingecarribee reservoir
Total 2,720,000,000
;hus leaving 13,615 million gallons as the minimum flow of the scheme
iov 15 months to supply the reservoirs.
Hence the- complete result of this investigation of the Loddon and
'ingecarribee scheme as to supply :
Gallons.
Storage power .. .. .. 13,893,000,000
Deduct 15 months’ consumption, at
30 millions daily.. .. .. 13,680,000,000
213,000,000
Add influx for 15 months .. .. 16,335,000,000
LKjyUUUjVKJ'jyyj'jyj
16,548,000,000
Deduct evaporation for 15 months 2,720,000,000
Leaves 15 months’ supply and to
spare
13,828,000,000


Storage power
7,110,000,000
Deduct 237 days’ consumption at 30
millions daily
Add 237 days’ influx, at daily aver-
7,110,000,000
age for 8 months . .
3,436,000,000
Deduct 237 days’ evaporation
1,516,800,000
Leaves 64 days’ supply
919,700,000
That is to say, at a 30-million gallon rate, the scheme has 15 months’
supply from store, and 15 months’ additional supply from the flow of
that 15 months, and the flow overbalances the draught, and once full,
always full and wasting. This scheme, therefore, absolutely satisfies
the test, and is perfect as to supply at the 30 million gallon rate.
Now, let us try the Upper Nepean scheme from the same point of
view. The statement of figures in article No. 11. holds good, and
shews that the Nepean scheme is not good enough. Mr. Clark’s 8
months’ test is untrue of the Loddon and Wingecarribee, because this
scheme has 15 months’ store, and therefore 15 months’ rain; but it is
true of the Upper Nepean, because, by accident, the so-called “dry
period” of the climate is identical in length with the lasting power of
the scheme. Therefore, as applied to the Upper Nepean, Mr. Clark’s
test and mine are the same. Let us repeat the figures :
Gallons.
This is to say, at 30 millions daily, the scheme has 8 months’
supply from store, and 2 months’ additional supply from its 8 months’
flow", in all 10 months’ supply, and the reservoir is empty. If the
drought last longer, the daily supply is only influx less evaporation,
being from a maximum 8 million gallons downwards.
These comparisons speak for themselves, the Loddon and Winge-
carribee scheme needs no further advocacy on the score of supply. I
will now investigate the scheme for its special merits.
These consist mainly in being the opposites of the defects of the
Upper Nepean scheme, and the prevention of the evils which those
defects would produce. I will enlarge upon the chief of them.
I.—Good Gravitation and its Advantages.
This scheme satisfies the utmost leaning of our people to gravitation
principles. Of all those submitted for examination, it alone
exhaustively complies with the requisition to siipply Sydney ly gravi-
tation, which Mr. F. H. Grundy, in his report in i 869 to the Water
Commission, of which he was a member, very properly “ conceives to
have been the real original decision of that body ” ; and I have no
doubt whatever that, had this scheme been known to them then as I
have since displayed it, the Upper Nepean would never have been
presented for acceptance.
This scheme commands every height within the county of
Cumberland. As regards Sydney, its water would deliver itself at the
top heights of Waverley by its own natural force, and from one
distributing reservoir there it would again deliver itself far and near,
noith, south and west, to every inhabited and habitable height of the
city" and suburbs, including North Shore and all the locality on the


north side of the harbour,* without cost , except of service mains.
Pumps, and all their attendant infirmities, would have no place in this
scheme.
The system of town and suburban reservoirs, suggested by Mr.
Clark, with their attendant expenses, would be needless (except, of
course, the necessary distributing reservoir at Waverley, and a reser-
voir at North Shore), and we could follow directly in the steps of
Melbourne, whose water system, acknowledged to be the best in Aus-
tralia, has no such thing as a town or suburban reservoir, and
supplies every demand, far and near, from one distributing site at
Preston, six miles outside the city, whose elevation is as nearly as
possible the same as Waverley. As to the Crown-street and Padding-
ton reservoirs already existing, the managing authorities might use
them or not as they please—perhaps keep them going until they had
perfected an improved system of reticulation for bearing the Waverley
pressure, and then sell the sites.
Under this scheme there would be no such thing as artificial unequal
heads of water, which the Nepean system of pumping from one level to
another would create, but at every spot served the water would have
the head that the Waverley height would give it there, less the friction
developed up to that spot. Therefore fires would have no chance to
live anywhere, and if the reticulation be laid down sufficiently large
and liberal in the first instance, so as to meet the friction developed
by intermediate abstractions of water, the pressure of the Waverley
height might be availed of all over the town by the application of
hydraulic lifts. Further, still, public baths and playing fountains, the
groundwork of health, cleanliness and beauty, might be had everywhere.
Moreover, for the mere purposes of delivering water to the popu-
lation, this scheme requires a much smaller system of reticulation than
the Upper Nepean. This latter cannot afford to have much friction
generated by water abstractions, because it has not head enough to
match it, and therefore must use large and costly service mains to give
the water play ; but the scheme now under consideration has a head
which no amount of friction can neutralize, and which will make the
service mains do far more work with far less size. This virtue of the
high-delivery plan will enable it to supply with ease from Waverley
all the railway suburbs, right away to Parramatta itself, and further,
without stint or intermittence, just as St. Kilda and Brighton (Melbourne
suburbs) are supplied from Preston; while, under the Nepean system
of low delivery, in later years, when the railway suburbs become more
thickly inhabited, the outposts of population will probabty find their
water supply not permanent, unless still larger and costlier mains,
capable of neutralizing friction, be used for conveying the water
The high altitude at which this scheme starts its waters for Sydney
(1062 feet or thereabouts) is a value which cannot be over-estimated.
First, it enables the scheme to deliver its waters high to the city, as we
have already seen. Hence its works would be more beneficial to Sydney
than the Nepean works. Its tunnels and canals, and the pipe line
uniting the outlying Wingeearribee and Kaugaloon with the Loddon
system, no matter what their cost, serve the good end of bringing the
♦Note.—By service mains direct to the heights of St. Leonards, laid across the harbour under
water from Dawes Point to Milson’s Point, by the aid of “ Ward’s Flexible Joints,” or by bridge,
if ever built.


accumulated waters to an elevated spot, from which high delivery
to Sydney can be effected. But the Nepean has to do prodigious work
in tunnels and canals to get its waters out at all, even on to a low level
and when it has delivered them in Sydney the level is not nearly high
enough, and it has to recoup itself, by artificial means and with feeble
effect, that quality of elevation which nature deprived it of in the
passage.
In the next place, the height of the starting point gives the water
immense velocity, which means, as I pointed out previously (Article
No. III.), saving of expense in the carrying conduits; and as the
greater portion of the conduit is iron piping, in which the velocity tells
it will be found that the cost of the whole of the Loddon and Winge-
carribee conduits to deliver 30 million gallons a day, 75 miles of
tunnels, canals, and pipes, will be less than that of the Upper Nepean
conduits to deliver the same, 63 miles of corresponding but far more
complicated structures.
Again (and this is akin to the velocity question), the head with
which the water would be delivered at Waverley (viz., 700 feet and
upwmrds, being the difference of height between the starting and dis-
charging-points) would eliminate there out of suitable pipes, when the
pressure is released, a certain amount of motive power having a perma-
nent annual value for application to machinery. In my letter to the
Government on the subject I stated that the value of this power would
pay a large proportion of the interest on the cost of the scheme. This
would unquestionably be the case if the closed-pipe system (which
means, stopping the water at the bottom or end of the pipe, so as to
get the weight of the column) were adopted, and Mr. Clark has mis-
understood me in concluding, as he seems to do (Report, pages 20 and
21) that I have assumed for this scheme a virtue which it does not
possess. But inasmuch as the proper adaptation of the pipes so as to
allow the power to generate, would be, as Mr. Clark truly remarks, an
expense not needed for the mere delivery of water, and since by the
adoption of the open-pipe system (which means, stopping the water at
or near the top or starting point of the pipe, thus making it a free
channel), the pressure in the pipes is greatly relieved, and therefore
the cost reduced, I should prefer a reduced cost of pipes with little
motive power, to an increased cost of pipes with high power. There-
fore, the matter really comes back to the same point, viz., that the
eight of the starting point gives us money’s worth in either one way
or t e other, and it only rests with ourselves to determine which way
we will avail of it.
2.—Large Storage Capacity.
_ is was claimed as a special merit of the Upper Nepean scheme,
an is so ar true that, at a 30-million gallon rate, the scheme is equal
o mon s supply from store, and 2 months from flow, plus influx,
u, on e same score, it is far truer of the Loddon and Wingecar-
ii ee, w ic a tre same rate will stand as shown, 15 months’ supply
Ol V* moi jths’ from flow, plus influx. This merit was,
therefore, claimed for the wrong scheme.
n nf P et ndently °5 the I mere nu mber of days or months that the
e respective schemes will last, the lasting power of the


Loddon and Wingecarribee has the additional virtue of being able to
tide over that amount of trial which our experience denotes as most
likely to happen. An 8 months’ drought is much more probable
than a 15 months’ drought—in other words, the probability
of a drought is inversely with the length allowed it. The lasting
power of the Nepean scheme might not unfrequently be sorely tested,
while a trial of the strength of the Loddon and Wingecarribee would
but seldom happen.
3.—Superabundant Supply and Collateral Advantages.
Neither the Tipper Nepean, nor the Loddon and Wingecarribee,
nor any water scheme except Warragamba, George’s River, and Lower
Nepean, could properly face the 80-million gallon rate spoken of by
Mr. Clark in his letter to the Government forwarding his report, nor is
there the slightest chance of any scheme for Sydney purposes ever
being required to do so. But, so far as mere relative ability goes, the
Loddon and Wingecarribee could deliver 80 millions daily for nearly
twice as long as the Upper Nepean—viz., in proportion to their respec-
tive stores.
The Nepean water scheme possesses at its back a fund of fitful
power in the Nepean River, a large portion of which power it cannot
appropriate to its own use, and, indeed, in very wet times is quite un-
manageable, and has to be left alone to expend itself in the Pacific
Ocean. This spasmodic energy—wasted so far as water supply to
Sydney is concerned—it is sought to turn to more or less account by
elaborating a Nepean irrigating scheme, so far as the character of the
river is fit for it, for the benefit of that portion of the county of Cum-
berland which lies between Pheasant’s Nest and Prospect.
In a previous article (No. II.) I discussed this project, and found
that, as a matter of tact, it is very impracticable and unreliable,
and apt to interfere with the working of the Nepean water scheme,
and that it is not really deserving of the credit which has been assigned
to" it. However, to whatever extent the feature might be good or
could be practically availed of, the Nepean water scheme has a perfect
right to claim it a? a collateral advantage, so long as it is entirely sub-
servient to the first and foremost consideration—water supply for
Sydney and suburbs.
For the same reasons, the excessive quantity of supply possessed
by the Loddon and Wingecarribee water scheme over and above
the possible wants of Sydney, at any rate for a great manv years
to come, entitles the scheme to seek for an extended field for utilizing
its wasted energies. Had I the slightest faith in irrigation from
sources which are not absolutely inexhaustible (and neither the Upper
Nepean nor the Loddon and Wingecarribee sources are) I might claim
for this scheme a power to irrigate a large portion of the best part
of the Hlawarra country, which lies immediately below its conduits,
and is for the most part far better worth irrigating than any countrv
which the Nepean can reach, and each scheme has an equal title to the
claim for irrigating power, that is to say, in my opinion, neither
has any title at all.
But the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme has a further field
of work in genuine town supply, to which it is well entitled, and


In respect of which the Nepean has no equal advantage—the power to
supply the town of Camphelltown being, though very useful, not
at all of the same corresponding value. I refer to the power to supply
water to the town of Wollongong, for domestic purposes. This centre
of population, including the town itself and its immediate surround-
ings, and not counting the Bulli and coal-mining populations, contains
now not less than 2000 souls. These people are entirely dependent
for water upon what they can catch in tanks or sink for in wells, helped
out by a lagoon near the town, and tanks, wells, and lagoon all give out
together, and after that the people have to go to Fig-tree Creek
tor water, two miles out, at a cost of four shillings per cask of 56
gallons. lam also given to understand that the water in general use
is of indifferent quality.
The growing prosperity of the Southern coal-fields is causing the
Wollongong, and indeed all the Illawarra, population to increase, and
apart from the future connection of that district with Port Jackson by
rail, its further field for eventual improvement in manufactures and so
forth gives us good ground for anticipating a much larger increase, and
it is beginning now to be clearly seen by the people that some effort
must shortly be made to provide a proper supply of water for domestic
and other purposes.
Wollongong lies, at the farthest, only 4 miles from the Wingecar-
ribee mains. From the mains to the town the fall is immense—say
1400 feet—and the velocity of water in a branch pipe from the main
would create such a tremendous delivery power, that a comparatively
small pipe would suffice to bring down more water than Wollongong
could ever consume. The cost of such a water supply, exclusive of the
reservoir and reticulation, would be included in the cost of the Loddon
and Wingecarribee scheme.
But altogether beside the above valuable collateral advantage,
there is yet another equally feasible, and of infinitely greater merit
(already hinted at by me in my published paper, read before the Royal
Society of New South Wales on 4th August, 1875), viz., the ability of
the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme to supply water to Wollongong
so as to transform it into a great manufacturing emporium. In this
case, the three main elements of manufacturing success, so rarely
found combined, are all present together in an uncommon degree.
First, there is the great Southern coal-field, the cheapest coal in
Australia, its present working pits within three miles of the centre of
Wollongong, and in direct communication with it by rail and tram-
ways, and with capacity for unlimited expansion. Next, there would be
the water running past within 4 miles of the town in far greater quantity
than the wants of Sydney are equal to, and the surplus water would
be ready, instead of all running to Sydney, where there would be no
sufficient use for it, some to run to Sydney for manufacturing purposes,
and the remainder to another, and, in my opinion, superior field of
operations, viz., to the coal itself at Wollongong. Lastly, there is the
sea, the great receptacle of pollution, ready to sweep away, without
cost or labour, and render innocuous, all the waste and impurities
which an unlimited extent of manufactories might produce. The
combination of these three incidents has all over the world resulted in
manufacturing prosperity; and wherever it can be met with capital
and industry will avail of it.


This qualification of the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme, both
in its inception and development, is worth twenty Nepean irrigating
schemes, and is so big with financial results that it would assume the
proportions of a national matter. I should, perhaps, say that a reason-
able labour rate is a condition precedent and essential to its develop-
ment. But it is impossible to believe that the present starved condition
of the colony for population can last for ever, and whether it last or
not, this scheme is not amenable for the condition of the labour market,
and its merit is simply dormant, ready to spring into action as soon as
an improved condition comes.
The cost of delivering a reasonable quantity of water at Wollom
gong, for the purpose of initiating manufactures and industries, would
also be included in the cost of the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme
4.—Facility op Collecting Water.
As I have previously stated (Article No. IY,), the watersheds of
this scheme are under perfect control, and the reservoirs absolutely
command them like mountain passes, and all the rain that ever falls on
them, from the heaviest storm to the gentlest shower, must pass with-
out waste into the reservoirs, less soakage and evaporation.
Being all top sources, the country is very clean and pure, and free
from the dirt and debris which pollute the low-lying areas. I have
seen the Loddon Eiver in flood, and there was no material difference
between the waters then passing down and the ordinary flow.
The general average experience of our own rains is, that the heavy
spasmodic semi-tropical downpour is more common and frequent than
the gentle steady rains of the northern latitudes of Europe. The
heavier the rain, of course the less the proportion of evaporation and
soakage, because the water has no sufficient time to operate upon the
soil, and be operated upon by temperature, being hurried off by the
falling torrent, and hence the reason why storm waters do but little
comparative good to ordinary soils, and run off in immense volume and
cause floods.
Since there is no escape for the rainfall, whether much or little,
from the Loddon and Wingecarribee reservoirs, and the watersheds are
small, so that the rain never falls at any great and exhausting distance
from the dams, and since the heavy rains or storm waters run oft' clean
and almost in gloho after the complete saturation of the absorbing
swamps which the watersheds contain, the rain is scarcely fallen on the
watersheds before it is in the reservoirs ready and fit for use. This
means that the whole country is a canal to the reservoirs, and there is no
waste whatever except after they are full.
This is an immense advantage, and one which the Nepean scheme
does not possess. The most that that scheme can take into store in a
day is 84 million gallons (by a canal whose power to draw upon the
Nepean Eiver is limited to that), and whatever more goes down the
Nepean Eiver runs to waste, not because the scheme may not want it,
but because it cannot help it, unless it depart from its elaborated
shape, and enlarge its canals and duplicate its reservoirs. The time
when there is most water to take aud the greatest harvest is to be made,
namely, periods of heavy wet, is just the time when the Nepean waters
are least fit to take, owing to impurities, and the Nepean scheme must


reject them and shut its gates, or apply them to irrigating purposes
alone. By the time the river is clear again, and the Nepean gates can
be opened, the water which would have filled the Prospect reservoir,
had it been fit to take, is in the sea, and the river is rapidly running
down to its average level, at which it seems from the figures in the
report that the canal does not draw more, that is, cannot get more to
draw, than 51 million gallons daily, or only 21 million gallons in
excess of the required draught. And yet this compulsory waste of
water by the Nepean scheme, for all that it is so patepf a weakness, is
put forward as a credit, and a tabulated statement of the daily average
waste for eight years finds a place in the report!
5. —Safety of Reservoirs,
The statement cannot be gainsayed, that the most perfect possible
dam is that which, being of minimum relative size, impounds a
maximum relative store, and vice versa. Therefore the Prospect dam
must be the worst possible dam, since, out of its whole 80 feet height,
55 feet is useless work, and serves no other end than that of being a
sediment pond, and the top 25 feet alone are of any use for the pur-
pose of storing water for the city. In a previous article (No. III.) I
pointed out the danger of a large city depending for its supply upon a
solitary reservoir, owing to the many risks which such reservoir runs,
and that in our own particular case, the Prospect dam, owing to its
immense height and length and difficult position, possesses the ele-
ments of danger in a maximum degree. I also mentioned that the
Yan Yean water scheme, running minimum risks of the same kind, is
now about to obviate those risks and increase its supply by duplicating
its dams and stores.
The reservoirs of the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme are so
disposed and situated that they absolutely annihilate risk, and establish a
perfect balance of safety. The dams are comparatively small and simple,
and all put together would cost no more than, if as much as, the Prospect
dam alone. The Wingecarribee swamp dam, wedge-shaped, of earth-
work and puddle wall, impounding 9555 million gallons, would be about
a mile long, 45 feet high at most in the river bed, and tapering to nothing.
The Kangaloon dams, impounding say 1446 million gallons, are not
surveyed as they should have been by Government, but the biggest of
them would not be more than say 30 feet high and 12 chains long, in
timber and earthwork. Of the Loddon dams, impounding 2892
million gallons, the Loddon Lake is the only one worth mentioning,
the others, though eminently useful and effective, being comparatively
mere trifles to construct. This dam, in concrete, shaped like a flattened
V, as already said, would be about 38 to 40 chains long, 68 feet high
in the centre, and tapering quickly on either side to nothing. All
these reservoirs present a perfect chain, able to connect and disconnect
at will, and in the event of a casualty happening to any of them—a
most unlikely occurrence—the others would carry on the work whilst
repairs were doing, and so far as the permanent supply of the city it
concerned, none but the management would know that anything had
happened.
These are the chief special merits of the Loddon and Wingecarribee
scheme, and it has been seen that they are peculiarly its own, and that


the Upper Nepean scheme at any rate has no claim to them. I will
now consider the alleged imperfections.
These are all on points radical to the issue, and no defence having
been called for before judgment, rejection followed as a matter of course.
I must now inquire into the truth of the charges, which are mainly as
follows.
1. Limited Catchment and Storage,
This involves the whole question of power to supply, and is
the chief charge of all. It is said (Report, page 19), that at a
12-million gallon daily rate, the storage and flow of the scheme would
be exhausted in 240 days, thus leaving no margin beyond eight
dry months.
Article No. IV. has been devoted to the consideration of this
subject, and I have only briefly to recapitulate. It is there shown,
that so far from this statement being true, the fact is, that at a 30
million gallon daily rate the scheme is practically inexhaustible , since
it has 15 months’ supply in store to start with, and at the end of
15 months'* draught there is still 15 months’ supply in store, the inflow
being equal to the draught, and at the end of every repeating 15
months there is still 15 months’ store, and so on endlessly.
It is a matter of some surprise to me how Mr. Clark can have set
his allocatur upon such a statement as the one referred to. It is
traceable to three proved errors, viz., miscount of the store of this
scheme, deduction of a wrong figure as the flow of the watersheds of
another scheme, and wrongful assumption of that wrong figure as
representing the flow of the watersheds of this scheme. With such
fallacies as these for a foundation, the superstructure cannot help
but crumble.
A great deal has been said, from time to time, about the smallness
of the Loddon and Wingecarribee catchment areas, and the general
impression has been, that as their size so their value—that is to say,
by their extent they shall be judged. The arguments adopted by me
in Article No. IV. should have effectually dispelled this mistaken
notion, and set up a new standard of judgment of the value of catch-
ment areas, viz., as their yield, so their value—that is to say, they shall
be known by their own fruits. It is by this test that we try everything
else in the world, and why make any exception of watersheds ? Where
would the Yehar water-works be, if its small but productive watershed
was judged by the former standard? Yet, as a matter of fact, 3948
acres supplies the whole city of Bombay, with more than half a million
of population. Liverpool, Lublin, Dartmoor, Botany, where would all
these water systems be if judged by such a standard ? They must be
ail condemned at once; yet as a matter of fact they have done and are
daily doing wonders, and, speaking by relation, are among the finest
systems in the world. It is nothing whatever to the point how large
or how small watersheds are; if we can get as good work and .as much
return from ten thousand acres in one place as we can from one hundred
thousand acres in another, the ten thousand is worth every whit as
much as the hundred thousand, and more, being better under control.
These are truisms, too obvious to require any further elucidation, and
I consider that the question is at rest.


2. WINGECARRIBEE SWAMP AS A STORAGE RESERVOIR.
Mr. Clark says (Report, page 19), —“While I hold an opinion
that the Wingecarribee Swamp is unsuited to act as a storage reser-
voir, I am desirous to give the full advantage to the statement of the
promoter of this scheme, by taking a part of its waters.”
This remark, to be consistent, means two things—one, that the
Wingecarribee waters are worth having, the other, that the merit of
the swamp as a storehouse for water admits of difference of opinion.
I quite agree with him on the first point, and have availed of the
admission in a former place (Article No. IY.), when speaking of the
storage of the swamp. On the other point I hold, by his sanction, a
different opinion—and 1 propose to show grounds for my opinion.
It is impossible that there can be any objection to the swamp as
a storehouse on the score of any physical features, such as size or
depth, since a single reservoir 1,170 acres and more, 30 feet deep and
more all over, is not to be found every day provided by nature, with
so little work to do to perfect it. There are only two other possible
reasons for Mr. Clark’s opinion, viz., either that the swamp is incapable
of being dammed up, or that, whether capable or not, it contains
within itself the elements of failure and the seeds of injury to the
store.
In Article No. IY., I established the fact, that the swamp is
capable of being dammed, and that Mr. Clark knew and admitted it.
As therefore this cannot be his reason, there is but the other possible ;
and this is evidently the line he has adopted. He says (Report, page
18-19) —“Pure as the water now is, without any demand on its
volume beyond that of the overflow by the river, and loss by evapora-
tion, it might be otherwise when 10 or 12 million gallons daily were
withdrawn from it, and probably some of the vegetation now immersed
become dry; the conditions would then be altered, and a process of
decay and change would be continually going on, which might alter
materially the present pure condition of the water.”
The damming of the swamp, so as to bring all its levels up flush
(which is, as previously pointed out in Article No. IY., the amount of
dam work required to impound all the natural store), would effect two
objects, one the prevention of the outflow, the other the submersion of
the surface. Had Mr. Clark gauged the volume of the outflow when
he saw it, instead of rejecting it as no true indication, because of a few
hours’ previous rain, he would certainly have found that outflow to be
in excess of the 10 or 12 million gallons draught which he speaks of,
and, indeed, he admitted as much at the time. Hence, at the rate of
outflow then observed, and with the rate of draught just mentioned,
the swamp would be permanently submerged on the execution of only
so much dam-work as would impound the natural store, and therefore
the vegetation would never become dry, and the process of decay and
change would never begin, and the present pure condition of the water
would never be altered.
But this is not sufficient answer to the false alarm about the
quality of the swamp as a reservoir, because the outflow (or rather
what would be outflow if the swamp were not dammed up) might
possibly average less than what it was when we saw it, and if the


draught upon the swamp for purposes of supply were in excess for any
great length of time, the level of the natural store of water would
sink, and the vegetation be again exposed. Personally, Ido not believe
in such a thing as decay and change, such as Mr. Clark means, among
water plants (than which there is nothing else in the Wingecarribee
swamp), for they strike their roots to the water whatever its level, and
so long only as they are not deprived of air they will amply preserve
their own vitality. But it is unnecessary to pursue this argument
further than just to mention it, since, whatever the drawbacks of the
vegetation, great or little, they will be removed altogether.
In a former place (Article No. IV.) I pointed out the ease and
simplicity of extending the Wingecarribee swamp dam. Mr. Clark
was as well able to see this feature as I was, and indeed had far better
opportunity, for the survey staff of the colony was at his command, and
he should have used it, and if he had used it he would have had
the mathematical proof of that which I have alleged and know to be a
fact, viz., the ability to raise the dam 20 feet and more above the
swamp level. This 20 feet of water thus thrown over the whole
swamp would weigh more than 28 million tons, and would exert a
downward pressure of 10 lbs. to the square inch all over the 1170 acres
area, and would smother and annihilate the entire mass of vegetation
and precipitate it bodily to the bottom. This was the Yan Yean
experience under circumstances not at all dissimilar, and there is
no reason why the same effect should not be produced in this case.
What then becomes of the alleged impurification ? The objection is
unfounded, and should never have been raised.
3. Character of Wingecarribee Watershed.
Mr. Clark says ("Report, page 19), “ The country round the swamp
and Kangaloon Creek is very fertile, the soil consisting of decomposed
trap, and every portion of the district is, I believe, alienated, with the
exception of the area of the swamp itself. It is being rapidly cleared
of timber and converted into pasturage for cattle. To a small extent
it is used for agriculture. Its value is said to be from £lO to £l2 per
ac 'e to the agriculturist, and I should apprehend would become the seat
of a large population.”
After our tour of inspection, but before the Report was issued, Mr.
Clark expressed an opinion to me, that if this scheme were recom-
mended the lands might have to be bought up.
These remarks, summarised, would seem to mean that agricultural
and pastoral operations, and still more a large settled population on
the Kangaloon and Wingecarribee watersheds, might have a deleterious
effect upon their waters by the absorption of impurities, and that large
compensations might eventually be necessary to obviate this.
The Kangaloon watershed is scarcely within the scope of these
remarks, as, although a portion of it is alienated, the majority of it is
still reserved with the Nepean catchment areas. Therefore, I shall
treat the objection as referring to the Wingecarribee alone. But in
any case, my arguments will apply equally to both.
If these are Mr. Clark’s views, they are significant of prejudice
against this remarkable watershed and the storage to be obtained
from it. They are also unscientific, and require refutation.


The aliention of that district is not of late date, having begun
with the Land Act of 1861, and was completed in something like two
years, and is now fully occupied. There is little increase of population
except by natural birth, no influx of people, and not the slightest
likelihood of the present rate of increase ever being much exceeded,
nor the least right or reason for anticipating any such thing as density
or town massing. The staple business of the country is, and ever will
be, pastoral, in the shape of dairying operations, and our long
experience in these colonies goes to prove that large populations are
not due to nor in keeping with such, and in fact rarely, if ever, follow
fertile lands when distantly removed from the metropolitan market.
The country is already fully stocked with cattle (that is to say, so much
of it as is cleared, which is much the major part), and it has been so
for years, and in fact at the present time is carrying a prodigious
quantity.
Therefore, Mr. Clark need have no apprehension whatever as to
the further stocking of the Wingecarribee country either by man or
beast. He does not find the water polluted yet, for all the heavy
stocking, but, on the contrary, he admits, and his analysis proves, that
the Wingecarribee water, under the existing state of things, cannot be
surpassed for purity; and the above statements are sufficient proof
that it will ever maintain that purity, undet any subsequent conditions
ptobable.
But I desire to go further, and to say that, supposing all these
lands should become utilized to their utmost, and settled with agricul-
tural and pastoral population, even more heavily than experience has
ever shown, and stocked with animals even more densely than now
(which would be rather difficult, fori was told by one resident that
there were 5000 dairy cows in the immediate vicinity), there would
still be no cause for apprehension such as Mr. Clark indicates. This
assertion is supported by the following reasons.
It is an admitted axiom, and well known in science, that Nature
has made a special provision for the preservation of the purity of water
for animal life. Humber, in his valuable work on “Water Supply for
Cities and Towns ” (page 22), speaking of the organic impurities in
Thames water (which, I should remark, must be far greater than the
utmost amount of impurities ever possible in the Wingecarribee
waters), quotes the language used by Dr. Rranckland to the
the Royal Commission on Water Supply for London (1869) : —“ These
noxious elements would be sufficient to do great mischief, were it not
for a most beneficial provision of nature for effecting spontaneously the
purification of the streams. Some of the noxious matter is removed by
fish and other animal life, and a further quantity is absorbed by the
growth of aquatic vegetation. But, in addition to these obstructions,
important changes are effected by chemical action. The organic com-
pounds dissolved in the water appear to be of very unstable constitution
and to be very easily decomposed, the great agent in this decomposition
being oxygen, and the process being considerably hastened by the
motion of the wat.r. Now, as such waters contain naturally much air
dissolved in them, the decomposing agent is ready at hand to exert its
influence the moment the matter is received into the water, in addi-
tion to which the motion causes a further action by exposure to the


atmosphere. The effect of the action of oxygen on these organic
matters, when complete, is to break them up, to destroy all their peculiar
organic constitution, and to rearrange their elements into permanent
inorganic forms, innocuous and free from any deleterious quality.”
As applied to the Wingecarribee case, this indisputable authority
(to whom Mr. Clark himself refers in his Report) means that the waters
discharging off pasture lands become cleansed of all organic matters
by the simple effect of the oxygen in the air oxidizing, or burning up,
all such matters during their passage to the reservoir, and that what is
not done by the atmosphere would be completed by free oxygen in the
water itself. In other words, motion produces exposure of the particles,
and exposure admits the attack of the decomposing agent, and the
necessary result is organic change. Moreover, the power of water
to absorb oxygen from the air (and carbonic acid which gives it fresh-
ness and life) increases with its coldness, and as the waters of this high-
source scheme are practically mountain waters (and, as a matter
of fact, would be delivered in Sydney many degrees colder than either
Nepean or Botany waters), they contain in themselves a comparatively
greater power of ridding themselves of any imperfections. Added to
this, the aquatic vegetation and the fish and animal life to be imported
into the reservoir would give further purifying assistance : and further
still, the water would receive a finishing course of oxidation and
aeration not only in the reservoir, but also during its onward course
through tunnels, canals, and pipes, for 75 miles, all the way to
Sydney.
In saying the above, my remarks must be understood to apply
only to the impurities which would be generated in a dairying and
sparsely populated country, such as the Wingecarribee must ever
necessarily be, and not to the subject of organic town sewage, which
could have no possible place on the watershed in question.
The Jabove remarks are a complete answer to any objection that
may ever be raised against the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme on
the ground of impurity of any of its watersheds.
4. Wrought Iron Pipes.
The wrought iron system of pipes is of the essence of this scheme,
as distinct from a cast iron plan. It is an engineering question, and,
as such, is the point of variance between me and the advisers of our
Government on the water subject, beginning with the Government
officers and culminating with the Hydraulic Engineer. This may seem
a curious variance, between a single amateur and a band of pro-
fessionals, but Ido not apologize for it—let the sequel show.
There is a great defence due to this question, and it is of itgelf
entitled to far more space than this paper will permit. The main
points, however, must be discussed here, and I will do this as succinctly
and consecutively as possible.
The hydraulic advisers of our Government know nothing whatever
about the use of wrought-iron pipes. In the published evidence taken
early in 1876, by the Health and Sewage Commission on our systems
of water supply for the information of the Hydraulic Engineer then
ordered from home, Mr. Moriarty, as the general mouthpiece, expressed
himself to the effect that “ he was not aware, and had never been able


Virginia and Gold Hill Waterworks
.. 71
12
Cherokee Gravel Mines
.. 2*
30
Spring Valley Hydraulic Mine
30
Hutch Hill ditto
—
22
San Francisco, present insufficient supply..
.. 34
30 and 22
to learn, that wrought-iron pipes are used to any extent in America in
connection with the supply of water to towns, and that Virginia city, a
small mining town in California, was the only one he was aware of,
and that they were not, to his knowledge, adopted in any of the other
States.” Other members of the same Commission have expressed
similar views on other occasions.
Mr. Clark, when speaking to my statements on this head, con-
tained in my letter to the Government, says (Report, page 20) :
“Wrought-iron pipes are used in America, but I am not aware that
up to the present time they have been used in England or by English
engineers.”
Our advisers know as little about the value of wrought-iron pipes
as they know about the use. Mr. Moriarty, in the same evidence, said
that “ they are objectionable for carrying water any distance (and
28 miles, the then supposed length of the pipe line from the Loddon
to Sydney, he considered a great deal too far to bring water by pipes),
being more liable than cast-iron to corrosion and affection by water
and earth.” Mr. Clark (Report, page 20) expresses himself to the
effect, that wrought-iron does not resist corrosion so well as cast-
iron; that the anti-corrosive asphaltum coating (which is of the essence
of the wrought-iron system) is now universally used for the protection
of cast-iron pipes ; that from the experience of gas pipes wrought-
iron pipes are durable when the coating is perfect, but failing that,
they corrode : and that in a pipe trench such coating can only be
painted on, and perfect coating without flaw cannot be obtained.
This is the pith and substance of all the allegations against the
wrought-iron pipe system, both as to its use and its value. I will dis-
prove it all.
First, as to use and application. In my letter to the Government,
I stated that “ wrought-iron pipes in America are counted by hundreds
of miles.” In support of this statement, among the scores of instances
all over the continent of east and west America, where they have been
for years and years, and are now in continual use and uninterrupted
swing, and others now projected, I am in a position to enumerate a
few, sufficient for the argument, as follows
Wrought iron-pipes.
Diameter in
M lies. • ,
inches.
Eastern (New York) States:
Rochester waterworks (besides some 70 or more
instances unknown to me by name .. ~ 28 36 and 24
Western States :
&c. &c. &c.


not the particulars, but all of immense length,—
Blue Lakes scheme, to deliver 40 million gallons daily
138
42 and 40
San Joaquin scheme, 25 millions ..
81
46
El Dorado scheme
139
40
Lake Tahoe scheme (I believe)
153
San Francisco proposed supply (now under the con-
sideration of their water Commissioners and
Colonel G. H. Mendell, XT. S. Engineer of
Harbours and Fortifications), among some 10
or 12 submitted schemes of all of which I have
"Wrought Iron Pipes.
Miles. Di * m f er in
incneo’.
All this independently of canal work, which in the Blue Lakes scheme
alone is over 50 miles.
So much, then, in proof of the widespread use and development of
the wrought-iron pipe system in America. The evidence is irresistible,
and yet all the members of the Health and Sewage Commission, and
all the advisers of our Government on the water question, have
admitted their ignorance of it, and Mr. Clark is silent, except to men-
tion its bare existence.
But I am in a position to go still further on this question of
use, and to state that the system is also known in England. I hold the
name and address of one firm in the Midland counties (and there may
be others there and elsewhere, for anything that either Mr. Clark or I
know to the contrary), which manufactures wrought-iron pipes for pur-
poses of water supply, and that, too, with the very latest improve-
ments, namely, seamless pipes, without any longitudinal riveting, and of
all sizes up to 36 inches diameter. These are admitted by some
American engineers to be even superior to their own pipes, and this
English firm has agencies in America, and is now introducing these
improvements to the very people who may be called the pioneers of
the principle.
To what extent English engineers may yet have availed them-
selves of this invaluable scientific advance in the matter of water
pipes, I am not in a position to say ; but it is a very remote probability
that such a manufacture, working in the midst of an intelligent and
observant community, is going on for export purposes only, and
without any one knowing it—and therefore I fear that Mr. Clark’s
statement must be received with much reservation.
Next, as to value and durability. It is unnecessary to compare
wrought and cast iron for relative advantages. Mr. Clark admits
(Eeport, page 20) the great superiority of the former in bearing
pressure—which pressure it is so desirable to obtain and keep, if
possible to be had : and American instances might be quoted, almost
without number, as evidence of the extraordinary amount of pressure
which wrought iron is capable of bearing. Thus, in the case of
the Virginia city and Gold Hill Waterworks, the pressure borne is no
less than 750 lbs. to the square inch on a pipe only 34-100th inch thick.
The comparative lightness and easy manipulation of wrought-iron
pipes require neither admission nor proof. For the purpose of a carry-
ing main, as distinct from distributing or service purposes, wrought


iron is superior to cast iron in every point of comparison except in
lasting power; and this is now the one point left to be settled, whether
or not this power can he grafted on to it.
The asphaltum coating of wrought-iron pipes is no new feature,
for, as Mr. Clark says, cast-iron pipes use it equally for purposes of
general preservation, and indeed it is among the most valuable inven-
tions of modern times, and it is to California that we owe it. If the
coating of wrought iron be perfect and without flaw when the pipes
are laid in the trench, it is admitted that wrought iron is as durable
as cast; therefore the question simply resolves itself into one of the
practical application of the asphaltum coating.
Mr. Clark is evidently not aware, that in America the method of
asphalting wrought-iron pipes has been brought to perfection, as otherwise
his objection would have been inadmissible to himself. Up to the
time of laying in the trench the process of asphalting is the same for
both kinds of pipe, namely, immersion and boiling in molten liquid,
which makes, as Mr. Clark says, an efficient protection. But after
that there is a difference. Cast-iron connections are made with lead,
and there is little or no concussion, and therefore no abrasion of the
impervious coating, so that nothing more is required to be done ; but
wrought-iron is jointed by double riveting, which necessitates hammer-
ing, and therefore cracks and flaws come in the coating at the joints.
If these cracks and flaws are allowed to remain, they become the point
of attack for the water, and eventually result in conosion and decay,
which is the objection to the wrought-iron system. But if, on the
other hand, these are removed, and the impervious coating restored,
the objection also is removed ; and the following is the description of
the mode of doing this—a mode universally adopted in America, an
integral part of the business of .pipe laying, and so complete and
effective that, the defects and casualties arising out of want of experi-
ence once got over, such a thing is now never heard of (except through
mere accident) as corrosion of an asphalted wrought-iron pipe.
As soon as a joint is riveted complete in the pipe trench, boiling
asphaltum and coal tar is painted on and about the joint, inside and
out, by means of wire brushes. The joint is then subjected to the
action of circular gas jets inside and out, until the temperature of the
irdn reaches some 300’ to 400• (Fahrenheit). The effect of this heat is
to burn the asphaltum in like a japan, and the cracks and flaws entirely
disappear, and the pipe regains the same impervious coating as it had
before the riveting began.
This, added to the instances given of the practical working of the
system, seems to me to be proof enough, without more, that the quality
of durability or lasting has been successfully engrafted on wrough-
iron. Therefore, its supremacy over cast-iron is established, since in
point of durability only did it fail.
There are some alleged instances of wrought-iron pipes having
been taken up, corroded. The only case that I know of, and at any
rate the ease most spoken of, was at Toronto, in Canada. The
champions of cast-iron have held up these few instances in condemna-
tion of the wrought-iron system generally, and with as little show of
right as all their other objections. The pipes which have been taken
up were neither plain wrought-iron, nor asphalted wrought-iron, but


cemented or concreted wrought-iron, namely, pipes prepared under a plan
and by a method peculiar to Eastern America, of coating with hydraulic
cement. The plan is very effective, if perfect, but the perfection is
difficult and unreliable, and the asphalting process is far before it, and
is, in fact, superseding it, and, indeed, I believe that Western America
has never used the cemented process at all.
But if, as to the value of the wrought-iron pipe system, there be
any readers yet unconvinced, notwithstanding what I say now and have
been saying more or less for the last three years, then let them hear
what others say. I append three letters, from gentlemen of variously
high positions in America, which have been handed to me for general
information, and which speak for themselves.
“ San Francisco, January 2, 1874.
“ To the Hon. Board of Commissioners, Rochester, N.Y.
“ Gentlemen, —In answer to your question in regard to the durability of
wrought iron pipe, allow me to state that pipes uncoated, either in or outside, I have
known tc last for ten years or more. Pipes, though, that we laid in 1861 (22-inch
pipe of No. 14 iron), with 100 feet pressure, well coated in and outside, are perfectly
sound and in full operation to-day, an examination I have lately made,, after about
twelve years’ working, revealing the fact of their being sound throughout, the iron
under the coating having the same blackish blue face as when it left the rolling-mill.
All the wrought-iron pipes I lately laid, that is 1867, more care having been taken
with riveting and especially coating, are perfectly sound to-day, and we expect them
to last from fifty to seventy-five years, or perhaps more. On an average a wrought-
iron pipe costs us about 25 per cent, of what a cast iron one, of the same interior
diameter, strength, and reliability, would cost
“ H. Sghtjssler,
“ Chief Engineer of the San Francisco Water Works.”
“ U. S. Coast Survey Station, San Francisco, Cal.. April 20, 1877.
“My dear Mr. Bishop,—-If I personally knew anyone in Australia to whom I
could address a letter in your behalf, I would do so with the greatest cheerfulness and
with confidence in you.
“In the special matter which you propose to bring before the authorities con-
cerning the supply of water to the city of Sydney, I am sure you can place before
them, with the fullest assurance, the examples in this State of carrying water under
extraordinary heads by means of wrought-iron pipe.
“ I have personally taken great interest in this matter, because when the first
experiments were made I had very grave doubts of its success, not as a question of
strength, hut of lasting. But the results have been conclusive and convincing to
my mind, and we need not hesitate a moment upon adopting wrought-iron pipes of
any diameter and length, when the article is properly prepared to resist oxidation.
“Of the very many examples afforded in our ‘ hydraulic diggings,’ you can
hardly go amiss in selecting good types, and even in the supply of our town under
greal difficulties.
“ It is upon the success of the wrought-iron pipe system in this and adjacent
States that so many projects have been placed before the Water Commissioners for
the supply of this city that contemplate the carrying of water under enormous heads
for distances of even more than 100 miles.
“ After simply naming the pipe part of the system for the supply of San Fran-
cisco, I would suggest as good specimens the 12-inch pipe line of the Virginia and
Gold Hill waterworks, with its length of 7£ miles of wrought iron pipe, under a
pressure of 17-50 feet, or say 750 lbs. per square inch.
“ Also, the pipe line of the Cherokee gravel mines, where the 30 inch wrought-
iron pipe-line has a total length of miles, and a pressure of 890 feet, or say 3901h5.
per square inch. I visited the invert of this pipe in 1873, as one of the United
States Commissioners of Irrigation. I was hardly prepared for the statement then
made, that even small boulders dropped into it were carried clean through it rapidly.
But I have no doubt of the fact. When we visited the line it was in capital con-
dition.


“ And you should not fail to call attention to those examples -where the wrought-
iron pipe has been employed to cross deep, sharp ravines by suspending it in mid-
air, where a cast-iron pipe could not have been carried without much greater cost
and doubt.
“I could communicate many other less impressive, although instructive,
examples that we saw, hut you are more familiar with them than I am.
“The results of all Californian experience through many years have convinced
me of the decided superiority and economy of the wrought-iron pipe method ; and I
do not hesitate to fully endorse it, and would advise its employment in decided
preference over cast-iron piping for water supply under large and small heads.
“ Your long acquaintance and experience with the subject of water supply
entitles your opinion to the largest respect; and I hope you will he successful in
establishing it abroad as well as you have done it amongst those who know you
here.
“ So far as my good will and good opinion will aid you, do not hesitate to call
upon me at any time.
“Yours very sincerely, George Davidson.”
“Mr. F. A. Bishop, C.E., Hydraulic Engineer, El Dorado Water and Mining
Company, Placerville, California.”
“ U. S. Engineer Office, San Francisco, April 23, 1877.
“Dear Sir,—On the occasion of your departure for Australia, I wish to express
the sincere hope that your journey will serve to restore the vigour of health which
you seemed to possess last summer.
“ I hope that you will be able to interest yourself in the hydraulic operations
which I understand are being introduced lor mining purposes in Australia. Your
long experience in managing these enterprises in California, and in the construction
of canals and use of wrought-iron pipe, makes your opinion on these subjects
valuable anywhere.
“ The use of wrought-iron riveted pipe for the carriage of water under high
pressure is almost peculiar to California, and quite so in the subjection of iron to
strains of a degree unusual elsewhere. What was at first experiment, became,
after due experience, conservative and safe, and we now in California have no
hesitation in applying strains which as yet will scarcely he admitted where less
experience obtains. We, however, use the iron under a steady pressure when high
strains are employed, and keep it as free as possible from shocks.
“ These wrought-iron conduits are the means through which this city is now
supplied with water, and they must so remain, unless superseded by steel, for the
reason that the configuration of the country is so uneven as to require a succession
of inverted syphons.
“ If occasion should arise for the discussion of this kind of conduit in Australia,
your observation will supply you with a great many instances in California where
these pipes have been in use 12 or 15 years.
“ Your friend, G. H. Mendell,
“ U.S. Engineer Harbours and Fortifications.
“ F. A. Bishop, C.E.”
Our Victorian neighbours have lately been obtaining still further
corroborative evidence on this head. It appears to have been some-
what on this wise. The Sandhurst School of Mines, having become
satisfied that something was going on in America which they ought to
know, about the carriage of water for mining and other purposes,
in wrought or sheet iron pipes, from far distances and under great
heads, requested the Victorian Government to send over a commission
of inquiry for the benefit of the mining interests of the colony
Notr.—Mr. Bishop, the gentleman to whom these last two letters are addressed, lately came to
Sydney from San Francisco, with a view to establish business relations here, and in so doing to
give the colony the benefit of his long and varied experience in those branches of hydraulic
engineering for which Western America has become noted. Unfortunately ill health has compelled
him to return home, but he was so well pleased with his reception, and so satisfied with the colony
as a new field of operations, that he intends to come back if restored.


generally. The Government refused, so the School of Mines took the
matter up themselves. Their delegate, Mr. G. Thureau, has lately
returned from California, and is now issuing notes of his researches,
preliminary to a more comprehensive report. The first of his series
of notes was published in the Town and Country Journal of 21st July
instant, and will well repay the reading of it. The bulk of this article
was written before those notes appeared, yet the two are wonderfully
in accord, and singularly enough, some of our instances are identical.
The above collective evidence must carry conviction to the mind of
the utterest sceptic. It proves that the wrought-iron pipe system is an
existing, accomplished, working fact, and has revolutionised the whole
question of the supply of water to towns. It proves that the local
advisers of our Government on the water question, and the members
of the Health and Sewage Commission, who reported on the Loddon
scheme, were not competent to investigate the matter; and, —what
I very much more regret to say, yet perforce must say,—it points to
the fact that Mr. Clark himself possesses an insufficient knowledge
and experience to make him a just judge of the merits of this water
scheme. Finally, it completely verifies the truths and principles
for which I have so long contended, and substantiates the fact, that as
a means of transporting water from far and elevated distances the
wrought-iron pipe system is not a bane but a blessing, and that the
cast-iron age is past.
Thus far I have fought this fight in the interest of Sydney single-
handed, against those combined leanings and tendencies which would
deprive her of much available good. Henceforth, I consider that
I should no longer be left, as I have been left, to battle the watch
alone, but that I should now receive the countenance and active
support of those who are satisfied with the proof, to put a stop to
the retrograde movement now being enacted, and to show that, as
a body of enlightened citizens, we know what is going on in the world,
and intend to have the benefit of its progress.
5. Cost.
Much has been said from time to time aboiit the cost of this scheme,
mostly by people who know least about it. Mr. Moriarty, in his
evidence before the Health and Sewage Commission, said that the
Loddon portion alone (being less than half of the whole, and the onty
portion that the Commissioners took any notice of), could not be esti-
mated at less than to million pounds sterling.
Mr. Clark, failing to understand the quality of the scheme, tried
to estimate its cost by his “12 million and 6 million increment ” plan,
and upon that plan arrived at £1,136,000 for 12 million gallons, and
£536,000 more for every extra 6 millions, in all £2,804,000 for 30
millions.
Until lately even my own knowledge was indefinite, and I do not
blame others for being at sea in their figures, provided they make, as
Mr. Clark has, an effort to bring them honestly out. But, on behalf of
the scheme, I object, first to the random statements uttered generally
on the subject by members of the Health and Sewage Commission, as
uncalled for, unsupported, and untrue and next to Mr. Clark’s plan


•of providing small increments of supply, and estimating the cost of the
scheme by those small increments. Whether this plan suits other
schemes or not (which I do not believe), it is at any rate foreign to
this one, and cannot be entertained.
In a former article (No. II) I showed that the only genuine com-
pliance with the demand of our authorities for an eventual 30 million,
gallon rate, and the wisest, most comprehensive, and in the end most
economical plan, though somewhat heavy at first, is to deliver the
required 30 millions from the start, and, therefore, to charge ourselves
with the entire cost at once. In my letter to the Government, I seem
to have propounded other views, saying that I did not desire to advo -
cate works which might not be required for a considerable time. Bui
I had then considered the question only from the point of view of
expense, and not from that of productiveness, and the argument to be
drawn from this latter is alone sufficient to engender an alteration of
opinion as to the amount of work desirable to execute. Moreover, the
experience of other systems of water supply points the same way. I
take Glasgow as a type, and in support I quote from a leading article
in the Sydney Morning Herald of 16th May, 1874, from the pen of a
gentlemen who is now no more, but whose loss to this community is
only equalled by his worth—the late Mr. Howard Reed :
“Instances are not wanted in which enormous sums of money have
been expended upon waterworks, the money repaid, leaving the works
as a source of revenue to the towns for whose benefit they were made.
During the few first years the rates upon property were somewhat
heavier, but these in time spread over a wider area, and the result was
that the cost virtually decreased in proportion as the use of the water
increased. Several cities might be mentioned in which this has been
the effect. Aberdeen and Glasgow are striking cases. The facts of
the latter being in our possession, we will refer to them.
“ It appears that up to the year 1858, the expenditure of Glasgow
for water was £651,199. In return for this outlay the 420,000 people
within the bounds of this supply received 16,710,000 gallons daily, or
39'8 gallons a head. This was at the rate of 26 gallons for every
pound expended. The domestic rate per pound was (for both sides of
the Clyde) thirteen pence. But at this date the demand for water
required additional works. The capital was increased by loans to
£1,272,940, or nearly double what it was in 1857, and the expendi-
ture of that year exceeded the revenue by £5,642, the latter being
£68,497. The rate the following year was still thirteenpence in the
pound, but the capital was increased to £1,428,452, and the expendi-
ture exceeded the revenue by £14,417 —a rather alarming deficit. A
continued enlargement of the capital took place in 1860-61, when the
limit seems to have been reached. The expenditure was then £83,964,
the revenue £75,699, and the rate per pound unchanged. The deficit,
of course, was £8,265. In 1861-2 the deficit merely amounted to
£SOOO. An extra twopence in the pound in 1862-3 brought about a
change, and, in place of a deficit, left a surplus of £2,539 ; and a
continuation of the same remedy yielded a surplus of £7,022. Id
1864-5 there was a return to a thireenpenny rate, and yet a surplus of
£5,292. During the following five years a shilling rate sufficed —the
surplus in 1869-70 being £17,519. The year following the rate was


reduced to ninepence, and in 1871-72 it stood at eightpence—the money
expended on the works having been £1,706,306, the annual expendi-
ture £109,014, and the income £110,780.
“ This affords an excellent example of what may be reasonably
expected in all cases of towns destined to become the centres of manu-
facturing industry. It would be impossible to say in what degree the
foresight of the Corporation of Glasgow has contributed to the
spread and importance of the city by this judicious expenditure of
money ; but it is clear that Glasgow could not have been what it is
without it. It must be equally apparent to any one who surveys the
position and prospects of Sydney, that we are justified in making
preparation for a spread of the population. The city would be
experiencing the benefits of the change before they had time to feel the
weight of its cost, and, finally, consideration of cost would fade before
countervailing advantages.
“ It is a question whether we shall provide for or check the dis-
position to grow; whether we shall rely upon such experience as we
have presented from Glasgow, or as might be presented from
Melbourne (for we understand that the works there are now paid for,
and no longer exist as a burden upon property) ; or whether we shall
be contented with some cheap and temporary scheme, which will be
sure to fail when we most need it.
“We want water for houses, water for streets, water for manufac-
tories, water for fountains, water for fires, a supply from a source equal
in all these particulars to the wants of 500,000 people prospectively.
Are we to content ourselves with barely enough for household and
street use ? It is clear from the above figures that a spirited endeavour
to make the supply adequate to the growing wants of Glasgow,
although burdensome at first for two or three years, is becoming less
and less so each year, and will cease fina’ly to be a burden at all.
The same experience may be ours if we make a judicious use of the
means at command.”
This language of our lamented friend is almost prophetic, and
commends itself to the respectful attention of every reader. It is
opposed to the principle of Mr. Clark’s work, which provides only
sufficient for the day, and distinctly points to the nobility of the
Loddon and Wingecarribee, or any other plan which will provide
superabundance at the outset, so that people may learn its value,
and grow to it.
So far, then, as this scheme is concerned, it is entirely settled that
its cost is the cost of delivering 30 million gallons daily from the begin-
ning. In my letter to the Government, I stated this to be, in round
numbers, a million and a half of money. I own that I could not then
have substantiated the figures in any detail, but I knew enough to tell
me that 1 was not very far out. Since then there has been great
accretion of works proposed, notably in the shape of increased storage
accommodation, and such augmentation of works means a correspond-
ing augmentation of price. Since then, also, I have gained more
definite knowledge as to cost, and have now arrived at an ultimatum
in the matter —which is, that 30 million gallons daily can he delivered at
Waver Ley for twopence per 1000 gallons, and the cost of the scheme is the
capitalized value of that twopence at 5 per cent., or £1,825,300, plus


some trifling compensations, which will be matched by the sale of the
useless city reservoirs, and interest at 5 per cent, on the money ex-
pended during the time of building, five years maximum.
I promised in a former article (No. III.) to ascertain the true
minimum cost of the Nepean scheme, when elaborated to a 30 million
gallon rate, with interest added. At prices admittedly too low, I found
£1,629,932, with every probability of the cost reaching £2,000,000.
Giving the scheme the benefit of the doubt, it will cost at least the
£1,825,000 above found to be the cost of the Loddon and Winge-
carribee The latter scheme having been charged with interest for
its time of building, five years, the Nepean scheme must also be
charged interest for its time of building, ten years. Since the Loddon
and Wingecarribee will be ready to deliver, and therefore earning,
at the end of five years or sooner, the interest for the difference
between the respective times of building, viz., five years, must be
charged against the Upper Nepean scheme, and added to the principal
sum as capital, and interest be then charged upon that whole siim for
the remaining five years. Therefore the whole cost of the Upper
Nepean scheme is at least £1,825,000, plus £456,250, or £2,281,250,
plus interest for five years building.
The claim of the Upper Nepean, that it can begin to supply
earlier by supplementary works, even if true, does not reduce the
general cost, since the cost of the supplementary works themselves
would probably be more than equal to the interest for the difference
of the years. In this respect the Loddon and Wingecarribee has a
far superior merit, in that the Loddon portion, delivering from
9 to 12 million gallons daily, can be finished complete in three years.
Thus we find that the Upper Nepean scheme would cost altogether
more than the Loddon and Wingecarribee by nearly half a million of
money, and would then be a much inferior scheme in almost every
point of comparison, and I doubt if anyone could be found to contract
for the building at the price. Therefore, I have brought forward a
scheme which will cost less than that recommended by the professional
engineers, and the Upper Nepean is out of court on the question of cost.
But with regard to the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme, not
only can it be constructed for the money stated, but more than that, it
will be done , if the country will sanction the work. The able article
from which I quoted above, contains the following remark :—“ What
a boon it would be if some one would relieve us of the difficulty of
solving the water question for Sydney, by appearing with a scheme in
his hand and commanding its immediate execution.”
I come with this scheme in my hand. Ido not command its exe-
cution, for ours is not a despotism, and if it were I am not its despot.
But this scheme already commands the attention and confidence of large
and various bodies of capitalists, ready and willing to embark in the
work, and it only remains for the Government to signify willingness to
treat, and its execution can become a fact upon the above terms.
I have now finished the discussion of the Loddon and Wingecarribee
scheme. I have found it to be a scheme possessing not only equal but
far greater power of supply than the Upper Nepean, great special
merits to which the other has no claim, and its alleged defects, so far
from being defects, are actual boons.


These papers are not by any means exhaustive as to either scheme,
and from many points of view, 'Mr. Clark’s report itself requires con-
siderably more handling. But I cannot trespass longer upon the
patience of the reader, and abstain from further investigation. I will
now epitomize and contrast the two schemes, and conclude my review.
lII. Uppish Nepean and Loddon and Wingecareibee
Schemes, Contrasted.
It is clearly understood that dry times and minimum rainfalls are
the only phases of climate which can be taken notice of in examining
the merits of water schemes, and it is upon such phases only that
ail the calculations, both by Mr. Clark and me, have proceeded.
It has also been seen and well understood that a 30-million gallon
daily rate is the prescribed rate of any scheme for supply of Sydney,
and therefore all statements, investigations, and comparisons must
be made upon .this basis, and they have been so made throughout
these articles.
A selection of all the features, good and bad, of the two schemes
which we have been considering, results in the following epitomised
comparison:—
I. Upper Nepean.
1. Supply, 30 million gallons
daily for 10 months only, viz., 8
months from store and 2 months
from flow, and thereafter the
reservoir is empty, and the subse-
quent supply is only influx less
evaporation, 8 millions daily
maximum and diminishing, if the
8-months’ minimum rate of rain-
fall last beyond 8 months.
2. Storage, 7,110 million gallons,
held in one reservoir only, an
immense work, of very doubtful
security, and no balance of safety
provided in the event of casualty,
and the prospect of a water famine
in such event, besides terrible
damage to property in the neigh-
bourhood.
3. Poor gravitation and low
delivery, requiring to be supple-
mented by pumps to reach the
high levels of the city and suburbs,
resulting in low and uneven
pressures, and necessitating an
elaborate system of town and
suburban reservoirs (six on the
Sydney side and one on the North
Shore), and costly service mains
and large reticulations.
ll.— Loddon and Wingecareibee.
1. Supply, 30 million gallons
daily for practically an unlimited
time, viz., 15 months from store,
and 15 months from flow, and the
flow overbalances the draught,
and, therefore, once full always
full and wasting, unless the 15
months’ minimum rate of rainfall
last beyond 15 months.
2. Storage, 13,893 million gal-
lons, held in chains of safe reser-
voirs, the works for which are
moderate, and a perfect balance
of safety preserved, and no risk
of water famine possible, and no
neighbouring property to damage
even if a casualty happened.
3. Good gravitation and high
delivery, reaching every height of
Sydney and suburbs of its own
natural force, with an even uni-
form Waverley pressure, and no
city or suburban reservoirs at all
required except one at Waverley
and one at North Shore for dis-
tributing purposes, and a com-
paratively cheap service system.
Hydraulic lifts, available all over
the city, and public baths and
fountains throughout the city and
suburbs.


4. Dull, lifeless water, and cloudy,
unless prevented by filtration, the
works for which would require an
amount of gravitation which the
scheme cannot afford to spare,
having only just enough head of
water to enable its waters to reach
the distributing reservoirs.
5. Insufficient power of collect-
ing water, owing to dependence
for supply on a canal of limited
draught drawing upon a river of
ever-varying flow, resulting some-
times in unavoidable waste of
river flow, which would otherwise
be available for store, at other
times in insufficient supply of
river flow to keep the drawing
power of the canal occupied.
6. No margin of storage power
over the period of a comparatively
likely drought, viz., 8 months,
and only 2 months’ supply in the
meanwhile from flow to help it
out, and therefore comparative
probability of frequent trial.
7. No securiry against fires, or
power to extinguish.
8. Obligation of the scheme to
preserve Nepean vested water
rights, and provide compensating
supplies thus rendering its
success dependent on the effective-
ness of a compensation dam of
very doubtful power, and possibly
necessitating eventual abandon-
ment of the scheme on the failure
of the compensation dam to effect
the necessary purposes.
9. Cost of scheme, £2,281,250
minimum, or not less than
per 1000 gallons, plus interest for
5 years building, and no end of
trouble to get the work executed.
10. Unequal water ratesbetween
the high and low levels, surely
not to be tolerated under the
circumstances of this city, but,
whether or no, arising out of the
necessity to pump.
4. Living, sparkling water, pure
and cold, from a clean mountain
country, and abundant room to
filter without diminishing the high
pressure. But filtration will not
be nearly so necessary as in the
Nepean case, and indeed not
needed at all.
5. Maximum facility for collect-
ing water, there being no escape
for any portion of the rainfall ex-
cept over the dams when full.
6. Storage power, equal to a
comparatively unlikely drought,
viz., 15 months, and helped out
by 15 months supply in the mean-
time from flow, so that the scheme
could stand out longer than the
longest drought on record.
7. Perfect security against fires.
8. No vested water rights to
conserve, nor compensating sup-
plies to provide.
9. Cost of scheme, £1,825,000,
(and a few trifling compensations
which the sale of the present city
reservoir would balance), equal to
2d. per 1000 gallons, plus interest
for 5 years building. No trouble
about getting the work done, there
being contractors ready to take the
whole thing up.
10. Uniform water rates, and
no risks with pumping machinery.


11. Collateral advantages, an
irrigating plan of very dubious
success, and to a large extent im-
practicable.
11. Collateral advantages, a
power to create another manufac-
turing centre in the colony besides
Sydney, viz., Wollongong, only
dependent upon the same contin-
gency as industry generally, viz.,
a reasonable labour rate.
This comparison requires no comment, but is the proof itself of
the inferiority of the recommended scheme, and therefore, the Tipper
Nepean must take rank as a rejected scheme.
This question naturally rises to every reader’s lips, “ Why did we
not learn all these things from the report of the hydraulic engineer ?”
The answer will not be palatable to all readers; but the public interest
demands it, and though an unpleasant duty I must not shrink from it.
The Water Commission of 1869 was appointed to inquire into the
best water supply for Sydney. Its members were, as is well known,
Lieut. Woore, K.N., Professor Smith, Mr. F. H. Grundy, C.E., Mr.
Adams, Surveyor-General, and Mr. Moriarty and Mr. Bennett, engineers
and hydraulic advisers of our Government. After taking voluminous
evidence they found no other than the Upper Nepean scheme which
seemed to them worthy of development. Even had they discovered
.the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme, they must have passed it
over, at any rate, for the time, for cast-iron mains would be quite
unequal to bearing its high pressure, besides being untransportable in
mountainous country, and they knew nothing at all about wrought-
iron mains, or of any means of getting water down from such heights
except by letting it run down to the low levels by its own natural
channels, and thus losing the quality of gravitation which they were so
desirous of finding. Portions of the Loddon and Wingecarribee, in
fact, become portions of the Nepean when its waters are run down to
the low levels and the gravitation lost. Accordingly, with little wisdom,
the Water Commission spent all its money in elaborating the Upper
Nepean scheme, to a large extent wastefully, and recommended it to
the Government for acceptance.
For the reasons which would have prevented the Water Commission
from accepting the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme even had they
known of it, for the same reasons Mr. Clark, who did know of it, was
obliged to reject it, even had he been able to find no other reasons or
ground of objection. As has been already sufficiently shown (Article
No. IY.) the wrought-iron pipe system is the soul of the scheme, and
to both the Water Commission and Mr. Clark that system is a foreign
tongue.
Of the members who represent the report of the Commission there
nre now virtually but two persons. Mr. Woore resigned rather than
be a party to it. Professor Smith, President of the Commission,
acknowledged his disagreement, at the Eoyal Society meeting of 9th
Lecember, 1874, on the occasion of my reading my first paper on water
supply for Sydney, and stated that he was in a minority among the
Commissioners, and that he was mainly instrumental in procuring the


insertion of that clause in their Eeport which called for scrutiny and
criticism, and admitted the possibility of superior discoveries. Mr.
Grundy, in his own report to the Commission, disagreed with the
scheme, so far as the reservoir portion of it is concerned, and that is
nine-tenths of the whole. Mr. Adams is and always has been, neutral,
and for that reason, among other good ones, was very properly selected as
Mr. Clark’s guide in his official inspection of the water schemes. The
Government Engineers, Mr. Moriarty and Mr. Bennett, are the only
ones left; all the others have virtually deserted the scheme of the
Commission.
Between the recommendation and elaboration out of a public
vote, the Nepean became called “The Government Scheme.” It was
a false name, for the Government had no right to be a partisan, and
could have no scheme at all, except the one that should eventually be
shown to be the best. But the name being once given, stuck to it, and
imparted a semblance of tone and quality to which the scheme was not
entitled ; and as the hydraulic credit of its promoters depended on it,
although they knew that the appellation was wrong, they could
scarcely by expected to correct it.
It has also been called “ The Commissioners’ Scheme,” because it
emanated from the body of the Water Commission. This is no more
its proper name than the other. There is no such thing as a Com-
missioners ’ scheme , for all the Commissioners did not agree to it—
though they all signed it (I may be allowed to say unwisely) except
Mr. Woore.
The Upper Nepean was quite as much a private scheme as the
Loddon and Wingecarribee, or any other scheme promoted —the only
and great difference being that the promoters had public money to
promote it with: and its real fathers and promoters were the pro-
fessional hydraulic advisers of the Government, and it is their private
scheme and nothing else ; and the proper name by which it ought
to be called is, “ The scheme of the Government Engineers.”
Since that time other schemes have been discovered, more or less
deserving of notice, among them the Loddon and Wingecarribee,
which is the only one with which I have to do; and as to this one, it is
well known that, owing to its thorough gravitation and other manifest
virtues, a large portion of the current of public opinion set in its
favour. Therefore this scheme at least, if not others also, was entitled
to as thorough an investigation as the Nepean received, and this one
still more so, because it possesses in a peculiar degree that very quality
of gravitation which the people had asked for through the Commission.
But the Water Commission, or rather all that was virtually left of
it, namely, its most active members, the Government Engineers, being
themselves the promoters of the Nepean scheme, had identified them-
selves with and become wedded to it to the exclusion of all others, not
only those that were before them at the time of making their Eeport,
but also those that were of subsequent discovery. Moreover, they had
spent all their money, and, even if willing, they were not able to do
anything for any other scheme.
The Health and Sewage Commission of 1876 was appointed for
various purposes, among others (I presume, since they assumed the
power) to take additional evidence on our water systems for the benefit


of the expected hydraulic engineer. It consisted, among other
members, of all the members of the Water Commission except Mr.
Woore, and I am not aware, and at any rate the result does not show,
that the new body contained any more hydraulic knowledge or ability
than the old one, except that among its members were Mr. Whitton,
who accepted neither office nor emoluments, and Mr. Hell, whose
attention has been confined almost exclusively to the Botany system of
water supply. It echoed exactly the same sentiments upon the Nepean
scheme as the Water Commission ; and as to the Loddon scheme, the
only new one which it attempted to examine, it uttered sentiments of
which the less said the better, and which received their fit reward at
the hands of the first assemblage of gentlemen in the land
These things point to a murky atmosphere and a gloomy prospect
for our civic affairs. There are three things shown —first, that the
Upper Nepean is a bad scheme, at least as compared with the Loddon
and Wingecarribee, and perhaps others ; next, that the Government
engineers are its fathers, and, as such, interested in its maintenance,
because their hydraulic credit depends upon it; and lastly, that with
the Government engineers on every board and commission, their
Nepean scheme always comes uppermost. What is the deduction?
Plainly this —first, generally, that such boards and commissions, as
hitherto constituted, are valueless for the protection of public interests ;
next, particularly, that the influence of the Government engineers,
exerting itself on such boards and commissions, predominates and rules
and carries the day in favour of the bad scheme which the Government
engineers have promoted —and so the “ sick man ” among the water
schemes wins, because the other schemes are handicapped in the com-
petition.
That which is true in the past and present will prove to be equally
true in the future. The same influence will be found operating on all
subsequent boards and commissions, unless some radical change of the
system be made. The Central Board of Works, or Commission, as
suggested by the Health and Sewage Board, and endorsed by Mr.
Clark, for management of water supply and drainage, although itself
good in the abstract, yet as a matter of practical effect will be no good
whatever, unless it be constituted of widely different material from that
which constituted the Health and Sewage Board itself. However
efficient such bodies may be for executing works which others decide
upon, for the purpose of themselves deciding upon the works, they are
not to be trusted.
It is time that our body public roused itself from the lethargy and
sleep which pervades it on all these matters; and if they fail to do so
after the hint being so broadly given, they will stand finally convicted
of Mr. Garrett’s terse reproach, of being “ A very prosperous and a
very stupid people.”
■ To return. The meaning of all this is, that nothing but the Upper
Nepean scheme could get a hearing, the people who were appointed to
hear having turned a deaf ear to all others. And not only no hearing,
but no help. Knowing the intrinsic value of the Loddon and Winge-
carribee scheme and its incalculable worth to Sydney, I applied
* See the debate on their report in the Upper House, 30th March, 1876.


repeatedly to the Government for assistance to develop its features and
put it into proper shape for inspection. All that I was ever allowed
(independently of some printing) was the services of one surveyor for a
wee k—and that, thanks only to the courtesy of the then Premier (Sir
John Robertson), and in direct opposition to the Health and Sewage
Board ; and the result of that isolated piece of work was to disprove
certain statements made by some members of the Board, and to verify
my counter statements.
Binding that I could get nothing at all done for this scheme, I did
the best I could myself, and I spent my own time and labor and money
for a public object to an unwarrantable extent —rather than I would
see a valuable scheme shelved, because it possessed merits which
endangered the safety of the scheme of the Government engineers.
The result and value of my work, viz., the plans, sections, data,
and every sort of information which I laid before Mr. Clark, was simply
this. It had no pretensions to being sufficient for purposes of
construction , and, compared with the herculean labors expended on the
Nepean elaborations for construction, it made no show whatever. But,
for the only purpose which was necessary, and which could be expected
from the promoter of any scheme —viz , to enable any inspector to see
all over the scheme from one end to the other, and know what there
was in it, and what could be made out of it, to sound the key-notes
from which the chords could be struck, and to point out the scent from
which the hunt could be followed—my work was abundantly sufficient.
It is upon that work, and no other, that other people have become as
perfectly master of the scheme as I am ; and it has been held to be
quite enough for the purposes of estimate and contract, and to warrant
the investment of money, and the staking of reputation and means.
But, for the purposes of Mr. Clark’s vision, it appears that my
work was insufficient. He says that the Upper Nepean scheme has
been elaborated and investigated in considerable detail, but that the
plans and data with which I had furnished him are necessarily very
incomplete. In other words, the projects were summoned to trial, btxt
in the Nepean case only was the evidence for the defence sufficiently
got up for him.
This was an improper condition for things to be left in, and one
under which no righteous judgment could be expected from Mr. Clark.
He therefore had only two consistent courses before him, viz., either to
declare for the Upper Nepean at once, upon the elaborations shown, or
to defer judgment until better investigation of the others. He could
not, and did not, do the first of these, for it would have been tanta-
mount to admitting that he came out to Sydney for nothing. His
plain duty, therefore, was to do the other; and the question is—did he
do it or not ?
So far as the Loddon and Wingecarribee scheme is concerned, he
did not do it. After all the difficulties which I have had to contend
with, and all the injustice which the scheme has suffered, I naturally
looked, when he brought his independent judgment to bear, that at last
this unfortunate and ill-used scheme would be heard, and that
my labours, well begun for the general good, would be as efficiently
carried on, and that any insufficiency in my data would be supplemented,
so that the scheme might have a just and thorough searching, and its


merits and faults be critically examined and brought to light. But, as
a matter of fact, nothing of the sort was done. Mr. Clark made no
effort to improve or complete my plans and data, or to find out what
the scheme was capable of, although his power was plenary, and the
survey staff of the colony was placed at his disposal for the purpose,
and his instructions were to use his opportunities of observation. 1 was
once applied to for further surveys, as if this was a private affair of my
own ; and when I referred the application to the Government as the
proper person to ask, the matter was dropped. Considerable sums of
public money were expended over others of the schemes submitted, as
stated by Mr. Clark in his Report, and even over the Upper Nepean
itself, already so elaborately investigated, but none on the
Loddon and Wingecarribee. Even those very virtues of the scheme
which patent to the eye, independently of nicer investigation by
survey, which were more or less seen, discussed, and admitted at the
time of official inspection—even these have been passed over in silence,
and the Report on the subject reads as if they had no existence. Worse
still, the scheaie has been charged with faults, which are no faults
at all, but cardinal virtues, and the very grounds out of which rejection
sprung should have brought it in the accepted scheme.
I have yet to learn how these facts can be reconciled with Mr.
Clark’s published statement, that he has endeavoured to weigh all the
sch'emes submitted fairly upon their merits.
Finally, every line of the records of this scheme is a history of
the contest between progress and stagnation in hydraulic science. The
Upper Nepean is of the old order of things, good enough if nothing
better can be had, and at least much better than nothing; but the
march of discovery has put them in the back ground. The Loddon
and Wingecarribee is of the new order, a type of the advanced ideas, a
sample of those things which fresh enlightenment has placed at our
command, but which under formerly received opinions, were quite
beyond our reach. In the position which Sydney now occupies,
pausing before a great social question, and weighing the arguments as
to what course to pursue, it will be a permanent blot upon her
escutcheon if she fail to avail herself of the new lights of hydraulic
science.
I therefore now state it to the public as a proved fact, the decision
of the hydraulic engineer on the Sydney water guestion has been given with-
out evidence , and against the weight of evidence. Hence the community
suffers. Whether the people know it or not, and whether they will
listen or not, I tell them that the seeds have been sown of a great mis-
fortune, and that its only cure is timely uprooting, and its certain fruit,
if allowed to go on, will be universal disappointment. If the people
desire to protect their own best interests, they must adopt one or other
of two courses, viz., either to have the whole water question recon-
sidered, or to take the short cut to success which the people of Dublin
and Glasgow took they carried the two best schemes in Britain in direct
opposition to their advising engineers.
lam not well versed in the history of the other water schemes
before the public, my own and the Upper Nepean being quite enough
to engage my attention. But if any of them can show such good
qualities as the Loddon and Wingecarribee has shown, and can prove


such wholesale neglect as the Loddon and Wingecarribee has proved,
then, for the good of the community, it is the duty of their promoters to
show it as I have.
I trust that this review will not be taken as a controversy between
me and the hydraulic engineer. I have been obliged perforce to cross
his views, and that in no mild way sometimes ; but not out of hostility
to him, and only as an enforced guardian of the interests of our
citizens, that they may ensue the good and eschew the evil scheme. So
far, indeed, as Mr. Clark is personally concerned, I take the liberty of
expressing my regret that he has linked his name with such a scheme.
I have no more to say. The Water Commission concluded their
Report by inviting scrutiny and criticism, and at last, though late, they
have had it. I, in my turn, invite scrutiny and criticism of mine ; and
if any one is able to upset my position, for the general good, I call
upon him to do so.
JAMES MANNING.


SYDNEY WATER SUPPLY.
APPENDIX No. I.
OFFICIAL PARTICULARS OF THE LODDON AND
WINGECARRIBEE SCHEME.
James Manning Esq., to The Colonial Secretary.
Sydney, 15th November, 1876.
Sir,
In compliance with the request contained in your letters of the
22nd May and 29th September last, I now proceed to give a concise
statement of my scheme for the supply of water by gravitation to
Sydney and suburbs.
I desire this paper to be read in connection with my previous
papers on the subject, read before the Royal Society of New South
Wales, which are already in your possession Wherever diversities
appear, they are to be understood as having arisen out of the further
development and extension of the general plan, of which the state-
ments herein made are the true exponents.
The whole project, in its entirety, consists of two distinct schemes;
one a high level, the other a low level scheme. My remarks will
be mainly directed to the first, as, in the events which have happened,
I do not, comparatively, attach much importance to the other.
The high level scheme is in two parts or sections, viz,
1. Loddon and Madden’s Plains.
2. Wingecarribee and Kangaloon.
The low level scheme is of one part only, viz.; —
Port Hacking River.
All these three plans are distinct in themselves, and any one of them is
practicable and construetable without reference to the others. The
Wingecarribee and Loddon schemes, however, can with the utmost
facility and to the greatest advantage be worked together, and are by
nature so homogeneous and concurrent that so far as their practical
results are concerned they could not be distinguished. The Winge-
carribee and Rangaloon is simply a distinct adjunct of the Loddon and
Madden’s Plains, available as part of it at any moment when required,
but not needing to be dealt with until required. They are, therefore,


properly conjoint. The Port Hacking Piver scheme, on the other
hand, is without this advantage, and being hundreds of feet lower than
either the Loddon or the Wingecarribee levels, its waters cannot bo
delivered at anything like the same elevation. It is, therefore, neces-
sarily and properly separate.
I.—HIGH LEVEL SCHEME.
Part I.—Loddon and Madden’s Plains.
Commonly known by the name of the “ Loddon scheme.” As to
the ability of this scheme, I have personally no doubt whatever that it
would be sufficient to satisfy the wants of Sydney for many years to
come. For four months of the year, the dry season, at the summer
level of the streams, it would deliver at Waverley (tire highest point
within miles of Sydney, and considerably upwards of 300 feet above
sea level), with storage help, 9,000,000 gallons daily—a quantity quite
double the present Sydney supply, and equal, I believe, on an average
to the supply of the best watered cities in England, but not up to the
nominal 12,000,000 gallons spoken of by the Water Commission.
Haring the remainder of the year the supply is far greater, and to
increase the summer supply, so as to equalize it over the year up to
the stated 12,000,000 gallons, it is only necessary to increase the
storage. The works could be constructed in three years at most, at a
cost of about £600,000, exclusive of compensations, which are of a
trifling nature. Lastly, the waters are of the purest quality, and of
sparkling brightness, coming as they do from a sandstone country, free
from impurity of every kind.
This section is divisible under three heads or branches; —namely,
watersheds, reservoirs, and conduits.
1. Watersheds, or gathering grounds.
1. Loddon watershed. —This is an area of 3,218 acres measured, on
the west side of the Bottle Forest Eoad, and some 200 acres
unmeasured between the Bottle Forest Eoad and the sea cliffs between
Bulli and Coal Cliff.
2. Second Loddon watershed. —This is an area of 938 acres measured,
lying between the previous watershed and the Wollongong and Appin
Eoad, and closely abutting on the Loddon Bridge.
These two watersheds constitute what is commonly known as the
“ Loddon basin,” measured to the extent of 4,156 acres, besides some
unmeasured additions.
There are some 3,000 acres of watershed close by, arising from
Knight’s and Eeeve’s Creeks to the south-east of the Loddon Basin,
and from the country immediately abutting on the Wollongong and
Appin Eoad (of which 783 acres are measured), all of which can with-
out any engineering difficulty be brought into the second Loddon water-
shed, and be there utilized as if it were directly part of it.
By further ditching to the southward and by simply grading of
levels, the water falling upon an additional area can be brought to


the same destination; but I do not think it is necessary to extend this
system any further than as previously stated.
3. Madden's Plains watershed. —This is an area of some 1,500 acres
lying to the east and west of the Bottle Forest Road, to the north of the
Loddon watershed. By the assistance of simple but adequate storm-
water dams, these waters can he easily intercepted in their natural
western course, and be diverted north into a short sloping underground
conduit of about 30 yards, which would lead into the main tunnel to be
hereafter described.
4. Waranora watershed. —This is an area of about 1,000 acres lying
to the north of Madden’s Plains. These waters trend north, and by
simply deflecting to the eastward the course of the canal conduit to be
hereafter described, they fall into it in their natural course.
These above-named four watersheds constitute the body of the
Loddon scheme, being a total collective watershed of at least 9,000
acres, or upwards of 14 square miles. The first and second belong to
the Nepean system of waters, the third and fourth are tributaries of
George’s River.
This is a suitable occasion to remark upon the superiority of small
watersheds oyer large ones. All over the world the best systems of water-
works are those whose catchment areas are sufficient to provide ample
supplies, yet are not so large as to be unmanageable. Mr. Hughes,
F.G.S , 0.E., the writer of the well-known work called “Water-
works,” and himself a great authority upon all water matters, has the
following remark on the subject:—“lt is now generally admitted that
immense gathering grounds of several hundred square miles are not
adapted to furnish large concentrated supplies of water, in consequence
of the numerous difficulties and expense of collecting them.”
It is also noteworthy that several of the best systems of waterworks
in Great Britain are derived from small watersheds. Thus :
Liverpool , with 493,000 inhabitants, is principally supplied from
the Rivington district with 12 million gallons daily, the drainage area is
estimated at 10,400 acres, 120 days’ consumption is stored in the
reservoirs, and of the mean annual rainfall of 46 23 inches, - 436 is
saved. It is true that the population has now quite outgrown this
supply, but that is no argument against its efficiency.
Plymouth , with 71,000 inhabitants, is supplied from the Dartmoor
Hills, having a drainage area of about 4,000 acres, the average annual
rainfall on which is found to be 44 inches, of which ‘343 comes in for
town supply.
Greenock is supplied from a drainage area of 5,043 acres, the
average rainfall on which is 60 inches, of which ‘603 has been observed
to run into the reservoirs.
Dublin , with a population of 310,000 in 1867, now receives its
supply from the river Yartry (30 miles off, from a high level in the
county of Wicklow), which off a drainage area of 14,000 acres
furnishes 20 million gallons daily, besides compensation to mill-owners.
The storage reservoirs are capable of containing 120 days’ consumption
at the above rates, and of the mean annual rainfi.ll of 60 inches *402
is saved.
This Dublin water supply, initiated and promoted by Sir John
Gray in the teeth of a determined opposition, was thus spoken of in


March, 1876, by Mr. M. Brooks, M.P., in the House of Commons :
“By these admirable waterworks an ample supply is brought into the
city from the county of Wicklow, a distance of nearly 30 miles, and
distributed not only in the city but throughout the suburbs for many
miles. I think I may say that in the whole world there is not a better
or more efficient supply.”
The circumstances of our own city tell strikingly in favour of this
contention. The consumers of city water in Sydney and suburbs are,
roughly estimated, something over 100,000 souls. The watershed
which has supplied them, if not bountifully, at least sufficiently, and
which has shown a staying power beyond all belief, is only 4,250
acres.
The maximum discharge of the watersheds which supply the above-
mentioned British towns is 60 per cent. If, then, the general water-
shed above described had only the same discharge, the fact that these
towns are sufficiently supplied by their systems is proof that Sydney,
at its present size and larger, would be sufficiently supplied by this
system. But not only have we here a discharge of 60 per cent., but
late gauging experiments made by me in the Loddon Eiver after
ordinary rains show beyond a doubt a discharge equal to 70 per cent.
That there are such places in the world having such discharges, the
celebrated engineer Bateman is a distinct authority; and if there be
any such place, the Loddon country, from its spongy character and
saturated stratifications, is best calculated to fulfil the conditions.
2. Reservoirs , or storage.
1. Loddon Lake. —This is an area of 408 acres, receiving all the
waters of the first Loddon watershed, and proved by survey, and
average depths estimated from cross sections, to be capable of storing
1,446.000,000 gallons minimum. It is constructed by building a con-
crete dam 55 feet high and 25 chains long overall, across a narrow and
rocky gorge in the Loddon Eiver, at a height of 1,121 feet above the
sea. There is no engineering difficulty in its construction, there being
many similar works in the world.
This is the storage reservoir of the Loddon scheme. It may take
12 months at most to fill in a dry season, but in a wet one much less
time. When full it will hold 120 days’ supply at the full rate of con-
sumption of 12,000,000 gallons daily, but at the lesser rate, 160 days’.
It is not to be supposed that these figures represent the limit of the
capabilities of this reservoir. The acreage, cubical contents, and
storage supply above stated, are the product of a dam 55 feet high
only. The last 5 feet have added 42 acres (a former survey having
shown 366 acres for 50 feet), and another 5 feet would probably add
far more. There is no sound reason against raising the dam much
higher than I have at present fixed it, nor any difficulty in increasing
the storage to any desired extent, and every drop of the store would be
available and fit for consumption. There are other storage reservoirs
besides this available, but I have not thought it necessary to amplify
them here. I may, however, specially mention one feasible on the
Madden’s Plains watershed, capable of holding at least a month’s
supply at highest rates of consumption, and possessing great facilities
for augmentation.


2. The Tunnel Reservoir. —So called because it is the starting point
of the tunnel, which I shall describe hereafter. This is an area of 37
acres, abutting upon Loddon Lake, and in connection with it by proper
waterways. It is formed by a small dam 20 feet high and 8 chains
long, put across another narrow gorge of the river at a point 42 chains
distant from the upper dam, and at a level of 12 feet below the floor of
the Loddon Lake. This reservoir receives all the waters which come
into the second Loddon watershed, besides the overflow waters of
Loddon Lake. It is a feeding reservoir, supplying and regulating the
supply to the conduits. It is capable of large augmentation like the
Loddon Lake, and in wet seasons it and the Madden’s Plains and
Waranora watersheds will supply Sydney by themselvee. Indeed the
late Sir Thomas Mitchell, who is looked upon as an authority in these
matters, credited these sources of supply with even more effectiveness
than I do.
3. The Waverley Reservoir. —A small covered reservoir for receiving
the waters from the high-level conduits, and for distributing the water
to the city, suburbs, and surrounding country (North Shore and
Balmain included). To be situated, as its name implies, on the highest
available point of Waverley, and to be large enough to hold not less
than 2,000,000 gallons.
3. Conduits.
From the floor of the tunnel reservoir, at a height of about
1,111 feet above sea level and about 10 feet below the outlet of
Loddon Lake, the waters are let into a tunnel, and proceed by that
tunnel about 3f miles very nearly north ; thence by an open aqueduct
about miles, by a tortuous course, mainly northerly and easterly,
to a point about 1,062 feet above the sea level on the Bottle Forest
Eoad, where the Port Hacking Eiver sources begin to form ; thence
by wrought iron piping of suitable diameter through and over every
obstruction for a distance of under 32 miles to the Waverley reservoir.
There are no practical obstructions to the laying of this pipe line.
The chief difficulty to be overcome in its course is George’s Eiver.
This need not be regarded as an obstruction, as it can be easily
surmounted by means of proper turpentine pile supports, which can
be made to serve the double purpose of a traffic bridge.
From Waverley the city and all the suburbs and surrounding
country could be commanded and supplied by direct gravitation, with a
head of water of more than 300 feet above sea level, after releasing the
pressure of 750 feet in the mains at the reservoir.
Part 2.— Wingecarribee and Kangaloon.
The so-called “ Wingecarribee Swamp” is situated at a height of
2,230 feet above sea level, about 36 miles south from the Loddon basin,
by the course along which water can be conducted. Its formation is
peculiar, and can only be described as a great water basin, evidently a
trachytic formation produced by igneous eruption in past ages. It is
6 miles in length, and of various widths, from 60 chains downwards;
its surface is 1,170 acres measured, and its average depth is about 20


feet. Its surface is more or less covered by a dangerous quaking bog,
bearing only water plants and mosses. It has a watershed of 1 Si-
square miles, or 11 ~840 acres, ail consisting of high volcanic ranges
rising from 300 to 500 feet above the lake. The natural outlet of these
waters (which, in point of purity, cannot be surpassed) is westward by
the Wingecarribee River into the Wollondilly, and thence into the
Lower Nepean by Warragamba.
These waters could be brought eastward into the head of the
Upper Nepean River by a tunnel of about mile in length, through
the range which separates the watersheds. This tunnel would start
from somewhere at the eastern end of the Wingecarribee Swamp,
where its inlet would be at the bottom levels of the swamp; then it
would perforate the range towards Kangaloon, and open into a tribu-
tary of the Mittagong River, one of the main streams of the Upper
Nepean. Thus the Wingecarribee and Nepean waters would meet
and the point of junction would be about half-a-mile above Howell’s
Bridge across the Mittagong River, which stands at an elevation of
about 2,030 above the sea.
The Kangaloon watershed forms the sources of the Mittagong
River and its top tributaries, and also Wombat Creek, Little River,
and Molly Morgan’s Creek, all permanently running streams, and, at
the elevation at which this scheme can avail of it, it has a collective
area of rather more than 14 square miles, or 9,000 acres. I shall
presently show the mode of utilizing this watershed, and the supplies
arising therefrom.
At a little distance below the meeting point of the Mittagong
River and the Wingecarribee waters there is a fine site for a storage
reservoir. A simple crib and earth dam, 29 feet high and 111 chains
long overall, would throw back a sea of water second only to the
Loddon Lake. Considering the immense, I might almost say inex-
haustible, natural storage in the Wingecarribee Swamp, I cannot see
how this reservoir will ever be needed; but if it should be wanted, or
if it should at any time be thought a desirable addition to the scheme,
it is available at a moment’s notice.
In the Mittagong River, at a point about half-a-mile below
Howell’s Bridge, or at any other neighbouring point thought preferable,
according to the exigency of the levels, an ordinary weir would be
constructed, to turn the waters into an open canal or ditch. By this
conduit and one short tunnel they would proceed in a north-easterly
direction, contouring Mount Butler and the other natural features of
the country by a moderately winding course, cutting and gathering
en route the supplies from Wombat Creek, Little River, and Molly
Morgan’s Creek, with a gradual fall for about 7 or 8 miles to a point
on the old Dapto and Bong Bong road, about 1,955 feet above the sea.
Here the country begins to fall rapidly. From this point to the Loddon
the course is nearly north, skirting the Illawarra country, along the
western slopes of the coast ranges, passing close by Dapto Mountain,
Mount Kembla, Mount Kiera, Broker’s Nose, Rixon’s Pass, Woonoona,
and Bulli Pass ; and by this course from the 1,955 feet level, the waters
gathered there from all these topmost sources, to the extent of


20,000,000 gallons daily, and more, in all seasons, would be conducted
in closed wrought-iron mains direct over hill and dale with a fall of 500
feet for 22 or 23 miles to a point near the Bulli Pass about 1,449 feet
above the sea, and or 4 miles from the Loddon Basin ; and from
that point by ditching and 72 chains of tunnelling into the Tunnel
Reservoir, 1,129 feet above the sea.*
Thus the Wingecarribee and Kangaloon waters would become
part of the Loddon waters, and both would go to Waverley together by
the system of conduits above described. In kind, that system is
perfect for the purpose; in degree, it only requires sufficient amplifica-
tion.
For the discovery and simple development of this general plan 1
am indebted to the salient geological fact, the regular dip from south
to north of the coast country. Having regard to the relative situations
of the Wingecarribee Swamp and George’s River, the highest and
lowest points in the plan, it is a very singular coincidence that the
Loddon Basin, which is the natural meeting-place of the two systems
of water supply, should be almost exactly half-way between those two
points, both in respect of distance and of elevation.
This is the complete high-level scheme. Its total collective water-
shed is not less than 30,000 acres, or 47 square miles. Its works, to
construct, from first to last, will take about five years, and cost a
million and a half of money. When complete its daily delivery will be
30,000,000 gallons and upwards, and no one need for one moment
hesitate to contract or guarantee to deliver not only the 12,000,000
gallons spoken of by the Water Commission, but more than double
that quantity—in fact, a supply which will set all anxiety upon the
subject finally at rest.
It may be said that this cost and this supply are in excess of our
requirements. As to supply, I will not offer an opinion beyond what
I have already said. If the supply is wanted, the cost is not
excessive, for in these matters cost is the last consideration, quality and
effectiveness are the great desiderata. But if the supply is needless,
and the cost inadvisable, there is no necessity to avail of the whole
scheme. Either section will suffice. From the point of view of a
perfect work, I should much prefer to see the completion of the entire
scheme, but have no desire to advocate works that may not be
necessary for a considerable time, especially as the scheme can be
developed without difficulty as occasion may appear to require.
I will here, in passing institute a comparison between this scheme
and the two best systems of water supply in Great Britain and Aus-
tralia —Glasgow from Loch Katrjne, and Melbourne from Yan Yean
(both gravitation schemes). From such comparison this proposed
scheme will come out with credit. The figures which lam about to
give, though they do not all of them pretend to exactness, as I have no
* These waters could with equal facility be let into the Loddon Lake, if such course should be
thought more desirable ; with this difference, however, that owing to a depression in the country,
the last 3J or 4 miles of ditch and tunnel must be replaced by closed mains.


means of attaining to greater accuracy,
the value of the comparisons:—
_T ?
-c'S !3i:
« o ©
si ■ c a
-§ g* *3
* _ «.S
£.2 ~
Glasgow—
Loch Katrine...
540,000
compensations
to mill-owners,
&c.)
200,000
lions possible.
Sydney, proposed—
> Loddon and 167,000
Wingecarribee
are yet near enough to preserve
I Length in
Amount saved Average daily Character m ** es ' Gallons per
out of total supply in of ■S I ■ £ I*3 m °/ P°P U
rainfall. gallons. country. S 2Vi c lation.
- ?S 2'i
? <; -5 ;q e
•402 = ? actual. 50 millions pos- Granite 13 3J 55 present,
sible, 36 millions actual
actual (besides
40 millions for
1 of 2 = 1 actual 10 millions Clay-slate, j 9 16 50 actual, 70
2 5 5 ' actual, 14 mil- possible.
| nominal 30 millions Sandstone 6£ 14| 55 180 nominal,
nominal, 40 mil-|and tra- 240 indi-
dions indicated, 'chyte, cated.
All experience in water supply seems to point to the fact that the
quantity of water usually saveable from watersheds, i.e., the discharge,
is about two-fifths of the total rainfall, the remainder going in soakage
and evaporation, &c. This is, in fact, mainly true of all the instances
given in this paper. It is in theory no doubt true of the Yan Yean,
but in this case all the freshets and flood waters, which may be taken
to represent half the discharge, are shut out owing to their impurity,
and only the permanent stream availed of. "What is true of most
watersheds I assume to be at least true of those whose adoption I am
now advocating; and as to the Loddon basin, I believe, as above
stated, that it possesses extraordinary qualifications in this respect.
According to my calculations, by the light of the figures above
given, I estimate that the actual yearly yield of water into the present
Yan Yean reservoirs is something over 5,000,000,000 gallons (though
the consumption has never reached that amount). With that fact before
us, and by parity of reasoning, I deduce that the scheme now under
consideration will annually yield over 14,000,000,000 gallons. This is
nearly equal to 40 million gallons per day, so that my previous assur-
ance of a daily supply of 30 millions to Sydney will be considered
moderate. This is pretty clear evidence that the supplies available for
this scheme will amply suffice for Sydney when it is five or six times as
large as it is now.
I should not omit some special remarks upon the value of this
scheme, derived from its high levels and high pressures. It has a head
of water of 700 feet or more, at Waverley, and the value of the motive
power there obtainable from the pressure resulting from this head
would go far towards paying the interest on the total cost of the
works.* It would also be invaluable as a fire-engine, since the
* One of my American correspondents has the following remarks upon the subject of this
pressure:—“The above pressure is not exceptional. The Spring Valley Hydraulic Mine has 950
feet pressure on a 30-inch pipe, the plate being |ths inch thick. The Dutch Hill Hydraulic Mine
has 612 feet on a 22-inch pipe, number 12 plate. The Virginia City and Gold Hill Waterworks has
1.750 feet eu a 12-inoh pipe of X. 0. Birmingham wire gauge, or 34'100 inch thickness.


pressure that the Waverley height would give would reduce the risk of
fires to a minimum. Moreover, as a purgative, it would be particularly
valuable in the flushing of sewers and the erection of baths, and as
a source of ornament it would have the special recommendation,
that every garden and homestead in Sydney and suburbs could be
irrigated to perfection, and with the same pleasing results as are
enjoyed by our Melbourne neighbours. Also, in the matter of the cost
of iron-piping, this scheme shows great economy. In round numbers,
a 26-inch pipe would bring 9,000,000 gallons from the Loddon to
Sydney, a 30-inch pipe, 14,000,000, a 36-inch pipe, 21,000,000, and so
on ; and there the expenses end. But from a low level, like the Port
Hacking River plan, of which I have yet to speak, and like all the
other plans before the public, the above quantities would require
double pipes of such sizes to carry them, and when carried, they would
not be nearly as high as they ought to be, and pumping expenses
would have to be continually incurred to bring them within reach of
every citizen.
It is specially important to notice the value of the 300 feet head
of water at the distributing reservoir. Any system of water supply
designed for a large city, having numerous suburbs to be served, must
have a large head of water to work upon, if it be intended by the
system to provide supplies to such suburbs; otherwise the extra
friction created by such abstraction of water will cause the water to
have little or no head to reach its supposed destination, if the draught
upon it be very considerable. Thus in Melbourne, with a head of
water of 300 feet above sea level, at the Preston reservoir, six
miles distant, in times nof extreme consumption, 150 feet, or one-half
the head, is required to overcome the friction. This is a startling
fact, and simply means that, if the Yan Yean waters at the Preston
reservoir had not a head of 150 feet, the quantity required in times of
extreme consumption could not be brought to Melbourne.
This is the weakness, more or less, of all the other schemes
for water supply before the public, including my Port Hacking River
plan. They would all have slow, sluggish streams, and the best of
them could get little higher than Paddington, with all their resources
husbanded. Now, suppose that Parramatta, and every other suburb
lying along the line of pipes, had, as they certainly should have, leave
to tap en route , the consequence would probably be that during the hot
summer months, when the demand is everywhere the greatest, the best
of the schemes would deliver only an intermittent supply to the city,
and the others of them nil.
11. -LOW LEVEL SCHEME.
( Omitted , as not bearing on the subject.)
With reference to these various schemes, it may possibly be said
that they are insufficiently illustrated and inexhaustively treated. I
would reply, this is no fault of mine. As the schemes now stand,


and as far as they are known to the public, they are, with the excep-
tion of one slight assistance rendered to me by the Government, the
product of my sole unaided efforts. It will readily be conceded that
no private purse could be expected to elaborate a plan designed for the
public good, in the same exhaustive manner as can be effected by the
public coffers ; nor is it in any sense the duty of a private individual to
do so. His duty is done when he has pointed the way, and it rests
with the rulers of the country to take advantage of it. Nevertheless,
it is but right to say, that there is neither guessing nor approximation
about the particulars I have given—they are the product of accurate,
skilful, and authentic survey. Moreover, an immense amount of work
has been done to get those particulars together. I have personally
made no less than seventeen visits to the localities in question ; there
have been not less than a hundred miles of surveying and levelling
done by competent surveyors ; labour to the extent of some ten or a
dozen persons have been from time to time employed about the work ;
and from first to last the whole thing has cost me some hundreds of
pounds. I mention these facts, not willingly but in self defence, and
to put a final end to the erroneous impression, that I have not sufficient
support for my statements.
I have the pleasure to be in frequent correspondence with some of
the first engineers of America. That country is peculiarly remarkable
for the immense strides made by it of late years in the science of
hydraulic engineering, and has conceived designs and executed works
of which it may fairly be said that for grandeur and successful results,
they surpass anything in the world. Their waterworks are on the most
magnificent scale. Their water-pipes, now all in wrought iron for
high-pressures, cast-iron being discarded in its favour', are counted by
hundreds of miles. San Francisco has already 34 miles of 30-inch
wrought-iron conduits, and it is now in contemplation to go further
afield to the extent of 153 miles to the Sierras Nevadas. The town of
Eochester, N.Y., with its population of only 100,000, has recently laid
down and completed, with the greatest success, a conduit of water thus
described tome by an American hydraulic engineer:—“The water comes
from Hemlock Lake, 28 miles south of the city, being conducted
through lines of 36-inch wrought-iron pipe to the first reservoir, and from
thence b miles to the distributing reservoir by 24-inch wrought-iron
pipe, and passed through the city by over 60 miles of service pipe
of different diameters. It is one of the most complete and effective
systems of waterworks in America.” These are only two out of
numerous cases (one on the Pacific, the other on the Atlantic side), and
every day is bringing forth new improvements and results.
The main features of the scheme which I have laid before you are
already known to some of the most eminent hydraulic engineers both
in East and West America, and have received the most satisfactory
criticisms and confirmations. The figures for expenses given in this
paper are based upon information obtained from them, and it is largely
due to them that I see the way so clearly through this water scheme,
and can predict its success if undertaken. I have also much pleasure
in stating that, during recent surveys privately undertaken by myself,
I have been most ably assisted by Mr. Gipps, a civil engineer of the


American school, who has had considerable experience in hydraulic
works in Nevada.
Lastly, I would remark, that the wrought-iron mains now so much
in vogue in America, and against ■which the objection of corrosion is
always raised here, are, by anti-corrosive materials that are habitually
used, rendered, in the words of one of my American correspondents,
“ practically indestructible, and perfectly impervious to the action of
water and earth.” It is besides distinctly proved that no bad taste or
prejudicial consequences whatever are imparted to the water by such
treatment of the pipes. Granting this proved, wrought-iron must
stand unrivalled for this kind of service, especially for mountain regions,
since its wonderful power of bearing pressure enables us dispense
with weight, and Iherefore its proportionate lightness renders it capable
of being carried, worked, and handled at a mere fraction of the cost of
cast iron.
Thus I have done my best to provide this important city with a
good system of water supply, and to assure the country of its gieat
value under its various phases. The proposals which I have ventured
to press upon the attention of the Government would be, as I have
shown sufficient to ensure for this growing metropolis an ample supply
of pure water for many years te come, and have also the merit of
being expansive enough to provide for a remoter future. The cost of
the works would be small when compared with the utility, the safety,
and the magnitude of the undertaking ; and once set going they would
last for all time, wdth occasional and slight repairs.
I have, &c.
JAMES MANNING.


APPENDIX No. 11.
MR. CLARK’S REPORT ON THE LODDON AND WINGE-
CARRIBEE SCHEME.
James Manning, Esq., proposes to obtain a supply of water from the
Loddon and Madden Plains, supplemented by a further supply from
Kangaloon and Wiugecarribee.
He has a still further proposal to obtain _ a supply from Port
Hacking, but which is entirely separate and distinct from the others.
The Loddon scheme has its collecting reservoir near to, and north
of the road leading from Appin to Bulli Pass ; and on the river Loddon
this is supplemented by some other small intercepting reservoirs.
The catchment area in this locality is stated to be between 9,000
and 10,000 acres, or about 15£ square miles.
It is entirely on the sandstone formation, quite unsuited for culti-
vation ; and from its general sterile character it may be assumed that
except as a catchment area for purpose of water supply, it is unlikely
to find any economical use. It is moreover, I believe, unalienated.
The area has been carefully inspected, and its characteristic
feature is the large extent of swamps of which it is composed.
These swamps are not deep, but even during a somewhat dry
period at the time of my visit in December last they were saturated
with moisture.
Their existence is due probably to the elevated situation of the
district, 1,100 to 1,300 feet above the level of the sea, and also to its
proximity and influence.
It is proposed to form a reservoir by constructing a dam of con-
crete across the Loddon Creek about 60 chains from the point where it
runs under the Appin Road.
This dam with a maximum height of 55 feet will form a reservoir
estimated by the proposer at 408 acres in extent, with a storage capacity
of 1,446 million gallons, or, as stated, 120 days supply, at the rate of
12 million gallons daily —this does not however allow for loss by
evaporation. .
A second and smaller dam half-a-mile nearer to the Appin Road,
and lower down the stream, would intercept a portion of the water at
a somewhat lower level and add 37 acres to the storage reservoir. The
dam is proposed to be 20 feet in height. A third dam, on Madden s
Plains, 26J acres in extent, will receive the drainage of 1,500 acres
included in the above total area, lying to the east and west of the Bottle
Forest Road ; these are to be brought into connection the main
tunnel through which the water passes in its course to Sydney.


The heights of the waters in these reservoirs are stated to be
1,121, 1,111, and 1,203 feet above the sea respectively.
The sandstone rock is exposed at the surface at the proposed sites
for the dams.
The total distance of the Loddon Lake from Sydney over the
various lengths of work mentioned by Mr. Manning will be 40J miles.
The water is to be conducted from these storage reservoirs, partly
by tunnel and partly by open conduit to a point on the Bottle Forest
Load, miles from the Loddon Reservoir, where a pipe line is to
commence by which it descends to Sydney by gravitation.
This pipe line is to follow the Bottle Forest Road to George’s
River, to be crossed either by a timber bridge, or by a flexible pipe
laid in the bed of the stream, and thence to a reservoir proposed to be
constructed at Waverley ; the total length of this pipe line is stated to
be 32 miles.
The cost as estimated by the proposer is £600,000, and the amount
of water to be delivered during four months of the year, or dry season,
9 million gallons a day ; and for the remaining portion of the year 12
million gallons daily.
Mr. Manning considers that this portion of his scheme will be
sufficient for many years to come, and that only when it is proved to be
insufficient will it be necessary to extend this work to Wingecarribee.
He claims for it the great advantage of a delivery of the water to
a distributing reservoir to be constructed at Waverley 300 feet above
sea level, and at a pressure of 700 feet, which used as a motive power
will go far towards paying the interest on the total cost of the work.
Under this view it will be convenient to inquire, how far this
scheme will be likely to realize the expectations of the proposer, in
delivering into Sydney 9 to 12 millions of gallons daily for domestic
consumption, from a catchment area of 1 square miles, aided by the
reservoir for storage.
It must, however, be noted that situated as the area is, very near
the top of the range of hills and sources of the Cataract and George’s
Rivers, it is necessarily limited in extent, and Mr. Manning evidently
depends upon arresting the water that would otherwise run off by the
river during periods of storm. At ordinary times the discharge by the
river Loddon is small, and on the occasion of my inspection of it was
insignificant.
As before mentioned, I propose to apply to this and the other
schemes the test of the dry period of eight months in 1875-6.
The tables of rainfall, &c., in the Appendix, and the proportion
flowing down the rivers Nepean and Cataract, will also be used for
this purpose.
It was found, page 6, that or about l-20th of the rainfall
by measurement was passing down the river at this period, and that
proportion is therefore assumed as the quantity available.
It is however to be borne in mind that the atmosphere of this dis-
trict is frequently loaded with moisture which, though not measurable
by the rain guage, will probably assist in saturating this swampy
area; while on the other hand it must be remembered that the evapo-
ration from a swampy ar> a, is most probably largely in excess of the
average. Moreover, exposed as the region is to the south-east winds,


and close upon the sea-coast, the rainfall is considerable. This how-
ever affects the measurement in the river lower down, where observa-
tions have been most carefully recorded during the past eight years,
and it will therefore be safe, and not unjust to the merits of this
scheme, to take these results as applicable to this case.
The amount of rainfall, as recorded at Cordeaux during eight
months, September, 1875, to August 1876, was 16 '92 inches.
1-20 of 16-os inches on
square miles
Storage capacity of Loddon
Reservoir assumed as full
190 million gallons
-at commencement of
the dry period .. . . 1,446 ~
Total available for supply . 1,636 ~
Deduct evaporation from 408
acres for the period at
32-5 inches 301 ~
1,335 „
or 112 days supply at the rate of 12 million gallons daily.
The depths and contents of the smaller reservoirs are not given by
Mr. Maiming—they would not however materially affect the result
w'hen evaporation is taken into account.
Assuming that one-third of the rain could have been stored, then
of 16-92 inches of rain from
151 square miles .. .. 1,269 million gallons
Quantity in the full reservoir 1,446 ~
Total 2,715
Deduct evaporation as before 301 ~
2,414
Equivalent to 201 days’ supply at 12 million gallons, whereas the dry
period extended over 240 days.
However efficient in ordinary seasons, it is very evident that the
Loddon scheme would be insufficient to give the requisite supply
during a period such as that experienced last year, and the extended
project to include the Kangaloon and Wingecarribee must now be
considered.
This Wingecarribee Swamp is described as six miles in length,
and of varying widths from 60 chains downwards ; it measures 1,170
acres in area, and its average depth is stated to be about 20 feet; its
surface is more or less covered by a quaking bog, bearing water-plants
and mosses. It receives the drainage of about square miles ; its
natural outlet is by the Wingecarribee River into the Wollondilly, and
thence into the Lower Nepean by the Warragamba. The surface
level of the water has been found to be about 2,244 feet over the sea.


In addition to this, Mr. Manning proposes to intercept the drain-
age of square miles, running into the Kangaloon Creek and
Nepean, or Mittagong River.
From these sources it is stated that 20 million gallons, or more,
daily could in all seasons be taken, and by means of wrought-iron pipes
and conduit delivered into the tunnel reservoir at Loddon 1,100 feet
below the Wingecarribee.
At very considerable personal labour Mr. Manning has recently
taken the levels over the country between Wingecarribee and Loddon,
and the section so made has been handed to me ; it shows a very rough
country, and one which for purpose of a pipe line and conduit is
certainly not favourable. No doubt, however, it could be much
improved by further examination and survey.
An inspection of the locality, with all the information I could
obtain, appeared to indicate that a considerable supply could be
derived from this source. Mr, Hanrahan, on old resident, informed
me that I saw the water at its lowest, and there was then a stream of
about three million gallons daily running into the swamp at its upper
end, and, in addition, in every direction small rills of water were
trickling down the hill sides, in quantity which would add consider-
ably to the total volume. Scarcely any open water was to be seen.
At the surface of the swamp, upon which cattle -were grazing, a
twenty-foot pole did’not fathom the depth in several places when tried,
but a plummet suspended to string could not be got through the mass
of vegetation.
The outlet from the swamp into the Wingecarribee at the time I
saw it was running in a large volume, owing to a heavy rain of eight
or ten hours duration, which had fallen in the previous night, and
could not be taken therefore as an indication of the ordinary flow.
In consequence of the analysis of the Wingecarribee water,
as given in the report of the Commission, being somewhat unfavour-
able in regard to the volatile matter, 3 grains per gallon indicating a
somewhat large amount of organic impurity, a further analysis has
been made by the Government Analyst, which will be found in the
Appendix, page 47. *
The fact has been brought to my notice that the river which drains
the swamp is occasionally dry. This indicates that seasons do occur
when the swamp would have to be drawn upon as a reservoir. It is a
matter for consideration how far it is suited for this purpose. Pure as
the water now is —without any demand on its volume beyond that of
the overflow by the river and loss by evaporation—it might
be otherwise when 10 or 12 million gallons daily were withdrawn from
it and probably some of the vegetation now immersed became dry ;
the conditions would then be altered, and a process of decay and change
would be continually going on, which might alter materially the pre-
sent pure condition of the water.
The country round the swamp and Kangaloon Creek is very fertile,
the soil consisting of decomposed trap ; and every portion of the
district is, I believe, alienated, with exception of the area of the swamp
* Establishing a purity unsurpassed by the water of any scheme examined by Mr. Clark.


itself. It is being rapidly cleared of timber and converted into pastur-
age for cattle. To a small extent it is used for agriculture. Its value
is said to be from £lO to £l2 per acre to the agriculturist, and I should
apprehend would become the seat of a large population.
The plans and data with which I have been furnished by Mr.
Manning are necessarily very incomplete. He has, however, estimated
the cost of the entire project at l£ million sterling, and, when com-
pleted, its daily delivery at 30 million gallons of water.
There are no data to enable me to estimate this latter quantity
except those which have been already applied to Lake Loddon ; nor
have I any means of determining the storage capacity of the Winge-
carribee Swamps, or amount of evaporation from a reservoir, nearly
filled with growing vegetable matter, the presence of which diminishes
the storage capacity and increases the rate of evaporation.
In the absence therefore of any observations of the rainfall of
this district, or of the discharge of the rivers, I adopt those above
referred to, for the dry period of eight months in 1875-6 ; and I may
here add that while I hold an opinion that the Wingecarribee Swamp
is unsuited to act as a storage reservoir, I am desirous to give the full
advantage to the statement of the promoter of this scheme, by taking
a part of its waters.
On the occasion of my visit Mr. Manning pointed out what appeared
a suitable site for a reservoir at Kangaloon ; he since informs me that
“ a simple crib and earth dam, 29 feet high, and chains over all,
would throw back a sea of water second only to the Loddon Lake.”
This, however, would require verification by actual survey ; for the
purpose of estimate, however, I will assume that one or more such sites
could be found where by the construction of dams it would be possible
to impound at reasonable cost as much water as has been calculated
for Lake Loddon.
Under this supposition we shall then have the entire drainage area
comprised in the several sites, as follows ;
Loddon square miles.
Kangaloon .. .. .. ~
Wingecarribee .. .. .. 18-|- ~
Total .. .. ,,
Taking then l-20th of the rainfall 16 92 inches as recorded at Cor-
deaux, during the dry period of eight months before referred to, as the
quantity passing into the reservoirs, it will amount to 593 million
gallons.
Then —
From rainfall . . .. .. 593 million gallons.
Quantity stored, assumed as twice
the quantity in Loddon Reservoir 2,892 ~
Total
3,485 „
602 „
Deduct evaporation 2 x 301'
2,883 „


an amount equivalent to 240 days’ supply, at the rate of 12 million
gallons per day, which would empty the storage reservoirs at the end
of such a period of eight dry months.
Mr. Manning states that the cost of these works will be “
million of money.”
I have also endeavoured to form an estimate with the information
before me. To do this, however, it has been necessary to assume
many quantities which could alone be ascertained by detailed surveys,
which I have little doubt, from an inspection of the sections, would
rather tend to increase than diminish the amount. Exclusive of land,
compensation, &c., my estimate for the works executed, as proposed,
with wrought iron pipes, &c., amounts to £1,136,000. This sum
includes the cost of two pipes, each 24 inches in diameter, for the
lower or Loddon portion of the scheme, each theoretically capable of
delivering 7£ million gallons in twenty-four hours. The sum also
includes the cost of one 26-inch pipe between Wingecarribee and
Loddon, capable of delivering 6-J million gallons per day theoretically.
In the event of an addition to the daily 12 million gallons becoming
necessary at any future time, an additional 54£ miles of pipes would
be required, costing £556,000 for the increase to the supply of 6
million gallons, supposing that from the source under consideration
water be available.
The wrought-iron pipes which are proposed for conveying the
water to Sydney are used in America, but I am not aware that, up to
the present time, they have been used in England, or by English
engineers.
When the pressure exceeds 300 or 400 feet of head, wrought-iron
is undoubtedly better suited to bear such excessive pressure, and the
concussions liable to be brought upon it, than cast iron. It is known,
however, that when buried in the ground, wrought-iron does not resist
corrosion so well as cast-iron. 1 have known wrought-iron to be used
for gas-pipes, and when the asphaltum, with which they are always
coated, was perfect, the pipes were durable ; but where, from any
cause, such as making a connection, or otherwise, any part of the
iron was exposed to the action of the soil, a hole speedily followed,
and the pipes were ultimately removed, owing to the large escape of
the gas from this cause.
It is proposed that the wrought-iron pipes, which are riveted
longitudinally, and across to form the joints, should be coated with
Angus Smith’s solution inside and out, in the same way that is now
ttie universal practice for the protection of cast-iron pipes ; this is done
by immersing the pipe in the molten liquid and boiling them in it for
about twenty minutes; so applied it forms an efficient protection.
Where however the seams would have to be riveted in the pipe-trench,
to join together the different lengths, the solution can only be painted
on, and it is precisely at these joints, as with a steam boiler which
they resemble, where corrosion would take place. Everyday experience
will render familiar examples of the corrosion of plate iron when used
for water tanks.
Bessemer iron, which is rolled out from an ingot, and is therefore
homogeneous and unlike ordinary rolled plate, which is lamellar in its
structure, would be far better suited for such work than the best of


ordinary plate. The corrosive action of the soil would affect this also,
hut in a less degree, as it would take place only at the surface.
A further consideration in the case is, how far it is desirable to
undertake a work of this nature, with a material dependent in so great
a degree upon a varnish for its permanence.
Regarding the motive power, which Mr. Manning expects might
be obtained from pressure, due to the height from which the water is
brought, it may be well to explain, that by the usual arrangements
no effective power can be obtained save by an extra expense in cost of
The size of a pipe is usually calculated to be that which will at
the given inclination deliver the quantity of water required.
In this case the distance of the inlet of the pipe at Madden’s
Plains from Waverley is 32 miles; the difference of level is 1,062, less-
-320 or 742 feet.
A pipe to deliver 6 million gallons flowing continuously during
twenty-four hours must be 22 inches diameter, and the water will
issue with a velocity of 4 - 66 feet per second, or about 3 miles per hour
only, to supply that quantity.
If then any form of machine be interposed, in order to obtain
useful work, the flow will by the resistance it has to overcome be
checked, and the discharge diminished in proportion to the resistance
interposed. _ ...
To obtain motive power from water flowing through a pipe, it is
therefore evident that a pipe of larger diameter than is actually neces-
sary to supply the city must be adopted, involving an extra expense.
In the case of hydraulic gold-mining, jets of water are used of
much smaller diameter than the pipe which supplies them, as in the
case of fire hose attached to an ordinary street hydrant; if, however,
these jets be increased in number till their collective areas approach to
that of the pipe which supplies them, they will fail to act as jets.
It may be remarked that the pipes included in the estimate are
calculated to discharge theoretically 3 million gallons daily in excess of
the required quantity ; this is necessary to ensure efficient working,
and to meet occasional difficulties when repairs of pipes are required-;
but I am not of opinion that it would be desirable to apply any power
which might be derivable from this increased size, to any purpose
foreign to the delivery of water for the supply of the city.
Yaluable as such a power would be, especially in extinguishing
fires, such a pressure as is here contemplated could not with safety be
put upon the ordinary street mains and house fittings, which are calcu-
lated to bear from two to three hundred feet, and special pipes of the
necessary strength would require to be provided. There are many
other inconveniences attending the introduction of such extreme
pressures into the arrangements for town supplies.
The better plan in such a system is to control the flow of water by
a sluice placed at or near its upper end, while the pipe is left entirely
open at its lower end. By this arrangement all danger of bursting
the pipe by a sudden stoppage of the flow of water would be avoided.
This being the only one of the various schemes which is capable of
delivering water at a higher level than the Crown-street Reservoir, it
is necessary to ascertain the amount with which this scheme should


8
To be lifted to the height of
Paddington Peservoir..
214
From Crown-street
141
73 feet.
And one-third of Imillion = 500,000,
to be lifted—
To Waverley .. .. say
320
From Paddington
214
106 feet.
be credited, in order to make a just comparison with others not possess-
ing this advantage.
It has been ascertained that of the present population of 167,146
of Sydney and it subsurb, that 146,000 reside on an area of the town
which can be supplied by the Crown-street Reservoir, and that 21,000
are on an area above that level—the latter being the population of
Cook and Fitzroy Wards, together with portions of Paddington, Rand-
wick, and Waverley. The present proportion would, therefore, be about
seven to one. This proportion mustinerease every year, as the high level
area is of very limited extent, whilst the low level area may be taken
as extending as far as far as Parramatta, and the settlement per acre
is much more dense than is ever likely to be on the high land about
Paddington ; moreover, all water used for manufacturing purposes
would, of course, be supplied from the low level.
Such being the case, one-eighth of the daily supply be
estimated as requiring to be pumped from and if it
be assumed that the higher or Waverley levels be one-third of that
area, the quantity, when 12 million gallons per day are supplied, will
be as follows :
12 million
= million per day
The above quantities lifted these respective heights will be equivalent
to lifting the entire quantity of million gallons to a height of 108
feet, and this would require an engine of 70 h.p., working twelve
hours per day. .
The cost of the above with necessary buildings, or of duplicating
the engine of 84 h.p., now in course of erection, is about £9,000.
The cost of establishment and coals, at £l per ton, stores, and
upholding will amount to £1,750 per annum, which capitalized
£1,750 per annum, at twenty years’purchas e.. 35,000
Cost of engines, buildings, &c 9,000
£44,000
Which sum of £44,000 must be taken in reduction of the estimate of
this scheme for purpose of comparison, reducing it to £1,092,000.
FINIS.
WILLIAM CLARK.


Wuo
flSiO^T
d£VU
I 4
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINQHAME AND CO., PRINTERS,
186 PITT STREET.






‘ 11 hi : : ■" ”■ " 11 — J=j — : —— 'I'
UPPER NEPEAN
LEVELS
Pheasants Hast 436ft.
Praughtoms Pass 420
Prospect Thun, 170 ~195
Grown, SfReservoir 141
Sixncuje, 7110 MilL. (jails.
Tunnels f lOi miles
LODDON & WJNGECARB1BEE
LEVELS
Wzngecurriiee 2230P
JTangaJioon, 2030
Laheloddarv 1171
WaverLey 320
Storajjej 13,8 S3 Mill: galls:
Tunnels, Si miles •-"
V •
/
\ SYDNEY WfM SUPPLY
PLAN shoring the PONTES of the
\ UPPER NEPEAF AND LODDON AND WGECMHIBEE
\
j WATER SCHEMES.
f H R j Scale of Miles
:
* . •;
funnels shovnthus ; V
CaasJs f- „ -■ A A ‘
pipes /'V #
\
V JL-'' '%=/ & f PMOTOHr-MMtM#M» AT TMI •OVT, PWHtM OmPS.
'X i rvoiwv. m* wirr* *»Lm
\e? \ **
1 \ *
■'
1
V
V \ „ J* /•
\ C «•»** V 1 V
V * \ y *
. ■■ —*■ jf'' >
/■ V
\ &
\
C"f*W \
r —r - ' a
A, 1 A
■*7 . ' *’7* 2230
\- \fT2w
/ *
V* -X-'m
/ \» tO’P" «0WHfifT/r
l/» /tary’ 1 ’ 5 " feiji,
\ „ \
J >
'■V- /
1 "X
W. TU y* I »
X ...>. %
# aAA-
r . /
. f V V
J \ \} \ W KBr'
Wa-v-Vy
§ ©
> / -A-i—
. « x —/ #• 1
.y
Ax flW**
AkKS?>x
/ W\ U* /vA
v .' o/~V r *5—^
!/ X «y — y/Y
/X 7 \ 7 __o*r \
\ . .1/, X/
”/ ■ v ' 1 ' J
4> 'Xr
y 1 ]y *» v xjNhk,
■* yrJ-^
yPfOAi f v c*t» n
' V > r / '"A x
Y*% x i4, X- <j
\ \ K \-yA' A
\ V 'WH \jfh % !
\ V \ * A \\ -:Vr /
\ ?■ XA A
V>\ “'Of ■■•*■.«, J l)v - / LAKMjmJk
--''XT' X In
./" \&™yk '">■' ‘) / v-xfe v '“
/S lAKt J I \ LStw>v
', \„4julawarra? -.
V\ t £
i ■ ,
e
■ V • s
>. & \
V S I
S' . \_jsssa-—
**»> \\ —\ , >v \ V
, , jpx —fxno , \
3 A-"Vjj JgU—o \ / fi »V \ J
•ax u V-l I -a„ \ 3
> — 3 —'y / X. / X \ i \ C / 5 * 55^
T r A r-O v X t / M /t r V/ A
<1 ' - — t *r£hi S ' i ,,,—, < p 1 A « ) ! \ /
Aa : y \ \. A-y V'' '
JS-A . r. / _J. je! I _ i
\ J t gf jMtx Dl\ \ \ '-' \ 1 e A X
-A' -, -3a\ y A/
ji v ., /'■-"" /
A caa r-> 4%f\^
£ l fj / }
A. A- - i 5 —s \W\ )f Sr¥ J® p / IPs
' v A y y£ ' j a '■* w
il/ v ,at f . ■ \ A i
■ r i r * s- a in
- 0* . „ m ® - - — - Al
■sg::.--.- ■ X t ■ t mrm*
-• TrT ~ ri ■ 1 —— 8 tl !£


-4 ‘ U
% y
blftLlO
y
•
M
- -v
\
" " • *
ff^y
| e - HOV1992 ”))
4
'
♦
* - ,
■
* /•
t
»
\
•
0 * ' , 1
9
m *
« 4
•
