





SYLLABUS
OF THE TWO
COURSES OF LECTURES
OF
GENERAL JURISPRUDENCE
DELIVERED AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
DURING THE YEARS 1859,
“To discover one new link of that C p a 'indissolubly fastened
’ aSsSrifrtt? tuo “
Sir James Mclntosh's Introductory Discourse on the
Study of the Law of Nature and of JSatxons.
“Themagnanimity of uprightness, all f t i® ti ® l ®g at *“ S^ e f 1 1I aiS t |sf path of
. '
Professor Smyth's Fourth Lecture on the French Devolution




This Syllabus is published chiefly for the use of the Students
attending my Lectures, to diminish their trouble in taking notes
and to enable them without difficulty at any future period to
refresh their recollection of my Lectures, and to extend their
further readings into the various stores of learning into which
it has been my duty to guide their minds.
At the same time it is possible that these short summaries
may also be of service to others than the Students who attended
my Lectures; and may perhaps, by bringing into one view the
various topics which present a practical view of General Juris-
prudence, throw some glimmering light on those “ Fundamental
Verities which” Lord Bacon said, “are like the lights of Hea-
ven, —not only beautiful and entertaining in themselves, —but
give light and evidence to other things, that without them could
not be seeu or known ”
JOHN F. II AUG HAVE.
University, Sydney,
2(BA September, 1801.


SUBJECTS OF THE LECTURES.
first course.— trinity term.
Lecture 1. Introductory Lecture.
2. On our Constitutional Law.
3. On our Legislative System.
4. On our Judicial System.
5. On the Office of Justice of the Peace.
6. On the Common Law of England.
7. On the Law of Real and Personal Property.
8. On International Law and Commercial Jurisprudence-
9. On the Civil Law and Equity Jurisprudence.
10. Ou Modern Conveyancing and Testamentary Dispo-
sitions.
SECOND COURSE. —MICHAELMAS TERM.
Lecture 11. On Municipal Corporations.
12 On Joint Stock Companies.
13. On Commercial Partnerships.
14. On Principal and Agent.
15. On Trustees and Executors.
16. On Mortgagors and Mortgagees.
17. On Landlord and Tenant
18. On Husband and Wife.
19. On Parent and Child.
20. On Master and Servant,


Thk following Summaries can scarcely be fairly criticised without
reference to the following extracts from my Introductory Lec-
ture of March sth, 1860:
Page 11.—“ Unless actual Laws exist and can be cited to you as
founded on those great principles of Justice and Reason with which
I would seek to imbue your minds, and which lie at the root of all
sound Law, our Readings on General Jurisprudence will be without
practical illustrations of the great truths I am appointed to teach ;
and, on the other hand, unless our Readings be conducted so as to
exemplify and explain the practical duties of our daily life, I shall
despair of leaving any useful or beneficial trace of our progress on
your minds or memories.shall endeavour to keep our minds alto-
gether free from those theoretical, and in a great measure speculative
inquiries, which might perhaps appear to be popularly included
under the term “General Jurisprudence,” but which I believe to be
of little practical benefit to any student, certainly to any youthful
student of this University ”
So at page 14: —“ University Lectures on Jurisprudence are, as
Blackstone said, addressed to you as part of a liberal aud polite edu-
cation, and as an essential part of the Education of Gentlemen and
Scholars; and will have no more of a professional character than is
necessary to elucidate each subject.”


To the like effect I thus explained to ray audience at page 29 that
my intentions were threefold: —“first, to show you the class of Authors
whose writings you should peruse;—secondly, to point out to you
how noble and ennobling is our subject in itself; —and thirdly, to
warn you against all narrow views of our .subject, which would
impede your future progress in studying Jurisprudence. By this
mode of treating our subject, I thought I might secure, if not
increase, your veneration for the extensive and almost exhaustless
stores of philosophy which lie open to your enquiries under the
name of General Jurisprudence.” —“ I thought further that by
this mode of treating our subject, I might excite your curiosity
most effectually on our several topics; communicate some general
knowledge on some of the points touched upon, give some hints that
may be useful to you in your future studies, —call into activity
all the nobler qualities of your hearts; —encourage a love of con-
stitutional freedom and of mild government;— a love of peaceful
industry and of lawful authority, which, to be patiently sub-
mitted to, must be founded upon Reason and Justice; —inculcating
and impressing upon you a sense of duty and responsibility as the
basis, and only firm and lasting basis, of every sound system of
Jurisprudence.”
So again at page 43 :—“ The topics of Jurisprudence to be consi-
dered by us, the mere titles of subjects set forth on the prospectus,
and thus rapidly glanced over in this Lecture, will show you at once
how “ the wholt compass of human affairs ” lies here displayed be-
fore us; how “the principles of original Justice” have been adapted by
the “ collected Reason of Ages ” “to the infinite variety of human
concerns ;” and how “the cautious and unwearied exertions of wise
men ” have, through a long course of time, formed a science which,
I trust, will be found, in your experience also, “ to quicken and in-
vigorate all your understandings,” and to “discipline all your mental
fatuities.” It is in this light, Gentlemen, as a discipline of the mental
faculties, that I would especially wish you to bring all your moral
and intellectual powers to bear upon the science now placed before
you ; so that hereafter in all the difficulties of social life, in all your
intercourse with men of every possible opinion, and under every
varied phase of personal and political character, and in every relation
of social life, you may possess an unerring Catholic Jurisprudence,
afely guiding all your opinions and conduct.”


I would now commit these rough notes of my Readings to the
criticism of the Colony, with the same words that I used at the con-
clusion of my Introductory Lecture :
“ No one can be more sensible than myself of the deficiencies and
short-comings of these Lectures, ,and I might find many and suffi-
cient excuses in the circumstances under which I accepted my ap-
pointment ; though I would rather seek my excuses in the vast and
immeasurable subjects of these Lectures.”
“ Enough for me that I have done my best to fulfil my duty towards
you, and towards the University; and it will be hereafter the highest
reward and gratification to me, if any of you should hereafter look
back upon these Lectures, as having in any degree given new vigour
to your intellectual progress; —in any degree opened new stores of
learning to your enquiries;—in any degree introduced you to au-
thors, whose guiding stars may henceforth shine on any portion of
your mental existence, and assist you to steer your course, manfully
and honourably, through the troubled seas of this Life/’


SUMMARY OF LECTURE. IT
INTRODUCTORY LECTURE.
ON THE INFLUENCE OF THE JUDGES AND LAWYERS OF ENGLAND
IN ESTABLISHING AND DEFENDING OUR CONSTITUTIONAL
LIBERTIES.
Introductory remarks on the Common Law of England and the
connection of its study with that of General J urisprudence.
The origin and progress of the English Inns of Court: Dugdale,
Blackstone, Reeves, Lord Campbell's Lives, &c.
Historical division of the Constitutional History of England into
three epochs. These Epochs defined and described.
During the first Epoch; from King Alfred to the Reformation, ob-
serve
The peculiar power and influence of the Clergy, as the Chief de-
positaries of learning under the Saxons and Aormans.
The relation of the Common Law J udges to the Ecclesiastical system.
A’Becket and the Constitutions of Clarendon.
Chronicles and annals as to these contests. Hallam s remarks.
The gradual establishment of the authority of 1 rohibitions and
Supremacy of the Common Law.
« Ranulphus de Meschines.” "The great and worthy Earl of Che-
ster ” of Coke. The " invictus causidicus ” —of Malmesbury.
The part taken by Lawyers during the Reformation.
Hall, Holingshed, Burnet, Reeves,Yol.l. of Parliamentary History.
The speech of the "Gentleman of Greyes Inn" upon the Sta-
tutes of 25 Hen. VIII. The great effect of this speech.. .
The speech of Mr. Atkinson of the Inner Temple in opposition to
the Act of Supremacy.
During the second Epocn; under the Stuarts from Jas. I. to Queen
Anne, observe: —
The attitude assumed by the Protestant Hierarchy towards the
Puritans, the Articuli cleri of Bancroft, the claims of Laud
against the Common Lawyers.
The Strafford correspondence, the Westminster Assembly and the
Commonwealth. Clarendon’s remarks, Hallam s, Macaulay s.
The conduct of Eliot, Pym, Hampden, Selden, Prynne and other
eminent Lawyers and the scope of their arguments during the
contest with Charles I.—The debate on the Nolumus Clause.


The Restoration of Charles 11. and subsequent perils of our
Constitution.
The Revolution of 1688. Hallam and Macaulay's views compared.
The Convention Parliament. The various difficulties then exist-
ing for settlement by the English Nation. The divisions
of Parties and Statesmen in both Houses of Parliament,
All the Constitutional difficulties reconciled by Somers.
Summary of the First two Epochs :
The chief points to be noticed during these two epochs are :
1. The conduct of the Monarchs and the Nobles.
2. „ „ Men of learning, whether ecclesiastical or lay.
3. ~ „ Judges and the Common Lawyers.
During the third Epoch, from George I. to Queen Victoria ob-
serve :
1. The improvement given to the Judicial position by the inde-
pendence of the Judges.
2. The rise of the Middle Class and Diffusion of Knowledge.
3. The settlement of the Colonial Empire after the American War.
Compare the American with the French Revolution and the
part taken by Lawyers during each. Burke, Smythe.
During the last Fifty years observe the conduct of the Common
Lawyers
1. Macintosh, Romilly and other Lawyers, in Law Reform.
2. Brougham and other Lawyers, in Parliamentary Reform.
3. Daniell O’Connell, Shiel, and other Lawyers, in restoring
Religious Freedom.
4. Roebuck and other Lawyers, in Colonial Reform.
5. Wentworth and other Lawyers, in obtaining our own Colonial
Liberties.
Concluding observations upon the present position of the Com-
mon Law, as the basis of the English, American, and Austra-
lian Constitutions.
The advantage of an antiquarian knowledge of our English Con-
stitutional History, in order to appreciate our Colonial von-
stitutions
Lawyers


SUMMARY OF LECTURE 11.
ON OUR CONSTITUTIONAL LAW.
Importance of sound opinions on this subject in the present age.
Connection of this Lecture with the other topics of Lecture.
Definitions of “ Constitution.” Dr. Arnold’s Inaugural Lecture.
Division of our Constitutional History into three Epochs:—
First Epoch: Magna Charta, John & Hen 111. Coufirmatio Char-
tarum, 25 Ed. 1., and Articuli Super Chartas, 28 Ed. I. De
Tallagio non concedendo 34 Ed. I.
Other important Statutes of Ed. I.
The Revocation of Ordinances, 15 Ed. 11.
The Jury Laws of Kd 111. The Constitutional Statutes of Ed. 111.
The Law of Treason 25 Ed. 111.
The Constitutional Importance of the Deposition of Richard 11.
The Act of Hen. IV. altering the Electoral Franchise. Sir Francis
Palgrave’s remarks thereon.
The amendments of the Electoral Law during Hen. VI.
The Treason Law established by 11 Hen. VII.
The Constitutional Statutes of Hen. VIII. and Queen Elizabeth.
Summary of the Constitutional principles established during the
first Epoch.
Second Epoch : Constitutional progress under the Stuarts.
The points at issue between the English Nation and James I. and
Charles I.
The "Great Rebellion.” Its Constitutional Importance.
The Revolution of 1688. Establishment of the Parliamentary
Title to the Crown.
Other Constitutional points.
Third Epoch : Constitutional progress since George I.
The progress of public opinion and rise of the Middle Classes.
The American war of Independence.
The Roman Catholic Emancipation Act.
The Reform movement.
Books referred to; Leading Cases.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE 111.
ON OUR LEGISLATIVE SYSTEM.
•Introductory observations. • , . . . , ,
•Origin of the preamble and enacting words of Statutes.
•Comparison of Imperial and Colonial Forms of preambles.
Intention, proper objects and limitations of Legislative Action.
,'How Legislative Action is distinguished from, and how connected.-• •
with, the Executive Authority. De Lolme.
iln what sense Colonists “ bring out” with them the Laws of Eng-
land.
Limitations of Colonial Legislation. Their reason and operation '.v:V.v.\v !
reservations in the Governor’s Commission of specific topics for
the Quern's assent. Separate consideration of these reservations,
j The Constitutional foundations of our Legislative System, such as:
1. The Hoyal Prerogative of Assent preserved, but for the public
good since 1688.
2. The Executive Authority kept distinct from the Legislative
Chambers; but the “ Ministers ” are Members of Parliament and
responsible to the people.
8. The Bicameral question, or necessity of two Chambers of Legis-
lature. The arguments pro and con. The present result.
'4. No direct Legislative power remains in the people after election.
5. The Construction of Legislative Houses subject to variation.
Burke’s speech to the Electors of Bristol.
Webster’s comparison of Representation with Delegation.
The mischiefs of Delegation shortly considered.
Legal decisions bearing on the above topics of Constitutional Juris-
prudence :
Ashby v. White-.—Lord Holt’s doctrine as to the Elective fran-
chise.
Stockdale v. Hansard. —The power of the Imperial Parliament and
its relation to the Judicature.
Fenton v. Hampton. —The position of Colonial Legislative As-
semblies and their claim to Lex Parliament!
Concluding observations.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE IV.
ON OUR JUDICIAL SYSTEM.
Brief Survey of connection of this Lecture with Constitutional
Law and legislative System.
Various modes of considering the topics of this lecture.
1) Historically, 2) Analytically, 3) Practically.
x. If Historically, consider the conduct of the Judges and Law-
yers of England during the three Epochs mentioned in the
Introductory Lecture.
During the first Epoch, —trace the Judicial authority, opposing
the Ecclesiastical innovations, and checking the Civil and
Canon Laws as dangerous to the Common Law.
During the second Epoch,—trace the power of the Crown over
the Judges, as claimed and exercised by all the Stuart
princes, especially James I. and Charles I.; its great and
incurable mischiefs.
During the third Epoch, —observe the restoration of the Inde-
pendence of the Judges; and the establishment of our pre-
sent Judicial System, in full efficiency in all its branches.
11. If Analytically, consider the various Constitutional principles
which distinguish the System of English Judicature, as :
The separation of the Judicial Authority from the Executive
and Legislative functions; The Sections of Magna Charta
as to certainty of Justice; The publicity of all English .Judi-
cial proceedings; The right of the Jury to decide the
criminality of all offences; The duty of the Legislature to
to fix all punishments or at least their boundaries.
111. If Practically, consider the various Courts of Judicature, as of
Common Law, Equity, Insolvency, Admiralty both here and
in England, also the modes of appeal and the objects of
appeal.
The general nature of magisterial Jurisdiction, and of the
Quarter Sessions and District Courts.
The various Colonial Acts The Charter of Justice;—The
District Courts Act of 1858, &c., &c.
The position of Barristers and Attorneys, as part of our Judicial
system.
The general result satisfactory, in whatever mode considered.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE V.
ON THE OFFICE OF JUSTICE OF THE PEACE.
Nature of this Office as part of our Judicial System.
Antiquity of the appointment and its duties. Blackstone, Dalton.
Abolition of property qualification in English Municipalities.
So in the Colonies. The Municipal Mayors ex officio Magistrates.
The general intention and effect of these alterations.
The subject now practically considered by means of
Sir John Jervis’s Acts 11 & 12 Vic. c. 42 as to the Ministerial
duties of J. P ; —c. 43 as to the Judicial duties of J. P; —c. 44
as to the Protection of J. P»
Importance of these distinctions and divisions of the subject.
Blackstone’s Text, p. 354, as to protection of the unpaid Magi-
stracy :
As, on the one band, great lenity and indulgence shewn to them, when
acting as Magistrates, without favouritism or corrupt motive; —
So, on the other hand, malicious or tyrannical abuse of their office ia
most severely punished.
1. Ministerial. Preliminary proceedings in Ministerial matters.
Rules to be observed by the Justices in Petty Sessions as to the
Summons or Warrant, Hearing, Depositions, Commitment,
' " f . Recognizances, Bail, &cr
2. Judicial. General observations on these duties, as:
Must sit in open Court, and allow publicity ; —Conform exactly to
the Statutes giving the Judicial power Proceed regularly by
; ; Complaint or Information, hearing evidence; examinations and
.’ / cross-examinations of adjournments, adjudications,
costs, and punishments.
3. Protection of Justices. Blackstone’s Statement of the principle.
Personal interest in the matter of Jurisdiction to be avoided.
Time for bringing actions against Magistrates. Ground of such
actions. .
The Colonial Statutes adopting Sir John Jervis’s Acts. /
Various subsequent Colonial Statutes, affecting the Magistrate s
office or duties.
General conclusions and observations, as to this part of our Juris-
prudential machinery.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE VI.
ON THE COMMON LAW OF ENGLAND.
Tlie “ Lex Terrae ” mentioned in Magna Carta, and other Statutes.
Its power before Parliamentary Statutes, a 3 embodying continuously
Public Authority. De Lolme’s remarks thereon.
On the rise and progress of the English common Law. Hale. Coke.
Its history during the separation and establishment, of the Legis-
lative, Executive, and Judicial Functions and Government.
Blackstone. Hallam. Laws of Alfred, Edgar.
Reports of Commissioners on Public Records.
Permanency and antiquity of the Common Law.
Spence’s Summary of the English Common Law :
as to The rights of Property, real and personal, descent and heirship ;
The Royal Domains and Royal Property; The Public Domains,
as distinguished from the Royal Domains; The Feudal System
before the Norman Kings: —
as to The Municipal Institutions of the Anglo-Saxons; Their Judi-
cial Institutions, and The Councils of the Kings :
as to The several changes in the above under the Norman Kings;
The transition state of the Common Law from Hen. 11. to Ed. L
The Common Law as to Property, Pleading and Procedure.
The Maxims of the Common Law, where recorded and evidenced,
and their value.
Examination of some of the most familiar Common Law Maxims,
such as: —,
Salus populi suprema lex. Rex nunquam moritur. Rex non
potest peccare.
Nemo potest exuere patriam. Audi alteram partem.
Communis error facit jus. Übi eadern ratio ibi idem jus.
Übijus ibi remedium. Sic utere tuo ut alienum non leedas.
Cujus est solum ejus est usque ad caelum. Caveat emptor,
De vigilantibus non dormientibus jura subvenient.
Nemo tenetur seipsum accusare.
Summary of the above.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE VII.
ON THE LAW OF REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY.
The importance of clear and sound views at to the abstract right of
Property, being one of the foundations of Society.
Sir James Mclntosh’s Introductory Discourse and Lord Bacon’s
Advancement of Learning, Book 11.
Modern errors of Socialism, Communism, &c., &c.
Williams on the Principles of the Law of Real and Personal property.
Examination of the different interests which must arise in all
11 property,” as Inheritable property, Joint Ownership, Life
Interests.
Lord St. Leonard’s succinct view of the English Law of property.
Littleton and Gilbert’s “ Tenures.” The topics of these treatises.
Dalrymple’s “ Feudal Tenures.” The general scope of this work.
The foundation of property in Land is Improvement', in personalty
Possession.
Title ” to be distinguished from “property.”
The English division into legal and equitable Interests.
The Statute of Uses and its operation and effect. Sanders on Uses.
The rise of the Commercial Interest of England, and its effects on
all the English Laws of property, both real and personal.
The Ecclesiastical system introduced many of our present rules as
to personal estates and property.
Reports of the Real Property Commissioners.
What cannot be property ; Anomalous kinds of property ; as Shares
in Companies, Tolls, Partnership in Land, good will of a Trade.
The Equitable doctrine of conversion of Realty into Personalty
and vice vers&.
Heir looms defined and explained.
Technical division into Corporeal and Incorporeal hereditaments.
Collateral topics and subjects to be traced or considered as connected
with property; as the Law of Dower, Curtesy, Ac.
The tendency of some Judges to create a Judicial Code of Property
Law. Dangers of such a Code.
The modern amendments of Property Law. Their general scope.
Concluding remarks.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE VIII.
ON INTERNATIONAL LAW AND COMMERCIAL JURISPRUDENCE.
Importance of each of these subjects. Distinction between them.
I. History of International Law as a Science.
Division of the writers on this subject, 1. Ancient and 2. Modern.
1. Aristotle, Plato, Cicero, and the “Oracles of the Digest."
The scope of these ancient writers.
2. Grotius, Bacon, Selden, Hobbes, Cocciejus, Puffendorff, Zouche,
Loefler, Wicqueford, Barbeyrac, Bynkershoek, De Woolff>
Ueiueccius, Burlamaqui, Vattel, Montesquieu, Von Martens,
Hume, Tucker, Smith, Burke, Pale.y, Mclntosh, Ward,
Manning, Kent, Story, Phillimore.
The chief points of enquiry among these modern writers are :
1. The source of moral obligation upon nations, and on man in a
state of nature.
2. The boundaries of the Reason and Intellect, in defining public
laws and international duties.
3. The distinctions between the primary law of Nature and the
Secondary Law of Nature or “positive Law of Nations.”
4. The necessity of Revelation, to assist in defining obligations
natural and international.
The general result of modern investigations. a,nd experience has
been firmly tQ establish* a high, Code of International Moral Duty.
The AmpbiotyonV s Council, Achoean, League. Modern propo
sals for Congas of Nations.
11, History of the progress of Commercial Jurisprudence as a Science.
The mercantile relations to be hereafter considered, relating to
obligations, &c.
Lex Mercatoria. Laws of Oleron. Mercantile Usage. Its
authority and influence on Judicial Law.
Lord Mansfield, Sir W. Grant, Lords Stowell and Tenterden.
Mercantile topics of Jurisprudence, their intricacy and variety.
Consignor and Consignee’s rights, duties and liabilities, Mari-
time liens,' freight liabilities, Insurance claims, Collision
liabilities, Ss^yage.
Lead jpg Cases Maxims on Mercantile Law.. SwW>. Bsoow,


SUMMARY OF LECTURE IX.
ON THE CIVIL LAW AND EQUITY JURISPRUDENCE.
I Records of the Civil Law of Rome.
».«* a - d - 633 '
Thf^a”' Juris Civilis consists of The Insti-
tutes Digests, and the Imperial and New Constitutions.
_ . - 1. Studv i n 1151. Blackstone corrected by Hallam-
;;i n...
Summary of its topics. Introductory observaion^
The first 150 pages of Strahan's Domat «A*»TM»o
should he accurately considered; and where enquiry
desirable, followed out. throughout the
The want of legal authority in the Civil naw fc
• rr' ;i„i P T and other authorities.
British Empire. Tmda , ■ ■> P t; o n with the Civil Law.
The Canon Law usually noticedun connection with t
Its collection by Gratian into three 00 s ’ Boni face VIII.
The subsequent Decretals of Gregory
1298, John XXII. 1317, and other Popes, torm r
Juris Canonici Romam. .. e and Provincial
* As t 0 the E^gll " 25 & H VIII. c. 19, revived and con-
Constitutions. Statute ZO n.
firmed by 1 ®«. «• ted aud eMmm ed; also the
The Canons of 160 d ana 1 Cokej Holt>
VoI.V Concluding Chapter rapla.m'd
Topics of Equity Jurisprudence: such as fraud, aecden ,
infants, lunacy, fc-, fc- Performance, fc.
Subsequent Vises by Story, Spence, Jos,ah Smith, fc.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE X.
ON MODERN CONVEYANCING AND TESTAMENTARY DISPOSITIONS.
Historical Notices of the Anglo-Saxon Conveyances and Charters.
They contained all the essential parts of Modern Conveyances.
Turner’s Anglo-Saxons, Vol. I. Ten points to be noted.
Conveyancing under the Normans.
The introduction of Ffench in place of Saxon. Latin general till
Jas. I.
Sir John Cavendish’s Will, Latin and French. Chancellortoßich.il.
The Chartuary, 1534; The Book of Instruments, 1543 ; West’s
Symboloeography, 1594; Perfect Conveyancer, 1650; Perfect
Guide, 1654; “ President of Presidents,” 1655, &c.
Historical view of the changes in Instruments of Assurance, and in
the Study aud Practice of Conveyancing; Pigot, Booth, The
Shelley Settlement, Bradley, Fearne, Butler, Duval, Brodie, Hodg-
son, Bythewood, Sweet, Davidson, Martin, Christie, &c.
The present tendency of Precedents and the principles of their
formation and proper use. Maxims to be observed in adapting
them to practical operations of Conveyancing.
On the formal parts of Modern Deeds.
1. Commencement aud parties. 2. Recitals. 3. Witnessing part.
4. Parcels. 5. Habendum. 6. Covenants.
The logical intention and legal effect of this arrangement.
IT. On Testamentary Dispositions.
The origin of the abstract right to devise or bequeath.
The operation of a “revocative” or “ambulatory” Instrument.
The Anglo-Saxon right of devise restored by the Statute of Wills.
Comparison with the Roman and Continental Systems.
The historical view of the forms of Wills as Conveyances.
The different rules of Interpretation applicable to Wills.
Jarman’s statement of these Rules. Their general intention and effect.
The general tendency of the English Conveyancing Reforms.
The Reports of the Real Property Commissioners.
The Statute abolishing attendant Terms added £250,000 to the
annual value of Real Property in England.
The present position of this branch of Jurisprudence.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE XI.
ON MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS.
Introductory recapitulation of the First Course of these Lectures.
Divisio 1 and Arrangement of the topics of the second Course.
Reasons for selecting Municipal Corporations for the first Lecture.
, After “ Nations ” the largest and most effectual combination of
men for Common Advantage.
Consideration of Corporations under three Aspects, viz: Ist Roman,
2nd European, 3rd English.
I. Roman “Municipia” or “Communities” under the Civil Law.
Extracts from Domat’s Civil Law by Strahan.
The principles of the Civil Law as to these Communities.
11. European “Corporate Towns” among the continental Nations.
Their influence on the progress of Civilization in Spain, Holland,&c.
Their value in checking the various feudal despotisms, and in
preserving popular liberty.
Extracts from Guizot’s'Histoire de Civilization. Hallam.
111. English Corporations. General Summary of their History.
Guilds, Fraternities, Chartered Cities and Trading Towns under
the Anglo-Saxons and Normans.
Connection of English Corporations with the Establishment of the
English Representative System.
The forfeiture of their Charters by the Stuarts. Hallam, Macaulay.
The present state of the English Constitutional Law on this point.
Blackstone on Corporations, concluding Chapter to Vol. I.
Merewether’s Treatise on Corporations. Introductory Chapter.
The Constitutional advantages and difficulties of these Institutions.
The present English Municipal Corporation Reform Act.
The N. S. W. Act for establishing Municipal Institutions.
The Establishment of Municipalities in America, and the Colo-
nies of the British Empire.
Remarks by He Tocquevillo on the value of Municipalities in
America, as tending to give stability to the Republic.
Concluding Summary of this Lecture.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE XII.
ON JOINT STOCK COMPANIES.
Remarks on Joint Stock Companies, as the second most usual social
combination of men for common advantage.
Division of the Subject. Distinctions between Joint Stock Companies,
Corporations and Partnerships.
Utility of Joint Stock Companies: 1) Any possible amount of Ca-
pital may be subscribed and employed. 2) Small amounts may
be made usefully valuable. 3) Continuity of purpose may be ob-
tained and secured beyond lives of partners.
The vast projects which have in modern times been undertaken and
accomplished, and the various branches of National Industry
which have been encouraged by Joint Stock Companies.
Exclusive privileges are usual and necessary, to supply the absence
of personal enterprize and to preserve energetic Action.
These exclusive privileges are sometimes justified by other circum-
stances or special difficulties, as distance, dangers, wars, dec.
Ex. Russian Fur Comp. Turkey Comp. East India Comp.
The grant of these exclusive privileges is the easiest and most na-
tural way for the State to encourage the exertions of Citizens.
“Open” or “regulated” Companies, as the Dutch E. I. Company.
French Companies “en CommauditS,” and not “en Commandite.”
The advantages and disadvantages of each System.
As to the Legal principles applicable to Joint Stock Companies.
See J. W. Smith’s Compendium and the six points considered.
Two Rules of construction and constitution of most importance, viz:
1. However great the Capital, however complicated the arrange-
ments, however numerous the Shareholders, a Joint Stock Com-
pany is a Partnership; and as such is liable to all the Common
Law and Equities of Partnership, except where controlled by the
Legislative enactments or the charter or deed.
2. All ambiguities and obscurities of construction must be con-
strued in favor of the Public and against the Company.
Consideration of the English Statutes, consolidating the Law on
these topics to great precision and efficacy.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE XIII
ON COMMERCIAL PARTNERSHIPS.
Connection of this Lecture with the previous Lectures on Corpora-
tions and Joint Stock Companies, and with the next Lecture on
Principal and Agent.
The Civil Law on Partnership, Strahan’s Domat, Title VTIT.
1. Puffendorf’s Definition of Partnership:—“Contractus societatis est,
quo duo pluresve inter se pecuniam, res aut operas conferunt eo
fine, ut quod in.de redit lucri inter singulos pro ratft dividatur.”
Illustrations of each point in this definition.
2. How partnerships may be formed.
Consideration of the various modes of establishing partnerships.
3. How Partnerships may be dissolved.
Consideration of these dissolutions and consequences to all
parties.
4. As to the rights and liabilities of Partners inter se.
The principles of Jurisprudence fixing these rights and liabilities*
Importance of adhering to these first principles.
5. As to the rights of third parties against the Partners.
Distinctions in this respect from Sole Traders.
Modern importance of maintaining these distinctions accurately.
6. As to the rights of partners against third parties.
Dormant partners and their liabilities and rights. Examples.
Modern Partnership Deeds seek by specific Clauses to specify and
accomplish all the above mentioned objects.
The usual Clauses of such a Deed explained with reference to the
above six points.
1. Provision for the Partnership, objects and business accurately set
forth at Commencement.
2. Particulars of the Partnership as to Capital, Labour, Profits, &c.
3. Definite Term of Partnership or contingent dissolution.
4. As to partners’s rights and liabilities inter se, in signing securities,
trading, drawing profits, making up loss.
5. As to rights of third parties against Partners.
6. As to rights of Partners against third parties.
Concluding observations as to Partnerships.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE XIV.
ON PRINCIPAL AND AGENT.
Connection of this Lecture with the preceding Lectures on Corpo-
rations, Companies and Partnerships.
Definition and Characteristics of an Agent under General Juris-
prudence.
Modes of appointing Agents, their different powers and duties.
Different classes of Agents “ General ” and “ Special .”
Distinctions between “ Factors,” “ Brokers,” and “ Agents.”
General Maxims of Jurisprudence applicable to Agents, as :
Yicarius non habet vicarium ;
Delegatus non potest delegari, &c.
Eights and liabilities of Principal and Agent, inter se.
The Agent's duties :—To pursue the usual course of business in
transacting his Agency ; —To maintain perfect good faith to his
Principal and in his Duties; —To keep proper accounts of all the
Agency transactions.
Special duties of Mercantile Agents: : —To keep Goods with the
same care as if his own Goods ; —To insure as usual in the trade or
business of his Agency;—Not to sell on credit without the au-
thority of his principal; —Not to buy beyond authority of his
Agency.
Difference between ‘'remunerated” and "unremunerated” Agents.
The Principal's duties:— To pay all agreed and lawful Commis-
sions and allowances; —To pay all proper and reasonable expenses
incurred in the Agency; —To indemnify the Agent against all
lawful acts and liabilities on behalf of Principal.
Eights of third parties against Principals.
„ Principals „ Third parties
„ third parties „ Agents.
„ Agents „ Third parties.
Smith’s Compendium of Mercantile Law.
Extensions and amendments of the Imperial Criminal Law, as to
Bailees, Factors, Brokers, Agents, &c.
Colonial Statutes on the same subject.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE XV.
ON TRUSTEES AND EXECUTORS
Connection of this Lecture with the Lectures in the first Course on
Real and Per sonal Property, Civil Law and Equity Jurisprudence,
Modern Conveyancing and Testamentary Dispositions.
Great social importance and necessity of a due appreciation of this
Relation.
Present mistakes and misapprehensions on these topics.
Disinclination to accept these duties, the sources of this disin-
clination and their remedies.
Various modern proposals to pay Trustees for their duties.
Objections to this plan. Lord St. Leonard’s remarks thereon.
The difficulties and mischiefs arising from paying Trustees.
The payments of Trustees sometimes allowed in Equity suits. Consi-
deration of the circumstances under which such payments allowed.
Joint Stock Companies for trusts would be disadvantageous and
mischievous and open to special objections.
The mode in which modern legislation has proceeded on these topics.
Foundations of - these Fiduciary Relations not to be confounded
with the liabilities and duties of Contracts.
Practical points to be attended to by all trustees:—
1. As to the Trust deed and ascertaining its meaning and operation.
2. As to the Security of the trust funds and property.
3. As to acting with Co-trustees, when and how to be declined.
4. As to the trust duties and the principles of their performance.
5. As to settling trust difficulties and disputes as to the trust.
6. As to actions suits and payment of trust funds into Court.
All the above points must equally be attended to by executors,
administrators and persons in any fiduciary position.
Additional points arising as to executors and administrators.
1. Payment of Testamentary and Funeral expenses, &c.
2. Getting in the assets and realizing the property of the deceased.
3. Winding up the Estate, division of residue, and obtaining re-
leases from legatees or next of kin.
Observations on the topics of this Lecture, as connected with the
next Lectures on Mortgagors and Mortgagees and Landlords and
Tenants.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE XVI.
ON MORTGAGORS AND MORTGAGEES.
Importance of the Law of Debtor and Creditor in every system of
Jurisprudence.
As to “ obligations ” under the Civil Law. Strathan’s Domat.
The Seven points as to these debts discussed in the Civil Law.
1. The nature of a Mortgage and what may he mortgaged.
2. The several kinds of Mortgages and their creation.
3. The liabilities of Debtors to their Creditors and inter se.
4. The liabilities of Creditors to their Debtors and inter se..
5. As to the rights of creditors having or not having securities.
6. The substitution of creditors inter se, and transfer of debts.
7. The extinguishment of debts and releases by Creditors.
As to Mortgages under the English Common Law.
“ Statutes Merchant” and “ Statutes Staple” Blackstone Vol. 11.
The connection of the Feudal Law with the Civil Law on these points.
The Common Law doctrine of Conditional Conveyances.
Combination of this subject with the Civil Law of Contracts.
Sweet’s Note to Blackstone Vol. 11. Littleton s Tenures.
As to Mortgages considered in Courts oi Equity.
As to the priority of Mortgages; Registration Systems, their in-
tention and operation.
As to delivery of Deeds, by way of Equitable Mortgage. Their ope-
ration and use.
As to Mortgage accounts, how kept; and as to marshalling assets.
As to Mortgages as distinguished from Conditional Sales.
As to Guarantees and Sureties. Statute of Frauds thereon.
As to forms and precedents in Conveyancing relating to Mortgages.
Analysis of the most useful of these instruments
Consideration of mortgages with reference to General Jurisprudence.
As to the debts of Public Bodies, as Corporations, Joint Stock Com-
panies, Independent Nations.
The principles of the English and other National Debts.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE XVH
ON LANDLORD AND TENANT.
Connection of this Lecture with the Lectures on Trustees and Exe-
cutors, Mortgagors and Mortgagees.
Importance of clear views as to this Relation of Social life.
Recapitulation of the Law of Real property as applicable to tenants.
Connection of this subject with the Civil Law of Contracts.
Origin of Feudal tenures as connected with the Improvement of Land.
The Status of Villeinage considered and its modern substitutes.
Russian, and other Continental Systems. Westmoreland “Statesmen.”
American and other Systems illustrating General Principles.
Land considered as an article of Commerce. History of this prin-
ciple under the English Jurisprudence and its several epochs.
How far the facility of Transfer of Land and the Improvement of
Agriculture may be the objects of National Legislation.
Division of the Lecture under the following heads.
1. Who may be Landlords?
Extent of interest necessary to create this relation. Donees of
Powers; Act of Hen. VIII. as to tenants for life. Its principles.
2. Who may be tenants?
As to femmes coverts, infants, aliens, &c., and leases to them.
3. What property may be the subject of this relation ?
Any corporeal or incorporeal hereditaments.
4. The Instrument or conduct by which this Relation may be created.
The ramifications of this relation.
The Statute of Frauds, 29 Car. 2. Cap. 3. Its importance and
effect on land, both agriculturally and commercially.
Davidson’s short forms of leases. Lord Brougham's Act.
5. As to Colonial Leases.
Leases of Crown Lands in New South Wales. Substance of the
Rules and Regulations as to waste Lands.
6. Points in the Law of Landlord and Tenant such as:—
1. Nothing can be added to or deducted from a written lease by
parol evidence.
2. The possession of Tenant is that of Landlord.
The mutual duties and liabilities of Landlords and Tenants.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE XVIII
ON HUSBAND AND WIFE.
Pteasons for introducing this relation into these Lectures; viz.: that
this Relation with that of “ Property ” are the two chief foundation
of Social Ethics. Sir Jas. Macintosh’s statement of this maxim.
The social ties arising from Marriage and from Birth constitute the
Primary Obligations of natural Society.
How far this topic is connected with the preceding Lectures of
both courses; and with the other two domestic relations, viz.:—
On Parent and Child and Master and Servant.
Division of the Lecture into three branches, viz.: This Relation as
considered :—l. By the Civil Law. 2. By the English Common
Law. 3. By the English Statute Law.
1. By the Civil Law: Strahan’s Domat and Taylor’s Civil Law.
2. By the English Common Law, Blackstone Vol. 1., as altered
by modern statutes and decisions.
3. By the English Statute Law, 26 Geo. 11. c. 33. Lord Hardwick’s
Act and its amendments.
Fox’s attempt to repeal it, also 4 Geo. IV. c. 76, 6 & 7 Wm.IV. c. 85.
Dissenter’s Marriage Relief Act and other Modern Legislation.
As to the law relating to marriage with deceased wife’s sister.
The principles of General Jurisprudence affected by these Statutes.
Legal decisions on the subject of marriage, such as Dalrymple
v. Dalrymple; Rex. v. Mills.
Legal Maxims as to Husband and Wife; as Unity of Person, Marital
Responsibility.
Statistics as to proportion of Divorces to Marriages.
The effect of the marriage tie on the Property of Husband or Wife.
Analysis of a modern Marriage Settlement with reference to the
abstract principles of Jurisprudence. Intention and structure of
these settlements.
The Colonial Law of Marriage.
As to the reservation of Divorce Bills for Imperial Assent.
Concluding observations.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE XIX
PARENT AND CHILD.
Consideration of the mutual duties and rights of Parents and Children
in a Natural state of Society.
Nurture and protection returned in sickness and old age.
Extension of these natural duties and rights into the more varied
relations arising from civilization.
Advantage arising to the state from the due performance of these
mutual duties, as constituting the foundation of Peace and good
order under any Political Institution.
The Filmer Theory of Paternal Government considered; so the
Patriarchal System.
Other theories as to this relation of natural life.
The advantages of combining a Theoretical acknowledgment of this
relation, with the other principles of General “Jurisprudence upon
which our English Institutions are founded.
Blackstone’s Chapter on Parent and Child.
1. Duties of Parents under the Civil Law.
The English Statute Law on this point.
Necessary sustenance, nurture, protection, education, &c.
2. Powers of Parents under the Civil Law and under the English
Common Law, over the Child’s Person and Property.
As to Guardians of all sorts; —wardships; at Common law, under
the Statutes, and in Equity.
3. Duties of Children under the Civil Law and Statute Law.
Consideration of Collateral topics, as Sir J. N. Talfourd’s Act as to
custody of infants by Mother under certain circumstances.
The Legal consequences of Illegitimacy.
The Parliament of Merton 20 Hen. 111. A. D. 1253.
Infancy, its incidents and legal consequences and privileges.
Summary of this Lecture.


SUMMARY OF LECTURE XX.
ON MASTER AND SERVANT.
Introductory observations on the importance of this relation in every
code of Practical Jurisprudence.
Few positions of life independent of this relation or unaffected by its
results.
The “hire of labour” must form the foundation of Social Progress.
The object of this relation is very largely to “create property”
under every Social System.
Importance of regulating this Relation by Maxims of Justice and
Wisdom.
Historical summary of this Relation in ancient and modern civilized
Nations.
Consideration of some special principles; as to contracts for the hire
of labour, viz.: contracts for illegal services, in restraint of trade,
Working on Sundays, &c.
As to Trade Combinations and Strikes.
The English Factory Acts as to employment of Children, their
contracts and apprenticement.
The Truck Act and other Imperial Statutes.
1. As to the duties of the Workmen, Servants, or Contractors.
2. As to the duties of the Employer.
As to Domestic Servants and Trade contracts of service.
As to wages, when due, when and how payable pro rata.
As to the right of dismissal on disobedience, gross negligence, or
moral faults, &c.
Effect of dismissal on right to wages, &c.
3. As to the duties of Masters, to employ, protect, &c.
As to giving “ characters” and consequences of refusal.
English Statutes and decisions as to Masters and Servants, and
disputes between them.
Colonial Statutes considered and examined upon general principles.
Forms of contracts of service, the principles involved therein.
Conclusion of the Lectures for the year.
General Summary and review of progress made.


GENERAL JURISPRUDENCE.
EXAMINATION QUESTIONS
FOR THE
YEARLY EXAMINATION AT THE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY,
MARCH, 1861.


LECTURE I.—introductory.
1. Distinguish between offences mala in se and mala prohibita.
2. What Is the fallacy of Hobbes’ Philosophy on Jurisprudence?
LECTURE 2.—ON OUR CONSTITUTIONAL LAW.
1. How was the law of Treason altered in the reign of Henry VII?
2. What was the Constitutional point decided in Stockdale v. Hansard ?
LECTURE 3.— ON OUR LEGISLATIVE SYSTEM.
1. Specify some of the Colonial Bills to be reserved for Imperial
Sanction.
2. What was the point decided in Fenton v Hampden ?
LECTURE 4.— ON OUR JUDICIAL SYSTEM.
1. What Constitutional change in our Judicial System was effectd
by the Revolution of 1688 ?
2. What was the principle of Fox’s Libel Act?
LECTURE S.—ON JUSTICE OE THE PEACE.
1. Distinguish between the Ministerial and Judicial duties of Magis-
trates.
2. How may Justices of the Peace be removed from the Commissions ?
LECTURE 6.—ON THE COMMON LAW.
1. Give some examples of Common Law Maxims.
2. What is the of the Common Law in the Colonies?
LECTURE 7. —ON REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY.
1 How did the Statute of Uses affect the English Law of Real
Property?
2. What was the tendency of Lord Mansfield’s decisions as to
the Law of Property ?
LECTURE 8. —ON COMMERCIAL JURISPRUDENCE AND MERCANTILE
LAW.
1. Distinguish between International and Commercial Law.
2. What is the Policy of the Ship Registry Act?
LECTURE 9.—ON THE CIVIL LAW AND EQUITY JURISPRUDENCE.
1. What branches of Equity are founded on the Civil Law ?
2. State some equitable principle applicable to Contracts.
LECTURE 10.—ON MODERN CONVEYANCING AND TESTAMENTARY
DISPOSITIONS.
1. What was the object of the Statute of Frauds ?
2. Distinguish between a Will and a Testament.


LECTURE 11.—ON MUNICIPAL CORPORATIONS.
1. What were the Munieipia of the Civil Law ?
2. What is the intention of a modern Charter of Incoiporation. ?
LECTURE 12—ON JOINT STOCK COMPANIES.
1. What are the chief advantages of Joint Stock Companies?
2. How may Joint Stock Companies be dissolved ?
LECTURE 13.—0 N COMMERCIAL PARTNERSHIPS.
1. How may Commercial Partnerships be formed?
2. What are the rights of third parties against dormant partners ?
LECTURE 14.—0 N PRINCIPAL AND AGENT.
1. Give some Legal Maxims as to Agents.
2. What are the duties of a Principal towards his Agent?
LECTURE 15.—0 N TRUSTEES AND EXECUTORS.
1. Specify the chief points to be ascertained befoye accepting a Trust-
2. When may an Executor divide the Residue?
LECTURE 16.—0 N MORTGAGORS AND MORTGAGEES.
1. llow are the rights of Mortgagees and General Creditors adjusted?
2. Distinguish between a Mortgage and a Conditional Sale.
LECTURE 17.—0 N LANDLORD AND TENANT.
1. Distinguish between a Lease and an Agreement for a Lease.
"2. What are the liabilities of a Tenant, holding over after the expi-
ration of his tenancy?
LECTURE 18.—ON HUSBAND AND WIFE.
1. Quote Sir James Mclntosh, as to the importance of this relation. '
2. What is the substance of the Modern English changes in the
Divorce Law.
LECTURE 19.—0 N PARENT AND CHILD.
1. Specify the relative duties of Parent and Child, according to
natural law.
2. What was the Feudal Law of Wardship?
LECTURE 20.—0 N MASTER AND SERVANT.
1 How is this relation of great importance to all communities?
2. What is the legal right of a Servant as to a Character.




General jurisprudence.
examination QUESTIONS
FOR THE
yearly examination at the sydney university,
DECEMBER 12th, 1861.




LECTURE I.—INTRODUCTORY.
1 State what you know as to the English Inns . the
2 How did Somers reconcile the Constitutional Statesmen
Convention Parliament ?
LECTURE 2.—ON CONSTITUTIONAL
1. Quote Sir Francis Palgrave’s Bemarhs as to Election Co .
2. State the greatest Constitutional change » George HI. .
LECTURE 3. —ON LEGISLATIVE SYSTEM.
.. „ , -rh--R..val prerogative of Assent now act in Legislation .
1. How does the tv val pre M to the Kepre-
2. Quote Burke s Speech to the Electors o
sentative Office.
LECTURE 4.— ON JUDICIAL SIS - •
1. What is the intention of the Charter of Justice»•
2 Distinguish beta <*4he duties of the Judge and Jury,
' Legislative and E& itive authority, as to Pu “*“ entS '
LECTURE . -ON JUSTICE OE THE PEACE.
1 Quote Blackstons a. to the difference between Stipendiary an
unpaid Magistrates. . , . . „
2. What was the object o f Sir John Jervis cs .
LECTURE 6. —ON THE COMMON LAW OE LNGLAN .
1. 'Where is the Common Law of England presen l . t
2 Explain the Common Law Maxim « Obi jus, ib. remed.um.
LECTURE 7. —ON REA,. AND PERSONAL PROPERTY.
1 What was the chief foundation of Feudal property in .an
2. Define Heir-looms. How may they be created t
LECTURES—ON INTERNATIONAL AND COMMERCE .
1. State some of the Chief points of Enquiry in Modern Inter-
national Law.
2. What is a Maritime Lien ?
LECTURE 9. —ON THE CIVIL LAW AND EQUITY JURISPRUDEN ,E.
1 What legal authority in this Colony does the Civil Law possess.
2 What sort of “ Accidents ” does Equity remedy ?
LECTURE tOt—on conveyancing and testamentary dispose
TIONS.
1. Give the formal parts of .a modern Grant.
2. How is a Will to be now executed legally ?


1. How did the European Mumc'p and Join t Stock
2. Distinguish between 1 >£■::
Companies. COMPANIES.
" E . rZZ* ** °™ trwi ia tivor of or
1. Are Ambiguities in a Company
against tlie Company ? „ exc l U sive privileges ? ”
2. What is the political intention « , , _
LECTURE 13.-0 N
! «" P "£ "tog Parte-hio ?
i , ** p^?
LECTURE 15/ —ON TRUSTEES AN CUTOUS.
1. Why are Trustees entitled to no
" HOW MORTGAGORS ANOM.OTGAGEE,
, How are Enable Mortgages ££££&,
2 . What does a Nation -W AW)
LECTURE 17.-ONI.ANDL „
1. Trace the Feudal aw o f Landlord ?
2H - isa c:r::r— ;r:: .
! what was Lord Hardwicke’s Act 26. G. •
2. Give an example of Marital Responsibility
LECTURE 19. —ON PARENT A.
1. What was the Filmer theory of Colonial Law ?
2 . How are deserted " “sERVANT.
lecture Somerset's Case and in
1 What were the decisions l
' Forbes v. Cochrane and ScmntV’ Act?
2. What is the object of our -






Chronological Chart of Constitutional Law
STATUTES OF THE REALM AND OTHER PUBLIC RECORDS DECLARING AND ESTABLISHING OUR CIVIL AND RELIGIOUS LIBERTIES.
A.D. Jflfjn (1199 to 1216). . .
1215.—17 John ~. .MAGNA CHARTA—especially sections 14, 17, and 18, forbidding taxation without consent
of Parliament; section 20, fixing the Court of Common Pleas ; and sections 42, 43, and
44, providing for the due course of Justice, trial by Jury, and lawful process.
Covenant for observance of the Charter by the King ; and temporary delivery of the City and
Tower of London to twenty-five Barons, as security for the King’s fulfilment of his
Covenant.
III. (1216 to 1272). A 1 „ t
1225.—9 Hen. 111. GREAT CHARTER OF HENRY lll.—especially sections 11, 28, and 29, to the same efiect
as sections 20, 42, 43, and 44 of John’s Charter. . .
1254.—38 ~ Public excommunication by the Archbishop and Prelates in Westminster Hall, before t e
King and Barons, of all breakers of the Charter, and free customs of the Realm of
England. 1
EUfoart! I. (1272 to 1307). I
1275.—3 Ed. I Statute of Westminster the First, viz.: —
Cap. 5. Against disturbance of free elections by arms, malice, or menacing.
~ 6. Amerciaments to be reasonable —saving to a freeman hisAeehold, to a merchant his
merchandize, and to a villein his wainage, and that by his or neir peers.
~ 9. All men to pursue felons, notwithstanding franchises, at t.e summons ot the bheritt.
11. Against partiality and favour in inquests for murder.
26. ~ extortion in Sheriffs and kings officers, on forfeit! re of double, the amount.
fi 29. ~ deceit and collusion in serjeants, pleaders, and otl ers, to beguile the Com t
)f 34. ~ slanderous news, whereby discord may arise b tween the King and his
people, or the great men of the Realm.
1279. 7 Ed. I For coming to Parliament and other assemblies without force or ar iour, well and peaceably.
1285. 13 Ed. I. .. .Statute of Westminster the Second, reviving the Statute of Gloipester (1278), for speeding
justice in all’suits and actions; especially Cap. 31 establishin<Mhe right to a bill ot excep-
tions, to be sealed by the Judge on tender of the same in wrMig.
1297.— 25 Ed. 1.... CONFIRMATION OF THE GREAT CHARTER OF H. 111., frith annexed excommuni-
cation by the Archbishop and all Bishops (Cap. 4) of all who* should break the same, by
any pretence.
1305 —33 Ed. 1... .An ordinance for inquests, and as to showing cause for Crown challenges.
1306.—34 Ed. I STATUTUM DE TALLAGIO NON CONCEDENDO, with excommunication annexed,
(cap. 6). *
ISDfoatb 11. (1307 to 1377). . a „
1322.—15 Ed. 11. . .REVOCATION OF ILLEGAL ORDINANCES, and Parliamentary declaration that all
legislative authority resides in King, Lords, and Commons, according as heretofore
accustomed.
3SHfoart> in. (1327 to 1377). t . .
1327. 1 Ed. 111. . .Stat. 2, cap. 5. Against compulsory military service out of the shire—except as usedm times
past, where necessity requireth, and suddain coming of strange enemies into the Realm.
1328. 2 Ed. ILL . .Cap. 8. No commandment under King’s seal to disturb or delay pommon right or justice.
133 D—4 Ed! 111. . .Cap. 2. Authority of Justices of Assize, Gaol Delivery, and of the Peace.
1 14. ANNUAL PARLIAMENTS. PARLIAMENT TO BE HOLDEN EVERY YEAR,
ONCE, AND MORE OFTEN IF NEED BE.
1350.—25 Ed. HI. .Stat. 5, cap. 2. STATUTE DECLARING WHAT OFFENCES SHALL BE TREASONS;
also as to escheats and forfeitures, and against new treasons and felonies.
„ ~ 3. No informer to be upon the inquest of the party indicted.
~ ~ 4. No one to be condemned upon suggestion, without lawful presentment.
~ ~ 14. Effectual process by capias against indicted and as to forfeitures.
1354 28 Ed. 111. .Cap/3. No one to be taken, imprisoned, or condemned without answer, by due process of law.
~ 13. In all trials where aliens are parties the j,urors to be de mdietate lingua.
1361. 34 Ed. 111. .Cap. 4. Panel of jurors not to be taken from distant places, but “Hi-om the next people which
shall not be suspect nor procured;” and for punishment of Sheriffs and others who act
contrary, according to the damage which the King or the party hath suffered.
1363. 36 Ed. 111. .Cap. 10. Parliament shall be holden every year ; as already ordahed by Statute.
» 15,^ J leas to argued, and adjudged in the Engjkh. tongue, and enrolled m
Hfdjarb 11. (1377 to 1399). T~
1381.—5 Rich. 11. .PARLIAMENTARY REMONSTRANCE AS TO THE EVIL COUNCILLORS OF THE
KING, and other causes of the popular commotions under Wat Tyler and others.
Petition of the Commons as to equal participation in the Statutes on the Parliament Roll.
1384.—8 Rich. 11. .Cap. 2. No man of law to be Justice of Assize or of Gaol Delivery in his own country.
1396.—20 Rich. 11. Cap. 3. No lord nor other of the country, little nor great, to sit upon the bench with the
Justices of Assize, upon penalties of “ great forfeitures.”
1399. .PARLIAMENTARY RECORD OF THE DEPOSITION OF RICHARD 11., AND THE
ELECTION OF HENRY IV.; by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and all the States
of the Realm there present.
Pfenrg IV. (1399 to 1413).
1405.—7 Hen. IV.. Cap. 15. County elections to be proceeded with freely and indifferently, and duly returned
by the Sheriffs.
1407.—9 Hen. IV. .Parliamentary Record as to the rights of the Commons in money bills.
Pfmrg VI. (1422 to 1461).
1429.—8 Hen. VI. .Cap. 7. The forty shilling freehold county qualification established.
1445.—23 Hen. Vl...Cap. 14. FOR FREE ELECTIONS AND DUE RETURNS IN COUNTIES, CITIES,
AND BOROUGHS; with penalties on Sheriffs and others who do contrary to such
Statute.
VII. (1485 to 1509).
1494.—11 Hen. VII. Cap. 1. No attainders or forfeitures for attending upon the King for the time being , or for
doing him true and faithful service of allegiance in his wars.
~ 12. Counsel and attorneys to be assigned to speed poor persons in their suits, and redress
their wrongs, without fees or reward for counsel and help in ffie same.
Pletxrg VIII. (1509 to 1547).
1534.-26 Hen. VIII. Cap. 1. ACT OF SUPREMACY : KINGS OF ENGLAND THE ONLY SUPREME
HEAD ON EARTH OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND ; and to enjoy all dignity,
power, jurisdiction, and authority thereto belonging.
lEtihmttJ VI. (1547 to 1553).
1547.—1 Edw. VI. .Cap. 12. Repeal of all Penal Acts since Richard 11., “in any wise concerning opinions, doc-
trine, or matters of religion ;” and of all pains and forfeitures concerning the same.
1552. 5& 6 „ Cap. 11, sec. 12. NO ATTAINDERS FOR TREASON BUT BY THE EVIDENCE OF
TWO WITNESSES, to be brought in person before the party accused.
fHatg (1553 to 1558).
1553. —1 Mary . ...Sess. 1, cap. 1. Repeal of all treasons, except under 25 Edw. 111., and of all felonies and
praemunires since 1 Hen. VIII. ; not being felonies before, nor within the case of
Praemunire.
IBlhafjetfj (1558 to 1603).
1558.—1 Elizabeth Cap. 1. ACT OF SUPREMACY, RESTORING TO THE CROWN ITS ANCIENT
JURISDICTION OVER THE ESTATE ECCLESIASTICAL AND SPIRITUAL,
AND ABOLISHING ALL FOREIGN POWERS REPUGNANT TO THE SAME.
» 2. Act of Uniformity, restoring the book of Common Prayer and service in the Church,
and administration of the sacraments, in every parish of the Realm.
1601. —43 „ Cap. 2. Act for the relief of the poor, to establish poor’s rates, and to set the poor on work.
University of Sydney, 2Ath May , 1865.
A.D. If antes I. (1603 to 1625).
1621 19Jas I PROTESTATION BY THE COMMONS FOR FREEDOM AND LIBERTY OF
DEBATE IN PARLIAMENT; and that the King should not give credence to private
information as to anything said or done in Parliament.
©fjatkS I. (1625 to 1649). .
1627.—-3 Clias. I. .. PETITION OF RIGHT, remonstrating against the kings infringement of the great
Charters of John and Henry 111., against illegal taxation and arrest, against billeting
of soldiers contrary to law and custom, and against commission courts and martial law.
1640.—16 ~ Cap. 10. Star Chamber Abolition Act.
11. High-Commission Court Abolition Act.
14. Against Ship Money and extra-judicial opinions “by agreement of the Justices to
the Crown.
Cfjatles n. (1649 to 1685). . „ x
1660.-12 Chas. 11. Cap. 24. Abolishing the feudal Courts of wards and liveries; changing all tenures to tree
and common socage only; and granting revenue duties to the Crown in lieu thereof.
1676. 29 ~ Cap. 9. Abolishing the writ de Jlceretico comburendo , and all other punishments by death under
such writ, or in pursuance of any ecclesiastical censures.
1677. 31 ~ Cap. 1. Abolishing illegal billeting of soldiers. , ... A A «
2. HABEAS CORPUS ACT. For better securing the liberty of the subject, and for
prevention of imprisonments beyond the seas.
Wiliam HI. anh jjHatg (1689 to 1702). , , ~ A
1689.-1 W. & M.. .BILL OF RIGHTS, specifying the mis-government of James 11., declaring the rights and
liberties of the subject, and settling the succession of the Crown on King William and
Queen Mary and their issue, with remainder to the Princess Anne of Denmark and her
issue, and in default of such issue, then to the heirs of the body of the Prince of Orange.
Cap. 6. Establishing a new form of Royal Oath and Coronation Service.
~ 18. Toleration Act, exempting Protestant Dissenters from the penal laws.
1694. 6W. & M.. .Cap. 2. Triennial Parliament Act. For the frequent meeting and calling of new parliaments.
1695. Refusal of the House of Commons to renew the Censorship of the Press.
1695.—7 w! lIL .Cap. 3. For regulating indictments and proceedings upon all trials for treason and misprision
of treason. . -
1700.—12 &13 W. 111. Cap. 2. ACT OF SETTLEMENT. For the further limitation of the Crown on the
Princess Sophia of Hanover, and the heirs of her body being Protestants; and for better
securing our Religion, Laws, and Liberties.
ffiearge I. (1715 to 1711).
1715.—1 George I. .Stat. 2, cap. 38. Septennial Act, extending the duration of parliament to seven years, unless
sooner dissolved by the Crown.
ffiteorge 111. (1760 to 1820). -
1779.—19 Geo. 111. Cap. 44. Relieving Protestant Dissenting teachers from subscription to the 39 articles.
1792.-32 „ „ 60. THE LIBEL ACT. Removing doubts as to the functions of juries in cases of
libel, declaring their right to try the whole matter in issue, and to give a general verdict.
1812. —52 ~ ~ 155. Toleration Extension Act, and repealing certain penal laws as to Religious Worship.
1813. —53 ~ ~ 160. Unitarians’ Relief Act extending IW. and M., Cap. 18, to Unitarians.
(Sreotge IV. (1820 to 1830).
1825.—6 Geo. IV.. .Cap. 50. Consolidating and amending the laws relating to jurors and juries.
1828. —9 ~ ~ 17. Sacramental Test Repeal Act.
1829. —lO ~ ~ 7. Roman Catholic Emancipation Act.
Will. IV. (1830 to 1837).
1832.—2 &3 W. IV. Cap. 45, 65, and 88. ENGLISH, SCOTTISH, AND IRISH REFORM ACTS.
IMPERIAL AND COLONIAL STATUTES AND OTHER PUBLIC RECORDS
RELATING TO THE CONSTITUTION OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
1823. — 4 Geo. IV.. .Cap. 96. To provide for the administration of Justice in New South Wales, and for the more
effectual government thereof. To expire July Ist, 1827.
~ ~ The Charter of Justice.
1827. —7 &BGeo. IV. Cap. 73. Continuing I Geo. IV., Cap. 96, till December 31st, 1829.
1828. —9 Geo. IV.. .Cap. 83. The same as 4 Geo. IV., Cap. 96, with amendments. To expire December 31st, 1836.
1830.—10 Geo. IV. .No. 9. Adopting the Roman Catholic Emancipation Act.
1836.—6&7 W. IV..Cap. 46, 1 Vic. Cap. 42, 1 & 2 Vic. Cap. 50, 2 & 3 Vic. Cap. 70, 3 & 4 Vic. Cap. 62, 4 & 5
Vie. Cap. 44, continuing 9 Geo. IV. c. 83, till December 31st, 1837, 1838, 1839, 1840,
1841, and 1842; also empowering the Local Legislature to make provision for the ad-
ministration of Justice; authorizing the Separation of New Colonies, and establishing
new Local Legislatures.
1842.—5 & 6 Vic. . .Cap. 76. Establishing a Local Legislature for New South Wales and Van Diemen’s Land,
of twelve nominated and twenty-four elected Members; also making permanent 9 Geo.
IV., Cap. 83, except as to Council, &c.
1844.—7 & 8 Vic. . .Cap. 72 & 74. Explaining and amending 5& 6 Vic., Cap. 76.
1850. —l3 &14 Vic... Cap. 59. Australian Colonies Government Act; extending the powers of the Colonial Legis-
latures to constitute new Electoral Districts, and otherwise establish Colonial Parliament;
general provisions as to Victoria, Van Diemen’s Land, South Australia, and Western
Australia.
1851. —l4 Vic No. 48. First New South Wales Electoral Act, establishing single Chamber of Legislature,
consisting of eighteen nominated and thirty-six elected AI embers.
1854. —l7 Vic, .. . .No. (41). New Constitution Act, establishing two Chambers, &c. (Reserved )
1855. — lB &19 Vic... Cap. 54. The Imperial Statute modifying the last-mentioned Colonial Act.
~ » >, 56. Repealing the Imperial Acts as to the Crown Lands, and authorizing the Colonial
Parliaments to legislate thereon.
, i July 20th.. Lord John Russell’s despatch accompanying the Royal Assent to the Consolidation Act.
1857. —2O Vic No. 10. Amendment of 18 &19 Vic., Caj). 54, as to two-thirds majorities.
1858. —22 Vic No. 13. Act to establish Municipal Institutions.
~ ~ ~ 18. Act to establish District Courts.
~ ~ »20. The Electoral Law Amendment Act!
1859. —May 3rd Lord Carnarvon’s Despatch, providing for the administration of the Government, in
the absence of the Governor-General.
1861.—March sth His Excellency Sir John Young’s commission as Governor-in-Chief.
~ » Letters of Instruction accompanying the same.
~ 25 Vic No. 1. Act to regulate the Alienation of Crown Lands.
~ ~ No. 2. Act to regulate the Occupation of Crown Lands.
JOHN F. HARGRAVE,
> Reader in Constitutional Law and General Jurisprudence.


Chronological Chart
Constituional Law
