

UNIVERSITY EXTENSION LECTURES
SYLLABUS
A COURSE OF SIX LECTURES
vemocxaa ?
G. C. HENDERSON, 8.A.,
Balliol College, Oxford.
Acting Professor of History in Sydney University.
SYDNEY;
A. PATERSON & CO., PRINTERS, 12 ROWE I 'STREET.'
1899.




LECTURE I.
THE ARGUMENT OF THE LECTURE.
“All men are by nature free and independent, and have certain inalienable
rights.”—Constitution of California, Section I.
“ There can be no right unless on the ground that it is for the common good,
and if so, there is a duty.”—T. H. Green, Vol. 11. p. 422.
“ Sovereignty being only the exercise of the general will can never be alienated,
and the sovereign who is only a collective being can only be represented
by himself. The power may be transmuted, but not the will.”—
Rousseau, Social Contract.
“If, therefore, Democracy means that everything which ‘concerns all should
be decided by all,’ and that each citizen should enjoy an equal and
identical share in government, Trade Union history indicates clearly the
inevitable result. Government, by such contrivances as Rotation of Office,
the Mass Meeting, the Referendum and Initiative, or the Delegate
restricted by his imperative mandate, leads straight either to inefficiency
and disintegration, or to the uncontrolled dominance of a personal dictator
or an expert bureaucracy.”— Sidney and Beatrice Webbe, Industrial
Democracy.
SCOPE OF LECTURE.
Part I.
What Theory says.
Meaning of the term “Democracy”—“Everything which concerns all should
be decided by all.’ Necessity for discriminating between what is nominally
true and what is really true. There is a democratic element in all States:
“ Will, not force, is the basis of the State” (T. H. Green). The generally
accepted meaning of Democracy ; reference to different theories of govern-
ment ; contending parties at the time of the Puritan Revolution ; the change
effected then.
The assumption underlying the democratic form of government. Two views
of human nature —Hobbes v. Rousseau ; and two corresponding political
theories. Examination of Rousseau’s position; his views respecting the
“natural ” man. Two theories of political rights. What is a right? Is it
“ natural ”oris it “ ideal ”? Does Democracy also imply that “ all men are
equal ”?


Part 11.
What Experience Proves.
Can the theory that “ all men are equal ” stand the test of experience? It
is approximately true of the democratic life of small primitive communities.
Illustrations (a) from the account of life in Germania given by Tacitus, (b) from
the early history of Trade Unions. But the statement is false when applied to
large and highly organised communities. Illustration from a conspicuous and
successful Trade Union —the “Boilermakers and Shipbuilders’Society.” Its
constitution shows the characteristics of a primitive democracy—changing
committees, rotation of office, aggregate vote ; but, in actual fact, it works in a
totally different way ; Mr. Knight, general secretary for twenty years; his
cabinet of officials really permanent; committees little more than formal
assenting bodies, aggregate meetings confirm official opinion. This explains
the Society’s success. What does it mean ? That industry may be organised
on a democratic basis, but it cannot secure efficient administration by working
on the principle that “all men are equal.” What holds good of primitive
democraacy may be quite false when applied to modern society. Society is an
organism, and the laws which are applicable to one stage of organic develop-
ment do not necessarily hold good at another : “ development is qualitative ”
as well as quantitative (Edward Caird).
Part 111.
General Conclusion from Theory and Practice.
Rousseau’s view is inadequate, it must be supplemented by the historical
view. It is true that the real Sovereign is the General Will ; but how is this
to be made workable ? Here lies the fundamental problem of Democratic
Government—to maintain popular control, and, at the same time, secure
efficient administration. Is this possible in large modern States? Represen-
tation and the institution of the Cabinet have solved the difficulty in English
Politics. In working men’s centres it will have to be solved by paid represen-
tation. This is true even of limited local centres. This being so, is it possible
to have Democratic Government at all, and in what sense ? Mr. Dicey on the
Legal and the Political Sovereign; England is democratic in the sense that
ultimate power rests with the people ; to make their control more effective,
more constant is the work of national education ; but personality will never be
eliminated from government ; the great man is bound to rule ; he can never
become a mere delegate; he may be controlled, he must be trusted. In
matters of government pure democracy is a phantom.


BOOKS RECOMMENDED.
Sidney and Beatrice Webbe, “Industrial Democracy.”
Wm. Von Schulze Gavernitz, “Social Peace.”
Graham Wallas, “Francis Place.”
Rousseau, “Social Contract.”
J. Morley, “ Rousseau.”
T. H. Green, “Political Obligations.” 1 Read together _
H. Spencer, “Man v. the State.” j
Rose, “The Rise of Democracy.”
Daniel G. Thomson, “ Politics in a Democracy.”
QUESTIONS FOR CLASS.
Why does the Idealist affirm that all men are equal while every business
institution accepts degree without question ?
Purpose wedded with plans may easily suffer ship-wreck; but an unfettered
purpose, that moulds circumstances as it goes masters us, and is
terrible.” —Show the bearing of this on the government of institutions.
Explain why a “muddle-headed ” man cannot be entrusted with power over
an institution.
Show precisely the weak point in Rousseau’s theory.
Why is it necessary to have a captain of a boat’s crew or a football team ?


LECTURE 11.
PERICLEAN DEMOCRACY.
ARGUMENT OF THE LECTURE.
“ It is true we are called a Democracy, for the administration is in the hands
of the many and not of the few. But, while the law secures equal justice
to all alike, in their private disputes, the claim of excellence is also recog-
nised, and when a citizen is in any way distinguished he is preferred to the
public service, not as a matter of privilege, but as a reward of merit.
Neither is poverty a bar, but a man may benefit his country whatever be
the obscurity of his condition.”—Pericles’ Funeral Speech (Thucydides),
Jowett’s translation.
“ Socrates was entering upon his missionary activity. Thucydides was gather-
ing the ideas which were to be embodied in his immortal history. Pericles
was ruling the fierce democracy by his intellect and eloquence. Three of
the world’s greatest poets, Sophocles, Euripides, and Aristophanes, were
moving the Athenians to tears and laughter. FEschylus had passed away
just a quarter of a century before. Plato was to be born within two years
after.”—Bosanquet, Essays and Addresses.
“ Payment for performing the duties of government in Greek democracies the
symptom of decay,’’—Bradley, Hellenica, “Aristotle’s Conception of the
State.”
“ It is, so far as I can judge, impossible to deny that he destroyed a form of
government under which his city attained to the height of her prosperity,
and that he plunged her into a hopeless and demoralising war. In w'hat,
then, did his greatness lie ? The answer is, it lay in the ideals w'hich he
cherished. He saw what a city might do for her citizens, and what
citizens might do for their city. In the years of peace his dreams took
shape, and the result is recorded in the Parthenon and the great funeral
speech.”—Abbott on “Pericles.”


SCOPE OF THE LECTURE.
The Constitution and How it Worked.
Extracts concerning the constitution of Athens from Pericles’ Funeral Speech.
“It is true we are called a Democracy.” Explanation of this. Growth of the
Democratic spirit at Athens. The reform of Clisthenes. Changes made by
Aristides. Further developments by Pericles and Ephialtes. Examination
of the different Institutions in the time of Pericles, (i) The Law Courts;
extremely Democractic in form ; 6,000 citizens drawn by lot each year ; great
juries of citizens, from 300 to 3,000 deciding on each case, controlling minute
details, giving judgment on questions of law as well as fact; our judge and jury
in one ; comparison with the old English Courts ; position of the Archons or
Magistrates. (2) The Assembly or Ecclesia ; every man over eighteen years
a member ; forty meetings a year, also extraordinary meetings ; every one had
right of free speech and initiative ; Aristophanes’ picture of the Assembly in
Acharnians. (3) The Council of 500, its Democratic Constitution, its position
and its powers. (4) Strategi or Generals, appointed by show of hands, not by
lot; they were the chief Executive Officers. (5) Pericles chief man in this
body, great man in Council, great man in the State, a virtual prime minister,
general for fifteen years.
The Aims and Interests of Athenian Democracy.
Further extracts from the Funeral Speech of Pericles. “ Because of the
greatness of our city the fruits of the whole earth pour in upon us.” (1) The
careful education of the youth of Greece ; every citizen could read or write ;
vital importance of character in a small city state. (2) The value of their
political training in the making of character and in creating a bias in favour of
law ; the Nomophylakes ; the Nomothetae and the Graphe Paranomon ; con-
stant contact with great politicians and great political ideas: “We alone
regard a man who takes no share in public business, not as a harmless, but a
useless character.” (3) The wider politics of Athens ; their relations to other
Greek .States ; constant dangers to which the city was exposed ; their Wars ;
their Leagues ; their Colonial and Imperial Policy; direct interest of the
citizens in these questions. (4) The literary and artistic interests of Athens:
“We are lovers of the beautiful, though simple in our tastes.” The plays of
Aristophanes and Euripides ; the work of Socrates. The efforts of Pericles to
enlarge the life of the Athenian people ; the Theatres ; Festivals ; the Odeum;
the Statues of Phidias, and the Parthenon. “We owe half our intellectual
life to Athens.”


Verdict of History on the Athenian Democracy.
Magnificent attempt to combine individual liberty with public authority.
What was the cause of its overthrow? Undoubtedly the severe blows dealt at
Athens in the Peloponnesian War were the external cause of its overthrow.
But there were already signs of internal decay, (i) Evil effects of the payment
of juries on the character of the people and the administration of justice ;
dangers of popular influence in administration of justice. (2) The people did
not enter into the great ideals of Pericles; they did not appreciate the grandeur
of his aims, and his death left them stranded. (3) The spirit of denial came with
the Sophists, and the Athenians had not enough religious basis to steady them.
Socrates might have saved them, but he was not understood. His death
sealed the fate of Athens. One thing could have saved her, one only—sterling
moral character of the citizens ; it was not there: intellectual sophistry largely
responsible for this, and—the democratic experiment too.
BOOKS RECOMMENDED.
E. Abbott, “Pericles.”
Grote, “History of Greece,” vol. V.
W. Warde Fowler, “ The City-State of the Greeks and Romans.”
Bosanquet, “ Essays and Addresses.”
Aristophanes, “Acharnians.”
Jowett, “Thucydides.”
Welldon, “ Politics of Aristotle.”
Huxley, “Method and Results.”
QUESTIONS FOR CLASS.
1. Account for the interest of the Athenians in the maintenance of law.
2. Point out the differences between the Greek City-State and a modern State.
3. State briefly the arguments for and against the payment of Members in
Parliament.
4. Why do you think the Sophists were so dangerous to the Greek State ?


LECTURE 111,
ARISTOTLE’S IDEAL STATE.
ARGUMENT OF THE LECTURE.
These passages from Aristotle should he committed to memory.
‘ The state comes into existence, originating in the bare needs of life, and
continuing in existence for the sake of a good life. And, therefore, if the
earlier forms of society are natural, so is the state, for it is the end of them,
and the completed nature is the end. For what each thing is when fully
developed we call its nature, whether we are speaking of a man, a horse,
or a family. Besides, the final cause and end of a thing is the best, and to
be self-sufficing is the end and the best. Hence, it is evident the state is a
creation of nature, and that man is by nature apolitical animal.”—Book I.
p. 4 ([owett’s translation).
“The state is a community of well-being in families and aggregations of
families for the sake of a perfect and self-sufficing life.—Book 111. p. 84.
‘ The happy life is the life according to unimpeded virtue, and that virtue is a
mean ; then, the life which is in a mean, and in a mean attainable by
every one, must be the best.” —Book IV. p. 126.
“The pleasure of the best man is the best, and springs from the noblest
sources. ”
“The virtue of the citizen must, therefore, be relative to the constitution of
which he is a member.” —p. 72.
“ His (thecitizen’s) special characteristic is that he shares in the administration
of iusice and in offices.”
“It is no the possessions, but the desires of mankind which require to be
equalised, and this is impossible unless a sufficient education is provided
by the state.”—Book 11. p. 44.
“ The beginning of reform is not so much to equalise property as to train the
noblei sort of natures not to desire more.” —Book 11. p. 46.


SCOPE OF THE LECTURE.
Part I.
The Key to Aristotle’s Ideal.
“A social instinct is implanted in all men by nature .”
What precisely is the reason why men live together in a state and not
separately ? Is the state based upon expediency or necessity ? The question
must be settled in order to discover Aristotle’s starting-point. One school
maintains that it originates in contract : hence the Social Contract theory.
Aristotle’s position becomes clear by contrast with this. With him the state is
a creation not of man but of “nature”; it is bound up with, the nature of man;
only a “ beast ”or a “god ” can live alone. He arrives at this by two methods,
(i) Analysing man’s inner live, he finds that he is a “ political animal ” : he is
social by nature. What does Aristotle mean precisely by “nature”? This
must be thoroughly understood if his point of view is to be appreciated. He
means by “ nature ” the ultimate and final expression of anything ; what it is
in the last and highest development. This idea runs through all his political
speculation, and it cuts at the root of the contract theory. (2) He treats his
subject historically. He starts with man not as an individual, but as a member
of a family ; then of a wider community—the village ; lastly of the self-
sufficing community—the state. In all these grades we get a continuous growth,
not a series of contracts. Each stage was immanent in the one that preceded
it ; an illustration from nature to make this clear.
Part 11.
How his Ideas work out in detail.
“ But a state exists for the sake of a good life , and not for the sake of life only.”
Keeping these ideas before us, we must fix on some definite end; this to
Aristotle is not mere living, but “living well”; and living well with him means
unimpeded intellectual activity : the life of the cultured man and the philoso-
pher. This should be possible to all the citizens in an ideal state. He would
like all his citizens to be “ aristoi." For this end education is of the first
importance ; (a) Education of infants ; (b) of youths ; reading and writing,
gymnastics, music—the “practical,” “ spirited,” and “cultured.” His ideas
concerning the useful and the ideal in education (c) of citizens. What is
Aristotle’s definition of a citizen ? He must administer justice and hold office.
But he must also be trained in the spirit of the constitution. There is a civic


virtue, as well as an ideal virtue : both have their claims. Mr. Gardiner’s
observation on Wentworth. Is the virtue of the good citizen the same as the
virtue of the good man ! Yes, in the best states. Aristotle on the question of
Government interference, (i) In the household ; (2) in religion. No man to
do “as he pleases his “ leisure ” must be used for high ends ; the good man
must determine what happiness is, pressure must be brought to bear on the rest.
In all these matters —Education, Citzenship, Government interference, Happi-
ness—his opinion is determined by the ideal or end.
Part 111.
Criticism and Conclusion.
How are his citizens to find leisure to secure the highest good ? This intro-
duces the question of slavery. Aristotle’s dilemma : the slave is a man, and
yet is incapable of virtue ! His Greek contempt for manual labour ; in his
judgment on labouring classes, he mistook cause and effect. They must be
“ kept down, not cruelly treated.” But how could they be kept down ? Here
arises the question of the size of the Greek state ; this explains much. (1) The
great importance of education and of character ; the flute-player to illustrate.
(2) The large amount of Government interference. (3) The limitation of
citizen rights ; compare the Chinese question in Australia to-day. (4) The
rigid class-distinction—what does it all mean? That much more direct
mechanical pressure was possible then than in modem times ; our states much
more organic. But the Greek had advantages which we do not possess ; he
could see much more clearly the relative importance of material and spiritual
strength; of property and charaeter; and he knew where effective reforms must
begin; he knew, too, the value of good and great men ; he would like all his
citizens to be aristoi ; he knows there are but few ; so his best state takes the
form of Aristocracy, not Democracy.
BOOKS RECOMMENDED.
“The Politics of Aristotle.” Translated by Jowett. This is the text-
book for the lecture, and, if mastered, is quite sufficient. But to understand it
properly read also —
“ Aristotle’s Conception of the State,” by Bradley, in Hellenica. This is
a very valuable essay ; full of the deepest and finest thought on the subject.
Half the lecture is an attempt to work out the ideas of this essay.


“Plato’s Republic” is excellent reading, especially when studied with the
“ Politics of Aristotle,” who often uses and criticises his predecessor. Aristotle
can hardly be understood without reference to Plato.
Newman’s work on the “ Politics of Aristotle” is a book which should be
studied with the text by those who find Aristotle’s thought difficult to follow.
“The Theory of Education in the Republic of Plato” is a very valuable essay
in Hellenica, written by Lewis Nettleship. It should be studied in connection
with Part 11. of the lecture.
Maine’s “Ancient Law, 1
_ T ( contain material for the problem of the first
Hobbes “ Leviathan, >
r , ~ „. , part of the lecture.
Locke s Civil Government ; r
“The Philosphy of Aristotle,” by T. H. Green, in the third vol. of his
collected works, is difficult, but amply repays trouble spent on it.
Jowett’s “Introduction to the Politics ” simplifies and explains the text,
but adheres very closely to it.
QUESTIONS FOR CLASS.
1. Criticise carefully the last quotation in the “Argument ” of this lecture.
2. Explain what is meant by the Social Contract Theory.
3. What is meant by saying that the oak is Immanent in the acorn ”?
4. Why did Aristotle spend so much time discussing education in his ideal
slate ?
5. Point out the injustice of Aristotle’s observations on the labouring classes.


LECTURE IV.
DEMOCRACY OF OUR FOREFATHERS.
ARGUMENT OF THE LECTURE.
“ For my own part, I agree with those who think that the tribes of Germany
are free from all taint of intermarriage with foreign nations, and they
appear as a distinct unmixed race, like none but themselves. All have
fierce blue eyes, red hair, huge frames, fit only for a sudden exertion.”—
Tacitus.
“About minor matters the chief deliberate, about the more important the
whole tribe.”— lbid.
“ Kings are chosen by birth, their generals for merit. These kings have not
unlimited or arbitrary power, and the generals do more by example than
by authority.”— lbid.
“The inequalities in the use or possession of land involve no inequalities in
social or political rights.”— Stubbs, “ Constitutional History,” Vol. I.
“Land proportioned to the number of inhabitants is occupied by the whole
community in turn, and afterwards divided among them according to rank.”
(This is the most difficult passage in Tacitus ; its exact meaning and
application puzzles the best historians).
“ Out of this relation of lord and gesith grow, in later times, a new nobility,
and not of birth ; thegns instead of eorlas ; a new army, the feudal levy
rising above the old host; a new land system, the manors in the place of
free communities ; a new idea of justice, private jurisdictions in place of
the old popular courts ; a new idea of royalty, the suzerains of vassals
instead of the heads of the kindred ; feudalism, especially the baronage ;
the framework of the administration ” —A. L. Smith.


SCOPE OF THE LECTURE.
Part I.
“ The English are of German descent . ’
History traces the English people back to Germania. Relative importance
of the accounts given by Csesar and by Tacitus. Csesar writes mainly of one
tribe living under exceptional circumstances. The account given by Tacitus is
the more reliable. His description shows that the Government under which
our ancestors lived was extremely Democratic ; in many respects it was a ptcre
Democracy. Proof of this : (i) The Sovereign Power in the State was the
Assembly of the People ; that was a Council not of representatives, nor of
delegates, but of all fi’eemen; all great questions, such as war, peace, alliances,
were settled there ; only subordinate matters decided upon by the frincipes.
(2) All officers elected by that Assembly ; {a) To preside over justice ; {/>) To
lead in war ; in Bede’s time these “duces” were appointed by lot, but in
Tacitus by merit. (3) The Assemby regulates the distribution of lands among
the communities. (4) In the Assembly youths are invested with arms,
and become citizens. (5) “The king is a mere figure-head.” Method of
conducting the meetings of the Assembly.
Part 11.
Political, Social, and Military Institutions.
“j Every tribe and every group has its own history
But the Democratic character of their Government is even more striking in
matters of detailed administration, and it is in their local institutions where the
real strength lay. (1) In the Law Courts the “suitors” were the judges;
100 “ assessors ” chosen from each pagus; they declared the law ; fines went
partly to the State and partly to the kindred. (2) There was common owner-
ship of land. In Csesar’s account, communities change every year ; but now,
according to Tacitus, village settlements are permanent; but within the village
there is not separate ownership of land ; the arable land is divided into lots ;
these lots change hands annually. The people have common rights of pasture
in the abundance of land that remains over. The slave and the freeman have
their own household : contrast Caesar. Picture of a homestead and its
surroundings. (3) Military life. The host is the whole nation in arms. One
hundred champions sent from each pagus. The distribution of forces : one-half
remains at home, in alternate years, to provide for the rest who fight. The
strong military spirit of the people ; their predatory habits and instincts ; their
strong contempt for cowards.


Part 111.
Criticism and Conclusion.
Thus far we see how extremely Democratic were the ancestors of the English
people. But we must remember that it is a primitive community with plenty
of room to move about, and that, therefore, comparatively little organisation
was necessary. (2) There are two other sides to their life which point in
another way. ( a) Social distinctions : the division of classes; nobiles, ingenui ,
libei-ti, servi ; the position of the slave with respect to his lord and to other
people. Social influence in matters that did not affect political rights, (b)
The relation between the princeps and the comes. Tacitus marvels at this ;
but it is an institution of first rate importance in the development of English
institutions and character. Examples : description of the institution ; the tie
is personal, not national ; th tdux and the national army. (3) The tie of blood
or kindred tie was very strong in Germania ; its influence in three branches of
government; the strength of home life in Germania, and the respect for women,
and the strength of home instincts in war. (4) The land question, as it
presented itself to them and to us. Importance of the decision in Law Courts
concerning Epping Forest. “ Common rights in land are not from the lord’s
grant, but are, as a rule, anterior to his existence ” (A. L. Smith, Balliol).
BOOKS RECOMMENDED.
Tacitus’ “ Germania.” This is the text for the lecture. It is the earliest
authentic record of our ancestors. Caesar’s account cannot be accepted as
satisfactory in considering the majority of the people in Germania. To
appreciate the remarks of Tacitus, read—
Stubbs’ “Constitutional History,” vol. I. pp. 1-62, This is thoroughly
sound, and the most generally accepted view.
Stubbs’ “ Charters and Documents of English History.” Read the Intro-
duction, pp. 1-4.
Freeman’s “Growth of the English Constitution.” This throws much
light and interest on the development of English history; and is a strong
argument on the side here taken up.
Green’s “ History of the English People.” First chapter is very interesting
from the literary as well as the historical point of view.


“The Deeds of Beowulf,” with notes and introduction, by Johjs l Earle,
M.A., is an English epic of the Eighth Century. It affords good material for
judging of the true spirit of English institutions.
For the opposite view on many points to that taken in the lecture , read —
Seebohm’s “ English Village Community.” This is a very interesting book
to read on the subject of the Manor. After reading Stubbs take up Sekbohm,
and consider chapters l-iv.
Pearson, “ Early History of England, ch. i.
Brewer, “ English Studies.”
QUESTIONS FOR CLASS.
i. What do you understand by a “ pure ” Democracy? In what way would it
differ from an Australian form ?
2. “As far, at least, as our race is concerned, freedom is everywhere older
than bondage.” Explain this statement.
3. Explain the land system in Germania as it is described by Caesar and
Tacitus.
4. Show from later institution in England the importance of the aristocratic
element in Germania.
5. Explain, by reference to any one institution, the continuity of English
history.


LECTURE V,
GROWTH OF DEMOCRATIC IDEAS IN 171 H
CENTURY.
ARGUMENT OF THE LECTURE.
“ The events which culminated in the death of the King gave a new impetus
to democratic ideas ” — Gooch’s “ Democratic Ideas in the 17th Century.”
“ The idea of the Government of the people was not embraced in England
w'ith the enthusiasm that it afterwards evoked in another nation.
There was no thought of constructing a government from the foundations
upwards conformably to theory.” —Rankk, History of England, vol. IV.
“When the Army Council met on Monday, Bth November, 1647, Cromwell
had made up his mind that the time for hesitation was at an end. Singling-
out the proposal of the “Levellers” to adopt manhood suffrage, he
declared that ‘that it did tend very much to anarchy.’”— Gardiner,
Civil War, vol. IV.
“ These levellers -wanted to reduce all to equality.”— Cromwell.
“ It was mainly Cromwell’s sense that continuity of government w’as necessary
which was at the bottom of his opposition to Lilburne.”— Gardiner,
Cromwell’s Place in History.
SCOPE OF LECTURE,
Part I.
The Puritan Revolution. At root its causes were religious, but political
questions involved. Where does ultimate authority lie—in the people or in
some occult power? Note the Divine right theory and the theories of Eliot
and of Pym. At the time of the Grand Remonstrance, a direct appeal made
to the people ; opposition aroused by this new departure. Theories of the
Commonwealth. Note the three declarations in 1649. The people are the
only lawful sovereign under heaven. The agreement of the people. The
career of Lilburne. His invincible belief in the sovereignty of the people.
Henceforth, that idea had to be embodied in workable constitutions. The
Instrument of Government. Cromwell accepted Lilburne’s idea, and combined
it with an Elizabethan Council; he recognised it, too, in the re-arrangement of
electorate ; but he demanded a property qualification for voters.


Part 11.
Religious Development.
The Puritans’ objection to Archbishop Laud ; the development of Puritanism
from objection to outward form to insistence on inward intellectual belief: one
step nearer to the personal form of religion. The rise of Presbyterianism ; its
democratic character. James I. experiences in Scotland. Place where
the democratic principle lay. The Solemn League and Covenant. England in
1643-4. One step further along the line of democratic progress. Vane’s
famous clause. Rise of the Independents : their triumph in 1649 ; logical
development of their principles. Innumerable sects : Anabaptists, Anti-
monians, Socinians, Quakers. Gerard Winstanley ; the “ diggers” on St.
George’s Hill; dangers arising from the extravagances of the sects. Instances :
“ These levellers wanted to reduce all to equality ” (Cromwell).
Part 111.
The democratic arguments in their extreme forms failed ; even the com-
promise attempted by Cromwell failed for the time. The Barebone’s Parlia-
ment represented the high-water mark of Puritan influence in politics; then
there was a return, step by step, to the Restoration. The democratic spirit
reasserted itself later on. But note, during the Revolution, that when the
democratic spirit was strongest there was most need of a man of conspicuous
ability. This man was Oliver Cromwell. Because of his genius, the Indepen-
dents triumphed over the Presbyterians in 1649. It was his ability that made
organisation possible. Pie was necessary (1) as a leader in war, ( a ) Marston
Moor, Dunbar, Worcester ; (2) a leader in religion, note his dealings with the
Independents and the sects later on : “Takecare that what you call inspiration
is not simply carnal ‘imagining’ ” ; (3) As a leader of Government after the
failure of Barebone’s Parliament. “ The horridest arbitrariness ever exercised
in the world.” Thus, we have again popular basis and personality. The
latter necessary to secure efficiency. “No theory or principle works in
isolation.”
BOOKS RECOMMENDED.
S. R. Gardiner, “ Puritan Revolution.”
~ “ Cromwell’s Place in History.”
G. P. Gooch, “ English Democratic Ideas in the 17th Century.”
M. Guizot, “ Portraits Politiques ” (see Essay on Lilburne)
S. R. Gardiner, “The Great Civil War,” vol. HI. (latter part).


S. R. Gardiner, “Constitutional documents of the Puritan Revolution,
pp. 270-282 (for the Agreement of the People), and pp. 314-325 (for Instru-
ment of Government).
Thomas Hobbe’s, “Leviathan.*'
Note. —The most reliable books on the Puritan Revolution are written
by Mr. Gardiner. The extracts, pp. 270-282, refer to the Agreement of the
People ; those on pp. 314-325 refer to the Instrument of Government. They
ought to be studied together. Both show an attempt to make the sovereignty
of the people real and effective. John Lilburne’s career is particularly interest-
ing from this point of view. Hobbe’s “ Leviathan ”is a reactionary book.
It is good as a protest against the extravagant ideas of the- “ Levellers ”; but,
in the main, it is an exposition, clear and logical, of a political doctrine that is
radically false.
QUESTIONS FOR CLASS.
1. In what sense could you call Cromwell a democrat ?
2. In what ways does the history of the “ Levellers” show the dangerous side
of Democracy ?
3. Give three examples, showing how Hobbe’s confounds legal with moral
right.
4. Show clearly, from the “ Instrument of Government,” that Cromwell used
Lilburne’s “Agreement of the People.”
5. Show how the democratic ideas of the Seventeenth Century grew out of the
religious convictions of the time.


LECTURE VI
DEMOCRATIC IDEALS.
ARGUMENT OF THE LECTURE.
“The best government is the one that makes itself most unnecessary, by rendering
its citizens ‘a law to themselves.”’— Mackenzie, An Introduction to
Social Philosophy ..
“I spend my whole life in going about and persuading you all to give your
first and chiefest care to the perfection of your souls . . and telling
you that virtue does not come from wealth ; but that wealth and every
other good thing that men have, whether in public or in private, comes
from virtue.”— Socratks as in Apology.
“ The difference between the most dissimilar character, between a philosopher
and a common street porter, seems to arise not so much from nature as
from custom, habit, and education.”— Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations.
“The true greatness and welfare of nations depend mainly on the amount of
moral force that is generated within them.”— Lecky, English History in
the iSth Century.
SCOPE OF LECTURE.
Part I.
Modern form of Government in England is essentially democratic. Rule by
the Cabinet is based on a Parliamentary majority, which, again, is based on the
power of the people. An examination of the Cabinet shows the importance of
personality. The premier a‘ ‘ primus inter pares ” ; the idea of collective respon-
sibility, the necessity for discretionary power. To play a game is more than to
follow a set of rules. The importance of any particular form of government
must not be over-rated. Yet Pope, in “Essay on Man,” goes too far in the
opposite direction. Democracy is the only form of government under which
an enlightened people can continue to be ruled.
Part IT
Influence of Education.
Whether Democracy is to be a blessing or a curse will depend, ultimately, on
the citizens themselves. The real foundations of national greatness are, moral
force, inward resource, character. This is clearly illustrated in the critical


parts of the Puritan Revolution in England. There is no hope for a nation
that turns its back on the permanent invisible things that make for character,
and loses itself in the superficial and material. There are two great safeguards
against the abuse of advantages which Democracy brings ; (i) Education ;
(2) Religion. A godless, ignorant Democracy must inevitably perish. (A) In
what way will education prevent this? (1) By creating a variety of inward
interests, so as to make citizens more 'self-contained, and, therefore, more
independent of external circumstances. (2) It must he an education that
brings men into closer touch with Nature ; this will relieve the pressure on
workmen in many directions—explanation by reference to the law of Supply
and Demand. What we must do is to shift the demand in a direction where
there is an infinite supply already to hand. The desire for luxury and artificial
enjoyment lies at the root of much national disaster—explanation of this.
Economically, it is a blunder for a nation to turn its back on God-given
sources of enjoyment; we cannot, in future, bear the strain of satisfying
artificial needs that take the place of real ones for which Nature provides.
Part 111.
Influence of Religion.
(B) The Religious instinct is the best defence of social simplicity; —what do
we mean by the religious instinct? Observation on two types : True religion
preserves the childlike and spiritual susceptibilities. (St. Francis). Demo-
cracy must be fundamentally true to this ; it corrects superficial tendencies by
directing force into deeper channels, and it preserves a reverence which more
than compensates for the remoVal of old barriers, mental and social. By
working along these lines, Democracy must have a great future ; not that the
people can ever directly govern ; but they can make government less and less
necessary. The farther Democracy wanders from these ideals the greater will
be the need for control, the more indispensable will the great man become,
until despotism takes the place of popular control, as it did at Athens.
Talk with Examinees.
BOOKS RECOMMENDED.
Lecky’s “ Democracy and Liberty.”
Montagu, “Individual Liberty.”
E. L. Godkin (i) “ Problems of Modern Democracy.”
(2) “Reflections and Comments.”
(3) “ Unforeseen Tendencies of Democracy.”
Henry Craik, “The State and Education.”
Edward Caird, “ Evolution of Religion,” vol. I.


W. H. Malloch, “ Social Equality.”
liui), “ Studies of Contemporary Superstition.”
Leslie Stephen, “Social Rights and Duties.”
J. S. Mackenzie, “An Introduction to Social Philosophy.”
QUESTIONS FOR CLASS.
Why is it necessary that people should be more enlightened in a Democratic
Government than in any other form of government ?
“The religion of the New Testament is extremely Democratic in tendency.”
Explain this.
Why is the pursuit of culture a fitting ideal for Democracy—especially the
Australian Democracy ?
Why would a struggle for mere material ambitions lead to the overthrow
of a Democracy ?
Does the system of Public Instruction in this country aim at lifting the
Democracy to a higher plane of thought and feeling ? Explain.




f''o4£>3 a
/ cryy
