

fate
- 'ST*'
MELBOURNE
University Extension Lectures.
SYLLABUS
OF A
“ITALIAN ART,”
REV. PROFESSOR HARPER,
Ormond College.
Course of six lectures


NOTICE TO STUDENTS.
The Class. —At the end of each Lecture the Lecturer will
hold a class for the informal discussion of questions
which have arisen during the Lectures, and during
which he will, if desired, give further information on
points with which he has not been able to deal fully
in the Lecture.
Periodical Essays. —Subjects will be set in class for Essays.
Essays should be as concise as possible, written on one
side of the paper only.
The Examination —At the end of the course an Examina-
tion will be held, if it be desired. An additional fee of
2/- will be charged for the same.
Best Single Small Book. —“ Poynter’s Italian Art."


LECTURE I.
Title too wide, perhaps. Intend to limit subject in mam to
Painting and Sculpture.
Reasons for this.
Then what is intended by course ? History of Mediaeval
Art and appreciation of it from a literary standpoint (largely
apart from discussion of the technique) as to the ideas
embodied in it.
What is Art? It is not abstruse and recondite. All of
us concerned with it —in Cradle Songs—Ballads—Carols—
Symbolism in Religion, Poetry, and Music—in our attempts
at public rejoicing.
To understand essential things in true Art is possible for
ordinary people, and it is public judgment which is final.
Decay sets in when it is regarded as a mystery.
But that view always goes with idea that beauty and
the pleasure beauty gives, is the aim and regulative principle
of Art. Why this is defective.
Tolstoi's definition, “ Art is a human activity consisting in
this, that one man, consciously, by means of certain external
signs, hands on to others feelings he has lived through, and
that other people are infected by these feelings, and also
experience them.”
That, if not final, covers more ground than any other
definition, and explains why beauty of nature is not Art.
Compare definitions of Milton and Morris.
This gives standard to judge of Art. Art which seeks to
give pleasure only cannot be highest. Art for Art’s sake is
nonsense. Compare in literature de Quincey’s Dream
Fugues.
This suits accurately Italian Art of 13th, 14th, and 15th
centuries. It represented the best that the people as a whole
believed and thought. It rose, flourished, decayed, and lies
now there a complete object of study.
Begun in Francis of Assisi—ended under Savonarola's
influence.
Character and work of former. Christianity renewed a
new world of tales for Art to exercise itself upon.
State of Art before Niccolo Pisano.
Way prepared by Niccolo of Pisa (1206) —St. Francis
new-birth year.
Describe his work.


LECTURE 11.
Italian Painting before Cimabue.
Mosaics of Ravenna and Rome. Byzantine
influence, and its good and bad effects.
Forerunners of Giotto —
Cimabue, 1240-1300 (Bull head); Benvenuto di Pepi,
character of his work, and Duccio of Siena.
Giotto (Ambrogiotto) di Bondone (1276-1266). His
history, his character, extent of his capacity—Painter
—Sculptor—Architect—Friend of Dante ; who was “ till
M. Angelo a law to religious Art in Italy.” His real teacher—
the sculptor Giovanni Pisano. He brought life and dramatic
expression into painting.
State of Painting in his time —Oil painting unknown
for centuries to come. Tempera and Fresco. Prof.
Sydney Colvin says :—(1) Knowledge of human frame and
its structure confined to what general observation would
supply. (2) In x'egard to linear perspective, few ideas, and
those elementary and empirical. (3) As to aerial perspective,
none had any clear ideas. (4) Scarcely any ideas of the
conduct of light and shade. His verdict —So far as painting
could ever be carried under these conditions, so far it was
carried by Giotto.
Ruskin’s state of what Giotto did (Mornings in Florence).
He was above all the painter of St. Francis, and three
times he has painted scenes from his life—
(1) Earliest work in Upper Church of Assisi, in 13th
century—twenty-eight pictures, seven certainly Giotto’s, and
probably part of others.
(2) In Santa Croce at Florence (see Ruskin’s Mornings in
Florence) —six pictures.
(3) In the lower Church at Assisi —especially his allegorical
pictures (in his later years).
At forty—He painted in the Arena at Padua thirty-eight
pictures from the life of the Virgin and the history of Christ.
Sydney Colvin’s summing up of what he did for Art.
His school —TaddeO Gaddi, Andrea Orcagna.


LECTURE 111.
The Rise of what is called Renascence
Ant (which is really the Artistic
Counterpart of Humanism) Move-
ment originated by four men.
Two architects, Brunelleschi (1377-1446) ; Alberti (1404-7,
1 47--7)- Two sculptors, L. Ghiberti (1378-1455); Donatkllo
(1386-1466). In painting some work done by Masaccio (1401-
1427).
At this new stage Sculpture again in advance of Painting.
Sculpture of new time begun by Brunelleschi and
Ghiberti.
Ghiberti's gates of the Baptistery in Florence. A plaster
cast, full size, to be seen in Sydney. Description and
qualities.
Donatello , properly Donato di Niccolo de Betto Bardi.
His life, apart from his art, very little known. “He lived
only for his Art.” He died, unmarried, at a great age (80),
having changed the whole character of Italian Sculpture.
“ His influence became greater than that of any sculptor
before him.” Among painters, only Giotto or Masaccio to
be compared to him.
His character—fiery, passionate, yet firm and deep.
His Work.—His Twenty Statues , life size. “These com-
pared with all other statues before, and even with the
antique, are a special and wholly new thing, eg., St. John
and St. George. His casting and chiselling, rough.
His reliefs. —Returned to the lower relief of the Ancients,
and so escaped the necessity of trying to imitate painting in
his reliefs, as Ghiberti had to do. The children in the
galleries for the musicians in the Duomo at Florence, com-
pared with Luca della Robbia’s.
The Della Robbias.—Verrochio.
Fra Angelico.—Character and works. St. Marks in
Florence.
Masaccio , 1401-1429.
The most pathetic figure in the history of Italian Art. His
poverty, the neglect he suffered, his tragic disappearance.
His manner of work.
The frescos in the Carmine Church, in the Brancacci
Chapel—“ Donatello’s art is here transferred to painting.”
(r.) Expulsion from Paradise. (2.) The Tribute Money.
(3.) Peter Baptising. (5.) Healing the Lame. (6.) Peter
and John healing the sick by their shadows. (7.) Peter and
John giving alms.
The new movement carried on by Filippo Lippi, 1406-1469.
Alessandro Filipepi (Botticelli), 1446-1510.
Domenico Ghirlandaio, 1449-94.
Andrea Verrochio, from whose school came (r.) Leonardo
de Vinci. (2.) Perugino. (3.) Signorelli.


LECTURE IV.
Leonardo da Vinci. 1452-1519.
With him begins a new period, in the History of Italian Art,
just as new periods began with Giotto and Masaccio. But
this is in some respects most important. With him modern
painting begins.
Oil painting introduced by the Van Eycks, i.e., oil painting
in a really successful manner —brought to Italy about 1445 by
Antonello da Messina. He communicated it to Domenico
Veniziano, who was murdered by Andrea dal Castagno, to
whom in turn he had communicated it. After these, oil
painting was taken up by Giovanni Bellini, Georgione,
Leonardo, Perugino, and Francia—Van Eyck’s method
modified by Titian.
Leonardo, a most extraordinary man, perhaps one of the
most intelligent that ever lived, possessed nearly all physical
gifts. Intellectually most richly endowed. Painter, Sculptor
Architect, Musician, Critic, Engineer, Anatomist, Botanist,
Physiologist, Astronomer, Chemist, Geologist ; an explorer,
and an Alpine climber.
His main passion was his longing to know, but in all
relations of life he was most admirable.
tflis discoveries in Science.
Most of his artistic works were never finished ; many
have perished.
There are only ten undisputed works of his existing. His
Sketch Book, his Treatise on Painting. In it the antique dis-
appears as an object of imitation. “ The painter should be the
son, not grandson, of nature.’’ In Florence till 1480. From
1480-87 he was travelling in various places. In 1487 he
went to Milan, where he remained till 1499, when House of
Sforza fell.
Two great works of this time, Equestrian Statue of
Ludovico Sforza —broken up. His Last Supper —almost
equally ruined. This nevertheless greatest of his works.
Goethe’s criticism. In employment of Caesar Borgia, 1501-3.
1503-6 —At Florence, Mona Lisa chief work.
1506-1513. —Milan for a second time under the French.
Three pictures belonging to this period, The Two Vierges
aux Rochers. and the Virgin and Child, with St. Anne.
1514. —Went to Rome.
1516. —Went to France, died at Cloux (1519).
Sydney Colvin's estimate : He could draw finer and truer
lines than have been drawn by any man, excepting, perhaps,
Albert Diirer. Carried the refinement of solid modelling in
light and shade to the same high point to which he carried
the refinements of linear definition.
Colour he left where he found it, or perhaps, by his
predilection for effects of light and shade, did something
towards bringing about the degradation of colour.


LECTURE V.
Michel Angelo and Rafael.
Michel Angelo (1475-1563) —A Florentine, who took deep
interest in the city, but was forced into an intimate
connection with the Medici. Not cheerful like Rafael, nor
happy like Leonardo. His mind was full of discords and
struggles, and never found peace or rest. His poems and
his friendship with Vittoria Colonna.
He was sculptor, painter, architect, but cared most for the
first, and devoted himself to it almost exclusively during the
first thirty years of his life. Only two pictures The
Madonna of Manchester and The Holy Family (about 1501),
such as had never been done before. He showed beauty of
form, but had no regard to the meaning of the picture.
First sculpture—Battle of Centaurs (seventeen years old).
David—The Pieta at St. Peter’s. His most complete plastic
work.
(1508)—Went to Rome and did his great work as a painter
in the ceiling of the Sixtine Chapel and in his Last
Judgment.
Sculpture of this time—Moses, Christ, The Two Slaves.
(1516-34) —Florence, Medici Monuments.
(1534-1563) —Rome and Vittoria Colonna, painted for her
Christ on the Cross. She died (1547) in her fifty-eighth
year. Last Judgment (1535). The Dome of St. Peter’s.
Rafael (1483-1520) —In Urbino and Perugia. His master,
Umbrian (period 1494-1500), Perugian (1500-1504). Perugino
—characteristics of Perugino’s Art. The influence of the
country upon him. Rafael’s characteristic was to absorb all
influences of all schools. Took imprint of Perugino very
deeply. During this time Rafael busy with large church
pictures.
(1504-1508) — Florence. Begins with St. George (St.
Petersburg). Three groups of Madonnas ; received
influence of Leonardo through Fra Bartolomeo.
(1508-1520) —Rome. The Stanze. All his pictures were
sacred, save portrait of Pope Julius 11. Rafael as
Portrait Painter.—His greater Madonnas della Sedia,
Foligno; Madonna with the Fish, St. Cecilia ; The
Cartoons (1515-16) ; Cupid and Psyche in the Farnesina ;
The Sybils in Santa Maria della Pace, Rome ; The
Sixtine Madonna; the most perfect picture of Italy’s
most perfect painter—The Transfiguration,


7" Aff
%I6UO
t , LECTURE VI.
/V £*py
Venetian School and Titian
His mythological subjects, for the courts of Italy.
In the north of Italy a development, in some great degree
independent, had taken place. The great name in connec-
tion with this, Andrea Mantegna , 1439-1506, greater than any
Florentine contemporary up to 1460. Padua scene of his
labours. Characteristic of his work is a harsh strenuousness.
He seeks to give the clear, sharp picture of actual things.
He brought lineal perspective to its highest point. In 1460
went to Mantua.
In Padua —Squarcione, Filippo Lippi, Paolo Ucelli, and
Donatello had worked in Padua before Mantegna. Latter
specially affected Mantegna. The painter who influenced
him most was Jacopo Bellini, whose daughter he married.
Chief work frescos in the Eremitani Chapel. Never did
better work.
In Mantua —Becomes more secular and allegorical in his
subjects. He painted slowly with great care. Only thirty
works of his. Picture of the Gonzaga family—a new thing
in Italy.
The Bellinis —Jacopo and two sons, Gentile and Giovanni,
of whom former died 1507. Giovanni, 1428-1516, painted the
two pictures which Kuskin declared to be the finest in the
world. This last Titian’s master. He had been influenced by
Mantegna. His greatest work, The Madonna of S. Zaccaria,
1505, and S. Maria dei Frari.
Titian (Tiziano Vecelli 1477-1576) came to Venice when
ten years of age. Worked first with Giorgione, and had a
Giorgione period. Earthly and heavenly love. An example of
allegory. Later his subjects fell into three divisions.
His Church pictures, painted mostly for Venetian Churches.
His Portraits. His life and character ; a complete man of
the world, devoted to the pleasures of society and the table.
A friend of Aldus Manutius and Bembo, quite indifferent to
the deeper religious spirit. His friendship with Pietro
Aretino a clever scoundrel, indicates his moral indifference.
His qualities as artist. The greatest master of colour that
ever lived. He gathered up all that had been done before
him as to the technique of painting, and brought painting to
its highest power, but lost grip of any worthy feeling to
convey by it. And thus he marks the perfection and the
end of great Italian Art.
