

SYNOPSIS OF THE COMMONWEALTH BILL.
Approved by the South Australian Representatives.
THIS Federal Constitution under the Crown was framed by the recent
Federal Convention, and will be referred to the Electors for the House
of Assembly in South Australia for acceptance or rejection on the 4th June,
1898, which has been declared a Public Holiday for the convenience of electors.
The Constitution is contained in a Bill of 127 clauses, to be passed by the
Imperial Parliament.
This Bill is not at present intended, by its passing, to affect any State which
has not adopted it—
(a) By the direct votes of its Assembly electors: and also
(b) By subsequent addresses from each House of its Parliament:
But by such adoption it is proposed to be applied to New South Wales, Victoria,
South Australia, Tasmania, and Western Australia. Further, should Queens-
land so desire, the Bill may be applied to her. All States to which the Bill is
applied from the first are called Original States.
The Bill, when passed into an Imperial Act, will enable a Royal Proclamation
to issue, uniting the Colonies which have adopted the Bill in a Federation
under the name of “ The Commonwealth of Australia ” and under the Consti-
tion set out in the Eight Chapters of the Bill.
The Proclamation will fix a date, not later than one year from the passing of
the Act, when the union shall take effect.
The chief objects of the Constitution are—
(a) To constitute a Federal Parliament:
( b) To establish a Federal Government:
(c) To define the powers of the Federal Parliament:
(d) To preserve and declare the rights of the States :
(e) To specially provide for Inter-State Free Trade and in relation to
Inter-State riparian rights and competing railway rates :
(/) To regulate the financial relations of the Commonwealth and of the
States:
(y) To provide for a High Court of Appeal and other Federal Courts to
guard the Constitution, and to exercise the judicial powers of the
Commonwealth :
(A) To prescribe the mode of admitting new States and of effecting con-
stitutional amendments.
THE PARLIAMENT.
The Federal Parliament is to be constituted of—
(a) The Queen, or Her successors, represented by a Govern or-General;
(b) The Senate, representing the Peoples of the States; and
(c) The House of Representatives, representing the People of the Com-
monwealth.
The Parliament is to meet annually.
Half the Senate retire every three years.




Plural voting is forbidden in all cases.
The suffrage for both the Senate and the House of Representatives is the
same.
It is given to all persons who in the particular State possess the suffrage for
the local House of Assembly.
Thus, in South Australia all adults duly registered will be entitled to vote
for both the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Further, whilst the Federal Parliament may prescribe some extended suf-
frage, no adult person entitled to the suffrage for a local. Assembly can be
denied the right to vote for both Houses of the Federal Parliament.
Thus, so long as adult suffrage for the Assembly is the law in South
Australia, no adult in South Australia can be deprived of the right to vote for
both Houses of the Federal Parliament.
The Federal Parliament may prescribe a uniform method for choosing
Senators, and, subject to any such law, each State Parliament may prescribe its
own method.
Every member of the Federal Parliament, until Parliament otherwise pro-
vides, will receive an annual salary of £4OO.
The Senate may not originate appropriation laws or laws imposing taxation,
nor may they amend laws imposing taxation or the ordinary annual Appropria-
tion Bill, or any law so as to increase the burdens of the people.
Where, however, the Senate may not amend, it may suggest amendments,
which the House of Representatives may make or not, as it pleases.
In all other cases both Houses have equal powers of legislation.
No appropriation is to be voted in either House unless first recommended by
the Governor.
The ordinary annual Appropriation Bill and Taxation Bills are neither to
include other matters.
Taxation Bills may deal with only one subject of taxation, except Customs
Bills, and these may deal with Customs only, and Excise Bills, and these may
deal with Excise only.
When the House of Representatives, with a three months’ interval in the
same or two successive Sessions, twice passes a law with which the Senate fails
to agree, the Governor-General may simultaneously dissolve both Houses,
except within six months before the expiry of the House of Representatives by
effluxion of time.
If after the dissolution the Bill is again passed by the House of Representa-
tives and rejected by the Senate, the Governor-General may convene a joint
sitting of both Houses, which shall have power by the votes of three-fifths of
the members voting to decide all points in difference as if they were so decided
by the votes of each House.
When a Bill is presented to the Governor-General for the Queen’s assent he
may either —
(a) Return it to the originating House with recommendations for amend-
ments which may be dealt with by the Houses ; or
(b) Declare — .
(1) The Queen’s assent; or
(2) The withholding of the Queen’s assent; or
(3) The reservation for the Queen’s pleasure.
Any Bill to which the Queen’s assent is declared by the Governor-General
may be disallowed by the Queen within one year from such assent.


lissolved at any time, and can never
i first meeting.
to be equally represented, and never
irwise provided by Parliament, is to
original State.
xn me nouse of Representatives members are to be chosen in the States
according to the numbers of their people.
As nearly as practicable the members of the House of Representatives shall,
in number, be twice the Senators.
To ascertain the number of members to which each State is entitled the
population of the Commonwealth is to be divided by twice the number of
Senators, and the population of each State is to be divided by the quota thus
ascertained, a member being allowed for each quota and for any remainder
over greater than one-half.
In any case five members are to be allowed to each original State.
If New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia, Tasmania, and Western
Australia were now included in the Commonwealth, their representation in each
House would be as follows :
State.
Senate.
House of
Representatives.
Total.
New South Wales
6
25
31
Victoria
6
22
28
South Australia
6
7
13
Tasmania
6
5
11
Western Australia .'
6
5
11
The following are the only qualifications required for membership of either
House:—
(a) Twenty-one years of age :
(5) Three years’ residence in the Commonwealth :
(c) The right to vote, or to qualify to vote, at an election to the House
of Representatives :
(d) British nationality, either by birth or by five years’ specified naturalisa-
tion.
The following are, however, disqualified for membership :
(a) Convicts under sentence for offences punishable by imprisonment for
one year or more :
(5) Undischarged insolvents:
(c) Government contractors:
(c?) Crown pensioners and holders of offices of profit under the Crown,
with certain exceptions, which exceptions include Ministers of State
for the Commonwealth, and of any State.
No member of either House can be elected to the other.
Any member taking a fee for services rendered to the Commonwealth, or in
the Federal Parliament, forfeits his seat.
Senators are to be chosen by the people of each State voting, until the
Federal Parliament otherwise provides, as one electorate.
Members of the House of Representatives are to be chosen by the people of
the Commonwealth voting in each State as one electorate, until the Federal or
State Parliament otherwise provide.




No Bill reserved for the Queen’s pleasure is to have any force unless the
Queen’s assent is notified to the Federal Parliament within two years after the
reservation.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
A Governor-General, appointed by the Queen, is to exercise the executive
power of the Commonwealth as the Queen’s representative.
The Governor-General will be advised in the government of the Common-
wealth by a Federal Executive Council, consisting of persons chosen by him
and holding office during his pleasure.
Ministers of State to administer departments may be appointed by the
Governor to hold office during his pleasure, and to be, from their offices,
members of the Federal Executive.
These Ministers must not exceed seven until Parliament otherwise provides.
An annual sum is appropriated for Ministerial salaries, which, until Parlia-
ment otherwise provides, is not to exceed £12,000.
After the first general election no Minister of State is to hold office for more
than three months, unless he is a member of the Federal Parliament.
The command of the naval and military forces of the Commonwealth is
vested in the Governor-General as the Queen’s representative.
Until otherwise provided by Parliament, the appointment and removal of
Government officers is vested in the Governor-General in Council.
The Commonwealth will take over the States Customs and Excise Depart-
ments on its establishment, and the control of Defences, Postal, Telegraphic,
Lighthouse, and Quarantine services will be similarly assumed by the Common-
wealth on dates declared by the Governor-General.
The seat of government must be within territory vested in the Commonwealth,
and is to be determined by the Parliament.
Until determined, Parliament will meet from time to time where decided by
a majority of the Governors of the States, and, in case of an equal division, by
the Governor-General.
THE POWERS OF THE FEDERAL PARLIAMENT.
Section 51 specifies in thirty-nine paragraphs various matters on which the
Federal Parliament may legislate.
These are chiefly as follows :
(a) Inter-State and foreign trade and commerce :
(b) Taxation. This must apply equally throughout the States :
(c ) Bounties. These must be uniform throughout the Commonwealth :
(d) Borrowing on the Commonwealth credit:
( e ) Defences :
If) Postal, Telegraphic, Lighthouse, and Quarantine services :
(ff) External affairs :
(A) Races requiring special legislation :
( i ) Naturalisation and aliens :
(/) Immigration and Emigration :
(A) Marriage stnd Divorce :
(l) Invalid arid old age pensions :
( m ) Industrial conciliation and arbitration in disputes affecting more than
one State :


( n) Census and statistics, currency, banking, insurance, bankruptcy,
copyrights, patents, foreign and trading and financial corporations :
(o) The acquisition, Avith the consent of the State, of any State railways
and railway construction in any State with its consent:
(«) Matters referred to the Parliament by any States, but so that the
referring States can only be affected.
The CommonAvealth is given the exclusive power of making Laws relating
to —
(a) The seat of Government and any part of a State surrendered to the
Commonwealth and any territory placed by the Queen under its
authority:
(, b ) Public departments taken over by the Commonwealth and places
acquired by it for public purposes :
And, after the adoption of the uniform tariff —
(c) Customs and Excise duties and bounties.
The CommonAvealth is expressly prohibited from establishing or prohibiting
the free exercise of any religion, and from taxing any State property.
THE RIGHTS OF THE STATES.
The Constitution Laws and Legislative powers of the States are not affected,
but continue unimpaired, except when—
(a) Exclusive power of legislation is given to the Commonwealth ; or
(b) The State power of legislation is expressly limited ; or
(c) The State laAv is inconsistent with some law made by the Common-
wealth under the Constitution.
In the last-mentioned case the law of the Commonwealth prevails, and the
State law fails to the extent of the inconsistency.
States may levy charges on imports and exports to execute their inspection
laws, but the net proceeds shall belong to the Commonwealth, and the Federal
Parliament may annul any State inspection law.
Intoxicants passing into a State for consumption are to be subject to the
State laws equally with intoxicants locally produced.
No State may—
(a) Coin money, or make anything but gold and silver legal tender :
Nor Avithout the consent of the Federal Parliament —
( b ) Raise or maintain any military force:
(c) Or tax any Commonwealth property.
Every State is entitled to he protected by the CommonAvealth—
(a) Against invasion :
And, on the request of the State GoA^ernment —
( b ) Against domestic violence.
No Queen’s subject resident in one State is in another State to be subjected
to any disability from which he Avould be free if resident in such other State.
FREE TRADE, RIPARIAN RIGHTS, AND RAILWAY RATES.
Intercolonial free trade is provided for by requiring the Federal Parliament
to adopt a uniform tariff Avithin two years after the establishment of the Com-
monwealth, and by the declaration that on the adoption of such tariff trade


among the States by sea and land shall be absolutely free, and that State
bounties and State duties of Customs and Excise shall cease, except bounties
under agreement or grant made before June 30th, 1898.
This is subject only to the following qualifications :
(a) States may grant aids and bounties for mining for gold, silver, and
other metals, and, with approving resolutions of both Houses ot the
Federal Parliament, for the production or export of goods :
(b) Western Australia may for five years after the uniform tariff impose
Customs duties on the goods of other States, but these duties
(1) Will be collected by the Commonwealth, and must not
exceed the Western Australian rates when the tariff is
adopted;
(2) Will, after the first year, be annually reduced 20 per cent.
until extinguished.
No goods of other countries are to be admitted into Western
Australia for less Customs duty than the goods of other States :
(c) Goods imported before the uniform tariff, and within two years after
the uniform tariff, passing into a State are to be charged with the
Customs duties payable under the uniform tariff, less any duty paid
on the original importation.
No preference is to be given to any State or locality by the Commonwealth
by any law or regulation of trade or revenue.
There is to be an Inter-State Commission, charged with the duty of executing
and maintaining the Constitution, and all laws made thereunder relating to
trade and commerce.
The members of the Inter-State Commission are appointed by the Governor
in Council, and during the seven years for which they are appointed are secured
in their offices equally with Judges of the High Court.
The powers of the Federal Parliament with reference to intercolonial
riparian rights and competing railway rates are aided and regulated by the
following declarations :
(a) That the power of legislation with reference to trade and commerce
extends to navigation and shipping and to railways the property o±
any State: ....
(b) That the Parliament may forbid any railway preference or discrimination
by any State if the same is adjudged by the Inter-atate Commission
to be undue, or unreasonable, or unjust to any State, due regar
being had to the financial responsibilities of the State in connection
with its railways :
(c) That the right of a State or the residents therein to the reasonable use
of the waters of rivers for conservation or irrigation shall not be
(d) That rate on a State railway shall be rendered unlawful if
deemed by the Inter-State Commission to be necessary for territorial
development and if applying equally to goods within the State and to
goods passing therein from other States.
FINANCIAL.
All Commonwealth revenues are to form a consolidated Revenue Fund, and
money is only to be drawn from the Commonwealth Treasury under appropna
tions made by law.


Not more than one-fourth of the net revenue from Customs and Excise may
be annually applied by the Commonwealth towards its expenditure.
The balance must be paid to the States or applied towards the payment of
the interest on State debts taken over by the Commonwealth.
Until a uniform tariff is imposed each State—
(a) Is credited with the revenues collected therein :
( b ) Is debited with the Commonwealth expenditure therein incurred
solely for the maintenance or continuance of the departments
taken over as at the time of their transfer :
(c) And is also debited with its proportion, on the basis of population,
of the other expenditure of the Commonwealth.
Any balance in favor of the State is to he paid to it monthly.
For five years after the uniform tariff, and until Parliament otherwise
provides, the same rule is to be followed, and provision is made for crediting
any State with duties on goods consumed in it, though collected in some other
State.
After the five years Parliament is expressly authorised to provide, on such
basis as it deems fair, for the monthly payment to the several States of all
surplus revenue of the Commonwealth.
The Federal Parliament is empowered to take over and to convert, renew,
and consolidate the State debts existing at the establishment of the Common-
wealth, or a proportion thereof, on the basis of the populations of the several
States; and the States are to indemnify the Commonwealth against the debts
taken over.
The Commonwealth is to assume the current obligations of the State in
respect of departments transferred, and to compensate the State for departmental
property.
State officers who may lose their appointments without receiving others of
equal value are to be immediately entitled to any compensation payable under
the State law on abolition of office; hut, if continued in the service of the
Commonwealth, they will preserve all accruing retiring rights under the State
law, the State and the Commonwealth sharing the responsibility in proportion
to the period passed by the officer in the service of each.
FEDERAL COURTS.
The judicial power of the Commonwealth is vested in—
(a) The High Court of Australia :
( b ) Such other Federal Courts as the Parliament creates :
(c) Such other Courts as it invests with Federal jurisdiction.
Judges of the High Court and of the Courts to be created by Parliament
are removable only on addresses from both Houses on the ground of proved
misbehavior or incapacity, and their remuneration may not be diminished
during their continuance in office.
The High Court is to have the fullest power of hearing and determining
appeals —
(a) From its Judges :
( b ) From any Federal Court or Court exercising Federal jurisdiction or
from any Court of any State from which at the establishment of the
Commonwealth an appeal lies to the Queen in Council:
(c) From the Inter-State Commission on questions of law only.


The Parliament may declare exceptions to the appellate jurisdiction of the
High Court, but not to prevent any appeal thereto from the Supreme Court of
a State when an appeal would lie from such Supreme Court to the Queen in
Council. . . ,
The Constitution does not impair the Royal prerogative to grant special
leave to appeal from the High Court to the Queen in Council, except that no
such appeal shall be permitted in any matter involving interpretation of the
Constitution of the Commonwealth or of a State unless the public interests of
some other part of Her Majesty’s dominions beyond the Commonwealth are
involved. .... . ~ ,
The Parliament may, however, make laws limiting the matters m which
special leave to appeal may he asked.
Trial by iury is preserved upon indictment for offences against the laws ot
the Commonwealth, and the trial is to be held in the State where the offence
was committed.
new states and constitutional alterations.
The Federal Parliament may admit new States to the Commonwealth, and
may alter State boundaries, hut only with the consent of all States whose
territory is affected.
No alteration of the Constitution will be effectual unless adopted by
(a) An absolute majority of each House of the federal Parliament.
(b) Maiorities of the electors voting in a majority of the States, nor unless
such majorities constitute a majority of the electors of the Common-
wealth voting on the question.
Until a uniform suffrage is adopted only one-half the electors voting in any
State for and against the proposal shall be counted m any State m which adu t
suffrage prevails. . c .
No alteration affecting the proportionate representation of any State in
either House, or the minimum number of its members m the House of
Representatives, can become law without the consent of a majority of its
electors voting on the subject.
