

VOU4 Win
SYSTEMATIC COLONIZATION.
SYNOPSIS
OF THE
SPEECH
CHARLES BULLER, Esq. M.P.
IN THE
HOUSE OF COMMONS,
On Thursday , the 6 th of April, 1843.
SYSTEMATIC COLONIZATION.
LONDON:
SMITH, ELDER AND CO., CORNHILL.
/«W


The republication of Mr. Sutler’s Speech* has given great
satisfaction to the friends of Systematic Colonization, and
is worthy of perusal and study by all who take an interest
in the important question he has so ably and temperately
advocated.
The following Synopsis was compiled with a view to
facilitating an acquaintance with the principles which Mr.
Buller has enunciated: as it brings under review, within
moderate compass, all the important points of the Speech;
and in this manner, will help to exhibit the system and
method employed by the speaker in his treatment of the
great “ Condition of England Question.”
* Speech of Charles Buller, Esq. M.P. in the House of Commons,
on Thursday, April 6, 1843, on Systematic Colonization. London :
John Murray, Albemarle Street.


SYNOPSIS.
Magnitude of tbe subject—Present state of party favourable to a calm
attention to matters of public concern—Condition of England . page 3
Present temper of the people—necessity of something being done . 4
Lord Howick’s motion on the distress of the country led to an universal
agreement as to the existence of the evil—but entire disagreement as to
the remedy.
Actually more of the means of wealth at present than ever before pos-
sessed by England—but no profitable employment for capital —labour
unemployed—wages reduced 5
Increase of poor rates; falling off of the revenue from customs, excise,
stamps, and taxes.—Temporary causes partially account for the evil—
commercial and monetary derangements, undue speculation, bad
harvests . . 6
Over-production may cause future distress—but without that overpro-
duction there would in the mean time have been greater present distress
—more inmates of the workhouse 7, 8
Over-speculation caused fearful commercial embarrassments in the
United States —but capital and labour never failed there to find ample
employment.—We must look for more permanent causes .... 9
The great permanent cause, a constant accumulation of capital and
people in a restricted field—counteracted to some extent by increased
foreign demand and by agricultural improvements—but these counteract-
ing influences not commensurate with the pressure 10
Since the war, great sums have been employed in extending the trade,
manufactures, and wealth of England. But still an accumulation
of unemployed capital, which has been sunk or unprofitably invested.
Universal stagnation and want of confidence the result 11
Great capitalists alone can look now for a living profit. Coincident
with all this, an unprecedented competition in the field of physical and
mental labour, from the younger branches of the aristocracy to the
farmer and tradesman. Severity of competition among educated women,
aggravated by the narrow range of employments open to them . . 12
Since 1810, Six Millions have been added to the British population—
production has not proceeded pari passu —wretched poverty, unwhole-


some labour, precarious existence, and mental abasement of vast bodies,
proofs of the inadequacy of the present means of subsistence ... 13
The 15,000 overworked and miserably remunerated milliners of the
metropolis—workers in coal mines—shirtmakers, &c.—results of the annual
addition of 300,000 mouths to the population—2,ooo,ooo of persons al-
ways out of employment in Ireland for 30 weeks in the year ... 14
Contrast with the state of America—the 20,000 factory girls at Lowell,
described by Mr. Dickens, with various comforts and luxuries, if dis-
charged at an hour’s notice might fall back upon their savings ; whereas,
a sudden stoppage of any branch of manufacture in England or Scotland
causes horrible destitution. Examples, the substitution of barilla for kelp
in the manufactories of Inverness, the sudden stoppage of the herring
fishery, the transfer of the silk manufacture from Spitalfields to the North,
and the woollen manufactures from Wilts and Somerset to Yorkshire..ls
In England, the greatest amount of opulence seen side by side
with the most appalling mass of misery—the people of England the
richest and the neediest people in the world .16
Yet the physical condition of England actually improved—but the
lowest class absolutely lower than at any former period, as in the cellars
and garrets of Liverpool and Manchester, and the alleys of Glasgow—
there, too, vice more habitual and gross than ever previously existed
a positively larger number of the “ dangerous classes.’’—Condition more
precarious from the extreme subdivision of employments .... 17
But the standard of comfort has increased—luxuries are now almost
necessaries, and distress is the greater on their deprivation ... 18
Lesser distresses, from the extension of knowledge, more intolerable
than the greater used to be—and irritation heightened by the contrast of
luxuries and wants
Policy not less than charity demands the interference*of legislation—
perils to property and order. “ Something must be done” .... 20
Physical amelioration must go hand in hand with mental and moral
education—a fair day’s wages for a fair day’s work this to be obtained
only by an extension of the field of employment 21
Colonization a remedy, not held up as the remedy—a variety of reme-
dies demanded. But Colonization peculiarly adapted to meet the evils
arising from a restricted field of employment. The relaxation of the
New Poor Law and other remedies have no direct connexion with this
particular view of the condition of England 22
The small allotment system possibly a useful occasional relief, but
unfitted and even prejudicial as a permanent remedy.—Free trade the
first and most simple and effectual relief—-but Colonization is not pro-
posed in opposition, but as subsidiary to free trade—Free trade would


remove barriers from existing foreign markets, Colonization would
extend and increase the national markets ......... 23
Colonization slower in its effects than Free trade—but surer —as
unexposed to foreign caprice and foreign restriction 24
Colonial markets under our own control —Eight hostile tariffs within a
few years in foreign markets. No country can play the game of restric-
tion with such impunity as the colonial empire of Great Britain . . 25
Colonization will not only relieve, but prevent recurrence of distress.
Colonization is but to carry the plough to the field, the workman to his
work, the hungry to his food 26
Abraham and Lot colonizers—the Mediterranean studded with the
colonies of the Greeks and Phoenicians 27
Cost of emigration one year’s subsistence in the workhouse.
Emigration restores the relation of labour and employment ... 27
Two hundred thousand persons a-year must emigrate to keep popula-
tion stationary—but it is not the mere removal of numbers, but the reac-
tion on the market of labour and on enterprise at home by the formation
of colonial markets, that is to be regarded.—The former pauper appears
in the market as a customer 28
Illustration in the case of two paupers—the emigration of one relieves
the parish, while in time the emigrant sends home orders which set his
fellow pauper to work.—Removing a portion of the population enables a
country to support more inhabitants than before 29
The trade with the fourteen or fifteen millions of the United States,
the result of English emigration, constitutes one-sixth of the whole
external trade of Great Britain—without the United States, we could not
have supported the 40,000,000 at home even as we do 30
The Colonization of the United States has doubled the number and
wealth of the English race. Double that colonization would have
doubled the effect; and all this was done without vigor, purpose, system,
or constancy 31
Colonization must not consider the mere numbers withdrawn—the
good is measured by the demand created by colonization for our manu-
factures. The probable results of systematic colonization incalculably
great.—Our present exports to foreign countries amounted in 1840 to
22,026,341/. —to colonies, or countries lately colonized, 28,680,089/. or
as four to three 32
The respective tonnage in like manner, was 1,584,512 and 1,709,319
tons; while North America, the West Indies, and Australia alone, look
1,031,837, or nearly one-third of the whole.—Colonial monopolies no
doubt, have had some effect in causing this disproportion .... 33
But sixteen European nations with 211,000,000 of inhabitants take


21.000. of our goods; while one set of our colonies with 36,000,000
of inhabitants, or one-sixth of the above population, take as much. The
average consumption of colonists is 125.; of European countries 2s. a-
head 34
The average consumption of pure colonies 7s. 3d., while Australia
takes no less than 10/. 10s. a-head. Her trade having increased from
400,000/. in 1831 to 2,000,000/. in 1840, or five-fold. Russia, with
56.000. of inhabitants taking absolutely less, and consuming at
the rate of 7d. per head. Spain takes 9d.; the Spanish Colony of
Columbia 35.; of Cuba 245. 4d.; France Is. 4|d.: the French Colony
of Hayti ss. 4d 35
Had our colonies been attached to the soil, no one could ever have
questioned the advantage of colonizing. Had the distance been that of
the Menai Strait, we had soon bridged it over: and though we cannot
build bridges over the Pacific and the Atlantic, we can connect them by
our wooden walls 36
Large public grants if necessary , could not be better made than to pro-
mote colonization—but proper colonization can support itself—Capital
wants labour in the colonial fields, and is willing and able to pay for its
transmission 37
Land must not be obtained too easily—this formerly the case—no good
effect on the labour market in consequence—labour, unaccompanied by
capital, unemployed 38
Mr. Wakefield’s theory put a stop to gratuitous distribution of lands,
and sold them at a certain uniform price, of which the proceeds were de-
voted to the transmission of selected labourers. Labourers were in this
manner compelled to labour for wages, and the capitalist, on this ground,
was tempted to purchase 39
The Colonial Office and the public at length convinced of the value of
these principles—and able advocates in and out of parliament devoted
themselves to make them known 40
Lord Howick and Lord John Russell assisted in office to carry these
principles into effect—and Lord Stanley had fixed the disposal of lands
on the basis of an Act of Parliament . 41
These principles, on trial, have been successful—in eight years before
the application of the system in 1832, the annual emigration to the
Australian Colonies was 1464 persons—in the ten subsequent years,
10,448, or more than seven-fold—while to other places during these
respective periods, the emigration was 352,580, average 44,072 a-year,
and 661,039, or 66,104 a year 42
The Fund from Australian Land Sales from 1833 to 1841, was nearly
2.000. —from New South Wales alone 1,100,000/. taking out
52,000 selected emigrants. But the system had been partially tested in


the United States in 1795, since which time upwards of 23,000,000/. have
been realized by land sales, although at an insufficient price ... 43
The average of the last twenty years sales in the United States has
been 900,000/ a year—in the last seven years upwards of 2,000,000/. 44
But in the above case the price was not fixed with a view to getting
the greatest amount of revenue—At a proper price 80,000.000/. might
have been realized °45
Had we at the same time applied correct principles to the disposal of
our own lands, the effects on British commerce at this moment would
have been incalculable—overpopulation, overproduction, low wages, low
profits and destitution, would have been unknown 46
All the elements that go to make up society at home, should be carried
out to our colonies. Each expedition of the ancient republics was an
epitome of the parent state —Bo it was with the settlements of Virginia
under Raleigh—of Maryland under Baltimore —of Pennsylvania and
Carolina—of j\ T ova Scotia.—So it is now in the migration from the United
State s 48
Convict colonies the first step in a wrong direction—The systematic
neglect of emigrants to Canada on the part of the British government,.49
Within the last ten years, colonization has altered its character. To
Australia and New Zealand the emigration has been of every class, with
capital and labour in proportion—with the means of education and re-
ligion—and of public works. The colonial career is now open to gentle-
men—and colonization has become an extension of civilized society . . 50
Tried principles, therefore, are advocated in the adoption and exten-
sion of the new colonial system
It has never been tried to its fullest extent—We should be able to
realize 2,000,000/. a year from land sales, instead of a quarter of a
million, and to send out 110,000 emigrants a year instead of 10,000 52
The defect is in the mode of facilitating the access of labour to the
colonies—the matter ought to be fully investigated and faults of detail
analyzed and removed. The merchants of London, and other principal
places in the kingdom—the public—look to colonization as a remedy for
our national difficulties; it is, therefore, the duty of Government either
to sanction or to veto the extensive and systematic application of these
colonial principles ,53
It was not intended to propose emigration as an alternative of the
workhouse : it is even doubtful whether parish-rates should be applied
in aid of emigration—emigration should be made a boon, not a necessity.
The popular prejudices against proper emigration are gone, and the
short-sighted opposition of a portion of the free trade party would be
harmless


All that is wanted is that Government should facilitate access to the
colonies, by the application of the land-fund to that object. It is only
requisite to perfect the details of the system now in force .... 55
The Australian system must be extended to all our colonies—to the
Cape of Good Hope, for example and, in co-operation with other
colonial legislatures, to North America 56
The price should be merely sufficient to attract labourers to the colony
anything more would be a partial tax on emigrants and agriculture.
The question of a system of fixed price, or of auction sales, and the evils
of the respective systems, must be weighed the auction system being
represented as encouraging land-jobbing and undue speculation, while
the uniform price enables the purchaser to possess himself of advanta-
geous sites, and gives the surest stimulus to industry 67
Another important question is, whether the whole of the land-fund
shall be devoted to the introduction of labourers, or any portion applied
to general purposes; the arguments for the former course being, that
increase of population will increase revenue, and that revenue is the
legitimate fund for general improvement 5S
One other still more important question is the expediency of anticipa-
ting the land sales by a loan, on security of future sales ; such an ad-
vance bein o " certain to give an immediate value to the land, and afford an
immense impetus to colonization. The legislative council of New South
Wales had strenuously advocated such a loan, and their report has had
the effect of correcting an incautious statement of the Secretaij for the
Colonies, that there was in these colonies an over-supply of labour;
they could still receive and employ 10,000 labourers a-year ... 59
The details of any plan must he filled up by the executive govern-
ment; hut it must be considered as a subject of general import, not
merely to the colonies, but to the condition of England .... 60
The speech concludes with the motion, That an address he presented to
Her Majesty, praying her to take the subject of systematic colonization
into consideration, as a means of augmenting the resources, employing
the capital and labour, aud improving the condition of the nation . 61
Stewart and Murray, Printers, Old Bailey.
