

How
What
AND
Why?
Systematic and
Proportionate
Giving.
Or, METHOD,
MONEY, and
MOTIVE.
By
REV. A. S. WILSON
(Ex-President W.A. Christian Endeavour Union)
With a Preface by
REV. D. ROSS, M.A.
President of the Church Council of West Aus.)
THREEPENCE. 5th an d 6th Thousand.




The
Tenth
Legion.
Motto “ Unto God the things that are God's."
This Legion is composed of
Christians whose loyalty to Christ,
their Commander and spirit of self-
sacrifice for the spread of His King-
dom are expressed by the dedicating
of one tenth or more of their income
to His Use.
ioth Legion Superintendent for IV.A.
C.E. Union :
Rev. A. . WILSON, “ Carraholme,”
Colin Street, Perth, W.A.
The same method to be used to
enrol as one of “ The Comrades of
the Quiet Hour.”
'Superintendent —Mrs. A. S. Wilson,
“ Carraholme,” Colin St., Perth.
For further particulars see Golden Link.
Copies of this Pamphlet are procurable
from Mr. JOHN BARNES, Secretary
of the W.A.C.E. Union, or through
any Bookseller.
3d. on 2s. 6d. Dozen


HOW? WHAT?
AND
WHY?
OR,
MONEY, METHOD, AND MOTIVE.
SYSTEMATIC
AND
PROPORTIONATE GIVING.
By
REV. A. S. WILSON
Addresses delivered at the First Annual Session■
of the Church Council of Western Australia ,
September 21st , iBgg, and at the West
Australian Christian Endeavour Conven-
tion, September 26th, iBgg.
With a Preface by
REV. D. ROSS, M.A.
(President of the Church Council of W.A.>
Ipcrtb:
E. S. Wigg & Son, Printers and Stationers,.
Hay Street.
1899.




PREFACE.
IT is with pleasure I consent to preface
these addresses with a few words
of commendation. I heard them
when they were given and was im-
pressed with their force. They are wor-
thy of being printed and widely circu-
lated. The subject they deal with is one
of great moment, more intimately con-
nected than most of us think with the
spiritual blessing for which the churches
are working and praying. We have
withheld the Lord’s portion and have
had to resort to means of getting money
which cannot be pleasing to Him. I
dream sometimes what simplicity there
would be in our church business, what
wealth in our church treasuries, what
a rapid extension of our church work,
what joy and lightness of heart and
enthusiasm, if only the principles of
these following pages were accepted
and practised. May the reading of
these pages go far towards making the
dream a fact in this land, where in
these years coming so much that
. needs money will fall to be done by
the churches of the Lord Jesus.
DAVID ROSS.




PREFACE
To 3rd and 4th Thousand.
FOR the hearty reception accorded
to the first edition of this booklet
by the Christian people of Western
Australia, I thank God.
To my brethren in the ministry and
other Christian workers for their
cheering words and practical help by
circulating it among their church mem-
bers, I am much indebted.
Most of all to the Rev. A. T. Pierson,
D.D., whose writings on this subject
have delighted me, and have helped me
to express what for many years have
been the deep convictions of my
heart.
The alterations to the first edition
are very slight; the additions are largely
composed of kindly letters, commend-
ing the pamphlet, from leading ministers
and others.
Praying for God’s continued blessing
and that it may help many earnest and
anxious pastors to emphasise a way to
raise much needed money for the Lord’s
work, without weakening the spiritual
force of the life of the church.
A. S. WILSON.
Perth, October 31st, iBgg.




Christian Beneficencec
Thank God for these gatherings of
Free Churchmen. Behold, how good
and how pleasant it is for brethren
to dwell together in unity. When the
great principles of protestantism are
being assailed by wave on wave of sac-
erdotalism sweeping over the nation
how glad I am that the representatives
of the four great denominations of Free
Churchmen, substantially at one in all
the great essentials of their faith, have
responded to the bugle call, u The Bible
as the basis of our faith and practice,
and with this watchword stand as one r
shoulder to shoulder, heart to heart, to


check the rising tide, and thus prove
themselves the worthy descendants of
the great reformation, where we re-
ceived the name of Protestants. What
a wonderful reformation that was
over three centuries ago when the
Bible was unchained and opened
to men of every rank that they
might learn for themselves God’s plan
of salvation.
What a wonderful reformation was
that of a century ago when the churches
of the reformation were unchained and
sent forth with the Gospel of Christ to
the dark places of the earth.
It is to the everlasting honour of the
Free Churches that organised modern
Foreign Missions began with them.
But, brethren, we need to §tart the
20th century with a much needed re-
vival, which will complete and give
effect to those two reformations, —one
that will unlock the Lord's money that
men are holding as their own and let it
.go consecrated to its proper uses for
evangelizing the world.
There is a beatitude of Jesus which
the Church needs to learn. His
beatitudes are the admiration of men.
Who has not felt his heart warmed and
his devotion and reverence of the
Great Teacher increased by reading
the sth of Matthew ?


There is, however, a beatitude not
found in the Gospels, but which is a
crown to all the others and which was
preserved and given to us later by Paul
in his address to the Ephesian Elders
—■“ Remember the words of the Lord
Jesus, how He said, it is more blessed
to give than to receive.” With such a
Scripture it should not be difficult to
speak to Free Churchmen —the descen-
dants of those men who willed to give
up all for Christ.
The grace of giving is one precious
fruit to be expected from the heritage
of a noble past wherein men loosened
from material things were willing to
suffer for conscience sake and live “ as
ever in their great Taskmaster’s eye.”
It is said that the doctrine emphasised
by these words of the lord Jesus is
unpopular in this degenerate day of a
partially secularised Church ; that the
modern notions of giving are not only
far below the Scripture level ; they
contradict Bible standards.
It is said that the ministry of money
is not understood —its stewardship is
practically denied. It is considered by
the mass of Christians an obsolete
notion that all we have belongs to God
—held in trust for God to be put to
holy uses.


But notwithstanding the contemptuous
scorn of the often shallow Christianity
of the day, this doctrine cannot be put
out of court. While the Church lasts
or souls remain to be saved it will never
cease to be a sacred obligation, and
the thermometer which shows the
spirituality of the Church will be her
treatment of Christ’s words u It is more
blessed to give than to receive.”
I believe these criticisms are correct
and as a Free Churchman and one
whose desires are for the maintenance
by our churches in these Southern
lands of the grand records of our
history by men who, unlike us, were
called upon to suffer for their convic-
tions or deny principle, conscience,
God. As one whose heart beats warm
with Christian love to the assembled
members of the four great denomina-
tions of Free Churchmen I would say :
If we are to prove our superiority over
great institutions, pretentious and
formal, we must reveal the life-warmth
vigour and simple devotion of the first
century. If we are to prove our like-
ness to the New Testament idea of the
Church we must seriously before God
review our whole system of giving and
compare it with Century I. in its
methods, amount, and spirit.


We plead for an alteration in our
METHODS of giving. We need to
teach and cultivate giving as a grace
and privilege instead of a painful duty.
What the churches need is a revival
of the method of direct giving. We
say direct, for is it not true that out-
giving is becoming less and less direct ?
Take a case of destitution where the
breadwinner dies. People, even Chris-
tians, feel that about the only thing to
be done is to hold a dance, an enter-
tainment, or at least a social.
If money is wanted for the sacred
obligations of the maintenance of the
ministry, or of paying for the sanctuary
for the worship of the Most High,
people fly at once to the roundabout
method of a bazaar, entertainment, or,
sometimes, of some trumpery show, in
which the man of God, who on Sunday
is expected to minister in holy things,
on Monday is expected to be one of the
showmen. Is there sl need for these
things or is it the result of defective
training ? If Christian men and women
will not give directly without
something for the eye to see, or
the ear to hear, or the tongue to taste, it
is because we are failing in our churches
to train people to give as a distinct
grace of the Christian life. In this we
are not apostolic, and it was to people


that abounded in faith, utterance, know-
ledge, diligence and love that the
apostle Paul, was careful to add : “ See
that ye abound in this grace also,” i.e., —
the grace of giving.
Oh the shame of it, Christian men
and women, to train our young men to
give grudgingly to the offertory but
cheerfully for ice creams at the vanity
fair stall of a bazaar. Picture him, with
immaculate collar and tie, and with
great condescension, partaking of a
delicious dish worth is. 6d., for which
he pays is., and thinks he is giving unto
God.
Picture the purse-proud woman
flouncing in the courts of God’s house
to tempt herself with some coveted
article, or the ostentatious church mem-
ber dealing out his much-prized pieces
of hardware and calling it giving unto
God. And yet the churches and chari-
ties must have money. How shall we
remedy it ? Must the Church continue
to drag her beautiful garments in the
dust of worldliness—even though it be
gold dust ? Must she allow Mammon
to have a part of God’s place ? Must
she continue to use up her energy in
questionable and sometimes unhallowed
means to replenish the treasury of the
Lord ?
No, a thousand times NO.


We must begin again.
We must revolutionise our methods.
We must cease to divorce our giving
from our worship. We should rather
view it as one evidence of the reality
of devotion.
Let us begin a crusade on the lines
of systematic and proportionate
giving.
At the risk of misrepresentation. At
the risk of unpopularity the leaders of
our churches must seek earnestly to
redeem the past mistakes by a course
of persistent training in systematic and
proportionate giving. Depend upon
it, it will solve the financial problems
of the church of God. Not impulse
but principle must guide Christians in
their giving. Like God himself we
must have system. We get the seasons
systematically. We get our days and
nights systematically. We have one
meal at a time instead of three or four
together at caprice. Our great com-
mercial houses are conducted on
stringent systematic lines. Let us con-
sider the distribution of God’s money,
either to the poor or to Christian work,
worthy of trouble and system.
Nor is it only in our methods that we
need improvement. We plead for an
alteration in the AMOUNT of our
giving. The parsimony of the gifts of


men and women to the poor or the
Church would bring a blush to the face
of Christ were He again among us in the
flesh. “By their fruits ye shall know
them.”
The spirit of giving is essentially the
spirit of Christianity, but when one sees
church members filled with a desire to
either hoard or withhold or to spend all
upon their persons or pleasures, we ask r
Where is the evidence of the life of
Christ in the soul ?
The great peril of Christian men and
women to-day, especially in these
colonies (where we are likely to suffer
—not so much from aristocracy as
plutocracy), is the deceitfulness of
riches and the falling down to w r orship
the God of Gold.
Dr. Pierson, whose writings have
greatly helped me to express my con-
victions, says men are getting “a sort of
metallic hardness and insensibility to
impression and a kind of metallic ring.”
Whether a man has his little bank
balance of or his utter-
ances are flavoured with L.S.D., and'
exhibit the vulgar longing for wealth,,
which withers the beautiful and softer
traits of character, and, it is said of
some, that they will drop into their
coffin with a chink. Would
that we had more evidence of men


having really met the Christ. When
Zaccheus met Him what did he
say Lord, behold, the half of my
goods I give to the poor,” but many a
recipient of the manifold blessings of
God —many a man who five years ago
would have thought his prosperity
to-day as far beyond his expectations,
said in his heart last Sunday, not “ Lord,
behold,” but “ Lord, look the other
way,” while I give not according to my
means but according to my meanness.
What we as Free Churches need
is to cultivate the joy of giving. We
rather hesitate to fix the proportion for
all because a tenth may be a liberal
response for a poor man and a miserly
one for the rich.
For myself I am a convert to the ioth
principle as a minimum. In all God s
gifts we should let Him nip a piece
out as a token that all belongs to Him.
The ioth is scriptural and the
method goes back to the most ancient
times. If accused of taking you under
the Mosaic law we reply that like the
Apostle could deal with justification by
faith so we can take you far beyond
the law for the ioth principle and find
it in Abraham. In fact even among
the Carthaginians and Phenoecians and
others it was found, almost showing it
to be a law of nature.


The ioth principle is nowhere con-
tradicted in the New Testament, but,
by the very spirit of Christianity is
encouraged and emphasised. It is
common to speak of the greed of the
Jew but the poorest Jew gave his ioth.
That was the Jewish minimum, their
regular offering being more like a
quarter or one-third.
Is Christianity better than Juda-
ism ? Then her fruits of giving should
at least equal it.
People cannot see their way clear to
begin. Why ? Because it means to
begin to sacrifice, and the Christianity
of the age cannot see its way clear to
give much more than it can spare. Is
it giving? Hundreds of people who
thought they could not afford to c >m-
mence, having given it a trial, cannot
now afford not to do it ; and as one
who has practised it for years I declare
to you that I would rather go hungry
than give less than one-tenth, so great is
the joy and so close is the relation that
giving has to progress and enjoyment
in spiritual life. Let us ‘‘ cure our
selfish greed and give reins to our
spiritual nature. Giving is God’s anti-
dote and corrective for selfishness.”
Let us cultivate a pure disinterested
Christ-like ministry of money to those
who are moaning in their abode of
want and woe.


May God help us as Christians. The
atmosphere around us is laden with
miserliness and greed. The yawning
gulf between the very rich and the very
poor is becoming wider and wider,
while the remark is proving itself that
“ Christians are becoming electro-
plated with fashionable avarice and
are hardened into a respectable in-
sensibility to human sorrow and
suffering.” Yes, Dr. Pierson is right!
It is becoming easy to feed and fat-
ten on dainties while Lazarus is left to
the dogs.
It is more common to be comfortable
in luxury while a world is dying in
poverty and sin than in any other
previous age.
No vice is more destructive of Chris-
tian character than greed. Surely I
need say no more than that we are
enrolling Christians of all denomina-
tions on a Tenth Legion Roll, and
already a goodly company have banded
themselves together in Western Aus-
tralia, as an expression of their convic-
tion of the rightness of giving at least
one tenth.
Not only is there a close spiritual re-
lation to giving one-tenth, but also
to temporal prosperity. A host of
witnesses will gladly testify to this, but
time will only allow me to mention tha


someone in Chicago sent the follow-
ing printed quesion to thousands
of ministers in the United States :
“ Have you ever known any exceptions
to the rule that God prospers in their
temporal affairs those who honor Him
by setting apart one-tenth of their in-
come to His service,” and during nine
or ten years the same question was
asked of 5,000,000 persons, and no
conflicting testimony worthy of the
name was given. “ Prove Me now
herewith, saith the Lord.”
Yes, our Free Church will take her
own place, which should be the first
place, when her sons and daughters by
contact with Jesus learn to turn their
giving from an irksome duty into a
glorious privilege and a spiritual luxury.
u He was rich, yet for our sakes He
became poor,” and to-day Christ stands
over against the Treasury which is an
important indicator to Him. As He
stands there He notes not only what
we put in but also what we withhold,
and He says “ there is that withholdeth
more than is meet and it tendeth to
poverty.” The Lord Jesus Christ
stands with infinite concern over a
dying, sin-stricken world, but he
planned to work upon it by the agency
of the Church, which, alas ! is only to a
limited extent imbued with the spirit


of self-sacrifice. The work of evangeliza-
tion progresses only in proportion to the
zeal, love, and liberality of the Church.
It is said that Napoleon once stood
before his guards and asked foi ioo
men to lead a forlorn hope. He ex-
plained that every man would doubt-
less be killed the minute the enemy
opened fire. Now, who would date
for the Emperor !
«A hundred men forward ! Step
out of the ranks ! ” and not a hundred
men but the whole regiment, as one
man, sprang forward and rang theii
muskets at his feet.
And shall Christ and His Church fail
to command an enthusiasm which
Napoleon inspired ? Is there nothing
worthy of supreme sacrifice to-day.
The Captain of our salvation summons
the Church militant not to a forlorn hope
but to certain victory if we will go for-
ward. Oh that every soldier of His cross
might spring forward to offer the
sacrifice of a life yielded for daily
dying unto self and living unto God.
If our people have, up to the present,
given by impulse, caprice, or at hap-
hazard, we, church officers and minis-
ters, have allowed a false shame, a false
modesty, to hinder this important
faculty of the Christian’s life from being
trained and developed.


It is this fact that obtains for the
envelope system in church offertories
my hearty approval. Immediately we
start it, we find how weak has been our
training to systematic giving hitherto,
but like the somewhat irksome work
of training the unused muscles in learn-
ing to ride the bicycle, what at first is
hard work and duty becomes a positive
pleasure when the habit is once ac-
quired.
And, lastly, much as the Christian
church needs an alteration as to method
and amount, she also needs a revolu-
tion in the SPIRIT of her giving.
The spirit of Christ is to give, hoping
for nothing again.
The spirit of Christ is the spirit of
self-sacrifice.
Expediency will give with the ex-
pectation of returns or what it can
spare, but love gives its best.
u God so loved the world that He
gave His only begotten Son.”
His love produced an unspeakable
gift.
True giving always costs and does
not consider returns.
Froude was right in saying :
“ Sacrifice is the first element of re-
ligion, and resolves itself into the love
of God. Let the thought of self intrude
let the painter but pause to consider


how much reward his work will bring
him, and the cunning forsakes his hands.’ ’
That little boy who put his penny into
the plate and turning to his mother
asked what would come out ; would
it be caramels or lozenges, ? was an
unconscious illustration of much of our
present day giving. Is it not this ?: —
Christians so often give with the idea
of a return, or try to give something
that costs as little as possible. Giving
in order to get something is more of
investment or speculation. Christ would
have us give not hoping for something
again but as a true and simple instinct
of Christian life. “ All the rivers run
into the sea yet the sea is not full ”
The river complained, the story says,
“ I run and run and there is nothing to
show for it, the sea is never full,
never satisfied.” Ah ! foolish river,
thou hast not thought how thy waters
are drawn up to heaven by the kiss of
the monarch of day and given back to
thee in crystal showers. If we only
give what will provide for the religious
and social benefit of our families and
the solace and comfort of our lives are
we not giving as people put their
money into shares ? A good investment,
perhaps, but not true giving. It is said
there are three stages of experience—
(t) where the joy is all in the getting ;


(2) where the joy is in getting and
giving ; (3) where the joy is all in the
giving. The first is the spirit of the
worldling, the next that of the average
Christian, the last marks a close iden-
tity to the Lord which very few aspire
to, but to those who do, thus making
their getting a means to giving, it is a
taste of heaven upon earth. Depend
upon it those who give to God out of
pure love and not as investment will
find their poor gifts transformed
into the crystal showers of God by
the Sun of righteousness, and which
will fall upon them with the benedic-
tion of the Lord. As fire which has no
vent will die, so Christian life that does
not find vent for giving will soon be a
skeleton that will frighten others away
from God.
The spirit of Christ is at variance
also with the act called giving which
tries to escape denial or sacrifice.
“ Self-denial constitutes the enrich-
ment of giving/’ Let us beware how
we sanction means which avoid it.
The spread of bazaars, entertainments,
amusements, and dramatic displays
have filled many leaders of God’s army
with alarm, as it was in this way that
the corruption ot Christianity began.
These wretched expedients to gather a


little money without sacrifice make our
churches secular and our giving selfish
in the extreme.
An authority, before quoted, says :
that in raising money by ways that
obviate self-sacrifice the proportion of
our success is our failure, for does not
this mean that we have “ found out a
way to make the sacred ointment
and to leave out the perfume that
to God gives it all its sweet savor.”
Every church member, young and old,
needs to practice this grace of the
spiritual life for the sake of his own
Christian progress.
How true it is that far more than the
poor need our gifts do we need the disci-
pline of giving. Let us say with David,
“ Neither will I offer unto the Lord my
God of that which doth cost me nothing.”
Oh yes ! we want our gifts made into
a sacred offering. How truly does it
define many a seeming offertory when
we call it a collection. Like the little
boy whose father observed him putting
aside half his dinner. “ What are you
doing ?” said he. “ This is for my
dog.” “ You will do nothing of the
kind ; eat your dinner.” Afterwards
our young friend gathered the scraps
together saying “ Here, doggie, I was
going to make you an offering but I see
it is only a collection.”


The deeper Christian life of our
churches in Western Australia will
depend largely on the exercise of soul
in this great grace of giving.
Not to the few rich do I appeal,
though surely their small proportion of
return to God is often a disgrace, but
we plead for every member to do his
or her best. The gifts of the rich will
not take the place of the great spiritual
benefit that will come to the Church
through the sacrifices of the poor. The
greatest power in the Church will be
brought about by all sharing in the
work and the giving. That is a grand
illustration of this given us from
chemical galvanism —the increase of
force comes not by enlarging the cells
but increasing their number. True, the
cumulative energy of our gifts depends
not so much on the amount as on the
sacrifice they involve.
Let us go aside with Jesus Christ.
Let us stand to-night beside the
Agonized One in Gethsemane and look
at those great drops of blood. Let us
follow Him to the cross and listen to
that heartrending cry “ Eloi, Eloi, lama
sabacthani,” and hear Him saying “ I
thirst.” —I thirst for the souls of men
and women, and we are sure that the
power which comes alone from the
cross of Christ will “ subdue our hearts


and break the bands of selfishness
which have so long imprisoned our
souls,” while with new meaning we
join in the lines so dear to the Church
of God.
Love so amazing, so divine,
Demands my soul, my life, my all.


CHRISTIAN ENDEAVOUR
CONVENTION.
Systematic & proportionate
Giving.
WHAT 15 GIVING UNTO GOD?
It is the cheerful offering of that
from which we expect no return.
If we ask our friends to lunch they will
probably reciprocate our kindnes. Our
Saviour said: u When thou makest a
dinner or a supper, call not thy friends
nor thy brethren, neither thy kinsmen,
nor thy rich neighbours, lest they also
bid thee again, and a recompense be
made thee ; but when thou makest a
feast, call the poor, the maimed, the
lame, the blind, and thou shalt be
blessed for they cannot recompense
thee for thou shalt be recompensed at
the resurrection of the just.” The
trouble and hindrance to blessing of
many churches and individuals lies
just here— they have a keen eye for
returns. Thus they pervert giving
into speculation.


True giving is to impart freely and
cheerfully, leaving it to God’s pleasure
whether benefit, temporal or spiritual,
accrue. Men desire too much to be
guided by the world’s maxims : but
this often brings into the Church the
curse of a selfish secularisation of our
gifts, while God, whose ways are not
our ways, declares in His holy book :
“ There is that scattereth, yet in-
creaseth, and there is that withholdeth
more than is meet, but it tendeth to
poverty. The liberal soul shall be
made fat, and he that watereth shall be
also watered himself ” (Prov. xi.
24-25).
The honest soul that marks the
direction “ He that giveth let him do
it with simplicity” —without thought of
buying some advantage, but as an
instinct of the Christ-life within, will
find out how God takes notice and that
He will see to it that He is not in our
debt, so to speak.
Giving is parting with that upon
which we set a value. The giver
must have respect for his gift or giving
would lose all character. The true
lover dare not offer the dregs of a
wasted life —there must be self-affirma-
tion before true self-impartation.
David could not give by proxy when
he repented for his sin in numbering


the people. He was particular over
the amount and said “ Neither will I
offer burnt offerings unto the Lord my
God of that which doth cost me
nothing.”
God has been insulted by our leavings
long enough.
Be careful. He before whom the
hosts of heaven bow in reverence
marks the mockery of true giving and
worship when we offer scraps.
True giving implies sacrifice.
Said a missionary friend of mine to
a lady who offered what to the mis-
sionary seemed more than she could
afford “ But can you spare it ?” “I
would not give it to you if I could
spare it ” was the rebuke from the
servant of the Lord who had learned
the exquisite joy of true giving.
It is the amount of self-denial caused
by pure devotion to the Lord that
makes the gift precious and acceptable
in His sight.
Yes, it means sacrifice. But shall
what is cheerfully rendered to earthly
monarchs be called for in vain by the
Head of the Church.
Think of the life of the Lord Jesus
Christ on earth. “ Now if any man
have not the spirit of Christ he is none
of His.” How truly has Mr. Yatman said
“ If any spirit manifested itself in the life


of Jesus it certainly was the spirit of
sacrifice. Oh, how He gave ! What
devotion was His to His work ! No
massing of wealth. No seeking of ease.
He gave and gave and gave till He gave
His life away. How does our spirit
compare with this ?
In our offerings, as a rule, none will
have to eat less or walk instead of ride.
Few will go without the new coat or
gown.
Dessert will follow at dinner just the
•same.
As many fashionable gatherings will
be given, as many attended.
Scarcely a cigar less for millions of
men, or ribbons and hats and gloves
without a change in number cr quality.”
Once more. The giver himself
must go into the true gift.
The gift of a dear friend is valued
not at market price but for the amount
of regard and love expressed. How
fine is the offering that has mingled
with it the best feelings of a true heart.
As Lowell makes Christ to say in the
poem—
He who gives himself with his alms feeds
three,
Himself, his hungering neighbour, and
ME.
Thank God for the desire to know
what is true giving.


Now what is SYSTEMATICgiving?
It is giving our money according to
principle.
It is taking hold of the beautiful
emotions of the heart at seasons of holy
impressions, and turning it into the
steady, constant devotion that will
regularly and continuously carry out
what was seen to be our duty and
privilege.
The Apostle Paul was not in favour
of the Corinthians waiting to be stirred
to give by his addresses when he visited
them, but wrote beforehand : “ Upon
the first day of the week let every
man of you lay by him in store as God
has prospered him that there be no
gatherings when I come.” They
were to give according to their ability
Again they were to give according to
purpose. There was a time mentioned
to make the gift regular, and there is
great training power in regular giving.
Each man was to give, not according to
feelings, but ability. And when they
extracted from their income, the Lord’s
offering, it was to be done as the out-
come of deliberate purpose, “Accord-
ing as he purposeth in his heart.”
Christian Endeavourers, we have a
great foe to fight, and the Christian
hosts need system in their attack.
The victory is not often to the wild


tribes, although preponderating in
strength, but to the trained and dis-
ciplined regiments.
Guerilla warfare may do unexpected
work at times, but persistent, regular,
earnest fighting will triumph ovei it.
The great successes of the world are
surely not won by spasmodic work.
Great names and fortunes are rarely
made by chance.
The great discoverer is proclaimed
a lucky man, and few know how
systematically and tirelessly he has
investigated science.
The Rev. W. H. G. Temple said :
“Those who bestow their means to
extend God’s cause when they feel like
it seldom feel like it. It is they who
give on principle and according to-
some system upon whom our mis-
sionary boards and benevolent institu-
tions depend.”
And now something about PRO-
PORTIONATE giving,
“ It is conscientiously giving or lay-
ing aside a part of that which the Lord
has given to us in recognition of the
fact that all belongs to Him. It is
practically acknowledging our steward-
ship.”
Our God has not left us to grope in
the darkness, for in the Old T. estament
we find, what was never for a moment


denied in the New Testament, that He
has directly and indirectly said again
and again that the tenth at the very
least is holy unto Him. Some of these
scriptures are Lev., xxviL-32 ; Gen.,
xxviiL-22 ; Deut., XIV.-22 ; Malachi,
111.-7-12 But apart from this if the Jews
minimum of giving was a tenth, if some
of the Carthaginians, Lydians, Phenoe-
cians, and even Greeks gave a tenth
surely Christianity can produce as fine
fruit of beneficence as the worship of
the false gods of the heathen was said
to do.
Our blessed Saviour in speaking to
the Pharisees mentioned their tithes,
but pointed out their omissions in other
duties to God, and said, “ These ought
ye to have done and not to have left
the other undone.” Are we sure He
is not saying to us “ This ought ye to
have done.”
Dr. H. C. Trumble remarks: —
u There never has been a time when
it was right to give the Lord less than
one-tenth of .all one’s income. There
never has been since Jacob’s day.
Long before then, Jacob’s grandfather
had turned over one-tenth of the spoils
of battle to the Lord’s priest, before he
handed the remainder to the king of
Sodom. The man who calls himself a
Christian, and gives less than one-tenth


of his income to the Lord, is a meaner
man than Jacob, and has a lower stan-
dard than the King of Sodom, who were
evidently accustomed to count the giv-
ing of tithes a duty.”
Dear friend, you think you cannot
give a tenth ; but you can. A great
many with small incomes say : “I am
afraid I cannot afford it ” (and this is
the chief obstacle with nearly all Chris-
tians), but as the crow said, you know,
“ where there’s a will there’s a way.”
If you will try it you will keep it up,
because you will find that you cannot
afford not to do it. I know of one who
did it on 255. per week. He had to pay
for board and lodging, keep up a re-
spectable appearance in regard to
clothes, and pay a private weekly re-
sponsibility, and then declared it did
not hurt him one bit. This is only one of
hundreds. Oh for more of the spirit
of self-sacrifice.
That saintly and great servant of
God, Dr. A. J. Gordon, said :
“ How shall we restore the element
of sacrifiice to our missionary giving,
and so lift our contributions out of the
shameful parsimony which now charac-
terizes them ? We must begin with
ourselves, and set apart weekly a fixed
proportion of our income, and hold it
sacred to the Lord. When the Hebrew


brought his gift to lay it on the altar, it
was his ; but when he had withdrawn
his hand from it, it was God’s ; and
thereafter it would have been an un-
pardonable sacrilege to have devoted it
to common uses. Christians will never
give as they ought until they begin to
keep two purses, one for their own
necessary expenses, and one for the
Lord’s work, from the latter of which
they would no more draw for their own
use than they would purloin from their
neighbour’s pocket.”
This matter justifies itself to men’s
consciences. In his heart every
Christian surely knows he holds his
wealth in trust. Conscience is on the
side of larger, more systematic giving,
and we may fearlessly appeal to it.
Let us tell the man who claims to be
a Christian that if his purse is not
converted we do not believe in such
limited work by the Holy Spirit. The
poor cry for bread and the work of
God often languishes. Selfishness and
stinginess are certainly a contradiction
to the spirit of the Gospel.
A Christian whose giving is defective
is like a piano with one wrong note
and when the Spirit of God seeks to
play upon the life it will be found to
be out of tune. Only with full con-
secration can there be harmony.


As the Rev. E. R. Barrett, 8.A., of
Liverpool, said at the British National
C.E. Council of 1897 “We ought to
give, not merely because it is an act that is
of advantage to our fellow men, for
their good, but because we owe it to
God, an act that is for His glory. To
set apart a definite portion of every
shilling or pound we earn as ‘ The
Lord’s portion’ is an acknowledgment
that all we have comes from Him, and
that He has the right to all. This is
the only way to prevent giving being
impulsive, spasmodic, irregular, and to
make it a means of grace to the soul,
and a source of unfailing joy.”
How shall we tithe our income?
is the next important question, and the
following answer has appeared in the
■“ Endeavour Herald ” :
“ What constitutes my net income ?”
If you are a farmer, it is all the money
you receive for the products of your
farm, the cash value of all you obtain
by barter or exchange. From this
gross amount it is fair to deduct, before
tithing, all money paid for necessary
hired help, and also whatever interest
you pay or balance due on your farm,
but not fair to deduct interest on any-
thing else you may owe.
If you are a professional man, it is
your entire income.


If you work on a salary, whether by
day or by year, it is your entire income.
If you are in business, it is your
entire income less your business ex-
penses only, not your personal or family
expenses.
“ Should I deduct insurance from my
gross income before tithing it ? ”
If upon your property, no. If upon
your goods or stock in business, yes, as-
that comes under the head of business
expenses. If on your life, no.
“ Taxes ? ” No. u House rent ?” If
for your business house, yes ; if for
your dwelling, no. u Interest?” If on
money borrowed in your business to-
enable you to produce income, yes ; if
a personal matter, or on old debts, or
anything aside from your income-pro-
ducing business, no.
u Should I tithe my capital ? ” No.
Whether your capital is in money, or
property, or in brains, or in hands, or
in all these, it is that from which you
produce income. Pay proportionately
from your income only.”
Christian Endeavourers, the future
style and system of giving is in your
hands. The Churches, which we
love, and to which we are bound
by a thousand sacred ties, can
be helped to efforts and victories
before undreamed of. Let us hear


the call of the Master to discharge
the debt of a pure Gospel to those
who sit in the darkness. Think of the
Lost of our loved Christian En-
deavourers longing to march to the
■darkest places of our earth if we will
■only provide the sinews of war.
Testimonies abound to God’s bless-
ing even in temporal things to those
who give in the manner indicated.
One who promises to furnish, if
desirable, the names and addresses of
the cases relates that :
In the North of England two brothers
went into business. They were born
in a very small cottage, and had nothing
to start business with. They were
•enthusiastic in religion. They were
determined to give to the Lord, and
they made an agreement that the
Lord Jesus Christ should be a partner
in the concern, and that a fixed pro-
portion should be given to the Lord
Jesus Christ out of all the profits. They
so gave, and these lads prospered.
The first year they had a nice lot of
money to give. The second they had
still more. The third they had still
more. At the fourth year the profits
were so great that they went into four
figures. Then they thought the pro-
portion to be set aside for God was too
much to give to charity. They did not


say to the Lord Jesus Christ, but to
charity. Always be suspicious when
you change your terms. It was for
charity now, not for the Lord. Seeing
it was such a big lot, they divided it,
took half for themselves, and sent the
other half away. The next year
(on the testimony of the brother
who is now living) they did not make a
copper. And before the end of six
months of the following year they came
to a crisis. The two brothers met one
day and locked themselves in the office
to face the. situation. And William
said to James, “We have never
prospered, James, since we robbed
God. The first charge on the business
must be to pay back what we have
robbed.” They knelt down and prayed
and made this promise. Before the
end of the year the business pulled
around. Strange enough, after another
four years they made a similar mistake
and had a similar experience. To-day
they are amongst the wealthiest
Methodist people. They never failed
when they honoured God in their
giving.
Said the same worker :
The first person who introduced me
to the system of systematic giving was
a widow woman who was my landlady
many years ago. She had been very


poor. She was talking about this mat-
ter, and she told me her income once
was only ten shillings a week, and she
gave a tenth then. I said, “ How did
you manage it?” She said, “When I
got my ten shillings, I put them on the
Bible in a row, and I took the best
looking of the ten out, and I put that
in the Lord’s box. I had nine shillings
left.” I said, “ How did you live ?”'
She said, “ I do not know, unless it was
this ; I believe when I had taken one
shilling for the Lord, the Lord made
every penny of the nine shillings go as-
far as twopence.” She believed that
the God of Elijah was not dead yet,,
and that He who had power to increase
the cruse of oil and the handful of
meal, could make a penny go as far as-
twopence if she honoured Him.
“ Here is a way out of your diffi-
culties, your bad times ; adopt this-
Scriptural, reasonable method ; honour
God with all your increase in all
your business.” There was a man
who had intimated to his lawyer to-
call his creditors together on the follow-
ing week. On the Sunday night he
called on the lawyer and said he had
better not do it. He went home to-
put into practice this new gospel. On
the Monday morning I got a letter con-
taining ten shillings. He said he could


not trust himself to wait to the end of
the month, but he would divide his
takings now. He sent'ten shillings the
second week, and fifteen the third
week, and a sovereign the fourth week.
Then he told me the whole aspect of
affairs was changed, and that he had
taken more money in the month than
he had ever taken in two months in his
business previously.
There is another man in the North
of England, Alderman Stephenson, of
Newcastle. He told a friend that he
went into business resolved to spend a
third, to save a third, and to give a
third of all he made. He went on like
that until he had saved enough. He
went on spending a third and giving
-two-thirds. As he felt his family had
•quite enough, he now stops in business
and gives all he makes.
Jabez Woolley, of Garforth, did
almost the same. In seven years this
man gave to one worker £j,ooo. That
.seems a large amount to give. Unless
a man cultivates a habit of systematic
giving when he has not much to give,
he will give little when he is rich.
A man wrote to me, says the same
writer, and sent for the sufferers.
I did not know him. I did not bother to
find him out, and I did not hear from
.him again ior two years. Last May my


treasurer rung me up on the telephone,,
and said we must find £6,000 before
Christmas, or we would be in a hole.
We had a week of prayer. On the
Monday night I received a letter from
this gentleman saying he wanted to see
me. He gave me all the directions as-
to the tram I should take and all the
rest of it. I put on my Sunday suit,
and walked down the street trying to-
find a man who could give £l2s. I
could not see anything but workmen’s
cottages. A policeman said, “ Are you
looking for anybody ? ” I said, “I am
looking for a man named so-and-so.”’
He said, “ There is a man by that name
in the third house.” I said, “I do not
want a man in a cottage, but a man in
a mansion.” He said, “ There is not a
a mansion about here ; you had better
try that house.” I tried, and it was the
house I wanted. A woman came to
the door, and I did not know whether
she was his wife or mother ; she turned
out to be his mother. A young fellow
came in. He told me four years ago'
he earned less than £2 a week—to be
exact, between 345. and 355. a week..
He went into business on his own
account. Being an enthusiastic Chris-
tian and a thorough believer in syste-
matic giving, he made a resolution that
whatever he made God should have a.


half of it. He had nothing to lose
when he started. Whatever he got, he
would share, and share alike, with God
The way the money rolled in was quite
•embarrassing. I know this year he is
giving at the rate of £6OO a year, and I
do not know all he is giving. Since the
first of May every month I receive a
cheque for £SO, and that is only my
share.
In answer to the question “ How do
you account for the success which has
come to you ? ” The man’s wife said,
“ It is simply this, that we have agreed
that the first half of our profits is given
to God, and we believe so long as we
are faithful to that, God continues to
prosper us.” That is their explanation
for making money at such a rapid
rate.
Beloved Christian Endeavourers let
me urge you to commence systematic
giving while your income is small and
you will thank God for the joy of giving
when you are rich. Let us see to it
that our left hand is not ashamed of
what our right hand does. Spasmodic
givers nearly always think they give
far more than they do.
Be accurate. Keep an account of
your giving and you may be surprised
at the amount spent on trifles for your-
self and the small amount left for God.


u Regular giving invariably ends in
larger giving. Systematic beneficence
means systematic blessing. The oftener
you give the more frequently you will
receive.”
We shall miss much if we lose the
great advantage of the training power
in regularity.
Let me close with the words of
Horace Bushnell:—“The great pro-
blem which we have now on hand is
the Christianizing of the money power
of the world. What we wait for and
are looking hopefully to see is the con
secration of the vast money power of
the world to the work and cause and
kingdom of Jesus Christ. For that day,
when it comes, is the morning, so to
speak, of the new creation. That tide-
wave in the money power can as little
be resisted, when God brings it on, as
the tides of the sea ; and like these
also it will flow across the world in a
day.”


NOTICES.
From Rev. G. E. ROWE, General Superintendent of
Western Australian Methodist Missions.
Dear Mr. Wilson. Kindly accept my thanks for the
presentation copy of your printed address on Systematic
and Proportionate Giving. I had the pleasure of hearing:
the address delivered at the Church Council Meeting in
Trinity Church and I was much impressed by the sound
doctrine it contained. I could not help thinking what an
improvement would take place in our church work and
life if the scriptural principles, which you so clearly
expounded, were more generally acted upon.
I am glad that you have been persuaded to print the
address. It is worthy of wide circulation and I congratu-
late you on the success which has attended the first-
edition and I doubt not the second edition will be like
unto it.
From Rev. W. T. KENCH, Trinity Congregational Church
and President W.A. Christian Endeavour Union.
Dear Mr. Wilson,—l have read your pamphlet “ How,
What and Why ? on Systematic and Proportionate Giving.
w ith great interest. In a lucid and forceful manner you
have dealt with a question of great moment.
“Giving,” in the scriptural sense of that word, is
becoming a lost art I hope your timely message will
stimulate tiie members of all our churches and be
the means of deepening the grace of Christian bene-
ficence. ... .
May the pamphlet be widely bought and read.
From Rev. J. A. Jeffries, Superintendent Perth Circuit of
Wesleyan Methodist Churches.
My Dear Mr. Wilson,—l have read your addresses on
" Systematic and Proportionate Giving’ with great interest
all ffee° : assured that the low- tone of the spiritual life of
the Church is largely due to its unworthy giving, and that
when we offer willingly to the Lord “He will bless us-
and make us a blessing.” I trust that your printed
addresses will be widely circulated as you have dealt with
the whole subject so logically and forcefully that the
intelligent Christian reader cannot fail to be deeply
impressed thereby.
From Rev.E.H. Ex-President South Australian
Baptist Union.
I believe with God’s' blessing it will bear fruit after many
days, as well as now.
From the “ Western Australian."
“An interesting booklet, printed and finished in good-
style.”


From Mr. J. BARNES, Secretary W.A.C.E. Union, which
recommends the book to its Societies.
As General Secretary of the West Australian Christian
Endeavour Union, permit me to express my deep gratifica-
tion at the timely appearance of the simple and practical
message to the young people of our churches, even to
those whose income is but pocket money.
As a member of the “Tenth Legion” my personal
testimony must be given to the joy and satisfaction I have
experienced since I began to give systematically and
proportionately for the Lord’s use at least one tenth of my
income. I would not nor could I forsake the principle.
From Mr. E. Dimant.
Years ago I prayed for grace to give back at least a
tenth to my rich and royal Father in heaven and soon I
found out the joy of giving and that it is indeed more
blessed to give than to receive.
Oh ! that God’s redeemed ones knew what blessing they
are losing for time and eternity by dealing out as they are
alas doing with so slack a hand. If they only each and
all give a tenth of their weekly income—sales of gifts,
bazaars, tea meetings, art unions and entertainments to
help on the cause of the King of Kings would be unknown
and like Moses of old, our pastors and office bearers would
have to command the donors to cease giving because the
treasury was overflowing.
The" Southern Baptist,” an Intercolonial Newspaper, says :
Mr. Wilson has proved beyond controversy that the
least a Christian should give is one tenth of his income
to the service of Christ, and that where this is done,
experience shows that prosperity is consequent thereupon.
The circulation of this booklet, well written and well
printed, will rouse the Christian conscience to this obvious
and necessary duty.
Nothing can be more salutary than the author’s
teaching to Endeavourers.


E. S. Wigg & Son,
i it ’trs and Stationers,
Hay Street,
Perth,
W.A.
